TITHES Examined and Proved to be due to the Clergy by a divine right.

Whereby the contentious and profane Atheists as also the dissembling
Hypocrites of this age, may learn to honor the Ministers and not to defraude
them, and to Rob the Church.

The Contents hereof is set down in the Page next following.

Written by George Carleton Batchelour in Divinity.

Printed at London by T. Este, for Clement Knight dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Holy Lamb, 1606.

The contents of this Book.
CHAP. FOL. 1 The state of the question is set down, and the truth confirmed.
1 2 How Tithes stood before the Law. b 4. 3 How Tithes stood under the Law.
Where it is proved that then this constitution of tithes was neither
ceremonial nor judicial, but moral. 11 4 How Tithes stood in the time of the
new Testament. 21 5 How Tithes stood in the ages of the Church after the
Apostles, wherein the point in question is confirmed by the testimony of
Fathers without contradiction, until Antichrist by usurped authority
disordered the Church. 24 6 The objections answered, and the point in question
confirmed. 35

To the most Reverend Father in God, my very good Lord, the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury his Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
SVch has been the prejudice of the times (most reuered Father in God) not in
this age only, but in many ages of the world heretofore: that many truths
have lien either neglected, as covered in the dust, or oppressed by the
countenance and multitude of such as commonly are ready to condemn the thing,
which they will not vouchsafe to understand. The fear of which censures has
moved me to suppress for a long time, that which I had written of this
question. In which purpose I should still have continued, if the reasons of
other had not more prevailed with me then mine own opinion. Being therefore
persuaded of your graces favorable acceptance, I have presumed to offer this
as a pledge of my duty, which as it was intended for the service of the
Church, so to whom may it more worthily be offered then to him, who as in
place, so in care and resolution sits to advance the good estate of the
Church.

In offering hereof my case is strange and singular, for I must do it with
protestation, that I am far off from thinking that the thing for which I plead
will or can be effected, only the opinion which many have conceived of your
Graces wisdom and courage, for the advancement of the Churches oppressed
estate, does encourage me also to think that by your Graces care the
oppressions of the Church may be mollified, if not removed: that the malice of
injurious customs and prescriptions against the Church may be abated: that the
use of impropriating may now at least be stayed from proceeding to any further
greauance of the Church. In which service of the Church, as you shall
hereafter leave a memorable name to your self: so in the mean time you shall
stir up the prayers of many for your preservation and continuance for the good
of the Church of God, who with his plentiful graces bless and direct your
ways to his glory and the comfort of his Church, through Jesus Christ.

Your Graces in duty and in the service of the Church to be commanded.

George Carleton.

To the Reader.
Seeing we are fallen into these last times, times dangerous and filled with
much evil, wherein the furtherances of piety do daily decrease, and the
Church her self even with that small portion which she has left, is become
an usual pray, either to the profane Atheist, that will violently rob her,
or to the cunning hippocrite that under pretense of long prayers will devour
Gods house: I thought it fit to recommend this learned treatise to the
indifferent reader, that men of place in the common wealth, endued with
knowledge to support the truth, may make a conscience to assist the clergy for
obtaining their own right, least under color of some vain title or pretense
of custom, the Lord himself complain both against them and us, that his
house is a house of prayer, and we have made it a den of thieves. Our land, I
confess, is fair and blessed like the kingdom of Canaan, but many of the
people are like the Anakims, that eat up the clergy thereof: and though
Josias were a good king, yet the times were evil, and a punishment Numb. 13.
33.
of the former sins reserved in Gods justice to the 2. King. 22. 20.
days that followed. And howsoever we cannot with Joshua Spelunca latronum.
Ios. 10. 23.
find kings in this cave, yet I fear me, we may fetch out more then five
times five of our great families made richer by the spoils of the Church, who
have either come in dissemblingly like Icroboams wife, or boldly like Pharo to
the Israelites, 1. Kings. 14.
saying of the clergy, this people is stronger then we are, come let us work
wisely with them, least they multiply, Exodus 1. 9. 10.
and without a witness, the leprosy of Gehezie sticks so fast unto their
families, as many of our most ancient houses, I am persuaded, have been
ruinated by this means, for the Church living deals as the Arck with Dagon,
1. Sam. 5.
casts that down which they had of their own. If some of them dealt but as
David with Saul, cut off the lap of our garment it were well (yet I would wish
them to have remorse 1. Sam 24. 5.
for it) but to use the Clergy as the king of the children of Ammon did the
messengers of David (who shaued of half 2. Sam. 10. 4.
of their beards, and cut off their garments in the middle) it is a contempt
which the Lord will not suffer to escape unpunished.

Now I doubt not but the diligent perusing of this treatise shall so persuade
the consciences of all that are not already forestalled by some great sins,
that tithes are the Lords Psalm. 50.
portion, holy to himself, that this portion he has given to his ministers
that serve at the Altar, and so consequently that they may not safely detain
that from the Clergy which belongs unto them, but rather make restitution with all humility, and desire the Lord with penitent hearts to receive at our hands
the tenth part, which in a peculiar manner holily is his own portion (for by
another right, the cattle are his, Psalm. 50.
that are on a thousand hills) that so in mercy he may bless unto us, the nine
parts that remain of all our substance, this fruit if it shall bring unto thee
that read, and rest and peace to the poor Clergy, that are torn with
contentions for their own right, we shall have just cause to rejoice for thy
good, and be ready to recommend our further pains to tho blessing of thy
prayers, and the benefit of this Church.

Lambeth. Ianu. 4. 1606. WILLIAM COVELL.

CHAP. I.
The state of the question is set down, and the truth confirmed.

COncerning Tithes (so far as I could learn) there have been 1.
three opinions: First, that Tithes are mere alms, and that the Ministers of
the word have right to nothing, but should live in high poverty. This opinion
seems first to be brought by those who were called Waldenses, upon the abuse
of Tithes, which they saw under the Church of Rome. It is recorded an opinion
of theirs, by a writer whose name is not expressed, in the last aedition of
Catalogus testium veritatis, tom. 2. lib. 15. This opinion John Wiclif and his
scholars received from them, as he received matters of greater importance. It
is recorded the opinion of John Wiclif by one Lib. 2. doct. fid. art. 3. cap.
64.
Thomas Waldensis. And among those articles of John Wiclif condemned by the
counsel of Constaunce, this is one, Art. 18. Wiclifes Scholars held the same:
John Hus a Bohemian, William Thorp an Englishman, as appears by their
examinations, recorded by master Fox. The same opinion has been since taught
by Anabaptists, and Trinitaries, as may be seen in a book, de antithesibus
very and falsi Christi. Anno Dom. 1568. Albae Iuliae.

The second opinion is, that Tithes are not due by Gods law, that is, a
determinate quantity is not prescribed 2
in the word, but only as these men say, a reasonable or competent maintenance
is enjoined. This is the opinion of them of the Church of Rome, as Bellarmin
declares, Tom. 1. contr. 5 lib. 1. cap. 25.
the same is much received among our latter writers of the reformed Churches,
which only show of a general approbation in this opinion, has forced me many
times, I confess, to lay aside my pen, thinking it much more safe to err with
this approbation, then to strive for the truth against such a stream of
gainesayers. For I will not think that of our men who have labored in
reformed Churches, which others might say, that they have denied Tithes to be
due to the Church, upon a detestation of popery, wherein tithes were so much
abused: but this I think, that they intending greater points of doctrine,
suffered this to lie less regarded, and in a manner forgotten, as a thing not
altogether so necessary, as those other points wherein they made especial
choice to labor. Then the reverend regard of their names, their persons, their
labors being removed from this question, we take this opinion unsound, and of
less probability then the former.

The third is, that tithes are due to the Ministers of the Church, by the
express word of God. This is the judgment 3.
of the ancient fathers, from the beginning without crose or contradiction,
until the supreme authority of the bishop of Rome took them away by the
means of impropriations. This is the conclusion which we purpose here, God
willing, to confirm: First we will refute the two former opinions: then open
the story of Tithes, and confirm the point in question: last we will answer
objections.

The first opinion that tithes are alms, implies also those several
branches which Bellarmine for enlarging The first opinion refuted.
controversies, makes several questions, or questionable errors. That they
are not to be paid to evil Ministers, and that all ministers must resolve to
live in high poverty, as it was termed. This opinion is thus overthrown by
the words of the Apostle: Who goes to warfare at any time at his own cost?
who planteth a vineyard and eats 1. Cor. ^.
not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock and eats not of the milk of
the flock? The reason stands thus, if he that goes to warfare may of duty
challenge his wages of the people for whom he fights, or he that planteth a
vineyard may of duty challenge to eat thereof, or he who feeds a flock may
of duty challenge to eat of the milk of the flock: then the Minister fighting
for the people against their spiritual adversaries, planting a vineyard among
them, feeding a flock in feeding them, may challenge of duty his relief, not
beg it as alms: but the first is true; therefore the second. Out of which
reason of the Apostle drawn from these examples, it appears farther, that by
the law of nature the teachers are provided for, because by the law of nature
he who goes to warfare must be provided for, by them who set him to that
service: by the law of nature he who planteth a vineyard eats of the fruit:
by the same law he who feeds a flock eats of the milk. If it be said,
that alms are also to be given by the law of nature, for answer we must
observe this distinction between alms, and that thing for which the Apostle
here pleads. If alms be not given it is a breach of charity: but if this
be denied, of which the Apostle speaks, it is a breach of justice. For as it
is injustice to deny wages to him whom you appoint to fight for you, or to
debar a man from the fruit of that vineyard which he planteth, or to deny
him the milk of a flock which he feeds: so is it in like manner injustice to
deny the Minister that maintenance for which the Apostle pleads.

Now if it be injustice to deny the ministers maintenance, then he has a
right and part in the goods of those whom he teaches, for justice gives to
every man his own, and not one man's right to another: whereby it is evident
that the Minister has a part and right in their goods whom he teaches: Now to
take this is not to take alms but to take his own So then by this reason
alms are assuredly overthrown, because alms are not of duty and justice to
be challenged, as these things are: therefore the Ministers maintenance
stands not by alms but by justice; as the soldiers wages stand not by alms
but by justice; as by justice not by alms a man may eat the fruit of a
vineyard which he planteth, or of the milk of his flock. The same is confirmed
by those words, The labourer Luke 10. 7. 1. Tim. 5. 8.
is worthy of his wages: No man says, the beggar is worthy of alms. Now he
that says, the labourer is worthy of his wages, says that of justice he may
challenge it, not beg it as alms; for in as much as it is wages it is due by
justice, but no alms are due by justice, for so should we take away all
difference between justice and charity: therefore if alms, no wages: if
wages, no alms.

The second opinion faith, not tithes, but a competent The second opinion
refuted
maintenance is due by Gods law, and this is urged to be most agreeable to the
Apostles times, the words are only altered, otherwise this is the same with
the former that says, that tithes are mere alms; for this opinion brings in
with it these consequences: first, that tithes, as tithes, are alms; for he
that denies that they are to be paid of duty and justice, proves them alms:
secondly, that ministers may not claim any thing out of Gods word, and this
also proves alms. For he that says to his parishoner, tithes I cannot claim,
and therefore no certain thing out of the word, yet somewhat in conscience you
should contribute unto me, what does he else, but leave it to the choice of him
to give what he list? and what is this but alms? If it be said, the people may
agree to give a certain stipend, yet this is no otherwise then as they may
agree to give alms. If any object that the Prince or Maiestrate may appoint a
certain competent maintenance, as this indeed is the common hold; I would
have it noted that they who urge this, forsake the question which they pretend
to decide, for this opinion of a competent maintenance is holden as agreeable
to the Apostles times: but when they refer the matter to Princes, this is no
way agreeable to those times. For it will never be proved that either then, or
at any other time, princes did take order for this competent maintenance. Then
this fancy of a competent maintenance, we reject for these reasons: first, it
is not written or commanded in any scripture, therefore we have nothing to do
with it. Let them who maintain it, show scripture for it, and we yield.
Secondly, it can not by any deduction be drawn from scripture, therefore it
may not be received, for those reasons that are brought in to prove it, as that
the Lord has ordained that they who preach the gospel should live of the
gospel, and such like: these I say, do only prove the ordinary maintenance
of the ministry, for they speak of the Lords ordinance.

Now the ordinary maintenance of the Ministers, is a perpetual ordinance,
which either has always been used, or ought always to be used in the
Church. But certain it is, that this competencie is not the ordinary
maintenance. Thirdly, this competency was never in use from the beginning of
the world to this day. Now it is absurd to say that it is the ordinary
maintenance of Ministers, which never was in use in any age. Fourthly, it
crosses the use of the Apostles times, because this competency is at the
civil maiestrates appointment, that use was not, this must be gotten by
compulsion, that was not, this is not alms in their opinion who maintain it,
that was. Of the Apostolic times, we shall consider in due place: now we
reason thus. That which never was in use at any time in the Church, ought not
to be held the ordinary maintenance for Ministers: but this competent
maintenance was never in use. For before the law, tithes were paid by the
patriarks to the priests: under the law tithes were appointed to the Levites
and Priests: in the Apostles times there was nothing but alms, as will appear
when we speak of those times. After the Apostles times, tithes were in use
again, this competency never had place in the Church. And even there where
tithes are taken away from the Church, and put in lay men's hands: yet there is
no competencie established to supply that which was taken away: the Scripture
commands it not, no Prince has at any time ordained it, it never was, and
therefore as we may well think never will be. Now to make the ministers
ordinary maintenance (for that is it we seek here) to stand in such a thing
as never was, and by likelihood never will be, seems much unreasonable, and
therefore because it stands with much better reason to deny this opinion,
then to hold all the absurdities depending upon it, following the best reason
we think it necessary to hold, that the ordinary maintenance of Ministers
ought not to stand in this uncertain competency, which is only a devise in
the brains of some men, and never came into practice in the Church.

Again the Ministers maintenance must be and is generally acknowledged a
moral constitution, but that this competency is no moral constitution it
appears, because every moral duty ought always to be done, and sometimes
hath-ben done by the godly; but this competency ought not always to stand, and
will hardly be proved to have been done at any time, therefore surely not
moral. Now in tithes it is far otherwise for we will show, they ought always
to be observed, and even then when they were not paid, yet stood they always
the ordinary maintenance. Moreover to maintain ministers is a service of God,
but all the parts of the service of God are delivered in the word, therefore
this competency must either be showed out of Gods word, or taken for man's
ordinance, and not Gods. Further in this competencie many, I take it, are
deceived, for every man will take upon him to define a competent maintenance:
and that they call competent, which they think (as men dividing their alms)
may suffice a minister. But the scriptures speaking much of this maintenance,
do never term it a competency, or that which sparing men in their saving
humor may call sufficient; but an honorable maintenance, and sometimes double
honor. Now there would be found a great difference between that which the
scriptures calls an honorable maintenance, and that which men distributing their
alms do commonly account sufficient. Then this competency must either be
ordained of God, or by man: if by God, it is tithes, for no other maintenance
ordained by God can be showed: if by man, then it is not Gods ordinance; now we
seek Gods ordinance, what God has ordained for ministers, not what man
appoints.

If any man say, it may be man's ordinance, and yet allowed by God, or that God
ordains the general, but man appoints the particular manner: we must
entreat him to show us where God allows man either to make such an ordinance,
or to change the parliculer which God has ordained, seeing the Lord himself
has once ordained a maintenance, that must stand, until it can be showed
that God has given liberty to man to change it.

Here it must be well remembered, that to maintain ministers is a part of the
worship of God, for thus Jacob did worship God. Genesis 28. 22. And therefore if
the maintenance be withdrawn, God is robbed says Malach. 3. 8. God is moccked
sath Paul Gal. 6. 6. 7. for of Gods ordinances some are civil and do not
immediately touch the worship of God: some are holy, which touch the worship of
God immediately: when we speak of this ordinance, it may not be consounded
with civil ordinances, for Maiestrates are Gods ordinance, but civil: in such
civil ordinances, the particular manner thereof is left to man. But in Gods
holy ordinances, such I say as belong to the immediate worship of God, it is
otherwise: for in such things man's inventions have no place, then they who say
the general ordinance is Gods, but the particular manner thereof may be from
man, do by consequence hold the Ministers maintenance to be a civil ordinance,
not holy, which opinion I suppose no man of knowledge and learning will defend.
But if we once leave this opinion, and confess directly that the Ministers
maintenance is no civil ordinance, but holy, belonging to the moral immediate
worship of God, then must it needs follow that man has no authority therein,
to invent or devise any particular manner, but must take it as it is appointed
by God. Then if it must be granted, that one of these three is Gods ordinance,
alms, this competency, or tithes: It is certain, first that alms in this
point, and for this use are not ordained by God: it is no less certain that
this competencie is not Gods ordinance, because God no where appoints it, the
Church never used it: where upon it follows that for the maintenance of the
ministry, there is no other ordinance, then tithes.

CHAP. II.
How Tithes stood before the Law.

FOR the better satisfaction to the reader, and service to the truth, the
labor would not seem unprofitable, if we drew as it were the story of this
question along from the beginning to this time, which thing cannot be done
exactly, because this matter is not remembered exactly by the ancients, and we
must not so much stand upon narration, as upon disputation: but out of such
remembrances as I could light on, I thought good to observe how men of all ages
have thought of this point, that when it appears that the opinions which I
reject are altogether new, and without any testimony or show of antiquity,
men may be entreated more indifferently to think of the matter, at least I may
seem not unworthy of pardon, if I err in this point, when it shall be seen
that I follow not only the reasons which seem best, but all antiquity, none
contradicting till of late years. For orders sake we will first consider how
this stood before the law, then how under the Law, afterward how in the
Apostles times, and somewhat after. Last of all, how in the time of the fathers.

Before the law was given, we find tithes used by the Godly, as a part of Gods
service. First, we will show that by the law of nature, every man was bound to
give something to God, of those temporal blessings which God gives, then it
shall appear that this (somewhat) was turned into tithes.

Genesis 4. It is thus written. Cain brought an oblation to Genesis 4. 3.
the Lord, of the fruit of the ground. Abel also brought 4
of the firstlings of his sheep, and of the fat of them, and the Lord had
respect to Abel, and his offering, but unto Cain and to his offering he had no
regard. It is expressly noted 5
in the text, that Abel offered the best of his flock, de primogenitis, and
pinguissimis, the first, fairest, and fattest, which showed the sincerity of
his heart. In Cain no such thing is noted, but the contrary understood, whether
Cain did offer the tenth of the profit of his ground, and Abel the tenth of his
sheep, that question I move not here, there is nothing expressly either for
it, or against it: but out of these words this I observe. First, that to offer
to God of such goods as God does bless men withal, was from the beginning
accounted a part of the service of God, for Cain and Abel both offered, knowing
it was looked for at their hands. Secondly, it is hence manifest that they who
offer their goods to God, may not offer the worst, and serve God like S. Antony
his pig, with that which they make least account of: but they who serve not God
with the best of their goods, are found to be followers of Cain.

Thirdly, it appears also, that if there were not, neither ever had been any
ministry ordained, yet notwithstanding men should have stood bound to offer
of the best of their goods to God, for this offering seems to have been,
before a ministry was established. If any shall contend herein, that these
offerings were not tithes, I strive not, though with fair probability I
might, but thus much appears: that by the law of nature presently after the
creation, men did think in conscience themselves bound to give the best of
their goods to God, as knowing that this was the will of God. It is likewise to
be noted that God who from the beginning, as here we see, has a right in
every man's goods, may dispose his own right as it best pleases him: but in
disposing this his right to his ministers, he disposes and gives it by the
name of tithes. And this is that right which we seek out, not what man
bestows, but what God gives to his Church out of his own right, which right
of the Lord in every man's goods, is declared here in the beginning, and the
same right of the Lord in every man's goods remains unto the end of the world.

This right which the Lord has in every man's goods, himself names tithes,
and who knows it better then he? When a man would offer this right to God,
who knows how to offer him his own? who knows how to keep such a rule in
this action, as to assure himself that the thing which he offers is the
Lords part, as being neither more nor less then that which God has manifested
to be his own part. It follows therefore that in offering to God this right,
men must either offer tithes or else what themselves list, not what God
prescribes. Now these offerings whatsoever they were, were offered as tithes,
and whosoever offered in this sort afterward, offered tithes, because God had
manifested that the right which from the beginning he has in every man's goods,
is tithes. And therefore as soon as it can be showed that there was a Priest,
then will it also appear that tithes were paid unto the Priest of the Lord.

Now in the 14. of Genesis there is express mention of the Priest of the most
high God, and withal express mention of tithes paid unto him: the words are
these, And Melchisedech king of Salem brought forth bread and wine, and he
was a Priest of the most high God, and he Genesis 14. 18.
blessed Abraham etc. And Abraham gave him tithes of all. And unto these words
that which the Apostle observes Heb. 7. where he proves two things: first the
greatness of Christ's priesthood above the Leuiticall; this he proves because
Melchisedech did bless Abraham, for without all doubt the less is blessed of
the greater: Then he Verse. 7.
proves not only the greatness, but the perpetual and unchangeable estate
of Christ's priesthood, wherein it differed also from the priesthood of Leuy.
This he proves in Melchisedech, and by him in Christ, because Leuy in Abraham,
paid tithes to Christ in Melchisedech, for (says the Apostle) here men that
die receive tithes, but Verse. 8.
there he receives them of whom it is witnessed that he lives. Out of these
words we draw these observations. First, that under the law of nature, tithes
were to be paid to the priest of the most high God, for these things are
expressly delivered that Melchisedech was priest of the most high God, and that
Abraham gave him tithes of all. Secondly, that this practice of the patriarks
is commended by the Apostle in the new Testament, which shows that is no
will worship devised by them, but warranted from God, therefore we conclude, it
was undoubtedly ordained by God, albeit the time and first institution hereof
be not exactly declared, yet that it was ordained of God it appears as well by
that which we have said, because that right which from the beginning God has
in every man's goods, is declared by the practice of the patriarks to be tithes:
as also because Leuit. 27 it is said, tithes are the Lords, holy to the Lord,
which words are not Leuiticall or ceremonial, as hereafter shall appear, but
declare, that tithes were the Lords always, and that the Lord even from the
beginning has thus declared what part he has in every man's goods. And upon
this ground and reason the patriarks paid tithes before the law. Thirdly, we
note that ordinarily the priesthood (before the law given) was annexed to the
eldest of the house, the first borne, as here to Melchisedech, which is thought
to be Sem, the eldest son of Noah, as Lyra notes, and the years agree: For
Sem being an hundred years old, begat. Arphaxad, two years after the flood,
and lived after that, 500. years. Genesis 11. 11. the end of which 500. years,
falls in the 50. year of Isaac his age, ten years before the birth of Jacob
and Esau. The Lord afterward took the Levites to his service, in place of the
first borne. Number. 8. 16. this ordinary course was sometimes broken, and the
birth right went from the eldest to another, yet thus much was always without
change, the Priesthood did follow the birth right, and tithes the priesthood.

Fourthly, Leuy pays tithes in Abraham, whereby it appears that to pay
tithes is not a ceremony, for if it were, then should not Leuy be noted heete
for paying tithes, that thing cannot be a Leuiticall ceremony, which is
contrary to the Leuiticall ordinances: but that Leuy should pay tithes is
contrary to the Leuitical ordinances, which ordain that tithes should be paid
to Leuy. Now because it is against the ceremonies of the law, that Leuy should
pay tithes, therefore when Leuy pays tithes, he pays them not as a ceremony
of the law.

Fifthly, we observe that before the law tithes were paid to Christ, so says
the Apostle, Heb. 7. 8. Here men that die receive tithes, but there he
receives them, of whom it is witnessed that he lived. In which words the
Apostle proves, that in Melchisedech Christ received tithes. Now if tithes
were paid to Christ before the Law, what reason may be brought why they should
not likewise be paid unto Christ after the law ceased. Again, tithes paid to
Melchisedech are here brought by the Apostle, as a reason to prove the
perpetuity of Christ's priesthood, therefore tithes must be paid as long as
Christ's priesthood stands.

Let the reason of the Apostle be considered: men that die receive tithes
here, the Leuiticall tithes are but for a time, but when Leuy himself pays
tithes (as before the law it was, and after the law it must be) then are they
given to him of whom it is witnessed that he lives. Then from these words of
the Apostle there is a difference observed, between tithes as paid to Leuy,
and as to Christ: as to Leuy they stood for Leuy his time, but tithes die not
with Leuy: for they are still to be paid to him of whom it is witnessed that
he lives.

Sixthly, hence we understand the manner and reason of paying tithes to Leuy,
for tithes are the Lords, as a right in every man's goods from the beginning to
the end of the world. All tithes are the Lords, holy to the Lord, Leuit. 27.
30. he gave them for a time to Leuy, so long as Leuy should serve the
tabernacle and no longer, when Leuy ceased to minister at the Alter then tithes
ceased to be due to Leuy, but tithes then ceased not to be the Lords, for as
they were his before the law, so they stand his for ever; because the Lord can
never loose that right which at the beginning he had in the goods of every man.

Seauenthly, whereas a question may be moved, whether the tithes which Abraham
is said here to pay to Melchisedech, were tithes of the spoils (as some
think they were) or of his own goods: I think the opinion and reason of the
most judicious interpretor is here to John calvin,
be followed, that Abraham paid tithes, not of the spoils, but of his own
goods, because Abraham would not practice his liberality of other men's goods,
but of his own. And in the text it is said, that Abraham had lift up his hand
to the most high God possessor of heaven and earth, that he would not take so
much as a thread or a shoe latchet of that which was taken, which he yielded to
the king of Sodom, providing only to Aner, Escol, and Mamre their portions. It
is then more then probable that he paid no tithes of the spoils, seeing he
would not account any part thereof his own.

Eighthly, if Abraham paid tithes to Melchisedech of his own goods, the
question may be moved, whether he paid them yearly or no? To which question
in direct words we have no answer, and therefore we may be content to be
ignorant where the scripture teaches not, but in probability it seems he
paid yearly, because they were yearly paid under the law; for tithes were
not first instituted to be paid under the law, but before, and the same reason
was before, which was under the law, for the priest, to whom (as Lyra speaking
from these scriptures, says tithes were due before the law) was no less
yearly to be honored then afterward; and they who lived before the law had
as much reason to show their gratitude and obedience to God, as afterward.
Neither could the distance of place be any hinderance in this matter, for
Abraham dwelt at Hebron over against Sodom, and Metchisedech at Salem, which in
the judgment of Josephus is Jerusalem, both in the tribe of Judah, not far a
sunder.

Ninthly, whereas against this, it may be objected out of the words of the
Apostle, Heb. 7. 4. that Abraham gave to Melchisedech tithes of the spoils,
for answer we must call that translation in some question which translateth
(...) spoils, some learned men of late translate it so, but it was not so
understood in former times. Ierom. translateth it; de praeciputs, If it might
be plainly showed, that the word in the use of good authors is taken for
spoils, then we might make less question here. In the mean time we may
doubt. It is commonly taken of the autors of the Greek tongue for primitiae,
and sometimes pro primitijs manubiarum, but simply for spoils, not that we
know, the Seriac translation taking the word in his usual sense, has thus: To
whom the patriarch Abraham gave tithes and first fruits. Isidorus says,
Abraham decimas substantiae post benedictionem dedit Melchisedech, sicut
sucerdotibus benedicentibus sibi populus secundu^ legem decimas dabat. Lyra
says, Abraham dedit decimas ipsi. Melchisedech cui debebantur tanquam
sacerdoti.

Tenthly, admit (last of all) that Abraham gave tithes of the spoils (which
thing we cannot yeald without better proofs then we have yet seen) this is so
far from crossing the right of tithes, that rather it confirms all more
fully, for if Abraham gave tithes of the spoils, much more then of his own
goods, the whole course of the Apostle his speech proves no less, for how can
any man's conceit be satisfied with the tithes of the spoils only, considering
the Apostle speaks so much of Abraham his paying tithes, insisting so long in
it, drawing an argument of such weight from it: he whose kindred is not counted
among them, received tithes of Abraham, ver. 6. here men that die receive
tithes, but there he receives them of whom etc. ver. 8. Leuy also which
receives tithes, paid tithes in Abraham, ver. 9. If there were no other
tithes given by Abraham to Melchisedech, but of those spoils only, why is
this compared with Liuiticall tithes, which were paid yearly? would the
Apostle use this manner of speech of one only action, unless it showed the
common use and practice how tithes were then paid to the priest, as by common
use and practice they were afterward paid to the Lenites. By this then it
appears out of the story of Melchisedech that tithes were, and are to be
paid to Christ always, as well after as before the law.

Let us consider the next testimony we find in story before the law: the next
is Genesis 28. where Jacob voweth to pay tithes of all that God will give him, the
words are these: Then Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will keep Genesis 28. 20.
me in this journey which I go, and will give me bread to eat, and clothes
to put on, so that I come again to my fathers 21.
house in safety, then shall the Lord be my God. And this stone which I have
set up as a pillar, shall be Gods house: and of all 22.
that which thou shall give me, I will give the tenth to thee. Out of these
words it appears that it was the general opinion of the godly before the law
given, that tithes ought to be given to God, for otherwise Jacob did offend,
unless he knew that this thing pleased God, as being appointed by him.

But because Abulensis out of this place would prove tithes not to belong to
the law of nature, that matter would be examined: his reason is, because Jacob
vowed tithes; now a vow, says he, is not of those things which belong to the
law of nature. But Abulensis himself perceiving that this proposition is not
true generally, frames an objection against himself, that by removing the
objection be might the better settle that which he takes to be the truth: his
objection is, that a man may vow that which belongs to the law of nature; as
not to commit adultry, which objection he answers thus: a man may not vow
such things with condition, but absolutely. Now says he, Jacob vowed tithes
with condition, therefore they are not such things as are contained in the law
of nature. Bellarmins words are much more peremptory: impium To. 1. Con. 5.
lib. 1. ca. 25.
fuisset vouere decimas, si absolute fuisset obligatus eas soluere. These words
indeed being examined by the popish doctrine of vows, may stand as a glos fit
enough for a corrupt text, but being axamined by the truth of God, they shall
find no place to stand in. First, where Abulensis says, a man may not vow a
thing belonging to the law of nature conditionally, it appears to be false,
because as himself yields, a man may vow not to commit adultery, so he must
yield that a man may likewise vow to honor his parents, if God will prolong
their lives, this is conditional and no less lawful then the other, and he
that makes it, can keep it only conditionally, so long as God will suffer
his parents to live, if they dye, he is freed from the possibility of
performing his vow: so he that voweth tithes, can vow them no other way, but
conditionally, if God will bless him with goods, as Jacob does, for it he have
nothing, he is freed from the possibility of performing his vow. Other
objections of Abulensis shall be answered in their place.

Though the objection be answered, yet somewhat may happily stick in the mind
of the reader, and we as seeking a truth, would cast all objections without
favoring, for I protest, I have so captiued my senses to the truth, that
against the known truth I dare not stir, therefore I will freely open what I
can. To that objection, that no moral thing may be vowed, because we are bound
without a vow to perform such things: this answer may stand, that albeit we
be bound without a vow to such things, yet it is lawful to vow them, that we
may be stirred up with more exact care and zeal to such duties, as not only
God has bound us, but we also bind our selves. Now that it is lawful to
bind our selves to those duties, whereto God binds us, it appears by the
commended practice of the godly at all times. The people were bound to serve
the Lord in the time of Asa, no less then at other times, yet they made a
covenant and swear to serve the Lord, 2. Chron. 15. 12. 14. David was bound
without an oath or vow, to keep the righteous judgments of the Lord, yet he
bound himself by an oath: I have sworn and will perform it, to keep thy
righteous judgments. Psalm. 119. 106. And whereas David speaks so often of
paying his vows unto the Lord, the thing vowed and to be paid is moral.
Psalm. 50. 14. Offer to God praise, and pay thy vows to the most high. Psalm.
56. 12. Thy vows are upon me, O God, I will render praise to thee, for thou
have delivered my soul from death, etc. And albeit things ceremonial might be
vowed under the law, yet no otherwise but as they drew to some moral duty.
And therefore when the people in vowing things ceremonial did so stick in the
ceremony, that they looked no farther, then are such vows reproved, and they
are taught, that the vows which please God, are obedience, a contrite heart,
and such like. This which I have said will answer another objection. If tithes
were always the Lords, we cannot vow them, for a vow must be of a thing
that is ours. Jacob then vowing tithes, shows that they were not always the
Lords, the answer is plain out of that which has been said. It is lawful to
vow unto the Lord that which is not ours, but his. For what thing is more the
Lords, and less ours, then our obedience, yet we vow it, binding our selves by
a new promise to that whereunto the Lord has bound us by duty. And therefore
as David did vow to perform that obedience to God, which otherwise he was
bound to do without a vow: so Jacob does here vow to pay tithes, though
tithes be the Lords right; when this obedience comes from a willing mind; it
is acceptable: now a vow serves to show a resolved and willing mind. Having
done with the objections against this place, let us gather hence such
observations as may confirm our purpose.

First, it is evident hence, that Jacob did not account tithes any part of the
judicials, because no part of the judicials were to be offered in a vow to the
Lord, but either things moral were vowed, or ceremonial as they lead men to
moral obedience. The reason is, vows were a part of Gods service, and
judicials belonged not to the service of God, but were of things common, and
for the civil government of men.

Secondly, it must be considered that the thing wherein Jacobs vow stands
principally, is in these words, this stone which I have set up as a pillar,
shall be Gods house. Some interpretours take this to be the place where Abraham
offered Isaac. Lyra says, that all interpretours take it generally for that
place where Jerusalem stood afterward. Jacob saying it should be the house of
God, signifies it should be as a temple where God should be worshipped, now
unto the house of God he joins tithes.

Thirdly, if therefore the question be moved, in what sort these tithes were
paid which are here vowed, whether as things given immediately to God, as
were sacrifices, or vowed to God, that is to the priest of the most high God? I
would gladly learn of other in such questions, but in the mean time, until I
can learn a better answer, I think it best to understand the manner of
Jacobs paying tithes, by the practice of his grandfather Abraham, who paid
them to the priest of the most high God. And therefore Jacob after that example
vowing to pay tithes, may best be understood to pay them to the priest.

Thus far having spoken of the time before the law, so far forth as scipture
speaks of tithes: before we come to the time under the law, let us consider
how heathen men, having not the knowledge of the law of God, but only directed
by a glimps of the light of nature, did judge that tithes were to be paid to
such gods as they worshipped, wherein howsoever they were corrupt, yet in that
corruption may be seen some sparks of the light of nature before the law. I
will not bring all, but only of many testimonies will show a fevv, whereby a
man may judge of the rest, and understand how this question has been
conceived even among the heathen.

Cyrus king of Persia when he had overcome the Lydians, Herodot. Clio.
offered the tithes of all to Jupiter. Among the Romans the custom was ancient
of offering tithes to their gods. Camillus vowed tithes to the goddess called
Matter Plutarc. Camil.
Matuta, in case he should overcome the Ueians. After the victory in low of
the tenth a cup of Gold was sent to Delphi, weighing eight talents, as Plutarch
witnesses in the same place. It is reported of Lucullus that he grevv Plut.
Lucullo.
rich because he observed the use of paying tithes to Hercules. For that this
was an ancient custom among the Romans, Macrobius proves out of Varro, who
writes Lib. Saturn. 3. cap 42. Biblith. lib. 8. cap. 2.
that it was the common custom among the anucients, vouere decimam. Herculi.
Diodorus Siculus opening the reason of that custom says, that when Hercules
was friendly entertained by Potitius and Pinarius, he promised a happy life to
such as should offer him the tithes of all their goods, which practice he says
remained in Rome till his time, multi enim Romanorum non solu^ medio cui sensu,
sed qui ditissimi suat habiti, decimas Herculi vouerunt, posteaque fortunatio
res facti bona sua ad quatuor talentorum millia Herculi sacrarunt. In which
place he reports the same of Lucullus, which after him Plutarch observed.
Xenophon witnesses that others used to pay tithes to Apollo. (...). 3.
Neither was this thing observed only among the civil nations, but even so
far as the sense of manhood reached it was spread also among the barbarous
people. Pliny writing of the Sabaeans and Aethiopians, says that Hist. not.
lib 12. cap. 14. and 19.
in the spices, which those countries yield abundantly, the merchants may not
meddle with any; before the Priests have laid out the tenth to their gods. And
(which one general testimony may stand in place of many particulars) Festus
says: Decima quaeque veteres dijs suis offerebant. Which use being so general
among all nations, does show, that even from Noah it was dispersed among all
people; though much corrupt in them, yet bearing in it self evident signs
that it came from the incorrupt light of nature before the law given. For what
other reason can be given why such an apparent resemblance of Gods truth,
should be kept and dispersed so far among all nations? And hereupon, I take
it Franciscus Iunius departing from the judgment of other learned men whom
otherwise he reuerenceth, was moved to say thus much, decimae iure omni post
hominum memoriam deo fuerunt sacrae. What is that, iure omni? but as well
written in the consciences of natural men, fortified by privileges of
princes, as expressly declared in the word of God. Thus having declared so far
as we can learn, how tithes stood before the law, let us consider the same in
the time of the law.

CHAP. III.
How tithes stood under the Law. Where it is proved that then this
constitution of Tithes was neither ceremonial nor judicial, but moral.

THis being first out of controversy, that during all that time between the
law first given, and last abrogated, tithes were to be paid to the Leuits by
the commandment of God: the first question may be, whether tithes had their
first institution and beginning in the law. We answer shortly, tithes were
not first instituted in the law, but long before, even from the beginning.
What then was instituted in the law? all that which concerning tithes was
instituted in the law, was that tithes should be assigned to the Levites so
long as they served the Tabernacle: this will appear if we consider the first
and most principal places, wherein tithes are mentioned in the law. The first
is Leuit. 27. the words are these. All tithes of the Leuit. 27. 30.
land both of the seed of the ground, and of the fruit of the trees is the
Lords: it is holy unto the Lord. Every tithe of bullock and sheep, etc. This
is the first place that speaks of tithes: in which words there is neither
institution nor assignation, but a simple declaration of the Lords right. And
heereunto the next place, Behold I have given Number. 18. 21.
the children of Leuy all the tenth of Israel for an inheritance, for their
service which they serve in the Tabernacle of the Congregation. These two
places are first in order, and principal unto which we must refer all that
which in the law is spoken of tithes: the first testimony declares the Lords
right, the second shows that out of his own right the Lord assigns them to
Leuy, I have given them to the children of Leuy. It contains the end, and
condition of the assignation, for the Lord assigns tithes to Leuy, only for
the time of their service at the Tabernacle, for their service which they
serve, etc.

By this we may distinguish what is leuiticall, and what is perpetual in
tithes. This proposition, all tithes are the Lords, is no way leuiticall, but
contains a perpetual truth. That which is leuiticall in this point, stands
in two things, which we may call the leuiticall assignation, and the leuiticall
institution of tithes; for these words, I give all tithes to the Levites, for
the service which they serve at the Tabernacle, do contain the assignation of
tithes, for all tithes being the Lords, he does here assign them over to the
Levites for a time, during the service of the Tabernacle. This assignation we
grant to be leuiticall, and to endure only so long as Leuy shall serve at
the tabernacle, that service once ended, tithes shall no more be Leuy his
right, but tithes shall be the Lords.

The Leuiticall institution of tithes, is contained in the commandments of
paying tithes to Leuy, as where it is said, thou shall bring thy tithes to the
Levites, the Leuite thou shall not forsake etc. Where we see the commandment
for paying tithes to Leuy presupposes the Leuiticall assignation, the
assignation presupposes the perpetual right of tithes to belong to the Lord.
If these grounds were granted, the question were at an end, but because there
will be question made of these grounds, let them be examined, to try whether
they be sufficient to hold up that building which is to be laid upon them.

The first is this, that this proposition, all tithes are the Lords, holy to
the Lord: is not Leuiticall, this will thus appear. If all tithes were the
Lords, holy to him before the leuiticall ministry instituted, then they are
not leuiticall: but it is true and certain that all tithes were the Lords
before the institution of the Leuiticall ministry: therefore certainly they
are not Leuiticall, the proposition is evident, for that cannot be called
Leuiticall, which was before the institution of the Leuiticall order, the
assumption is no less true, because tithes were the Lords, holy to him as well
before as under the law, for if the Lord has always a right in every man's
goods, if this right was declared to be tithes, by the practice ofthe
patriarks, if that practice does show that even then in their times tithes were
the Lords, holy to him: it must needs be confessed that tithes were the Lords
before the leuiticall constitutions. Now in that by the godly patriarks tithes
were paid to the Lord, is confirmed that tithes were always the Lords, and by
that which here is said, all tithes are the Lords, is declared by what warrant
the patriarks paid tithes, this is sufficient to prove, that tithes were not
instituted first in the law. It may be objected, that albeit tithes be not
leuiticall, as being in use long before the leuiticall order, yet they may be
ceremonial, for some ceremonies were in use before the leuiticall ceremonies,
to this reserving a farther answer till anon, first, we say that tithes are
ceremonial no otherwise, then as they are leuiticall, and this I suppose, that
men which attend to this question will not deny me: If there be any ceremony
in tithes, it is a leuiticall ceremony. This thing is granted by Abulensis,
and all that have carried this question against us, and the common voice
against us is, that tithes are leuiticall ceremonies. I ask no more, the rest
will follow, for if tithes, have no other ceremony then that which is a
leuiticall ceremony, then before the leuiticall order instituted, tithes had
no ceremony in them at all: and after that order abrogated, tithes remaining
still, have in them no ceremony.

Now thus much we willingly yield, that all ceremonies may not properly be
called leuiticall, as sacrificing, and the ceremonies that were in use before
the leuiticall order, but those ceremonies which were ordained with and for the
leuiticall order (as many were) may properly be called leuiticall ceremonies,
so that if tithes have no ceremony but leuiticall, surely then before the
Levites, they had no ceremony at all, to clear these things the better,
leaving no doubt untouched, let us compare tithes and sacrifices together,
whereby it may appear what is the difference between tithes, and such
ceremonies as were in use before the law.

Sacrifices were in use before the law, and in the law certain particular
ordinances for the manner of sacrificing are commanded, those particular
ordinances may be called leuiticall, but sacrificing it self is not: so
tithes were in use before the law, and certain particular ordinances of paying
tithes to the Levites commanded in the law, which particular constitutions we
call leuiticall. Thus far sacrifices and tithes agree: here it will be
objected that tithes were ceremonies before the law, as well as sacrifices. The
answer is in marking the true differences between sacrifices and tithes,
which differences will show the one to be a ceremony, the other none. The
differences are first in the property, secondly, in the end of both: First,
the propriety of sacrifices and tithes considered, this difference appears
between them: the propriety and right in tithes, is always the Lords, and not
man's. Now albeit sacrifices are then the Lords, when they are once offered to
him, yet till that time man has the propriety and right in the thing which he
sacrifices, but in tithes man has no right, because all tithes are the lords.
Then in sacrificing man sanctifies of his own to God, which before offering
is his own, and if he should not offer it, remains his own still: but in
paying tithes man gives nothing of his own to God, but only renders to God
that which always was his right: in not sacrificing godlynes is violated, in
not paying tithes not only godliness is broken, but justice also. Now a
ceremony stands not in paying to God that which is his, but in giving to God
that which is thine own. For example, if thou give to God, honor, praise, and
glory: here is no ceremony, thou give to him that which was ever his right:
but when men by carnal rites did make sign to God of their faith and
obedience, then they gave him that which was their own in signification of
other things.

The second difference is, in the end of both, the end of sacrificing was to
signify the great sacrifice upon the cross for the sins of the world, and
therefore it was a ceremony, because it was a carnal type of that holy
sacrifice, therefore to remain only until that sacrifice be exhibited. And
in a word, the end of all ceremonies was to signify something, but the end of
tithes, is the honor or maintenance of the ministry at all times. I say, not
only the honor of the Levites, but of the ministers of Christ always, and
therefore to remain so long as that ministry shall stand. And that this was
the true end thereof, it appears.

First, because tithes were paid to the priests before the law. Secondly,
because they were particularly assigned to the priests and Levites under the
law. Thirdly, because by the fathers succeeding the Apostles, (as hereafter it
shall be opened) they were challenged to the Church, as Gods ordinance, for
the maintenance of the ministry, and by the consent of all Christians yielded
so. If this be not the end of tithes, let any man show and prove to us another
end of them: if this be their end, even an honorable maintenance of the
ministry, then certainly tithes are no ceremonies, because the end of a
ceremony is only to signify something, and it has no other end or use,
whereby as we have the apparent differences between tithes and sacrifices,
showing plainly the one to be ceremonial, the other not: so we have this truth
no less cleared, that this proposition, all tithes are the Lords, contains
no leuiticall ceremony, but a perpetual truth.

For the farther manifestation of this point, it must be considered, that upon
this ground (al tithes are the Lords) the leuiticall assignation rests, for
whereas first the Lord makes it manifest, that all tithes are his, and
afterward assigns them to Leuy, it is declared that herein he does wrong no
man, for he gives that to Leuy, which by peculiar right and propriety is his
own, no man has right or propriety in the tithes of his own goods, but as
every man has a propriety in the rest of his goods, so has the Lord in
tithes. Then this right which the Lord has in tithes, none can challenge from
him, for otherwise some man might thus surmise, I am wronged if my goods be
taken from me and given to Leuy. In these words there is a secret answer to
all such surmises, tithes are none of thy goods, thou have no right in them at
all, all tithes are the Lords. And that this is the true meaning of these
words, it may appear, if we compare them with other places which sound like
this, but cannot thus be expounded. It is said that, all the beasts of the
forest are the Lords, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. Psalm, 50. the
earth is the Lords and all that therein is. Psalm. 24. but these things are said
to be the Lords in another sense, then tithes are. I remember well that
sentence and rule of Hillary, that he who reads scriptures as he ought, must
not bring a sense to the words, but fet the sense from the words, and not
compel the Scripture to speak as he in prejudice conceaueth. If I break
this rule, it is of ignorance, not of wilfulness, and I will willingly take a
rebuke, if I fail herein, especially from such as will both reprove and teach
me.

Things are said to be the Lords in diverse senses, when the earth is said to
be the Lords, and such like: we understand that these things are the Lords, in
two respects.

First, in respect of a duty all creatures are the Lords, because he is their
creator, for every thing created owes a duty to the creator, as to the great
Lord to whom all things owe their homage, albeit evil and corrupt men
understand not this, and therefore are far from this dutiful obedience: yet
they should in regard of this duty, set the service of God before all things
whatsoever, because he is creator of all, this reason the Prophet touches
where he says, the earth is the Lords: for (says he) he has founded the
world etc.

Secondly, all creatures are said to be the Lords also, in respect of that
power whereby he rules all, evil and corrupt men, though not understanding
the same, and being far from yielding their dutiful obedience to the Lord, are
yet subject unto this his power, for he directs every thing to his proper
end, in this respect the Prophet says: He does whatsoever pleases him in
heaven and in earth. Psalm. 135. And in these respects we understand those
Scriptures that say, the earth and the creatures are the Lords, as well because
all things created owe a duty to him, and as it were their homage, as also
because all things created, are governed by his power and providence.

But when tithes are said to be the Lords, this is in respect of a propriety
and immediate right, that he has in tithes, for otherwise why should the Lord
say that tithes are his, more then the other 9. parts? for in those former
respects the 9. parts are his, even as the earth is his, etc. this then
declares an immediate right and propriety that the Lord has in tithes,
distinct from the respects of duty, power and providence, in which respects
all the rest is his. And that the words force us, and not we them to this
sense: it may farther appear by the words following, which do expound the
place, and puts it out of doubtfulnesse. Al tithes are the Lords holy to the
Lord: These words (holy to the Lord) do interpret the former, and show in what
sense tithes are the Lords, not only in respect of a general duty, or in
respect of his power, but even in this sense, because the propriety and
immediate right to tithes is not in man, but in God only, for that which is
holy to the Lord, is separate from man, and man's use; in such things man has
no right at all, therefore if man keep tithes from the Lord, it must be
confessed that this is usurpation and sacrilege. Moreover, we note the manner
of these words. It is not said thou shall pay all tithes to the Lord, for such
a precept might argue an institution of tithes: but it is said, all tithes are
the Lords, which words do not express any new institution, but declare an
ancient right which was begun long before the law.

It is farther to be considered, that the law observes a distinction in holy
things, by which distinction we may learn how tithes differ from other things,
which by the leuiticall law were called holy, for things holy, or separate from
man's use, are either such as the Lord seperateth to himself, wherein man has
no right: or such things as man seperateth to the Lord: now tithes are made
holy and separate from man's use, not by man, but by the Lord himself. For it
is said: Leuit. 27. 28. Nothing separate from common use, which a man
separateth to the Lord, of all that he has, may be sold, nor redeemed, but
tithes may be redeemed Leuit. 27. 31. by adding a fifth part. Therefore tithes
are such things, as man has no power to separate from common use, because they
stand separate from common use by the Lord, which shows evidently that man
has no right or propriety in his own tithes, as he has in the things which
he may separate from common use to the Lord.

Then the general ordinance of tithes was not instituted in the law, but long
before, as appears both by the practice of the godly in former times, and by
these words declaring the ground of that practice, which ground is the
immediate right which the Lord has always in tithes, for if the former
practice, and that which we have observed of these words, All tithes are the
Lords, be compared together, it is evident that the Lord did not then begin to
have a right in tithes when the law was given. This right is not instituted in
the law, but only declared, whereupon it follows that this is right
perpetual, for we call that perpetual whereof no beginning can be showed, but
the use thereof proved from the beginning. Therefore we conclude that this
proposition, All tithes are the Lords, holy to the Lord, contains a
perpetual truth, and no leuiticall ceremony.

To confess the truth, I find my self in writing this which I know many are
ready to gainesay, so affected as they who fortify an hold against the
enemies, where the wall is weakest or lowest there the greatest force of the
enemies is set to make a breach, so I find that we are now as it were in that
breach, and if I can fortify this one piece so as to put the adversaries out
of hope of entrance here, I shall be at more ease for the rest: for every man
will grant me that tithes were due before the law, and under the law assigned
to the Levites, but how the perpetual right is proved, or how this right may
appear assumed again after the abrogation of the law, this is that whereat
most stick, this is that which I must fortify. To that therefore which
already we have spoken add that which the Apostle says in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, for he has so fortified the matter that I know not what may be
brought against him, in those words, Heb. 7. 8. Here men that die receive
tithes, but there he receives them, of whom it is witnessed that he lives:
who is he of whom it is witnessed that he lives.? It is spoken there of
Melchisedech, but it is verified in Christ, Melchisedech here is brought in to
no other end, but as a type of Christ, to show how these things spoken of the
tipe, are most true in the body Christ Jesus: for there the Apostle proves the
greatness of Christ's priesthood and the perpetuity of the same, so that these
things here spoken of the tipe, are declared to be verified especially and
principally in Christ: then albeit Melchisedech be in some sort witnessed to
live, because there is silence of his death, yet this is especially and
principally true in Christ: then when the Apostle faith, that here he
receives tithes who is witnessed to live, his meaning is that tithes are paid
in the priesthood of Christ, not only in the leuiticall priesthood. Here men
that die receine tithes, but there he receives them of whom it is witnessed
that he lives, where we have an evident distinction between the leuiticall
assignation, and the perpetual right of tithes. Here men that die receive
tithes, there is the leuiticall assignation, which was to have an end: but
there he receives them, of whom it is witnessed that he lives, in these
words the perpetual right (...)

First, whether tithes be ceremonial. Secondly, whether they be judicial. To
know whether tithes be ceremonial Whether tithes be ceremonial.
(that we may add more proofs to that which we have said in this point) it
seems needful to set down the definition of a leuiticall ceremony, which
may be defined thus: a ceremony is a carnal type of an holy thing, which for
the service of the Tabernacle is enjoined only until the time of reformation
By an holy thing in this definition, we understand an Evangelical truth, by
the time of reformation we understand, the first coming and full appearance of
our Lord Jesus Christ. All the parcels of this definition are confirmed by the
Apostle, Heb. 9. that it is a carnal type of an holy thing, it is proved. ver.
10. where they are called carnal rites, and ver. 23. they are say de to be
similitudes of holy or heavenly things, that such ceremonies were for the
service of the tabernacle, he shows, ver. 2. where first he discribeth the
tabernacle, and presently joins the ceremonies, as belonging to it, and
again, ver. 8. and 21. so that all those ceremonies had respect to the
tabernacle, and that they were ordained to endure only until the time of
reformation, it is delivered in express words, ver. 10.

It may be objected, that albeit all these things be expressed in the Apostle
his words, yet his meaning may be not to define a ceremony, but to discribe
diverse kinds of ceremonies, as namely, that of ceremonies some are carnal
types, other for the service of the tabernacle, others to endure until the
time of reformation, etc. we answer for our purpose all is one, whether it be
granted that this is a definition, or a division of ceremonies: if it be a
definition, tithes must agree to this definition, or else it can not be
ceremonial: if it be a division of ceremonies, then tithes must agree to some
part of it, otherwise they can be no ceremonies, but we say that tithes neither
agree to the whole, nor to any part thereof, for they are neither carnal, nor
types, nor carnal types of holy things, nor for the service of the tabernacle,
nor enjoined to endure only until the time of reformation, if no part hereof
agree with tithes, how is it possible this thing should be a ceremony, let us
then examine the parcels.

First, tithes are not carnal, for carnal in the Apostle his sense, is not
taken for every worldly thing, but for such a worldly and rude element, or as
the Apostle calls it, Gal. 4. 9. such an impotent and beggarly rudiment as
served for the institution of the rude and ignorant people of the Jews,
having no such use among Christians: but tithes served not for institution of
the Jews, for they did teach nothing, and yet they have among Christians the
same use, which then they had: for they served then, as now also they do, for
honor and maintenance of them who teach the people. Is it possible that this
thing should be a Leuiticall ceremony, which has the same use among
Christians, which it had in Israel? farther, tithes are no types, for a type
was instituted for no other use, but to signify an holy thing in Christ or his
kingdom, but tithes were not instituted for this use to signify any thing in
Christ or his kingdom, therefore no types, this appears plainly, because
tithes are after Christ, as they were before, the honorable maintenance of the
ministry always, therefore they signified no more then now they do, but as
they were, so they stand still, or if any think that tithes were instituted
only to signify some thing, let that thing once be showed. Now if they be
neither carnal, nor types, how can they be carnal types, and by consequence
they are not carnal types of holy things, but they are those holy things
themselves, for to pay tithes sincerely to the ministers of Christ, is an holy
thing, and this is enough to prove it no ceremony, for no ceremony is of it
self an holy thing, but that this is, it is apparent, because now in the time
of the gospel the same use of this thing is retained, when all ceremonies are
abrogated, neither were tithes instituted for the service of the tabernacle. I
speak here of the ordinance of tithes, not of the Leuiticall assignation:
which assignation I grant was instituted for the service of the tabernacle,
but the question of tithes in general, is much differing from this
assignation, for tithes were before the law, this assignation was not, tithes
are in use after the law ended, this is not, therefore there is as much
difference between tithes in general and this assignation, as between things
perpetual and temporary.

Last of all, it is evident, that tithes were not enjoined until the time of
reformation, for they are in use after that time, therefore we reason thus, no
Leuiticall ceremony may be allowed to remain in the Church any longer then
until the time of reformation, but tithes are, and have been by all godly
allowed to remain in the Church after the time of reformation: therefore
tithes are no such ceremonies, the assumption is in the manifest knowledge and
consciences of all men: the proposition is proved out of the words of the
Apostle, where he describes ceremonies in these words, Heb. 9. 10. carnal
rites which were enjoined until the time of reformation. If those carnal
rites were enjoined until the time of reformation, then manifestly it
follows that these carnal rites were to be abolished at the time of
reformation, and are not to be retained in the Church after that time: here
then of two things we must choose one, either to say, tithes are no ceremony,
or to charge the Church of Christians of impiety in the highest degree, for
appointing tithes for the maintenance of ministers, and so retaining a
ceremony in the Church after the time of reformation, against the express
doctrine of the Apostle.

But now consider what answer is thought by some to be sufficient. This for
sooth, that tithes are used now in the time of the gospel, not as a ceremony,
but as another thing, they were under the law (say they) ceremonies, but now
they cease to be, and are retained as some other thing: let them be as what you
list, this is no sufficient answer to that which I have said, and to show the
weakness hereof (because in this answer is placed all the hope of them who
hold tithes ceremonies) let us take a little pains with it, for the
inualiditie of this poor shift being manifested, we may go with more ease
through the rest. If this were a sufficient answer to say, we understand
tithes now not as a ceremony, then surely nothing in any disputation can be
proved, and because this matter reaches farther then at the first show it
seems, it shall not be unprofitable by the way of a short digression, to
speak in general of insufficient answearing, that is, of vnexact
distinguishing, where the truth is only sought out, without heat or
contention, there the distinction of the answer will show it self so quick,
as that it does not only answer the sophisme, but also carries force and
power in it self to overthrow the contrary falsehood, but where the distinction
has not this life in it, there it discrieth it self to be, not as armor of
defense as it should be, but only as that sudden help, which the man in
danger of drowning catches after: for example, that answer which serves for
the common hackney in schools: verum est materialiter, non formaliter: let it
be allowed for a sufficient answer, and what can be concluded? That the
absurdity hereof may more plainly appear, I will recite certain examples.

Thomas Aquinas concludes, that concupisence which 1. 2. q. 81. art. ^. ad. 1.
passes the bonds of reason is against nature. Dominicus* Soto not consenting
to Thomas, and yet being unwilling to stand against him in contradiction,
thinks this a sufficient answer: that which Thomas says is true, ratione
formae, sed non natione materiae, nam ratione materiae (faith Soto)
concupisentia illa est naturalis. Martin Luther made this objection against
Indulgences, Indulgences are said to remit penaunces, but penaunces are good
works, such as Fasting, Alms, Prayer and the like: therefore Indulgences are
not good but pernicious, seeing they hinder men from good works. Bellarmin
thinks it sufficient to answer thus; Indulgences remit penaunces not as they
Lib. 2. de Indulg, cap. ^^.
are good works, non quatenus sunt bona opera, but as another thing, as if he
should say, verum est materialiter, non formaliter. Just as these men
distinguish in a ceremony, tithes are now retained not as a ceremony, but as
another thing.

If this kind of answer run for current, who sees not that this blind
distinction is at hand ready against any truth though never so well concluded?
for when a man has concluded, that to drink till a man be drunck is a sin,
some will find out this distinction, it is a sin materialiter, sed non
formaliter: for I use, says he, non quatenus, not as drunkenness, but as
another thing. And why may not another frame the same distinction for
whoredom, especially if he may allege the advice of some Physicians which
hold such physic needful for his body. And so in other things, I would
know how a man can conclude against the Ebionites, if this kind of aunswering
be received for good? they receive circumcision with the Gospel: how will you
disprove them? if you urge those words of the Apostle, If you be circumcised
Christ profits you nothing: may not they answer Gal. 5. 3.
the Apostle, verum est formaliter, non materialiter. We retain circumcision
not formally, non quatenus, not as a sacrament, but as another thing. If this
were nothing else but to mock the Apostles divinity, why should any be so
much ouerseene, as to think this distinction may stand against us, which in
the like case can not stand against the Apostle? Therefore it is not enough to
bring a distinction, but the parts thereof should be confirmed out of the
principles of that profession, wherein the disputation is, if the disputation
be in Logic or Philosophy, then the parts of the distinction to be
confirmed out of Logic or philosophy, if in divinity, then out of the
scriptures. This sincerely practiced would cut the sinews of many friuelous
contentions which are so often moved and repeated again without end. Thus much
concerning the idle and endless humor of writing, which proceeds for the
most part from insincere answering.

Now to return to the former answer of those, who think they have said
enough, when they say that tithes are not now established in the Church as a
ceremony, but as another thing, it is as if they should say verum est
materialiter, non formaliter. For the frame of a ceremony remains not, yet
the matter, say they, remains. Which answer as in some place may stand, so
here it cannot, unless the parts of this distinction be proved by scripture,
which no man has at any time as yet proved. For it should be proved by
scripture that tithes were a leuiticall ceremony, and that the thing which
once was a ceremony, may be retained in the Church of Christ, but we have
showed the contradictary to both, that tithes were never a ceremony, by the
description of a ceremony, and that the thing which was a ceremony may not be
retained in the Church of Christians, because it was enjoined only until the
time of reformation: and therefore we conclude, this answer is every way
weak, and no sufficient exception against our cause.

But for the latter part thereof, it may be thus objected, some things were
ceremonies which yet are, or may be lawfully retained among Christians, as not
to sow a vineyard with diverse kinds of seeds; not to plow with an Ox and an
Ass; not to wear a garment of diverse sorts, as woollen and linen together,
Deuteronomy. 22. I answer these scriptures Deuteronomy. 22. do not speak of ceremonies,
but of iudicialls. Of this answer, there are these reasons. First, throughout
that Chapter he speaks of things judicial, and in the Chapter next before,
as also in that which next follows, he declares precepts judicial of all
sorts, concerning matters of state when they go to war, touching public
affairs, touching private, touching husbandry, touching a man's comely carrying
of himself abroad and at home: For iudicialls reach not only to the great
affairs of a state, but even to a comeliness in husbandry and apparel, of
which civil comeliness these precepts are to be understood, and in a civil
state well and exactly governed, to be received, for civil comeliness, and
an exact order is to be settled in every part of the state.

Another reason that these precepts are to be understood of iudicialls, not of
ceremonies is, because these things cannot agree to the description of a
ceremony, out of the Apostles words, for neither were these carnal tipes of
holy things, neither were they instituted for the service of the Tabernacle.
Again it can not be said that a ceremony is negative, as a precept may be,
for they are not set down in negatiues, this thou shall not do, but in
affirmatiues in doing or using, for a ceremony is positiuely to represent an
holy thing, for which cause the Apostle calls them (...). Heb. 9. 24.
Moreover in these and such like precepts we observe that albeit some
signification may well be drawn from them, yet that will not suffice to prove
them ceremonies, for from that which is written Deuteronomy. 25. Thou shall not
mussell the mouth of the Ox that treads out thy corn. The Apostle 1. Cor.
9. 9. draws a signification, and thereby a strong reason for maintenance of
ministers, and yet I suppose, no man will hold that precept to be
ceremonial, for it is judicial altogether, because it is of things in common
use, therefore certainly judicial: even so are these precepts Deuteronomy. 22. to
be understood. Wherefore the contrary apparaunces being removed, the truth of
this conclusion will better appear, tithes are no ceremonies.

Now as it is an easy matter for any without much learning to say tithes were
ceremonies, and to rest there without reason, without discussing the manner and
cause thereof, so if any would enter iudiciously into the careful and
conscionable search hereof, and open unto us the signification of this
ceremony, and show us the proper end and use thereof, and prove with one sound
reason, that tithes were instituted to signify something only for a time as
all ceremonies were: I should for my part think my selse much beholding to
him; otherwise if thou shall tell me a thousand times it is a ceremony, though
this were true that thou say, yet because thou know not the reason and
ground thereof, to thee it is as an untruth, he who holds this a ceremony,
ought to bring an approved reason from the word, and declare the true end and
use of the ceremony, which will open the signification thereof: till that be
done, lie that says it is a ceremony speaks without understanding.

We shall have less trouble to disprove the other opinion, Tithes not
judicials.
which holds tithes judicials, because it is holden with much less show of
reason: for to be brief herein, we reason thus. No holy things are judicials:
but all tithes are holy things, therefore no tithes judicials: The proposition
of this syllogism is manifest by that distinction which must be acknowledged
between things holy and common: holy things are taken from common use, which
things are of two sorts, either such as the Lord separateth from common use, as
the sabbath, and tithes, and such like: or such as man separateth from common
use to the Lord, of which those words are Leuit. 27. 28. Nothing separate from
common use, that a man does separate to the Lord, of all that he has, may be
sold nor redeemed, and in the verse following, things separate from common use
are expounded, separate from man. Thus are all holy things separate from common
use or from man, but all judicials are of things in common use, not separate
from man, therefore no judicials are holy things, no holy things judicials.

By this which we have said, the question I hope is cleared which was moved in
the beginning of this chapter, how tithes stood under the law, It appears
that then they were not as ceremonies, nor judicials, but a perpetual
ordinance and part of the moral truth. Before we pass from this place, I
would add a word of the antiquity of these two opinions which I have last
refuted. The judgments of former ages is a great presumption, and men of
judgment will very hardly depart from an ancient opinion without great
reasons. Now as the opinion which I seek to confirm is ancient, and has
been lield by the best learned in the Church from the beginning till these
late years: so those other two opinions last spoken of, are both new, though
the one somewhat elder then the other. That tithes are ceremonies, is an
opinion devised about an hundred years since, not above: the other, that
tithes are judicials is auncienter, for it was first devised by Alexander de
Hales an English man the father of schole-diuinitie, the first that wrote upon
3. part. q. 51. 3.
the sentences. This Hales died in the year of Christ 1250. says John Bale.
The same opinion is maintained by Thomas Aquinas scholar to Hales. These their
chieftains the schole-men follow, and hence it is now a received 2. 2. q. 87.
Art. 3.
opinion among them of the Church of Rome, that tithes are judicials. But one
thing I wish to be observed; that after the Pope had through corruption made
tithes away from their proper Churches by impropriations, then forsooth to
salve this corruption, least it might have been thought open sacrilege, these
devises were first invented. This I thought good to note, that it may be
known that this corrupt opinion of tithes came in with infinite corruptions
and deprauations of the truth.

CHAP. IIII.
How Tithes stood in the time of the new Testament.

LEt it be examined in the next place, how tithes stood in the time of the new
Testament. In this time we find no express mention that tithes were paid,
nor any express proof that they were not, but there is great probability
that they were not. First, because we find no express testimony for them.
Secondly, because that use of paying tithes, as the Church then stood, was so
incommodious and cumbersome that it could not well be practiced. And therefore
as circumcision was laid aside for a time, whilst Israel travailed through the
wilderness, not because the people of right ought not then also to have used
it, but because it was so incommodious for that estate and time of the Church,
that it could not without great trouble be practiced: even so the use of tithes
in the time of Christ and his Apostles was laid aside, not because it ought
not, but because it could not without great encumbrance be done. And as
circumcision was resumed as soon as the estate of the Church could bear it:
so tithes were reestablished as soon as the condition of the church could
suffer it, for tithes can not well be paid, but where some whole state or
kingdom receives Christianity, and where the maiestrate does favor the
Church, which was not as then. Now as soon as it can be showed that a
Maiestrate did favor the Church, so soon will it also appear that tithes
were established.

Thirdly, moreover tithes were paid to the priests and Levites in the time of
Christ and his Apostles, now the Jewish sinagogue must first be buried, before
these things could be orderly done, when the sinagogue was buried, and the
estate of the Church could bear the practice, then were tithes brought into
use in the Church.

Fourthly, in the times of the new Testament and somewhat after, there was an
extraordinary maintenance by a community of all things, which supplied the
want of tithes, but this community was extraordinary, and not to last always:
now as this extraordinary maintenance decayed, tithes being the ordinary
maintenance of the ministry grew in use again, and if it should so happen,
that the Church should be in the like case again as then it was, then must
paying of tithes cease for the same reason, as then it did. And then might that
community be reduced again for that time, that is, an extraordinary
maintenance at an extraordinary time: but this could not prejudice the right
of the ordinary maintenance, when fit time serves, albeit then that for these
reasons tithes were not used de facto in the time of the new Testament, yet it
appears that de iure they ought to have been paid, if these encumbrances
had not disturbed the convenient practice thereof: Mat. 23. 23 You tith mint,
and annise, and cummin, and leave the weightier matters of the law, etc. these
ought ye to have done, and not to have left the other undone, from which words
tithing has the approbation of Christ, as a thing that ought to be done, there
is an apposition between things of the same kind, the greatest moral things
in mercy and judgment, and the least moral things in paying the least tithes.
Thus Origin and other fathers understand these words, as belonging no less to
Christians, then to Hom. 11. In number. August. in Psalm. 146.
Jews, Luke. 18. the proud Pharisee in his prayer says: I fast twice in the
week, I give tithes of all that ever I possess, where we find tithes
accounted moral, as fasting. Heb, 7. 8. the Apostle shows from Abraham's
paying tithes to Melchisedech that Christ's priesthood is perpetual, not
subject to change as was that of Leuy, which declares that tithes follow that
priesthood which is perpetual. Briefly I reason thus, there is no proof
through out all the new Testament, for any other ordinary maintenance of the
ministry: therefore tithes remain still the ordinary maintenance.

But because the Apostles times are so much objected against us for the
pretended competencie, we must better consider these times so far forth as they
touch this maintenance. In the Apostles writings there be two things to be
observed concerning this point. First the examples of that maintenance which
then was in use. Secondly, the reasons and proofs which the Apostles use to
move the people to contribute: both these things stand against the pretended
competencie, for if the examples be considered, that which was done appears
to be nothing else but alms, if the proofs be weighed, they are such as prove
another thing then that which then was practiced, and if they be well examined
they prove tithes due Now the Apostles reasons are good and strong, when as by
such proofs as indeed prove the ordinary maintenance due, he calls for some
other thing of the people, because tithes the ordinary maintenance could not in
that estate of the Church well be paid. If these things be examined in order,
it will appear first by the examples and practice of that time, that those
contributions were nothing but alms, for no man was compelled to give any
thing, but every man gave as he was moved. It shall be sufficient of many to
show a few examples, the Apostle speaking of such contributions Romans. 15.
26. 27. says, it has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain
distribution, etc. By which words he describes an alms, and in the words
following, where he says, It pleased them, and their debtours are they: he
shows this distribution was but alms, for if it were given at their
pleasure, and if they who received it, were their debtours, surely it can be
nothing but alms. The circumstances of that action prove no less, for they of
Macedonia and Achaia, as likewise they of Rome, were not bound in any other
duty then mere charity to maintain those at Rome. And as here we find
that he accompteth it so, even so he calls it in plain terms by the name
of Alms, Act. 24. 17. After many years I came and brought alms to my nation.
By this it may appear that the Apostle accounted such contributions as then
were used in the Church, mere Alms.

Tertullian speaking of this use, which as it seemed continued to his time,
says thus: vnusquisque stipem quum velit, and si modo possit apponit, nam nemo
compellitur sed sponte confert. Then from the use and practice of the Apostles
times nothing can be proved but alms, and therefore this competent
maintenance cannot be drawn hence, first because this competency by them who
strive for it, is not meant alms: secondly because they who hold this, do
think that the people may be compelled to contribute some thing, but this is
directly against the use of the Apostles times, for no man was compelled, but
that only was taken which was willingly given. Thirdly because they would have
it at the appointment of the maiestrate, which thing is not answerable to these
times. This may suffice to prove that this competent maintenance does not agree
with the use of these times whereof we speak.

This the Waldenses and after them John Wiclife did foresee, and well
understood, that if the practice of the Apostles be urged in this point, then
assuredly nothing can be clamed but alms. And therefore they urging that use
did truly thereupon couclude that the ministers maintenance must be alms
though they urged those times without reason, yet that being once granted the
other must follow.

Now let us consider the reasons which the Apostles use in moving these
contributions, these reasons if a man consider them aright, do reach farther
then they are applied; and indeed do conclude another thing, for seeing the
contributions then practiced were alms, and the reasons confirm a due
maintenance, surely they confirm another thing then was practiced at that
time. For example the reasons whereof we have spoken, 1. Cor. 9. Who goes to
warfare at any time of his own cost? who planteth a vineyard and eats not of
the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock and eats not of the milk? These
reasons do not so much prove that which then was in use, as another thing:
what that other thing is, that is here in question? we say tithes: other say,
a competent maintenance, but these reasons prove the ordinary maintenance of
ministers due.

Now because tithes, the ordinary maintenance, could not be paid without
great encumbrance, the reasons show that in place thereof for a time some other
thing must of right be paid. So the Apostle reasons, 1. Cor. 9. 13. Do you
not know that they who minister about the holy things, eat of the things of
the temple, and they who wait at the alter, are partakers of the altar? So
also has the Lord ordained that they who preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel.

This reason concludes very strongly for tithes, and for nothing else, for it
must be granted that the Apostles words concluding something certainly, do
rather conclude that which was the ordinary maintenance commonly received in
the Church, then that which was never in use in the Church, certainly not in
those times. Now tithes were ordinarily received in the Church, as the
ministers maintenance, but this competencie as it is urged, was never in use in
the Church, surely not in the Apostolic times. Now it were hard to say that
the Apostle reasons for such a thing as was never in use.

Again, the Apostle says, the Lord has ordained the ministers maintenance,
this ordinance is not indiuiduum vagum, but some certain thing, being a part
of gods worship. Now we can say that tithes are the Lords certain ordinance,
but who is able to say and prove so much for this competent maintenance? As for
the use and practice of the Apostles times, assuredly it was no perpetual
ordinance of the Lord, but an extraordinary use for a time: we seeking the
ordinary maintenance, and this being extraordinary to endure but for a short
time, shall never find that which we seek in the use and practice of those
times. Then whereas the Apostle says, the Lord has ordained that they who
preach the gospel, should live of the gospel, there must be some ordinance of
the Lord showed, but none can be showed, but either tithes or the use of the
Apostolic times, therefore this ordinance must either be tithes, or alms, but
not alms: for this use of the Apostles times were extraordinary, therefore
the ordinary and perpetual ordinance of the Lord for the ministers
maintenance, can be nothing else but tithes, and that the reasons used by the
Apostle do in truth confirm tithes, albeit they name not tithes, it is the
iugdement of diverse fathers, as here after may appear.

Now that which stands with best reason, with the perpetual and ordinary
practice of the Church before and since Christ's time, and has the full consent
and testimony of the ancients, I prefer before that which stands with no
reason, was never used in the Church, and has the testimony of no ancient
father.

CHAP. V.
How Tithes stood in the ages of the Church after the Apostles, wherein the
point in question is confirmed by the testimony of fathers without
contradiction, until Antichrist by usurped authority disordered the Church.

HOW long that community of all things lasted in the Church, which began in
the Apostles times, we cannot precisely determine, but it seems to have
been in some use in Tertullians time, for so he says, omnia sunt Apol. cap.
39.
indiscreta apud nos praeter vxores. Eusebius labors to prove out of Philo,
that the Christians at Alexandria converted by Hist. Oct. lib. 1. cap. 17.
Mark, had all things common. But the testimony of Philo speaks of those who
were called Essaei, not of Christians, yet that this community was long
continued among christians, it is out of doubt. Some think that Vrbanus Bishop
of Rome Ann. 223. did make some mutation in the use of this community, who
first of all is reported to have retained lands to the Church use, for whereas
before we read Act. 2. 34. as many as were possessours of lands, sold them and
brought the price to the Apostles: Afterward it was thought expedient for the
perpetual relief of the Church, that such lands should not be sold, and the
price given, but the lands themselves should be given to the Church, Fassiculus
temporum ascribes this to Urbanus, praedia caepit ecclesia possidere huius
(vrbain) tempore, de quibus clericis and notarijs sumptus deputabant qui gesta
martirum conscripserunt, antea viuebant more Apostolico qui in actis
Apostolorum scribitur. Marsilius Patauinus says likewise, that Urban was the
first that possessed lands and temporalties, yet it seems that Defens. P^^^.
par. 2. c. 25.
use began before Vrbanus his time, if Gratian cite truly the words of Urban.

Albeit there may be some question of the authority of this testimony, the
credit whereof I will never seek to salve: yet because in a matter of story,
it agrees with other stories of that time, I think it not amiss for the
stories sake to set it down as it is in Gratian, and in the first tome of
councels, Videntes autem summi sacerdotes, and alij atque Leuitae, etc. that
is, The chief Bishops and other, Cuns. 12. q. (...)
and the Levites or ministers, and the rest of the faithful perceiving that
whereas lands and inheritances were wont to be sold, and the price given to the
Church, it might be more profitable if those lands and inheritances themselves
were given to the Churches that are governed by Bishops, because the faithful
that live in common might better be served and much more conveniently by the
rents of such lands, both for the present time, and for the time to come, then
by the price in money: hereupon those lands which before they were accustomed
to sell, they begun to bestow upon Cathedral Churches, and to live of the
rents. Now these lands were Matriabus ecclesijs.
within the privilege of every such diocesses of the Bishops In dictione
singularum parochiarum spiscoporum.
who hold the place of the Apostles, and so the same lands are, and for the
time to come ought to be. Out of these, the Bishops being faithful stewards
hereof ought to minister all necessaries to them that desire to live in
common, so that among them none want, for these things are the oblations of the
faithful, by these means the cathedral churches governed by the Bishops have
by Gods help had such increase, and so many so well provided, that among them
none that lives in common wants any thing, but receives all necessaries
from the Bishop and his ministers. And therefore if either now, or hereafter
any shall take those lands, let him be accursed, etc.

Out of which testimony, first it appears, that the community of things
lasted in some sort to this time, and therefore tithes are not spoken of so long
as this community was in use. It is also apparent by that which followed, that
this thing was the first occasion that the community ceased, and that tithes
came in use again. Secondly, we observe that the land and temporalties of
Bishops were not for this end, and use given them, that they should keep all
to themselves, but that they thence might comfort such as wanted, especially in
the ministry. Thirdly, it appears plain sacrilege to take such lands and
temporalties away from the Bishops and the Church. For first the lands were
sold and the price given, afterward the lands were given, if it were in the
choice of the giuers, whether they would give the price in money, or in lands:
I demand this question, when they gave the price in money, was it not
sacrilege to take it back again, or any part thereof? as Ananias and Saphira
did, Act. 5 1. Now if it were such sacrilege to take back the price, is not
the same to be thought of the lands themselves? for in this question, what
difference is between the lands, and the price of those lands?

Now whereas the question may be moved concerning Abbey lands, which were given
for superstitious uses: first the Ciuilians and Canonists are agreed upon the
point: for the Canonists hold that a custom may make a law how erroneous
soever the beginning was: the Ciuilians judge that if a thing be given to the
Church for unlawful uses, those uses must be altered, but the thing remain.
But now admitting that an error in the beeginning make a nullitie in the gift
from the beginning: yet we say this touches not Bishoprik lands at all, for
whoseuer is diligent in the story of the Church, will confess a great
difference between lands given to Bishopriks, and to Abbyes: for Bishopric
lands were given presently upon the planting of Churches. And no story can show
that ever there was a Church planted in the best times: but either lands were
committed to the government of Bishops for the use of the Church, or else the
price was brought to them, who then governed the Churches: but in Abbey lands
the case was nothing like, for this indowment of Abbyes with lands was of late,
in the time of superstition, brought in use, not upon the calling and planting,
but upon the corrupting of Churches, For which cause it must be confessed that
these two things, are not to be spoken of confusedly, as if one and the same
case were in both, seeing they are from such differing beginnings, and for such
differing ends.

Thus much then may be drawn, I say not from Urbanus his testimony, but from
the practice of the Church in the Apostles times, that whatsoever was given to
the Church, there being no error or superstition in the gift, that of right
ought to remain to the Church and to take that away, is sacrilege, what is
sacrilege if this be not?

Now as this does maintain the right of Bishops temporalties to the Church,
because that gift was given to the Church in the beginning without error or
superstition: so it maintains the right of tithes, which have been given by
the common consent of Christians to the Church. If there were no other right
saving this, that tithes have been dedicated to the Church, and in that
dedication there was no error or superstition, this were enough to prove that
tithes could not be taken away, no more then Ananias and Saphyra might take
away any part of that which they had vowed to the Church. But when we have this
reason added to the express will of God, that all tithes are the Lords,
always to be given to him, as we have showed, herein must needs be double
sacrilege, and manifest impiety committed, to take that away from God, which
God and man has decreed should be his.

A learned and godly minister of Scotland has set forth of late certain
sermons against sacrilege, yet not touching this question of tithes in this
sort, but rather declaring his opinion, that in some cases tithes might be
changed into another means of sufficient provision, if such godly zeal were
now among men, as was of old time, yet these cases wherein this change may be
admitted, he does not open, but as now the zeal of men stands, he is
utterly against the change. But it fares with him, as it must needs do with
all that sincerely write either against sacrilege or for the maintenance of
ministers, for let a man thoroughly touch these points, and will he, nill he,
he shall prove tithes due, as this man does, though not purposing the same,
for he proves, that to take away any thing of that which is holy to God, is
sacrilege. Now that tithes are ever holy to God, we have proved, both
dedicated to him by man, and aduouched by himself, so that of all things that
can be called holy in this sense, nothing has that place before tithes. If
then sacrilege be in taking away holy things from God and his Church, it
appears more in taking away tithes, then in any other thing whatsoever.
Neither can sacrilege herein be excused though men should establish something
in place of that holy thing taken away.

First, because the changing of holy things is sacrilege no less (though
happily a less kind of sacrilege) then taking away of the same. If
Nabucadnezzer having taken away the holy vessels out of the house of the Lord,
should in place thereof have put some other: might his sacrilege thereby be
excused? or Beltassar taking the vessels of the Lords house, and in them
banqueting with his Lords and Concubines, if he should in stead there of have
placed other, could any justify his sacrilege therefore? no more can the
taking away of tithes be justified, though something in place thereof should
be appointed by men. Secondly, again albeit we should admit, that in some
things of the Church this might be done, yet that it can be in tithes we
vtrerly deny, unless it be proved that the change is made by the same power
and authority by which tithes are made holy to God: now we have showed that
man did not make tithes holy to God and his Church, but the Lord himself.

Herein then we have not only the consent of man, but the express
approbation of God, so that if all the men of the world should agree to change
tithes, yet this would not make it lawful without express warrant from God,
who has appropriated tithes to himself, and out of his own right assigns
them to the maintenance of the ministry. Thirdly, what reason should move any
man to think it sacrilege, to take away lands given to the Church, albeit
given for superstitious uses; and yet think it no sacrilege to take away or
change tithes, which were not given for superstitious uses, but for maintenance
of preaching? For he that allows some other provision in place of tithes,
grants that to take away tithes in some case, is not sacrilege: If the
restitution of some provision in place of tithes could salve the Sacrilege,
why may not the Sacrilege of men be excused, who take away as much of the
Church lands as are at the value of ten thousand pounds, and in place thereof
give ten pounds? For when any thing is taken away, that a thing of the same
value should be restored, who can expect? and and who shall be judge? if then
to give some thing in place of that which is taken away, salve it from the
crime of Sacrilege, who sees not to what a wretched estate the Church must
needs be brought? for may not all be taken away, and something be given
back in place thereof, and yet that something be as good as nothing? But they
who admit that tithes may be taken away from the Church, do it with this
caution, so that a sufficient provision be left. This is a castle in the aier,
that never stood on the earth. For if we speak of the ordinary maintenance
of the preaching ministry, a sufficient maintenance is not, neither at any
time has been without tithes, and in this point the world is not like to
alter.

Then to speak of a sufficient maintenance without tithes, is but a conceit in
the brains of some men, which never was brought into action never will be: God
allowing a sufficient maintenance to the ministry, names it tithes. Now what
stipend can man name that will supply the place of tithes? I suppose it would
much trouble the wisest to name a stipend that would be sufficient at all
times, but tithes are sufficient at all times, howsoever the price of things
rise or fall, the minister has his part with his people in all estates by
tithes: which proportioning of the ministers estate making it able to answer
all estates a like, whether dear, or cheap: proceeding from the wisdom of God
cannot be bettered or matched by man's wisdom. Were it not then much easier to
bring that ordinance in use, which stands so agreeable with the laws of God,
and nature, and of godly kings: then to devise strange courses, which never
were in use; and being devised will never prove sufficient? But let us return
to the use of this time whereof we speak.

The use of giving lands to chief Churches, whether begun before Urban, or by
him, so much as in him lies, he confirms, providing that those lands so
given may be retained to the use of the Church, such lands and possessions
were then given to the head Churches of every country, and committed to the
Bishops who governed those Churches, as to wise and faithful stewards to
husband the same, according to the necessities of the Church through their
diocesses. It grew afterward in process of time, that the Bishops held those
lands for their proper uses, but this was from a latter use, the distribution
of Church goods, being first brought into four parts, and by little and little
afterward, as authority so power to maintain that authority falling into the
hand of one man. The former use was so ancient, that it is hard to fetch the
beeginning thereof. In the time of Urbanus Origin lived, for Hierom says, that
Lib de scriptor. eccles.
Origin was 17. years old in the tenth year of Seuerus, and died about the
70. year of his age, so he lived long before and after the time wherein Urban
sat in the Sea of Rome. In his time that order of the Church, which before was
held in the community of all things decaying: tithes were accounted due, and
called for. That thus they were accounted in his time, it appears by these
testimonies: Quomodo abundat iustitia nostra plusquam Orig. Hom 11. in Number.
Scribarum and Pharisaeorum, si illi de fructibus terrae suae gustare non
audent, priusquam primitias sacerdotibus efferant, and Leuitis decimae
separentur: and ego nihil horum faciens, fructibus terrae ita abutar, vt
sacerdos nesciat, Levites ignoret, diuinum altar nonsentiat? where Origin for
the farther manifestation of his meaning does distinguish these terms, lex,
mandata, iustificationes, praecepta, testimonia, but forasmuch as serves our
purpose, he observes that it is not written, haec est lex decimarum, as it is
written of things ceremonial: haec est lex paeschae, lex Azymorum, lex
circumcisionis, where Origin notes that this is a mark of a ceremony, for of
such it is never written says he, hoc est mandatum Paschae, but haec est lex
Paschae, etc. by which he proves that tithes are no ceremonies, and he lays
down this position, Christus nos redemit de maledicto legis, non de maledicto
mandati, nec de maledicto testimonij; aut iudiciorum, which sentence would be
favorably expounded, as taking usaledictum for the obligation which did bring
the curse with it: but I seek out only the judgment of Origin for the point
in question: upon these reasons he says plainly, hanc ego legem (speaking of
the law whereby Ibid.
tithes were paid) obseruari etiam secundum literam, sicut and alia nonnulla
necessarium puto, and again, non videtur huinsmodi anima habere memoriam Dei,
nec cogiture, nec credere quia Deus dederit fructus quos caepit, quos i^a
recondit quasi alienes a Deo, si enim a Deo sibi dates crederet, sciret vtique
munerando Sacerdotes, honorare Deum de datis and muneribus suis, farther he
expounds that saying, Mat. 23. these things you ought to have done, and not
to have left the other undone: to be a precept no less for the use of
Christions, then Jews. Out of which testimonies we see plainly what Origin
(whom Hierom accounts the most learned of the Fathers) esteems of tithes.
Of diverse things so expressly affirmed by him, we may especially observe two.

First, that Origin (who by Hieroms account was borne in the year of Christ
188.) had received from his elders no other knowledge of this question, then
this, that tithes are due among Christians, secundum literam, as well as among
Jews.

Secondly, it is to be observed, that as soon as we first hear any thing
spoken of this question in the church we find that tithes were not accounted
ceremonial, or judicial, but moral and perpetual precepts for the Church.
Now as Origin receives and reports the doctrine of the Church before him, so
immediately succeeding the Apostles, for between the death of John the
Apostle, and Origin were but 84. years, so that which Origin here delivers
of tithes, was never crossed in the Church following, till Antichrist oppressed
all. Now this seems to me, a very great presumption for the truth, if there
were no more, that a sentence should be kept in the best times of the Church,
so long uncontrolled, and never altered, till the mist of superstition came in,
which changed all things. But let us consider the rest which follow.

Next after Origin follows Cyprian who reproving Cyprian ep. 66.
Geminius Faustinus, whom Geminus Victor had made ouerseer of his will this he
sharply rebuking as being against the Canons says, that ministers (or as he
terms them by a word in use in that age, Presbyteri) have nothing to do with
secular affairs: but as the Levites had no other business but to attend on
the Altar, so the Lord had provided for ministers, that they might not be
drawn by worldly occasions from their holy business: but might live of that
honorable stipend with their brethren, In honor sportulantium fratrum.
as they who received tithes of the fruit of the earth. etc. Tanquam decimas ex
fructu accipientes ab altari and sacrificijs non recedant, sed die ac nocte
celestibus rebus ac spiritualibus seruiant. Where he says the ministers lived
in honor sportulantium fratrum: It shows that ancient use whereof we spoke
before, that the goods of the Church, whether rents of lands, or tithes, or
whatsoever other provision, were in his time retained according to the ancient
custom, in the Bishops hands, and out of them did the Bishop minister to the
necessity of every one, for sportula was the stipend or allowance of each
Presbyter or minister, which the Bishop then used to distribute among them, of
the goods of the Church. This was the ancient use of the Church, before the
division of Parishes: for at this time the division of Parishes was not yet
instituted, so we find tithes paid before Parishes were divided: but then
brought to the Bishop and by him distributed among the Ministers.

It is the common opinion that Dyonisius did first institute the division of
the parishes, who was Bishop of Rome by Hieroms account in the year 266. that
is some Inter decreta Dionisij and cause. 13. q. 1.
eight years after Cyprians martyrdom or Origens death, for they two dyed
almost within one year. By this time parishes began to be divided, and tithes
orderly assigned to several Churches.

Here the question may be moved, when began tithes to be distinctly assigned
to their several Churches. This question we move for our ministers at the
common law, who following a common error, and taking up some rumor without
skanning, hold that tithes were not assigned to any certain Churches before
the council of Lateran: and that in the former times before that council, it
was lawful for a man to pay tithes to what Church he would; so he paid, it was
no matter to whom. But this is a tale not only without all ground of story,
but against the testimony of ancients: for presently upon the division of
parishes, it was assigned to what several churches tithes should be paid.
Gratian brings a testimony out of Dionisius himself to prove this. Ecclesias
singulas, Cause. 3. q.
etc that is: we have assigned several churches for several ministers, and
divided to each their parishes and churchyards, and appointed that every one
should have their proper right, so that none may intrude upon the parish or
right of another. The same is also confirmed by the testimony of Leo the
fourth, who says, de decimis etc. that is, concerning tithes not we only,
but also those aunceaunts that have been before us, have thought good that the
people should pay them to baptismall Churches. By a baptismall Chuch is meant
such a Chuch where all who dwell within the circuit of that parish ought to be
baptized, and it is distinguished by this name from Chapels, for albeit
diverse Chapels were founded within the same circuit, yet it was the ancient
order that Baptism might not be celebrated in those Chapels, but only in
the chief Church in that circuit. This is confirmed out of a council of
Toledo, plures baptismales Cause. 16. q. plures.
ecclesiae in vna terminatione esse non possunt, sed vna tantummodo cum
capellis suis. The counsel called Cabilonense about the year 650. has thus:
Ecclesiae antiquitus constitutae Ibid. Eccle.
nec decimis, nec vlla possessione priuentur, ita vt nouis oratorijs
tribuantur. And in case a man should build a Church or Chapel within his own
liberty, yet he might not pay tithes to it, but the tithes must go to the
ancient Church as in former times, for so says a council of Worms about the
time of Charles the great. Quicunque Ibid. qnicu^
voluerit etc. that is, If any man will build a new Church within his own
liberty, he may, so he have the consent of the Bishop in whose diocese it
is, but then the Bishop must provide that the ancient Churchs loose not their
right and tithes, by these new, but the tithes are always to be paid to the
ancient Churches.

Anastasius Bishop of Rome, Ann. 398. has two testimonies to the same purpose,
Statuimus etc. that is, we appoint Ibid. statui^
that if any shall withold the tithes and offerings which the people are to
pay, or shall give them from the baptismall Churches without the knowledge of
the Bishop, or of him whose duty it is to look thereto, and will not be
ruled by their counsel, he be accursed and debarred from the communion.

Now if hence any shall surmise that he may by the sufferance of the Bishop
do this, because he is commanded without his knowledge not to do it: that is
answered, Council. Wormac: that the Bishop himself may not give that license to
pay tithes from Baptismall Churches; and in an other place it is said, that if
the Bishop should do so, he should turn the house of God into a den of Ibid.
q. 7.
thieves, and should therefore be excommunicate without hope of return.
Again, Anastasius says, quidam laici qui vel in proprijs, vel in beneficijs
suas habent basilicas, contempta Cause. 16. q. 1.
Episcopi dispositione, non ad Ecclesias vbi baptismum and praedicationem, and
alia Christi Sacrame^ta percipiunt, decimas suas dant, sed proprijs Basilicis,
vel alijs Ecclesiis pro libitu sue tribuunt, quod omnibus modis legi and sacris
canonibus constat esse contrarium. The council of Chalcedon Can. 16.
witnesses that the country parish Churches were under the jurisdiction of
several Bishops, and if a question rose to which Bishop the parish belonged,
30. years prescription was required to prove the right. If any city should
be afterward renewed by the authority of the Emperor, then the ordination of
Parishes should follow the new ordination of that city. Thus were parish
Churches under the government of Bishops, and tithes assigned to their proper
Churches, long before the council of Lateran: that counsel provided nothing
at all in this point, only whereas the Regulars and Seculars were then
devising a trick to defraud the Churches of tithes, the counsel provided to
take order to stop that injustice, for the Regulars and Seculars when they let
their houses or farms, would covenant that the farmer should pay tithes to
them, hereby the Church to whose parish the farm belonged, was defrauded. To
redress this abuse the counsel of Lateran, Cap. 56. ordains that such
tithes should not be paid to the landlords, but to the parish Church. This is
the rather to be noted, because it opens the manner and beginning of that
wickedness, which came in by such fraternities, for from these beginnings
impropriations came in, now the counsel cunningly helped forward the matter,
for by taking away private authority, there was a privilege cunningly thrust
into the Popes hands, and therefore this abuse was forbidden by the counsel,
because they who would do it, must fetch a license from the Pope, for before
this time began those dispensations as hereafter will be showed. Before we
proceed to the testimonies of succeeding Fathers, one thing I would note
concerning patronages of Churches, for that is a thing not unworthy of
knowledge, and pertaining to the question which I follow.

The Church had of old, even from the Apostles times, or very near them, lands
and possessions, which were desposed by the chief of the clergy, that is,
Bishops, there were also, as parishes were distinguished, some portions of land
assigned to every parish Church, Ministers then having temporalties, as now we
call them, it could not choose but questions might arise concerning those
possessions. Now when any troublesome question did arise, those godly men in
the beginning would not be contentious in the law, no not for their own
lands, wherefore because they should neither be drawn from the service of the
Church through suits, nor yet loose their land upon the suit of contentious
men: there were certain temporal men appointed either by godly kings, whom
Marsilius Patauinus calls Legislatores, or by such as gave those lands, to be
Patrons of Churches, who might be ready to defend, the Church-rights, that the
Bishops and Pastors might with more fruit, and less encumbrance apply their
vocations.

Marsilius Patauinus witnesses thus much: Dominium Defens. pac. part 2 Cap. 14.
temporaliu^ quae sunt pro ministroru^ Eua^gelicoru^ sustentatione statuta, est
legislatoris, aut eius vel eoru^, qui per legislatorem ad hoc fuerint deputati,
vel per eos qui talia dederunt, si fuerint singulares personae, quae supra
dicta temporalia dederint, et ordinauerint ex bonis suio ad vsum praedictum.
Qui sequidem sic statuti ad ecclesiasticorum temporalium defensionem and
vendicationem, vocari solebant ecclesiarum patroni. Nam antiquitus viri sancti
atque perfecti ministri eua^gelici Christum imitari volentes, contra nullum
voluerunt contondere iudicio. Our purpose is not to stay in examining every
defect in Marsilius, whereunto he was carried by an earnest welwilling to the
Emperors cause, and an hatred against the abuses of the church as then it
stood. Only we note that temporal patrones were appointed by the first
doners, not to bestow church-liuings, as now they do, but to defend the right
of the land given to the church. For at the first, patrones had no more right,
neither could retain any more to themselves then that which was common to all.
This appears out of diverse testimonies (which I cite only for story sake:
for although these be not undoubted testimonies, yet undoubtedly this use may
be made of them) Whereas one Julius had founded a church, Gelasius writes to
Senectior Bishop of that dioces, wherein the church was founded, to dedicate Or
as the gloss seems to read the dotation.
the same. Provided, that first Julius did resign the donation: and he must
know that he can retain therein no right to himself, praeter processionis
aditum, qui omnibus christianis dibetur. What is meant by processionis aditus, I
Cause. 16. q. 7.
leave to the canonists to expound: but by the words it seems to be a thing
common to all christians. It is likewise witnessed, that one Frigentius,
founding a Church, retained no more then the former. The same is confirmed Ibid.
by a constitution of the fourth Toletan council. Nouerint conditores
basilicarum in rebus quas eisdem conferunt, nullam se potestatem habere, sed
iuxta canonum instituta, Council. Tolet. 4. can. 32.
sicut ecclesiam, ita and dotem eius ad ordinationem episcopi pertinere. But in
the same council it is granted, that the founders of churches in their life
time only may nominate a minister to the church. Thus much concerning the
beginning of patronages: where we may note how far this thing among many is
drawn by corruption from the beginning: for patrons were first instituted for
defense of the church rights from the wrong and insolences of corrupt and
contentious men. But the rights of the church, are at this day every where
overthrown, as it were by a common conspiracy of men, against the church and
ministry, partly by ancient corruptions, partly by latter. And where can the
church have her right, for corrupt customs? but do the patrones stand in the
gap to defend the church-right? do they not look on whilst enery one makes
have to carry away the spoils, one inuiting another as to a common pray. They
will say, it were to much for them to defend the church in this spoiling age:
yet this they should do from the beginning. Sed quis custodiat ipsos custodes?
but I return to my story.

We have showed out of such records as are least, when tithes began to be
established in the church, after the Apostles: how parishes were separated, and
tithes severally assigned to each limitation; that the use of paying tithes to
limited churches was not a matter devised by the council of Lateran, but in
better use, and more incorrupt order before that council then ever since: that
the use of patronages in the beginning was for the defense of the
church-rights. Now we are to inquire how the succeeding fathers did write of
tithes after they were once assigned to particular churches.

Chrysostom teaching an husbandman how he may be a worthy Christian and do
good works though he build no Churches, says: quasi ducta vxore vel sponsa,
vel data virgin, sie erga Ecclesiam affectus esto, dotem ascribe Hom, 18, i^
Act.
illi, ita benedictionis praedium multiplicabitur, quid enim non erit illic
bonorum? parumne est obscero toreular benedici? panumne est Deum ex omnibus
fructibus prius partem ac decimas accipere? ad pacem agricolarum hoc vtile, and
presently after, preces illic perpetuae propter te, lauds ac synaxes propter
te, he does not only teach them that they ought to pay tithes, but he gives
these reasons, because their service, prayers, preaching, is for thee: and
because this is the means to have a plentiful blessing upon the rest, he
witnesses also the same use of paying tithes in his time, by reproouing the
abuses of Bishops and ministers, when they seemed more careful to receive
tithes, then to procure the good of the people, of which sort many were in his
time, and many more are in our days: Si populus decimas non obtulerit,
murmurant omnes: at si peccantem populum viderint, nemo murmurat contra cos.
Hom. 44. in Mat.
Hierom speaking in the person of a minister of the gospel, says thus. If I
then being a part of the Lords inheritance, take not my part among my brethren,
but as a Leuite Ad Nepotia. de vitacler.
and Priest, live of tithes, having meat and raiment, heerewithall I am
contented. Again he says, quod de decimis diximus, quae olim dabantur a
populo sacerdotibus and In Malach. 3. 8.
Leuitis in Ecclesiae quoque populis intelligito. In which place he says
farther: Ecclesiae populis praeceptum est dare decimas, for proof he
alleges S. Paul, the elders that govern well, are worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor 1. Tim. 5.
most in the word and doctrine, expounding honor, maintenance: and
understanding that maintenance, tithes. Out of which testimonies of Hierom (who
is by Erasmus judged the most learned of the Latin Fathers) it may be observed.

First, that the precept of tithes is taken to be part of the moral law, and
ought to be in no less force among Christians then among Jews, such strangers
were the learned Fathers in these late devises which now are found out, that
tithes should be ceremonial or judicial, for albeit these terms, decimae
debentur iure diuino, were not in use in those ancient times, yet the Fathers
expressly delivered that which is aeqiualent, that Christians are bound to the
law of tithes as well as Jews were: that the precept for paying tithes is now
to be understood in the Church secundum literam.

Secondly, we observe that the reasons used in the new Testament by the
Apostles do truly in the Fathers judgments conclude for tithes, and not for
the pretended competency, which thing was utterly unknown to the Fathers.
Ambrose faith: Quicunque recognouerit in se quod In sermon. Quadrages.
sideliter non dederit decimas, modo emendet quod minus fecit, quid est
fideliter dare? nisi vt nec peius, nec minus aliquando afferat de grano, aut de
vino, aut de fructibus arborum, aut de pecudibus, aut de horto, etc. In
Augustins time, it seems the people, at least in Africa, were very negligent
in paying tithes, and therefore he exhorts them very earnestly to that
duty, Maiores nostri ideo copys Lib. 50. Homoliarum homel. 48.
omnibus abundabant, quia Deo decimas dabant, and Caensari censum reddebant:
modo autem quia discessit deuotio Dei, accessit indictio fisci: noluimus
partiri cum Deo decimas, modo autem totum tolletur. In which place he
witnesses two things. First, that it was the custom of the Church long before
his time to pay tithes. Secondly, that this thing pleased God so much, that he
blessed them who used it, so that therefore they had abundance: and that men
now in his time wanted, because they were not faithful in this service of God:
and therefore preaching upon the 146. Psalm. upon these words, he makes the
grass to grow upon the mountains: he compares the husband man to the
mountain, that receives rain and brings forth grass, he compares
preaching to the rain, and tithes to grass, ecce mons es, accipe pluuia^, and
da faenu^, and therefore a little after he says exime partem aliquam reddituum
tuorum, decimas vis? decimas exime, quanquam parum sit, dictum est enim quia
Pharisaei decimas dabant, and quid ait. Dominus, nisi abundauerit iusticia
vestra plusqua^ Scribarum and Pharisaeorum non intrabitis in regnum coelorum,
and ille super quem debet abundare iusticia tua, decimas dat, tu autem vix
centessimam das. Where S. Augustine expounds the words of the Gospel as
Origin and other Fathers did, as no less belonging, yea much more to
Christians then to Jews. He speaks not doubting (as some understand his
words) but because the people of his country were so far from performing this
duty, if there be any doubt in his words, it is only in this, whether the
tenth part were not too little, for so does his words imply, decimas vis?
decimas exime, quanquam paris sit. And he whom thou must exceed in
righteousness pays tithes, whereby he implies, that thou must pay more, for
he does not leave it at the peoples liberty to pay tithes, or not to pay, as
some take it: but shows them that were so far from this duty, that they
ought to pay tithes and yet do more then that. Leo the first, lived in S.
Augustins time, but younger; Gratian cites his words thus. Nullus decimas ad
alteru^ pertine^tes accipiat: not long after this, the council called
Marisconense 2. was held, Cause. 16. q. 2.
wherein it was thus decreed. Leges diuinae sacerdotibus and ministris
ecclesiaru^ pro haereditaria portione omni populi praeceperu^t, Council. Matif.
2. can. 6.
decimas fructuu^ suoru^ sacris locis praestare, vt nullo habere impediti,
spiritualibus possent vacare ministerijs: quas leges Christianorum congerics
longis temporibus custodiuit intemeratas. Vnde statuimus vt mos antiquus
reparetur, vt decimas ecclesiasticas omnis populus inferat. This council was
held about the year of Christ: 580. The testimony of the fathers of this
council is to be observed They witness that the ordinance of tithes was very
ancient in the church before them: and as ancient, so universally received
among Christians. They witness likewise that the right thereof is from the law
of God. Before this council almost an hundredth years, was held the first
council of Orleans, which affirms the same. After this the same truth was
likewise confirmed by diverse counsels. Council: Caebilone^s: 2. cap. 19.
council: Melens. cap. 2. Council. Valent. cap. 10. Council. Foreiuliens. cap. vlt.
Council. Mogunt: cap. 17. Council. Rothomag. which is thus cited by Gratian:
Omnes decimae terrae, sieve de frugibus, sieve de pomis arborum, domini sunt, and
illi sanctificantur Ones, boues, and Cause. 16. q. 1.
caprae quae sub virga pastoris transeunt, quioquid decimae euenor it
sanctificabitur Domino. The Fathers of this council show that they understood
the precept of tithes Leuit. 27. literally, no otherwise to be understood for
Jews then Christians. Council. Triburiens. cap. 13. and 14. says thus: quid si
dicerit Dominiss, nempe meus es o homo, mea est terra quam colis, mea semina
q^^ spargis, mea animalia quae fatigas, meus est solis ardor: and quum omnia
mea sint, tu qui manus accomodas solum decimam merebaris, sed seruo tibi nouem,
da mihi decimam, si non dederis decima^ auferam nouem, si dederis mihi decimam
multiplicabo nouem. Si ergo querat aliquis cur decimae dantur, sciat quod ideo
dandae sunt, vt hac deuotione Deus placatus, largius praestet quae necessaria
sunt, and vt ministri Ecclesiae exinde releuati, liberiores fiant ad
spiritualis exercitij explecionem. Gregory the first says thus: sicut offerre
in lege iubemini, fratres Hom. 16. in Euang,
charissimi, decimas rerum, it a ei offerre contendite decimas dierum, where
Gregory expressly applies the precept of tithes written in the law to
Christians, teaching that christians in the law were commanded to pay tithes.
Beda in his book called Scintillae proves tithes due by Scriptures and
Fathers, he cites out of Augustine: decimae ex debito requiruntur, and qui eas
dare noluerit, res alienas inuadit. And again: haec est Domini iustissima
consuetudo, vt si tu illi decimam non dederis, tu ad decimam reuoceris: And
many other testimonies.

Caesarius Arelatens. Episc: says, decimae non sunt nostrae, sed Hom: 9,
Ecclesiae. Walafridus Strabo says, decimas Deo and sacerdotibus eius dandas,
Abraham factis, Jacob promissis insinuat, De rebus ecclesijs. cap. 87.
deinde lex statuit, and omnes doctores sancti commemorant. Leo the fourth,
about the year of Christ, 840. is thus cited by Gracian, de decimis iusto
ordine, non tantum nobis, sed etiam maioribus visum est a plebibus tantum vbi
sacrosancta Cause. 16. q. 10.
baptismata dantur, debere dari. About this time and after it, tithes were
established by constitutions of Princes, as by Charles the great, and other.
Some learned men have thought, because some Princes have made constitutions for
tithes to be paid to the Church: that therefore tithes are held by no other
right then Princes constitutions. But before this time tithes were always held
by the laws of God, and not of Princes. I grant if Princes were so ungodly,
as they were in the time of the Apostles, that they would not yield to Gods
ordinance herein, but would resist the same: then could not tithes be paid,
as in the Apostles times for that cause they were not, but the right cease
not, and as wicked Princes cannot take away the right by stopping the practice:
so godly Princes cannot make a right, but only confirm it, when by their good
laws they yield to Gods ordinance. Though Ezekias by a Godly law command the
keeping of the Passover: yet the Passover may not therefore 1. Chron 30.
be called the constitution of Ezekias. It is the more to be maruailed, that
men of learning are so hasty in concluding that tithes are nothing but princes
constitutions, because they find them confirmed by some few princes. After
this time the Church succeding, agreed with the former Churches in this
opinion, as appears by the testimonies recorded. Auent: lib. 3. Anual. Synod.
Arelat: 4 cap 9. Synod. Anglic. cap. 17. in which place it is testified, that
tithes ought to be paid, as it is commanded in the law, they testify also
that no man can give acceptable alms of the rest, unless first he separate
the tenth to the Lord, which he has appointed for himself from the beginning,
they testify farther, that many grudging to pay the tenth part, are therefore
often themselves brought to atenth part: the same is confirmed by Rabanus
Maurus, in Number. lib. 2. ca. 22. and 23. Leges Boiorum apud Auent. lib. 3.
Gregory. 2. apud Auent. lib. 3. Council. Warm. cause. 16. q. 1. Nicolaus 1.
(about the year of Christ 858.) cause. 16. qu. 2.

And thus in the story of tithes we are come to those timees wherein the
change began, for all this while there was no change thought of in this
question. After this, began those late devises where of we spoke before, for now
the Pope being grown to such an incorrigle pride and liberty, that he would do
al things after his own pleasure, no Prince or Emperor being able to bring
him into order, began by his al-oppressing power to change this ordinance of
tithes, which from the beginning remained untouched till now, for after it was
once found out, that all things holy and profane, were ready merchandise for
them that brought most: then came in exemptions first, and afterward
impropriations, transfering tithes from one to an other: when exemptions first
came in, I cannot certainly define. In the schism between two Popes Alexander
the third, and Victor the fourth, Alexander prevailed by force and
perfidiousnes, as they speak who write thereof, of him it is testified:
Cistercienses, Hospitalarios, and Templarios decimarum solutione exemit, before
that time Catus. test. veril. tom. 2. lib. 15.
John xv. gave the like privilege to Saint Benets Monks at Casinum as
witnesses Leo Marsican: Hostiensis Episcop. Lib. 2. cap. 1. histor. Casinensis
monasterij, in these words. hoc vltra Iohannem duodecimum, etc. in suo
priuilegio autoritate Apostolica addidit, nulli Episcopo licere ab vllo ex
populis monasterio subiectis, vel a quibuslibet vbique terrarum ad se
pertinentibus Ecclesijs, decimas viuorum seu oblationes defunctorum qualibet
occasion percipere. This John was Pope Ann. 990.

After this the merchandise of exempting and appropriating was well followed:
this new practice of Popes against the ancient ordinance of God was first
maintained by the wit of Alexander de Hales, and after by Thomas of Aquine as
we have showed. Their devise is that tithes are judicials: they framed new
distinctions to color the Popes usurpation, after he had first by
impropriations broken the ordinance of God, and put tithes away from the
teachers, which from the beginning of the world till these times, had not been
done before. All the schole-men in a manner follow these two in this question:
who with their unfruitful disputations darkning the church, as they carried
many parts of the holy truth into bondage, so it is not much to be maruailed
if this truth of tithes found among them the same intertainment, which other
parts of the truth of greater importance did find. After this time the right
of tithes seemed to lie buried by the Popes usurpation, without great
resistance: yet some were found though few, who against the flattery of
schole-men, preserved the truth of this question. Nicolaus Lyra, albeit carried
into some superstitions by the stream of those times, yet taught this point
not after the late schole-men, but after the ancient fathers. So did Strabus
an Anglosaxon the author of the ordinary gloss. Johannes Semeca, author of the
gloss upon Gratians decrees, did withstand Pope Clement the fourth, exacting
tithes through Germany, which thing Semeca took to be unlawful, and was
therefore excommunicate by the Pope, and put from the place of government,
which he held at Halberstade. Against which injustice, Semeca appealed to a
council, and had many great men favoring his cause. Whilst the contention grew
hot between them, the death of them both ended the quarrel: the story is in
Krantzius. And thus the Pope oppressing all with his greatness, making open
sale of tithes, instituting impropriations, laid wast the Churches every where.
And in this sort they stood until the time of reformation began by the blessed
labors of them whom God raised up for that service. After which time the
opinion that tithes were ceremonials was first devised.

CHAP. VI.
The objections answered, and the point in question confirmed.

THus far have we followed the story of Tithes from the beginning, though not
so exactly as might be wished, yet so as serves sufficiently to show how the
right of tithes have stood: that they were always due to the teachers of the
Church, before the law, under the law, and in the time of grace. And this is
sufficient to show that this thing belongs to the moral law, and so to the
law of nature. For that which always remains the same in all ages of the
church, does surely belong to the moral law. Thus have tithes always stood the
same in all ages of the church, until late corruptions breaking in like a flud,
have taken away the knowledge and right difference of things. But if a man with
judgment think of the matter, he will confess that late vpstarts opinions,
especially such as are maintained neither by scriptures, ancient fathers, nor
reasons (for they who hold tithes from the church have no other argument then
such as moved the Pope to take them away, might, and usurpation, and that most
pleasing reason of gain) A man I say of judgment and indifferency must
needs yield that these later opinions ought not to prescribe against so
ancient a truth.

Now least any scruple might remain, we purpose last of all to consider the
objections moved against our conclusion. Bellarmine passes somewhat hastily by
it, and makes but one objection, but Alphonsus Tostales Bishop of Abula does
insist in the question and seeks to breed more trouble. First he would
prove that tithes belong not to the law of nature. Secondly, not to the moral
law.

And first he obiecteth thus: God did institute in the old Testament, that
tithes should be paid, therefore Abulens. in Mat. cap. 23. qu. 136.
this is not pertaining to the law of nature: the reason is, that which is
natural is not instituted by a law, for unto such things the bond of nature
suffices: we answer, we find many things instituted in the law, which out of
question belong to the law of nature, as the whole decalog. Abulensis reasons
against this answer thus: things pertaining to the law of nature, are not put
among other precepts, but only they are contained in the decalog, tithes are
put with others. I answer to this last objection, and to the former thus:
tithes have two respects.

First, if we respect the general ordinance of tithes, they were not
instituted in the law, for this ordinance was before the law, and so tithes
were always the Lords, as we have showed. Secondly, if we respect the
particular assignation of tithes to the Levites, this is all which was
instituted in the law. Now this Leuiticall assignation is put with other
precepts, but the general ordinance of tithes is included in the decalog. The
parts of this distinction we have proved, wherefore all that Abulensis can
prove by this argument, is only this, that the Leuiticall assignation was not
belonging to the law of nature, which we yield. Again, where he says, nothing
belonging to the law of nature is set among other preceps, this is false: for
those things which are included in the decalog, are often repeated among other
precepts, therefore idolatry, whordome, and such like are forbidden, not only
in the decalog, but among other precepts: usury is against the law of nature,
as natural men have witnessed, yet it is set among other precepts, and the
Prophet Ezekiel shows that all these, usury, idolatry, whordome, etc. are the
breaches of the moral law, Ezekiel. 18. therefore those things that beelong to
the law of nature are set among other precepts. To that objection which
Abulensis draws from Jacobs vow, we have answered before.

Farther he obiecteth thus: If they were of the law of nature, then should all
nations be bound thereto, to this we have answered before, showing that all
Christians have thought themselves bound thereto, and that even heathen men
have thought no less.

Another objection is: If they belong to the law of nature, then should they be
due to Gods ministers; and yet in the old Testament tithes were not given, nor
any part of them, to the priests, which were gods chief ministers, but only
to the Levites which were ministers of less place. I answer: where as
Abulensis says, the priests had no tithes, which saying he often repeateth; we
think it enough to answer him with the authority of other. Lyra a Jew borne
and more skillful in the ancient affairs of the Jews, then Abulensis, upon
the 7. Heb. says thus: Leuitae generaliter recipiebant decimas a reliquo
populo. Inter Leuitas autem illi qui erant maiores illius tribus, videlicet
sacerdotes summi filij* Aaron, non solum accipiebant decimam a populo, sed
etiam de part Leuitarum recipiebant, quae vocabatur decima decimae Number: 18.
This testimony spoileth his argument. Hierom also witnesses as much, in
Malach. 3. Again, in the language of the fathers, this word Levites under the
gospel is always used for a preaching minister. Whereby they signified that
tithes were due to laboring ministers. Bishops were otherwise provided for:
albeit in the beginning Bishops had the distributing of such things among the
ministers. He obiecteth farther. When GOD disposed of tithes Number. 18. He says:
I have given the tithes to the children of Leui, for their service at the
tabernacle, etc.

Wherein is meant, that he gave this possession but of late to the Leuits: and
therefore commanded them to possess nothing among their brethren (thus much we
grant, what is the conclusion?) now if tithes were due by the law of nature,
then would not God take from them the right of possessing the land among the
Israelites. We answer: this last inference is divided, there is no proof
brought for it, neither is there any affinity between the antecedent and
consequent: For GOD may command the Levites to possess no lands (other then
was assigned to them, which was a large portion) because no worldly business
should call them away from the service of GOD, and because the ministers of the
gospel might be instructed, not to entangle themselves with the affairs of
this world to much, in which sense the Apostle gives that instruction to
Timothy: no man that warreth does entangle himself with the affairs of this
life, because he would please him that has cosen him 2. Tim. 2. 4.
to be a soldier: and yet the general right of tithes may belong to the law
of nature for all this. But admitting the conclusion, we say it concludes
only of the Leuiticall assignation, not of the general ordinance. Another
objection is. The Levites by the law of nature were not dedicated to the
service of the Tabernacle, therefore the tenth was not determinable by nature.
We answer: The dedication of the Levites to the service of the Tabernacle was
ceremonial. That therefore tithes should be ceremonial, the consequence
houldeth not: no not so much as to prove the Leuiticall assignation
ceremonial. It proves that assignation only temporary not perpetual: For it
is to last no longer then the service of the Levites. This is all that can be
truly inferred.

Another objection is thus: That thing is only pertaining to the law of
nature, whose bond and duty may be determined by natural reason, but
natural reason does not determine numbers, for there can no natural reason
be brought, why rather the tenth part then more or less should be paid. We
answer by distinguishing both laws natural and moral. If we understand the
law of nature to reach as far as the moral law in his largest sense, (as
Abulensis understands it) then tithes belong to the law of nature, even as
does the sanctifieng of a seventh day to God, and natural reason does as well
determine the tenth in number as the seventh in number. And because Abulensis
takes natural in this sense, (for in Leuit. cap. 1. qu. 1. he says: Moralia
praecepta naturalia sunt) therefore in answering whenever I admit tithes to
belong to the law of nature, I would be understood to speak in this sense.
But if we take the law of nature, for that which flows from natural
principles and is manifested to the natural man by natural means: so we
grant tithes not natural. We may also distinguish things moral, for either
they are moral by divine institution, or by nature: things moral by nature
are those that belong to the law of nature, in which sense the moral law and
natural law is all one.

But moral by institution are all things beelonging to the true worship of
God; which things as they come not from the principles of nature, so they are
not known to the natural man. Among these things are a sanctifieng of a
seventh day by God, and sanctifieng of tithes to God: which things are moral
by divine institution, and so natural by a secondarie declaration after, and
upon the law of nature, and in that sense reduced to the law of nature, as all
things that are reueiled in the true worship of God, being moral, not by
nature but by divine institution.

Another objection is: If it were moral, then must it remain as it then
stood, but then it stood so, as to be paid to the Leuits, not to the Priests,
therefore it should not now be paid to the Priests, yet now it is paid to
the Priests, we answer, this is a fallacy (...) the ambiguitie is in this
word Priest. They are not now given to such Priests as then were, but they are
now given to the laboring ministers: who albeit in the time of Abulensis were
commonly called priests, and (the word being understood aright) may justly be
so called: yet in truth they answer not to the Priests of the old Testaments,
but to the Levites, as we have showed. Again, we have proved out of Lyra and
Hierom, that even then also they were given to the Priests.

An other objection is: tithes were the Levites right for their service: but
there was no more reason to give tithes to Levites, then to Priests: this is
answered, it rests upon those grounds, that no tithes were then given to
Priests, which is untrue, and that tithes were assigned to the Levites which
speaks only of the assignation, and not of the general ordinance.

Another objection is: the service of the Levites was a greater thing, then
that which was given for their service: but the service it self cease,
therefore all the Levites right ought to cease: we answer, we admit the
conclusion. All the Levites right cease, that is that Leuiticall assignation,
but the perpetual ordinance of tithes, as it was before Leuy can not be taken
away by the particular assignation.

Another objection he frames thus: If it were natural, then it could not be
changed nor altered by any dispensation: we answer, hoc illud est. This is
the great objection that carried Abulensis, and all the rest to devise these
quirks and subtilties against tithes, we can easily answer, that the Popes
dispensation herein was unlawful and impious, but all means must be
attempted that man's wit can devise, before the Popes high crown be touched.
This is the obiecton which only was thought unanswerable, all the rest are but
brought to fill up a number, as doing their service to this: now this reason is
with us of no strength, what account soever the Papists make of it, and even
among them, there are diverse which doubt not but that the Pope does dispense
with some things even against the law of nature, as appears by those cases,
which are called casus Papales, Apud francis. Astesanum ite^ Hostiense^.
which are drawn also into verses beginning thus: Si sit Catholicus papam non
iudicat vllus.
Wherein it is said that he has power to dispense in exemptions and perjury,
to dispense with that which is cursed anathemate, to dispense against all the
rules and canons of the Church, to dispense with that sin which is greater
then adultery, and such like, and therefore no marvel if he dispensed against
the right of tithes. And these are the great reasons that Abulensis brings
against this question.

Bellarmine brings but one argument, and that to prove tithes not ceremonial,
but judicial, he says tithes are not ceremonial but judicial: nam non
ordinantur immediate De cleric^ lib. 1. ca. 25.
ad colendum deum, sed ad aequitatem inter homines, but how does he prove this?
for faith he, God commanded tithes should be paid to Leuy, because Leuy was
the tenth part of Israel, that there might be a proportion between their
estate, and the rest: we answer this reason for paying tithes is found in no
Scripture, but in Bellarmines idle conceit, who afterward misliking it,
overthrows it, and finds Leuy to be the twelft part of Israel. Again, if
this were a reason to pay tithes, then ought not tithes to have been paid
before the law, for this reason had no place when Abraham and Jacob paid
tithes, farther the reasons that are in the Scripture do overthrow this
reason, for God assigns tithes to Leuy out of his own proper right, because
all tithes are the Lords Leuit. 27. If the Lord before and in the law had right
to all tithes, then this true reason both takes away Bellarmins false reason,
and proves that false which Bellarmine says, tithes had no immediate
ordination to the worship of God Last of all, if this reason conclude any thing
against us, that tithes are not moral, because they have no immediate
ordination to the worship of God, by the same reason it holds likewise
against all maintenance of ministers, and yet they who deny us tithes, grant
that some maintenance is due, and part of the moral law. Now look what
ordination the maintenance which they yield us, has to the worship of God, the
same we prove of tithes: but Bellarmine says as much for us, as we can desire,
certum est (says he) praeceptum de soluendis decimis, qua part diuinum and
natural est, non posse vlla lege humana To. 1 con. 5. lib. 1. c. 25.
vel consuetudine contraria aboleri, ac proinde certum est, Ecclesiam habere
ius petendi decimas, etiam vbi consuetudo est, vt non soluantur, in hoc enim
omnes theologi and Canonistae conueniunt. If this be so certain, then it is
also certain that if it were not for the Popes dispensations to the contrary,
all Papists would assent to our conclusion.

By this grant of Bellarmins we have gotten somewhat, that all the schole-men
and canonists, that is, in a manner all papists, hold that the precept of
tithes is divine and of the law of nature in some sort, and that therefore the
Church has right to claim tithes; which words would be well noted, for if
therefore the Church has right to demand tithes, because in some sort tithes
belong to the moral and natural law, then are tithes neither judicial nor
ceremonial in any sort. For that which the Church may always demand is
natural, and divine. But the Church, says Bellarmine, may always demand
tithes, that is, the tenth part, though custom be against it. Therefore the
tenth part is due by the law of God and of nature. Now the Church has not
always right to demand things ceremonial, or judicial.

By this which Bellarmine grants, we have enough, for he proves that the
quota pars is natural and divine. And whether Bellarmine grant thus much or
not, the force of the truth will compel every man to confess that the thing
which must of right always be demanded in the Church, is natural, and
divine. Now certain it is, that the Church has no right to demand any other
kind of maintenance then tithes.

Abulensis (who seems to be much more curious then Bellarmine) moves this
question, quo nam iure debetur In Mat. 23, q. 148.
decima? after much disputation, his resolute answer is, debetur iure
canonico, quia non debitur iure naturae, nec diuino, nec civilly, quum illud non
imponat onera pro ministris dei, neque est enim aliqua lex ciuilis quae obliget
omnes Christianos, quum non sit aliquis vnus princeps secularis omnium, sicut
est vnus princeps ecclesiasticus. In which words we observe the absurdities
whereinto great wits must needs fall, when once they resolve to have the
truth, as Saint James says, in respect of persons, for by this it appears
what they would hold if the Popes authority to the contrary, did not set a
byas upon their wits and words.

First, he says, tithes are due only iure Canonica, but what then must be
said of those times before this ius Canonicum was invented? Tithes were proved
by the ancient Fathers to be due, when there was no Canon law in the world,
and were more sincerely held by the Church before, then after the Canon law
came in, held by the Fathers from the law of God, and no other.

Secondly, he grants that tithes are not due, iure civilly, and gives
reasons why they cannot stand by that law, which are well to be marked,
because, says he, tithes are the ministers right through all Christendom. Now
neither do the civil magistrate impose those rights, neither is there any one
civil Prince that rules over al christendom, therefore they are not, neither
may be imposed by the civil laws. If this reason be good, then is it certain
that tithes have nothing to do with judicials: for nothing is judicial, but
that which may be imposed by the civil laws, this is an evident truth which
none denies that knows what are judicials, whereby it is no less evident
that Abulensis does utterly overthrow all that devise at once, which the
schole-men so busily build up.

Thirdly, we reason from his enumeration of laws thus: Tithes are due by some
law, either by the law of God, or by the civil laws, and Princes
constitutions, or by the Canon law. But Abulensis and the rest of that side
grant that they are not due by the civil law, and Princes constitutions: and
we prove that they are not due by the Canon law, (because they were more
duly, more orderly, and sincerely paid and held before the Canon law was
invented, then ever they were since) therefore it must follow that they are due
by the law of God. As this stands against the Papists, so it stands no
less strong against such as hold tithes Princes constitutions: because it is
proved that tithes were held as orderly, and duly in the Church, before they
were confirmed by Princes constitutions, as afterward. Princes indeed may
confirm or forbid the use, but they cannot make or take away the right.

Wherefore seeing all that stands against us is declared to be of no force:
and that we have proved that the maintenance in the Apostles times, was nothing
but alms: that tithes were established in the Church as the ancient ordinance
of God: that this ordinance is not judicial because it is holy, and of things
separate from common use: nor ceremonial, because it was not ordained to
remain only until the time of reformation, but remains after that time:
seeing these things stand thus, we may safely conclude that tithes are now due
to the ministers of the Church by the express word of God, as they have been
always accounted in the best ages of the Church.

FINIS.

