LACHRIMAE: OR LAMENTATIONS OVER THE DEAD, WHEREIN is described the earnest
zeal of the godly, in mourning for the sins of the people, who are dead in
trespasses and sins.

By Nathanael Cannon, Minister and Preacher of the Word at Hurley, in Berkshire.

EZECH. 9.4. Set a mark upon the foreheads of those men that mourn for the
abominations that are done in the City.

JEREMY 9.1. O that my head were a well of water, and my eyes a fountain of
tears, to lament the sins of the people.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for William Welby. 1616.

TO THE VIRTUOUS AND WORTHY Lady, the Lady Milwarde, wife to the Right
Worshipful, Sir ROBERT MILVVARD Knight, N. C. wishes the blessings of this
life, and the life to come.
IF external actions may any way witness our internal affections; the^
verily I have like a Herald, fitly placed your Ladyship amongst the chief
mourners; even amongst those whose hearts bleed, and whose eyes gush out with
rivers of tears, to see the abominations of these our latter and worser days.

Christ wept over Jerusalem, and often would he have gathered her together as
a hen does her chickins, but she would not: Matthew. 23.37.

Good Christians do the like, they mourn and melt into tears, to hear, to
see, to understand, how God is provoked, his holy name blasphemed, his word
neglected, his Sacraments contemned.

O how sin reigns, how the devil rages! never was the soul of just Lot
more vexed amongst the Sodomites, then are the consciences of Gods children
grieved to see Demas forsake God to follow the world; to hear the blasphemies
of Rabsaketh; to observe the little faith and truth amongst the sons of men;
to mark the open wickedness, and secret practices, the lack of charity, and
the height of hypocrisy, when men do sin, and think they are not seen.

These and the like enormities do cause the holy ones of Israel to open their
spiritual sluices, and to empty themselves in prayers and tears, in groans and
lamentations for the sins of the people.

In which number (virtuous Lady) I have been bold to reckon you, and for such
a Principal, as that I cannot say who may have more right unto mourning weeds
then your self in this kind.

For mine own particular, it may grow questionable, upon what acquaintance I
have offered this poor treatise to your protection.

I answer, that in this I am upon a good ground; for the fruits of your
religion has led me forward, and I am ready to justify this commendation. We
have met together often in the house of God, where I always noted you fervent
in prayer, and diligent in hearing.

You have with your worthy Knight also given testimony of your love unto Gods
Ministers; and in particular, unto us who were the Lecturers of the place,
where you sometimes make your abode.

Therefore seeing this was delivered by me in that place, and that it was for
the good of others to see the light, I knew no person or persons so fit in that
Auditorie, as your self to send it unto.

Vouchsafe therefore (good Madam) to take notice of it, and let it have place
amongst those tokens of good will, that the world has cause to present unto
you.

Whilst I betake my self to prayer for you and yours, with all the rest of
your Christian family; whom with your self I now recommend unto the throne of
Grace, with a desire to be esteemed,

Your Ladyships in all duty, Nathanael Cannon.

LACHRIMAE: OR LAMENTATIONS OVER THE DEAD.
PSALM. 119. VERSE. 136. My eyes gush out with Rivers of waters, because men
keep not thy law.


TThese Canticles (for so a man may fitly call the divided parts of this Psalm.)
being considered in the whole, do properly, and very lively present unto us
the state and condition of the Regenerate man: For look what good affections
and motions are to be found in a man newly begotten to the Lord, the same shall
we have collected in the compass of this Psalm. Whether it be Consolation
for the fruition of the spirit, or recuperation after the absence of the Lord
for a season: or confirmation, which seals up mercy to our souls: or
correction, which brings us home to the Lord: or resolution, which challenges
any thing that would separate us from Christ Jesus: or spiritual passion in a
case of conscience: or lamentation to behold the sins of the people.
Whatsoever, I say, may serve to describe the new man who is both sanctified and
mortified, this Psalm will present it.

In this Psalm three things are of especial note: First, the Title. Secondly,
the Author. Thirdly, the Matter.

The Title of this Psalm is of an high strain. Huic Psalmo Titulus
praeponitur: (Alta): Quia factus est ad laudandum Deum: as the learned observe.

The author of this Psalm was David, as Jerome, Ambrose, Origin, and other of
the Fathers affirm. For it was penned by him out of his particular occasions,
as from a very co^fluence of matter, which still called upon to call upon God.

The Matter of this Psalm has diverse observations, but especially four, that
no other Psalm in the whole book has besides.

1 David is always presented unto us in this Psalm, speaking as it were with
God himself without digression.

2. His petitions are altogether spiritual in this Psalm, and not for
temporal causes.

3. It is described by the order of the Hebrew Alphabet, there being so many
parts, and every part entitled according to those several characters.

4. That there is not one verse in that Psalm, amongst the whole 176. verses,
but the Law of God is repeated in it, although it be per diuersa vocabula:
either verbum Dei, or lex Dei, or iudicia dei, or testimonia Dei: in every one
of them either the law of God, or the word of God, or the judgment of God, or
the testimonies of God.

The Phrase that my text expresses, is the law of God, and the affection, or
spiritual passion, that our Princely Prophet will herein discover, is a case of
tears, most abundantly shead, as appears by the Trope or figure here used,
Whole rivers of tears, as it were a very flood to drown sin in the deluge
thereof.

In this David stands forth as an excellent pattern of piety, whose heart does
lanch forth into a maine Ocean, and cannot endure that his God should be
openly provoked: zeal has so wrought upon him in this case, that he is even
consumed therewith, as himself witnesses in the 139. verse of this Psalm.

The parts that we are generally to consider in the distribution of this text,
are two: Division, 1. A Lamentation, in these words, My eyes gush out with
rivers of waters. 2. A Reason of this lamentation, because men keep not thy
law.


Out of the Lamentation, I observe his zeal. It pierces his heart, and goes
through his reins, which makes him weep bitterly, and so abundantly, that
whole rivers of tears are said to stream from him.

Out of the Reason, I observe the true ground of his zeal, it is in Gods
cause; it is not a fantastical passion, as is many times amongst carnal men,
who are often dround in tears for worldly losses; or else have tickling
affections for earthly delights: but this is sound and substantial for Gods
glory. It is with the heart of Gods child, as it was with the Altar of the
Lord, Leuit. 6.13.

That Altar must never be without fire, no more must the heart of Gods child
be without burning affections for Gods glory, but still the sparkles must fly
upwards, and still the heart must be on fire, either rejoicing in that God is
praised, or else lamenting when God is dishonored: from whence we are taught a
most excellent and powerful doctrine, viz.

Doct. 1. Whosoever has Gods spirit, must be zealous for Gods glory. It was a
great reproach unto the Church of Sardis, Revel. 3. verse. 1. in that she had a
name to live, and yet was dead, dead in sense, dead in feeling, wanting as it
were the quickening spirit, and feeling such a stupefied conscience, as if
there were an utter decay of grace within her: it is like in those men who have
living bodies but dead souls, unto whom zeal has always been such a
stranger, that they never knew what the lifting up of the heart meant. But if
we look upon David, we shall find that the spirit works within him, and
like a flood will not be contained, but his outward actions shall make good his
inward affections, he is truly zealous for Gods glory. Now to the intent, that
we may truly conceive, what this zeal is, that must show it self in the
hearts of all them that fear God, I will first of all draw forth some
definition thereof; afterward I will show in how many parts it may be said to
consist, and those parts shall be proved from the fountain of sacred
Scriptures; and last of all I will descend unto uses, as shall be necessary
for our edification.

Definition of zeal.
Zeal is a fervent and burning affection in the hearts of Gods chosen,
earnestly following and loving those things that make for Gods glory; but
hating and detesting sin, which does the contrary.

This definition may be proved being grounded upon the Scripture. For the first
branch of it, that it is a burning affection within us for the glory of God, we
see it proved from the 24. of Luke, verse. 32. Did not our hearts burn within
us when he expounded the Scriptures, say they, who were going to Emmaus: Christ
appearing unto them, but not making himself known, does open unto them, and
expound unto them the word of God, whereat they rejoice exceedingly. For the
other branch, that it is a hating and detesting of all unrighteousness, it is
proved in the 139. Psalm. verse. 21. Do not I hate them O Lord that hate thee,
and does not my soul earnestly contend with them that rise up against thee?
Thus you see the Scriptures do confirm the definition: now for the parts
whereon it may be said to consist.

Zeal does consist on four parts or points.

1 In lamenting of sin. 2 In punishing sin. 3 In reproving sin. 4 In
avoiding sin.
Now you shall see me return to the doctrine, and prove, that whosoever has
Gods spirit, is zealous in all these.

First, for the lamenting of sin, according as David does here, whose eyes
gush out with water, we find that weeping Prophet Jeremy to do the like,
Chap. 9. verse. 1. When he saw all Israel to be out of course, the Princes, the
Priests, and the people: O (says he) that my head were a well of water, and
my eyes a fountain of tears, that I might lament the sins of this people.
Our Savior Christ also confirms it in the 19. of Luke, verse. 41. When he
came near unto that sinful City of Jerusalem, he shead tears over it,
lamenting their wickedness, and the hardness of their hearts: a most pregnant
proof whereof we have likewise in the passage between Hazael and Elisha, 2.
King. ^^^p. 8. verse. 12. When Hazael had done his message, and received his
answer, the Prophet looked, and looked upon him at length fell a weeping: why
weepest thou (says Hazael to Elisha) I weep (says he) to think what
wickedness thou shall commit, and to think upon the evil that thou shall do
unto Israel: this affection we find in many of Gods children, who many times
turn unto the wall, and lament their own sins, wherewith they have grieved the
good spirit of God; and when they hear Rabsaketh rail against God, or Shimei
curse David, or Absolon rebel against his father, or the fool ask who is
God, or the sinner rejoice in that whose wages is death, Romans 6. verse. 23. They
cannot choose but lament and power forth their souls unto God, and no marvel
though they show their devotions and affections unto their Lord and Master in
this case.

Reasons.
1. Reas. The first reason is drawn from the consideration of the person that
is offended, and that is God: v^^o shall plead that man's cause that wi^^lly
sins against God? as old Ely says in the 1. Sam. chap. 2. verse. 25. If one
man sin against another, the Judge shall sit upon it, but if a man sin
against God who shall plead for him? the dignity of the person offended
aggrauates the offense: If a man offer violence to his neighbor, it is the
breach of the Law; but if he offer it unto the Magistrate, it is a greater
offense; but if it be offered unto his own Father, O what a wickedness is
this, against law, against nature, against reason, against religion! O then
what is it, when it is offered against God? who is it that has any sparkles of
grace, that can hold him from sheadding tears in this case?

2. Reason. Does not nature teach us when our children or our parents die, to
lament the death of their bodies? and shall not grace teach us to lament the
death and separation of their souls from the mercies of God, which follows
on them that live and die in their sins?

3. Reason. Has sin caused thy Christ to sweat both water and blood, have
those bitter drops come from him for thee, and comes there no remorse from thee
in a case of sin? O God forbid! unless we be stony hearted, we must needs
relent: this therefore that David does, is but a duty of Christianity, even to
lament the sins of the people.

2. Branch of zeal is for to punish sin, and this every man ought to do
either in public or private: in public, that is, if he have a lawful
calling under God for that purpose; as namely, Magistrates and rulers, who
carry not the sword in vain, Romans 13. verse 4. In private, that is, to punish
sin in himself, and so stop the current thereof.

For the first, we see the commendation of this in Phineas, Numb, chap. 25.
verse. 11. Phineas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron has turned away my
wrath, because he was zealous for the Lord; how? in punishing those who
committed whoredom in the host: a proof of like nature we have out of the
2. of Kings, chap 10. v. 16. where God commendes the zeal of Iehu, in that he
did execute the will of God, which was, that none of Ahabs house should be
left alive, because he had wrought such wickedness in the sight of the Lord.
And to the same purpose is that commanded in the thirteenth chapter of
Deuteronomie, verse. 6. If thy brother the son of thy mother, or thy wife that
lies in thy bosom shall persuade thee and entice thee unto idolatry, then
shall thy hand be upon them, and thy eye shall not pity them, for I am the
Lord. Now wherefore the Lord requires our zeal in punishing sin may easily
appear.

Reasons.
1. Reason. Because he is a jealous God, and plagueth the sinner unto the
third and fourth generation: now as the Lord does this himself, so does he
require that those who are as Gods, Psalm. 82.6. shall do the like.

2. Reason. He that has power from God to punish sin and does it not, he
does conclude two things against God himself: the one, that God was not wise
enough in the making of that punishment, and therefore man in forbearing will
take upon him to be wiser then God.

The other thing that he concludes against God is, that God is too severe, and
therefore man will sometimes spare, where God would have him punish; and herein
man will take upon him to be more merciful then God himself.

But let the first, that will be wiser then God, remember Ahitophel, who when
God will preserve his David, yet this man will take upon him to give counsel
against him; but God confounded Ahitophels wisdom, so will he do theirs.

Secondly, he that will be more merciful then God, let him remember Saul, who
for sparing Agag, and the fatlings whom God would have had destroyed, had his
kingdomerent from him: yea that which was worth ten thousand kingdoms, God
took his holy spirit from him.

3. Reason. He that spares punishing offenders, brings the vengeance upon his
own head, as Ely did, 1 Samuel 3.13. because he would not correct his children,
therefore God plagued him.

Now follows the private punishment which I mentioned, and that is to be
inflicted upon our selves, not in the course of Popish penance, by wearing
hairie shirts, by whipping our selves, or with the Baalites, by cutting or
lancing our own flesh, not by going barefoote upon craggie rocks, or Hermit
like, by betaking us to cells: but by mortifying the flesh, by bringing down
the body, by that sorrow which is never to be sorrowed for, because it causes
repentance unto salvation, 2. cor. 7. verse. 10. And this is that which the
Apostle speaks of in the eleventh verse of that chapter: Behold (says he)
what zeal this sorrow has wrought in you, yea (says he) behold what revenge
it has wrought in you, that you have punished sin in your selves by fasting
and prayer, that it had no opportunity to hold up a scepter within you: and
this every man also ought to do, according to the rule of Christ: If thine eye
offend, pluck it out: and if thy hand offend, cut it off; that is, avoid
those sins hereafter, that have come through thine eyes or thy hands, and so
shall thou be said to observe a godly discipline, and to keep (as it were) a
house of correction for thy unruly members. And this may suffice for the
second branch of our zeal, that he who has Gods spirit must be zealous for
Gods glory, in the punishing of sin publicly upon others, if he have
thereunto a calling; and privately upon himself, if there be cause requiring.

3. Degree of Zeal is for the reproof of sin, where the Lord expects not
only a weeping eye, and a resisting hand, but also that there be an open
mouth against it: for as in the proposing of a question, our silence may
infer a consent; so in the course of sin, our daintiness of speaking
against it, may seem to yield approbation unto it. Therefore God requires a
zealous affection in his children, for the reproof and taking down of them
that are grown hardy in a course of sin. Our God does this in the 50.
Psalm, verse. 18. When thou see a thief thou art partaker with him, thou
sit also and speak against thy brother, yea and have slandred thine own
mothers son: these were fearful sins: now what will God do, will he hold
his peace, will he stop his ears, and wink with his eyes, as man does many
times? no verily: These things thou have done, but I will reprove thee, and set
before thee the things that thou have done. How excellently also does our
Apostle confirm this in the 5. chap. to the Ephesians, the eleventh verse:
where he cautioneth the children of God to take heed of sin, as of a thing
that would separate us from God: Have therefore no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. And it is the charge
that Paul gives Timothy, 2. Tim. chap. 4. verse. 1. I charge thee before God,
and before Jesus Christ, that shall judge both quick and dead, that thou
exhort, reprove, rebuke, etc. It was the commendation of the Church of Ephesus,
Reuelat. chap. 2. verse. 2. in that she could not bear with them which were
evil, but must needs reprove and reprehend it: and the reasons are at hand.

Reasons.
1. Reason. Because hereby thou may gain thy brother, as Solomon speaks,
Prou. 17.10. A reproof enters more into him that has understanding, then an
hundred stripes into a fool.

2. Reason. By rebuking of one many may be bettered; which makes the Apostle to
urge reproof of sin even for this cause: Them that sin (says he) rebuke
openly, that the rest may fear. 1. Tim. chap. 5. verse. 20.

3. Reason. When Christ comes in judgment, he comes to this end, To rebuke the
world of sin, Ioh. chap. 16. verse. 8. Therefore his holy ones before his
coming must be his mouth as it were, and show that if by his Ministers and
servants they will not now be reproved, hereafter they must be condemned,
when Christ comes to reprove the world of sin.

Object. But it may be objected after this manner: I shall be counted a
busie-body, and every one will hate me, what need I run into these
inconveniences?

Answ. Indeed Jeremy found the truth of this, for he complains that every man
hated him, and what had he done to deserve this? only told them the truth,
reproved them boldly for their sins, Ier. chap. 15. verse. 10. and Solomon
foretells the same, Pro. chap. 9. verse. 8. Reprove a scorner, and he will
hate thee: yet notwithstanding thy mouth must not be sealed up; as for the
world, though it hate us, yet our comfort is, that God has overcome the world;
and therefore to satisfy those particulars of being busy and intermedling in
other men's matters, that the world will say, does not concern us: take
therefore such rules along with it, as shall warrantize reproof of sin.

Rules for reproving.
1. There must be a consideration of the time: for every time is not fit for
reproof.

2. There must be a respect had unto the place, for every place is not fit for
the reproof.

3. There must regard be taken unto the person; which is also a chief point
both in the matter and manner of reproving.

1. For the time, Abigael may be our example, for in 1. Sam. chap. 25. verse
37. her husband Naball being overcome with drink, she took a golden time,
that is, when the wine was out of his head; for to have told him of it before,
had been to beat the air, and to have lost her labor, he not being capable.

2. For the place, Christ may be our example, who in the 16. of Matthew. verse.
23. reproving of Peter; Get thee behind me Satan: it is when they were amongst
themselves at Cesarca Philippi, none of the malignant spirits being by, but his
own Disciples alone with him: and this may be allowed of amongst us for the
place that we choose, that when Gods children are by themselves, then more
liberally may the reproof be uttered, because Gods enemies will rather rejoice
to hear of such infirmities amongst us, then any way be bettered by the
reproves that are put upon us.

3. For the person, a double respect must be had, first in the person
reproving, he must be called: secondly, in the person reproved, if he be
great. For the first, every man must not take upon him to reprove such, unless
he have a calling directly leading him thereunto: then Nathan may say plainly
even to David himself, if be sent, Thou art the man, 2. Sam. chap. 12. verse.
7. For the person reproved, care must be taken if he be Royal or Noble, there
must be reverence used: again, in the person, the person we must observe the
disposition, if he be weak and tender, he must be restored with the spirit
of meekness, lest he be swallowed up, Galath. chap. 6. versr 1. if he be
obstinate, he must be ferreted and used accordingly.

Quest. May not the child of God, who has no public place either in Church or
Common wealth, reprove the blasphemer, or the Sabbath breaker, or any other
leaud liver, in respect of that which formerly has been spoken?

Answ. Yes verily, he both may and ought, but yet after such a manner, that the
reproof may seem to be a loving admonition, rather then a bitter
reprehension, because they never are so well placed as from a public calling:
and this shall suffice for the third branch of our zeal, which consists in
the reproof of sin.

4. Branch of zeal in the detestation of sin, is to avoid it, and to fly
from it.

The Apostle inlargeth himself in this point very plainly, in the fifth
chapter to the Ephesians; Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness: and again in the same chapter, speaking of ungodly ones, Be not
companions of them. The like sequestration we find in the 2. Thessal. chap. 3.
verse 14. If any man (says he) obey not, note him, but have no company with
him: and mark the separation that is required in the eighteenth of the
Revelation, verse. 4. Go out of her my people, that you be not partakers of her
sins, and that you receive not of her plagues: now this must be thought
upon, yea and resolved upon, lest we be defiled: as may appear.

Reasons.
1. Because sin is infectious, like unto the plague it self: Qui tangit
picem, coinquinabitur: he that touches pitch shall be defiled; much more he
that conuerseth with the ungodly, shall be polluted.

2. We are in danger of our very religion, and holy profession by ungodly
company, and that sometimes does alienate us from the service of God: which
point is urged by God against Ahab, 1. King. chap. 16. verse. 31. Was it a light
thing (says God) in Ahab to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
but he must also take to wife Iezabel the daughter of Ethbaal to lead him to
Idolatry?

3. There are covenants of peace betwixt God and man, and the child of God has
promised to forsake the devil, to renounce the lusts of the flesh, the pride
of the eyes, the vanities of the world: now if thou remember this covenant,
thou will not look upon sin, nor join thy self to sinners, zeal will teach
thee, that thou must not have any thing to do with the stool of wickedness,
whereby thou should grieve the good spirit of God, whereby thou should
forfeit the grace of God, or defile thy soul which is the temple of the holy
Ghost.

4. Sin though it be sweet in concupiscence, yet it is bitter in conscience,
like that book which Saint John must eat, Reuelat. chap. 10. verse 9. Sweet
in his mouth, but bitter in his belly: and like that Image in the third
chapter of Daniel, verse. 35. Whose head and beginning was gold, but the feet
and latter end thereof was dirt, so that this reason speaks home, who would
venture his soul for a little pleasure! Sin is but for a season, Heb. chap.
11. verse. 25. Therefore if thou have a burning heart, thou will redeem that
which is past, and avoid all evil in the future time which is to come, then
shall thou have leave to come near the mercy-seate; then shall thou relish
Christ indeed; when once thou beginnest to love godliness, it will prove such
gain unto thee, as thou will after choose rather to be a dore-keeper in the
house of God, then to be a great man in the tents of the ungodly, Psalm. 82.10.
And with this I conclude the four properties of zeal, which ought to be
found in that man who is borne again, such will be his love unto God, and
hatred unto sin, that he will lament his sins, and the sins of the
people, that he will punish sin both in himself and in others, that he
will reprove sin without partiality; and finally he will avoid and fly from
sin as from a Serpent.

Now this peradventure may pass for current, as being allowed that these
graces may be found in some men: but it will be said, every man has not this
grace, no verily, for it is apparent that every man seeks not for this grace,
if they were humble suitors to the throne of grace, no question but they should
prevail: for Jacob is so good a wrastler, that he lets not go without a
blessing; so that let the fault be ours, and not laid upon our God, for he is
near unto them that call upon him faithfully: and if any man lack wisdom
(says Saint James) let him ask of God, who gives liberally, and hitteth no
man in the teeth. Iam. chap. 1. verse. 5. Wherefore as many as desire to come
near unto God, although as yet they have not attained unto any taste or
comfort from the Lord, let the^ give ear, for I will speak of some means
which are to be used for the increase of our faith, and the perfecting of our
love unto the Almighty.

Means to beget zeal.
The first is Prayer. The second is the Word. The third is the Sacraments.
These are excellent means, through which God will answer us, and prosper the
new birth of the soul unto us.

1. For the first, is it not the very joy of the heart? is it not the good
Samaritan, which will bind up our wounds, and heal our sickness? is it not the
cure of affliction? Is any man afflicted, let him pray. I am. chap. 5. verse.
13. does not our prayer interpret unto us the mercies, of God? does not Jacob
prevail over an Angel by his prayer, Hos. chap. 12. verse. 4. Have not Moses,
Iosuah, Abraham, Elias, and other of Gods petitioners, what they will (as it
were) at the hands of God out of their fervent prayers? is there not a heaven
upon earth by the lifting up of innocent hands? is not prayer our greatest
comfort in our greatest misery? O if it were not for this, Satan might trample
upon us, sin might swallow us up, affliction might bury us alive, and our
corruptions so far prevail against us, that we might truly cry with the
Apostle: O wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us!

Object. It is most true, that prayer is very comfortable, and fit to beget
zeal, but every man has not the gift.

Answ. The holy Ghost takes away that objection, when he says, that the
spirit of prayer shall help our infirmities, Romans chap. 8. verse. 26. Now then
who will not thus ask, that he may have, and thus seek, that he might find
the mercies of God in such abundant measure?

Object. But I have often addressed my self unto the Lord in my prayers, and
have sought the Lord, but had no feeling, and that has made me to give over.

Answ. It is in heavenly wisdom that God does sometimes abate our feeling and
apprehension of his mercy, and that because when we do recover strength, we
shall the more cleave unto the Lord, and think more dearly of his grace when
we have it: for no man knows so well what the benefit of health is, as he
that has been sometime sick; and no man has so much cause to speak of
deliverance, as he that has bin in greatest dangers; for in these men there is
not only a view of the action of mercy gone before, but there is also an
application, which fastens God unto their souls for ever after.

Again, it is not thy case only to want this feeling at some times, but even
thy Christ has in our nature been thus perplexed, O God my God (says he) why
have thou forsaken me?

Again, his Church so dear unto him, as that they are the very members of
Christ Jesus, they have this cause of complaint sometimes, Cant. chap. 3. verse.
1. In my bed by night I sought him, but I found him not: this was not because
the Church wanted the knowledge of faith, but that sometimes she wanted the
knowledge of experience; she had not always that feeling as sometimes she
had, and yet who will doubt of the mercy of God toward his Church? We see
that there may be fire under the ashes, although there be no flame; so there
is faith at all times in the hearts of Gods children, although sometimes they
want feeling. Now then if thou would have a zealous heart for Gods glory,
use this means of prayer, and use it often, evening and morning, at home, and
abroad; it will (with Elias) make thee cast down thy loose mantles of
pleasures and profits, when thou shall be taken up into the heavens, as it
were, in thy fervent prayers.

The 2. means to beget zeal, and to increase it in our hearts, is the blessed
word of God, that, whereby we are taught, Psalm. 119. verse. 33. That which is a
lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our paths: this sets forth the
mercies of God, and this declares the judgments of God; in both which
alphabets when we grow skillful, we shall love God, we shall fear God; yea
with David, we shall hunger after the Lord: and as the Heart brayeth after the
rivers of waters, especially when she has been hunted; so will our souls
long after the Lord our God, Psalm. 42. verse. 1. If the Scriptures be our
studies and our recreations, we shall then be for God indeed; and his word
will be sweeter to us then honey or the honey comb: his law will be our
delight, and we will study his statutes both day and night. Now then apply thy
self unto this, thou that desire that the Son of righteousness should
shine upon thy soul, and thou shall find these means are like the steps of
Jacobs ladder, bringing thee by degrees unto the knowledge of God, and making
such love unto the Lord in thy prayers, and exercises of holy Scripture, that
it shall appear thou art both sanctified and mortified; that thy desire is to
be with Christ, which is best of all, Phil. chap. 1. verse. 23.

The 3. and last means, is the frequent use of the blessed Sacraments: For the
first, which is Baptism, thou ought to think upon it often, and therein as
in a glass to behold thy self, thou shall see therein a double condition:
first, what thou were by nature; secondly, what thou art by grace; thou shall
find that Baptism is a lauer of regeneration unto thy soul, and it will teach
thee an excellent use, namely, newness of life; for if any man be in Christ,
he must be a new creature, 2. Cor. chap. 5. verse. 17. The other Sacrament,
which is the Lords Supper, is as a loue-token betwixt God and thy soul: The
King (says the Spouse) has brought me into his bed chamber, Cant. chap. 1.
verse 3. meaning that God had showed her jewels, and rich furniture, whereof
she should be partaker. In this Sacrament the Lord does show himself unto us:
As often as you receive this, do it in remembrance of me: As who should say,
Remember what I have done for you, my body has been broken, my blood has
been shead for the remission of your sins: now then think upon this, what
joy may it bring unto you, when as by means of faith men may feed upon
Christ; how will it satisfy doubts, how will it qualify fear, how will it
build up the soul, and beget zeal in such measure, as that the man that uses
these means shall truly stand forth in Gods cause, with life, with goods,
with Christian resolution, knowing that he must needs take Gods part, and
join with the righteous in Gods cause, and separate himself from Gods
enemies, yea grow up to such a hearty zeal, as that nothing shall please us,
which is displeasing to the Almighty? Then may we truly be called the children
of God, when we fear him, and nothing but him; when we hate evil, for the
fear of the Lord is to hate that which is evil, Pro. chap. 8. verse. 13. When
we know that all our advantage is in Christ, and therefore esteem all but
dung in comparison of Christ, Philip. chap. 3, verse. 8. Finally, the^ we
triumph over the world, over hell, over death, over our corruptions, over
principalities and powers, and nothing shall be able to separate us from the
love of Christ Jesus. And this shall suffice for the godly means, that are to
be used for the begetting and increasing of zeal within every one of us. And
now that every one of us may have our Gomer full of Manna, our measure of
understanding from this which has been taught; let us descend unto the uses
that flow from this fountain of doctrine.

Uses generally are two.
1. An instruction. 2. A reprehension.

The instruction offers it self unto 4. sorts of people.

1. Unto them of David's rank, as Kings and Princes.

2. It teaches David's Substitutes, Magistrates and Rulers.

3. It teaches David's Mouths, godly Ministers.

4. It teaches David's companions, namely, good Christians.

All these four are naturally within the instruction.

The reprehension reaches three sorts of people.

1. Nullifidians. 2. Semi-christians. 3. Professed wicked ones.
I begin with the first use, namely, the instruction, which points first of
all unto them of David's rank, Kings and Princes.

For as much as David, who was both a King, and a Prophet, has here showed a
mornefull president; as to open the sluices, and to power forth whole rivers of
tears, in remembrance of the sins that were daily committed against the
Lord; it teaches the greatest upon earth, even those that sit upon Thrones,
and are the Lords anointed, sometimes to acquaint their eyes with tears, in
token of zealous compunction, for that Gods law is not kept. They must remember
that they are nursing Fathers and Mothers of Gods Israel, that they are
supreme heads and governors of the Church; and therefore must look unto the
soundness of the religion that is professed, that there be no dispensation,
neither for Naaman the Assyrian, nor any other, but as there is but one God,
one Faith, one Baptism; so there may be but one profession in all places, and
for all persons of their dominions.

It will serve also to kindle coals of zeal in their royal breasts, and so
beget such a love in them unto the word of God, that with David, in the 15.
Psalm, They will make much of them that fear the Lord; yea when the law is
read, with good Josias, they will melt again betwixt that joy and fear, that
of right ought to be yielded unto it.

Last of all, it will teach these Heads of the people even to purge their own
houses: I will not have a deceitful nor ungodly person dwell in my house,
says David, Psalm. 101. verse. 7. A worthy pattern, and princely president for
all the world, when they who are as Gods, Psalm. 82. shall thus begin to love
righteousness, to hate wickedness, to lament impieties, who then would not
follow such royal examples?

Regis ad exemplum totus co^ponitur orbis.

When David himself is religious, and so tender hearted as to weep for sin,
then the laughter of the wicked shall be counted madness, and the mirth of
the ungodly shall be turned into heaviness; lo, thus shall it be in Judea,
where the King thereof is a man after Gods own heart: and thus much for that
royal rank.

Secondly, it teaches Magistrates and Rulers, who are David's Substitutes, how
they shall discharge their duties: Moses is so zealous, that when he comes
from God, and finds the people dancing about a Calfe, he breaks the very
Tables of stone, out of a zealous indignation against their Idolatry, Exodus
chap. 32. verse. 19.

Now then if you be men of God, how can you forbear your zealous anger
against sin, your Lamentations, to behold the unbridled courses of sin?
when you shall see how desperate Cain is, how profane Esau is, how careless of
the blood (which is shead) Simeon and L^ui are; what strange furies are abroad
burning in malice against their Christian brethren, never satisfied with
revenge, until they have bathed themselves in blood; such is the poisoned
nature of our wicked Catilines.

Again, when we shall see the smooth subtilty of Gehazi, who makes obeisance,
and bows down to the ground at every word; who cries, I forsooth, and lie
forsooth at every word.

When we shall see the treachery of Absolon against his father; when we shall
behold the subtilty of Ziba, in betraying his master; when we shall perceive
the infidelity of friends, who with Judas, betray with a kiss, and will not
stick to help at a dead lift: he that shall observe these tragical
practices, so lately imprinted in the hearts and ears of the people, they may
well cry, O tempora, O mores, wondering what may be the end of such cursed
beginnings!

Again, how ready is Shemei, and his Romish spawne, to rise against the Lords
anointed; how impudent are they in their seducing courses; and where will they
settle, even as the devil did, upon the woman in Paradise; then the wife must
labor the husband; and if she prevail, then the whole family is thus
poisoned with Popery: but if the husband shall refuse, yet the young fry must
suck it (as it were) from the mothers breast.

O if we have tears, we shall shead them at these sights; if we have zeal,
the fire will burst out, and at the last we shall speak with our tongues, O
Lord God of hosts, arise, and take thy cause into thine own hand. In the mean
time, how ought Magistrates to bestirre themselves, they have promised every
one in their places to do it; nay more, they have sworn to execute Justice,
which is the greatest bond, for it is vinculum Animae, the very bond of the
soul.

If a man be bound in an hundred thousand pound, it were a great obligation;
but when he is bound in his soul by a binding oath, sealed in the presence of
the blessed Trinity, it is far beyond the other condition: your authority
will hold to punish sin, for it is from God, Romans 13. v. 1. Those powers that
are, they have their ordinance from God, and who so resists them, resists
the Lord. Now then if you do not lament it, and punish it, and reprove it, and
in your own examples avoid it, how can you answer it? Look, I pray you,
whether God will take it at your hands, by the example of that judgment which
fell upon Ahab in that case of omission. Because (says God) thou have let
Benhadad go, when thou should have smitten him, thy life shall go for his,
2. King. chap. 20. verse. 42. O draw therefore that sword of Justice, let it not
rust in the scabbard; do not rattle the poor that offend, and afterward arise
up unto the rich, and bend, when they are in the same sin: No, remember thou
must not favor the person of the poor, nor respect the person of the rich;
but remember who is offended, God; and remember who will not be pacified, until
Jonas be flung over board. Now therefore dally not with him, lest our great
ship, I mean the whole land; and our best wares, I mean the word of God; and
our dearest lives, with all the rest of the tackle should prove in danger, even
for the over much conniuencie and pity showed unto them, who remain
incorrigible, inconuertible, and may hereafter prove as intolerable. Be
affected therefore with this you Magistrates, and Rulers, show your zeal for
Gods glory, and you your selves thus discharging your duty, shall reap of the
Lords mercy.

3. The third instruction is to teach them, that should teach others, whom I
call David's Mouths, even godly Ministers: If they should not mourn for the
sins of the people, it were very strange; if they should not reprove sin,
it were much to be wondered at; and if they themselves should not avoid sin,
it were as much to be lamented? These are the lights of the world, and
therefore must needs reprove the works of darkness; these are the Lords
trumpetters, and therefore must needs sound forth his praise: If these men
should hold their eyes from weeping, their mouths from speaking, their hearts
from throbbing and groaning within them, when God is dishonored, the very
stones of the street might rise up in judgment against them. But how woeful is
the lamentation, that may be taken up for want of lamentation by these men?
whose eyes should gush out with tears, whose mouths should reprove sin both
in season, and out of season, 2. Tim. chap. 4. verse. 2. and yet there is that
altum silentium, as it may be enquired where the Seers are, and where the
speakers are, that should open their mouths against these sins. There are
diverse diseases crept in amongst us, which turn to a kind of pippe, in the
mouths of many of us; some of us have gags in our mouths, and those cannot
pronounce one word; they may be fair readers, but I am sure they are no
speakers in Gods Parliament. house here on earth, which is his Church: yet
blessed be God, this evil begins to be taken away in many places, and most
Churches better furnished of late, then ever they were before: othersome of us
have Cankers in our mouths, and they have sore throtes, through a kind of
desuetude and cessation of speaking; this disease begins commonly on one
side of the mouth, but in time turns about unto the other side; there are
very non residentes, that can find out the cause of this, for it is so sore a
Canker, that they of all men are loath to touch it; yet true it is, that this
Canker, or Cancer, deuoureth more the^ would serve two or three, and so cease
not to feed as long as any matter may be applied unto it: this hinders their
pronuntiation, and makes them pass over a multitude of sins in their
brethren, lest their own should come in question. This evil were the less
dangerous, if the worthies of our Church, who both in respect of their
dignities, and eminent gifts might have the overplus: who without some
extraordinary means cannot maintain their studies, states, nor degrees: but
when pluralities shall be conferred upon them, who are not able to stand in
the gap, betwixt God and the people; when our dumb Ministers, who are not able
to watch over souls, nor able to make laments, or to shead moaning tears for
the people; when these shall dip their feet in oil, and thus eat up the fat
of the earth; it is no small sin in themselves, nor no little grieuance to
others: but most of the fault is in Gehazi; for Elisha did not consent that
Gehazi should run for his change of raiment, and two talents of silver for
the young men, 2. King. chap. 5. but Gehazi gets it by a lie, and forged
device: and so no question there are courses of the like nature taken, to make
some men capable of pluralities, who are more fit to keep sheep, then to
feed the flock. Let us therefore take it to heart, that desire to be
faithful dispensers of the Gospel of Christ Jesus: Let us be grieved to
hear, and see wicked me^ grieve the good spirit of God; let us of all men be
free from it our selves, and so we shall be the fitter to reprove others. But
yet there is another complaint to be made against our selves, who ought to be
David's Mouths: for as the first sort have gags in their mouths, and so cannot
speak: and a second sort have Cankers in their mouths, and will not speak: so
there is a third sort, who have sugar pellets in their mouths, and speak so
sweetly, that they will discover themselves so plainly, as that the whole
congregation shall bear witness they can dissemble. Their common place is
placentia, wherein they so excel, that Apelles himself could never paint more
lively then they. Alas, my brethren, is this the way to gain souls? is this
the way to bring men out of darkness, and shadows of death? no surely, this
will nurse them in sin, and hold a candle to their transgression; and
therefore if ever we will do good in the Church of God, let us take example
from David, by weeping for the sins of the people, and by reproving of their
sins, without respect of persons; lest it be said that with Ianus we have two
faces, and can to day frown upon sin, and to morrow can laugh at the same: and
this shall suffice for our instruction, who are appointed by God to instruct
others.

4. The fourth and last sort of people, who in the use of this doctrine are
instructed, are those whom I called David's companions, namely, good Christians:
I am a companion (says he) unto all them that fear God. They are taught also
a duty, and that is, inwardly to be affected with grief, whenever God is
dishonored: let them remember God is their Father; will a son stand by and
here his earthly Father railed upon, and will he hold his peace? and can the
child of God hear and see his heavenly Father blasphemed, his Redeemer
crucified again, the blessed and sanctifying Spirit grieved, and does not all
this trouble him? Look upon David, Psalm. 120. verse. 5. Woe is me (says he)
that I am constrained to dwell in Mesech, and to have my habitation in the
tents of Kedar. Just Lot was grieved with the sins of Sodom, and so must
just men be touched, and pricked in their hearts for to see God dishonored,
which will take away all these euasions and slips that many use, viz. Every man
shall answer for himself, and the soul that sins shall die; yet for all
this remember, God looks to have thy heart well affected, and thy tongue
zealously prepared to speak in the Lords cause, lest thy silence may cover
consent, and thou seem ashamed of thy masters cause; whereof let every man
take heed, lest Christ be ashamed of him in his heavenly kingdom: and so I
conclude the uses that belong to the Instruction.

Use 2. The second general use that was drawn from the former doctrine, I
called Reprehension; and it took hold especially of three sorts.

1. Of Nullifidians. 2. Of Semi-christians. 3. Of Professed wicked ones.
1. The first of these are our godless Atheists, these men must needs be far
from God, when they will acknowledge no God at all: These men (says the
Apostle) cannot please God, Hebr. 11. neither are they displeased at any thing
that shall be displeasing to his Majesty. This use therefore of reprehension
first ceazeth upon them: The very ox and Ass know their master, and their
masters cribbe, Esa. 1. But these men know not God. The heavens declare his
glory, and the firmament sets forth his handie work; but these earth-wormes
will declare nothing, but their reservation unto the day of vengeance.

2. The second sort justly to be reproved from this doctrine, are the
indifferent men, whom I call Semi-christians. These men with Agrippa, Act. 26.
are almost persuaded to be Christians, and a little thing will dissuade them
to the contrary. These men have no tears in their eyes for God, and though
they should stand by, and behold Christ upon the Cross, with all the
despitefull usage they used against him, yet these men would both hold their
tongues, their eyes, and their hands, and be so far from taking part with
Jesus, that with Peter in his weakness they would follow him a far off.
Matthew. 26. These men out of a lukewarm observation, will venture the spewing
out of Gods mouth, Revel. chap. 3. Lord, how hot and earnest these me^ will be
in a revenging course, against the man that shall impair their credit? but they
can stand by whilst their Christ is raild upon, whiles the blasphemer does
diue into his precious wounds, and it never troubles the^; this shows their
love is little or nothing to God; for where the Lord has gained the heart,
there he commands the heart, there the eyes shead rivers of tears; there the
tongue pleades, and the groans of grief, and sorrowful sighs are as often
uttered, as God is offended: Know then, thou halfe-Christian, that thou art but
almost the child of God, and shall never attain unto it altogether, until
thou have David's heart, and zealous affection, and that is, to be grieved in a
case of sin, because it is done against the Majesty of God.

3. The third person reprehended, is the professed and habituated sinner, he
that sold himself to commit sin, he that with Jeroboam, makes Israel to
sin; O draws others to hell, and gallops himself thither, lest he should
not have time enough to run to destruction. Do these men take it to heart
when God is offended? no verily, but they rejoice, and make it the very joy of
their hearts, and the sole delight of their eyes, when they can draw others to
be partakers of ungodliness. Thus Jeroboam makes Israel sin, and claps his
hands at the fall of the righteous; it is their sport: and as the Philistims
did make themselves merry with Samson, until the house was plucked over their
ears; so they, who with Ahab, have sold themselves to commit sin, will never
give over their hellish delights, until God pay them their wages with his
heavy vengeance. These are they that the Apostle speaks of, in the first
chapter to the Romans, the one and thirtieth verse: which men do not only
commit things worthy of death, but also favor, and delight in them that do
the like. If I should be required to amplify this part of the reprehension
with some instance: Is it not seen, my brethren, that there are those who
spend their time, and their estate in this kind? are not those in many places?
nay, in most places, that lay plots to discover their brothers nakedness: O
these are cursed Chams! that will make them naked, and then discover their
nakedness: these men are strong to drink, but woe unto them, Esa. chap. 5.
verse. 22. O you Ieremies of this land, weep for this sin: O you David's, men
after Gods own heart, shead rivers of tears, to see how these ungodly ones
will run up and down, to overtake a weak brain, and at length will so inure
them to that sin, that they will also hunt after wickedness in the same
kind. These damnable imps do count it a great glory, to make their poor
brethren in such a sinful taking, as that with drunkenness they strip them out
of their reason, wit, memory, sense, and feeling; and when a man is thus
transformed into a beast, by their wickedness, then this is their glory. But
shall I show them what will be the end of this glory, the Prophet tells them,
Habak. 2.15. Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink, thou ioynest thine
heat, and make him drunken also, that thou may see their priuities, but
the cup of the Lords right hand shall be powered upon thee, and shameful
spewing shall be for thy glory: Lo what thy glory is, nothing but ignominy,
and reproach; like unto the alteration that the daughters of Judah find, Esa. 3.
Their beauty is turned to baldness; their perfumes to stenches; their music,
and blithe-full melody, to anguish, and extreme misery. Look then upon your
portions, you ungodly ones, although you may sing to the Violl and harp for a
time, yet there will be a black and gloomie day; but as for the righteous,
who have shead tears, great shall their joy be, for they have their blessing
from Christ's own mouth, Mat. 5. Blessed are they that mourn now, they shall
rejoice hereafter: and, they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. O blessed
harvest, and glorious triumph! O happy tears, to gain such immortal joys! O
triumphant state and condition for the elect, who have bin so accustomed to a
course of mortificatio^, as that they have bin true mourners indeed! They shall
hereafter be clothed in white, they shall wait upon the Lamb, they shall see
God, they shall inherit with Christ, they have suffered with him, they shall
reign with him. Finally, they shall have fellowship with God, and his holy
Angels: lo thus shall the men be honored that honor God, and thus shall it
be unto the^ who are heirs of salvation, elected in Jesus Christ: Unto who^
with the Father, and the most blessed Spirit, one Eternal, immortal,
invisible, and God only wise, be ascribed all honor, praise, might, majesty.
glory, and dominion, for ever and ever. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

