A Treatise, Written by M. Doctor CARIER, wherein he lays down sundry
learned and pithy considerations, by which he was moved, to forsake the
Protestant Congregation, and to betake himself to the Catholic Apostolic
Roman Church.

Agreeing verbatim with the written Copye, addressed by the said Doctor to the
King his most Excellent MAJESTY.

PSALM. 44. Mine heart will utter forth a good matter: I will entreat in my
works of the King.

1614.

The Preface to the Reader.
Having exactly perused, (good Reader) this Treatise, here presented to thy
view, and finding it both in stuff and style to be learnedly, and eloquently
contrived; I took my self, in some sort, obliged in Christian duty, to
divulge it in Print to the World: unwittingly, I confess to the Author:
Howbeit encroching upon his charitable consent; who, I am well assured, is most
forward to defray his Talent, in ought, wherein the Catholic Roman Religion
may be advanced. Of this full and firm resolution he has made effectiue
proof, not only in words, but also in works.

The Author, as it is notoriously known, has gained Name and Fame among the
Protestants: Having been a Teacher in their Colleges, a Preacher in their
Pulpits, a Doctor in their Schools, a Canon in their Churches, Chapplain to
the King his most excellent Majesty, flowing in wealth, supported with the
credit of the Court, most likely, in short time, to aspire to higher
Ecclesiastical preferments, had he persisted in the course of his former
Profession: yet notwithstanding all these worldly allurements, which are, in
good sooth, wondrous intycing baits, to hook and to hold an unstayed Soul:
M. Doctor Carier, having from his greener years, wallowed himself in the
choicest Writings of the most learned Protestants, and confronting in his
mature Age, their wavering opinions with the uniform and settled consent of the
ancient Fathers, found the New so opposite to the Old, that at length
receiving gracious light from the Father Pac. 17. 19.
of lights, did tear at a trice all these forementioned earthly snares,
resolving not to wander any longer like a lost sheep, but to come to the fold
of the Catholic Roman Luc. 15. 4.
Church, and conscquently choosing, like a zealous Moses, to be afflicted with
the people of God, then to have Heb 15. 25
the pleasure of temporal sin: These and the like pregnant points are
sufficiently debated in this Treatise; which I wish thee gentle Reader, to
pervse with heedfull attention, whereby the Author his pains may turn to thy
profit, if happily thou be altenated from the Catholic Roman Religion: Always
presenting thy prayers to our Lord, sweet Jesus, that he vouchsafe, to
illuminate thy mind in the passage of thy eternal salvation, that thou may
prefer light before darkness, truth before falsehood, Catholic Religion before
particular opinions, as M. Doctor Carier has done, upon such sound and
grounded reasons as he has opned in this Treatise. And this wishing that good
to thy Soul, which I wish to mine own, I betake thee, good Reader, to the
direction and protection of Psa. 83. 12.
the Author and giver of grace and glory.

MOST EXCELLENT AND RENOWNED SOVEREIGN.
IT is not unknown to all that know me in England, that for these many years
I had my health very ill. And therefore having from time to time used all the
means and medicines that England could afford. Last of all, by the advice of
my Physicians, I made it my humble suit unto your Majesty, that I might
tranell unto the Spaw for the use of those waters, purposing with my self, that
if I could be well, I would go from thence to Heydelberg, and spend this
Winter there. But when I was gone from the Spaw, to Aquisgrane, and so to
Colin, I found my self rather worse then better then I was before. And
therefore I resolved with my self, that it was high time for me to settle my
thoughts upon another world. And seeing I was out of hope to enjoy the health
of my body, at the least to look to the health of my soul, from whence both
Art and experience teaches me, that all my bodily infirmities have their
beginning, for if I could by any study have proved Catholic religion to be
false, or by any means have professed it to be true in England, I doubt not
but the contentment of my soul would have much helped the health of my body.
But the more I studied the Scriptures and most ancient Fathers to confute it
the more I was compelled to see the truth thereof. And the more I labored to
reconcile the religion of England thereunto, the more I was disliked,
suspected, and condemned as a common enemy. And if I would have been either
ignorant or silent, I might, perhaps, with the pleasures and commodities of my
preferments, have in time cast off the care of religion. But seeing my study
forced me to know, and my place compelled me to preach, I had no way to avoid
my grief, nor no means to endure it. I have therefore apprehended the
opportunity of my License to travel, that I may withdraw my self for a while
from the sight and offense of those in England which hate Catholic religion,
and freely and fully enjoy the presence of our blessed Savior, in the unity
of his Catholic Church, wherein I will never forget at the daily oblation of
his most blessed body and blood, to lift up my heart unto him, and to pray for
the admission of your Majesty thereunto. And in the mean time I have thought
it my duty to write this short Treatise with mine own hand, wherein, before I
publish my self unto the world, I desire to show to your Majesty these two
things: 1. The means of my conversion unto Catholic Religion. 2. The hopes I
have to do your Majesty no ill service therein.


I humbly crave your Majesty's pardon, and will rest ever

Your Majesty's faithful and truly denoted servant, B. CARIER.
Liege December. 12. 1613.
CHAP. I. The means of my Conversion To Catholic Religion.
I Must confess to Gods honor, and my own shame, that if it had bin in my
power to choose, I would never have bin a Catholic. I was borne and brought up
in schism, and was taught to abhor a Papist, as much as any Puritan in
England does. I had ever a great desire to justify the Religion of the State,
and had great hope to advance my self thereby. Neither was my hope ever so
great, as by your Majesty's favor it was at the very instant of my resolution
for Catholic religion, and the preferment, I had together with the honor of
your Majesty's service, was greater by much; then without your Majesty's
favor, I look for in this world. But although I was as ambitious of your
Majesty's favor, and as desirous of the honors and pleasures of my Country,
as any man that is therein: yet seeing that I was not like any long while to
enjoy them, and if I should for my private commodity speak or write, or do
any thing against the honor of Christ his Church, and against the evidence of
mine own conscience, I must shortly appear before the same Christ, in the
presence of the same his Church, to give an account thereof. Therefore I
neither durst any further to pursue my own desire of honor, nor to hazard my
soul any farther in the justification of that religion, which I saw was
impossible to be justified, by any such reason, as at the day of Judgment
would go for payment, and that it may appear, that I have not respected any
thing so much in this world, as my duty to your Majesty, and my love to my
friends and Country. I humbly beseech you give me leave as briefly as I can to
recount unto you the whole course of my studies, and endeavors in this kind,
even from the beginning of my life until this ptesent.

2 I was borne in the year 1566. being the son of ANTY. CARIER, a learned
and devout man, who although he were a Protestant and a Preacher, yet he did so
season me with the principles of piety and devotion, as I could not choose but
ever since be very zealous in matters of Religion. Of him I learned that all
false religions in the world, were but policies invented of men for the
temporal service of Princes and States, and therefore that they were diverse
and always changeable, according to the diverse reasons and occasions of State.
But true Christian religion was a truth revealed of God, for the eternal
salvation of souls, and therefore was like to God, always one and the same,
so that all the Princes and States in the world, never have been, nor shall be
able to overthrow that Religion. This to me seemed an excellent ground, for
the finding out of that religion, wherein a man might find rest unto his
soul, which cannot be satisfied with any thing but eternal truth.

3 My next care then was, after I came to years of discretion, by all the best
means I could to inform my self, whether the Religion of England were indeed
the very same, which being prefigured and prophesied in the old Testament, was
perfected by our blessed Savior, and deliuerd to his Apostles and Disciples,
to continue by perpetual succession in his visible Church, until his coming
again: or whether it were a new one for private purposes of Statesmen
invented, and by humane laws established. Of this I could not choose but make
some doubt, because I heard men talk much of those days of the change of
religion, which was then lately made in the beginning of Queen ELIZABETH'S
reign.

4 I was sorry to hear of change, and of a new Religion, seeing, me thought,
in reason, if true religion were Eternal, then new religion could not be true.
But yet I hoped that the religion of England was not a change or new religion,
but a restitution of the old, and that the change was in the Church of Rome,
which in process of time might, perhaps, grow to be superstitious and
Idolatrous; and therefore that England had done well to leave the Church of
Rome, and to reform it self, and for this purpose, I did at my leisure and
best opportunity, as I came to more judgment read over the Chronicles of
England, and observed all the alterations of religion that I could find
therein: but when I found there that the present religion of England was a
plain change, and change upon change, and that there was no cause of the
change at all of the first, but only that King HENRY the eight was desirous to
change his old Bedfellow, that he might leave some heirs male behind him, for
belike he feared that females would not be able to withstand the Title of
Scotland; and that the change was continued and increased by the posterity of
his latter wives. I could not choose but suspect something, but yet the love of
the world, and hope of preferment would not suffer me to believe, but that all
was well, and as it ought to be.

5 This I satisfied my self at school, and studied the Arts and Philosophy,
and other humane learning, until being Master of Arts, and Fellow of Corpus
Christi College in Cambridge, I was at the last by the Statutes of that house,
called to the study of Divinity, and bound to take upon me the order of
Priesthood, then I thought it my duty, for the better satisfaction of mine
own soul, and the saving of other men's, to look as far into the matter as
possibly I could that I might find out the truth. And having the opportunity of
a very good Library in that College, I resolved with my self to study hard
and s^tting aside all respect of men then alive or of Writers that had moved or
maintained controversies (further then to understand the question which was
betwixt them) I fell to my prayers, and betook my self wholly to the reading
of the Church history, and of the ancient Fathers, which had no interest in
either side, and especially I made choice of Saint AUGUSTINE, because I hoped
to find most comfort in him for the confirming of our Religion, and the
confuting of the Church of Rome.

6 In this sort I spent my time continually for many years, and noted down
whatsoever I could gather, or rather snatch, either from the Scriptures or the
Fathers to serve my turn. But when after all my pains and desire to serve my
self, of antiquity, I found the doctrine of the Church of Rome to be every
where confirmed, and by most profound demonstrations out of holy Scripture,
made most agreeable to the truth of Christ's Gospel, and most conformable to
all Christian souls, and saw the current opinions of our great Preachers to
be every where confuted, either in plain terms, or by most unanswerable
consequence, although my understanding was thereby greatly edified (for which I
had great cause to render immortal thanks to our blessed Savior, who by
these means had vouchsafed to show himself unto me) yet my heart was much
grieved, that I must be feign either not to preach at all, or else to cross
and vary from the doctrine which I saw was commonly received.

7 Being thus perplexed with my self, what course I were best to take I
reflected back again upon the Church of England, and because the most of those
Preachers, which drew the people after them in those days, were Puritans, and
had grounded their Divinity upon CALVIN'S Institutions, I thought,
peradventure, that they having gotten the multitude on their side, might wrong
the Church of England in her doctrine, as well as they desired to do in her
Discipline, which indeed upon due search I found to be most true, for I found
the Commonprayer-booke, and the Catechism therein contained, to hold no point
of doctrine expressly contrary to antiquity, but only that it was very
defective, and contained not enough. And that for the doctrine of
Predestination, Sacraments, Grace, Free Will, Sin, etc. the new Catechismes
and Sermons of those Preachers, did run wholly against the Common Prayer book
and Catechismes therein, and did make as little account of the Doctrine
established by law, as they did of Discipline, but in the one they found
opposition by those that had private interest; in the other they said what they
list, because no man thought himself hurt.

8 This truly was a great increase of my grief, for knowing diverse of those
Preachers to be very honest men, and such as I did love with all my heart, I
was very loath to descent from them in private, much more loath to oppose them in
public. And yet seeing I must needs preach, I was lothest of all to oppugn
mine own conscience, together with the faith wherein I was baptized, and the
souls of those to whom I preached. Nevertheless having gotten this ground to
work upon, I began to comfort my self with hope to prove, that the Religion
established by law in England, was the same, at the least in part, which now
was, and ever had been held in the Catholic Church, the defects whereof might
be supplied, whenever it should please God to move your Majesty thereunto,
without abrogating of that which was already by law established, which I still
pray for, and am not altogether out of hope to see: and therefore I thought it
my duty, as far as I durst, rather by charitable constru ctions reconcile
things that seemed different, that so our souls might for ever be saved in
unity, then by malicious calumniations to maintain quarrels, that so men's
turns might for a time be served in dissension.

9 In this course, although I did never proceed any farther then law would give
me leave, yet I ever found the Puritans and Caluinists, and all the creatures
of Schism, to be my utter enemies, who were also like the sons of ZERVIACH,
too strong for DAVID himself, but I well perceived that all temperat and
understanding men, who had no interest in the Schism, were glad to hear the
truth honestly and plainly preached unto them. And my hope was by patience and
continuance, I should in the end unmask Hypocrisy, and gain credit unto the
comfortable doctrine of Antiquity, even amongst those also, who out of
misinformation and prejudice did as yet most dislike it. And considering with
my self, that your right to the Crown came only by Catholics, and was
ancienter then the Schism, which would very feign have utterly extinguished
it, and that both your disposition by nature, your amity with Catholic
Princes, your speeches, and your proclamations did at the beginning all tend to
peace and unity, I hoped that this endeavor of mine, to enforce Catholic
religion, at the least as far as the Common Prayer book and Catechism would
give me leave, should be well accepted of your Majesty, and be as an
introduction unto farther peace and unity with the Church of Rome.

10 But when after my long hope, I at the last did plainly perceive, that God
for our sins had suffered the Devil, the author of dissension, so far to
prevail, as partly by the furious practice of some desperate Catholics, and
partly by the fiery suggestions of all violent Puritans, he had quite diuerted
that peaceable and temperat course, which was hoped for, and that I must now
either alter my judgment, which was impossible, or preach against my
conscience, which was intolerable: Lord, what anxietie and distraction of
soul did I suffer day and night, what strife betwixt my judgment; which was
wholly for the peace and unity of the Church, and my affection, which was
wholly to enjoy the favor of your Majesty, and the love of my friends and
country. This grief of soul growing now desperate, did still more and more
increase the infirmities of my body, and yet I was so loath to become a
ptofessed Catholic, with the displeasure of your Majesty, and of all my
honorable and loving friends, as I rather desired to silence my judgment with
the profits and pleasures of the world which was before me, then to satisfy it
with reconciling my self unto the Catholic Church. But it was Gods will that
ever as I was about to forget the care of Religion, and to settle my self to
the world among my neighbors, I met with such humors, as I saw by their
violence against Catholics, and Catholic Religion, were like to waken my
soul by torture, rather then bring it a sleep by temper. And therefore I was
driven to recoile to God, and to his Church, that I might find rest unto my
soul.

11 And yet because I had heard often that the practice of the Church of Rome,
was contrary to her doctrine, I thought good to make one trial more before I
resolved, and therefore having the advice of diverse learned Physicians to go
to the Spaw, for the health of my body, I thought good to make a virtue of
necessity, and to get leave to go, the rather for the satisfaction of my
Soul, hoping to find some greater offense in the service of the Church of
Rome, then I had done in her books, that so I might return better contented,
to persecute and abhor the Catholics at home, after I should find them so
wicked and Idolatrous abroad, as they were in every Pulpit in England affirmed
to be. For this purpose, before I would frequent their Churches, I talked with
such learned men as I could meet withal, and did of purpose dispute against
them, and with all the wit and learning I had, both justify the doctrine of
England established by Law, and object the Superstition and Idolatry, which I
thought they might commit, either with the Images in the Church, or with the
Sacrament of the Altar.

12 Their common answer was, that which by experience I now find to be true,
vz. that they do abhor all Idolatry and superstition, and do diligently
admonish the people to take heed thereof. And that they use Images for no other
purpose, but only for a devout memory, and representation of the Church
Triumphant, which is most fit to be made in the time and place of prayer, where
after a more special manner we should with all reverence have our conversation
amongst the Saints in heaven.

And for the B. Sacrament, they do not worship the Accidents, which they see,
but the Substance, which they believe; and surely, if Christ be there truly and
really present (as your Majesty seems to grant he is) he is as much to be
worshipped, as if we saw him with our bodily eyes; Neither is there any more
Idolatry in the one then in the other. If our blessed Savior himself should
visibly appear in person as he was upon the earth, Jews and Infidels would
hold it for Idolatry to worship him, and would crucify him again, and so
would all Heretics also, who refuse to worship him in the Sacrament, where he
is really present.

13 After diverse other objections which I made, not so much because I was not,
as because I desired not to be satisfied, I came to the Popes supposed pride
and tyranny over Kings and Princes, and told them of the most horrible treason
intended and practiced by Catholics against your Majesty, which has not yet
bin iudicially condemned by the Church of Rome. They all seemed to abhor the
fact as much as the best subjects in the world, and much more to favor, and
defend the authority of their Kings and Princes, then the Heretics do. And
they said, that althoug your Majesty were out of the Church, yet they doubted
not but if complaint were made in a judicial proceeding, that fact should be
iudicially condemned. In the mean time it was sufficient that all Catholic
writers did condemn it, and that the Pope by his Breue had condemned it,
exhorting the Catholics of England to all Christian patience and obedience. As
for any other authority or superiority of the Pope, then such as is spiritual
and necessary, for the unity of the Church, I have met with none that do
stand upon it.

14 So that whereas my hope was, that by finding out the corruptions of the
Church of Rome, I should grow farther in love with the Church of England, and
joyfully return home, and by inueighing against the Papists, both enjoy my
present preferments, and obtain more and more, I saw the matter was like to
fall out clean contrary. It is true indeed that there are many corruptions in
all States. God has no Wheat-field in this world, wherein the Devil has no
Tares growing, and there are no Tares more rank, then those that grow among
the Wheat. For optimi corruption pessima, and where grace abounds, if it be
contemned, there sin abounds much more. But seeing both my reading and
experience has now taught me that the truth of Christian Religion, taught and
practiced at this day in the Church of Rome, and all the obedient members
thereof; is the very same in substance, which was prefigured and prophesied
from the beginning of the world, perfected by Christ himself, delivered to his
Apostles, and by them and their Successors perpetually and universally in one
uniformity practiced until this day, without any substantial alteration. And
that the new Religion of England, wherein it does differ, has no ground, but
either the pleasure of the Prince and Parliament, or the common cry and voice
of the People, nor no constancy or agreement with it self, what should I now
do? It is not in my power, not to know that which I do know, nor to doubt of
that which I have spent so much time, and taken so much pains, and bestowed so
much cost, and made so many trials to find. And yet I know if I should yield to
be reconciled to the Church, I should be for this world in all likelihood,
utterly undone; and that which grieved me more, I should be rejected of your
Majesty my most redoubted Lord and Master, and despised by all my dear friends
and lovers in England.

15 These were my thoughts at the Spaw, which did so vex and afflict my soul,
as that the waters could do my body no good at all, but rather much hurt.
Nevertheless I avoided the company of Catholics, abstained from the Church,
and did both dispute and write against the Church of Rome, as occasion was
offered. I still hoped that time would give me better counsel, and therefore
resolved to go from the Spaw to Heidelberg, to do my duty there. In the mean
time I thought with my self, It may be God has moved his Majesty's heart to
think of peace and reconciliation. I know his disposition was so in the
beginning, and I remember Master CAVSABON told me, when I brought him out of
France, that his errand was nothing else, but to mediate peace between the
Church of Rome, and the Church of England. Therefore I thought, before I would
submit my self to the Church of Rome, I would write unto Master CAVSABON such
a letter as he might show unto your Majesty, containing such conditions as I
thought might satisfy your Majesty, if they were performed by the Church of
Rome. The copy of which letter is too long here to set down. But when Master
CAVSABON answered me, that he knew your Majesty was resolved to have no society
with the Church of Rome upon any condition whatsoever, and that it would be my
undoing, if those my letters should come to your Majesty's hands, or of those
that bare the sway, I began to despair of my return into England, unless I
would overthrow both the health of my body, and the quiet of my mind, and
either utterly damn mine own soul, or greatly endanger not only my living
and credit, but my life it self also, by reason of your Majesty's displeasure,
and the severity of the Statutes made, and in force against Catholics, and
Catholic Religion.

16 There is a Statute in England made by King HENRY the eight, to make him
supreme head of the Church in Spiritual and Ecclesiastical causes, which
Statute enioynes all the subjects of England, on pain of death to believe, and
to swear they do believe that it is true. And yet all the world knows, if
King HENRY the eight could have gotten the Pope to divorce Queen KATHERINE,
that he might marry ANNE BOLEINE, that Statute had never been made by him, and
if that Title had not enabled the King to pull down Abbeyes, and Religious
houses, and give them to Laymen: the Lords and Commons of that time would
never have suffered such a Statute to be made. This Statute was continued by
Queen ELIZABETH, to serve her own turn, and it is confirmed by your Majesty
to satisfy other men. And yet your Majesty yields the Church of Rome to be
the Mother Church, and the Bishop of Rome to be the chief Bishop or Primate of
all the Western Churches, which I do also verily believe; and therefore I do
verily think he has, or ought to have some spiritual Jurisdiction in in
England. And although in my younger days, the fashion of the world made me
swear as other men did (for which I pray God forgive me) yet I ever doubted,
and am now resolved that no Christian man can take that oath with a safe
conscience, neither will I ever take it, to gain the greatest preferment in
the world.

17 There is another Statute in England, made by Queen ELIZABETH, and
confirmed by your Majesty, that it is death for any English man to be in
England, being made a Priest by authority derived, or pretended to be derived
from the Bishop of Rome; I cannot believe that I am a Priest at all, unless I
be derived by authority from GREGORY the Great, from whence all the Bishops in
England have their being, if they have any being at all.

18 There is another Statute in like manner made and confirmed, that it is
death to be reconciled by a Catholic Priest, to the Church of Rome: I am
persuaded that the Church of Rome is our Mother Church, and that no man in
England can be saved, that continues wilfully out of the visible unity of that
Church, and therefore I cannot choose but persuade the people to be reconciled
thereunto, if possibly they can.

19 There is another Statute in like manner, made and confirmed, that it is
death to exhort the people of England to Catholic Roman religion, I am
persuaded that the religion prescribed, and practiced by the Church of Rome, is
the true Catholic religion, which I will particularly iustisie and make plain
from point to point, if God give time and opportunity, and therefore I cannot
choose but persuade the people thereunto.

It may be these are not all several Statutes, some of them may be members of
the same, (for I have not my books about me to search) but I am sure all of
them do make such felonies and treasons, as were the greatest virtues of the
Primitive Church, and such as I must needs confess my-selfe, I cannot choose
if I live in England, but endeavor to be guilty of, and then it were easy to
find Puritans enough to make a Jury against me, and there would not want a
Justice of Peace to give a sentence, and when they had done, that which is
worse then the persecution it self, they would all swear solemnly that
Doctor CARIER was not put to death for Catholic Religion, but for felony and
treason. I have no hope of protection against the cruelty of those laws, if
your Majesty be resolved upon no conditions whatsoever, to have no society at
all, nor no communion at all with the Church of Rome. And therefore whilst the
case so stands, I dare not return home again. But I cannot be altogether out
of hope of better news before I die, as long as I do believe that the Saints
in heaven do rejoice at the conversion of a sinner to Christ, and do know
that your Majesty by your birth, has so great an interest in the Saints of
heaven, as you shall never cease to have, until you cease to be the son of
such a mother, as would rejoice more then all the rest for your conversion. And
therefore I assure my self, that she with all the rest do pray that your
Majesty before you die may be militant in the communion of that Church wherein
they are triumphant.

And in this hope I am gone before to join my prayers with theirs in the unity
of the Catholic Church. And do humbly pray your Majesty to pardon me, for
doing that which was not in my power to avoid: and to give me leave to live,
where I hope shortly to die, unless I may hope to do your Majesty service,
and without the prejudice of any honest man in England, to see some unity
betwixt the Church of England, and her Mother, the Church of Rome. And now
having declared the means of my conversion to Catholic Religion. I will
briefly also show unto you the hopes I have to do your Majesty no ill service
therein.

CHAP. II. The hopes I have to do your Majesty no ill service in being
Catholic.
MY first hope, that your Majesty will accept of that for the best service I
can do you, which does most further the glory of our blessed Savior, and my
own salvation. Indeed there are Kingdoms in the world, where the chief care
of the Governor is, Non quam bonis prosme, sed qua subditis, such were the
Heathen Kingdoms which S. AUGUSTINE describes in his 2. De ciuit. Dei. cap.
20. In such commonwealths, the way to be good subjects is not to be a good
man, but to serve the times and the turns of them that bear the fway,
whatsoever they are. But if it be true, that as some holy and learned Fathers
teaches, that in a well ordered government there is, eadem faealicitas vnius
hominis ac totius ciuit atis, then I am sure that it must follow, that in a
common wealth truly Christian, there is, eadem virtus boni viri, ac boni ciuis.
And therefore being a Minister and Preacher of England, if I will rather serve
your Majesty then my self, and rather procure the good of your Kingdom then my
own preferment, I am bound in duty to respect and seek for those things above
all other, that may advance the honor of God, and the salvation of my own
soul, and the souls of those which do any way belong to my charge; and being
sufficiently resolved, that nothing can more advance the honor of our Savior
and the common salvation, then to be in the unity of his Church, I have done
you the best service I could at home, by preaching peace and reconciliation,
and being not able for the malice of the times to stand any longer in the
breach at home, I think it safest in this last cast to look to mine own
game, and by my daily prayers, and dying, to do your Majesty the same service
in the unity of the Church, which by my daily preaching and living I did
endeavor to do in the midst of the Schism.

2 And although it be sufficient for a man of my profession to respect only
matters of heaven, and of another world, yet because this world was made for
that other, I have not regarded mine own estate, that I might respect your
Majesty's therein, and after long and serious meditation, which Religion, might
most honor your Majesty even in this world, I have conceived undoubted hope,
that there is no other Religion that can procure true honor and security to
your Majesty, and your posterity in this world: but the true Catholic Roman
Religion, which was the very same, whereby all your glorious predecessors have
been advanced, and protected on earth, and are everlastingly blessed in heaven.

3 The first reason of my hope, is the promise of God himself, to bless and
honor those, that bless his Church and honor him; and to curse and confound
those that curse his Church and dishonor him, which he has made good in all
ages. There was never any Man, or City, or State, or Empire so preserved, and
advanced, as they that have preserved the unity, and advanced the prosperity
of the Church of Christ. Nor ever any been made more miserable and inglorious,
then they that have dishonored Christ, and made hauoke of his Church by Schism
and Heresy.

4 If I had leisure and books, it were easy for me to enlarge this point with
a long enumeration of particulars. But I think it needless, because I cannot
call to mind any example to the contrary, except it be the State of Queen
ELIZABETH, or some one or two other, lately fallen from the unity of the
Catholic Church, or the State of the great Turk, that does still persecute the
Church of Christ, and yet continues in great glory in this world. But when I
consider of Queen ELIZABETH; I find in her many singularities, she was a
Woman, and a Maiden Queen, which gave her many advantages of admiration, she
was the last of her Race, and needed not care what became of the World after
her own days were ended. She came upon the Remainders of devotion and
Catholic Religion, which like a Bowl in his course, or an Arrow in his
flight, would go on for a while by the force of the first Mouer, and she had a
practice of maintayning Wars among her Neighbors (which became a Woman well)
that she might be quier at home. And whatsoever prosperity or honor there was
in her days, or is yet remaining in England, I cannot but ascribe it to the
Church of Rome, and to Catholic Religion, which was for many hundred years
together, the first Moouer of that Government, and it is still in every settled
Kingdom, and has yet left the steps, and shadow thereof behind it, which in
all likelihood cannot continue many years without a new supply from the
Fountain.

5 As for the honor and greatness of the TVRKE and other Infidells, as it
reaches no farther then this Life, so it has no beginning from above this
World, and if we may believe Saint AMBROSE, in LVC. 4. Et alibi. Those honors
are conferred rather by Gods permission, then by his donation, being indeed
ordained, and ordered by his Providence, but for the sins of the People,
conferred by the Prince that rules in the Air. It is true that the Turkish
Empire, has now continued a long time, but they have other principles of State
to stand upon. The continual Guard of an hundred thousand Soldiers, whereof
most of them know no Parents, but the Emperor. The Tenure of all his Subjects
who hold all in capite ad voluntatem Domini, by the service of the Sword, their
enjoined silence, and reverence in matters of religion, and their facility in
admitting other religions, as well as their own, to the hope of salvation, and
to tolerate them, so that they be good subjects.

These and such like are principles of great importance to increase an Empire,
and to maintain a Temporal State. But there is no State in Christendom that
may endure these principles, unless they mean to turn Turks also, which
although some be willing to do, yet they will neither hold in Capite, nor
hold their peace in religion, nor suffer their King to have such a guard about
him, nor admit of Catholic religion so much as the Turk does.

6 It is most true, which I gladly write, and am so out with all the honor I
can of your Majesty, to speak that I think, there was never any Catholic
King in England, that did in his time more embrace and favor the true body of
the Church of England, then your Majesty does that shadow thereof, which is yet
left; and my firm hope is, that this your desire to honor our blessed Savior
in the shadow of the Church of England, will move him to honor your Majesty so
much, as not to suffer you to die out of the body of his true Catholic
Church: and in the mean time to let you understand, that all honor that is
intended to him by Schism and Heresy, does redound to his great dishonor,
both in respect of his Real, and of his Mystical body.

7 For his Real body, it is not as the Vbiquitaries would have it, every where,
as well without the Church as within, but only where himself would have it,
and has ordained that it should be, and that is only amongst his Apostles and
Disciples, and their successors in the Catholic Church, to whom he delivered
his Sacraments, and promised to continue with them until the worlds end: so
that although Christ be present in that Schism by the power of his Deity (for
so he is present in hell also) yet by the grace of his humanity, by
participation of which grace only there is hope of salvation, he is not present
there at all, except it be in corners, and prisons, and places of persecution.
And therefore whatsoever honor is pretended to be done to Christ in Schism and
Heresy, is not done to him, but to his utter enemies.

8 And for his Mystical body, which is his Church and Kingdom, there can be
no greater dishonor done to Christ, then to maintain Schism and dissension
therein. What would your Majesty think of any subjects of yours, that should
go about to raise civil dissension, or wars in your Kingdom, and of those
that should foster, and adhere unto such men? It is the fashion of all Rebels
when they are in Arms, to pretend the safety of the King, and the good of the
Country; but pretend what they will, you cannot account such men any better
then Traitors. And shall we believe that our blessed Savior, the King of Kings
does sit in heaven, and either not see the practices of those, that under
color of serving him with Reformation, do nothing else but serve their own
turns, and distract his Church that is his Kingdom on earth, with sedition?
Or shall we think that he will not in time revenge this wrong? Verily he sees
it, and does regard it, and will in time revenge it.

9 But I hope and pray that he may not revenge it upon you, nor yours; but
rather that he will show, that your desire to honor him, is accepted of him,
and therefore will move you to honor your self, and your posterity, with
bestowing the same your favor upon his Church, in the unity thereof, which
you do now bestow in the Schism, and that he will reward both you and yours
for the same, according to his promise, not only with everlasting glory in
heaven, but also with long continued temporal honor and security in this
world. And this is the first reason of my hope, grounded upon the promise of
God.

The second Reason of my hope, that Catholic Religion may be a great means of
honor and security, to your Majesty's posterity, is taken from the
consideration of your Neighbors, the Kings and Princes of Christendom; among
whom there is no State ancient, and truly Honorable, but only those that are
Catholic. The reason whereof I take to be, because the Rules of Catholic
Religion are Eternal, universal and constant unto themselves, and withal so
consonant unto Majesty and Greatness, as they have made and preserved the
Catholic Church most Reverent and Venerable through out the World, for these
thousand and six hundred years, and those temporal States that have been
conformable thereunto, have been always most honorable, and so are like to
continue, until they hearken unto Schism. And as for those that have rejected
and opposed the rules of Catholic Religion, they have been driven in short
time to degenerate, and become either Tyrannical, or Popular, your Majesty, I
know, does abhor Tyranny, but if Schism and Heresy might have their full
swing over the Seas, the very shadow and Rehques of Majesty in England, should
be utterly defaced and quickly turned into Heluetian, or Belgian popularitie,
for they that make no conscience to profane the Majesty of God and his Saints,
in the church, will after they feel their strength, make no bones to violate
the Majesty of the King, and his children, in the common wealth.

11 I know well that the Puritans of England, the Hugenots of France, and the
Geuses of Germany, together with the rest of the Caluinists of all sorts, are
a great faction of christendom, and they are glad to have the pretense of so
great a Majesty to be their chief, and of your posterity to be their hope, but
I cannot be persuaded, that they ever will, or can join together, to advance
your Majesty, or your children, farther then they may make a present gain by
you. They are not agreed of their own religion, nor of the principles of
universal and eternal truth, and how can they be constant in the rules of
particular, and transitory honor, where there is Nullum Principium ordinis,
there can be Nullum Principium honoris, such is their case, there is a voice of
confusion among them, as well in matters of State, as of Religion. Their power
is great, but not to edification. They join together only against good order,
which they call the Common Enemy, and if they can destroy that, they will in
all likelihood turn their fury against themselves, and like Devils torment,
like Serpents devour one another. In the mean time, if they can make their
Bourgers Princes, and turn old Kingdoms into new States, it is like enough
they will do it, but that they will ever agree together, to make any one
Prince, King, or Emperor over them all, and yield due obedience unto him,
further then either their gain shall allure them, or his sword shall compel
them; that I cannot persuade my self to believe. And therefore I cannot hope
that your Majesty, or your posterity can expect the like honor or security from
them, which you might do from Catholic Princes, if you were joined firmly to
them in the unity of Religion.

12 The third reason of my hope, that Catholic religion should be most
auailable for the honor and security of your Majesty, and your children, is
taken from the consideration of your subjects, which can be kept in obedience
to God, and to their King by no other religion, and least of all by the
Caluinists, for if their principles be received once, and well drunk in, and
digested by your subjects, they will openly maintain, that God has as well
predestined men to be Traitors, as to be Kings, and he has as well
predestined men to be Thieves, as to be Judges, and he has as well
predestined that men should sin, as that Christ should die for sin: which
kind of disputations I know by my experience in the Country, that they are
ordinary among your country Caluinists, that take themselves to be learned in
the Scriptures, especially when they are met in the Alehouse, and have found a
weaker brother, whom they think fit to be instructed in these profound
mysteries. And howsoever they be not yet all so impudent, as to hold all these
conclusions in plain terms, yet it is certain they all hold these principles
of doctrine, from whence working heads of greater liberty, do at their
pleasures draw these consequences, in their lives and practices. And is this a
Religion fit to keep subjects in obedience to their Sovereigns?

13 Here I know the great Masters of Schism, will never leave obiecting the
horrible treason of certain Catholics against your Majesty, which if the
Devil had not wrote to their hands, they had had little to say against
Catholic Religion before this day. But I humbly entreat that the fact of some
few men, may not be for ever objected against the truth of a general Rule. It
is not the question which Religion will make all your subjects true, but which
religion is most like to make all true. It is certain there be Traitors
against God and man, of all Religions, and Catholics, as they are the best
subjects, so when they fall to it, they are the worst Traitors. But if we will
look upon examples, or consider of reasons. The Catholic is the only
Religion, which as it does duly subordinate Kings unto God, so does it
effectually bind subjects to perform all lawful obedience unto their Kings.
I will not repeat examples, because the Ancient are tedious, and the present
are odious. But if there can be but one King named in all the world, that did
ever receive honor from Caluinists, farther then to be their Champion, or
Protector, until their turn were served: then I may be content to believe
that your Majesty, and your Family shall receive perpetuity from them. But if
your Caluinists do profess to honor you, and all other Caluinists do
overthrow their Kings and Princes, wheresoever they can prevail. I can hardly
believe that yours do mean any more good earnest then the rest. There is
certainly some other matter, that they are contented for a time to honor your
Majesty, it cannot be their religion that ties them to it, for it does not tie
them to it self. There is no principle of any religion, nor no article of any
faith, which a Caluinist will not call in question, and either altogether deny,
or expound after his own fancy, and if he be restrained, he cries out by and
by, that he cannot have the liberty of his conscience. And what bond of
obedience can there be in such religion?

14 It is commonly objected by Statesmen, that it is no matter what opinions
men hold in matters of Religion, so that they be kept in awe by Justice, and by
the sword: Indeed for this world it were no matter at all for Religion, if it
were possible without it to do Justice, and to keep men in awe by the sword.
In Military estates whilst the sword is in the hand, there is the less need
of religion, and yet the greatest and most Martial States that ever were, have
been willing to use the conscience and reverence of some religion or other, to
prepare the subjects to obedience. But in a peaceable Government, such as all
Christian Kingdoms do profess to be; if the reins of religion be let loose,
the sword commonly is too weak, and comes too late, and will be like enough to
give the day to the Rebel, and seeing the last and strongest bond of Justice
is an oath, which is a principal act of religion, and were but a mockry, if it
were not for the punishment of hell, and the reward of heaven; it is impossible
to execute Justice without the help of Religion. And therefore the neglect and
contempt of religion has ever been, and ever shall be the forerunner of
destruction in all settled States whatsoever.

15 The Devil that intends the destruction as well of bodies, as of souls,
and of whole States, as of particular men, does not commonly begin with men's
bodies, and with matters of State; but being himself a spirit, and the father
of lies, he does first insinuat himself into men's understandings, by false
principles of religion, whereinto he has the more easy entrance, because he
has persuaded their Governors to believe that it is no great matter what
opinions men hold in matters of religion, so that they look well into their
actions, and keep them in obedience, which persuasion is all one, as if the
Enemy that besieges a City, should persuade the garrison that they might
surrender the castle unto him well enough, and keep the base town to
themselves. But when the Devil has prevailed so far, as by false opinions
in matters of the first truth, that is, of Religion, to get the understanding
in possession, which is the castle, as it were, and watchtower of both the
soul, and body, and state, and all: he will peradventure dissemble his purpose
for a while, and by slandering of the truth, and pleasing them with the trifles
of the world (which by Gods permission are in his power) make men believe, that
the world is amended, for Nemorepente fit pessimus, but shortly after, when he
sees his time, he will out of his Arsenale of false apprehensions in
understanding, send forth such distorted engines of life and actions, as will
easily subdue both body and goods, and states, and all to his devotion.

16 The Caluinisticall Preacher, when he has gotten his honest abused, and
misguided flock about him, will cry out against me for this Popish collection,
and call God and them to witness, that he does daily in his Sermons exhort men to
good works, and to obedience unto the Kings Majesty, and am not I and my
brethren, says he, and our flocks, as honest, and as civil men, as any Papist
of them all? For mine own part, I will not accuse any Caluinist, though I
could, neither can I excuse all Papists, though I would. Iliacos inter muros
peccator and extra! But I must never forget that most true and wise
observation, which the Noble and learned Sir FRANCIS BACON, makes in one of
his first Essays, vz. that all Schismatikes utterly failing in the Precepts of
the first Table, concerning the religion and worship of God, have Necessity in
Policy to make a good show of the second Table, by their civil and demure
conversation toward men. For otherwise they should at the first appear to be,
as afterward they show themselves to be altogether out of their ten
Commandments, and so men would be as much ashamed to follow them at the first,
as they are at the last. It is a sure rule of Policy, that in every mutation
of State, the Authors of the Change will for a while show themselves honest,
rather of spite then of conscience, that they may disgrace those, whom they
have suppressed, but it does never hold in the next generation. You shall
scarce hear of a Puritan father, but his son proves either a Catholic or an
Atheist. Mutinous soldiers, whilst the enemy is in the field, will be
orderly, not for love of their General, but for fear of the enemy: but if
they be not held in the ancient discipline of wars, they will upon the least
truce or cessation, quickly show themselves.

17 And as for their exhortations to obedience to your Majesty, when they have
first infected the understanding of your subjects, with such principles of
rebellion, as have disturbed and overthrown all other States, where they had
their will: it is a ridiculous thing to think upon such exhortations, and all
one, as if a fantastical fellow, finding a herd of young cattle in a close,
should first break down the hedges, and then cry alowd to the cattle, they
do not venture to go out, nor to seek any fatter pasture, for fear they be
put into the pound; and if they chance to feed where they are, because they
have no experience of other, and to tarry in the close for an hour or two, then
the unhappy fellow should run to the owner of the cattle, and tell him what
great service he had done him, and how he had kept his cattle in the close, by
his goodly charms and exhortations. Let them say what they list of their own
honesty, and of their exhortations to obedience, as long as they do freely
infect the peoples souls, with such false opinions in Religion, they do
certainly sow the seeds of disobedience, and Rebellion in men's understandings,
which if they be not prevented by your Majesty's giving way to Catholic
Religion, will in all likelihood spring up in the next generation to the great
prejudice and molestation of your Majesty, and your posterity. So that whether
I do respect heaven, or earth, mine own soul, or the service of your Majesty,
God, or your Neighbors, or your subjects, my assured hope is, that by joining
my self to the Catholic Church, I neither have done, nor ever shall do any
ill duty or service, unto your Majesty.

18 But perhaps there is such opposition, both in matter of doctrine, and in
matter of State, as it is impossible that ever there should be any
reconciliation in at all betwixt the Church of England, and the Church of Rome;
of which I humbly pray your Majesty to give me leave to show to you what I have
observed.

19 It is true, the breach has continued now these many years, and it is much
increased by so long continuance, so that it was never greater, then it seems
to be at this day, nor never more dangerous to deal withal; for if a man do
but go about to stop it, there arises presently a great and fearful noise,
and roaring of the waters against him; but yet nevertheless, the greatness of
the noise ought not to discourage us, but rather to give us hope, that although
it be wide, yet it is but shallow, and not far from the bottom, as proceeding
from affection, which is sudden and violent, and not from judgment, which is
quiet, constant, and always like it self; for if a man ask in cold blood,
whether a Roman Catholic may be saved, the most learned Churchman will not
deny it. And if a man ask whether a Roman Catholic may be a good subject, the
most wise Statesman will easily grant it; May we be both saved, then we are not
divided in God? May we be both good subjects, then we are not divided in the
King? What reason is there then, that we should be thus hotly and vnplacably
divided?

20 Truly there is no reason at all, but only the violence of affection, which
being in a course, cannot without some force be stayed. The multitude does
seldom or never judge according unto truth, but according unto customs. And
therefore having been bred and brought up in the hatred of Spaniards, and
Papists, cannot choose but think they are bound to hate them still, and that
whosoever speaks a word in favor of the Church of Rome, or of Catholic
Religion, is their utter enemy. And the Puritanicall Preacher, who can have no
being in charity, does never cease by falsifications, and slanders, to blow the
coals, that he may burn them, and warm himself.

But if your Majesty shall ever be pleased to command those make-bates to hold
their peace a while, and to say nothing, but that they are able to prove by
sufficient authority, before those that are able to judge; and in the mean
time, to admit a conference of learned and moderate men on either side; the
people who are now abused, and with the light of the Gospel held in extreme
ignorance, are not yet so incapable, but they will be glad to hear of the
truth, when it shall be simply and evidently delivered by honest men: and then
they will plainly see, that their light of the Gospel, which they so much
talk of, is but a counterfeit light in a Thieves lantern, whereby honest men's
eyes is dazeled, and their purses robbed. And it will also appear, that there
is not indeed any such irreconciliable opposition betwixt the Church of
England, and the Church of Rome, as they that live by the Schisine, do make
the world believe there is, neither in matter of Doctrine, nor matter of State.

21 For matter of Doctrine, there is no reason that your Majesty or the
Kingdom should be molested, or burdened for the maintenance of Caluinisme,
which is as much against the religion of England, as it is against the religion
of Rome, and will by necessary consequence overthrow, not only the Catholic
Church, the Communion of Saints, and the forgiveness of sins, but also all the
Articles of the Creed, saving only so much as the Turk himself will be
content to believe, which will be easy to prove upon better leisure.

The Doctrine of England is that which is contained in the Common Prayer book
and Church Catechism, confirmed by Act of Parliament, and by your Majesty's
Edict, wherein all Englishmen are Baptized, and ought to be confirmed, and
therefore there is some reason that this should be stood upon.

But this Doctrine in most of the maine points thereof, as has bin touched
before, and requires a just treatise to set down in particular, does much
differ from the current opinions and Catechismes of Caluinisme, or does very
near agree with, or at least not contradict the Church of Rome, if we list
with patience to hear one another. And those points of Doctrine, wherm we are
made to be at wars with the Church of Rome, whether we will or not, do rather
argue the corruptions of that State, from whence they come, then are argued by
the grounds of that religion whereupon they stand; and the contradiction of
Doctrine has followed the alteration of State, and not the alteration of State
bin grounded upon any truth of Doctrine.

22 For when the breach was resolved upon, for the personal and palticular
ease of King HENRY the eight, and the children of his latter wives, it was
necessary to give every part of the Commonwealth contentment, for which they
might hold out in the heat of affection, and study to maintain the breach,
otherwise it was likely that in the clearness of judgment it would quickly
have grown together again, and then the Authors thereof must have been
excluded, and given account of their practice.

23 Therefore to the Lords and Favorites of the Court were given the lands and
inheritance of the Abbeyes, and Religious houses, that having once, as it were,
washed their hands in the bowels and blood of the Church, both they and their
posterity might be at utter defiance therewith. And so having overthrown and
profaned the good works of the Saints, it was necessary for them to get them
Chaplains, that might both dispute, preach, and write against the merits of
good Works, the Invocation of Saints, the sacrifice of the Altar, prayer for
the Dead, and all such points of Catholic doctrine, as were the grounds of
those churches and religious houses, which they had overthrown and profaned.
And it was not hard for those Chaplains, by some show of Scripture, to prove
that which their Lords, and their followers, were so willing to believe.

24 To the Commons was given great hope of relief for their poucrtie, ease of
Subsidies, and of the burden of so great a Clergy, and many other goodly gay
Nothings. And for the present, they should have liberty, and the benefit of
common law, that is leave, to live by such Laws as themselves list to make,
and to contemn the authority of the Church, which although it were for their
benefit every way, yet because it crossed their affections; like way ward
children, they could never abide it. And was not this reason enough for them to
hold out the breach, and to study Scripture themselves, that they might be
able to confute Confession, Satisfaction, Penance, and to declaim against all
that. Tyranny of the Church of Rome, whereby themselves, and their
forefathers, had been kept in awe and obedience unto God, and their Kings?

25 To the Clergy men, that would turn with the times, besides the possibility
of present preferment by the alteration, was given shortly after leave to
Marry, and to purchase, and to enjoy the profit and pleasure of the World, as
well as the Laity. And what carnal minded Monk, or Priest, would not with
might and maine keep open the breach, after he was once plunged in it, rather
then be in danger to forgo so pleasing a commodity: Hence did arise a
necessity of speaking and writing against Vows, Virginity, Poverty,
Fasting, Praying, Watching, Obedience, and all that austeritie of life, which
is by the Laws of the Church required in a Monastical, and Priestly
conversation.

26 Upon these conditions, the Lords, the Commons, and the Clergy, were
content to believe that the King was supreme head of the Church of England, not
that they did think so indeed, or that they desired to augment his
authority, but that they might be protected by him, and freely enjoy those
commodities, which they thought Schism had brought unto them, and feared the
unity of the Church might again take from them. Hence did arise a necessity
of inveighing against the Pope, and the Church of Rome, as against Antichrist
and Babylon, and the greatest Enemies of the state of England.

In so much that that Clergy man was most acceptable to them, and in their
opinion most worthy of preferme^ts, that could most confidently preach, and
write, the most foul, and monstrous assertions of the Pope, and the Church of
Rome, though they were never so false. These and such like are those temporal
respects, which would feign seem the daughters of those doctrines, which them
selves have brought forth, and to be divided from the Catholic Church by
doctrine, when they themselves have caused the doctrine of division.

27 In all these and all other doctrine of division, Men have received great
countenance, and encouragement from Geneua. For although M. JOHN CALVIN, were
never any good Subject or Friend, to Bishop, Duke, or King, yet he did so fit
the Common people with new Doctrine, that no Gospel can be so pleasing to
them, nor so lightsome as his. For finding Geneua to be fallen out, both with
their Bishop, who was their ancient Prince, and their Duke, to whom they
pretended against their Bishop, and to be all in a combustion among themselves,
for want of government, although he were then a stranger and a very young man of
some six and twenty or seven and twenty years old at the most: yet he thought
good, upon the opportunity to give the venture, and to step in himself, to be
the founder of a new Church, and State amongst them, and for that purpose, he
found them out such a Catechism, as they might easily contemn all ancient
learning and authority, and save themselves by a strong fancy, which he called
faith. And this pleased the Bourgers of Geneua so well, that they called a
meeting, and caused all the Citizens to swear, that, that Catechism was true,
and that all Popery was false, as may appear in CALVIN'S life, written by BEZA
himself, and prefixed to his Epistles. And although the Ministerial
Presbytery of Geneua, have lost much of Master CALVIN'S greatness, yet the City
has had the fortune ever since, by the help of their neighbors, to hold out
against their Bishop, and their Duke, and all their ancient Governors.

28 Now it is the nature of all Common People, especially of Ilanders, not only
still to affect more and more Nouelty and liberty, and to be weary of their old
Clergy, but also to admire any thing that comes from beyond the seas, and to
cherish, and comfort one another, with reporting the good success, which
Schismatikes and Rebels happen to have against their lawful Prelates, and
ancient Governors, and to impute all their good fortune unto their new
Religion. Hence it is come to pass, that that Doctrine, which is indeed the
lawful Doctrine of the Church of England, is neglected, and contemned as a
Relike, or a Ragge of Popery, and CALVIN'S Institutions being come from Geneua,
and fairly bound up with the Preface of the Gospel, is dispersed throughout
all Schools, Cities and Villages of England, and has so infected both Priest
and people, as although it be against law, yet it is cried up by voices to be
the only current Divinity in Court and Country. In hope, belike, that it may
one day serve the turn in England, as well as it has done in Geneua, and in
other places, where it has prevailed.

29 These Reasons, or rather corruptions of State, have so confounded the
Doctrine of the Church of England, and so slandred the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome, as it has turned men's brains, and made the multitude on both sides
like two fools, who being set back to back, do think they are as far asunder
as the Horizons are, which they look upon. But if it might please your Majesty
to command them to turn but each of them a quarter about, and look both one
way to the service of God, and your Majesty, and to the salvation of souls,
they should presently see themselves to be a great deal more near together in
matters of Doctrine, then the Puritanicall Preachers on both sides do make them
believe they are. I cannot in the breuity of this discourse descend into
particulars. But if it please your Majesty, to command me, or any other honest
man, that has taken pains, to understand, and observe all sides freely, and
plainly to set down the difference betwixt Caluinisme, and the Doctrine of
England established by law, and then to show Locos concessos, and Locos
controuersos, betwixt the Church of England, and the Church of Rome; I doubt
not, but the distance, that will be left betwixt, for matter of Doctrine, may
by your Majesty be easily compounded.

30 But perhaps there is so great oppositions in matter of State, that although
the Doctrine might be compounded, yet it is impossible to hear of agreement.
And if there be the same reason of State, which there was in the beginning, and
continued all Queen ELIZABETH'S days, there is as little hope now that your
Majesty should hearken unto reconciliation, as there was that King HENRY the
eight, or Queen ELIZABETH would. But when I do, with the greatest respect I
can, consider the state of your Majesty, your Lords, your Commons, and your
Clergy, I do find as little cause of holding out in reason of State, as I
do in truth of Doctrine.

31 King HENRY the eight, although he had written that book against the
Schism of LVTHER, in the defense of the Sea Apostolic, for which he deserved
the Title of Defensor fidei; yet when he gave way to the lust of ANNE BOLEINE,
and the flattery of his favorites, and saw he could not otherwise have his
will, he excluded the Pope, and made himself supreme head of the Church, that
so he might not only dispense with himself for his lust, but also supply his
excess with the spoil of the Church, which was then very rich. But when he
saw God blessed him not, neither in his wiuing, nor in his thriuing, he was
weary of his supremacy before he died, and wished himself in the Church
again, but he died in the curse of his father, whose foundations he
overthrew, and has neither child to honor him, nor so much as a Tomb upon
his grave to remember him, which some men take to be a token of the curse of
God.

32 Queen ELIZABETH, although she were the daughter of Schism, yet at her
first coming to the Crown, she would have the Common Prayer book and
Catechism so set down, that she might both by English Service satisfy the
Commons, who were greedy of alteration, and by Catholic opinions gave hope to
her neighbor Princes that she would her self continue Catholic. And all her
life long she carried her self so betwixt the Catholics, and the Caluinists,
as she kept them both still in hope.

But yet being the daughter of the Breach-maker, and hauinig both her Crown,
and her life from the Schism, it was both dishonorable, and dangerous for her
to hearken to reconcilement. And therefore after she was provoked by the
Excommunication of PIUS QVINTVS, she did suffer such laws to be made by her
Parliaments, as might cry quittance with the Pope, and the Church of Rome. And
this course seemed in policy necessary for her, who was the daughter of King
HENRY the eight by ANNE BOLEINE, borne with the contempt of Rome, the disgrace
of Spain, and the preiucice of Scotland.

33 But now that your Majesty is by the consent of all sides come to the
Crown, and your undoubted Title settled with long possession, the case is very
much altered, for your Majesty has no need of dispensations, nor no will to
pull down Churches, nor no dependence at all on HENRY the eight: and if this
Schism could have prevented your Title, with the divorce of one wife, and the
marrying of five more, neither your Mother, nor your self, should ever have
made Queen ELIZABETH afraid with your Right to the Crown of England. And
therefore, although it were necessary in reason of State to continue the
Doctrine of Division, as long as the fruit of that Doctrine did continue: yet
now the fruit of Schism is all spent, and that Parenthesis of State, is at an
end; there is no reason, but that the old sentence may return again, and be
continued in that sense, as if the Parenthesis had been clean left out; and
that God had of purpose crossed the fleshly pretense of Schism, and raised
your Majesty to restore it, as your most wise, and Catholic Progenitor, King
HENRY the seventh, did leave it.

34 But perhaps the Schism, though it serve you to no other use at all for
your Title, yet it does much increase your authority, and your wealth, and
therefore it cannot stand with your honor to further the unity of the Church
of Christ.

Truly those your most famous and renowned Ancestors, that did part with their
authority and their wealth, to bestow them upon the Church of Christ, and did
curse and execrate those, that should diminish and take them away again, did
not think so, nor find it so, and I would to God your Majesty were so
powerful, and so rich, as some of those Kings were, that were most bountiful
that way. You are our Sovereign Lord, all our bodies and our goods are at your
command: but our souls, as they belong not to your charge, but as by way of
protection in Catholic Religion, so they cannot increase your honor or
authority, but in a due subordination unto Christ, and to those that supply
his place in ijs quae sunt Iuris diuini. It was essential to Heathen Emperors
to be Pontifices, as well as Reges, because they were themselves Authors of
their own Religion. But among Christians, where Religion comes from Christ,
who was no worldly Emperor (though above them all) the Spiritual and
Temporal authority have two beginnings, and therefore two Supreames, who if
they be subordinate, do uphold and increase one another. But if the Temporal
authority do oppose the Spiritual, it destroys it self, and dishonoreth
him from whom the Spiritual authority is derived. Heresy does naturally spread
it self, like a canker, and needs little help to put it forward, so that it is
an easy matter for a mean Prince to be a great man amongst Heretics, but it
is an hard matter for a great King to govern them. When I have sometimes
observed, how hardly your Majesty could effect your most reasonable desires
amongst those that stand most upon your Supremacy, I have been bold to be
angry, but durst say nothing, only I did with my self resolve for certain,
that the Keys were wont to do the Crown more service, when they were in the
Arms of the Miter, then they can do, now they are tied together with the
Scepter, and that your Title in Spiritual affairs, does but serve other men's
turns, and not your own.

35 As for your wealth, it is true, that the Crown has more pence paid unto
it now, then in Catholic times it had, but it has never the more wealth. It
is but the gain of the Tellers to have more money, true wealth is (...), He is
the richest Prince, that has means to maintain the greatest Army, and to
do most magnificent works both in war and in peace, wherein the facts of
Catholic Ancestors do appear upon good Record, your Majesty's are but yet
hoped for: and if ever you have the help of Catholic religion to assist you,
I hope you shall excel them all; otherwise I assure my self, the Schism will
do what it can to make you poor, and then complain, that you are not Rich. It
was indeed one of the maine pretenses in the Statutes of HENRY the eight, that
the Schism might enrich the King, and maintain his wars; but God did not
bless it: for notwithstanding all the Church Lands, and goods, and tenths, and
fruits, and premuniries: King HENRY the eight was feign to abase his coin more
then once, and yet he died not so rich as his Catholic father left him. And
since his time what is become of the Court of augmentation? what benefit you
receive of all the Church Lands, more then your Progenitors did when they were
in the hands of the Clergy? what ease your subjects have of subsidies thereby;
or in brief, how much your coffers are enriched: you may be pleased to be
informed by those that have to do with those offices, and can readily give you
an account; for mine own part I have diligently read over all the Statutes,
made by HENRY the eight, and do find that the Event are so clean contrary to
the Prefaces and pretenses of them, as if God of purpose would laugh them to
scorn.

36 There is yet another objection or two in Reason of State, concerning your
Majesty, which seem to be harder to answer, then all the rest, whereof the
one is that your Majesty has undertaken the cause in writing, and set out a
book in print, and it must needs be great dishonor to you to recall it. This
indeed is that which I have heard the Caluinists of England often wish for,
before it was done, and much boast of, after it was by means effected, that
your Majesty should be no longer able to show your self indifferent, as you
did at the first, but were now engaged upon your honor, to maintain their
party, and to oppugn the Catholics, and altogether to suppress them. But
there is nothing in that book why your Majesty may not, when you please,
admit the Popes supremacy in spiritualls. And you are partly engaged thereby
to admit the trial of the first general Councels, and the most ancient
Fathers. And as for the question of Antichrist, it is but an Hypotheticall
proposition, and so reserved, as you may recall your self when you will. And
howsoever that book came forth either of your own disposition, or by the
daily instigation of some others, that did abuse your clemency, and seek to
send you of their own errand; it cannot serve their turns, nor hinder your
Majesty from hearkening to an end of contention. For if King HENRY the eight
in the judgment of Protestants, might save his honor, and contradict his book
from very good to stark naught; they must not deny, but that your Majesty may
increase your honor by altering your book from less good to much better.

37 The other, and the greatest objection, that howsoever your Majesty before
your coming to the Crown, and in the beginning of your reign, were in
different, yet after the Gunpowder-treason, you were so angered, and auerted, as
now you are resolved never to be friends. And therefore he is no good subject,
that will either himself be reconciled to the Church of Rome, or persuade any
of your subjects thereunto. It is true, I confess, your Majesty had great
cause to be thoroughly angry, and so had all good men, whether Catholics or
Protestants, but if your Majesty will hearken to those, that work their own
purposes out of your anger, you shall be driven to live and die out of
charity, which although it be not so horrible to the body, yet is it more
harmefull to the soul, then violent or sudden death. It is hard, I confess,
for a private man to assuage his anger on the sudden; and there is as much
difference betwixt the anger of a private man, and the indignations of a
Prince, as betwixt a blast upon the river, which is soon down, and a storm
upon the sea, which having raised the billows to the height, is nourished by
the motion thereof, and cannot settle again in a long time. But there is a
time for all things. And seven years is a long time, when a man is in the
midst of his anger, it pleases him not to be entreated by his neighbors,
much less by his servants, but when a man has chidden, and punished until he
is weary, he will be content to hear his servant speak reason. And though he
be not the wisest, yet he is the louingest servant that will venture to speak
to his Master in such a case. God himself is exorable, and it pleases him to
be entreated by his servants for his enemies. I am persuaded there is no good
Catholic in the world, that can be your Majesty's enemy. And therefore I do
assure my self, that God will be pleased with you to hear them speak, and
not angry with me for moving you thereunto. And if your Majesty do but
vouchsafe so much patience as to give equal hearing, I doubt not but you shall
receive such satisfaction, as will give you great quiet and contentment, and
disquiet none of your subjects, but those only, that do for their advantage
misinforme your Majesty, and mislead your people.

And if your Majesty have no such use of the Schism, as King HENRY the eight,
and Queen ELIZABETH had, and that it does neither increase your authority,
nor your wealth, nor your honor, but rather hinder them all, and deprive you of
that blessing, which otherwise you might expect from Christ and his Church,
from your Catholic neighbor Princes, and subjects, and from the Saints in
heaven, in whose communion is the greatest comfort of every Christian both in
life and death, then whatsoever some great Statesman may say to the contrary,
I do verily believe they do but speak for themselves, and that there is no
true reason, that may concern your Majesty to hinder you from admitting a
toleration of Catholics, and Catholic Religion, that those who cannot command
their understanding to think otherwise, may find the comfort they do, with
so great zeal pursue in the unity of the Catholic Church, amongst whom I
confess my self to be one, that would think my self the happiest man in the
world, if I might understand that your Majesty were content that I should be
so.

38 But although your Majesty sit at the stern, and command all, yet you are
carried in the same ship, and it is not possible to weild so great a Vessel
against wind and tide. And therefore, although it do not concern your
Majesty in your own Estate; yet if your Lords, and your Commons, and your
Clergy do reap any great benefit by the Schism: it will be very hard for
your Majesty to effect unity. But if upon due examination there be no such
matter, then it is but the cry of the passengers, who for want of experience,
are afraid where there is no danger, and that can be no hindrance to any course
your Majesty shall think to be best, for the attaining of the Haven.

39 For mine own part, for the discharge of my duty, and conscience, I have
considered of all their states, and can resolve my self, that I have not
prejudiced the state of any good subject of yours, but mine own, in coming to
the Catholic Church. And first for your Lords and Nobles: It is true that many
of their Ancestors were allowed a very good share in the division of the
Church, when the Schism began, and therefore it concerned them in reason of
their State to maintain the doctrine of Division. But I think there are very
few in England, either Lords, or other now possessed of Abbey lands, which have
not paid well for them, and might not as well possess them in the unity of the
Church, as in the Schism. And there was a declaration made by the Pope, to
that purpose, in Queen MARY'S days, so that there is now no need at all to
preach against the merits of good Works, nor the virtue of the Sacraments, nor
the Invocation of Saints, nor the rest of Popery, that built Churches, unless
it be to help the Hugonots of France to pull them down.

40 But perhaps the Commons of England do gain so much by the Schism, as
they cannot abide to hear of unity. Indeed, when the Puritan Preacher has
called his flock about him, and described the Church of Rome, to be so
ignorant, so Idolatrous, and so wicked, as he has made himself believe she
is, then is he wont to congratulat his poor deceived audience, that they by
the means of such good men as himself is, are delivered from the darkness,
and Idolatry, and wickedness of Popery, and there is no man dare say a word,
or once mutter to the contrary. But the people have heard these lies so long,
as most of them begin to be weary, and the wisest of them cannot but
wonder, how these Puritan Preachers should become more learned, and more
honest, then all the rest that lived in ancient times, or that live still in
Catholic Countries, or then those in England, whom th^se men are wont to
condemn for Papists. Nevertheless, I confess, there be many honest Men and
Women amongst them, that being carried away with prejudice and pretext of
Scriptures, do follow these Preachers more of zeal and devotion to the truth,
as my self did, until I knew it was but counterfeit. And these good people,
if they might be so happy as to hear Catholics answer for themselves, and
tell them the truth, would be the most devout Catholics of all other. But the
most of the people were never led by Sermons, if they were, the Catholic
Church is both able, and willing to supply them far better then the Schism.
But it was an opinion of wealth and liberty, which made them break at the
first, and if they do duly consider of it, they are never the better for
either of both, but much the worse.

41 For wealth the Puritan unthrift, that looks for the overthrow of Bishops,
and Churches Cathedral, hopes to have his share in them, if rhey would fall
once; and therefore he cannot choose, but desire to increase the Schism, that
he may gain by it: but the honest Protestant that can endure the State of the
Church of England as it is, could be content it were as it was, for he should
receive more benefit by it every way.

The poor Gentleman and Yeoman, that are burdened with many children, may
remember that in Catholic times, the Church would have received and provided
for many of their sons and daughters, so as themselves might have lived and
died in the service of God without posterity, and have helped to maintain the
rest of their families, which was so great a benefit to the Commonwealth, both
for the exoneration, and provision thereof, as no humane policy can procure
the like. The Farmer and Husbandman who labors hard, to discharge his
payments, and has little or nothing left at the years end to lay up for his
children, that increase and grow upon him, may remember that in Catholic times
there were better peny-worthes to be had, when the Clergy had a great part of
the land in their hands, who had no need to raise their Rents themselves, and
did what they might to make other Lords let at a reasonable rate, which was
also an inestimable benefit to the Commons. So that whereas ignorant men carried
with envy against the Clergy, are wont to object the multitude of them; and
the greatness of their provisions, they speak therein as much against
themselves as is possible.

For the greater, the number is of such men as are Mundo Mortus, the more is
the exoneration of the Commons, and the more the lands is of such as can have
no propriety in them, the better is the provision of the Commons. For
themselves can have no more but their food, and regular apparel, all the rest
either remains in the hands of the Tenants, or returns in hospitality, and
relief to their neighbors, or kept as in a living Exchequer for the service
of the Prince and Country in time of necessity. So that the Commons does
gain no wealth at all, but rather do lose much by the Schism.

42 And as for liberty, they are indeed freed from the possibility of going
to shrift, that is, of confessing their sins to God in the care of a Catholie
Priest, and receiving comfort and counsel against their sins, from God; by
the mouth of the same Priest, which duty is required of Catholic people, but
only once in the year, but performed by them with great comfort and
edification, very often, so that a man may see, and wonder to see many hundred
at one Altar to communicate every Sunday with great devotion, and lightly no
day pass, but diverse do confess, are absolved, and receive the blessed
Sacrament.

The poor Commons of England are freed from this comfort, neither is it
possible, unless their Ministers had the seat of secrecy for them to use it.
And what is the liberty that they have in stead thereof? Surely the servants
have great liberty against their Masters by this means, and the children,
against their parents, and the people against their Prelates, and the subjects
against their Ring, and all against the Church of Christ, that is, against
their own good, and the common salvation, for without the use of this
Sacrament, neither can inferiors be kept in awe, but by the gallows, which
will not save them from hell, nor superiors be ever told of their Errors, but
by Rebellion, which will not bring them to Heaven. These and such like be the
liberties, that both Prince and People do enjoy by the want of Confession, and
of Catholic Religion.

43 As for the liberty of making Laws in Church matters, the common Lawyer
may perhaps make an advantage of it, and therefore greatly stand upon it, but
to the common People it is no pleasure at all, but rather a great burden. For
the great multitude of Statutes, which have been made since the Schism (which
are more then five times so many that ever were made before, since the name of
Parliament was in England) has caused also an infinite number of Lawyers, all
which must live by the Commons, and raise new Families, which cannot be done
without the decay of the old. And if the Canons of the Church, and the Courts
of Confession were in request, the Lawyers Market, would soon be marred.

And therefore, most of your Lawyers, in this point, are Puritans, and do
still furnish the Parliament with grieuances against the Clergy, as knowing
very well, that their own glory came at the first from the Court Infidel, and
therefore cannot stand with the authority of the Church, which came at the
first from the Court Christian. I speak not against the ancient Laws of
England, which since King ETHELBERTS time were all Catholic, nor against the
honest Lawyers of England, I know many, and honor all good men among them; and
do for better times by the Learning, Wisdom, and moderation of the chiefest.
But I am verily persuaded that the pretended liberties of the Commons, to make
Laws in matter of Religion, does burden the Commonwealth, and both trouble
and prejudice your Majesty, and pleasure none at all, but the Puritan, and
Petty-fogging Lawyer, that would feign fetch the Antiquity of his common Law
from the Saxons, that were before King ETHELBERT. So that whether we respect
the spiritual instruction and comfort, or the temporal wealth and liberty of
the Commons of England, if the Puritan Preacher, and Puritan Lawyer, who both
do seek the overthrow of the Church, and deceive and consume the people,
would let them alone, there would quickly appear no reason of their State at
all, why they should hate the Catholic Church, that is so comfortable and
beneficial unto them; or maintain the Schism, that with sugared speeches, and
counterfeit faces does so much abuse them.

44 I am therefore in very assured hope, that by my coming to the Catholic
Church besides the satisfying and saving of mine own soul, I shall do no ill
service to your Majesty, neither in respect of your self, nor your Children,
nor in respect of your Lords, and Commons, and that there is no reason
concerning the State, if any of these, that is sufficient to dissuade unity.
There is only the Clergy left, which if Caluinisme may go on, and prevail
as it does, shall not in the next age be left to be satisfied.

And there is little reason, that any man that loves the Clergy, should desire
to satisfy such Clergy men, as do underhand favor Caluinists, and maintain
such points of Doctrine, as if your Majesty's favor were not, would out of
hand overthrow the Clergy, and in stead of them set up a few stipendarie
Preachers.

45 There never was, is, nor shall be any well settled State in the world,
either Christian or Heathen; but the Clergy and Priesthood was, is, and must
be a principal part of the Government, depending upon none, but him only, whom
they suppose to be their God. But where Caluinisme prevails, three or four
stipendarie Ministers, that must preach as it shall please Master Mayor, and
his brethren, may serve for a whole City. And indeed, if their opinions be
true, it is but a folly for any State to maintain any more. For if God has
predestined a certain number to be saved, without any condition at all of
their being in the visible Church by faith, or their perseuering theroin by
good works; if God has reprobated the greatest part of the world, without any
respect at all of their infi delitie, Heresy, or wicked life; if the faith of
Christ benothing else but the assured persuasion of a man's own Predestination
to glory by him; if the Sacraments of the Church be nothing but signs, and
badges of that grace, which a man has before by the carnal Covenant of his
parents faith; if Priesthood can do nothing but preach the Word (as they call
it) which Laymen must judge of, and may preach to; if they will, where
occasion serves; if the study and knowledge of Antiquity; Universality, and
Consent be not necessary, but every man may expound Scripture, as his own
spirit shall move him; if, I say, these and such like opinions, be as true, as
they are among the Caluinists in the world common, and in England too much
favored and maintained, there will certainly appear no reason at all unto
your Parliament, whenever your Majesty or your Successor shall please to
ask them, why they should be at so great a charge as they are, to maintain so
needless a party, as these opinions do make the Clergy to be: They can have
a great many more Sermons, a great deal better cheap; and in the opinion of
Caluinisme, the Clergy do no other service. They that do in England favor,
and maintain those opinions, and suppress, and disgrace those that do
confute them; they, although themselves can be content to be Lords, and to go
in Rochets, are indeed the greatest enemies of the Clergy. And it were no
great matter for the Clergy, they might easily turn Lay, and live as well as
they do, for the most part. But it is a thing full of compassion, and
commiseration to see, that by these false and wicked opinions, the Devil, the
father of these and all other lies, does daily take possession of the souls of
your subjects, both of Clergy and Laytie.

These kind of Clergy men, I confess, I do not desire to satisfy any other
way, then as I have always done, that is, by the most friendly and plain
confutation of their errors, to show them the truth. As for other Clergy men,
that are conformable to the Religion established by law, as well for their
Doctrine, as for their Discipline, if they be good scholars, and temperate
men, (as I know many of them are) they cannot but in their judgments approve
the truth of Catholic Religion, and if it were not for fear of loss, or
disgrace to their wives and children, they would be as glad as my self, that a
more temperate course might be held, and more liberty afforded unto
Catholics, and Catholic Religion in England.

These Clergy men, I am, and ever shall be desirous to satisfy, not only in
respect of themselves, but also in respect of their wives and children, whom I
am so far from condemning and misliking, as that I do account my self one of
them; and I desire nothing more in this world, then in the toleration of
Catholic Religion, to live and die among them. And therefore I have had so
great care in this point, as before I did submit my self to the Catholic
Church, I received assurance from some of the greatest, that if your Majesty
would admit the ancient subordination of the Church of Canterbury, unto that
Mother Church, by whose authority all other Churches in England at the first
were, and still are subordinate unto Canterbury, and the first free use of
that Sacrament, for which especially all the Churches in Christendom were
first founded. The Pope for his part would confirm the Interest of all these,
that have present possession in any Ecclesiastical living in England. And
would also permit the free use of the Common Prayer book in English, for
Morning and Evening prayer, with very little or no alteration. And for the
contentment and security of your Majesty, he would give you not only any
satisfaction, but all the honor that with the unity of the Church, and the
safety of Catholic religion may be required: which seemed to me so
reasonable, as being before satisfied for the truth of Catholic Religion, I
could ask no more. So that I am verily persuaded, that by yielding to that
truth, which I could not deny, I have neither neglected my duty and service
to your Majesty, and your Children, nor my respect and honor to your Lords and
Commons, nor my love and kindness to my honest friends, and brethren of the
Clergy; but rather that my example and my prayers shall do good unto all.

46 But that which I must trust to, when all the rest will fail me, is the
service of God, and the saving of my soul in the unity of that Church, which
was founded by Christ himself, and shall continue until his coming again,
wherein all the Saints of God have served him on earth, and do enjoy him in
heaven: without which Catholic Church, there is no communion of Saints, no
forgiveness of sins, no hope of resurrection unto life everlasting. I
beseech your Majesty let not CALVIN'S, Ecclesia Predestinatorus deceive you, it
may serve a Turk as well as a Christian, it has no Faith, but opinion no
Hope, but presumption, no Charity, but lust, no Faith, but a fancy, no God,
but an Idol. For Deus est omnibus Religionibus commune Nomen, Aug. Ep. All
Religions in the world, begin their Creed, with I believe in God. But homini
extra Ecclesiani, Relligio sua est culius phantasmatum suorum, and error suus
est Deus suus, as S. AUGUSTINE affirms.

48 I have more things to write, but the have of answering your Majesty's
commandment, signified to me by Sir THOMAS LAKE his Letters, have made me
commit many faults in writing this very suddenly, for which I crave pardon, and
cut off the rest.

But for my returning into England, I can answer no otherwise but thus, I have
sent you my SOVLE in this Treatise, and if it may find entertainment, and
passage, my BODY shall most gladly follow after. And if not, I pray God I send
my Soul to heaven, and my Body to the grave, as soon as may be. In the mean
time, I will rejoice in nothing, but only in the Cross of CHRIST, which is the
glory of your Crown. And therefore I will triumph therein, not as being gone
from you to your Aduetsarie, but as being gone before you to your Mother, where
I desire and hope for ever to continue.

Your Majesty's true servant and Beadsman. B. CARIER.
Liege December. 12. An. 1613.
PSALM. 119. VERSE. 5. 6. Multum incola fuit anima mea. Cum bis, qui oderunt
pacem, eram pacificus: cum loquebar illis impugnabant me gratis.

