The pathe of Obedience, compiled by James Cancellar, one of the Queen's
Majesty's most honorable Chapel.

Qui resistit potest^ti^ dei ordination^ resistit.

Romansxiii. Imprinted at London by John Wailande, at the sign of the Sun in
Fletestrete over against the Conduit. Cum priuilegio per septennium.

To the high and mighty Princes. Mary the first, by the grace of GOD Queen of
England, France, and Ireland, your humble obedient subject and servant James
Canceller, one of your highenes most honorable Chapple, wysheth health and long
prosperity to your most excellent Majesty, with true obedience of al your
loving subjects according to this treatise and their, most bounden duties.
MOst gracious and dear Sovereign Lady: as the children of Israel in ye
Deuteronomy were commanded to appear before God, not with empty hands: but
to offer to his divine Majesty, such things as their power was able to
supply, in token of their dew obedience, and loyal subjection, as of whom
they received al goodness, so they ought to render part to the geuer of al Even
so it be houeth al faithful subjects to behave the^ selves toward their king
and governor: especially those that daily atte^d in serving of their dear
sovereign lord and king, and receive their living at their Princes bountiful,
and most liberal hands, To who^, for acknowledging of their Princes goodness,
as they comenli render not part of their living, for that neither can they
spare it, ne yet the Prince need it: so ought they some mean to devise
whereby their good will and ^ial subjection may well appear to their king and
master to whom they are most bounden. In the number of your daily attendant
servant, most gracius sovereign, am I, most bounden to your highness, To who^
my lowly obedience better I could not signify, then to devise and endight some
what of true obedience. Nether could I present to your highness any thing of my
pore store, more acceptable then ye, whereby housholdes, cities, co^me^weales
and Realms are only enriched, and most happily governed and mayntained. The
contrary whereof has brought things in a few days to greter ruin, then
wise and politic heads could raise and establishe in a number of years. I
need not herein to make any discorse of old stories, neither of Rome,
Carthage, Athenes, or Lacedemon: since, even here at home, in mine own
country, with mine own grief, I have seen such hurt by disobedience to
have happened to england this little Island, that has drawn all Europe not
only to admiration but also to lamentation, for that the beautye of this land
by disobedience has been so defaced and the grouud of al wealth so shaken,
that all other Nations by England might take example, to exchew the occasion
of the like Ruin. The wounds that we thereby have received, being now by God
closed up, and continualli with the oil of your graces goodness, bathed and
suppled, at this present to open again, I much mind not seeing, that the
touching of on sinewe not perfitlye healed may dysturbe the hole body: and
yet I thought it not unmeet to treat of, in such wise, as the reader may well
understand, what a foul, and ugly monster disobedience is: whose fair
pretensed enterprises pleasant to the unwise in the beginning, in the end
brynges the folowers to utter confusion, much like the poison of a scorpion
rolled together in the form of a pil sugared round about, and so received
into the body to purge yt same, in steed of purgation bri^geth present
death. To whose displeasa^tnes and wreched end, true obedience compared, shall
y^ better, with her swetnes allureech person to walk in her virtuous pathe.
And as by co^traries most things we tried, so by co^pari^g these two most
contraries together: the falshoode of them shall be fullye dysclosed: and the
virtue of the other plainly set forth. In which mine enterprise, most
Gracious Soue-Ladye the want of learning let my good will supplye, which I
Dedicate too your highness, rather that other may receive it the better,
coming for the under the safeconduite of your Graces favor, then to hope
thereby to atcheue any praise, as knows god: who preserve your Grace and
grant you your hearts desire.

The pathe
AS it is necessary that in the Church of God and in the wall public, and in
every of them there be diverse degrees of estates, and as we also are most
assured that god has so ordained for both of the^, as in his Church
Archbishops bishops, preachers, and ministers, And likewise in the weal
public, Emperoures, Kings and maiestrates with other inferior officers to
them: So it is also necessary that every subject do reverently honor and obey
them, as ordained of God (and not as of men) for the government of both of
the^. For as God has appointed al other inferior creatures for man, and to be
obedient to man, so god most chefely would man to be obedient to his will and
commandment. For as much therefore as very many things be written, and put
in precepts notably of singular and well learned both to good manners and to
the order of man's life, which should stir and en^lame us to the right
respect of ^iuing, Conducted and led by the autorities of Scripture as also by
diverse other the fathers of Christ's church, yet not withstanding in these
our days as experience does show unto us, we are far from that good order
which made the life of man better then it was, or else more virtuous. For we
judge nothing to be good, but that the opinion of vulgar people does allow: And
we also judge such things, by whose degrees men have ascended to heaven,
void and vain, ^y reason whereof it has so^owed that ever sithen this evil
^aner of mind has cropen in ^o the heads of some euel men, Noble men has been
seduced, and ^ysobediens of subjects has ^uche incresed, commen profit ^ath
decaide, Carnal affection ^athe floryshed, private wealth ^ath prevailed, and
monsterous a^erice augme^ted. For as much as (...) is so, considering in my
self ^e state of this wortht realm, and how far the people thereof ^re
altered and changed from ^e order and condition of good ^uynge and obedience
toward ^od and man, I think nothing ^ore meeter at this time to in^eat of,
then of obedience, while as S. Augustine says, is the ^other of virtues, or
rather ^e fountain or welsprynge of al virtue. Obedience caused the son of
God too dyscende from heaven in to the womb of the virgin, and as it does
appear in the second of Genesis. Gene. ii.
It was the first lesson that God taught our father Adam, when he sayd^ unto
him: eating, thou shall eat^ of every tree in the garden. But as touching the
tree of knoweledge of good and euel, of it thou shall not eat. And even as god
than spoke unto Adam, so h^ now speaks unto us, saying^ You shall
obedientlye do according to all that I commaund^ you. Iere. xi. and ^v. ^xvi.
And the Psalms says: t^ day if ye hear his voice har^den not your
hearts, as your^ fathers did in the wilderness. and In this wise GOD alwaye^
did speak unto his people from time to time by the mouth (...) ^ys holy
Prophets, and therefor the Prophets of the old law ^re properlye called the
voice of GOD. And now in the time of ^he new law, which is the ^ime of
grace, the holy fathers and preachers, of Christ's Ca^holicke church, are
also called ^he Church and voice of God: for Christ speaking to the fathers,
and preachers of his visible and kno^e^ church, which is his voice, ^oth sai:
who yt hereth you hears me. Ih^. iiii
This church, the voice of God, teaches all truth, and this church is
builded upon the strong rock which is Christ. Then for as much as we have, a
long time, turned our eyes from the voice of the visible Catholic church
of God, and disobediently have followed the cursed and unknown church of
Satan, whose prophets prech lies and vanities, leading souls into
everlasting darckenes: it is meter therefore that we (which I fear do much
yet favor the same) should hear what Christ speaks of that cursed church.
mat. xxiiii
Take heed says Christ that no man deceive you, for i^ the perilous time,
many falls prophets shall come in my name, saying that I am Christ, and shall
deceive mani. Be ye not companions of them, says saynct^ Paul which
through Ipocresy fashion them selves like unto the Disciples of Christ. Ephe.
v.
For they who has not the spirit of Christ, although they preache^ Christ,
be not of Christ: therefore good country men, which a long time obstinately
and dysobediently have forsaken our mother the Catholycke Church, let us
beware of that disceytefull and dysobediente church of Antichrist (Which
stands and is set in the rotten marrysh of disobedience, where it may not
be seen by the light of the day, but in the misty night of darcknes) and
obediently abidynge in the fear of God, follow our lo^ynge mother the
Catholycke church, Job. xx^^^
for it is written: he is ^lessed that obediently walks ^n the fear of God:
Psalm. cxix.
And again. The fear of God is the begyn^inge of wisdom, and worcketh ^n man's
heart humble obedie^s. The lack whereof among us ^ath been the only cause of
our ^all from the unity of Christ's church, deserving therefore, and for our
ingratitude, the great displeasure of almightye God, which now we find,
being daili scorged with mani, diverse, and sundry plages not needful at this
time to be named or rehearsed. If we therefore would open our eyes, to that
end, that we, which now are noted through all the world for our
singularity to be a people of al others most froward (against the true and
known church of god and our natural King, Queen, and Maiestrates) might see
our own fautes, Ps. xxxii.
who alonge time (as Dauyd says), have been a laughing stock to al other
countries, and nations, which above all other have been called Most victorious,
and also a country Most beautiful of all welthy commodites, planted with ^
most cuiyll and obedient people, and now, called most sedicious, rebellous and
disobedient.

These things well considered what English heart can but lamente to see how
far we now are from the felinge of these our wealthy commodities: and also
how far we are in these out days from that faithful obedience which was
among us in the time of our wealth. Sense the which time many of us have not
only declared our selves in all our acts unnatural and disobedient subjects
against our most virtuous Queen, Queen Mary, But also as I have said against
our mother the catholic church. Wickedly devising, Jesting, and railinge
against all the holy Sacraments of the same. Forgetting that which God would
us to do, seasyng not from these worckes which are euel, Gala. v.
as whordome, aduoutrye, hatred, strife, dyssencion, sects, and such like.
Whose revenue and final reward is everlasting death. And therefore the wise
man says: my son avoid evil and keep thy self in the fear of God. Psa.
xxxiii
And the profit David says: turn from evil and do good. But what says
our cursed and disobediente libertines? eue^ as Lucifer said among the Angels
in heaven, perswadinge us that they were the worthy pastors that ought to sit
in the seat of theapostels, following therein the example of the proud and
disobedient Lucifer, and gouerner of their cursed church, who proudly said: I
will ascend and be equal with the highest. For whose presumpcion and disobedient
mi^d not he only, but al those angels that to him did consent were cast down
in to the damnable hell. And if god therefore did not spare his angels, but for
their transgression and disobedience did cast them forth of heaven, ii. Petr.
ii.
what deserves then man, who^ god has made like unto him self (and for whose
sake he garnyshed the whole earth with all manner of pleasant things) and
yet is disobediente against his Lord God and his anointed? Sayncte Paul
tells us, Ephe, v.
the wrath of God. Which is an horible saying, and yet it is most true, as
by example: when God had made Adam a parfyte man, and set him in the pleasant
garden of Paradise, ^^ne. iii
wherein was planted al manner of fruit delicyous too eat, he said unto
Adam: of all the fruit in the garden thou shall eat, one only excepted,
which death in the midst of the garden of that thou shall not eat: if thou
eat thereof, thou shall die. There was laid before Adam the blessing and the
curse. deutro. xi.
The blessyng if he were obediente, the curse if he were not obediente: i,
esdra, iiii
so ye god did set before him good and evil, to chose of the^ which he would,
yet Adam for want of grace, at few words to him spoken by his wife Eve, who
before had conferred with the subtle serpent, chose that was evil, and did
eat of the fruit whereof God said he should not eat: disobediently brekynge
thereby the will and commandment of his Lord God, whereby they both lost the
original innocence which they had at their creacion: and they which before
were most precious and pure in the sight of god, at now: become before god,
hateful and odious. Thus by ye falls suggestion of the wily and dysobedient
serpent, Man which was King and Emperor over all, lost his soueraintie, and
so being ouerthro wen was cast into this vale of miserable wrechednes, and so
became subject unto death, sin, and all other miseries and infirmities.
Saint Paul therefore not forgetting the fall of Adam, Roma. v.
writteth to the Romans, saying: through the disobedience of one man, many
became sinners so that dysobedience brought sin, and sin brought death
unto Adam and his hole posterity. Like wise Cayne the first son of Adam
having a privy hatred against his brother Abel maliciously slew him
contrary to the will of his Lord God. And for so doing he was also accoursed
of God, so that Cayne, for his disobedience, was wrapped by his evil fact, in
y^ chain of his wickedness.

For it is written: Pro. v,
the wicked and disobedient man, shall be catched in his own cursed deuycis, and
also fast fetered in the bands of his offenses, and so was this cursed Caine.
Thus by disobedience sin so much encresed, that god repented the creacion of
man, determining that he, for the punishment of sinners, would destroy the
whole world, and so God did (eayght persons) Noe his wife, his three sons and
their wives, only excepted. Gene. xix.
We do read also that when Loath was commanded to depart from Sodom with his
wife and daughters, he was forbidden of God that he nor any of them should
look behind them, but should go forward to that city which God had a poynted
him to evil in: yet Loath his wife being sumthynge like unto Eve, the wife of
Adam, contrary to gods commandment did look back up on the two cities of
Sodom and Gomorra, and she for her disobedience was turned into a pillar of
salt, and so remains for our example to this day. Exo. vi.
When Moses also was sent by God unto Pharao King of Egipte, for the
diliuerau^ce of the peculiar people of God, Pharao would not hear him:
wherefore God said unto Moses, I will harden Pharos heart, for that he is
dysobedient unto my voice, and I will multiply miracles in the land of Egipte,
and so God did (...) there eat bread nor drink water: therefore shall not
thy body come into thy Fathers grave. And it came to pas that as he was goinge
from Bethelem to Judah, he was devoured in the wai with a grievous Lio^. Here
might somethyng also be spoken of the great folly and disobedience that was in
Achab, and how obstinatlye he did refuse to hear the true Prophets of God,
^i. ^c. xvi^
Doing evil in the sight of God, more then al they which were before him
kings over Israel. For he thought it but a small thing too walk in the sins
of Jeroboam, so that he did more to provoke God unto wrath, then all the
kings that before him werein Israel. We have also a notable example of the
Prophet Jonas, Jonas. iii
who being called of God to go unto Niniue to preach his word, and also to tell
them in what short time their city, if they did not repent them selves, should
be destroyed, yet Jonas, not having the heart of Moises, did flee from the voice
and face of God, preparing him self to go another way: but god preventing him
in his journey, so ordained, that when Jonas was upon the Sea, there arose such
a wonderful tempest, that all yt were in the ship, thought that God had
forsaken them. And until the Prophet Jonas by the mariners was cast into the
sea the tempest seized not: and as soon as they had thrown Jonas into ye see,
the weather was fair and calm.

Anotable example, worthy of all christen me^ to be noted, for yt it teaches
us that god does not suffer any one spark of dysobedience in man to skape
vnponyshedde, although the offense to some man may seem but small, yea even
in those which god tenderly loves as he did this good Prophet Jonas. Now as
we have heard, by diverse examples of scripture what dysobediente people were
among the peculiar people of god: So it is to be asked whether the like
example have been in practyse among us of this realm or no? or whether in
these our days there has been among us, such or rather the same manner of
proud and dysobedyente people, which as before you have hard, was among the
peculyar people of God* did not our late pretensed bishopes, as Lucifer before
had done, presume to sytte in Gods seat, apoca. x^ii.
proudly speakinge against god, blasphemi^g his holy name, dispisynge his
tabernacle, and holy saints that dwell in heaven, teaching in the Church of
God the wicked doctrine of Satan, and as the Prophet says, Daniel. xi.
seaced not to unhallow the sai^ctuary of truth, to put down the daily
offeringe, and to set up the abominable desolacion, which was the seasinge
of the veneration of the body and blod of Christ in the blessed Sacrament of
the altar, and the taking away our holy fastings, holy feasts, and holy
prayinge too Saynctes. Iere. xxiii.
Thus these dysceytefull Prophets, as says our Lord, made speedye haste,
but I appointed them not, they Ran a great pase, but I sent them not: they
preached fast, Iere. xxii,
but not out of my spirit: therefore with false title and corrupt entencion they
have entered, whose reward and Judgment shall be everlasting fire. Otherwise,
also, have we not had among us such other like temporal Lucifers, as cold not
be contented and plesed with such estate and honor as their drad sovereign had
called the^ unto, but rather desired, as Lucifer did, in their hearts to
aspyre to the Imperial state of this Realm? Again have we had no Caimes
trow you y^ has not let to seek the blood of just Able, his brother? May
it not be asked, how many just Ables in our days have suffered, for the
unity of Christ's Catholic Church in this Realm, the cruel death of
Marterdome? I mean not here of those late Heretics that latelye have been
justly burned for their heresies, as Hoper, Rogers, Ridlei, Latimer, and
Cra^mer, and such like: but I mean of those which have suffered for the unity
of the Catholycke church of Christ, as did that holy father Docter Fysher
sometime Bishop of Rochester, and Sirre Thomas More sumetyme Chaunceler of this
Relme, Docter Powel, Fetherstone, Reinoldes, Rochester, Newdigat, with many other
notable learned me^ after the^. How many Lothes wives have we had in this
Realm, that have not only turned their hearts from the rules of obedience,
Gene. xix
but also have turned their hearts from y^ sincere faith of the universal and
Catholycke church of christ, and from the true understanding of his word.

Have we not also had among us, Chore, Dathan and Abyram, which
dysobedyentlye have gathered theyin selfs together against Moses and Aron,
taking upon the^, to bring in to the church of God a new devised serui^g of
god, newly inverted of the^ selves, instructinge the multitude to despise and
forsake their true Moises and Aron, and to follow them as sent of God to
teach? O unhappy and Cursed dyscyples of Antychrist how have you bewitched y^
people of this worthy realm yt many of us (to conform their heresies) had
rather at this day burn and dye with the dyuill, then to rise with Moses and
live with Christ. (...)
Hear some will ask what is meaned by our forsaking Moises, ^unswer^
I answer, yt our forsakinge of Moises, was when we (by the false persuasion
of Chore, Datha^, and Abiram, disobediently fell from our mother stay and
cou^celler of our faith the Church of Rome, and so were divided from ye flock
and unity of ye Catholyke church of god, and our forsakynge or puttinge Aaron
to silence was when our faithful and obedient bishops were persecuted and
imprisoned for the Catholic faith, as was the good Bishop Athanasius among
the Arriens, which was of the^ most persecuted for his constant faith, if we
therefore will mark what enormities followed after our forsakinge the Apostolyke
church of Rome, we shall find so many in number of the^ as before has not
been seen, and namely among those of the Clergy. For did not our new holy
Bishops marrye horishe wives, I had almost said other men's wives, did they
not besides turn godly fasti^ges to riotous feastinges: and devout prayer to
leude prattling, calyng chaste me^ Sodomites, and turned obedience to unlawful
liberty, and then unlawful liberty brought forth Rebellion, even in the
beginning of al euel: Edward the.vi.
In ye time of king Henry of famous memory. Also in y^ time of king Edward the
sixte, what disobedience of laws: what rebellion, what Sedicion was in this
Realm, we all do know. And it followed, y^ when god had taken from us the
worthy young king, Rebellion against the queen.
did not unlawful liberty disobedyently devise, work, and goo about most
traytrously, to destroy and take away the right tit^^l and enterest which
our virtuous Queen Mary, most justly had to the princely kingdom of this her
realm, but God who hates the proud and presumteous, myraculouslye gave them
in to the hands of her hyghnes, and her grace for that victory had, praised
God and said with Dauyd: our Lord is my helper and his mighty arm has
exalted me. Psa. x^vii.
The^ immediately afterward her highness as the humble handemaide^ of God, sowght
for Moses the chief servant of the servants of God in earth, and delivered
Aron forth of prison, And also opened the mouths of him and them which before
were closed together by sharp and bluddie laws, streyghtly commaundyng them,
to open and declare unto her people, the treachery, craft, and falshod of those
deceitful prechers, which had seduced and led her people from faith to
infidelity, from virtue to vice, and from a godly unity to sedicious
rebellyon. Another Rebellion
But when the impacient children of disobedience, heard that their baneketing
tables, with their new invented religion and strange seruinge of god, should
vanish and fall down, they could no le^ger tarry, but as the fire breaks forth
of the furnes, semblably blustering and freting, proudly came with baners
displaide against the lords anointed their dread sufferayne lady, who before
they had seen and known to be brought to this princely Kingdom even by great
miracle and high providence of god only, and not by dent of swerd, and only
by godly wisdom, and not by worldly polycie had ye victory of her enmies,
which had been to the^ a sufficient example. As long therefore as we were within
the goodly fold of obedience, to our mother the catholyke church, we like
obedient subjects, quietly obeyed the laws and ordynaunces of our princes.
Thus as you have heard as well by diverse examples of holy Scriptures, as in this
our present time, how god leueth not unpunished any one which to his will and
commandment is not obediente, and also as ye have heard of the fall of the^,
so must we understand of our fall from the unity of Christ's church. It is
necessary therefore su^ thing to speak of ye holy fathers, which walked i^ a
most parfit order of obedience, as first in the time of the law of nature we do
read yt Abraham among ye ebrues for his great virtue was reverenced, obeyed
and had in great honor: and Abraham also, having then no prescribed law,
honored Me^chisedecke not that he was so commanded of god, But that nature
led by grace stirred and provoked him to honor the said Melchesedech, Gene.
xiiii
who^ God had called to high actoritie, and Abram also of his own free will
did give unto Melchesedech, ye servant of god, the tenth part of that spoil
why the he had gotten in his victory against the kings. Which will was
accounted to him a law, and wrought that work in him by grace. Abraham being
yet free and not under the law, did show unto us a great example of our
obedience, in observing of the law, which as then was neither maunded nor yet
written: but only by gods singular grace inspired in the heart of man. Then
it followed that when the time was come that the holy Exodus xi^i, xiiii.
Prophet Moises was comman^ded by god to bryngforth of the land of Egypt his
peculier people, and after the law was given, he led and governed them: and
also after the law received they were governed, without a king, until the
time of Samuel the Prophet, In whose time the people being desierous to be
like unto the Gentylles, called unto Samuel and said: let us have a king that
he may go before us to battle. Samuel this heryng them went to our LORD
and said: i. S^. viii.
Lord thy people cries upon me too have a king, and God said to Samuel
hear the voice of the people in all that they say unto the, for they which
are desirous to have a king, have not cast thee away, but me, that I should
not reign over them, but this thou shalt say unto them, that they, there
wives, sons and daughters, menseruauntes and women servants, ox, ass, and
all other their goods and cattels shall be at their kings will and
commandment.

And Samuel did speak unto the people as GOD had commanded him, 1. Samuel
ix.
and chose them a king out of the house of Cis, whose name was Saul And Samuel
before the whole multitude, called him the Lords anointed, because he was
made holy unto the Lord. Here is to be noted, gentle reader, the great love
and kyndnesse that God had to his people to keep them in awe and fear, and
how mercifullye he did show unto the^ by the mouth of his Prophet If
necessity required to serve for a commonwealth their king according to god his
appoyntement by his Scriptures whom he had ordained to be their head and
governor. For as every one body has one head which by wit and reason
governs the hole parts of the same body: so GOD gave unto his people being
but one whole body a head to rule and govern them as one body, and that they
as particular parts of one body and members to one head should be governed
by that head, in case like: So god gave them a king to be their head to
reygne over them, and that they as obedient subjects should truly serve and
obey him: For it is written: ^ro. viii,
through me kings do raygne, through me Councellers make just laws, and
through me princes bear rule, and judges of the earth execute judgment.

Who therefore that will call to mind the noble hystoryes of princes, and also
have in memory the famous time of their regymente, and the prosperous estate
of the weal public, it is necessary for him first to behold the order that
god almightye has put generally in all his creatures, and most chieflye to the
estate of ma^kinde, for whose use, all other creatures, as I have said, were
ordained of god. And like as in the inferior creatures, there are diverse
properties of natures, whereby one excels another, ^o in man like wise
appears that God gives not unto every one like gifts of grace of nature: but
to some more to some les, as it likes his high divine majesty. It is therefore
of a co^grue^ce, and according unto reason, ye like as one excel^et hanother,
so should ye estate of ye person be auasiced in degree, or place to the
aduau^cement or excellency of ye common weal. For like as ye angels be highest
exalted in glory, and as in this world they which excel or surmount in virtue
and vuderstanding are called to high honor, by gods providence: so god has
appointed here, kings and mai^strates, unto whom he has given auctorite to
rule and govern the weal public, for as much as the said persons excelli^g in
knowledge whereby other be governed: be ministers for the only profit and
commodity of them which have not like authority ought to be set in a more
high place the^ the resydew where they may se and also be seen, that by the
beams of their excelle^twit and virtue showed thorough ye glass of authority
other ye inferiors may be directed to ye way of al virtue and obedience among
which inferiors also behooves for to be a disposycyon and order of reverence
and specially to kings whereof proceeds ye dew obedience among subjects For
this, where al things be common, Hebru. xxi
there lacks good order, and where order lacks, there is neither reverence
nor yet dew or humble obedience, and where is no true obedience there al
things is odyous, and uncomely, so ye in every thing an order is to be
observed and had: for without de we order may nothing be stable or long
parmanent. And also it may not be called a due order oulesse it contain in
his degrees high and also base according unto ye merit or estimacyon of the
things yt is ordered. For as good order is ye septer of every ^yngdom, so is
the obedyence of ^ubiectes ye assured seat orplace of prices. What shall I
nedehere ^o resite for example ye noble histo ^ies of the paga^t prices whose
^ubiectes as we may read were ^o obedient yt what soe^uer laws Augustus
vespacianus Antony ^^^rcus Alexander.
^roclamacio^s or other ordinan^es by the^ set forth ordained or ^euised were
of the^ most obedie^t^y observed and kept, and not only for fear and rigor
of the ^awe then, but also and most singlary of love, and for those vettues
which they did perceive and know to be in their kings and maiestrates. And in
case this obedyence among the pagant people, came of love and for virtue sake
only, and not by the rygore of the law, what just cause have we then now in
England to be more true obedyente subjects unto our most virtuous king and
Queen, whose virtues at not hid, but do shine as a light and example to all the
world and whose love toward us their subjects is such, that it is heaviness to
either of them, to hear that the least of us should peryshe.

It is therefore necessary if we will be called Christiens, y^ than we be not
worsser then the he the^ or pagantes, whom nature moved to be obedient: and
otherwise we Christians are of god commanded, and by nature moved also, to
obey our king and maiestrates. For he most Ientelye says unto us: if ye
love me do all that I command you. This love and obedience that god here
commands us to have, has been of us neglected by the false entisementes of
the late Eritical libertines. Ephe. v.
Saint Paul therefore warns us of the^, saying: let no man deceive you
with vain words, for the indignation of god comes upon all disobedient
children. For like as ye woulfe sucketh the blood of lambs, so likewise
disobedience deuoureth the state of every common weal. Let every subject
therefore according to the mind of Saint Paul, submit him self unto the
authority of the higher powers, for there is no power but of god only. Who so
ever therefore resists ye power he resists the ordinance of god and he yt
resists the ordinance of god, strives against god, and saint Peter also
does say submit 1. Peter* ii.
your selves unto the King as unto your chief governor, and also unto them
that are sent of him for the punishment of evil doers, for so is the will of
God. as we have exaumple of king David who being perfecuted of king Saul
never resisted neither used any force or violence against him, Ie. xxxiii.
but was to him obedient as to his liege lord and king, and therefore our
Lord says by the mouth of his holy prophet, I will bring forth unto David,
my servant, ye brau^che of righteousness. Let us therefore, good contreman,
follow the examples of David, Abraham and Job, with other the obedient
servants of God, as here of late we have followed the evil examples of the
children of disobedience to the great displeasure of almighty god, and
despised al things yt were good, although we have many special graces by the
receiving of the Sacraments of the Church: yet there has been among us that
has rejected the wholesome and comfortable Sacrament of confession, not
considering the benefits yt we receive by it which God had ordained in his
church, assuring us thereby, to receive the forgeuenes of sins. For christ
our savior speaking unto his ministers of his Church, Math. xvi
says in this wise: whose sins ye remitte shall be remitted: And whose
sins ye retain shall be retained. Mat, xvi.
And therefore the psalmist swetely sings. John. ii.


O Lord I have received thy mercy in the myddest of thy Church, Psa, xiviii
here some obieccion of our Swinglians will say unto me that then GOD cannot
forgive sin but with the consent and auctorytye of his Church. To that I
may answer, that GOD can of his absolute authority, but he has ordained
this Sacrament to be applied to manne that he might be ordered at the
Mynysters hand by gods word, and receive wholesome counsel: for God could
have instructed Paul going to Damasco and not to have sent him to holy
Ananias, but GOD would not do so, Acts. ix.
but sent him to Ananyas, not for any variableness that was in GOD, but that
god would that Paul whom he then had called to be a minister of his Church
should there be known, that GOD had left power and authority in his
Church, and that the holy ghost should be given to all people by layinge
on of hands by the holy fathers and ministers of Christ's Church, for as
CHRIST had made this promise to his Church before he called Paul, so he
performinge the same promise before made unto his church, saint Paul to
Ananias, at whose hands he received baptism and the holi-ghost: and by the
same promise and authority do we receive in the church of god, at the hands
of his mynysters, the forgeuenes of our sins. John. ii.


And saint Paul also speakinge to the holy fathers at Ephesus, Acts.ii.
said unto them, take heed unto your selves, and to all the stock, among
whom the holy ghost has made you over seers, to rule ye church and flock of
god, the which he has purchased with his blood. Mark here, good countremen,
how ernestly saint Paul speaks of the authority of the church, calling them
overseers and rulers of the company and faythefull, which christ has
purchased with his blood: and furthermore, I am sure says saint Paul, of this,
that after my departinge shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparinge
the flock, and also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse
things to draw disciples after them. Have not good contreme^ the like Wolves
entered among us in this realm? Grafting in the vyneyard of our lord, thorns
and brambles, and also drawing christ's members from the true obedience and
discipline of their mother y^ catholic church As of late many has risen
among us in this realm, and especially that presumpteous he retike John Bale,
Bale.
who has taken no ^inale travail to hinder through his abominable heresies,
the glory of Christ's gospel. As it does appear by diverse and sundry books by
him made, and specially in his book intiteled the vocacion of John Balle to ye
bishoprike of Ossery where he not a little triumphs of his dangerous
travails which he had in the same, not shaming to compare himself with holy
saint Paul in troubles, in labors, in peril of shipe wrack, in peril of
the sea, in peril of false brethren, in peril of pirates, robbers and
murderers. Thus whilst he is comparing himself with the holy Apostle like a
mad harehead begins to say why should I shrink or be ashamed to boste as
the Apostle has? who as it appears in the second to the Corinthians (says
he) did boste of his labors perils and troubles in the gospel. And the like
labor and perilles had I in my Iorneye with no less trouble then he had from
Jerusalem to Rome, saving that says he we lost not our ship, and in the.vii.
lefe and on the left side he says, I wryhte not this for that I would
receive praise thereof, But that I have done it also to declare my most earnest
rejoice in the same god, which by grace has called me, by persecucyon has
tried me, and of favor has most wonderfully delivered me. Here Friar Bale
begins craftily to persuade with the poor Christians that GOD has
delivered him from peril of death by miracle as though he were called of god
in these days to set up a light in his church: but as that notable here tyke
terinthus did labor to put out of the Church of God the true light of the
gospel in the time of the holy apostle Saint John so does that shameless freer
labor and travail all that he may, like a false disciple, to put forth
himself and to tread down in these our days the true light of the gospel
wherefore freer Bale where you say that god wonderfully has delivered you we
Christiens would that you did understand that we take your deliverance from
perils of your enemies to be like as the common barratours do stand by the
high way side to take and rob the true manne of his goods and after does
flee from town to town to save themselves. So do we well understand you to
be a notable heretic a postata and runagate whereby you are compelled of
necessite to run with ye thief or murderer from City to City and from
contrie to contrie for the assurance of your life, but ondoutedly If you had
been as you say a true disciple of Christ and as fellow like with Saint Paul
as you wryght your self to be, when you by chance of wether were driven into
Dover rode would like as Paul did at Philippus have set your foot on land
and preached Christ Acts.xvi.
but contrary wise as you have written in the xl. lefe of your book and on the
left side you were more desirous to set your hand to a bill of fyfty
pounds more the^ you were able to pay to that end you might be set on land
in flaunders, for that ye might ^aue spedye travail to the rest of your
viperous brethren in Germany, whereas ye say you were received with as much
rejoice of your myraculus deliverance (as you term I^. xxviii
it) as was saint Paul at Apiphorum of the Catholycke and christian brethren,
thus this mad frantike friar Bale in the myddest of his proud bostinges, and
praisinge him self, does say. If Helias, that wether driven runnagate
remain now in a foren land, I pray thee gentle reader mark here, how he
hitteth here the nail on the head, and of a false lying friar is become in this
one point a true tale teller, naming him self* Helias, with this addiscion, that
wether driven runnagates, so has he brought himself from the fellowship of
saint Paul to be as he is, a runnagate, and fellow with the unplacable
enemies of Christ's Church, and companion with Cerinthus the enemy of truth.
And in the conclusyon of his Book the. xliiii. leaf and on the left side
also, he has diverse comparysones, between the prophets, apostles, and the
Church of England, and these are his words. What shall I say more? John
Baptist is now derided in the prison, and Jesus the son of God is grenned at
upon the cross, but contrary wise in England, master Bale, John baptist is
now delivered forth of prison. And IeIesus the son of god is truly
worshipped upon the cross, and moreover he says: Paul in Athens is hissed
at, the poor apostles are slyly laughed to scorn But now in England praised
be our lord Jesus Christ, Paul is truly preached, and the Apostles receive
their dew honor, and last of al he says, John the son of zebede is sent
into Pathinos, whiles Cerinthus, Menander, and Hebion play the heretics at
home. But otherwise I say, John zebed is now received forth of Pathinos in to
England, and Cerinthus, Mena^der and Hebyon, who triumphed in England while
John was in Pathinos, are now fled in to Germany to play the prophets of
heretics there. The rest of Bales trachery I will omit at this time and
return to my matter. Saint John speakinge of the notable heritike Cerinthus
does say to his disciples, beware that you bath not your selves in bathes,
wherein Cerinthus the enemy of truth has washed himself, lest by the^ you be
infected with his untruth, it is good for us therefore (good cuntryme^) that we
whom god now has called from the bathes of Cerinthus, do run with all our
mind, and with all our heart, in to the lap of our mother the catholic
church, who with her sweet bathes will wash and cleanse us from al these wicked
errors which we have learned of this wicked church of Satan, and then shall we
receue such heavenly moisture as shall bring forth in us immovable obedience,
saint Paul says, unhappy is that ground and nerest to the curse of God,
which when it receaueth heavenly moystures, does bring forth none other
thing but thorns and wedes: therefore to avoid this great threatninge of
Saint Paul, let us y^ now are called by gods deuyne grace, learn of Christ to
be obedient, who suffered for us, leui^g us an example yt we should follow his
steps, in whom was no sin, he was obedient to Joseph his supposed father,
and to Mary his natural mother, he also who was king of al, obediently paid
tribute to Caesar for him and Peter. Also this most absolute or ground of all
virtues, gave unto us one notable example of obedience, at the time of his
passion, what time he suffered the Jews to beat, and scourge him, and
specially when he was brought before the wicked Judge Pilate, John.ix.
who said unto him: know thou not that I have power to crucify thee: and
have power also to lose thee? Christ our savior mekely answered and said:
thou could not have power at all against me except it were given the from
above. Therefore S. Paul does say, there is no power but of god the people that
be are ordained of god, and who that is of god will obey the power and
ordinauncis of god, as christ here for our example was obedient unto Pylate,
whose power was of god, and yet he was a wicked judge much more we christians
having this example of our sauyoure christ ought of our bou^de^ duties to be
obedient to our most virtuous King, Queen, and maiestrates, even as Saint
Paul says for consience sake and also for Christ's sake, Ephe. vi.
who for us became like unto men and was found in his apparel as a man he
h^bled himself and became Philip. ii.
obediente unto the death, even the death of the cross, Let us therefore good
contremen following the example of Christ put from us our wilful disobedience
wherein we have obstenatly continued along time, by the perswacion of a rabble
of pernicious heretics, and hear what Saint Paul says. i. timo. iiii,
In the latter days some shall go from the true faith of Christ's church ii.
timo, iii
and shall give head to the spirit of error, and to the teachinge of the devil
and his apostles, and in another place he says also, that before the coming
of Antechrist ii. The. ii.
there shall be a notable discentio^, and departing from the faith of the
catholycke church, through disobedience, and is it nor even so now with us:
what a notable dyscencion, has been in this Church of England, what
departinge from the true faith of the known church of God, what sects, what
diversity of opinions is yet among us? For that we will not hear the voice
of god, nor our mother the catholic church, but still will run after
diuelysh Prophets of that cursed or malingnaunt church of Satan, who did
pretend as it did apere unto the simple and unlearned, aspecial favor unto
gods word, colourynge and payntyng their heresies, with the sweet sentenses of
the Scripture peruersly understood leading us thereby to everlasting
dampnacion. Iere. v,
Let us therefore pray with the Prophet, and say: Lord turn thou us to the,
and then shall we be turned. And vndoughteles shall be opened unto us, the
abhominacion of their false and cursed preachinges who did repute the^ selves
to be the church catholycke conde^pning al other good and verteous men, that
were of the universal and known church of god, not to be of the church of god,
as did the Nouacions in Rome, the Arryens in Greece, and the donatistes in
Affricke. And now in our time the Luterians and Swynglia^s in England: The
fa^le of the H^retikes.
Further more if there were no Scriptuures, as there are plenty, to persuade
us y^ these our Luterians and Swinglians, were not the true disciples and
followers of Christ, yet the myraculus destruction and fall of them, were a
sufficient proof unto us, that they were not of god: but the only disciples
of Satan. For in what estimacion were they in this realm? How were they
exalted and had in honor? have not their doctrine been received and followed?
I need not much to speak thereof, for it is not unknown to us. What state they
were in among us, and how malyciouslye they brought to pas, that the holy
sacred temple, and house of prayer (wherein god was of his faithful people)
honored and served, was so by the^ defaced and disguised, that of that sacred
temple, they made a Speluncke or den of Heretykes. Also if we would not the
inconstancy that was in them, and the variete of order that was in their
religion, it were a notable testimony also that they were not of god. To speak
much of the end of them I will not, but only of that execrable man Cranmer,
which when he understood that he should die, humbled him self to the Catholic
church, and showed him self to be repentant, and sorry for his sedicious and
evil doctrine, which he before had taught and set forth in this church of
England. But what manner of repentance it was that he the^ had and how he
humbled him self you shall here. ii. reg. xxi.
In the.iii. of the Kings we read yt Achab when he heard the thonderinge
thretninges of god for his ydolatrye, for a time repented and humbled himself,
and it continued not long: but that he did fall to his old accustomed
ydolatrye again, likewise Cranmer as I have said repentid, and humbled
himself to the Catholic church, and shortly after with Achab, Ioh. xvii
returned to his shameful heresies. Again Judas also repented that he had
betrayed his master Christ, but the fruits of repentance followed not in him,
and therefore Christ speaking of him says: father al those which thou have
given me have I kept and none of them is lost but the one child of perdicion,
that the scripture might be fulfilled, Cranmer likewise repented his heresies,
not simply and unfeignedly, but craftily and subtelly under the cloak of
ypocrisy having a certain trust thereby to avoid present death the^ at hand
wherefore good contremen as this wretched man have chosen part with Judas and
Achab, so does his evil and miserable end declare him to be a detestable
heretic and a disobediente member of Satan, and forasmuch also as we by him
have been seduced and led into diverse and sundry errors, so is it most
necessary that we like obedient subjects and faithful Christians do abhore
and detest his h^nouse and unsavory doctrine, remembryng always that as by the
disobedience of the first man Adam we were made the children of wrath, so by
the obedience of the second Ada^ which is Christ we are reconciled and made
the children of God, then (...)


