ASTPOLOGOANIA: The Madness of ASTROLOGERS. OR An Examination of Sir
Christopher Heydons Book, ENTITLED A DEFENSE OF Iudiciarie Astrology.
Written near upon twenty years ago, by G. C. And by permission of the Author
set forth for the Use of such as might happily be misled by the Knights Book.
Published by T. V. B. of D.

Esaias 44. 24. I am the LORD that makes all things, that stretches the Heavens
above, that spreads abroad the earth by my self: that frustrateth the Tokens
of the Liars, and makes Diuiners Mad, that turns Wisemen backward, and
makes their knowledge Foolish.

London, Printed by W. Iaggard, for W. Turner of Oxford. 1624.

To the Worshipful my very good Cousin M. THOMAS CARLETON, of Carleton Hall,
in Cumberland, Esquire, and one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the
Couties of Cumberland, Grace, and Peace.
SIR,

THE Sun has run over the Zodiake, in his periodicall Motion almost twenty
times since this Learned Treatise was first penned. During which time, you have
not bin wanting, with diverse other intelligent and Judicious Scholars, who had
a sight of it, what by Letters, what by word of mouth, to solicit the Reverend
and worthy Author, for a publication. And the Prayers of you, and the requests
of others well affected, have (at the length) prevailed. Now then, then, that
this Discourse has gotten Feet to walk abroad in the Light, it desires
earnestly to run into your embracements, being assured of welcome, upon that
good experience of your former love and kindness toward it, while it was but
yet a breeding. And for my self, sithence I have had the Honor vouchsafed me
to confer a little pains (though it be nothing to speak of) in sending
abroad of this worthy work into the world, for the good of Christians in
general, and more especially, for their benefit, who have been a long time
bewitched with Sorcery and Astrology. I was verily induced to think, that I
could neither please my self, nor the Author better, then if I should make
choice of you for the Dedication, whose heart as it is truly touched with
Piety, to bear love unto the Psalm 16.
Saints of God, and such as excel in virtue; so I persuade my self, it is
also affected with a Godly hatred of all Psalm 119.
such as imagine evil things, and that hold of Superstitious vanities.
Superstitious vanity is a far spreading Tree; one maine branch of it, is
Astrology and Divination, whether it be a more Artificial delusion, which
Satan works in the Learned and great Clearkes of the world, or a more simple
and gross kind of insinuation which he practices upon the ruder and
vn-lettered people, the matter is not much, neither is the difference
substantial but graduall, the former exceeding only in complement, being a
more formal imposture and refined Villainy. Both are here euicted to be
impious, both to be devilish, and the whole Art to be an unwarrantable
profession, and PORISMA
superstitious vanity. And because we desire not to be mistaken in ipso limine,
to open our selves a little, here (...).
we profess not to meddle with Astrology, as it is the same with Astronomia,
or Ouranoscopia, which is an ingenuous part of good Learning, and one of the
seven Liberal Sciences. But take Astrology for Astromantia or Genesiologia,
as the Knight does in his Book, and then we are right when we call it an
Imposture, Iugling, Superstition, Vanity: Quae nulla solidaratione firmetur,
nullo certo experimento insistat, nulla sapientum Six. Senes. Biblioth. Sanct.
lib. 6. Annot. 10.
authoritate probetur: sed quam Philosophi ceu ludibrium e scholis explodant,
Caesarea iura damnent, pontisicum decretae Synodicaeque Sanctiones interdicant,
diuinae Scripturae detestentur and omnium Theologorum iudicia reprobent. Which
I do find condemned by the Lord (...). Deuteronomy. 18, 9, 10 11, 12.
himself, Deuteronomy. 18. in the Canaanites, whom he destroyed before the
Israelites for this very abomination; condemned by the Lords Prophet, Esaias 47.
in the Esaias 47, 11, 12, 13, 14. Acts 19, 19. Augustine. Origin. Theodoret.
Ambros. Sexi. Synod. in Trullo C^lui^ Perkins. Chambers. K. JAMES.
Babylonians destinied to destruction; condemned by the practice of those
Conuerts in the prime Age of the Gospel, Acts 19. who had used those curious
Arts, but they burnt all their Books, and esteemed nothing of the great price
of them, though it amounted to fifty thousand pieces of Silver; condemned by
the judgment of S. Austen, other Fathers, Councils, and diverse famous later
Divines; and lastly, condemned by the neuer-too-much admired Pen of the most
Noble, and most Learned Prince incomparably, that lives this day in
Christendom, and that is, His most Excellent Majesty, our Gracious Sovereign,
whose Judgment is clearly this: That the Devil, who is the Doctor and Teacher
of the Black Art, according to a double curiosity in his Scholars learned or
vn-learned, has a double means to feed their Curiosity, thereby to make
them for to give themselves over to this study, and so at the last, to his
service.

These two means, He calls the Devils Rudiments, and the Devils School. His
Rudiments are Charms and Spells, for simple and vn-learned people. The Devils
School is Iudiciarie Astrology, and that's for the Learned only. The place is
in HIS First Book of Daemonol. cap. 3. and 4. where you may read more at
large, touching this point. So then, this impious and vain Art, having
received such a fair Trial, and full condemnation by competent Judges, what
withholds it from execution, but the methods and slights of Satan; who
works in the Children of Disobedience such a liking of the Art, that
(notwithstanding all that can be said against it) they will not stick to defend
the Practitioners of it, and applaud them many times in their sinful and mis
guided speculations. And because they will not be mad without Reason, (...).
they have a specious Argument, whereof they boast very much, which they are
wont to produce for them selves in favor of all Diuiners; and it is taken for
the truth of Astrologicall Predictions. In brief it is this. Object.
The Events fore-knowne and foretold by these wisemen fall out true, therefore
the Art of Divining is not vain, but useful and profitable in the life of
man. Equidem haec est illa singularis ac praecipua diuinatorum Sixth. (...)
supra.
demonstratio; cui, ceu immobili fundamento vniuersum diuinationis suae
aedificium impon^t. But as a Learned Writer of our own said in another
dispute, Miseri homines mendicant argumenta; nam si mercarentur, W^.
profecto meliora afferrent. Silly men that they are, that are feign thus to
go a begging for Arguments; for sure if they went to the Market where there is
choice, they would bring home far better Ware then this. Let us examine their
reason, and we shall find it carries no weight at all with it. Sixtus
Senensis, according S 1. Bibl. Sanct. 1. 6. Annota. 10
to the opinion of Basil, Chrysostom, and other Christian Doctors says, That
the truth of Astrologicall Predictions, is not to be referred to the
Const^llations of Heaven, but to four other more apparent causes; namely, Ad
sortem, ad pacta, ad prudentiam consultorum, and stultitiam consulentium; the
secret dispose of Gods Providence, the society and complot with Devils, the
prudence and sagacitie of the Wizardes, the folly and overmuch credulity of
the Inquisitors; which he exemplifies very well in each particular. We refer
the Learned to the place it self, because it is somewhat long, and will take
another course to give satisfaction unto this Argument, by a threefold Answer.

1 First then we answer, that to come to the knowledge Answer.
of any thing by unlawful means, does not make the practice warrantable. Now
it does most manifestly appear in this ensuing Discourse, that out of their
own mouths, who have been Masters and Professors in this Science, that the
cause why the Diuiner speaks true, is not by virtue of his Skill and Learning,
but because it pleases God to deliver him over to Satan's illusions, from whom
alone he has the knowledge of those particular Events he does undertake to
foretell, either by an open compact with him, or secret instinct at the least;
the Lord having by some means or other opened his will, and made known his
counsel touching that matter. For this by the way must diligently be
observed, that until that time, I mean till God have disclosed his will by
some means or other; neither the Wise man, nor the Astrologer, nor the Devil
himself, is able to foretell any thing.

2. Secondly I answer, that those Predictions do not always fall out iumpe and
true, as they would bear us in hand; but that either the Devil does miss
sometimes, or that his instrument does mistake his informations. This I am able
to justify and make good by a plain story of my self when I was a child, and
went to School at Carleill where I was borne. There came an odd Fellow about
the Country: He was reputed a Cunning man, and so called, for that he took
upon him to tell Fortunes. The Fellow was dumb, or at least feigned himself
speechless, but certain it was, he had an instinct or Familiarity with some
Spirit. This Fellow being on a time in my Fathers House, there were some there
more simply honest then Religiously wise, made signs unto him, to show what
should be my Fortune, and another Schoole-fellowes of mine that was then
present. Whereupon, this Wizard having looked earnestly upon us both, and
pawsed a little; for my Schoole-fellow, he takes me a low stool, and gets up
upon it, with a Book in his hand, and began to act after his fashion,
signifying thereby that he should be a Preacher: and for me, he took a Pen
and a scrowle of Paper, and made as though he would write, signifying thereby,
that I should be a Scriuener. Now it so fell out, that my Schoole-fellow
proved the Scriuener, and I prove the Preacher. By which it is plain to be
seen, that either the Devil himself did miss, or his instrument was
mistaken in his informations.

3. Thirdly, suppose that th^se Predictions fall out true, yet the wizard is
never a whit the more to be believed, as it is plain in the 13. chap. of
Deutro. verse 1. If there arise amongst you a Prophet, or a dreamer of
Dreams, and gives thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign or wonder come to
pass, yet shall thou not hearken unto him, for the Lord your God proves you,
etc. The Devil in Samuels shape foretold those things that were August. de
doct. Christ. lib. 2.
true unto Saul, yet the Art by which he was raised and presented, was never a
whit the less execrable. The Pythonisse in the Acts of the Apostles, gave a
true testimony to the Apostles of our Lord and Savior, yet the unclean Spirit
wanne never a whit the more favor by it. The Devil tells truth sometimes,
and yet he is still the Father of Lies; and his Instrument (at hap-hazard) may
light upon a Truth, and yet remain a Liar still. It is worth the while to
observe, how that the Prophet Jeremy puts upon these men their right name,
Chap. 50. verse 36. Indeed, they are accounted of the world Wise men, and so
they are called, verse 36. it is M. Caluins Observation upon that place. A
sword is upon the Chaldees, and the inhabitants of Babylon, upon her Princes,
and upon her Wise men. A Sword upon the Liars, and they shall dote, a sword
upon the strong, and they shall faint. Where, if we make a true resolution
ofthe Text, we shall find that God threatens his judgments first in general
upon Babylon the whole Country, and then the Inhabitants of it are specified
and parted into these ranks, Princes and Wise men, Liars and Strong men. Those
which in the former Verse he calls Princes, or principal men, in the next are
called Strong men, and the Sword upon them, or their Judgment, is, that they
shall faint. Those whom in the former Verse he called Wise men, in the next,
are called Liars, and the Sword upon them, or their judgment, is, that they
shall dote. That of the Psalmist, is most true, though it were spoken in haste,
All men are Liars; but for Astrologers, and Figure-flingers, and
Natiuity-Casters, and Fortune Tellers, they are doting Liars. It is their
Judgment, A sword is upon the Liars, and they shall dote.

The Conclusion now I take it is clear, that Iudiciarie Astrology is a
superstitious Vanity, and that the whole Art of Diuiners, is an unlawful
study. The Corollarie thereupon is as clear, that it is not lawful
COROLLARIVM.
to seek unto these men for their advice or help, in any matter whatsoever. I
could here (if I would take leave to expatiate) greatly inueigh against the
common custom of the worlds, too too rife in those parts, and other blind
corners of the Realm. For, if there come about but a Gypsy, or Canter, or
Fortune Tellers, presently you shall have the whole country flock about him, to
learn somewhat. If our little finger do but ache, or be a little diseased,
presently we send with Ahaziah to Baalzebub the god of Ekron, to know if we
shall recou^r: If we be but in a little straight and trouble either of body or
mind, we cannot rest till we run with Saul to the Wuch at Endor, to know
what will be the event of it. And what has bewitched the people thus to do,
but a strong delusion of Satan, and a firm opinion conceived of the Skill and
Cunning that such a man has, to tell strange Farlyes? They will say, they know
such an one well enough, he is a very skillful man, they have had experience
of (...).
him in other matters, and he has told them true, and why should they not seek
to him now? I remember I have read it of Archimedes the great Mathematician,
when he had by his dexterious Skill in his Profession, made Hiero King of
Scicilie draw a huge Ship along with his little finger, which an infinite
number of his Subjects with joint Forces were not able so much as to stir,
(...) (said the King) (...), that from that day forward, Archimedes was to be
believed, in whatsoere he said. Say that the Wise man thou consults withal, or
rather the Devil by him, hit on right at the first, and satisfy thy desires
in some unlawful and curious enquiry; Well, (...), from that day forward, thou
do resolve with thy self to believe whatsoever he shall tell thee
hereafter. And though his Magical Skill, and Diabolical Art fail him many
times (as indeed it must; for defuturis contingentibus non datur Scientia) yet
the opinion of Man, and the Illusion of Satan has so besotted thee, that sure
the fault is in thy self; when things prove not true, it is either by reason
of thy heedlesnesse in misunderstanding some words, or mis-applying some
means; the blame must be laid on any thing, rather then on the Devil.

Is it not a shame, that Christians, who live under such a bright Sunshine
of the Gospel, should suffer themselves to be led away with such superstitious
Vanities? Men forget that they have Learned Christ, when they will needs be
beholden to the Devil for his counsel in any matter. If they would but
remember that solemn Vow and protestation they once made before the face of
the Church in holy Baptism, wherein they promised to forsake the Devil, and
all his Works, it would readily prompt them to their duty: and what is that?
Not to regard them that have Familiar Spirits, neither to seek after Wizardes,
to be defiled with them, as the Lord commands, Leuit. 19. 31. Where mark
this by the way, that you cannot seek after these things, but you must needs
be defiled with them.

In which respect, Saint Austine excellently calls this running after Wizards,
genus quoddam fornicationis, A spiritual kind of Fornication. And the reason
is evident, August. de doct Christ. l. 2. c. 23
because the unclean Spirits are desirous to illude the Soul of man, and to
make a show of Obedience, to catch the Soul in their snares; requiring a
strong Credulity, and excessive desire to learn. So drawing the heart from
Gods fear, and bringing it by little and little in their Slavery (as is
plain by the following Discourse) which is the grossest kind of Spiritual
Whoredom that can be devised, when the Soul goes a whoring from GOD, after
the Devil.

But I fear I have out of a zeal to the Church, exceeded the bounders of an
Epistle. I will not trespass further upon you, by keeping you any longer (as
it were) at the Threshold, from entering the Discourse it self. Wherein you
have these things, and the whole matter, with sound judgment, and varieie of
Learning, perfectly hanled, and the Adversary driven from his starting holes,
by maine force of Argument. And so ceasing to be further troublesome unto you,
I humbly take my leave.

Your assured Loving Cousin, THO: VICARS.

In Authorem and eius Opera.
(...).
-- -- Non ego te meis
Chartis inornatum sileri, Horat. Ca^. lib. 4. Od. 9.

Totue tuos patiar labores
Impune (Praesul) carpere liuidas
Obliuiones. -- --
Maiorum titulis magnus, sed mayor haberi
Vis mage Musarum titulis (dignissime Praesul.)
Dordrechtum tua fama capit, quod Oration habit. coram Illustrif. Ordinib.
missus ab oris
Angliacis doctus Synodo consederis ampla.
Qui Heroici Characteres.
Characteres heroum legerit, ipsum
Vergilium, versu ve paren^ legate ille Poetam.
Sacrilegos Tithes proved due by divine right.
tuadocta manus prostrauit, and inde
Laus tibi, nec minor hinc, quod ineptos Astrologastros
Fuderis in terram This Discourse against Judiciary Astrology.
docto conanime, surgit.
Nempe and condignos norunt tibi pendere honores,
Sceptra The threefold Jurisdiction.
tuo calamo firmata. refer molestum
Non erit. Et pleno meritas Ecclesia lauds
Concinet ore tuas, Consensus Catholica Ecclesiae contra Tridentinos, and
Directions to the true Church, gathered out of the Consensus.
Consensum si been seruat.
T. V. posuit S. T. B.

(...): OR RECAPITVLATION of the Chief Passages in this Treatise.
CHAP. I.
TO the Confusion of Astrology, one witness more is added, by the writing of
this Book. Iudiciarie Astrology is no part of Natural Philosophy, nor of
the Mathematickes, neither is it Media Scientia, betwixt them.
CHAP. II.
The means of knowing aforehand particular Events, is not Natural, but
Diabolical. Those that have been most blockish in other Learning, have been
quick and sharpe-witted in Astrology.
CHAP. III.
Astrology and Augurie in the judgment of the learned are alike. The truth
in a Prediction does not make an Art warrantable.
CHAP. IV.
The Astrologer foretells that is true, by the help of Satan. Henry the
second King of France, and Ahab King of Isreal's death, compared together.
Astrologicall Predictions depend not upon Natural Causes. Natural Effects are
not Contigent, but Necessary. Of future Contingent Events, there is no certain
knowledge. Astrologicall Predictions stand not by learning, but by some
instinct.
CHAP. V.
Astrology considers the Fortunes only of Fools, and the wicked. The
Knights invincible Syllogism dashed to pieces. Natural Effects must be
distinguished from Contingent Events.
CHAP. VI.
No place for a definition in the beginning of a Controversy. Ars is not the
Genus for Astrology and Astronomy.
CHAP. VII.
The first Inuenter of Astrology was the Devil. The first spreader of it,
Zoroastes. Eudoxus an Astronomer against Astrological predictio^s Panaetius and
Cicero, Varro and Pliny against Astrology Pythagoras, Democritus, and Plato,
studious of Magic, silent in Astrology. A brief rehearsal of the points
delivered in the Book hitherto.
CHAP. VIII.
Those things which have supernatural Causes, cannot be foretold by the
Stars. Diverse things depending on Natural Causes, cannot certainly be
foretold by the Astrologer: as Rain, Weather, Dearth, Sickness. Those things
which depend partly on Natural Causes, on Man's Will, cannot be foretold by
Astrologers. Those things which are merely Contingent cannot be foretold by
the Stars.
CHAP. IX.
Magic, no part of Natural Philosophy. The Astrologer hides his sleights
under the name of Celestial Influences. The Influences confer nothing to a
Prediction, without a strong Credulity, and excessive desire of learning, in
the heart of the Enquirer. Astrology and Magic in practice inseparable. The
Astrologer attaineth not to his intended end in a prediction, without the help
of Magic. The learned Fathers of the Church, namely, Origin, Augustine,
Cyril, Theodoret, against Astrologicall Predictions.
CHAP. X.
That place Esaias 47, 12. cited by M. Chambers against Astrologers cleared:
where the destruction of Babylon there threatened, is shown not to have been
myraculous against the Knights cavil. Cicero denies fatum Stoicum, grants
fatum Physicum. That place, Job. 38. 33. soundly interpreted. That place, Judge.
5, 20. opened, and expounded. That place, Genesis 1, 14. Catholically expounded,
and vindicated from abuse. That place of Chrysostom. in Math. 2. interpreted. God
works in some things against his revealed will. Blasphemy is not only
against God, but against his truth and against the Saints that maintain the
truth. Ignorance of Astrology, is tolerable in a Christian Knight, but
ignorance in Theology cannot be excused. An irreligious speech of an
Astrologer, who thought by Numbers, to attain the Mystery of Salvation, sifted
punctually. A place in Cicero Lib. 2. de Diuinat. commended to the Knights
reading. The Kings Majesty as Judge of the whole Controversy, pronounces
sentence against Astrology Judiciary.
Ennius, apud Cic. Lib. 2. de Diuinat.
-- -- Non habeo denique Marsurn Augurem,
Non vicanos Aruspices, non de circo Astrologos,
Non Isiacos coniectores, non interpretes somnium.
Non enim sunt ij aut Scientia aut Art diuini,
Sed superstitiosi vates, impudentesque harioli,
Aut inertes, aut insani, aut quibus egestas imperat.
Qui sibi semitam non sapiunt, alteri monstrant viam,
Quibus diuitias pollicentur, ab ijs drachmam ipsi petunt,
De hisdiuitijs sibi deducant drachmam, reddant caetera.
CHAP. I.
Wherein the Grounds which the Knight takes without proof, and upon which he
builds his Book, are called in question.

MR Chambers (a man for his Life and Learning worthily honored of all that
knew him, and by his learned Labors known f^r and near) has written against
Judiciary Astrology, as many of the best learned before him have done. Wherein
having done no less then a Christian learned man ought to do, he had reason
to look for another reward of his Labors, then he found: For in stead of
thanks and commendation for his learned Labors so well placed, he is roughly
entertained by Sir Christopher Heydon Knight, a man that has taken much pains
to hold up a Cause, which cannot be holden up by man's strength. For albeit the
illusions of Judiciary Astrology have long been maintained by the policies
of Satan; yet when the light shines upon it, it will never be able to stand.
And in truth, in the hearts and Consciences of the godly in the Church, or of
the wise and learned without the Church, was never yet thought able to stand.
Now, after so many men, my coming into this cause, can add nothing unto it.
What can I bring hereto, which has not been brought by the Learned long since?
Yet, that the same truth may be confirmed by the mouths of many witnesses, and
that others may not be abused by the Knights Book, and that himself also may
have occasion to consider the whole matter afresh; I will examine this matter
once more, and open to the Knight the weakness and unsound foundations of his
unprofitable Labors. Wherein I leave not only the intemperancie of words, with
which he has so much enlarged his Book; but even so much as the cause will
suffer the multitude of words: For the pleasure that some ^ke in long writing,
neither can I allow in judgment; nor for my business, practice.

I purpose to examine the grounds that the Knight has brought, or any other
may bring for Astrology, wherein the Reader may know who they be that stand
against Astrology, and who for it. I shall also open to what part of knowledge
Astrology is referred, that is, to speak shortly, to Magic.

One principal ground upon which he much rests, is, that Astrology is a
part of natural Pholosophy: for thus he writes, Page 18. concerning
Natiuities and Predictions. I confess that Astrologers containing themselves
within the bounds of Natural Philosophy and reason, do take upon them so much
as lawfully they may, etc.

And this is the common Answer almost to every objection, Page 19. No man, I
think, of indifferency or common sense will censure the Astrologer (who
judges no farther of future effects, then as they are contained and revealed
in the stars, and second and remote causes) to busy himself farther in Gods
unknown Secrets. Page 29. Astrology professes only to foresee natural
mutations and accidents. Page 30. To place confidence in Stars as in divine
causes and powers, is one thing, and to esteem them but as subordinate and
second causes in Nature, is another. Page 36. The question between us is,
whether the Stars be signs or second causes of natural mutations or events;
and whether the study thereof be unlawful. It were too much trouble to recite
every place where he repeateth thus much. It is in a manner all he says;
take away this Answer, and ye take away all from him.

Now Sir, we charge you for abusing your Reader in writing so long a Book,
and throughout the whole Book, never once making offer to prove the thing in
question. For you confess the question between you and us, is, whether the
Stars be second causes of natural mutations (which I admit to be part of the
question, but not all.) But by your own grant if this be the question, then a
man of your learning and understanding should have spoken somewhat for the
proof of the question. Could you find in your heart to write so large a
Book, and yet not once prove the question, upon proof whereof all your Book
must rest? And thought you (Sir) that men of judgment would take these things
at your hands? It is an easy matter, I perceive to write Books, if this
liberty were granted: were it not better with modesty to hold your peace, then
to be called to such a reckoning? I say your Book is idle and to no purpose,
as long as that is not proved, which your self makes the question between us.

But least this might seem to be rather an imperfection in the man, then in
the cause it self: (For my meaning is not to take any advantage of selected
ouersights or slippes, as he seems to fear.) Let us consider this thing a
little farther. Then let this be the first question, which you confess is the
question between us, whether the Stars (as they are the subject of
Astrology) be natural causes remote or subordinate of such events: Or (which
is all one, and delivered likewise by himself) whether the Astrologers in
their Predictions contain themselves within the bounds of natural Philosophy.
You hold the affirmative, through al your Book, though never proving it:
whenever you find your self thrust to the wall, and held hard, then you
run continually to this help, as the halting man to the horse, and without
this poor shift so often repeated, you are not able to go one foot forward.
First then, let us reason this point, we deny that the Stars are natural
causes of those events which the Astrologers presume to foretell by them, or
that herein the Astrologer contains himself within the bounds of natural
Philosophy. That the truth may the better appear in this point; first we move
this question, To what part of learning Astrology belongs? We look for
your Answer: you tell us it is a part of the Mathematickes: And that
Astrology, which you say is the same with Astronomy, has two parts, the one
speculatiue, the other practical, which you call Judiciary Astrology, page 2.
I omit the escapes of this unwarranted division: We examine now to what part of
Learning this Judiciary Astrology is referred? You tell us sometimes, it is a
part of the Mathematickes; sometimes you say it is a part of Natural
Philosophy. These things are so diverse, that you cannot bring them to any
accord: For the Mathematickes are distinguished from Natural Philosophy so
far, as when you set Astrology sometime in the one learning, sometimes in
the other, we are persuaded that you do herein as men shifting, and not using
plain dealing, and not being able soundly to speak to the point, you confound
your self by confounding things which are in themselves distinguished. This
confusion in speech, is a sign of fear and confusion in your cause. For if
Indiciary Astrology be a part of the Mathematickes, as you would have it, then
the subject thereof is certain, true, no way subject to error, as is the
subject of the Mathematickes. But because you dare not say that it handles
such a subject, therefore you reserve this hole to hide your self in, that it
handles natural causes and events. But no part of the Mathematickes handles
natural causes and events, which are never separated from the matter, wherein
there is mutability; but the Mathematical considerations, are abstract from
the mutability of natural matter: And the Mathematician frames thence such
conceits, as whether we regard the manner of knowledge, or the subject, are no
way subject to error or mutability: and in this respect deserve only the name
of Sciences, because no humane knowledge, can be so certain as this knowledge
is. If therefore this be a part of the Mathematickes, it is not contained
within the bounds of Natural Philosophy; if it be within those bounds, it is
no part of the Mathematickes. If this were a true Art, or if the Professors
thereof were plain dealers, they would not thus collude between these
startingholes of Mathematickes and natural Philosophy. Now Sir, we whom you
account unlearned opinion-Masters, grauelled with the difficulties of the
mysteries of this deep Art, maintaining a senseless scruple, and as you say,
monsters of opinions, in denying Astrology, entreat your Worship with your
great learning to edisie us in this point here in the entrance, and to
certify us to what part of learning you will refer Judiciary Astrology? You
tell us a tale, that Aristotle calls it Scientiam mediam, between the
Mathematickes and Natural Philosophy. To prove this, you cite Aristotle, Li.
2. Cap. 2. Physic. and your reason is, because the Principles thereof are
purely and merely Mathematical, which in the practice are applied to sensible
matter, as the Physical subject thereof. Sir, you dreamed so; for this is no
better then a dream, to tell us of an Art that has Principles purely
Mathematical, and a subject Physical. As for Aristotle, it seems you cared
not whether he said so or no, it was enough to bring his name: For Aristotle
does not say, it is Scientia media, between those two, as you father upon him:
but disputing quo Mathematicus a naturali Philosopho differat, does consider
that which we now call Astronomy, as a part of Mathematickes, and not of
Natural Philosophy; neither does he leave it hanging in the midst between
them, but gives it directly to the Mathematickes. If the Knight here shall
catch at a word to help himself, it is but a poor help: For the Learned
know well, that the use of words receive great change in diverse Ages. In some
Age Astrologia and Astronomia were the same, especially in those old times,
when no man did ever dream, that they who then were called Chaldei, should at
any time be called Astrologi, or that Art Astrologia. For they were called
Astrologers long after Aristotle his time, who are now called Astronomers. Now
Aristotle, who little wist (God wot) how the use of names should run after his
time, uses the word Astrologia as then it was used, for that which we now for
distinctions sake call Astronomy, for says he, Astrologia est in ijs rebus de
quibus Mathematicus considerat: which words, if they had been written in those
times, when the Chaldei were called Astrologi and Mathematici, they might have
served the Knights purpose; but being written in Aristotle his time, to turn
them to this purpose, is either palpable ignorance, or wilful collusion,
wittingly wrangling to no purpose. For, who is so ignorant, that knows not
that Mathematicus in Aristotle his time did not signify a Chaldean (as
afterward it did) but only a Professor of those Arts which then were called
Mathematicae, whereof that which now is called Astrology, was not thought to
be any. Then where he says, that Aristotle makes it Scientiam mediam,
between the Mathematickes and Natural Philosophy, he is found many ways
faulty. For Astrologia in Aristotle his opinion, and the Knights meaning is not
the same thing. Further, Astrologia in Aristotle his meaning is not Scientia
media, but a part of the Mathematickes: and Aristotle does not once say that
the natural Philosopher medleth with it: For he understood then by that word
that which we call Astronomy. Much less does Aristotle admit the Knights
reason, that it should therefore be Scientia media, because the Principles
thereof are purely Mathematical, which in the practice are applied to sensible
matter, as the Physical subject thereof: which words without understanding the
Knight often repeateth: Those be the Knights dreams, not Aristotle his
reasons. Then still we urge for an Answer, to what part of learning you will
refer your Astrology? You think perhaps you have said enough, if you
refer it in some respect to the Mathematickes, and in some respect to
Natural Philosophy: but we will not leave you so. We say, in no respect it
can be referred to either of them. Not to the Mathematickes, because it
considers not things certain and infallible, which the Mathematickes do. It
will not help you to say it considers the Stars, and the Stars in some
respect are the subject of the Mathematickes. For it were a foolish and
unlearned speech to say, because the natural Philosopher considers a Body,
as in a place, and the Mathematickes consider a body as with his dimensions,
that therefore natural Philosophy should be referred to the Mathematics: so
unlearned and unreasonable is the assertion that says, because the Astrologer
considers the Stars as causes of inferior events, and the Mathematickes
consider the stars, so far as touches their bodies or motion; that
therefore Astrology should be a part of Mathematickes. Now if we drive this
your pretended Art from these two parts of Learning, it will never find any
resting place in any other part of good learning. And therefore, wheresoever it
is found, it will be taken for a Rogue that has no certain abiding place, as
it has been taken for the same, by the learned in former times, and for the
same whipped by them.

First then, Astrology is no part of the Mathematics, because it proceeds
not by demonstration from certain and known Principles, And even they who
would have it a part of Natural Philosophy acknowledge so much.

Now let us examine whether it be contained within the bounds of Natural
Philosophy. If they tell us that the Stars are causes remote and Subordinate
of inferior effects, they come not to the point: For that is not here in
question, whether the Stars be causes of some effects in these inferior
Bodies? For that influence which is apparent in the Moon and Sun may be
gathered in other Planets. This is granted concerning such Bodies as are
subject to their Virtue.

But here to cut off their long and idle discourses, and to bring our
disputation to a short issue, the question is, Whether the Stars are natural
causes of those events which the Astrologers presume to foretell? For these men
meddle only with men's actions. If Astrology stayed it self in this, to
foretell the natural Humors or their effects, which shall be in such Plants
and Bodies as are somewhat governed by Planets; it might seem to have some
likelihood. But with this they meddle little or nothing; their curiosity is
about men's Fortunes.

Now the Principles by which the Astrologer comes to his conclusion, are no
natural Principles, but Sorcery. For curious men wandering after the knowledge
of hid and unknown things, seek the cloak and pretense of an Art, and have
called it Astrology; which they seek to bring within the bounds of Natural
Philosophy: when as their Principles have no Affinity with natural causes; but
with those illusions which Satan inuenteth to deceive and draw away simple and
unstable Souls into an admiration of curious and impious sleights and
vanities. Let Philosophers judge of these Principles. That a Sextile and Trine
Aspect are fortunate, but a Quadrate unfortunate. That the first House
signifies the life and body of him that is borne; the second, his riches; the
third, Brethren; the fourth, Parents; the fist, Children; the sixth, sickness;
the seventh, Marriage; the eighth, Death; the ninth, Religion and God; the
tenth, Rule and Dignities; the eleventh, the good Spirit; the twelfth, the
evil Spirit. That in each of these, the three Lords of the Triplicities have
their several Virtues and significations. As in the first House, the first
Lord of the Triplicity, must show the Life and nature of him that is borne: The
second Lord of the Triplicity, the force and strength of his Body: The third,
his oldage; and with such conceits you must-runne through the rest. That in
whose House Mercury is found to occupy the dignities of Mars, Aries then
ascending, it will dispose him to Contention. Are these and such like natural
Principles? Or, are they means subordinate between a natural cause and a
natural effect?

The way to bring any thing to the knowledge of a man, is either by probable
Sillogisme, or by demonstation, or by faith. Now these things stand not by
demonstration; themselves do not challenge that: neither can they stand by
Logical deduction. For, what absurdity or improbability would follow if a man
deny any of these things? Nay, what absurdity were it withoutreason to yield to
any? It remains then, if any man know these things, he must know them by
faith; but not by that faith which God taught his Church: therefore by that
faith which the Devil teaches.

CAP. II.
That the Conclusions of Astrologers, cannot by natural Reason be drawn from
their Principles.

THat these things may the more clearly appear, we will show, that those men
who have farthest pierced, and with greatest Learning and Judgment searched
through all the points of Natural Philosophy, have rejected these vanities,
and branded them with the Title of Magical Superstitions and Sorceries:
excluding them from all parts of natural knowledge, and good Learning. But of
this in his due place: Here let us follow this point in hand a little further.

We may better understand the meaning of these men, by their own examples:
For in their Disputations they are never willing to come to the point; but they
mince the question: and like men oppressed with fears, (which Judgment
follows the maintainers of an evil cause) they seem to look every way for
help: and thus forsooth they come warily to the matter. The stars incline
the humor, the humor inclines the body, the body inclines the mind;
through all these inclinations the stars come at last to work upon the
Soul. But the force of the Stars is spent in many inclinations, before it
come to the Soul, that they dare not say it works directly upon the mind,
no not upon the body, but only upon the humor: for so the Knight says. This
being brought either to a Mathematical demonstration, or to a probable
Sillogisme, would prove a feeble consequence, and yet in disputation they are
afraid to proceed any further: here they stick. But if you look upon their
examples, wherein they set the glory of their Art, you shall find another
matter: For in the examples of their Predictions, they foretell the deaths of
Princes upon such a day: the fortunes of Kings, the ruins of Kingdoms, the
overthrow of Armies. Compare their Principles with their Conclusions, and there
is matter to wonder at the absurdity, or to laugh at the folly: For, from these
Principles, the Stars incline only the humor, the humor only inclines the
body, the body only inclines the mind: this Conclusion will hardly be
gotten, that therefore the Stars incline the mind.

But they proceed from these inclinations, to Predictions of the greatest
Events: which events, whether they can be concluded by natural Reason, let us
consider. And because this Gentleman might happily deny the examples brought by
others, as not proceeding from natural causes; therefore to prevent all his
exceptions, I will insist only in those examples which himself brings, and
wherein he glories much.

Paulus tertius, warned his Son long before of the very day of his death.
Page 81.

Picus, being foretold by three Astrologers, that he should not live above the
age of thirty three years, confirmed the Prediction. Page 193.

Gauricus warned Henry 2. French King, not to run at Tilt in the 41. year of
his Age, for that the Stars did then threaten a wound in his head. Page 194.

The Bishop of Vienna, by Astrology, assured Don Frederick then serving the
Duke of Bourgundy, that he should be King of Naples. Ibid.

The same Bishop of Vienna, did foretell the two overthrows of Charles Duke of
Bourgundy. Ibid.

These examples he rangeth with the forewarnings of Spurinae to Caesar, of
Publius Nigidius, and Theagenes concerning Augustus: of Scribonius and
Thrasillus touching Tiberius: of Ptolomy and Seleucus to Otho: of Ascletarian
to Domitian. Page 193.

Now if this Knight, or any other man of Learning can show us, that these
events were natural events of the Stars, or that the Stars were natural
causes of these things, and that by Astrology these things may beeforeseene, as
in their natural causes: then will we honor Astrology. But how will they
conclude? It will not serve to say, the Stars moved the humor, the humor
moved the Body, the body affects the mind; therefore King Henry 2. shall
have a wound in his head in the 41. year of his Age. Neither will it serve to
say, at his Birth the Lord of the ascendant did behold Saturn the greater
misfortune, and Mars the less misfortune, with quadrat Aspect or Opposition,
or the Lord of the eight House, with a Trine or Sextile Aspect. And the greater
or less fortunes, as Jupiter and Venus, were cadent, and not found in their
Angles; therefore he shall die at such a time, such a death: For who will
yield unto you, that these be natural causes of that effect. There is a
dependence and coherence between the cause and the effect, in natural things;
in this none. Before you can conclude, you must conjure a man to believe these
superstitious Sorceries, which Satnan has persuaded the Astrologer to believe.
The natural man receives them not, natural reason does not comprehend them.
For, take any of these examples; if you will, the Example of Henry 2. to insist
in one; and tell us by what means the Astrologer could see the wound in the
head: what humor did the Stars incline to this? Or, how was it possible by
natural means, that in the Stars he should see the 41. year of Age? The
humor stirred by the Stars might have carried him to many other courses, to
other kinds of death. We would know by what natural Reason, the tilting was
foreseen: the year, the stroke of the head? And why are you so fearful, as
to mince the matter, as always you do when you reason of the causes? The
Stars are only as you say causes of humors, not of actions, they have no
force directly over the will: Here is a particular action that proceeds from
the will; if this could be seen in the Stars, then what reason can be
brought why the Stars do not directly work in the will? I deny not but that
Gauricus might foresee this, and warn the King thereof; but the question is by
what knowledge he did it, whether by natural knowledge, or by other means.
For here is a particular event: and you know that one of your Masters in his
Centiloquie has this position. Fieri nequit, vt qui tantum sciens est,
particulares rerum form as pronunciet: soli autem numine afflati praedicunt
particularia. This testimony of one that was so great a Master in your Art,
tells us thus much: That if Gauricus in a particular Event did make a true
Prediction; then he was not therein tantum sciens. But besides his skill in
the Art, he had another help, namely the familiarity of some spirit: Because
particular events, says he, cannot be foretold but by the help of a spirit.

In the narration of Paulus Tertius, who warned his Son Aloisius of the day of
his death, the Knight does not deal fairly, and Knight-like: For he minceth
the Narration, and leaves out a part of it, which if it had been fully
declared, would plainly open, that though the Stars are there pretended; yet
that prediction was done by Necromancy, or by Familiarity with a Spirit. For
John Sleidan (from whom the Knight has taken that narration) says plainly,
that Paulus 3. was for certainty h^ld not an Astrologer only, but also a
Necromancer. His words are these. Sub hoc tempus Aloisio scribit Paulus tertius
pater, vt decima Ioh. Sleidan Commentar. Lib. 19.
Septembris die sibi caveat: Astra enim ei praenunciare cladem aliquam
insignem. Erat enim Paulus 3. Pontifex non Astrologiae modo, sed and
Necromantiae, sicut pro certo affirmatur; admodum studiosus. When Astrology,
and the black Art are joined together; then may some Predictions be told: But
the Knight should produce examples of Astrological Predictions, without the
help of that Art, which we say cannot be done; because one best known in both
Arts has plainly told us a Prediction of a particular Event cannot be made
but by the help of a Spirit.

Now Sir, if this be the Art you glory so much in: if the company of unclean
Spirits be your natural Principles, and natural causes; this Philosophy we
entreat you to keep to your self, and not to reach it to others. In the
mean time, we have the confession of one, who was a principal man in the
Profession of Astrology, whereby, as by a rule of that Art, we judge of all
your former examples, wherein you glory so much: For they are of all particular
events, and therefore if they were foretold, your Master has opened to us the
means: it was not by natural, but diabolical means. Thomas Aquinas says as
much. Si Secunda Secundae Qu 95. Art 1. Qu. Seq.
quis consideratione Astrorum vtatur adprecognoscendos futuros, casuales, vel
fortuitos euentus, aut etiam ad cognoscendum per certitudinem futura opera
hominum, procedit hoc ex falsa, and vana opinione, and sic operatio daemones
sese immiscet: quare erit diuinatio superstitiosa and illicita? If it were not
for these tricks, who could not be an Astrologer? The Knight says, that they
who Obiectio.
speak against Astrology, are such as being grauelled with the difficulty of
the Art, before they were half thorough, to excuse their own dullness, and
lack of industry, have broken into choler against it. Let wise men judge,
whether without the Church, Eudoxus, Solutio.
Panaetius, Cicero, Varro, Pliny; within the Church, Origin, Austin, Ambrose,
Hierom, with the rest of the Fathers: In later times Picus, Calvin, Chambers,
Perkins, and for Learning and Piety, the honor of this Age, King James. I
refer it I say, to the judgment of all that are wise and learned; whether
all these who have expressly written against Astrology, were grauelled with the
difficulty of this deep Art: or whether Sir Christopher Heydon be able to
pierce farther into learning, then these could: this we leave to judgment: my
meaning is not to detract from the Knights Learning. But I know such, and could
name them, saving that I will not touch the name of any man in that sort, who
through a blockish incapacity, being judged by their proof in the University
unapt for all good learning, have proved men of name and reputation in this
sottish profession: Shall I think, that these wits can go farther in the
apprehension of any part of good Learning, then others? especially then they
who I have named before? Will any man think, that these men, whose wits were
exercised in all the parts of good Learning, were grauelled with these
difficulties, when halfe-witted men go thorough? No, no, there is another
thing in it. For these men proceeding as far as by the warrant of natural
Reason they could go; and finding in the end, that by natural Reason they
could not come to the Conclusion of such Predictions; but that they must leave
natural Reason, and admit unnatural Principles proceeding from the illusion
of Satan, and in the end to have familiarity with Spirits: This indeed
grauelled them; and will gravel the greatest wits in the world, that seek
knowledge by lawful means, and no other.

CHAP. III.
The Conclusions of Astrologers are not from Natural Principles, and are not
to be iustisied for truth in a Prediction.

Here then, either the Astologers must inform us in the mysteries of their
Art, by better reason, or be contented to be informed in the mystery of
Truth. When a Prediction Astrologicall falls out true, we seek by what
means the Astrologer came by that knowledge: There are but two ways to know
the truth hereof; By the light of Nature, or by the word of God. The Natural
men that have been guided by the light of Nature, could never find out the
Affection of the Stars to such an Event: they could not understand why the
Stars should either cause it, or incline it, or signify it more then the
flying of a Bird; and as many (as wise and learned) have held the flying of
Birds, or the entrails of Beasts, to be Causes or signs of such Events. Then
it would trouble you to give a good natural Reason (for your supernatural
superstitions we reject, otherwise we should receive Aruspicine as well as
Astrology) we look, I say, for one good reason from you, why you should not
judge of Astrology, as you do of Augury? One great Master of this Profession,
Corn. Agrippa, Lib. 1. Cap. 53. perceiving such affinity between Astrology
and Augary, both depending upon Principles, so like affected to the Conclusion;
seeks likewise to confirm, that Divination, which is from Augury and
Auspicie. The best learned in Natural Philosophy, and the best learned in
Magic, have adjudged these things like.

And because we strive to do this service to the truth, we must examine and
follow you into these blind corners, whereunto you fly: you must be holden up
to some particular Event. For, the question is not whether the Stars signify
any thing; but whether they cause, or incline, or signify such a particular
Event, as that of Henry 2. the time of his death or danger, the wound in his
head, or any such as your other examples imply. If they show such particular
Events, then all your Answers of a general inclination, of the humor only,
but not of the actions of men (which you every where lay down as grounds) are
in truth brought in by you but as cloakes to cover some secret, to try, whether
in the mist of these clouds, you can escape from such Arguments as press you.
This is the very point that troubled Cicero and other Philosophers: for when
they came to this point, they were at a stand, and could proceed no further;
not through dullness of wit (as you impute) but because they following the
matteras far as the light of Nature did direct them, would go no further
then natural Reason could warrant. It is agreed upon between Cicero, and his
Adversary in that disputation, de Diuinatione, that no natural Reason can be
given. Cur a dextris coruus, a sinistra cornix faciat ratum: cur Lib. 1. de
Diuinat.
Stella Iouis aut Veneris coniuncta cum Luna ad ortus puerorum salutaris sit;
Saturni Martisuecontraria: He joins these together, as always his manner is,
the flying of Birds, and Aspect of Stars; because toward a particular Event,
there is just like affection in both these Causes.

And whereas the common reply of Astrologers is; sometimes their Predictions
fall out true: may we not answer them in Cicero his words? Ipsa varietas Lib.
de Diuinatione.
fortunam esse causam non naturam docet. Si tua Conclusio vera est nonne
intelligis eadem vti posse and Aruspicies, and fulgatores, and interpretes
ostentorum, and Augures, and sorti legos, quorum generum nullum est, ex quo non
aliquid sicut Praedictum sit, euaseret. Now if Augury Aruspicine, and all such
Sorceries are justly condemned, as not standing with Christianity; yea, even by
natural men, as not standing with Nature, though their Predictions were
sometimes true; what reason has any man to maintain Astrology, and condemn
these? Or to think, that the truth of a Prediction should Privilege
Astrology more then these? Neither is it any reasonable or tolerable Answer
to tell us of the truth of a Prediction, when we see the Cause. And yet this
Gentleman confesses, Page 195. I, for my part (says he) do freely confess,
that there is no one thing that has made me so confident in the validity of
this Art, as that which I have seen to fall out true. If no one thing have
made you so confident herein, then you have freely told us, that in your own
judgment, you do not so much esteem of your long Discourses of the natural
Causes, that the Stars are natural Causes of such Effects, these be not the
things that move you most; but you are most of all moved by the Events. Yet the
wise and learned, are not carried to such a confidence upon the sight of the
Events, but upon the knowledge of the Cause and Reason. And therefore Cicero,
and before him, as he witnesses, Eudoxus a Platonicke, whom he and others
much esteem for Learning; and Panaetius, whom he accounts the worthiest of
the Stoics; and diverse likewise after him, men of great Learning in
Philosophy, did reject this Art, for that these Causes are not Natural, albeit
some Events fell out true. For, if the question be of a thing determinable, by
the light of Nature, that Rule of Cicero holds always: It is a foul shame
for a Philosopher, to speak any thing without a natural Reason. And if this
be a sufficient warrant to make a man confident in the validity of an Art,
because he sees Predictions to fall out true; then must this Gentleman be very
confident in Witchcraft: because he sees, that all that which was foretold to
Saul by Witchcraft, 1. Sam. 29. fell out true. And shall the truth of that
Prediction make a man so confident in the validity of that Art? They who are
governed by the Spirit of God, and seek knowledge according to Godliness, may
not be confident upon the truth of Events. And seeing by this example we see
evidently, that God in his just judgment against the wicked King Saul, did
suffer Satan thus to deceive and illude Saul, even by foretelling him a true
Event, because by unlawful means he sought the knowledge of things to come:
They that would judge the like of the like things, must needs think, that God
in the like sort suffers the Devil to deceive and illude Astrologers, by
suffering them to foretell true things sometimes; that curious men, that will
not contain themselves within lawful knowledge, may be deceived, and drawn
into a great confidence of the validity of this Art. Herein Gods Judgment is
fearful, but just against such as seek the knowledge of things to come, by
unwarranted means.

Now this Gentleman writing for Astrology after so many Ages, and coming to
that very point, which so much troubled Cicero and the rest, and caused them
utterly to abandon the Art; because by the light of Nature they saw no way to
go through this difficulty: He coming (I say) to the same point, is to be
observed well, how he in his imagination goes through, where they all stuck:
For he uses no other means to inform us in the Mystery, but this. Page 99.
If Spice and other hot Simples are of force to stir and alter our humors by
their specificall qualities; why can you not as well conceive, that Mars and
the rest of the Stars, on which the qualities of these inferior things
depend, man exercise their qualities, and do the like in our Constitutions?
Thus you think you have spoken soundly to the point. Awake, Sir Knight, and
defend your Cause: You have with great confidence incountred with a man of
great Learning; you have undertaken to satisfy the Learned: We are come to a
maine point, whereat others have stuck; Whether these be natural Causes, or
comprehended by natural Reason? You tell us a tale of Spices, and hot Simples,
and entreat us to conceive the like of Mars his operation. Sir, here remember,
that you are come to that difficulty, wherewith you say others were grauelled;
you go smoothly through, thus: Because Spice and hot Simples increase choler,
why can we not as well conceive, that Mars may stir and incline an Humor?
How do you compare Effects together? The one from a known Cause, the other
from an unknown? The one a thing in Nature, the other only in Conceit. And if
we yield you the Conclusion (which you confess by this manner of writing you
cannot prove) what have you gotten? The question is not of an Elementary
humor, but of the particular Event, that upon such a day, in such a part of
his body, by such means, befell Henry 2. French King; (for in one Example, for
breuities sake we insist.) When the question is of such a particular Event,
whether there be any natural Cause thereof in the Stars? Who can bear this
idle answer; that the Stars may move a humor as Spice does? And who will
grant you this Comparison, betwixt Simples that go into the Body, and work
immediately upon it, and the Stars that are so remote? These things you
beg, and when you have them granted, you can never frame a Conclusion from
these Principles, to such a particular Event, as that is whereof we speak.

CHAP. IIII.
The Conclusions of Astrologers depend upon other Principles, then them selves
are willing to publish.

NOw Sir, seeing you cannot satisfy us in this point; we will try if happily
we can satisfy you. Philosophy, and the light of Nature have led men thus
far; that when the Astrologer tells a true Event by the Stars, they could
say that the Stars were not the true Cause of that Event. But the Astrologer
rages, and says the Events are true, therefore there is some true Cause.
Here the Natural Philosopher leaves him: For he sees that the Stars were
not the true Cause of that Event; but what was the true Cause, he knows not.
And because he finds none in Nature, therefore he casts it upon Chance
and Fortune: thus far the light of Nature leads. Let us come now to a
greater Light, that may lead us where this fails, that is, the light of Gods
Word. And as we took one of the Knights Examples, examining it by the light
of Nature; so let us take it again and examine it by the Word of God. To
insist still in the same Example, That Henry 2. French King should receive a
sore wound in his head, in such a year of his Age, this Event proved true: We
now seek the Cause and means, how the Astrologer might come to this knowledge.
You say, he saw it in the Stars; but that is the thing in question. We say,
that he might come to the knowledge thereof by some unlawful means, and yet
use the pretense of the Stars, to color the unlawfulness of the means. If
a Chaldean had been asked in the flourishing estate of Job, what should have
been Jobs Fortune? You say, by the Stars he might foretell his fortune,
which we deny: But when the Devil had gotten leave to vex Job, if after that
time and before his troubles, the Chaldean had been asked of Jobs fortunes,
then we see a means how he might have come to the knowledge thereof, as Saint
Augustine says, Illudentibus eos praeuaricatoribus Angelis. And he might use
the Stars as Signs, not framed by God to that end, as also the flying of
Birds was not, but by Sorcery framing Signs thence; as the same St. Augustine
does wisely admonish. Nam iste De Doctrina Christ Lib. 2. Cap. 2^.
opiniones quibusdam rerum signis humana praesumptione institutis ad eadem illa
quasi cum doemonibus pacta and conuenta referendae sunt. So that in Divinity
this question might with no great difficulty be decided. For we may say, that
the cause why the Astrologer sometimes speaks true, is not because he sees
it in the Stars, as in natural causes of that Event (which thing you repeat
often, but never prove) but because either by plain compact, or else by a
secret illusion of Satan, he comes to the knowledge thereof: which illusion
may be so great, that the Astrologer may believe that he reads it in the
Stars. Albeit, before that God has opened his will by some means, neither
the Devil, nor the Astrologer, is able to foretell it, as may appear in the
example of Job. If here you return (as often you say) that the Stars cannot
foreshew the actions of the regenerate, and therefore that the Chaldean could
not answer in the actions of Job: I think it would much trouble you to bring a
good or probable reason, why the Stars should not as well foretell the
actions of the regenerate, as that particular Event of Henry 2. Did the
Astrologer, tro ye, first consult whether that King was regenerate or no? Will
you have us to think that such things are incident to the study of Astrology?
If it were so, then should the knowledge of the Astrologer go far beyond the
knowledge of the best Divines: and we must repair to the Astrologer to know,
who are regenerate in the Church, and who are not. But go which way you will:
Nunquam body effugies: we will follow you even in this, and we will bring
your Astrologer to such a King, who was as unregenerate, as ever was Henry 2.
French King. Let the deaths of Henry 2. and Achab King of Israel be compared
together. Do you think that any Astrologer could have told Achab, that he
should either be slain, or hurt with an Arrow at Ramoth Gilead, at such a
certain time? It is impossible to prove, and absurd to think, that any
Chaldean could have foretold this by the Stars, because it was a secret which
God kept in his secret Counsel, until it pleased him to reveal it, 2. Chron.
18. 19. Now after that God had once revealed his will herein, that Achab should
fall at Ramoth Gilead, and to that end given him over, to the permission and
means which Satan devised, as we read in the same place, verse 21. then may
we well understand how a Chaldean (having by some means warning thereof from
Satan) might foretell the death of Achab, the place, the time, as the
Astrologer did in Henry 2. (if happily he did so) and as they do in all such
Events. For what can you find unlike in the deaths of these two Kings? Was
not the death of Henry 2. as well directed by Gods Providence, as the death of
Achab? Was not Achabs death as much seen in the Stars as Henry's? And if it
be blasphemy to say, that either the Devil, or any Astrologer could foretell
Achabs death, before such time as God had revealed it; is it any less to
pronounce the same of Henry 2.

But he tells us, that if Mr. Chambers or any other, know any Astrologer
that uses the familiarity of evil Spirits; those he will not defend, or
excuse. But we say, that no Astrologer can make a Prediction of such
particular Events, wherein himself gives instance, but by the familiarity of
an unclean Spirit: And yet unless we drive them to confess it, he will
still shift us off with this Answer, that he knows none that does it. What
shall we do here? Must we not believe it, till we hear the Astrologers
themselves confess it? It is plain enough by that which we have already
proved; because to know a particular future Event, is beyond the compass of
Nature, beyond the Reason of natural men: therefore, if a man attain to this
knowledge, it is not by natural means. Yet the Knight labors to prove this
to be natural from contingence. But how is this proved, forsooth? First, that
there are some things contingent: For thus he says, Page 210. The Astrologer
inquireth not whether he shall dye, or no; yet the time when, the place where,
how, and by what kind of death, or by whom to dye, is contingent, and not
necessary, and in that respect subject to Astrology. Thus far the Knight.
You tell us that Astrologicall Predictions are not in things necessary, but
contingent: When necessary and contingent are opposed one against the other:
Necessary imports always the dependence between a natural Cause, and his
Effect: Contingent is a fortuitall Effect, whereof there is no natural Cause
apparent: Have you not thus confirmed to us, that the Stars are not natural
Causes of such Effects? Surely, if you can make any sense of your words, it
must be to exclude Predictions from natural Effects: For no contingent Effect
has any apparent natural Cause; apparent, I mean to the natural man. Here
it must be observed, that Astrologers have bid Nature farewell, and have
betaken themselves, and the hope of their cause, to fortune and chance; therein
their Trade stands by their own confession. Now, that the thing which
consists in fortune and chance, is out of the compass of natural Causes, it
is apparent; because no Philosopher to this day, did ever acknowledge the Cause
of a fortuitall Effect, to be natural: but because they know no natural
Cause thereof, therefore they call it Fortune. Now they called Chance and
Fortune a Cause accidental, which cannot be reduced to a natural Cause, but
may be reduced to some other Cause, namely, to Gods Providence. Aristotle
admitting, that Chance and Fortune may be reduced to some Cause, does not
express how: But Hippocrates does; for he teaches, Lib. (...), Fortunam
medicam a Dijs esse. Where he says also, Medicos quando cum fide Artem
adhibuerint, reliqua fortunae committere. And expressing the same in other
words he says, Medici Dijs locum dant. So that the Philosophers that would
reduce it to a cause, can reduce it to no other, then the providence of God.
And it is chance only in respect of man's knowledge and purpose, otherwise there
is no chance at all. Now says the Astrologer, all Astrologicall Predictions,
are of such things which are in Chance: then it follows that they are not
natural, neither to be reduced to a natural Cause; but only to Gods
providence. By this, Astrology must be reduced not to Philosophy, but to
Divinity, if it be an explication of such Events as belong to Gods providence:
Then must you tell us no more of natural Causes, but teach us these things out
of Gods word.

Now where you take pains, Page 227, to prove that there is contingence in
Nature: which when M. Chambers has taken away, (you say) if he shall dare to
defend his Assertion, you will not fear likewise to affirm, that with
contingence, he takes away the Prescience of God; or otherwise induces fatal
necessity. You strive not against M. Chambers, but you speak at random like a
rauing man, you know not what. For he that takes away contingence in Nature,
or that which men call Fortune, does not take away Gods prescience, but rather
confirms it. For in regard of Gods prescience there is nothing contingent: In
this point you trouble your self more, then M. Chambers does trouble you. For
to prove contingence in Naeture, you tell us of contingent Propositions in
Logic, Page 227. you take exception against this Proposition of M. Chambers.
If Predictions be true, they are of necessity, the consequence you say, is not
only false, but draws with it impieties and absurdities: It is false, you
say; because in Logic, every true Proposition is not necessary, it may be
contingent. To prove it impious and absurd, you say, would require a longer
Disputation; and therefore you will not enter into it. We return, that M.
Chambers his Proposition, is neither false nor impious, as you are pleased to
term it. For admitting your Principles, that Astrologicall Predictions are no
other then the foretelling of natural Effects, from the knowledge of their
natural Causes; then we say it is a most true Proposition. If their
Predictions be true, they are necessary; for true and necessary, is all one in
nature. Tell us not here of contingent Propositions in Logic; for what
Logic or Philosophy taught you so to proceed in Disputation, from a
contingent Event in Nature, to a contingent Proposition in Logic? These
differ toto coelo. Then we yield that a Proposition may be true, and yet not
necessarily true, but contingently: but every Effect, that is, a true Effect of
a natural Cause, follows his Cause, non contingenter, sed necessario; by a
natural necessity, not by hap hazard: For if it be a true and natural Effect
of the fire to heat; then it hears non contingenter, sed necessario: So, if
it be the true and natural Effect of the Stars, to work such a particular
Event as you speak of; then it must be necessary: For you cannot show us any
natural Effect, depending on a natural Cause, which depends thereon
contingently. Then, that which M. Chambers says is true, you have nothing
against it. But mark good Reader, how the Knight disputing of contingence,
opens his meaning. For he perceiving belike, that if he should attribute
these Predictions wholly to contingence, he must needs thrust them out of
natural Causes; is much troubled, wrestling with himself, and interferring
he cannot tell what, to make of the matter which he has begun. For to make us
understand how these Predictions may be true, though not necessary, he tells
us Page 283. It is not simply necessary that the fire should heat the water;
yet if it be applied in due manner, upon supposition, it must needs heat. So
he says, presupposing that the matter or subject whereof the Astrologer
speaks, be convenient and well disposed, that which they conclude by the
Position of Heaven will come to pass. Before you can conclude any thing, you
must have liberty granted to coin a new Philosophy. For how many errors are
contained in these words? Consider your words. First, whereas you would show
in these words, the difference between absolute necessity, and that which is
called ex hypothesi: It seems you were never careful to understand what is
absolute, and what upon supposition. And whereas you call it necessity upon
condition; when the fire heateth or burns: this is not necessity upon
condition; but it is necessity secundum consuetum naturae ordinem, natural
necessity. That the fire should heat or burn matter applied to it, is not
necessary upon condition. For that which is necessary upon condition, does
infallibly follow the condition, being admitted, and therefore is called
necessitas infallibilitatis: but fire does not infallibly heat or burn the
matter applied; for it is hindered by a Miracle; if a Miracle cease, then it
heateth necessarily: but this necessity is natural necessity, and not
necessity upon condition.

Consider yet another error in those words, and in Philosophy not tolerable.
Having taught, that Astrologicall Predictions are of things not necessary, but
contingent: to prove this, you give instance in the fire, whose effect is to
heat; yet it heateth, you say, not simply necessarily, but upon condition:
whereby you infer, that the Stars work upon that which you take to be
their Subject, as the fire works upon his Subject: Then, it must needs
follow, that either in the work of the Stars there is natural necessity, or
in the work of the fire upon an apt subject there is contingence.

You impute to M. Chambers errors, ignorance, impiety, absurdity, forwriting
that which agrees with good Learning, and will be justified. But are you Sir,
or any man in the world by disputation able to justify these things? That the
Stars work upon their Subject, as the fire upon his; and yet that the
Stars work contingently, or that the fire works contingently? Or, that a
thing contingent is necessary? Or, that an Effect, which is granted to be
contingent, is an Effect of a known natural Cause? These things neither your
self, nor any for you, can make agreeable to Philosophy. These are the nets
wherein you have will fully entangled your self, and your Astrology cannot
help you out. Keep the distinction of things that in themselves are distinct:
distinguish natural necessity, from absolute; because the one may be hindered,
the other cannot: then distinguish it from necessity upon coaction, and from
necessity upon condition: place natural necessity in things that are according
to the ordinary course of Nature: distinguish all necessity from contingence;
that is, of things Philosophical: speak like a Philosopher, and then shall
you never be able to answer these things, whereunto the iniquity of your cause
has drawn you; but by plain confessing of your error. Now least you might
think, that this was rather your evil luck, then any fault in the Cause and
Art of Astrology; we will admit (for your pleasure) all these errors unsaid
again. And if you can take better advice, defend the Cause as you will, you
shall be brought about to the same absurdities again: For your Predictions are
either of things necessary, or contingent; answer what you will, you are
caught. If of things necessary, then holding (as you do) the Stars natural
Causes of such Effects, this necessity must be according to the ordinary
Course of Nature, the bond whereof is not broken but by Miracle: then your
Predictions cannot be hindered but by Miracle. But you see they are hindered
ordinarily, and without Miracles; and it is a greater Miracle to see them fall
out true, then to see them prove false: which your self perceiving, dare not
affirm to be of things necessary, but of contingents only. But now when you
say, they are of things contingent, you exclude them from the ordinary Course
of Nature: For those Effects that are produced according to the ordinary Course
of Nature, are not contingent, but always necessary by Natural necessity.
Thus say what you will, your Predictions fall to the ground: Yet if words will
hold them up, they want no help. For, having brought your self into a great
perplexity concerning Contingents, you go through, as though you would see no
danger: and you tell us, that Astrologers do not meddle at all with rare
Contingents, or such as have an indifferent respect to the Opposites, which may
happen one way or another, Page 283. It is, as if you should say, Astrologicall
Predictions are in things contingent, not necessary; and yet Astrologers meddle
not at all with things contingent, but only with things necessary; For you
call that a rare Contingent, which has an indifferent respect to the
Opposites. Now the truth is, there are no other Contingents but only such: For
all Contingence is in respect of man's Will and purpose, which has his natural
freedom and liberty; where some things fall out besides the purpose and
Counsel of man; there, and there only, Contingence has place. This is
always in such Actions, as (in respect of the liberty of the Will) have an
indifferent respect to the Opposites: If you say true; then they meddle with no
Contingents.

But see good Reader, when a man is once over the shoes, how he runs
through thick and thin.

This he says to persuade (if he could have a Reader that would believe him)
that their Predictions are not in such Contingents as these; but in another
so^t of Contingents, which he dreameth to be such, as when the fire burns;
this he calls Contingence. But this is so hot and heavy, that it would burn
his fingers that maintains it; it needs no Refutation.

Moreover, whereas M. Chambers (proving that there can be no Predictions, being
of future particular Events) for that purpose alleges a sentence of
Aristotle, that of future Events there is no certain knowledge, or things that
are so to happen, can neither be said true nor false. Thus Aristotle
expresses a thing contingent like a natural man; the Knight sore troubled
with this sentence, at last gives that Answer which bruiseth Astrology in
pieces: His Answer is Page 282. To affirm, that there is no truth of future
Events contingent; because it appears not to us, is erroneous; for all things
are present to God, and all axioms, or affirmations of future Accidents
appear to him, as they are either true or false. Neither is it alone known to
him; but farther to such, to whom he shall vouchsafe to reveal it, or
otherwise to them that are able to discern Events in their determinate Causes.
Thus far the Knight.

Were it not better utterly to renounce the defense of Astrology, then thus to
defend it? The question is whether future particular Events can be foretold by
natural means? Aristotle says they cannot be known being of Contingents,
and no man can say that such an Event is true or false before it be
accomplished; therefore it cannot be foretold. This Knight answers, that they
are known to God. The question is not whether they be known to God or to his
Prophets, when he reuealeth them; but whether they may be known by natural
means. Now how is the foreknowledge of God brought in here, and his Revelation
to his Prophets? Unless that it be to prove; that Astrologers are Prophets, to
have this Knowledge by Revelation, as some of them confess; that without the
help of a Spirit, these things cannot be known: Either he must confess,
that Astrologers have this knowledge by Revelation, not by natural means, or
else he answers nothing to Aristotle. For that which he adds, that these
things are known also to such as are able to discern Events in their natural
Causes, is but a begging of the question which Aristotle will not admit, who
saw Events in their Causes, as far as the Knight. Aristotle does deny that
these things can be known in their natural Causes, and we with him. Remove
from your Answer that feeble begging of the question, and then what else do
your words contain, but that Astrologers foretell future Events by Revelation,
as the holy Prophets of God have foretold such things by Revelation. Was not
he fore driven, trow you, that leapeth at one iumpe out of the Course of
Nature? But Aristotle will not so be satisfied: For he keeping still within
the bounds of Nature, made that Objection. The Philosopher thrusts you on the
one side from the Course of natural knowledge: The Prophets, thrust you out of
their company, on the other side: And the Church will never admit, that you do
these things by divine Revelation: then look you better to your standing.

What greater evidence against Astrology can we look for; unless we stay
till we hear themselves confess against themselves; that these Predictions
cannot be foretold by Art; or from any natural Principles, but only by the
illusions of the Devil. If nothing can serve, but their own confessions
(though this seem hard to such as are brought to strict examinations, as
witches are, between whom and Astrologers the difference is not great, both
being brought up in the same School, saving that the Astrologers (under a
pretense of more learning) seek to hide themselves) yet is it not impossible to
wring it out of their own Confessions.

The Knight tells us, Page 203. That the Papacy was certainly presaged to
Paul 3. by Paris Caeresarus, as Cardan testifies. And by Richardus Ceruinus
unto his Son Pope Marcellus 2. as Panuinus and Garimbertus report, and again
by one Erasmus a Germane, and Marcilius Ficinus to Pope Leo 10. whereof I take
to witness Paulus Iouius, says he. And thus (forsooth) he thinks he has
answered an Objection of M. Chambers, of certain false Predictions given by
some Astrologers. For if M. Chambers show him false Predictions, he thinks
it enough, that these whom he cites were not false: And how does he prove
them? Forsooth, because Cardan and Paulus Iouius witness so much. This is very
strange dealing. He takes exception, Page 202. at the testimony of Cicero;
witnessing a thing of his own knowledge, that the Astrologers of his time were
convinced daily: For Cicero knew them, that they assared Pompey and Crassus,
and Caesar, that none of them should dye till he was old, and of good
reputation, and famously. This which Cicero speaks of his own knowledge, the
Knight will not receive. He says, that Tully his testimony is worthily
suspected; but none that lived in his time, did ever charge him of such a
crime: yet must Cicero be rejected. But if Cardan or Paulus Iouius once say
the word, he takes that up as an undoubted truth. Was not Cordan commonly
noted throughout all Italy, by the name of Cardan the Fool? And who knows
not, that Iouius is (of the learned) noted, that where he would have spoken the
truth, that is in the Turkish and Persian affairs; there he could not. But
where he could have spoken the truth, that is, in the affairs of Europe, and
especially of Italy; there he would not. They who speak most moderately of
him say thus. But M. Askham in his Discovery of Germany, writes much more
sharply of him, charging him with flattery, lies, forgery, and that he wrote
his History to no other end, but to deface the truth of the Story with lies.
Yet the Knight will reject Cicero, whose credit in reporting a matter
Historical, was never in question; but Cardan and Iouius are Authors for his
tooth. But let us follow him a while in this humor, and see what he will make
of this matter.

Admit all this true that he says, that these were true Predictions. What
follows? Then says he, these true Predictions prove the validity of the
Art, and makes him confident in it. But we say, if they speak true (which
thing we deny, till we hear it better proved) yet it was not from the
knowledge of natural Causes; but from the Devil. If we could make one of
these Astrologers (on whom the Knight so much glories) confess the truth,
whether these Predictions were done by Learning and natural Knowledge, or by
the help of a Spirit: could any proof be more pregnant then that? But how
shall we wring this Confession out of them? Paris Caeresaruis, and Richardus
Ceruinus, and Erasmus the German, are men not famous for any writings. But
Marcilius Ficinus is a man of name for his Learning, and he will tell us the
truth. We will entreat him to clear us this doubt; seeing the Knight takes
it upon the report of Paulus Iouius, that he presaged the Papacy to Leo 10.
Whether may this thing be done by learning, or no? Let Ficinus answer.
Marcilius Ficinus answers thus. lib. 3. Aeneid. 2. Platin. Such Predictions
stand not by Learning, but by some instinct. And after some Discourse, wherein
he shows, that such Predictions are not by Learning, but by an instinct, he
says thus; Hinc efficitur vt plerique vel inertes, vel minus in artibus
eruditi praesagio doctiores excellunt. And after, speaking of the same knavery,
as he terms it, he says thus. Quam fallaciam doctissimi quique Astronom^
deprehendentes iudicia neglexerunt. In which place he shows, that diverse
Astronomers well-known to him, men of great Learning, did scorn this folly.
And adds, that Paulus Florentius, being a man of singular skill in Astronomy,
did utterly scorn these Predictions; who living till he was 85. years old,
and (with all exactness) considering the Figure of his own Nativity, could
find therein no sign of long life. Briefly, Ficinus gives this verdict of
them. Astrologi fingunt, non docent. This testimony is such, against which the
Knight can take no exception: For he has commended Ficinus unto us for a
great Astrologer. Which thing, for his pleasure, we will grant him; albe it
Ficinus is ashamed of the Profession. But wee-must believe the Knight, that-hee
was an Astrologer; yet that he did presage by Astrology, therein we cannot
believe him; unless he will exclude Astrology from all Learning, and call it
an Instinct. For Ficinus is resolute, that their Predictions cannot be known
by Learning, but only by Instinct. Now what he means by instinct, let the
Learned judge; whether an Instinct of the Spirit of God, or of another Spirit.
Again whereas Ficinus, a man of such Learning and skill in Astrology by your
own confession, tells us, that men without Art and Learning proceed further
in Predictions, then men of greatest wit and Learning; let it be remembered,
that which you so much glory in, that Picus, Chambers and such like, were
grauelled with these difficulties, before they could get half way through; but
your self (with some others) pass through pleasantly. Ficinus tells us
plainly, that which otherwise we have observed; That they who pass so far,
as to presage things to come, do it not by wit and Learning; but they are
either inertes, or minus in Artibus exercitati. Then if learned men come not to
the knowledge of Predictions, it is not because they want any parts of wit and
Learning; but because they are wise and learned: For if they had less parts of
wit and Learning, then by the judgment of Ficinus; they could also know that,
which you say you know. This witness has spoken well for you. Another witness
speaking to the same purpose, is he that wrote the Centiloquie. Who writes
thus. Abs te, and a scientia; fieri enim nequit vt qui tantum sciens est,
particulares rerum formas pronunciet: soli autem numine afflati praedicunt
particularia. He says, if thou will learn this knowledge, thou must learn it
partly by thy self, partly by Science and skill; by Science, in things
universal; by thy self, in things particular. Which things by Learning thou
can not foretell, but by the help of a Devil. Against this witness he
takes no exception, neither can he; for it is the confession of an
Astrologer: Only, he expounds his words thus, Particulares rerum formas,
that is, says he, either the essential form of a thing, or the Platonicall
Idaea: Then this must be the sense: He that has knowledge only, and not the
help of a Demon, cannot foretell the essential ^orme, or Platonicall Idaea:
But what is this for Predictions? He is there giving Precepts for Predictions
of particular Events, and says, that the thing cannot be done without the
help of a Demon. And himself declares what he means by particulares
formas; in speaking of Predictions concerning pa^ticular Events. Soli numine
afflati praedicunt particularia. But says the Knight, he shows in diverse
Aphorisms of the Treatise, that the Astrologer deals with many particular
Events; therefore his meaning cannot be of particular Events, but of
essential forms. Let M. Chambers reconcile these things together, says he.
M. Chambers is not bound to reconcile the absurdities of your Astrologers; for
that work were infinite: Yet this may well be reconciled. For, where he says
particulars cannot be foretold, but by the help of a Demon; and yet himself
in many Aphorisines declares, how the Astrologer may come to the knowledge of
particulars; Here is no contradiction at all: For either he speaks of such
particulars, as the Astrologer shall know by the help of his Demon: or of
such as himself (knowing by that means) did publish in writing. Wherein we
have an open confession of their impiety; but no repugnancie in the words. So
we may proceed to the examining of another witness. Plotinas, as Porphyry
writing his life does testify, as well studied in Astrology, and after great
pains taken therein, did find, that no credit was to be given to Judiciary
Astrology, and did refute the same, both in his private speeches, and in his
Books: Thus much Porphyry records. Marcilius Ficinus reporting this, lib. 3.
Ennead. 2. Plotin. adds farther: That Plotinus refuses judiciary Astrology,
Lib. de fato atque libres de prouidentia, and lib. de Coelo. This testimony is
double. for it witnesses what Porphyry and Plotin both did find in this Study,
which they both some while professed. Other testimonies to the same purpose,
we refer to the Sixth Chapter.

CHAP. V.
That Confession of the Knight examined, that Astrologicall Predictions reach
not to the regenerate. An invincible Syllogism of the Knights examined.

HItherto we have proved, that Astrologicall Predictions have no place or
ground among natural means: that the Stars are not natural Causes of such
Events: that the natural man receives not such knowledge: that the knowledge
of these things comes by an instinct or familiarity with a Spirit, by the
confession of those, whom the Knight much esteems for their knowledge in
Astrology. What proofs can we seek more evident? Therefore we conclude,
that the broken staff fails him, upon which all his Book rests: That the
Stars are natural Causes of such Effects, as Astrologers foretell, it is
broken in pieces, and the shiuers thereof strike the Cause through the sides.
Seeing Philosophers have rejected the Art for this cause, the Knight coming to
the same point, should have informed us with some conuincing reasons, and not
entreat us to conceive that which he should prove. And yet we must both
pardon and pity him. I will admit, that he is able to say much for the Cause;
that his Learning is much better then his Book makes proof of; that it is
pity so good parts should be so evil employed. How the Knight takes it, I
know not: But unto me it seems strange, that so good parts and gifts should
be spent upon so sottish a Subject; and failing in the maine point, that he
should not have feeling thereof. What can we think, but that with Astrology
there is always joined some Magic? And that your understanding, oth^rwise so
quick and lively, is in this particular bewitched with an Astrologicall
illusion, as it were with some Magical Incantation? I wi^h his good, from my
heart. Neither can I fear such a base fear, that he will take it in evil
sort, which is meant for his good. And if he be the man which I take him for,
he will one day thank him, that is not afraid to deal roundly with him, to
pull him out of the fire; I mean, to draw him, if by any means, so it be the
will of God, from this sottish Superstition: But I must proceed.

One common evasion he uses, which I have mentioned before, that Astrological
Predictions reach not to the Church, nor to the regenerate in the Church: and
sometimes he says, neither to the regenerate, nor to the wise. Now, because
properly every Art ought to be defined by the Subject; by this, Astrology
should be defined an Art, that considers the fortunes of fools and wicked.
For that every habit of the mind ought to be defined by the Subject; it is
well proved by Aristotle. And is not this, think you, the reason why the
Regenerate and wise forsake the Study of Judiciary Astrology? For, by your
confession, it profitteth them nothing, it reaches not so far as unto them.
For what other reason can you give us, why Augustine, Picus and such like,
being both thoroughly enabled by natural abilities, and having a desire to that
knowledge, utterly forsaked the Profession thereof; but because they were either
regenerate or wise? then what are they who profess it? I move nothing but from
your own Principles. And do you not handsomely persuade men, to think
honorably of your Profession, when you say, it concerns neither wise nor
regenerate? Or what account do you make of all such, as come to seek your
help in this Art? Do you not say, that they can have no help of you, unless
they be fools, and wicked men? Perhaps true. But here I entreat that it may
be well considered, what a manner of Art this is, that by the Professors
thereof is confessed, wholly and only to concern them, who are in Regno
Diaboli. All lawful Arts do concern alike the Regenerate and unregenerate;
and the work of regeneration, makes no distinction, no manner of alteration
in the use of a lawful Art. And is not this enough, to prove the whole
Profession not to belong to Nature? For can any man show any of the Liberal
Sciences, any Art or Profession in the world, that depends upon natural
Knowledge, and goes no further, which concerns not all men alike, of what
quality or disposition soever they be? And what warrant can any man have to
profess or practice such Art, as is wholly conversant about the members of
Satan, and goes no further? But as soon as ever they have bidden the Devil
farewell, the Art bids them farewell.

Again, they who grant that Astrologicall Predictions touch not Religion, nor
the regenerate, nor the Church, have no reason to use Predictions within the
Church. Let them be shut out of the Church, and illude the Reprobate, for
whose use they hold their Art by their own confession. Now within the Church
every one receives the Sacrament of Regeneration: And therefore the Children
that are baptized in the Church, are taken for Regenerate, albeit the effect
thereof, is more or less apparent, or not apparent in process of time. What
then has the Astrologer to do within the Church, where all receive the
Sacrament of Regeneration? Further, we say, that the Art which concerns only
those men which are in the Kingdom of the Devil, and none else, is
Diabolical, and nothing else: This is manifest from the contrary. For, as that
Profession which concerns the godly and obedient, and none else, is only of
God; so that Profession which concerns the wicked, and none else, must needs
be only from the Devil: For over the wicked the Devil, rules Ephesians. 2. 2.
and not in the godly; for they are freed from the Kingdom of darkness, from
Sin, and the power of Satan. Now when they are once freed from the power of
Satan; then says the Knight, they are freed from Astrology. Could any man
more plainly prove, that Astrology is one part of the power of Satan? Bodin
Lib. 4. Demon
proves by many Examples and Confessions of Witches, that Witchcraft has
(...) ^ower upon the Regenerate, or upon Magistrates, who execute the Laws
against them; which is fully confirmed by his Majesty, Daemonol. lib. 2. cap.
6. Now if Astrologicall Predictions have no power over the Regenerate and wise,
what do they differ from Wi^chcraft? Saving that here in a greater show of
Learning, they have gotten, as they think, a deeper hole to hide themselves
in? But this is but the deepenesse of Satan. In the mean time, we cannot but
observe one especial mark of an unlawful Art: the godly are excluded, it
medleth not with them. Lawful learning and Knowledge excludes none, but
works upon all sorts of men alike. Only Sorcery, Witchcraft, and Astrology,
declared herein to be the inventions of the Devil, are confessed by the
Masters of these Arts hereein to be unlike all other lawful Arts.

The Knight says, it is not his part to prove, but to answer; but no man will
yield it to be an Art or Profession, without proof: And therefore, Page 507.
he undertakes to prove, and warns us of an invincible Syllogism, which,
says he, is of that force, that neither Hemminga, nor all the Adversaries of
Astrology, shall ever be able to avoid it. This Syllogism is worth the
learning, it will give full satisfaction, and make us all recant what we have
written, or can write against Astrology. Let us therefore hear this
wonderful Syllogism. This it is. The Sun and Moon work upon these inferior
matters, but the other Stars have the same nature and substance: therefore the
other work and govern in the same manner. But how are we disappointed? For
we looked for a Syllogism concluding Astrologicall Predictions, and that so
forcibly, as could not be avoided. Here is nothing concluded touching
Astrologicall Predictions. This Syllogism, M. Chambers has answered, and so
battered it in pieces, that I do marvel, how the Knight could think it fit
for any Service: but he that has no better, must make much of the best he has.

To satisfy the Knight, I must set down how he refuteth M. Chambers: by this
the Knight can take less exception, and the Reader may better understand the
manner of his writing. M. Chambers admitting this Argument, says, the
operations of the Sun and Moon are evident; and nothing belonging to
Predictions. How repugnant, says the Knight, is he to himself? For if their
operations be known before hand, they must serve to Predictions: and to deny
it is all one, as if confessing a man able to know when the Sun shall arise,
he should yet deny it possible for him, to foretell when it shall be day. And
again, if the operations of their Lights be also first known unto us in
ouery part of the Zodiac; why should not their operations by like reason,
belonging to Predictions? For the Astrologer does no less know their effects;
as their motions do diversely apply their Influence to the matter of things,
then the Physician does the operation of those Simples, which be does
minister. But fully to stop his mouth in this point, what has he brought but
a begging of the question, which nevertheless is consirmed by Moses, who
expressly witnesses them to be created for Signs? And to oppose his own
Confession against him, M. Chambers himself in his 15. Chapter, acknowledges
them to be Signs to foretell the changes of the air, plenty, dearth,
plagues, drought, and such like: with what face then can he here deny, that
which he has expressly affirmed before? I have set down the Knights words at
large, because the Reader may judge of the proof of this invincible
Syllogism. M. Chambers says, the Argument proves not Astrologicall
Predictions: the Knight says, it is, as if granting that one knows the time
of the rising of the Sun, should not know when it would be day. Either this
instance is nothing worth, or else he holds, that as the day follows the
Sunnerising, by such a natural course, which cannot be broken without
Miracle; so the particular Events in men's actions foretold by the Astrologer,
follow the Positions of the Stars in such a natural course, as cannot be
broken, without Miracle.

The operation of the Sun and Moon that are natural, are confessed. The
Husbandman can tell when it will be day, as well as the Astrologer. The
Husbandmen and Fishers, by marking the course of the Moon, can foretell the
full Sea and E^be, more exactly then any Astrologer: what then? Are th^se
Astrologicall Predictions? No verily, no more then the foretelling of an
Eclipse. For, of these things that naturally follow, and without a Miracle are
not broken, our question is not. This M. Chambers grants: But what affinity
has this with your Astrologicall Predictions? Or, how will you conclude from
this grant, a particular contingent Event in a man's life or state: as that
Henry 2. shall be at such a time wounded in the head: or that Ioh: Medices
shall be Pope, or any such like. For M. Chambers by Astrologicall Predictions,
meant only particular contingent Effects, as your self say they are such,
Page 210. Now, when as your self confess, that Astrologicall Predictions are
in things contingent and not necessary; you grant directly with M. Chambers,
that the day following the rising of the Sun naturally, that is, necessarily
not contingently, the ebbing and flowing following the Positions of the Moon,
necessarily not contingently, the Eclipse following the interposition
necessarily, not contingently. You must needs grant that these natural and
necessary Consequents, have no affinity with Predictions, which are not
natural and necessary Consequences, but contingent, as your self do
acknowledge. And yet you ask, with what face can M. Chambers say this? With an
honest face, and a learned head. We will not urge with what face you may look
upon your ouer-sights. Learn what it is we grant, and what we deny. We
grant that the operations of the Sun and Moon are evident, that their
Effects are natural, and therefore bound to natural necessity, no way subject
to Contingence.

We deny, that the particular Events foretold by Astrologers, are natural
Effects or necessary, but only contingent. You confess thus much. How then can
you refute these things? If I grant the operations of the Sun and Moon, in
things necessary by the ordinary Course of Nature; must I needs grant the power
of Stars in things contingent? Yet this you thought to be such a Syllogism,
which all the Adversaries of Astrology should never be able to answer. You
deceive your self, and would deceive others. But who is not able to
distinguish between natural Effects, and contingent Events, which poor
distinction cutteth off all your hopes of this invincible Syllogism; and
shows the Cause to be weak, that cannot be better supported. And whereas
you take pleasure to compare the influence of Stars toward a contingent
Event, to the operation of Simples, it is not worth the refuting, your self
granting the one contingent and the other natural. Now call you this a begging
of the question; the question being of Predictions in particular Events? What
do we beg in distinguishing between natural Effects and contingent
Events? Does not he, think you, famously beg the question, who answers in
every passage of his Book, that the Astrologer contains him within the
bounds of natural Philosophy, that the Stars are natural Causes of
particular contingent Effects: which neither you prove, nor your self or any
man living is able to prove. Where you tell us, that M. Chambers is convinced
by the testimony of Moses, who expressly witnesses, that the Stars be created
for Signs, which words are often repeated in your Book, whereby you infer,
that Moses does warrant your Predictions: We answer, that you must not give
interpretations of Scripture to the Church; but take them from the Church. The
Church has interpreted these Signs, to be such as pertain to natural and
political Orders and Seasons. You draw the words to hidden secrets beyond the
Course of Nature, without warrant. Further, we distinguish between general
Effects in nature, and particular contingent Events. Now if M. Chambers admit
with Clem: Alexandrinus and others, that by the rising and setting of certain
Stars, men may foretell the change of the Air, plenty, dearth, plagues,
drought, and that in this respect, Mariners, and Husbandmen have use of that
knowledge: Must he that grants this, needs yield to your Predictions of
particular contingent Events? No Sir; we admit the one, and deny the other,
without any repugnance. But whereas we urge your particular Events, you would
gladly shift off the matter with a distinction of particulars. The conceit,
good Reader, if it be worth the hearing, is this.

Particulars, says the Knight, are of two sorts; either individual
particulars, or specificall: For species specialissima, and species subalterna
are particulars says he.

First, it is news (if we speak properly) that species and genera should be
particularia; particulare, in the proper acception thereof, being always
opposed to universal.

Secondly, if a man should admit this goodly distinction; yet will it do the
Knight no service: For if any were so absurd to say, that Astrologicall
Predictions are in particulars, that is in generals: yet this speech differring
altogether from the sense of the Learned, cannot help them, who set their
Predictions in such particulars; as that Henry 2. should be wounded in his
head, in such a year of his age; that such a man should be Pope; that Don
Frederick should be King of Naples, and such like; which are all of those,
which he calls individual particulars. And thus you see, to what fair end
you have brought your Syllogism, which you told us none could avoid.

CHAP. VI.
The Examination of the Knights Definition of Astrology: whereby, as by a
Rule, he would rule the question.

THe Knight fearing, belike, something, before he came to the Answers of the
Scriptures alleged by M. Chambers; sets down, as he calls it, a Rule,
whereby the Reader may level and direct his Judgment, as he says. This Rule
is to compare all authorities that are brought against him, with the definition
of Astrology by himself set down. This proceeding seems to us strange.
First, he will make a Definition as it pleases him best. Then, he will have
not only Philosophical truths, (which were absurd enough) to be leuelled
according to his Definition, and not his Definition to those truths: but he
would also persuade us, to level and direct the authorities of holy Scripture
to this Definition, and to understand the Scriptures by this Definition, and
not his Definition by them. For these are his words, Page 23. I have thought
good to forewarne the Reader, not to be discouraged with the show of
testimonies, which he (M. Chambers) mustered out of the Scriptures, Counsels,
Fathers, but still to compare his authorities and Arguments with the
Definition, by me at first set down, to the end it may serve as a Rule,
whereby the Reader may direct his judgment. Indeed Sir, if you could find
such Readers as you wish, that would take such Rules without examining; then
might you think your Cause were in good case. But what if the Readers will not
take your Rules? What if they will not be persuaded to leuel the Scriptures by
your rules, but examine your rules? Would any speak thus to his Reader, but an
Astrologer? What Readers do you hope for that will examine scripture and all
authorities by your rule? But what is this rule? This is your definition of
Astrology, Page 2. Astrology is that Art, which teaches by the motions,
configurations, and influence of the signs, stars and celestial Planets,
to prognosticate the natural Effects and Mutations to come, in the Elements
and these inferior Elementary bodies.When you have set down this your
definition or rule: then orderly you divide it into two parts: the first
speculatiue, in the heavenly motions and appearances: the second, practical,
which they call the Judiciary part of Astrology.

What learned man will ever yield this definition and division? It were an
easy matter to prove any thing, if this might serve the turn, to set down a
definition, and therein to beg the question. If this definition must be a
Rule to rule all disputations against you, you need not dispute or make proof
of any thing, it is all done in your definition. But this manner of writing, is
both idle and presumptuous, ruling the disputation by your fancy without
proof, without reason. Consider the absurdities of your definition. First,
whereas you lay it to Master Chambers his charge, that he did not define
Astrology; you have small reason for that, if you consider all. For this devise
of entering into a controversy with a defition, is unwarranted. Where did any
of the Ancients so? Now to examine the writings of learned men by new devises,
were not reason. The most learned and judicious Writers come not rashly to a
definition. Observe Aristotle, as you shall find that he sets not down a
definition, before he has fully proved every part thereof: Then comes the
definition as in a place of a conclusion. The judgment of this man, and
others, may warrant men to write after this sort. Neither is it reason, that
late devises should prescribe against the ancient manner of the best Writers.
Neither do you understand your Master Ramus herein; for it is not his meaning,
that all disputations should begin with a definition. But as it is the fittest
and most orderly course in teaching children the rudiments of Arts (and so
far we allow it) so in handling of Controversies what learned man did ever
use that course? There is a place, and time for all things: but in the
beginning of a Controversy no place for a definition. The reason is, the parts
should first be proved. Yet this man (without any proofs) is presently at a
definition. And having proved nothing, he will have his definition to be a
Rule, thereby to examine all things that are against him.

Now let us consider the manifold perfections of this definitie. First, he
says, Astrology is an Art: We have learned out of Aristotle, what an Art is:
It handles things variable, quae aliter fieri possunt: And so is distinguished
from science; which handles true things not variable. Aristotle speaks so
generally, that he would be understood of al Arts. (...) Lib. Ethic. 6. Cap. 4.
(...). Now this Knight will have ars to be genus to Astrology and Astronomy:
And Astronomy which is scientia not ars to be a species thereof. Was it ever
heard before, since learning first began to be known amongst men, that any
thing which is truly called Scientia, could have his genus to be ars? Then he
says, that this Art teaches by the motions, confifigurations, and influence
of Signs, Stars and Celestial Planets. Astrology medleth not with motions,
that is the work of Astronomy: with configurations it deals; but where he
adds influence; it had bin good: first to have declared what influence he
means. For as we deny not natural influences, so Astrologicall influence we
reject, as having no place in Nature, but only in the brains of Astrologers.
And whereas a definition should be short, no superfluous words admitted in it:
to what end does he say Celestial Planets, as if there were some other
Planets? And where he says it is to prognosticate natural effects, and
mutations to come: we admire his wisdom, that to save disputation and
proofs, has put the question in a definition. And therefore his definition is
a very idle conceit, unless he, or any, for him can first prove, that the
subject of Astrology, is the consideration natural of Causes, with their
effects. Now whosoever will prove an Art or Science, or any habit of the mind,
whatsoever, must first be sure of the subject thereof. For it is most true,
which Aristotle both sharply saw, and soundly delivered. Ethic. 6. That all
Arts, Sciences, and habites of the mind, are distinguished one from another,
by their several subjects. But this man having made no proof of the subject
of Astrology, thinks that is enough for him to define, and not prove, but
only put the subject in his definition, and then to give warning to all men,
to take this his definition for a Rule, to rule al things brought against him.
And therefore we utterly reject your definition as unlearned, because you have
not proved the subject. You say, the subject is the consideration of natural
Causes, and their natural Effects. This we utterly deny, for the reasons which
we have delivered. Other escapes we let pass, for shortness. Upon this we
stand, not only because the genus is mistaken, but especially because the
Subject is mistaken. You should by proof and disputation declare and manifest
the true subject of Astrology. But you may see what comes of it, when a man
will run so hastily to a definition.

CHAP. VII.
An Historical relation of the principal Authors, that have written of
Astrology.

THe Knight has added to this book a Chronologicall Index of Astronomers
(meaning thereby Astrologers) from Adam to his time. In this order he sets
all the Patriarchs, till Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, them, and all before them,
he reckons Astrologers. And in the midst of these godly Patriarchs between
Henoch and Methusalah, (whereby we must understand, that either Zoroastes must
be taken for an Holy Patriach, or that the Patriarchs must be accounted for
men of the same profession with him.) And thus along he joins clean and
unclean together, but without proof, without reference. In this Index, he
has set Joseph, Homerus, Hesiodorus, and many other to fill the number, which
would be a hard task for the Knight to make proof that they were
Astrologers. And therefore I have thought it needful for the use of the unwary
Reader, to mark the judgments of the best writers that have spoken hereof,
that a plain distinction may appear between good learning, and Astrologicall
Sorcerics.

The first invention of Astrology, is by many learned men attributed to the
devils. This is the judgment of Tertullian, lib. de habitu muliebri. And
again, Lib. de Idolatria. And of Clemens Alexandrinus in Eclog. And of Origin.
Hom. 13. in Number. Coelius (thodig. Lib. 2. cap. 12. has observed, that
Lactantius writes: Astrologia, Auspicia, Auguria et oracula esse Daemoniorum
inuentum. And that Apuleius (a man of that profession) confirms the same. The
Knight to remove this odiousness of their original tells us, that Plato in
Phaedro, attributes the Original of Arithmeticke and Geometry to a devil
that was called, Theuth. And others say, that Philosophy and other Arts were so
invented. The Knight by this answer would deceive himself and others. It is
true, that the Graecians did attribute the invention of Arts, and of other
things that serve for the benefit of man, to such as they held Gods; as the
invention of Wine and Corn and other things: though we know by the truth of
Gods word, that these things were invented before those Gods of theirs were
borne. It is also true, that those Gods of theirs were men which had lived here
before. It is also true, that the worship which they offered to such Gods, was
Idolatry; and by exhibiting divine worship to such, they made them devils.
Hereupon the Knight infers; therefore they did attribute the invention of
good Arts to devils: This we deny. For they did not hold their gods to be
devils, or unclean spirits: as the knowledge of the truth teaches us to hold.
And the Heathen did account them Gods, which once were men, as the Knight
himself confesses of this Theuth, which diverse think to have been Mercurius
Trismegist. Now when the learned Fathers of the Church speak of Devils, they
have an other sense, then the Heathen speaking of those which they c^ld (...),
or (...). Which words of Heathen, are taken in good part, but not of
Christians. And therefore his answer is nothing to the purpose; unless he
could show, that the Heathen did attribute such inventions, to such as
themselves accounted evil and unclean spirits: For from these evil spirits
came Astrology, and from these came no part of good learning. And therefore,
Origin careful long before to answer to this particular, disputing of that
which is called the wisdom of the Princes of this world, says: Sapientiam
principum huius mundi intelligimus, vt est, Aegyptiorum secreta, quam dicunt et
occulta Philosophia, et Chaldaeorum Astrologia, et Iudaeorum de scientia
excelsi pollicentium, sed et Graecorum multiplex variaque de diuinitate
sententia. Where he does distinguish Astrology from Philosophy, and the acts
which he names presently before, thus: Poetica, Grammatica, Rhetorica,
Geometria, Musica, Medicina. All which, he makes an other part of wisdom or
learning much differing from Astrology. For these Arts he calls the wisdom
of the world, and of men. But Astrology, says he, is not a part of the
wisdom of the World, but of the Princes of the World, for so he calls
Devils. And to this purpose do many learned, both Philosophers and Divines,
distinguish between Astrology, and good learning, accounting the one to be
profitable for man's use, the other to have no use in nature, no place in good
learning. The first spreder of this Art, as most men agree, was Z^roastes, who
being a man given to the familiarity of wicked spirits, did first open to the
world in writing, the secrets of these illusions, which curious men in a desire
to know things to come, being also enticed and drawn thereto by wicked
spirits, gathered into a kind of Art and Profession. The learning whereby
these men sought to know particular actions to come, was in one word called
Magic; whereunto Astrology did serve as an instrument or pretense. And
therefore Zoroastes is famous or infamous for teaching of Magic. This man was
a Persian, and not (as many think) a Bactrian, and from him the Persians had
this learning. Yea their Kings Sons were brought up therein. Plato terms
this (...) Alcibid. 1.
(...) ((...) The Magic of Zoroastes, the Son of Oromasius: this is the
worship of the Gods. True it is, that Plato speaks honorably of it: but no
otherwise then of the worship of their gods. Pliny witnesses that Plato
traveled to learn it, Plin. Lib. 30. Cap. 1.
and before him Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democritus; but they traveled to
learn all Magic, not only Astrology, as the Knight seems to say,
commending Astrology by their travel. For they were either Magitians, or
sought the knowledge thereof, in some measure. And therefore by their travel
he may as well commend Magic, as Astrology. As also where he says, that
Kings and great Personages have studied this Art; where he pleases himself
with a pleasant conceit of this study, which reaches to the highest heavens;
and therefore should (as it were) through their secret influence above all
other, be embraced and advanced by the Highest on earth. But if you strip his
speech out of his Rhetoric into plain Logic, then it will appear, that
these Kings, of whom he glories so much, were Students in Magic, as Pliny
witnesses, speaking of Magic. In tantum fastigij adoleuit, vt Plin. Lib. 30.
Cap. 1.
hodieque etiam in magna part gentium praeualeat, and in orient regum regibus
imperet. The Knight must either take all the commendation of this Art, or leave
it. Learned men have traveled for it, it has been the study of Kings. This
he takes as in the commendations of Astrology: By which he yields, that
Astrology is a part of Magic. For certain it is, that the study for which
these men are reported to have traveled, and which those Kings have studied,
was Magic. And if under this name of Magic, he commend Astrology, then
indeed we grant, that he may to this purpose find somewhat amongst the
Ancients: but otherwise, he will find nothing for Astrology. And he will never
find, that the Ancients referred it to any other part of learning then to
Magic. The Knight seems to help it well, by taking that to Astrology, which
the Ancients spoke of Magic.

Aristotle seems to scorn this learning, as not admitting it into any place
of natural knowledge. For he going thorough all the parts of good learning,
medleth not with Astrology, showing thereby, that he took it for no part of
good learning. After these, Eudoxus, a Scholar of Plato, was much renowned for
his learning, who being a man of great skill in Astronomy, utterly rejected all
this learning that stands in Predictions. Cicero says of ^im thus. Ad
Chaldaeorum Lib. de Divine. 1.
monstra veniamus: de quibus Eudoxus Platonis auditor, in Astrologia, iudicio
doctissimorum hominum facile Princeps, sic opinatur, id quod scriptum reliquit
Chaldae is in praedictione, and in notatione cuiusque vitae ex natali die
minime esse credendum. Eudoxus in the knowledge of the Mathematickes, went
beyond all the Chaldaeans, and all other in the judgment of the best learned,
as Cicero says. Pliny and others that speak of him, give him the commendation
of a man of greatest Learning in the Mathematickes.

If then a man of such knowledge rejected these Predictions; was it not because
he accounted these no part of Ma^hematickes or Philosophy? Now because the
Knight has said somewhat of this, and thinks he has well answered all; this
must be considered before we proceed.

To that which Tully says of Eudoxus, the Knights answer is, that he can
convince him by as Authentic witness, as his own. For Laertius (says he)
was the Son of an Astrologer, and wrote of Astrology. Sextus says, that he
and Hiparchus practiced Predictions of weather. And Pliny, showing that Magic
does consist of Physic and Astrology, affirms, that Eudoxus reputed it as
the most excellent and profitable study, of all other Disciplines that pertain
to wisdom. And therefore, says the Knight, considering that Tully is so taken
tripping in one, what credit are we to give to him in the rest? Whether Cicero
or S. Christopher be taken tripping, let it be examined. The Knight would
prove by other testimonies that Eudoxus was an Astrologer: And if he might
once prove this, then he thinks Cicero is taken tripping. Alas poor trip:
what needs he seek any proof for this? For Cicero has said more for this,
then all his proofs. Has not Cicero said, that Eudoxus was, in Astrologia
iudicio doctissimorum hominum facile Princeps? All the testimonies which the
Knight brings, come short of this: to what end, are testimonies brought to
prove a thing granted? What then follows? The Knight says, therefore we
must not give any credit to Cicero in the rest. Let the Reader judge; whether
this be plain dealing. Cicero deals plainly, and therefore deserves credit:
He says Eudoxus was a most learned man in Astrology, and yet he did utterly
reject the Chaldaean Predictions. Against this, there is nothing brought; for,
that he was an Astrologer, is confessed on all sides: the truth is, this word
Astrology was otherwise used, and in another meaning amongst the Ancients,
then now it is amongst us: and from the ambiguous use of this word, the Knight
seeks in diverse places, to deceive the unwary Reader. The word was by ancient
Writers, taken for Astronomy: And when they commend Astrology, they mean
Astronomy; and reprove Astrologicall Predictions, although they speak well of
Astrology. Cicero says, that Eudoxus rejects Predictions, and yet was the
greatest Astrologer that lived then. This shows, that Astrology, as then
this word was understood, might be studied and known without Predictions. That
which the Knight brings out of Pliny, is worse: For Pliny, speaking of
Magic, says Plin. Lib. 30. Cap. 1.
(as the Knight cites him.) Eudoxus, qui inter sapientiae sectus, clarissimam,
vtilissimamque eam intelligi voluit, Zorastem tunc sex millibus annorum ante
Platonis mortem fuisse prodidit. If he will make any thing of this testimony,
he speaks for Magic: so that he must prove Astrology, a part of Magic,
before that this can serve his turn. M. Chambers denies, that Eudoxus was an
Astrologer, as the Knight understands Astrology, the Knight out of Pliny
proves that he was an Astrologer, because Pliny says he was a Magitian.

Panaetius, whom Cicero accounts the most judicious of the Stoickes, did not
only himself reject these Predictions, but witnesses, that Archelaus and
Cassander, being as Cicero says, men of greatest sight in Astrology, did
refuse this part, which stands in Predictions. He witnesses the like of
Scylax of Halicarnassus. The Knight, being upon the excepting humor, would
also take exception against Panaetius: and why? because Tully says, that
Panaetius wrote more exquisitely of moral Philosophy then any other. Does not
this exception show the Knights humor? For this is no exception, unless he
will say, that he who has skill in Astrology, cannot be learned in other
kinds of Learning: and he would also except against him, because Tully says
of him, Non est ausus negare diuinandi artem, sed dubitare se dixit. This which
is called Ars diuinandi, the Knight takes for Astrology: but so Cicero calls
that which stood in Augurijs, Auspicijs, Extispicijs: and in general, all
Magic.

Let us consider what Cicero himself thought of this Profession: He takes
Auruspices, fulguratores, interpretes ostentorum, Augures, Astrologi,
Sortilegi, for Professors of certain vain and foolish Arts, whereof no reason
can be given: and puts them together usually in his Book, de Diuinatione,
as Professors of the like vanities: though one differing from another in the
manner, yet all agreeing in the end; which is by foolish and unnatural means
to know before hand the actions of men, in things to come. Wherefore, in his
judgment there can no reason be brought for Astrology, which may not
likewise be brought for Augury, Auruspicine, and all these damned Arts. Cicero
proves, that this divination has no part in good Learning. Nec eorum quae in
Geometria describuntur (can any Prediction tell) quae vera quae falsa sint,
sunt enim Mathematicorum non hariolorum: De illis vero rebus quae in
Philosophia versantur, numquid est quod quisquam diuinorum aut responderi
soleat aut consuli? Where we note, that Diuinus or Hariolus as it
comprehends the Astrologer, is clean thrust out from the Mathematickes and
Philosophy: And therefore the Astrologers profession, is no part of
Mathematickes or Philosophy. Cicero does likewise oppose, naturam and sensum,
against fortunam and casum, and shows that these Predictions come not from
nature and sense, but from chance, and fortune. For Lib. 1. de Di^n.
who is able to give a natural reason, Cur a dextra Coruus, a sinistra Cornix
ratum faciat? Cur stella Iouis aut Veneris coniuncta cum Luna, adortus puerorum
salutaris sit: Saturni Martisne contraria. And again, it is confessed that
these things are such: quorum rerum Ibid.
euenta, non causa quaerenda. And therefore in another place, speaking of these
future Events, he says: Id futurum est in nulla rerum natura. And because in
nature he finds no reason for such Predictions, therefore he calls them
Chaldaeorum Monstra. And again. O delirationem incredibilem, non enim omnis
error stulcitia est dicenda* And all this Art he calls superstitionem
Sagarum. Vtrum Philosophia Dignius Sagarum superstitione ita interpretari, an
explicatione naturae.

M. Varro living in that age with Cicero, and accounted Coel. Rhod. Li. 10.
Cap. 20.
the most learned of that age, says likewise. Ex Astrologiae sinu pro fluxisse
superstitionum omnium vanitates. Pliny puts these Predictions not in any
part of the Mathematickes, or natural Philosophy; but amongst unnatural
curiosities and Sorceries. And reckons that Divination which is ex Stellis,
amongst the parts of Magic; and reasoning of the ignorance of men, by
bringing in of many Gods: that Fortune is made a God, adds thus, Pars alia
and hanc (Fortunam) Lib. 2. Cap. 7.
pellit, Astroque suo euentus assignat, and nascendi legibus, semel in omnes
futuros vnquam Deo decretum, in reliquum vero alium datum. And again. Ecce
fulgurum monitus, oraculorum praescita, Auruspicum Praedicta, etc. Sometimes, as
his manner is, in the searching of Antiquities; he notes the Professions with
the Authors. Auguria ex auibus, Car monstrauit, a quo Caria Lib. 7. Cap. 56.
appellata. Adiecit ex caeteris Animalibus Orphaeus Aruspicium Delphus,
ignispicia Amphiaraus: Auspicia auium Tiresias Thebanus: interpretationem
ostentorum and somniorum Amphiction: Astrologiam Atlas Lybiae filius, vt alij
Aegiptij, vtalij Assirij. And thus joining Astrologicall Predictions with
Predictions of Augury Auruspicine, as Birds of a feather, at last he sets
down all these, as kinds of Magic or Sorcery. Vt narruit Osthanes species
eius sunt (speaking Lib. ^0: c. 2.
of Magic) nam and ex aqua, and e Sphaeris, and ex Acre and Stellis, and
Lucernis, ac peluibus, securibus and multis aliis modis diuina promittit:
praeterea vmbrarum inferorumque colloquia. I omit the Censures of the Roman
State against Astrologers, as is observed by Tacitus, and others.

Thus we find, that by the learned and judicious amongst the Heathen, these
things were held as impious vanities. So that the holy Scriptures and Fathers
need not be urged against this impiety. We have the voice of Nature in the
Consciences of the best affected natural men, thrusting these Predictions out
of all the bounds of natural Philosophy, and good learning. Let the Knight
never plead that himself, or any Astrologer, has proceeded farther in
natural knowledge, and good Arts, then these men have done, that thus have
overthrown their Predictions: for herein who will believe him?

Touching the Fathers of the Church, we need not trouble the Reader with long
citations: for they are all ours sure: And all sound Writers in the latter
time; until that Antichristian corruption came in, which with many other
doctrines of Devils, brought this also into the Church (practiced amongst some
Church men) in the smoke of the bottomless pit. Before we proceed, we must
meet with the Knight in some passages, touching the matter spoken of. M.
Chambers says, that Pythagoras, Democritus and Plato having traveled to
confer with the Magitians of Persia, and Priests of Egypt, either never
learned of them this kind of Art (meaning Iudic iary Astrology or if they did,
they seemed utterly to have contemned it, as never vouchsasing to mention it in
any writing: Thus far M. Chambers. The Knight answers, this is ab
authoritate negative. But I tell you Sir, if he disprove it Negative, from
these authorities, he speake^^ home to you: for these are the Philosophers,
that you must make much of; for you are like to have none other to help you.
If we prove, that these have not maintained Astrology, nor written for it;
then sure all Philosophers are clean gone from you: All the hope of your
Cause, is in these or in none. And therefore, as loath to lose these, he
tells us out of Lacrtius, that Pithagoras honored (...) and out of Tully,
that he did yield magnam authoritatem diuinaioni: You may add also out of the
same, I mean Cicero, if you please, that he was Augur: For so Cicero calls
him, Lib. 1. de diuinat. the like you say you could confirm of the others; and
after many words, you conclude thus. Because M. Chambers has thought this an
Argument to favor his purpose, I will add the testimony of Pliny, who
expressly witnesses against M. Chambers, Lib. 30. Cap. 1. that as they all
took upon them an exiled and banished life, rather then a travel to learn
it, and all secret Arts: so after they had attained it, and were returned, they
did no less extol it; but esteemed the same as a secret, not to be revealed.
This valiant Knight dare venture upon any thing: for the truth is, these words
of Pliny, which he cites, are directly and expressly spoken of Magic M.
Chambers says, That these Philosophers are (...) in Astrology: the Knight
reproouing this as an untruth, proves out of Pliny, that these Philosophers
traveled for the study of Magic: Which thing M. Chambers witnessed. The
truth is, and we confess it, that these Philosophers were studious of Magic,
and therefore so farre-forth, their Philosophy has not been accounted pure.
Then are these the only men, of whom the Knight had some hope. Yet it cannot
be proved, that these men favored Astrology: but the Knight rather (then he
will loose them) will confess that Astrology is Magic; for otherwise he can
have no help of these: If not of these, then of no Philosophers. Where then
are the learned men that have mayntained this Art, whom the Knight mustereth
in Arms? When all search is made of Antiquity, there will be found only
Zoroastes, Mercurius Tresmegistus, whom though we could be content to give
him, yet a doubt may be made of this man, because in his Books extant under
his name, though there be manifest profes of Magic, wherein he excelled; yet
there is little or nothing to be found of Astrology. Apollonius Thyanous,
Porphyrius, Iulianus, Apuleius, and such: Add to these; whom the Knight
himself challenges, Spurain, Theagenes, Thrasyllus, Ptolomy, Seleucus, and
Ascletarion: These we yield you. If you can prove that these or any of them
(for example take Apollonius, because he is more famous then the rest; the
other being obscure or less remembered) If you can prove that this man (whom
you reckon amongst your Astrologers) or any other did perform these
predictions by Philosophy, or natural knowledge; then will we confess that
you speak to good purpose: till then you have said nothing. If any man will
undertake this cause, he must be called within the bounds of certain
limitations: For otherwise, if he shall write as much as would load a horse,
either in commendation of Astrology, or in evil speech against such as stand
against his opinion: I have nothing to say but that -- Iubeo miserum esse
libenter; gratenus id facit.


Then he that will deal herein, may do well to speak to these points. 1. We
say, that it has not hitherto been proved by any Astrologer, that the Art that
is pretended to be in Astrologicall predictions, is any part of natural
Philosophy.

2. We say, that it has not been proved, that it has been a part of
Mathematics.

3. We say that as it stands against the Judgment of the most learned; so
neither can it be proved by any good reason, that it is, or ever amongst the
ancient learned Philosophers, was accounted a part of either.

4. We say, that all professors of Astrology of Ancient times, were also
professors of Magic.

5. That it was accounted more honorable to profess the skill in Augury,
Auspicia, and Extispicia; then to profess Astrologicall predictions, and men
(of more honorable place and greater account for their wisdom) have
professed the former, then this latter sorcery of Astrology.

If they will speak to these points and acquit Astrology, then they say
somewhat. But must warn the Knight, or any other, that he will be pleased not
to take for granted the contradictory of these positions, and so run along in
a flourishing discourse, but these be the things that you must prove. Now Sir
to prove these things, will much trouble you. First you will rake up the
Arabian dunghill; but that will not serve your turn: For I graut the Arabians
did honor this profession; but we speak here of the ancient times, wherein
good learning stood amongst the Heathen. Neither will it serve you to reckon up
Adam, Seth, Mahaleel, Iared, Henoch, Zoroastes, Methusaleth, Lamech, Noah, Sem,
Arphaxad, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Albion, Joseph, Homer, Hesiod, etc. And to
tell us, that these were Astrologers; Take Zoroastes from that company, and
then we yield him to you, he is the Father of your Art. You challenge him, you
shall have him. But then let the world know, what a goodly Father this
profession has.

CHAP. VIII.
That the operations of the Celestial bodies do not help the Astrologers in
their predictions.

COncerning the operation of the Celestial bodies upon these inferior, by
influence; there is an influence granted; but not this which the Astrologers
have by their imagination (without proof) devised. First this position is taken
amongst the learned for certain, that the celestial bodies do signify
nothing which they do not also effect: that which they effect is produced by
them as by natural causes: And therefore the things which God does by himself,
cannot be foreseen in the Stars, but such things proceed from supernatural
causes: And things supernatural cannot be demonstrated by a natural agent.
Neither can those things be foretold by the Stars, which are of fortuitall
events, for such things have no natural cause: such are all things which are
directed by man's will; that is in a word, all men's actions, to foretell these
things as from natural causes, is vain to seek, and impossible to find: For
of things that rest in man's will; a natural cause is not to be sought, the
things being voluntary; which things cannot be foretold but by revelation. It
remains then, that predictions natural, are of such things as have natural
causes. The things therefore that may be certainly foretold by the Stars, as
having their natural causes; are all such things as belong to the Theory of
Astronomy; as that the Sun moves swifter then Saturn, or when is an
opposition or conjunction, when an Eclipse will be. These things may be
certainly foretold, forasmuch as they depend upon natural principles* there
be other things of that kind which are usually (though erroneously) foretold
by Astrologers, having indeed natural causes, but not so evidently known to
Astrologers: the cause is, for albeit these things belong to nature; yet they
have not determinate causes, and so regulated to one Event, as those that are
in the Theory: And therefore their error is in these things usually seen: such
things are the predictions of rain, of fair weather, of wet times and dry:
For that there are times of wet and siccitic, it is true; and true also, that
these things depend upon the ordinary course of nature; and of such things as
are under the government of the superior bodies; yet are they not so
determinate, nor so inevitable, nor so evident to the Astrologer, as are those
of the Theory: For in the one the Astrologer erreth not, in the other he
erreth commonly. Of this kind are all Meteors, which proceed of natural
causes, but not determinate and inevitable: so that the Astrologer cannot judge
of these by such certitude, as of the things belonging to the Theory. After
this manner, the corruption of the Air is also of natural superior causes
commonly; whence come sickness, dearth and such like: as also the contrary
follows plenty, and healthfulnes. These are of certain causes, but not so
certainly known, that they may always certainly be foretold. True it is,
that these things sometimes come not by natural causes, and in a natural
course altogether, but God does send them at his pleasure; either for the
punishment of some people, or for their deliverance, as it seems best to him.
When God does so send them, then are they further out of the knowledge of the
Astrologer: so that in these things the knowledge of the Astrologer, is partly
nothing at all, partly little worth being taken at the best. For in matters of
this kind that Astrologers have either small or no knowledge, may be collected
from their common errors in this kind; as also from some places of the holy
Scripture, where Astrologers are found ignorant in these things.

A question may be moved, whether those seven years of plenty, and seven
years of scarsitie, foretold by Joseph in the interpretation of Pharaoh his
dream, were of natural causes, or sent by God without respect of natural
causes. This is certain that the foretelling of them, was not by natural
knowledge, but by revelation: for all the Astrologers of Egypt could not
foretell them, but Joseph did by revelation from God. And yet the Astrologers
were acquainted with the increasing of Nilus, whose measurable rising was the
ordinary cause of plenty and fertility in that country: the inordinate rising
thereof, either in too great abundance, or in too great defect, was both a
sign and also a cause of scarsity. The measurs of the rising of Nilus was
precisely kept by the Priests of Egypt; and upon the sight of the rising of the
River, they could know the fertility or sterility of the year following. But
this was no part of Astrology, it belonged rather to Geometry: and some report,
that the use of Geometry was first found out by that means. Then upon the
measure of the rising of that river, they that observed it, could foretell the
plenty or dearth which should be in that country: but I never read that any
Astrologer did foretell the just measure of the rising of that river before
hand. The Knight that is better read in them, may help us in this. For that
the rising of Nilus did some way depend upon the heavens it will not (I suppose)
be denied: because whatsoever was the immediate cause of the rising thereof,
that did depend upon the superior bodies, if any thing depend upon them. So
then, the Astrologers knowledge comes very short, when as he knows not, nor
is able to fore tell the event of those things, that are confessed to depend
upon the superior heavenly bodies. Now if this knowledge be so short and
uncertain, in things which depend upon the superior bodies; it must needs be
far shorter or nothing at all, in such things that depend not of them.

Another kind of things foretold by Astrologers, is of such things as have
partly a cause of nature, partly of man's will and operation. To undertake to
foretell in such things, cannot be without superstition: For albeit they
challenge a cunning, to foretell in things which hold a natural course, and
subject to the powers of the Heavens: yet in things that are free, as
mansactions are, nature has no casualty but man's will.

They can challenge no skill in such things; because these things are not
governed by a natural dependence from the Heavens, but from other Causes of
another nature. As if an Astrologer should foretell, that such a man shall be
sick at such a time; this judgment is vain and superstitious. It is true,
that a Physician may judge of a man's health or sickness, but not by Astrology,
but by the disposition of his body.

This thing depends upon some natural Cause, whereof notwithstanding the
Astrologer can have no knowledge by the Stars. For in the order of actions,
if diverse Causes be ordered to one Effect, the Effect follows the Cause
deficient; as may appear in the actions of reason: For if a dialecticall
Syllogism be made of one true Proposition, and another false, the Conclusion
is false, unless by accident: And if it be of one Proposition necessary and
another contingent, the Conclusion is contingent. So is it in natural
operations, if one Cause be natural, and another free, the Effect is rather to
be said free, then natural; And if one Cause be contingent, the other
necessary, the Effect is contingent. Of such things there can be no judgment,
but as of things free and contingent.

An other kind of things inquired by Astrologers, is in those things which
depend merely of contingence; in which things the connection of the Cause, and
the Event, is a thing not known; in which respect these things are said not to
have a natural Cause, because the connection of such a Cause to such an Event,
is not known in nature. In such things to make Predictions, is utterly vain,
and superstitious: For as things have their being, so have they their
signification; if then there be contingence in their being, it must needs be
in their signification. So, that it is impossible to find certain signs or
significations of things, which are themselves contingent. And yet in such
things the Knight does make especial choice to place Astrology. So it is in
things that are merely free: For over a man's freedom, the Positions of heaven
have no power. And it is a most foolish thing, for a man to seek that without
him, whose cause is altogether within himself.

The Astrologers from such uncertain grounds, have devised four ways to
seek the Events of things. 1. By Reuolutions. 2. By Natiuities. 3. By
Questions. 4. By Elections. In these things, they are so uncertain; that some
professing Astrology, are notwithstanding weary of the absurdities which they
see in some of these, and therefore disclaim them, as the Knight does some of
these. Yet such is the folly of others, that they have added a fifth way to
these former, which they say is by Intentions. If a man once give way to
unnatural grounds, his mind can never be free from superstitious and absurd
conceits, which are impediments to faith and good manners, and in the end make
ship-wracke thereof.

CHAP. IX.
That Astrology is an Instrument to Magic.

FOr the better satisfaction of the Reader, and clearing the truth: Let us here
examine, whether Astrology has any other use, then to be an Instrument to
Magic. We say, there is no other use thereof; because we find, that such
Philosophers as did rest only upon natural Reason, could find no reason in
Astrology* And further; because if any have maintained Astrology, they have
been such as were Magitians. This question I rather move, because I am not
ignorant, how some learned men have stumbled at this stone. For, albeit we
find none that have proved Astrology to be a part of Philosophy; yet some
have thought, that Magic is a part of Philosophy: And though that can help
them little; yet we would not leave the Astrologers that hole to hide
themselves in. Johannes Baptista Porta, has written a Book entitled, Magia
naturalis, implying in the Title, that some Magic may be a part of natural
Philosophy. But in delivering natural Magic, as he calls it, he
delivers diverse things, which Philosophy reaches not to, but are done by the
ministry of unclean Spirits. As of Elections to be written in certain
stones, whereby those stones are supposed to be animated, and to receive an
especial grace from Heaven. Et hoc (says he) fundamentum and radicem
statuunt omnium. Lib. 4. Cap. 25. Coelius Rhodig: a man of better name for
Learning, divides Magiam, in infamem and naturalem, Lib. 3. Cap. 42. From him,
we add another testimony for the honor of Astrology: Iam and Magiae clauis
commemoratur Astrologia. Unto this opinion of Coelius, Iansenius seems to
yield, Com. in Concord. Cap. 9. Perhaps not marking that Coelius has that
commendation of Magic, and even those very words out of Cornelius Agrippa. To
fortify their opinions, because they are ashamed of Agrippa, whose words they
bring; they send us to Plato 1. Alcibiad. who there says, That the Kings
Sons of Persia were instructed therein. If these things were true, they make
nothing for Astrology. But we take it (by their favor) that these men, though
otherwise learned and judicious; yet herein were ouerseene. For, whereas they
bring nothing for the confirmation of their opinion, but the authority of
Plato; if any such thing be found in Plato, then we yield, that they might
have some reason for their opinion. But in Plato we find the contrary; for
he, speaking of the Institution of the Kings Sons of Persia in Magic,
describes that Magic which they learned thus: (...). In which words Plato
tells us, that the Magic which the Sons of the Persian Kings learned, was
that which Zoroastes the Son of Horomasus taught, and it is (says Plato) the
worship of the Gods. Now, if there be no other natural Magic, but that
which can be proved out of this place of Plato; then assuredly, natural
Magic will never be proved. For this Magic, Plato will not have to consist
in natural knowledge, but in the worship of their Gods; which worship, because
it was Idolatry, therefore from hence may be proved, that Idolatry is a part of
Magic, but nothing else from hence. Then by this it appears, it is not
Natural, but Diabolical. Now these men, resting upon Plato his testimony, can
in this point stand up no longer, that staff failing them whereon they leaned.
And howsoever it may be suffered in an Heathen, to give an honorable
testimony to Magic, as being a service that pleased their Gods; yet is it not
likewise tolerable in Christians, to approve Magic from the same reasons.

This has deceived diverse, who looking more unto a show of Learning, then into
the study of the truth, have been too easily carried away, and deceived by
them that told them of a natural Magic. These be but the opinions of men of
latter times, who were herein deceived by Agrippa. And Agrippa for a Cousener
deals somewhat plainly: For he says in his Epistle to Tritemius: Tres libros
de Magia composui, and de occulta Philosophia minus infesto titulo inscripsi.
Then they who will call Magic Philosophy, because a Magitian (to color his
wickedness) so calls it, may understand how weak their ground is, and see
themselves directly deceived, by him that professes to deceive. The Ancients
do exactly distinguish Magitians from Philosophers, as may be seen as well
from the testimony of Plato last cited, which witnesses, that the Magic
whereof he speaks, stands only in the worship of the Gods, therefore in no
natural knowledge, and by consequence no part of Philosophy. As also by a
testimony to the same purpose out of Herodotus; for Herodotus, speaking of the
manner of sacrificing used amongst the Persians, declares; that their Magi
were their Priests, Magus astans theogoniam accipit, si Herod. Clei^.
quidem hanc illi dicunt esse incantationem efficacissimam; citraque Magum
nullum illis fit legitimum sacrificium. And afterward declares, how the Magi
differ from the Egyptian Priests: that is, how the Persian Priests differ from
the Egyptian Priests. By which it appears that Magi were Priests, not
Philosophers. Iamblicus distinguishing these, I mean Priests and Philosophers,
says thus. Non enim intelligentia coniungit Lib. de Myste rus Egyp.
sacrificatores Deo, alioqui philosophi vnionem Deificam reportarent. He
calls that, vnionem Deificam, whereby the Priests of Egypt and Magi of the
Persians, were so linked to their familiar Diuill, that thereby they had means
to foretell and work certain great works, that is illusions. These things be
of Magic craft, but not of Philosophy: and they who do such things, are
called Magi, Chaldaei, or sometimes Priests, but never Philosophi, of the
Ancients. To the same purpose, Diodorus Siculus witnesses, that the Chaldeans
were not as the Philosophers of Greece, studying natural knowledge; but as the
Priests of Egypt, foretelling particular Events. Chaldaei Babiloniorum
antiquissimi eum locum in sua repub. quem in Egypto Sacerdotes obtinuere; ad
cultum enim Deorum deputati -- Diuinatione quada futura praedicunt. This is
their Philosophy, not to seek the natural Causes of things, but by their
manner of worshipping their Gods, that is Devils, to learn the knowledge of
Predictions of particular Events, which cannot be known in nature, but are
known by the help of such Devils as the Chaldeans worshipped. Herein
Diodorus consents with Plato, and others, and teaches us to know these
Chaldeans. True it is, that Strabo calls them Philosophers, but not simply,
but (...), Philosophers of that Country. Whereby he distinguishes them from
such as otherwhere are known by the name of Philosophers, and does more
exactly distinguish them by their Profession. For speaking of Wizards by
occasion of Moses: such says he, was Amphiaraus, Trophonius, Orpheus, Musaeus,
and amongst the Getae, Zamolxis; amongst the Indians, Gimnosophistae; amongst
the Persians, Magi, who were called says he, (...) and (...) and (...),
amongst the Assyrians Chaldei amongst the Romans, Hetrusci, Aruspices. Thus
far Strabo, who speaks of these things with understanding, comparing the
Chaldeans, Magi, and Aruspices together.

And this may show how far they are mistaken, that without warrant, without
testimony of the Ancients, call either the Chaldei or the Magi Philosophers:
they may as well call the Aruspices by that name. Now these called by diverse
names in diverse Countries, Magi, Gymnosophists, Brachmanae, Chaldaeans,
Astrologers, Aruspices, Druides, all were Magitians of several Nations.
Whereas all the rest are, I cannot say utterly abolished; but if they be
practiced, it is in secret; only the Chaldean Superstition resumeth life and
courage in many places, by an abusiue pretense of heavenly influences: Whereas
in truth this Superstition has no more reason then the rest, that are not now
so boldly maintained.

These men would hide all their sleights under the heavenly influences: we
grant, that the Heavens have their force in these inferiors, so far as the
natural Philosopher can understand. If it be demanded, whether they have not
greater force, then the natural man can understand: to that, who can answer
precisely? For who knows all secrets of God, but God? But we know, that if
there be any, no man is able to express it. Now the Astrologer may learn
natural influences from Philosophy: but if there be above that which
Philosophers know, the Astrologer must give a reason how he comes to the
knowledge of such things, which the natural man knows not.

Give me leave (good Reader) for the manifestation of the truth, which only
God knows, I seek: to disclose those secrets, which Astrologers labor to
hide, holding us with fair tales of natural influences. It greeueth me, that
any should be (how much more a man of such place and parts) so bewitched, as
once to open his mouth in defense of these works of darkness, in this great
light of knowledge, and of the truth. If it were not against a cause that so
much overthrows Godliness, I should never troble him: but who can hold in
this case, wherein Gods glory and the truth is touched; which we doubt not,
will once hold his own place, like the Sun in his strength, dispelling
these mistes not only of Errors but of great impieties, which now ouercast the
light thereof.

That we may know what these men mean by their Influences, who can better
teach us then Corn. Agrippa, that has disclosed the secrets of this Art; whose
testimony is without exception, because he was better seen in Astrology then
the Knight, or any that takes part with him. Agrippa speaking of these
Astrologicall influences, first tells us a tale of the Platonicks: Omnia
inferiora esse idiata a superioribus Lib. 1. de occul. Philos.
idaeis; et totidem sunt in anima mundi rations, rerum seminales, quot idaeae
sunt in mente deuina, quibus ipsa rationibus aedificauit sibi in coelis vltra
stellas, etiam figuras, impressitque his omnibus proprietates: Ab hisce ergo
stellis figuris, ac proprietatibus, omnes specierum inferiorum virtutes ac
proprietates dependent. Then the Astrologicall influence depends upon that
doctrine which Plato learned of Mercury Tresmegist, concerning Anima mundi.
This influence say they, may, be hindered by the inability of the matter, and
is infused acording to the merits of the matter. As they would draw out of
Virgil, who herein expresses the Platonicall conceit. Igneus est ollis,
vigor, and Coelestis origo
Seminibus, quantum non noxia corpora tardant.
Further, he explicateth this matter thus. Prouenit virtus primo ab Idaeis,
deinde ab intelligentijs regentibus, postea a coelorum aspectibus,
disponentibus, porro ab elementorum dispositis complexionibus correspondentibus
coelorum influxibus. This is the doctrine of his Influences. I will only bring
it to the light. One thing I note throughout all his discourse of influences,
he never cites a Philosopher, but always Trismegist, Iarchas, Brachmanus,
and Hebraeorum mecubules. He proves also out of Trismegist, that by the right
marking of Influence; if an Image be made of such things as properly agree to
each Demon: that the image shall presently be animated by a Demon: all this
must we take as from Astrologicall Influences.

Let us proceed in these hid mysteries of Influences: He says further. Nihil
materiales numeri and figures Lib. 2. Cap. 22.
possunt in mysterijs rerum abditarum nisi representative per numeros and
figuras formales, quatenus reguntur and informantur ab intelligentijs, quae
nectunt extrema materiae atque spiritus at voluntatem animae eleuatae per
magnum affectum operantis, coelesti virtute potestatem accipiens a Deo, per
animam vniuersi and coelestium constellationum obseruationes. Thou must not
require of me (good Reader) the understanding of these things. For we are now
about the hidden secrets and mysteries of Influences, which neither the Knight,
nor I understand; but their great Master of the Art Agrippa, calls them
hidden mysteries: And hidden let them be ever from me. And he tells
concerning these Astrologicall Influences, that which I would have the
Astrologers to mark; but they know it better then I can tell them. And
therefore I wish the Reader to mark these Deceivers, who in defense of
Astrology, discreetly seek to maintain all the mysteries of Magic. For
Agrippa, one of the greatest Masters in both the Professions, or in one, which
includes both, further teaches; that no Divination can be perfited without
Astrology, and therefore he calls Astrogie, Clauem ad omnium arcanorum
noticiam pernecessariam. Lib. 2. Cap. 53.
Where he says further. Omnia diuinationum genera sic in ipsa Astrologia suas
radices and fundamenta habent, vt absque hanc parum aut nihil videantur
adferre. And again, Astrologica diuinatio quatenus coelestia sunt causae and
signa omnium eorum quae fiunt in inferioribus, ex solo situ and motu corporum
coelestium, quaecunque occulta aut futura sunt, illorum certissimas largitur
demonstrationes. Here we see, from whence the Knight has that learning, which
he so often repeateth, but never proves: that the Stars are Causes and
Signs of those Events which are seen in the actions of men. For, in such
stands Astrologicall Predictions.

Thou see much (good Reader) but yet thou see not all. There is yet another
secret, that belongs to these Astrologicall Predictions: For, it is not
enough to believe without reason, that the Stars are Causes of such Events,
which the Astrologer would foretell, whatsoever they be: but he must believe
with a strong credulity, and earnest affection, nay, with the excess of a
desire, otherwise they cannot come to their purpose. So that, it is not in the
nature of the thing, but in the vehement desire of him that seeks to know
these things. This is plain witchcraft and Idolatry, in abusing men to place
their highest desires, their faith, and affections upon these things. And
therefore he teaches farther thus. Omnes res habent naturalem obedientiam ad
animam humanam, and de necessitate habent motum et efficaciam ad id quod
defiderat anima forti desiderio. And again, Quando fertur in excessum
desiderij. And speaking of the same thing, he says: Et hac eadem ratio, est
etiam radix omnium Astrologicarum Lib. 2. Cap. 54.
quaestionum, quoniam anima eleuata in al^cuius desiderij excessum arrepit ex
se horam and opportunitatem magis conuenientem and efficacem, super qua
fabricata coeli figura, potest tunc Astrologico in ea iudicare and plane
cognoscere de eo quod quaerens ipse scire cupit, atque desiderat. All this
goes current amongst Astrologers, for good natural Philosophy. But let us
turn a little to the Knight, to whom from the heart; we with sound heartpray,
that God will deliver him out of these snares: hehath given us cause to hope,
that he may be drawn to see all these vanities; forasmuch as himself does
ingeniously confess; that, that part of Astrology which is about questions
and Elections, has in it apparent sortilegy. p. 3. He gives there some
reasons of that opinion: but I am persuaded, that the greatest reason that
moved him, was, because he saw it so impiously taught in Agrippa, that without
apparent sortilegy, it could not be admitted. He that does confess that
which is true, that as it is taught by these Masters, there is apparent
sortilegy in this part; may be drawn to see and confess, that in the whole,
there is the like to be found. For this Astrologicall Influence (without the
which ground the Astrologer can do nothing) is founded upon the Platonical
conceit of anima mundi: And this comes not by a natural Course of the light
and motions of the Stars; but from the conceived Idaea to the intelligence;
from the intelligence to the Sphere it comes so to the Aspects of Heaven, and
to the Elementary Complexions, reducing the Heathenish superstitions. And yet
all this will not serve, unless the Astrologer come to desire this secret
knowledge of things to come, with strong credulity, and excess of desire,
placing his faith and affections upon those inventions of Satan, which we owe
only to God, his holy Scriptures and truth. This is that which being against
all natural reason, has driven away the most honest among natural
Philosophers, from this profession; And has driven away all the holy Fathers
of the Church, and is able to drive all true Christians from it. For, when we
find by their own confession, that that these Predictions are not founded in
the nature of things sought; nor in the nature of the Stars, but in an
excess of desire and credulity in him that seeks, who will not be terrified
from this search? And where he says, all things have a natural obedience to
the soul of man; his meaning is not, that all things which they thus seek
have a desire to be known, which is Witchcraft: but that all unclean Spirits
are desirous to illude the soul of man, and make show of obedience, to catch
the soul of man in these snares; requiring a strong Credulity, and excessive
desire of the Soul: and so drawing the service of the Soul to themselves,
from God and from godliness. These be the trappes and snares that unclean
Spirits have spread for Astrologers: Our desire is to give them warning hereof,
that they may avoid them. Let us return to Agrippa, and mark his
proceedings. Non ab alia causa quam a Coelestiterenni orbis virtutes
proueniunt. Lib. 2. Cap. 60.
Hinc Magus per illas operaturus vtitur incantatione astuta superiorum, verbis
Mysteriosis in locutione quadam ingeniosa trahens vnum ad aliud, vitamen
naturals, per quandam conuenientiam inter illas mutuam. Sir, do you hear him?
When he has laid down a great secret of the Devils craft, yet he says, all
is done Vi Naturali. These be the things that we have renounced in our
Baptism; we renounce not Nature, but the works of the Devil. And farther, he
says: Sicuti in corpore humano membrum vnum mouetur percipiendo motum
alterius, et in cythera mota vna chorda mouetur et altera: sic quando aliquis
mouet aliquam partem mundi mouentur et aliae, percipiendo motum illarum. And to
teach us the cause of the malignitie of the Influences, he says: Quicquid in
istis inferioribus Lib. 3.
discors dissonumque reperitur, non ex influentiae malitia, sed ex mala
dispositione percipientis prouenit. And therefore he discourses how the
Superior Influences are first received in the Moon, and by the Moon
reflected upon the earth. Now in the Moon they receive some infection; then the
indisposition of these Inferior Bodies receiving this Influence, makes that
which is good in it self, to be evil. Thus says he, Saturnus influit
anxietatem, deliramentum, tristitiam, blasphemiam, desperatione, mendacium,
etc. Jupiter auaritiam, tyrannidem. Mars arrogantiam, temeritatem. Venus
lasciuos amores. Mercurius, frauds. Luna instabilem progressum. If this
Doctrine be true, there is no evil from the Influences, but from the
Inferiors indisposition. The truth is, the Astrologers know not themselves,
what to make of their Influence, and therefore we must be content not to know
it. Yet one thing I must observe. When they teach, that the Superiors by
Influence govern the Inferiors; and teach also, that the Influence of the
Stars are not evil, but as they are received into indisposed Inferiors. For
my part, I understand not how these things agree. For, it should rather seem
by this, that the Inferior Elementary Bodies, do overrule the Influence of
the Superiors. One thing I must remember more, that Agrippa retracting in some
show, these devilish superstitions, does not retract that which he wrote of
Astrology of the mutual use, conjunction and affinity between Astrologic and
Magic. But that we may understand that this knot between them is
indissoluble, he says in that retractation thus. Magiacum Astrologia sic
coniuncta atque cognata est, vt qui Magiam sine Astrologia profitetur is nihil
agit, sed tota aberret via. Then he leaves us this vnretractable Position,
that Magic and Astrology cannot be separated. Add unto this, that which
before we have rehearsed, out of the Book entitled the Centiloquie: That no
Astrologer is able by mere Art, without the help of a familiar Spirit, to
foretell any particular Event. And which we observed out of Ficinus, That
those Predictions stand not by Learning, but by some instinct. And then it is
apparent to all such as will not blindfold themselves, that all Astrologicall
Predictions of particular Events, concerning the actions of men, are not
natural, but mere illusions of unclean Spirits: and that Astrology, so
far as concerns these Predictions, has no other end or use, but only to
serve as an instrument to Magic. This is the Doctrine of these men, who have
most of all excelled in Astrology, whom in this case we are bound to believe,
before others. Now, what will the Knight say to these things? or, which way
will he turn himself? He will perhaps, devise a distinction between
Astrologers in old time, and in these times: but that will not help him. For
Agrippa has opened plainly, that old and new Astrology is the same, and
proceed from he same Principles by the same means, to the same end, and all is
to serve Magic. He will perhaps say, as often in his Book he does, that
Astrology is condemned only as it is joined with Magic, but neither will
this help him. For Agrippa tells us, that there is such affinity and
cognation beteene them; that as Magic cannot be performed without
Astrology; so Astrology cannot have a his and perfection without Magic. So
the difference is not much, whether we call these Predictions Magical or
Astrologicall Predictions. Nay, will the Knight say, the Magitian though using
Astrology, yet may proceed so far as to the conference with an unclean
spirit: but the Astrologer may stay himself in his figure, and proceed no
further. I answer, that difference is not great, in what degree he
proceeds, so he proceed at all with the Devil in his illusions. But if he
come to the knowledge of a particular Event, whether that be by conference, or
by some other means; we are herein certified, that this thing cannot be
done by Art and learning, but by the help of a Spirit; take that help which
way you will, it is Diabolical. For that judiciary Astrology, either has
been, or may be altogether separated from Magic; this the Knight can never
prove: Neither can he bring the testimony of one learned man of ancient times,
to testify for him: but we have enough against him. For, besides these which
we have cited, Iamblicus is so round herein, that his testimony admits no
answer, thus he says: Et impossible iudicare certos euentus, cum omnium
causarum concursum comprehendere Lib. de Mist.
nequeamus, nisi per inspirationem diuinam id assequamur. To the same purpose
says Psellus a Platonicke. Instructa est Magia multum Astronomica facultate,
Lib. de Daemonibus.
plurimaque per ipsum peragit. And Philo stratus writing the Life of Apolonius
(the most famous both Magitian and Astrologer in his time) says, that
Apolonius conuersing with Iarchas, the chiefest of the Indian Wizards, called
Brachmanae, did seek to find out the end of Judiciary Astrology, that is, to
be able to foretell things to come, by certain secret sacrifices. His words
are these. Verum arcanas libationes per quas Philostr. Lib. 3. Cap. 13.
Astrologicam facultatem, and diuinandi peritiam inquirebant, sacrorum
praeterea rationem and incantationem, quas dijs gratissimas esse nouerant,
Iarcham cum solo Apolonio communicasse refert Damis. It will much trouble the
Knight, to answer these testimonies, and especially this last: For Apolonius
was as well seen in the Mathematickes, as any other. If the mere knowledge of
Mathematickes could help a man to the knowledge of Astrologicall Predictions,
then might Apolonius have been able to know such Predictions by his skill in
Mathematics: but his skill was not able to help him; and therefore he sought
Astrological Divination by certain secret Sacrifices. And, bring all the skill
in natural knowledge that ye will; yet your great Masters have told you, that
a Prediction of certain events, cannot be made without inspiration. These be
the secrets of Astrology, which the Knight cunningly hides from us, but
others plainly reveal them: secrets they are, and must be done in great
secrecy. and that Agrippa witnesses, Experimentu^ omne magicum Lib. 3. C. ^.
fugit publicum, quarit occultari, silentio roboratur, propalatione destruitur.
Opportet ergo Magicum operatorem secretum esse, nullis aut opus suum, aut
locum, aut tempus, aut desiderium propalari, nisi preceptori aut coadiutori.
Ipsa socij loquacitas, incredulitasque in omni operatione effectum impedit.
These things agree together: For Agrippa speaks of the secrets in Magic, as
Philostratus does of the like secrecies in Astrologicall Divination. This
knowledge that thus flies the light, shows evidently whence it comes.
Iamblicus disputing against Porphyry, tells us, that Porphyry following
Astrologicall divination, went not foundly to the way of foretelling, but the
Egyptian way was as he thought the surer. Both did seek to know the Lord of
the Figure, which in truth was a Devil: but they were not well agreed to what
Devil to give the place: but the Egyptians (says he) went more directly to
it. Quidnam prohibet figurae dominum, atque Lib. de Mist. Egypt.
daemonem per Astrologiam quidem difficile inueniri; facillime vero per diuinum
vaticinium atque sacrificia. Where he plainly confesses, that Dominus
figurae, whom the Astrologers seek so much, is in truth Demon, a Devil. Sir,
you understand by this, how your Astrology is censured. There is no certainty
in it till you come to Magic, that is the sure way: so that Iamblicus tells
you, that Astrologers do but spend the time in vain, till they come to the
Egyptian sacrificing, that is, to plain Magic. Plotinus qui inscribitur; si
faciant astra: says (as Macrobius cites Insom. Scrip. Lib. c. 9.
him) Pronunciat Plotinus nihil vi vel potestate little hominibus euenire: sed
ea quae decreti necessitas in singulis sanxit, ita per horum septem transitum
statione, recessiue monstrari: vt aues seu praeter volando, seu stando futura
pnnis vel voce significant nes ientes. Whereby it appears, that in his
judgment, there is no more natural cause of a particular Event in the
Stars, then in the flying of Birds. And therefore these things being shut out
from natural Causes, are found only amongst diabolical Superstitions.

My purpose is herein to refute Astrologicall Predictions, as standing against
nature; by the voice of the natural man: by Philosophers, and the confessions
of them that have been reputed most learned in that fession: And I have dealt
little with Divines: I will add a few. Origin upon the Book of Numbers,
expounding (...) Mum. 23.
those words: There is no Sorcery in Jacob, nor Divination in Israel, in due
time it shall be revealed to Jacob and Israel, what the Lord will do:
speaks of the curiosity, which men by unlawful means use in seeking the
knowledge of things to come. He shows that there are but two ways to know
those things; either from God, as the Prophets spoke, or from the Devil, as
all other do that seek the knowledge of particular Events. Est talis quaedam
(says he) in Ministerio Hom. 16 in Number.
praescie^tiae operatio Daemonum, qua artibus quibusdam ab ijs qui se
Daemonibus maciparint, colligitur. And expounding the latter part of that
Verse: In tempore dicitur? Iacobo and Israeli quid perficiet Deus. Quid est
(says he) in tempore dicetur? cum oportet and expedit, hoc est in tempore. Si
ergo expedit pranoscere nos futura, diceture Deo per Prophetam Dei, per
spiritum sa^ctum. Si vero non dicuntur neque denuntiantur, scito quia nobis non
expedit futura pranoscere Quod si idcirco non dicuntur nobis, quia nobis ea
scire non expedit, qui diuersis artibus, and daemonum inuocationibus gestiunt
futura praenoscere, quid aliud faciunt, nisi ea cupiunt discere, qua sibi scire
non expedit. And a little after after, A solo Deo debemus de futuris discere,
and neque diuinum neque augurem, neque aliud quodcunque horum recipere. The
Knight would make Origin to stand for Astrology, and produces a testimony of
Origin (as he dreameth) out of the narration of Joseph, in which Jacob is said
to tell his Sons, that Heaven was a Book, wherein they might read
whatsoever should befall them. This, howsoever the Knight thought worthy his
Relation; yet I do not account it worthy my Refutation. It is gross
ignorance, or wilful collusion, to think that Origin gave credit to any such
Book, or wrote any such thing: it is true, that many such tricks are put upon
Origin, by deceivers, and thrust in amongst his works; of which Origin
complained in his life time, confessing that his works were interpolated by
couseners: but for this particular. 1. It is against the usual Doctrine of
Origin, in other places. 2. It is rejected by the Church as fabulous. 3. It is
refuted by S. Augustine, and others. Augustine teaches no otherwise, speaking
of Astrology, and of Divination in general: He says; Omnes Arts huiusmodi
vel nugatoria, velnoxiae superstitionis ex quadam pestifera societate hominum
and Daemonum. He calls it pestifera curiositas, crucians sollicitudo,
mortifera seruitus. And reckoning all the kinds of Magic, haruspicum, and
Augurum libros, ligaturas, remedia in praecationibus and Characteribus, and
other things of that sort, at last he says. Nec ab hoc genere pernitiosae
superstitionis segregandi sunt, qui genethliaci propter natalium dierum
considerationes, nunc autem vulgo Mathematici vocantur. For anciently these
were not called Mathematici, and therefore he seems loath to give them that
name; as a name undue to their occupation. For himself observes so much, Non
cos appellarunt Lib. 83. quaest qu. 45.
Mathematicos veteres, qui nunc appellantur, sed illos qui temporum numeros,
motu coeli ac Syderum peruestigarunt. This amongst the Ancients was the known
Subject of the Mathematickes, the supputation of times by the motion of the
Stars: And anciently, Predictions were never accounted any part of the
Mathematickes. The Knight utterly scorneth this ancient use, as idle and vain
without Predictions. For an answer to S. Augustine, the Knight tells us,
that S. Augustine reproves only such, as either follow the Idolatry of the
Heathen, or suppose a fatal necessity in those things that depend upon our
will; in all things else confessing the government of the Heavenly Bodies, and
both the Stars to have their properties, and the Astrologer to know the same.
This was soon said and boldly; but when will it be proved? The truth is, that
S. Augustine and the rest of the Fathers, reprove Astrology, for the vain
curiosity of foretelling things to come; which cannot be foretold but by God
and his Prophets, or to the Devil and his Prophets. This is that which moved
the Fathers against Prediction, because a Prediction cannot be foretold, but
by the Spirit of God. This says Origin, this says S. Augustine. That the
Predictions of those that are called genethliaci, is nothing but pernitiosa
superstitio. Cyrill, writing against Julian the Apostate, answers an
Objection that Julian has made, that Abraham was an Astrologer, that he did
use Divination or Prediction by the Stars. Cyrill answers, that there is no
such Divination or Prediction; the Stars have no such use, they were not made
for any such thing: but as he says; Factum ab ipso (Deo) dicimus Astrorum
chorum, non quod sanctorum Prophetarum dignitatem habeat, vel aliud quicquam
preter quam vt luceant hominibus, and sint in signa temporum. When the Fathers
reprove Astrology, this is their purpose, to reject it for Predictions of
future things. This Prediction cannot be done without the Spirit of God. The
holy Prophets did make Predictions by that spirit: If any shall attempt such
things by the Stars; then they answer, the Stars were not made to have the
honor of the holy Prophets, which they should have, if by them we should come
to the knowledge of things to come. The Fathers say, the Stars have no other
use or end but to give light, and by their motion to measure the times. The
Knight says, they should have an idle and vain creation, if this were all
their use: so he says, Page 2. Behold how far these men proceed, to censure
not only all learned men, that stand against their fancy, but the very
Creation of God must be censured, if it stand against their madness. God give
them a meek spirit. To satisfy the Knight in this, that the Fathers in
reproving or rejecting Astrology, do it in respect of the Predictions, that
their Divination and Predictions are unlawful: That this was the thing, which
so troubled the Fathers, he may understand by that which we have said, and if
that will not satisfy, we could bring enough. S. Augustine says; Planetarios
quos Lib. Confiss. 4. C. 3.
Mathematicos vocant, plane consulere non desistebam quod quasi nullum eis
esset sacrificium, and nulla preces ad aliquem spiritum ob Diuinationem
dirigentur. Quod tamen Christiana and vera pietas consequenter repellit and
damnat. And again, Iam and Mathematicorum fallaces Lib. Confess. 7. Cap. 6.
diuinationes, and impia deliramenta reicceram. And again, Inde certissime
collegi, ea quae vera consideratis Lib. Confess. 7. Cap. 6.
constellationibus dicerentur, non Art dici sed sort: quae autem falsa, non
artis imperitia, sed sortis mendatio. And again. His omnibus consideratis, non
immerito creditur, Lib. de Ciuit. Dci. 5. Cap. 7.
cum Astrologi mirabiliter multa vera respondent, occulto instinctu fieri
spirituum non bonorum, quorum cura est has falsas and noxias opiniones
deastratibus fatis humanis mentibus inserere, atque firmare: non horoscopi
notati and inspecti aliqua art, quae nulla est. And to this purpose Theodoret
says, Vniuersum Diaboli genus in Theod. in Zac.
medio proposuit, diuinatores ex syderibus prognostica profitentes, somniorum
interpres, little mendacia reprehendit, and poenas constituit. It would be a
work to fill a Book, if I should write all which the Fathers have observed to
this purpose: Let the Knight satisfy himself in this, that the especial
cause why the Fathers reprove Astrology, is, for that they take upon them to
foretell particular Events fortuitall. Which thing cannot be done but by a
Spirit, though many times that Spirit may lie: But without a Spirit this cannot
be performed, by the common consent and torrent of the Fathers.

CHAP. X.
The Censure of the Knights Divinity.

THe boldness of many men is much to be marvelled at in these evil and
licentious times, who in coloring of corrupt Causes, dare presume to use the
pretense of holy Scriptures, turning and forcing Gods truth sometimes to
justify the forgeries of Satan: which impiety, as it proceeded from the
Devil, the first corrupter of the truth; so, wheresoever it appears in
other, it does bewray it self, and shows evidently, whom they imitate that
use it. For Gods holy truth cannot be so spoken of, as a matter of common
Learning may be: For smooth terms, and a trim^ed speech, without a religious
heart, opening the truths of Gods word, will presently be descried. Whether
this religious heart be in the Knight, or that he has presumed with unclean
hands to handle holy things; let the Children of the Church judge. I will not
charge him with profane words; as where he, speaking of the immortality of
the Soul, of the divine Providence, of the Miracles and Mysteries of Religion;
calls these things merely Theological, or Metaphysicall, Page 94. and 95.
Religion is Metaphysicall, as it depends upon the immediate will of God, and
not upon the order of nature: This we pass over, and come to try his spirit,
and sound his judgment in Divinity.

Whereas M. Chambers cites the Prophet Esaias 47. 12. 13. where the Prophet
foreshewing the destruction of Babylon, derideth the Astrologers (so much used
and honored there) who took upon them to foretell calamities, because their
Predictions herein could not help Babylon. After a fruitless Discourse,
wherein he tells us that those Astrologers were Magitians, at last he
affirms, That the ruin of this Monarchy (meaning Babylon) was extraordinary,
beyond the compass of natural things, and did no less transcend humane
knowledge by natural means (to speak his own words) then the standing of
the Sun in the Heavens, in the days of Joshua, or the going back thereof in
the time of Hezekiah. Which things, being miraculous and not natural, the
Astrologer cannot foretell. And such he affirms the destruction of Babylon
to be. Because God in his secret purpose, had decreed to stir up the Medes
against that people: this determination depending (as he says) upon the
immediate will of God: because Cyrus is named two hundred year before the
accomplishment of that Prophecy: because the Medes were subject to the
Babilonians, and of small power: because the surprise of Babylon was so sudden,
as Herodotus reports, that the enemies found them eating and drinking, and
dancing.

And thus he runs on, and tells the Reader, that these are reasons to
prove, that the destruction of Babylon was not natural, but miraculous,
depending upon the immediate will of God: what he means by the immediate
will of God, I know not: But this we know, that the Miracles that are wrought
only by the Word, or immediate will of God, are such, as being done without
means, causes the natural man to wonder, whose knowledge can reach no
higher, then as it is led by means. Therefore the standing of the Sun in the
time of Joshua, and the going back thereof in Hezekiah his sight, and such like
works, were Miracles, because they were done without natural means, and
against the ordinary Course of Nature, and beyond the knowledge of the natural
man. But what Divines hold the destruction of Babylon to be a Miracle? Here
were all the means used, that are usual in other destructions: the means are
well understood by the Heathen Historiographers, that never found any Miracle
herein. The force of Men, great Armies, a valiant and politic King Cyrus,
against a feeble and dissolute King Belshazzer, a man without virtue and
foresight. What Miracle do you see here? Herodotus records, as the Knight
also notes, Page 36. when the Medes on a Festival day had entered on the one
side of the City, the other part was ignorant thereof, being wholly given over
to dancing and merriment. This the Knight notes, to prove, that this
destruction was miraculous, not by natural means. Did ever man reason thus
before? Is it a Miracle, that a vigilant, wise, valiant Army, should overthrow
a careless and drunken People? And must this be brought as a reason to make it
a Miracle? Your Cause wanted reason to maintain it; for shame give over such a
Cause, as must be maintained by such reasons; or else set better heads to it.
But he thinks that he has said much to it for proof, because the Prophet
Esaias names Cyrus 200. years before the accomplishment of the Prophecy. If
this be enough to prove a Miracle, because God foresaw the thing long before,
and revealed it to his Prophet; then, what thing in the world can the Knight
name, which by this worthy reason will not prove a Miracle? Does not God
foresee every thing as he did that? If there were such Prophets amongst us, as
had such revelations of things to come, as Esaias had; then should other Events
be likewise foretold. But seeing we have not such revelations, God has given
to the Children of the Church, that precious gift of Faith; by which we
believe and know assuredly, that all things in the world are ruled by Gods
Providence; and we are taught to know, that the knowledge of things to come,
not revealed to us, is not needful for us: When it it is needful, we shall
have it, but from God and his Prophets, not from Astrologers. Thus we rest in
Gods Providence, and we exhort the Knight to rest there.

But the Knight like a grave moral Divine, to win some honor both of
Cicero, and of M. Chambers, braueth it out thus, Page 95. Tully profanely in
his 2. de Diuinat. and in his Book de Fato, denies and derideth the
providence of God; and yet (says he) may M. Chambers go to School with him,
and learn manners. But before we have done Sir, it will appear, who they are
that have need to go learn manners, and the Doctrine of Gods providence;
which they may learn even of Cicero. For, good Reader, consider whether his
wits be not enchanted, that writes thus. Cicero through all the 2. de
Diuinat. denies and derideth nothing else but Predictions, which are made by
Auruspicine, Augury, Astrology, Sortiledge, and such like. This the Knights
Book calls Gods providence: Is not this good Divinity? Cicero in his Book
de Fato, disputes so, as to take away fatum Astrologicum, and leave fatum
Physicum; that is, a dependence between natural Causes and their effects: and
this is all which is called fatum. Chrysippus, says he, necessitatem effugere
voluit, and retinere fatum. This conceit pleased Cicero, and therefore he
says. Quid afferripoterit, cur non omnia fato fieri fatendum sit? modo
intelligatur, quae sit causarum distinctio, ac dissimilitudo. Tully then takes
away fatum Stoicum and grants fatum Physicum. And herein he goes as far as
the natural man could go, holding natural Principles, which he is ever
careful to hold. But whether the Knight goes so far as a Christian should,
inspeaking of Gods providence, or as one professing moral virtues, fathering
that upon Cicero which he overthrows; let others judge.

He proceeds still the same man, handling the undefiled word of God without
reverence, without fear of check. M. Chambers acknowledging the power of the
Stars, in things subject to their power, but denying it to touch particular
Events, or men's actions, wherein the Astrologers wholly set it, says, that the
Stars have no force at all in this sense: the Knight speaking hereof, says,
that place of Job, 38. 33. unanswerably refelleth that barbarous opinion which
M. Chambers holds, that the Stars have no force at all (understand over
men's actions) for if they had no force, God would not vainly tell us of their
Dominion over the Earth. Page 48. Then blessed is M. Chambers, and the Cause
which he handles, that cannot be charged of Barbarism; but with him the
living God must also be charged of vanity. It grees ^eth me to write these
and such like blasphemies. Shall a wretched man, corrupt dust and ashes lay
vanity to the living God, if the Dominion of the Stars reach not so far, as
he in his foolish heart imagines? These things need no resolution, but a
sharp reproof. Repent and weep for this blasphemy, and pray to God, that
these thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven. This also is your pride and
presumption, that you think that you can see farther into a Text of Job, then
all Divines can. In that place of Job, there is mention of the sweetness or
amenity of the Pleiades, the bands of Orion, and the Dominion of the Heavens;
which the best Interpreters expound thus. The sweetness or pleasures of the
Pleiades; Delitiae; does express the sweetness and amenity of the Spring,
which those Stars bring in. The bands of Orion, the constriction of all
things procured by Winter, which that Star brings in. The Dominions of the
Heavens on the Earth, is apparent in all things vegetable upon the Earth: And
is not this a great Dominion which the Heavens have over the Earth, when all
things spring and flourish at certain positions of the Heavens. And again,
all things are bound up and frozen, and as it were deaded at some other
Positions of the Heavens: What worldly power is like this power? Moreover, we
yield the influence of the Heavens over things vegetable: And when we yield
this dominion of Heaven, we yield nothing but that which is seen in Nature.
If you will have more, you must prove it. The actions of men we deny to be
ruled by this power. And you, if you cannot get the act^on^ of Men, and
particular Events to be under this power; you open your mouth against the
Creator, and charge him with vanity.

But how does the Knight prove his imagined dominion of the Heavens? Forsooth
he makes some show, to prove that the Stars have some force, which thing is
not denied. But the question between us and him is not, whether the Stars
have some force or no; but wherein their force stands. After some wandering
discourse, at last he will prove forsooth, that the influence of the Stars
reach to the success of men's actions. Now Sir, you are welcome home, prove
this, and there shall be an end. But how prove you this? thus forsooth, Page
49. The influence of the Stars extends to the success of men, which is yet
more fully confirmed, (as if before he had proved it) whereas he has said
nothing to this point. But how is this more fully confirmed? Iudic. 4. 20.
Where it is expressly testified, that the Stars fought from Heaven in their
Courses and order, against Sisera.

By all which, says the Knights Book, it appears what Dominion they have
over all men, as over all other creatures, either vegetable, or sensible. But
if M. Chambers object, that this power is not understood by men, why does Moses
testify, that they were created to be signs? whose significations if they be
notvnderstood, I affirm to be Barbarous, or no signs to us at all. M.
Chambers must be content to be charged with barbarous opinions; Moses and God
himself, and whosoever stand in his way, are thus charged. Sir, be contented
and quiet your self, and you shall sooner see the truth. The Conclusion which
you would prove, is, as you tell us, a thing natural: we looked for a
natural reason of a natural Conclusion. You go to prove it by Scriptures,
confessing thereby, that you find no reason in nature for it: We need no
Scriptures to prove things natural; they are for higher matters then nature
can reach. But you say, the Stars have Dominion over the success of men's
actions, because it is said, that the Stars fought from Heaven in their order
against Sisera. Did ever any Divine expound this as you do? And, what warrant
have you to make the word of God serve your fancy? First, you charge not only
the words, but the sense of the place: which thing either, you should not have
done; ot else, not so rashly and without considering of your own words, charge
M. Chambers of false suggestion, or false translating, as you do, Page 47. For
whereas M. Chambers cites the words of Job thus: Do thou know the order of
Heaven, and will thou reduce the course of it to the Earth? You say he does
falsely translate the words; because the Original has, Know thou the Laws
or Ordinances of Heaven; and can thou dispose the Dominion thereof upon the
Earth? Let a man, not transported with affection, tell me the difference
between your words and his, and give a sensible distinction between. Do
thou know, and know thou: between the order of Heaven, and the Ordinances
of Heaven: between reducing the Course of Heaven to the Earth, and disposing
the Dominion thereof upon the Earth? Is not one sense kept in both? But now,
how the sense and words of the other place, is chopped and changed by you, let us
consider. The place which you cite, in the original, and in all Translations,
certainly in all that I have seen. The Hebrew Text has it, the old Latin
Translation, the Septuagint, Tremelius, Leo, Judah, the English: all, I say,
without exception read the place thus. They fought from heaven; even the
Stars in their Courses fought against Sisera. The Interpreters of this place,
old and new, understand it so, that this fighting from Heaven, was by Hayle,
Rain and tempest. And true it is, that the Stars by their Cosmicall rising
or setting, are observed to further rain and tempest. And thus we have the
words of the Scripture, faithfully translated in all Translations, expounded by
ancient and later Expositors, showing how the Heavens fought against Sisera.
This is confirmed by the circumstances in the Text. For in the next words, it
follows. The River Kison swept them away. The inundation of the River is
declared, caused by the Hayle and Rain, which fell from Heaven, whereby the
Canaanites were overthrown by the tempest from Heaven, and drowned in the
River. Thus much is evident by the Text, and confirmed by the testimonies of
all that have touched this place. Against this the Knights Book (for Alas, the
Knight himself may be guiltless of many things contained in the Book)
against this, I say, this writer takes upon him to translate it anew, and to
expound it as him lists. That the Stars fought from Heaven in their Courses
against Sisera: and expounds it, that the Stars by their Influences gave
success to the Action; against all Expositors. But if the Influence of the
Stars gave success in this Action; we would know, whether the Astrologer
could have given Prediction hereof, by looking upon the Stars. In the
destruction of Babylon, you say, he could not; and why could he more in this?
For in this a Miracle was showed evidently. Again, if the Stars did signify
success; whether was it good success or evil? For, we know the ancient
cosenage of Astrologers and Oracles. If the Astrologer should have told the
King of Canaan, that the Stars signified good success, he should have but
deceived him, as many do. Further, if this be a good reason, because the
Stars did fight against Sisera, therefore the Influence of Stars reaches
to success in men's actions: Why should not this be as good? The River Kison
helped the people of God against Sisera; therefore the Influence of the Rivers
do the like: For there is no more given to the Stars then to the River. It
is true, that all the Creatures of God, are at his command, and are used as
Instruments to do his will in the protection of his Church, and against his
enemies. What is this to Astrology?

But you say, why did Moses testify, that they were created to be signs;
whose signification you affirm to be barbarous, or no signs at all to us, if
they be not understood Your meaning is, that Moses witnessing Genesis 1. 14. That
whereas God in creating the Lights of Heaven, said, Let them be for signs and
for seasons, and for days, and years. These words must be so understood, let
the Stars be created to signfie particular Events of wars, of troubles of
the Estate of Cities, and Commonwealths, of the death of Kings, of particular
Events of men's actions: that the Astrologers by looking upon them may foretell
those things. For if they be made for signs, they must signify these things:
And if they do not signify these things, then are they vainly created. And is
not this a great marvel, that the Devil did not set some Astrologers a work
to interpret Scriptures? For if you had the testimony but of some one Expositor
of Scriptures, you might have some pretense to excuse the impiety; but having
none, what Astrologicall Sorcery has bewitched you, to dare (without
reverence) offer force and compulsion to Gods holy word, to make it serve your
turn? All Expositors that ever I could see, with one consent expound this
place so, that your Astrologicall significations, are quite shut out. August.
Lib. Imperf. in Genesis ad literam. Chrysostom. in Cap. 1. Genesis Homil. 6. Beda in
Cap. 1. Genesis Origin in Genesis 1. Theodoret in Genesis 1. Abeuleus in Genesis 1. Lyra in
Genesis 1. Glossa ordinaria. Calvin in Genesis 1. Franciscus Vatabalus, not a
Translator of the Bible, as you call him, but a diligent Expounder. All do
agree in this, that this signification is of things in the known Course of
Nature, for times, years and seasons: And some do expressly reject
Astrologicall supposed significations. The Knight will have it only for
Astrologicall significations. Sir, do you think in your inward judgment,
that God has written a Book in the Heavens, only for the understanding of
Astrologers? If this signification be such as you would have it, it is only
for Astrologers; for none other can open the significations that you mean, and
yet you know many Doctors doubt, whether the Astrologers can open them: This is
your Divinity. But we think that it may much better become a Christian Knight,
to take Divinity as the Church receives it, then to make it new. Some expound
these signs of the moments of times, some of seasons and weather: of which
signs all Husbandmen take use: none as you do. Iunius translateth the place
thus: Vt sint in signa cum tempestatibus, tum diebus and annis. Which
translation if you receive, so agreeing to the use of words in the Original,
then are your significations gone. Be contented farther to consider the manner
of your Argument; for thus you reason. If the Stars be not created for vain
and barbarous signs; then they signify the success of men's actions; but they
are not created for vain and barbarous signs; Remember your self, where you
had this Argument; for by the like kind of reasoning, Q. Cicero. Lib. 1. de
diuinat. would maintain the Prediction that you maintain. Si sint dij, neque
ante declarant hominibus quae futura sunt, aut non diligunt homines, aut quod
euenturum sit ignorant, etc. And a little after, Sunt autem dij, significant
ergo. Et si significant, nullas vias dant nobis ad significationis scientiam,
frustra significarent, etc. By which manner of reasoning he would conclude,
that future Events of men's actions, may be foretold by Augury, and Astrology:
He would charge the Gods of vanity, unless these Predictions be admitted. You
are not afraid to apply the same manner of reasoning to the living God. But
what reason have you to leave out the whole Argument, and conclude but for one
part? For the Conclusion follows as well for Predictions by Augury, as for
these by Astrology.

It were too long to trouble the Reader, with all the Knights errors: yet I
must touch a few. M. Chambers refers to a place of Chrysostom in Math. 2.
The Knight says, this makes more for Astrology then against it. For this is
all that Chrysostom says; Si Christus secundum legem sit not us Astrorum
quomodo Astrologiam dissoluit, fatumque destruxit? If Christ were under the law
of the stars, how then (as the Knight translateth it) did his coming
dissolve Astrology, and destroy destiny? To which I answer, says the Knights
book (mark now his deep Divinity) That he has so dissolved destiny and
Astrology, meaning the power of the Stars over us, as he has dissolved
death by his passion and resurrection; not that we are in this world freed
from natural death by the death of Christ, but from the eternal damnation of
death: thus far the Knight. He says that Christ has dissolved the Dominion
of the Stars, as he dissolved the Dominion of death. But how did Christ
dissolve the Dominion of death? Verily that his Church might be freed from it,
only true Believers, the members of his body, all other lie still under the
dominion of death; for none are freed, but those whom he soon makes free.
Then, where the Knight says, Christ has dissolved Astrology, as the power of
death over us; whom does he mean by us? If you mean us, that is, all men,
then it is false: For Christ has not dissolved the dominion of death for all
men, but only for his Elect. If you mean by us, us that believe; then how can
you make your Similitude good, making sense, and keeping Divinity? As Christ
has dissolved the dominion of death to us Believers only, but not to all:
what will you make the (...)? will you infer, so has he dissolved
Astrology to believers, and all other are under the Dominion of the Stars,
as they are under the dominion of death. If this be a true inference, it
proves plainly, that Astrology is a part of the power of darkness, evil and
wicked: for true Believers are delivered from all such things; and the things
from which Christ has delivered them are such. But then you say, that except
they which produce this place, and otherwise interpret it, can prove, that
Christ by his coming has taken away the natural virtue and efficacy of the
Stars, there is nothing said by Chrysostom. It were good for him that wrote
this, to peruse that testimony which in the next Page he cites out of
Solomon. The fool multiplyeth words. No man says that Christ has taken away
the virtue of the Stars? but that men's actions depend upon the natural
virtue of the Stars: But the question between you and us, is, what is that
natural virtue of the Stars. You say again if Christ came to dissolve it,
he could not dissolve that which was not: Ergo, of consequence it was, and
till it be dissolved, is effectual. And after this manner, for want of better
stuff, you trouble your self and your Reader, with such as comes in your
head. We answer, Christ dissolved Astrology, as he dissolved Idolatry; yet
S. Paul says an Idol is nothing. Now will you Sir, chop Logic with S. Paul,
and say, if Christ came to dissolve Idols, he came not to destroy that which
was not; Ergo, by consequence it was. But the Apostle will tell you that Christ
came to dissolve those things that are not in truth, but only imagined by the
superstitious conceits of men, illuded by Satan: For Christ does not destroy
the nature of the Stars, but superstition, which fancieth another power in
the Stars then God has given them: whichsuperstition is the work of the
Devil, and therefore Christ dissolueth it, as Saint John says. For this
purpose appeared the Son of God, that he might dissolve the works of the
Devil.

If the Stars have such power over the actions of men, then was your book
written under an unfortunate Star: For as it is commonly said, he casts
evil, that casting all day, casts not one good chance; So may it well be
said, he writes badly, that writing so long a Book, writes not one sound
sentence: Such is your Book, always like it self. And I suppose it were hard
to cull out one sentence through the whole Book, that a man can justify, who
is resolved to maintain nothing but truth.

After your manner you preach thus: Page 393. I would know of him where he
learned this Divinity, that God having expressly forbidden any thing, as is
were against his revealed will (as he affirms Astrology) nevertheless
concurres to the effecting of that, which shall advance the credit of an
unlawful practices, to the derogating of his own glory: this is flat
repugnant to all Divinity. And a little after, That God does not work by such
means as himself prohibiteth: If need were, I could amplify by sundry reasons
and authorities.

Because I am loath to enter into such a large Theological Discourse, as this
question which here you move requires: I will briefly answer. Sir, did you
ever care to understand what were those famous Controversies, which that
blessed Father S. Augustine held against the Pelagians? It seems not. And
what do the knowledge of these things belong to a Knight? No more does it
belong to a Knight to move such deep questions, and peremptorily toconclude in
Divinity; these waters be too deep for him to wade in. Briefly know thus
much: That God does work in many things against his revealed will. His
revealed will was to Abraham, that Isaac should be offered in a Sacrifice; yet
God wrought against it. Nay the case may be so, that the will of God and the
will of man may be contrary one to the other; and yet both good. The Father
lies upon his deathbed; the Sons will and desire is that the Father should
live, and this desire of the Son is agreeable to Gods revealed will; for that
revealed will contains what we ought to do: But Gods secret will is
contrary to this desire of the Son, and the Father dies, will this Gentleman
accuse God, because he concurreth to some effects against his revealed will?
When Adultery is committed and Bastards begotten, it is against the revealed
will of God: But he that shall affirm that God has no will, nor power, nor
part in genegation, shall take away part of his power, and give it to some
other thing, and so make more Gods. The people and principal of Israel
conspired to put Christ to death; this was an unlawful action: Now he that
shall say, that the hand and Counsel of God did not concur in this action,
shall deny the plain Scripture. Act. 4. 27. Herod and Pontius Pilate, with
the Gentiles and people of Israel gathered themselves together to do
whatsoever thy hand and counsel had determined before to be done. Neither
does it follow hereby, that God does advance the credit of an unlawful
practice, to the derogation of his glory: for God orders all things in
nature, himself being pure from sin; and punishes all sinners, punishing
both Adulterers and Astrologers: But when (I say) that God orders all things
in nature, this does not teach Astrologicall Predictions, which are out of the
compass of nature.

No better is that Theology which he utters Page 480. There is no place in
Scripture in which blasphemy is named, but does describe it to be a verbal
injury uttered in detestation of God. Whence he seeks to prove, that except
it be evil speaking of God himself, it is no blasphemy. His knowledge and
sense in these things, whereof he is bold to speak, is rather to be pitied,
then refuted. I tell you Sir, that you do nothing throughout your Book but
blaspheme, when you speak evil of M. Chambers; though then your intent is not
to offer a verbal injury to God. Yet when you speak evil of such, as for
conscience, maintain Gods truth, and therefore speak evil of them, because
they maintain the truth, then you blaspheme. This is true; and if you repent
not of this sin, you will find it to be true another day: But therefore we
labor to do this service, both to the Truth and you; that when the knowledge
of your sin is brought to your sight, you may the sooner find the way to
repentance. Now, that blasphemy is not as you say, only a verbal injury
uttered in detestation of God, and so taken in every Scripture where it is
named; but that it is also against the truth of God, and against the Saints
that maintain the truth; may appear out of these places and many more. Act.
14. 45. When the Jews saw the people, they were full of envy, and spoke
against those things that were spoken of Paul (...), that is, contradicting and
blaspheming. Act. 18. 6. When they resisted and blasphemed, he shook his
raiment. S. Paul speaking of himself, and other his fellow Apostles, says,
Romans 3. 8. We are blasphemed, And 1. Cor. 4. 13. Being blasphemed, we pray. And
1. Cor. 10. 30. For if I through Gods benefit be partaker, why am I blasphemed
for that, wherefore I give thanks. To omit many places: they are also said to
blaspheme, who dissemble in hypocrisy, making show of an holy Profession,
themselves being unholy. Apoc. 2^9. I know the blasphemy of them, which say
they are Jews and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan. Which place^ I
note the rather, because the Knight out of his wor^ed confidence, does boldly
give it out, that there is not one place of Scripture, where blasphemy is
named; but it does describe it to be a verbal injury uttered in detesta tion of
God. If the places of Scripture were numbered, there will be more found against
this, then for it. But his advantage is, he is no professed Divine, and
therefore may err in these points, and we must pardon the imperfections of a
Knight in Divinity. Which kind of pleading, as I would never deny to a man
that did descry a sound mind, or were compelled to write; so if our Knight
look for the same favor; we may justly answer him, as Cato answered A.
Posthumous Albinus, who being Cos. wrote some Roman Stories in Greek,
desiring all men to bear with his imperfections: Because, quoth he, I am a
Roman, and therefore of me the exact knowledge of the Greek tongue is not to
be required. But Cato told him that this was but trifling, to entreat pardon,
when he might have been without fault. For who compelled him to do that for
which he thought fit to crave pardon; so may we say to the Knight, by silence
he might have been blameless: By writing so unskillfully of unknown tihngs,
upon hope of pardon; because his place requires not such exact skill in
Divinity, and of by upholding a corrupt cause, he has shut himself from the
benefit of that favor, which otherwise he might look for. And if ignorance
be to be excused in a Christian Knight, I should rather excuse ignorance in
Astrology, then in Divinity.

But must we pardon this also which follows? Where M. Chambers had found
fault with one, for ascribing so much to numbers t^t thereby he thought to
attain^ (...) mystery of hi^ ^tion, and to have his name registered in the (...)
God. The Knight defending that irreligious speech, writes thus; Page ^19. It
(...) to him that is not blind by malice, ^at he intends nothing in that
Hyperbolicall and excessive speech; but such a sequestration of our thoughts
from all material things, as thereby we may the more freely contemplate the
mystery of the Trinity in Unity; until through our whole conversion to the
same, we come to be registered in the number of those that are sealed to
salvation. Thus far the Knight. If any man contradict this Gentleman, he is
presently charged to be blinded with malice: And yet, M. Chambers did not
intend to contradict him, but opened an irreligious speech of another. But the
Knight will take the defense of all upon him. It were to be wished, that he
would deal more advisedly, and not take upon him the defense of every foolish
Astrologer. We hope upon better advice, he will think least malice in such
as deal most plainly with him. And truly, if we should suffer such profane
speeches to pass without reprehension, it were enough to spill him. We
reprove that profane speech: your Defense makes the speech no better, but your
self worse, then we took you. For you tell us, that by that Hyperbolicall
and excessive speech, he intends nothing, but such a sequestration of our
thoughts from all material things, as thereby we may more freely contemplate
the mystery of the Trinity in Unity; until through our whole conversion to the
same, we come to be registered and sealed to salvation. Some of your
Astrologers have told us, of great power of some names of God abused, and of
some words spoken without understanding. They tell us also, of the Language
that the Angels use among them selves; these be things which we understand
no^ therein they may go further then we poor souls can reach them. But when
they tell us, how by numbers we may be sealed to salvation; this thing is
such, wherein we may judge of their understanding. For in these things we have
the rule of the Scripture: And if an Astrologer from the Stars, or an Angel
from Heaven, preach unto us any other thing concerning our sealing to
salvation, then that is delivered in the Gospel, we are warned to hold him
Anathema. You say, we may know our names registered in Heaven, and sealed to
salvation by numbers, or by sequestration of our thoughts from all materials.
Consider the evil savor of this extrauagant speech. 1. This which you say, is
no Doctrine of faith; not contained in the Scriptures, and therefore it
contains not our sealing to Salvation; because all things necessary to our
Salvation, are, as S. Augustine truly says: Aperte in Scripturis posita. 2. We
say this sequestration of our thoughts from Materials, is neither Divinity,
nor true Philosophy; for what do you mean by it? If you mean Mathematical
abstractions which consider magnitude and number, without matter; then is it
impious in Divinity, to say, that such a sequestration can bring to us any
Mystery of Salvation: And absurd amongst Philosophers, who put not man's
felicity in that. If you mean any other thing, then you depart from your
friends purpose, who speaks of Mathematical numbers. 3. Where you say, we
may thereby contemplate the Mystery, etc. You err in setting the knowledge of
a believer in Contemplation; For our knowledge is in the heart, working in
love, and not in the brain an idle contemplation. 4. Where you say, by this we
may contemplate the Trinity in Unity: this is blasphemy to say or to think,
that the knowledge of this holy Mystery, can be apprehended by numbers, or by
such means as you describe. 5. It is against Divinity, admitting it were
spoken in good words; for a man is not taught to know his salvation by looking
upon the Mystery of the Trinity; but by looking into the Mystery of Christ his
Incarnation, and Passion, wherein he finds redemption; for herein he may
find himself; in the Mystery of the Trinity no man can see or find himself.
6. Where you by our conversion to the Mystery, etc. these be idle words, not
understood by him that uttered them. For, true it is, by our Conversion to God,
we come to know our selves to be Gods children; but this conversion to the
Mystery is unknown in Divinity. 7. Our conversion to God, is not either by
contemplation of numbers, or by abstraction of our thoughts from Materials,
but by says and repentance. 8. Where you say, by our conversion to the same,
we come to be registered in the Book of Life; understanding it the best way,
it contains false Doctrine: For our conversion is not a cause of registring
our names in Gods Book; but the contrary is true: We are not registered by our
Conversion; but we are converted because we were registered. It depends not
upon our Conversion; but our Conversion depends upon it. 9. Where you say,
we come to be registered; as if something that we do may cause or procure
this registring, it is false Divinity; for that depends not upon any thing
which we do. 10. Where you say, registered in the number of those that are
sealed: this is a confounding of registring and sealing, which are things
distinct. For, we are registered or Predestined not by faith, but unto faith;
we are sealed by faith after our effectual calling: as the Apostle teaches,
Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom after that you believed you were sealed with that holy
Spirit of promise. 11. The manner of your speech does breath out Pelagianisme:
For you say, we may by sequestration of our thoughts come to be registered,
etc. Do you not attribute this power to Man, that by the use of his natural
faculties, he may purchase this registring as you call it? For by natural
means, we may contemplate numbers, by natural means, we may sequester our
thoughts from all things material. If by this means we may come to be
registered, as you say, in the number of those that are sealed to Salvation: may
we not then by natural means obtain that grace? And do you know Sir, how to
distinguish this Doctrine from the Doctrine of Pelagius? 12. Last of all, you
ruune into that damned error, which Pigghius with some other few of late, raked
up out of Hell: That men may predestinate themselves when they please. For when
you say, Men may by sequestration of their thoughts from Materialles come to
be Registered in Gods Book: If you mean that which the Scripture calls the
Book of Life, that is nothing else but Gods eternal purpose of
Predestination, then you tell us, That men may by your device Predestinate
themselves.

Howsoever it is, you have played the part of a bad Interpreter, whilst you
desirous to expound another man's words, fall into so many Errors, Ignorances,
Absurdities, Impieties, Blasphemies, in the compass of so few Words.

This may teach you (if you be Wise) not to play the wanton with holy
Scriptures: not to speak of God, and his holy Mysteries with a profane heart:
For I must be plain with you; if your heart were Sanctified, you would not
speak in this sort. Give your heart to God, and all this will be mended.
Before that time, meddle with these Mysteries. For our God is a consuming Fire,
and will be Sanctified in them that come near him.

I will cease to trouble the Knight any further, exhorting him to abandon that
blind Study, which has no place in Nature, but only in the superstitious
conceits of men; and so judged as well by Heathen Philosophers, as by the
learned of the Church. Before we part, I commend unto him the reading of
Cicero, that if he hear not us, he may be reproved out of the mouth of an
Heathen man. Nam vt vere loquamur, superstitio fusa per gentes, oppressit
omnium fere animos, atque hominum imbecillitatem occupauit: Lib. 2. de divine
Quod et ijs libris dictum est, qui sunt de Natura Deorum, and hac disputatione
id maxim egimus. Multum enim and nobis ipsis and nostris profuturi videbamur,
fi eam funditus sustulissemus. Nec vero (id enim diligenter intelligi volo)
superstitione tollenda Religio tollitur. Nam and maiorum instituta tueri sacris
ceremonijs retinendis, sapientis est: et esse praestantem aliquam aeternamque
Naturam, and eam suscipiendam admirandamque hominum generi, pulchritudo mundi,
ordoque rerum coelestium cogit confiteri. Quamobrem vt Religio propaganda etiam
est, quae est iuncta cum cognitione naturae: sic superstitionis stirpes omnes
eijciendaesunt: Instat enim and vrget, and quocunque te verteris persequitur.
Sieve tu vatem, sieve tu omen au^ris, sieve immolaris, sieve auem aspexeris, si
Chaldaeum, si Aruspicem videris, si fulserit, si tonitruit, si factum aliquid
erit de Coelo, si ostenti simile natum, factumue quippiam: quorum necesse est
plerumque aliquid eueniat: vt nunquam liceat quieta mente consistere. Out of
which Testimony, from the mouth of a Natural man, it may please the Christian
Knight to consider, that the Natural man espied thus much in Predictions, that
they who yielded to them, were in their weakness oppressed with this strong
superstition, as they were also with other of the like sort. All which have no
place in Nature, nor in Religion, that as a pernicious conceit, it is with
diligence to be rooted out of men's hearts; that wheresoere this superstition
is once recoyued, men are driven, and as it were, haunted with Furies, that
they can have no quiet rest. This man shall rise a Witness against all such
Astrologers, as now in the light of the Word, follow that Study, so famously
convinced by the Light of Nature.

To conclude therefore, we have heard the Principles of Astrologers examined:
We have found, that they abhor from the knowledge of the Natural man, and
from all good Learning. This has been confirmed by the testimonies of
Philosophers, of Divines, and by the confession of Astrologers themselves. What
then remains, but the sentence of some Noble Judge, that may give judgment,
the cause being opened. But as here we seek not an ordinary judge, so we
have found one, a most Noble, Learned, and Judicious Prince, our gracious
Sovereign, his most excellent Majesty: with whose just Judgment, let this
plea be shut up without Appellation, or any further contradiction. His
judgment is this. As there are two sorts of Folks that may be enticed to
this Art, to wit, Learned or vn-learned: so Damonologie, L. 1. cap. 3.
is there two means, which are the first stirrers up, and Feeders of their
Curiosity, thereby to make them to give themselves over to the same. Which two
means I call the Devils School, and his Rudiments. The Learned have their
Curiosity wakened up, and fed by that which I call his School. This is the
Astrology Iudiciarie: For diverse men having attained to a great perfection in
Learning, and yet remain ouerbare (alas) of the spirit of Regeneration, and
the fruits thereof: finding all natural things common, as well to the stupid
Pedants as unto them, they assay to vindicate unto them a greater name, by not
only knowing the course of things Heavenly, but likewise to climb to the
knowledge of things to come thereby: which at the first face appearing lawful
unto them, in respect the ground thereof seems to proceed of Natural causes
only: they are so allured thereby, that finding their practice to prove true
in sundry things, they study to know the cause thereof. And so mounting from
degree to degree, upon the slippery and uncertain scale of Curiosity, they
are at last enticed, that where lawful Arts or Sciences fayles, to satisfy
their restless minds, even to seek to that black and unlawful Science of
Magic. Where finding at the first, that such diverse forms of Circles, and
Coniurations, rightly joined thereunto, will raise such diverse forms of
spirits, to resolve them their Doubts: and attributing the doing, to the power
inseparably tied, or inherent in the Circles, and many words of GOD,
confusedly wrapped, they blindely glory in themselves, as if they had by their
quickenesse of ingeny, made a conquest of Plutoes Dominion, and were become
Emperors in the Stygian Habitacles. Where, in the mean time (miserable
Wretches) they are become in very deed, Bondslaues to their Mortal Enemy:
And their knowledge, for all that they presume thereof, is nothing increased,
except in knowing evil, and the horrors of Hell for the punishment thereof,
as Adam was, for eating of the forbidden Tree. This judgment is according to
right, and we rest in it.

SANCTVS EST DOMINVS IN OPERIBVS SVIS.

FINIS.

