THE TRAGEDY OF MARIAM, THE FAIR Queen of Iewry.

Written by that learned, virtuous, and truly noble Lady, E. C.

LONDON. Printed by Thomas Creed, for Richard Hawkins, and are to be sold at
his shop in Chancery Lane, near unto Sargeants Inn. 1613.

TO DIANAES EARTHLY DEPVTESSE, and my worthy Sister, Mistress Elizabeth Carye.
WHen cheerful Phoebus his full course has run,
His sisters fainter beams our hearts does cheer:
So your fair Brother is to me the Sun,
And you his Sister as my Moon appear.
You are my next beloved, my second Friend,
For when my Phoebus absence makes it Night,
Whilst to the Antipodes his beams do bend,
From you my Phoebe, shines my second Light.
He like to SOL, cleare-sighted, constant, free,
You LVNA-like, unspotted, chaste, divine:
He shone on Sicily, you destined be,
T'illumine the now obscurde Palestine.
My first was consecrated to Apollo,
My second to DIANA now shall follow.
E. C.
The names of the Speakers.
Herod, King of Judea. Doris, his first Wife. Mariam, his second Wife. Salome,
Herod's Sister. Antipater his son by Salome. Alexandra, Mariams mother.
Sillius, Prince of Arabia. Constabarus, husband to Salome. Phaeroras, Herod's
Brother. Graphina, his Love. B^bus first Son. Babus second Son. Annanell,
the high Priest. Sohemus, a Counsell^r to Herod. Nunti^. Bu. another Messenger.
Chorus, a Company of Jews.
The Argument.
HErod the son of Antipater (an Idumean,) having crept by the favor of the
Romans, into the Jewish Monarchy, married Mariam the daugh^er of Hircanus,
the rightful King and Priest, and for her (besides her high blood, being of
singular beauty) he reputiated Doris, his former Wife, by whom he had
Children.

This Mariam had a Brother called Aristobolus, and next him and Hircanus his
Graund-father, Herod in his Wives right had the best ^^le. Therefore to remove
them, he charged the first with treason: and put him to death; and drowned the
second under color of sport. Alexandra, Daughter to the one, and Mother to the
other, accused him for their deaths before Anthony.

So when he was forc'te to go answer this Accusation at Rome, he left the
custody of his wife to Ios^phus his Uncle, that had married his Sister Sal^me,
and cut of a violent affection (unwilling any should enjoy her after him) he
gave strict and private commandment, that if he were slain, she should be
put to death. But he returned with much honor, yet found his Wife extremely
discontented, to whom Ios^phus had (meaning it for the best, to prove Herod
loved her) revealed his charge.

So by Salomes accusation he put Josephus to death, but was reconciled to
Mariam, who still bare the death of her Friends exceeding hardly.

In this mean time Herod was again necessarily to reuisite Rome, for Caesar
having overthrown Anthony his great friend, was likely to make an alteration
of his Fortune.

In his absence, news came to Jerusalem that Caesar had put him to death,
their willingness it should be so, together with the likelihood, gave this Rumor
so good credi^, as Sohemus that had suceeded Josephus charge, succeeded him
likewise in revealing it. So at Herod's return which was speedy and unexpected,
he found Mariam so far from joy, that she showed apparent signs of sorrow.
He still desiring to win her to a better humor, she being very unable to
conceal her passion, ^ell to vpbraiding him with her Brothers death. As they
were thus debating, came in a fellow with a Cup of Wine, who hired by Salome,
said first, it was a Love potion, which Mariam desired to deliver to the King:
but afterward he affirmed that it was a poison, and that Sohemus had told her
somewhat, which procured the vehement hate in her.

The King hearing this, more moved with Jealousy of Sohemus, then with this
intent of poison, sent her away, and presently after by the instigation of
Salome, she was beheaded. Which rashness was afterward punished in him, with an
intolerable and almost Frantike passion for her death.

Actus primus. Scoena prima.
Mariam sola. HOw often have I with public voice run on?
To censure Romes last Hero for deceit:
Because he wept when Pompeis life was gone,
Yet when he lived, he thought his Name too great^
But now I do recant, and Roman Lord
Excuse too rash a judgment in a woman:
My Sex pleads pardon, pardon then afford,
Mistaking is with us, but too too common.
Now do I find by self Experience taught,
One Object yields both grief and joy:
You wept indeed, when on his worth you thought,
But ioyd that slaughter did your Foe destroy.
So at his death your Eyes true drops did raine^
Whom dead, you did not wish alive again.
When Herod liu^d, that now is done to death,
Often have I wished that I from him were free:
Often have I wished that he might lose his breath,
Often have I wished his Carkas dead to see.
Then Rage and Scorn had put my love to flight,
That Love which once on him was firmly set:
Hate hid his true affection from my sight,
And kept my heart from paying him his debt.
And blame me not, for Herod's Jealousy
Had power even constancy it self to change:
For he by barring me from liberty,
To shun my ranging, taught me first to range.
But yet too chaste a Scholar was my heart,
To learn to love another then my Lord:
To leave his Love, my lessons former part,
I quickly learned, the other I abhord.
But now his death to memory does call,
The tender love, that he to Mariam bare:
And mine to him, this makes those rivers fall,
Which by an other thought vnmoistned are.
For Aristobolus the lowlyest youth
That ever did in Angels shape appear:
The cruel Herod was not moved to ruth,
Then why grieves Mariam Herod's death to hear?
Why joy I not the tongue no more shall speak,
That yielded forth my brothers latest dome:
Both youth and beauty might thy fury break,
And both in him did ill befit a Tomb.
And worthy Grandsire ill did he requite,
His high Assent alone by thee procured,
Except he murdered thee to free the spright
Whi^^ (...) he thought on earth too long immured.
How happy was it that Sohemus mind
Was moved to pity my distressed estate^
Might Herod's life a trusty servant find,
My death to his had been vnseparate.
These thoughts have power, his death to make me bear,
Nay more, to wish the news may firmly hold:
Yet cannot this repulse some falling tear,
That will against my will some grief unfold.
And more I owe him for his love to me,
The deepest love that ever yet was seen:
Yet had I rather much a milke-maide be,
Then be the Monarke of Iudeas Queen.
It was for naught but love, he wished his end
Might to my death, but the vaunt-currier prove:
But I had rather still be foe then friend,
To him that saues for hate, and kills for love.
Hard-hearted Mariam, at thy discontent,
What floods of tears have drencht his manly face?
How can thou then so faintly now lament,
Thy truest lovers death, a deaths disgrace:
I now mine eyes you do begin to right
The wrongs of your admirer^ And my Lord,
Long since you should have put your smiles to flight,
Ill does a widowed eye with joy accord.
Why now me thinks the love I bare him then,
When virgin freedom left me vnrestraind:
Does to my heart begin to creep again,
My passion now is far from being faind.
But tears fly back, and hide you in your bank^s,
You must not be to Alexandra seen:
For if my moan be spide, but little thanks
Shall Mariam have, from that incensed Queen.

Actus primus: Scoena Secunda.
Mariam. Alexandra. Alex: WHat means these tears? my Mariam does mistake,
The news we heard did tell the Tyrants end:
What weepst thou for thy brothers murders sake,
Will ever wight a tear for Herod spend?
My curse pursue his breathles trunk and spirit,
Base Edomite the damned Esaus heir:
Must he ere Jacobs child the crown inherit?
Must he vile wretch be set in David's chair?
No David's soul within the bosom plac'te,
Of our forefather Abram was ashamed:
To see his seat with such a toade disgrac'te,
That seat that has by Judas race been feigned.
Thou fatal enemy to royal blood,
Did not the murder of my boy suffice,
To stop thy cruel mouth that gaping stood?
But must thou dim the mild Hersanus eyes?
My gracious father, whose too ready hand
Did lift this Idumean from the dust:
And he ungrateful catiffe did withstand,
The man that did in him most friendly trust.
What kingdoms right could cruel Herod claim,
Was he not Esaus Issue, heir of hell?
Then what succession can he have but shame?
Did not his Ancestor his birthright sell?
O yes, he does from Edoms name derive,
His cruel nature which with blood is fed:
That made him me of Sire and son deprive,
He ever thirsts for blood, and blood is red.
Weepst thou because his love to thee was bent?
And readst thou love in crimson caracters?
Slew he thy friends to work thy hearts content?
No: hate may Justly call that action hers.
He gave the sacred Priesthood for thy sake,
To Aristobolus. Yet doomde him dead:
Before his back the Ephod warm could make,
And ere the Myter settled on his head.
Oh had he given my boy no less then right,
The double oil should to his forehead bring:
A double honor, shining doubly bright,
His birth anointed him both Priest and King.
And say my father, and my son he ^lewe,
To royalize by right your Prince borne breath:
Was love the cause, can Mariam deem it true,
That Mariam gave commandment for her death?
I know by fits, he showed some signs of love,
And yet not love, but raging lunacie:
And this his hate to thee may justly prove,
That sure he hates Hercanus family.
Who knows if he unconstant wavering Lord,
His love to Doris had renewed again?
And that he might his bed to her afford,
Perchance he wished that Mariam might be slain.

Nun: Doris, Alas her time of love was past,
Those coals were rakte in embers long ago:
If Mariams love and she was now disgrast,
Nor did I glory in her overthrow.
He not a whit his first borne son esteemed,
Because as well as his he was not mine:
My children only for his own he deemed,
These boys that did descend from royal line.
These did he style his heirs to David's throne,
My Alexander if he live, shall sit
In the Maiesticke seat of Salamon,
To will it so, did Herod think it fit.

Alex. Why? who can claim from Alexanders brood
That Gold adorned Lyon-guarded Chair?
Was Alexander not of David's blood?
And was not Mariam Alexanders heir?
What more then right could Herod then bestow,
And who will think except for more then right,
He did not raise them, for they were not low,
But borne to wear the Crown in his despite:
Then send those tears away that are not sent
To thee by reason, but by passions power:
Thine eyes to cheer, thy cheeks to smi^es be bent,
And entertain with joy this happy hour.
Feliciti^, if when she comes, she finds
A mourning habit, and a cheerlesse look,
Will think she is not welcome to thy mind,
And so perchance her lodging will not brook.
Oh keep her whilst thou have her, if she go
She will not easily return again:
Full many a year have I endured in woe,
Yet still have sude her presence to obtain:
And did not I to her as presents send
A Table, that best Art did beautify
Of two, to whom Heaven did best feature lend,
To woe her love by winning Anthony:
For when a Princes favor we do crave,
We fir^^ their Mynions loves do seek to win:
So I, that sought Felicity to have,
Did with her Mynion Anthony begin,
With double slight I sought to captiuate
The warlike lover, but I did not right:
For if my gift had borne but half the rate,
The Roman had been ouer-taken quite.
But now he fared like a hungry guest,
That to some plenteous festival is gone,
Now this, now that, he deems to eat were best,
Such choice does make him let them all alone.
The boys large forehead first did fairest seem
Then glaunst his eye upon my Mariams cheek:
And that without comparison did deem,
What was in either but he most did leeke.
And thus distracted, eythers beauties might
Within the others excellence was drowned:
Too much delight did bare him from delight,
For eithers love, the others did confound.
Where if thy portraiture had only gone,
His life from Herod, Anthony had taken:
He would have loved thee, and thee alone,
And left the brown Egyptian clean forsaken.
And Cleopatra then to seek had been,
So firm a lover of her wayned face:
Then great Anthonius fall we had not seen,
By her that fled to have him hold the chase.
Then Mariam i^ a Romans Chariot set,
In place of Cleopatra might have shown:
A mart of Beauties in her visage met,
And part in this, that they were all her own.

Ma. Not to be Emprise of aspiring Rome,
Would Mariam like to Cleopatra live:
With purest body will I press my Toome,
And wish no favors Anthony could give.

Alex. Let us retire us, that we may resolve
How now to deal in this reuersed state:
Great are the affairs that we must now reuolue,
And great affairs must not be taken late.

Actus primus. Scoena tertia.
Mariam. Alexandra. Salome. Salome. MOre plotting yet? Why? now you have the
thing
For which so often you spent your supliant breath:
And Mariam hopes to have another King,
Her eyes do sparkle joy for Herod's death.

Alex. If she desired another King to have,
She might before she came in Herod's bed
Have had her wish. More Kings then one did crave,
For leave to set a Crown upon her head.
I think with more then reason she laments,
That she is freed from such a sad annoy:
Who is it will weep to part from discontent,
And if she joy, she did not causeless joy.

Sal. You durst not thus have given your tongue the rain,
If noble Herod still remaind in life:
Your daughters betters far I dare maintain,
Might have reioyc'd to be my brothers wife.

Mar. My betters far, base woman it is untrue,
You scarce have ever my superiors seen:
For Mariams servants were as good as you,
Before she came to be Iudeas Queen.

Sal. Now stirs the tongue that is so quickly moved,
But more then once your collor have I borne:
Your fumish words are sooner said then proved,
And Salomes reply is only scorn.

Mar. Scorn those that are for thy companions held,
Though I thy brothers face had never seen,
My birth, thy baser birth so far excelled,
I had to both of you the Princess been.
Thou party Jew, and party Edomite,
Thou Mongrell: issued from rejected race,
Thy Ancestors against the Heavens did fight,
And thou like them wilt heavenly birth disgrace.

Sal. Still twit you me with nothing but my birth,
What ods betwixt your ancesters and mine?
Both borne of Adam, both were made of Earth,
And both did come from holy Abraham's line.

Mar. I favor thee when nothing else I say,
With thy black acts i will not pollute my breath:
Else to thy charge I might full justly lay
A shameful life, besides a husbands death.

Sal. It Is true indeed, I did the plots reveal,
That past betwixt your favorites and you:
I meant not I, a traitor to conceal.
Thus Salome your Mynion Joseph slew.

Mar. Heaven, do thou mean this Infamy to smother?
Let sl^ndred Mariam open thy closed ear:
Self guilt has ever been suspicious mother,
And therefore I this speech with patience bear.
No, had not Salomes unsteadfast heart,
In Josephus stead her Constabarus plast,
To free her self, she had not used the art,
To slander hapless Mariam for unchaste.

Alex. Come Mariam, let us go: it is no boot
To let the head contend against the foot.

Actus primus. Scoena quarta.
Salome, Sola. Lives Salome, to get so base a stil^
As foot, to the proud Mariam Herod's spirit:
In happy time for her endured exile,
For did he live she should not miss her merit:
But he is dead: and though he were my Brother,
His death such store of Cinders cannot cast
My Coals of love to quench: for though they smother
The flames a while, yet will they out at last.
Oh blessed Arabia, in best climate plast,
I by the Fruit will censure of the Tree:
It Is not in vain, thy happy name thou have,
If all Arabians like Silleus be:
Had not my Fate been too too contrary,
When I on Constabarus first did gaze,
Silleus had been object to mine eye:
Whose looks and personage must allies amaze.
But now ill Fated Salome, thy tongue
To Constabarus by it self is tide:
And now except I do the Ebrew wrong
I cannot be the fair Arabian Bride:
What childish lets are these? Why stand I now
On honorable points? It Is long ago
Since shame was written on my tainted brow:
And certain it is, that shame is honors foe.
Had I upon my reputation stood,
Had I affected an unspotted life,
Josephus veins had still been stuffed with blood,
And I to him had lived a sober wife.
Then had I never cast an eye of love,
On Constabarus now detested face,
Then had I kept my thoughts without remou^^
And blushed at motion of the least disgrace:
But shame is gone, and honor wipt away,
And Impudency on my forehead sits:
She bids me work my will without delay,
And for my will I will employ my wits.
He loves, I love; what then can be the cause,
Keeps me for being the Arabians wife?
It is the principles of Moses laws,
For Contabarus still remains in life,
If he to me did bear as Earnest hate,
As I to him, for him there were an ease,
A separating bill might free his fate:
From such a yoke that did so much displease.
Why should such privilege to man be given?
Or given to them, why bard from women then?
Are men then we in greater grace with Heaven?
Or cannot women hate as well as men?
I Will be the custome-breaker: and begin
To show my Sex the way to freedoms door,
And with an offering will I purge my sin,
The law was made for none but wh^ are poor.
If Herod had lived, I might to him accuse
My present Lord. But for the futures sake
Then would I tell the King he did refuse
The sons of Baba in his power to take.
But now I must divorce him from my bed,
That my Silleus may possess his room:
Had I not begd his life he had been dead,
I curse my tongue the hindrer of his doom,
But then my wandering hea^^ to him was fast,
Nor did I dre^me of change: Silleus said,
He would be here, and see he comes at last,
Had I not named him longer had he staid.

Actus primus. Soena quinta.
Salome, Silleus. Silleus. WEll ^ound fair Salome Iudaeas pride,
Has thy inn^ted wisdom found the way
To make Silleus deem him deified,
By gaining thee a more then precious pray?

Salo. I have deuisde the best I can devise,
A more imperfect means was never found:
But what cares Salome, it does suffice
If our endeavors with their end be crowned.
In this our land we have an ancient use,
Permitted first by our law-giuers head:
Who hates his wife, though for no just abuse,
May with a bill diuor^^ her from his bed.
But in this custom women are not free,
Yet I for once will wrest it, blame not thou
The ill I do, since what I do'es for thee,
Though others blame, Silleus should allow.

Solleus. Thinks Salome, Silleus has a tongue
To censure her fair action^: let my blood
Bedash my proper brow, for such a wrong,
The being yours, can make even vices good:
Arabia joy, prepare thy earth with green,
Thou never happy were indeed till now:
Now shall thy ground be trod by beauties Queen,
Her foot is destined to depresse thy brow.
Thou shall fair Salome comm^und as much
As i^ the royal ornament were thine:
The weakness of Ara^ias King is such,
The kingdom is not his so much as mine.
My mouth is our Obodas oracle,
Who thinks not ought but what Sill^us will?
And thou rare creature. Asias miracle,
Shall be to me as It: Obo^^as still.

Salome. It Is not for glory I thy love accept,
Judea yields me honors worthy store:
Had not affection in my bosom crept,
My native count^y should my life ^^plore.
Were not Silleus n^ with home I go,
I would not change my Palastine for Rome:
Much less would I a glorious state to show,
Go far to purc^ase an Arabian roome^

Silleus. Far be it from Silleus so to think,
I know it is thy gratitude requites
The love that is in me, and shall not shrink
Till death do sever me from earths delights.

Salom. But whist; me thinks the wolf is in our talk,
Be gone Silleus, who does here arrive?
It Is Constabarus that does hither walk,
I Will find a quarrel, him from me to drive.

Sille. Farewell, but were it not for thy command,
In his despite Silleus here would stand.

Actus primus: Soena Sexta.
Salome: Constabarus. Constable: OH Salome, how much you wrong your name,
Your race, your country, and your husband most?
A strangers private conference is shame,
I blush for you, that have your blushing lost.
Often have I found, and found you to my grief,
Consorted with this base Arabian here:
Heaven knows that you have bin my comfort chief,
Then do not now my greater plague appear.
Now by the stately Carved edifice
That on Mount Sion makes so fair a show,
And by the Altar fit for sacrifice,
I love thee more then thou thy self do know.
Often with a silent sorrow have I heard
How ill Iudeas mouth does censure thee:
And did I not thine honor much regard,
Thou should not be exhorted thus for me.
Did thou but know the worth of honest fame,
How much a virtuous woman is esteemed,
Thou would like hell eschew deserved shame,
And seek to be both chaste and chastely deemed.
Our wisest Prince did say, and true he said,
A virtuous woman crowns her husbands head.

Salome. Did I for this, vpreare thy low es^ate?
Did I for this requital beg thy life,
That thou had forfeited haples fate?
To be to such a thankle^ wretch the wife.
This hand of mine has lifted up thy head,
Which many a day ago had fallen full low,
Because the sons of Baba are not dead,
To me thou do both life and fortune owe.

Constable. You have my patience often exercisde,
Use make my choler keep within the banks:
Yet boast no more, but be by me aduisde.
A benefit vpbraided, forfeits thanks:
I prethy Salome dismiss this mood,
Thou do not know how ill it fits thy place:
My words were all intended for thy good,
To raise thine honor and to stop disgrace.

Sa. To stop disgrace? take thou no care for me,
Nay do thy worst, thy worst I set not by:
No shame of mine is like to light on thee,
Thy love and admonitions I defy.
Thou shall no hour longer call me wife,
Thy Jealousy procures my hate so deep:
That I from thee do mean to free my life,
By a diuorcing bill before I sleep.

Constable. Are Hebrew women now tra^sform'd to men?
Why do you not as well our battles fight,
And wear our armor? suffer this, and then
Let all the world be topsie turued quite.
Let fishes graze, beasts, swine, and birds descend,
Let fire burn downew^rd^ whilst the earth aspires:
Let Winters heat and Summers cold offend,
Let Thistels grow on Vines, and Grapes on Briers,
Set us to Spinne or Sow, or at the best
Make us Wood-hewers, Waters-bearing wights:
For sacred service let us take no rest,
Use us as Joshua did the Gibonites.

Salom. Hold on your talk, till it be time to end,
For me I am resolved it shall be so:
Though I be first that to this course do bend,
I shall not be the last full well I know.

Constable. Why then be witness Heaven, the Judge of sins,
Be witness Spirits that eschew the dark:
Be witness Angels, witness Cherubins,
Whose semblance sits upon the holy Arc:
Be witness earth, be witness Palestine,
Be witness David's City, if my heart
Did ever merit such an act of thine:
Or if the fault be mine that makes us part,
Since mildest Moses friend unto the Lord,
Did work his wonders in the land of Ham,
And slew the firstborn Babes without a sword,
In sign whereof we eat the holy Lamb:
Till now that fourteen hundred years are past,
Since first the Law with us has been in force:
You are the first, and will I hope, be last,
That ever sought her husband to divorce.

Salom. I mean not to be led by president,
My will shall be to me in stead of Law.

Constable. I fear me much you will too late repent,
That you have ever lived so void of awe:
This is Silleus love that makes you thus
Reuerse all order: you must next be his.
But if my thoughts aright the cause discuss,
In winning you, he gains no lasting bliss,
I was Silleus and not long ago
Josephus then was Constabarus now:
When you became my friend you proved his foe,
As now for him you break to me your vowed.

Sal. If once I loved you, greater is your debt:
For certain it is that you deserved it not.
And undeserved love we soon forget,
And therefore that to me can be no blot.
But now fare ill my once beloved Lord,
Yet never more beloved then now abhord.

Constable. Yet Constabarus bidde^h thee farewell.
Farewell light creature. Heaven forgive thy sin:
My prophesying spirit does foretell
Thy wavering thoughts do yet but new begin.
Yet I have better escaped then Joseph did,
But if our Herod's death had been delayed,
The valiant youths that I so long have hid,
Had been by her, and I for them betrayed.
Therefore in happy hour did Caesar give
The fatal blow to wanton Anthony.
For had he lived, our Herod then should live,
But great Anthonius death made Herod dye.
Had he enjoyed his breath, not I alone
Had been in danger of a deadly fall:
But Mariam had the way of peril gone,
Though by the Tyrant most beloved of all.
The sweet faced Mariam as free from guilt
As Heaven from spots, yet had her Lord come back
Her purest blood had been unjustly spilt.
And Salome it was would work her wrack.
Though all Judea yield her innocent,
She often has been near to punishment.

Chorus. THose minds that wholly dote upon delight,
Except they only joy in inward good:
Still hope at last to hop upon the right,
And so from Sand they leap in loathsome mud.
Fond wretches, seeking what they cannot find,
For no content attends a wavering mind.
If wealth they do desire, and wealth attain,
Then wondrou^ feign would they to honor lep:
Of mean degree they do in honor gain,
They would but wish a little higher step.
Thus step to step, and wealth to wealth they ad,
Yet cannot all their plenty make them glad.
Yet often we see that some in humble state,
Are chreefull, pleasant, happy, and content:
When those indeed that are of higher state,
With vain additions do their thoughts torment.
The One would to his mind his fortune bind,
T'hother to his fortune frames his mind.
To wi^h variety is sign of grief,
For if you like your state as now it is,
Why should an alteration bring relief?
Nay change would then be feared as loss of blis.
That man is only happy in his Fate,
That is delighted in a settled state.
Still Mariam wished she from her Lord were free,
For expectation of variety:
Yet now she ^ees her wishes prosperous be,
She grieves, because her Lord so soon did die.
Who can those vast imaginations feed,
Where in a property, contempt does breed?
Were Herod now perchance to live again,
She would ^gaine as much be grieved at that:
All that she may, she ever does disdain,
Her wishes guide her to she knows not what.
And sad must be their looks, their honor sower,
That care for nothing being in their power.

Actus secundus. Scoena prima.
Pheroras and Graphina. Pher. It Is true Graphin^, now the time draws nigh
Wherein the holy Priest with hallowed right,
The happy long desired knot shall tie,
Pheroras and Graphina to unite:
How often have I with lifted hands implored
This blessed hour, till now implord in vain,
Which has my wished liberty restored,
And made my subject self my own again.
Thy love fair Maid upon mine eye does sit,
Whose nature hot does dry the moisture all,
Which were in nature, and in reason fit
For my monachall Brothers death to fall:
Had Herod lived, he would have plucked my hand
From fair Graphinas Palm perforce: and tide
The same in hateful and despised band,
For I had had a Baby to my Bride:
Scarce can her Infant tongue with easy voice
Her name distinguish to another ear:
Yet had he lived, his power, and not my choice
Had made me solembly the contract swear.
Have I not cause in such a change to joy?
What? though she be my Niece, a Princess borne:
Near bloods without respect: high birth a toy.
Since Love can teach blood and kindreds scorn.
What booted it that he did raise my head,
To be his Realms Copartner, Kingdoms mate,
Withal, he kept Graphina from my bed,
More wished by me then thrice Iudeas state.
Oh, could not he be skillful Judge in love,
That doted so upon his Mariams face?
He, for his passion, Doris did remove.
I needed not a lawful Wife displace,
It could not be but he had power to judge,
But he that never grudged a Kingdoms share,
This well known happiness to me did grudge:
And meant to be therein without compare.
Else had I been his equal in loves host,
For though the Diadem on Mariams head
Corrupt the vulgar judgments, I will boast
Graphina: brow's as white, her cheeks as red.
Why speaks thou not fair creature? move thy tongue,
For Silence is a sign of discontent:
It were to both our loves too great a wrong
If now this hour do find thee sadly bent.

Graph. Mistake me not my Lord, too often have I
Desired this time to come with winged feet,
To be inwrapt with grief when it is too nie,
You know my wishes ever yours did meet:
If I be silent, it is no more but fear
That I should say too little when I speak:
But since you will my imperfections bear,
In spite of doubt I will my silence break:
Yet might amazement tie my moving tongue,
But that I know before Pheroras mind,
I have admired your affection long:
And cannot yet therein a reason find.
Your hand has li^ted me from lowest state,
To highest eminency wondrous grace,
And me your handmaid have you made your mate,
Though all but you alone do count me base.
You have preserved me pure at my request,
Though you so weak a vassaile might constrain
To yield to your high will, then last not best
In my respect a Princess you disdain,
Then need not all these favors study crave,
To be requited by a simple maid:
And study still you know must silence have,
Then be my cause for silence justly waide,
But study cannot boot nor I requite,
Except your lowly hand-maides steadfast love
And fast obedience may your mind delight,
I will not promise more then I can prove.

Phero. That study needs not let Graphina smile,
And I desire no greater recompense:
I cannot vaunt me in a glorious style,
Nor show my love in far-fetcht eloquence:
But this believe me, never Herod's heart
Has held his Prince-borne beauty famed wife
In nearer place then thou fair virgin art,
To him that holds the glory of his life.
Should Herod's body leave the Sepulcher,
And entertain the seuer'd ghost again:
He should not be my nuptial hinderer,
Except he hindered it with dying pain.
Come fair Graphina, let us go in state,
This wish-indeered time to celebrate.

Actus 2. Soena. 2.
Constabarus and Babus Sons. Babus. 1. Son. NOw valiant friend you have our
lives redeemed,
Which lives as saved by you, to you are due:
Command and you shall see your self esteemed,
Our lives and liberties belong to you.
This twice six years with hazard of your life,
You have concealed us from the tyrants sword:
Though cruel Herod's sister were your wife,
You durst in scorn of fear this grace afford.
In recompense we know not what to say,
A poor reward were thanks for such a merit,
Our truest friendship at your feet we lay,
The best requital to a noble spirit.

Constable. Oh how you wrong our friendship valiant youth,
With friends there is not such a word as det:
Where amity is tide with bond of truth,
All benefits are there in common set.
Then is the golden age with them renewed,
All names of properties are banished quite:
Division, and distinction, are eschew'd:
Each has to what belongs to others right.
And it is not sure so full a benefit,
Freely to give, as freely to require:
A bountious act has glory following it,
They cause the glory that the act desire.
All friendship should the pattern imitate,
Of Iesses Son and valiant Ionathans
For neither Sovereigns nor fathers hate,
A friendship f^xt on virtue sever can.
Too much of this, it is written in the heart,
And need no amplifying with the tongue:
Now may you from your living tomb depart,
Where Herod's life has kept you over long.
Too great an injury to a noble mind,
To be quick buried, you had purchased fame,
Some years a go, but that you were confinde.
While thousand meaner did advance their name.
Your best of life the prime of all your years,
Your time of action is from you bereft.
Twelve winters have you operpast in fears:
Yet if you use it well, enough is left.
And who can doubt but you will use it well?
The sons of Babus have it by descent:
In all their thoughts each action to excel,
Boldly to act, and wisely to invent.

Babus 2. Son. Had it not like the hateful cuckoe been,
Whose riper age his infant nurse does kill:
So long we had not kept our selves unseen,
But Constabarus safely crossed our will:
For had the Tyrant fixed his cruel eye,
On our concealed faces wrath had swaide
His Justice so, that he had forced us die.
And dearer price then life we should have paid,
For you our truest friend had fallen with us:
And we much like a house on pillars set,
Had clean deprest our prop, and therefore thus
Our ready will with our concealment met.
But now that you fair Lord are daungerlesse,
The Sons of Baba shall their rigor show:
And prove it was not baseness did oppress
Our hearts so long, but honor kept them low.

Ba. 1. Son. Yet do I fear this tale of Herod's death,
At last will prove a very tale indeed:
It gives me strongly in my mind, his breath
Will be preserved to make a number bleed:
I wish not therefore to be set at large,
Yet peril to my self I do not leare:
Let us for some days longer be your charge,
Till we of Herod's state the truth do hear.

Constable. What art thou turned a coward noble youth,
That thou beginst to doubt, undoubted truth?

Babus. 1. Son. Were it my brothers tongue that cast this doubt,
I from his heart would have the question out:
With this keen fauchion, but it is you my Lord
Against whose head I must not lift a sword:
I am so tide in gratitude Constable. believe
You have no cause to take it ill,
If any word of mine your heart did grieve
The word discented from the speakers will,
I know it was not fear the doubt begun,
But rather valor and your care of me,
A coward could not be your fathers son,
Yet know I doubts unnecessary be:
For who can think that in Anthonius fall,
Herod his bosom friend should escape vnbrusde:
Then Caesar we might thee an idiot call,
If thou by him should be so far abusde.

Babus. 2. Son. Lord Constab: let me tell you this,
Upon submission Caesar will forgive:
And therefore though the tyrant did amiss,
It may fall out that he will let him live.
Not many years agone it is since I
Directed thither by my fathers care,
In famous Rome for twice twelve months did live,
My life from Hebrews cruelty to spare,
There though I were but yet of boyish age,
I bent mine eye to mark, mine ears to hear.
Where I did see Octauious then a page,
When first he did to Iulions sight appear:
Me thought I saw such mildnes in his face,
And such a sweetness in his looks did grow,
Withal, commixt with so maie^ticke grace,
His Phi^mony his Fortune did for^show:
For this I am indebted to mine eye,
But then mine ear received more evidence,
By that I knew his love to clemency,
How he with hot^est choler could dispense.

Constable. But we have more then barely heard the news,
It ha^^ bin twice confirmed. And though some tongue
Might be so fal^e, with fal^e report t'abu^e,
A fal^e report has never la^^ed long.
But be it so that Herod have his life,
Concealment would not then a whit avail:
For certain it is, that she that was my wife,
Would not to set her accusation fail.
And therefore now as good the venture give,
And free our selves from blot of cowardice:
As show a pitiful desire to live,
For, who can pity but they must despise?

Babus first son. I yield, but to necessity I yield,
I dare upon this doubt engage mine arm:
That Herod shall again this kingdom weeld,
And prove his death to be a false alarm.

Babus second son. I doubt it too: God grant it be an error,
It Is best without a cause to be in terror:
And rather had I, though my soul be mine,
My soul should lie, then prove a true divine.

Constable. Come, come, let fear go seek a dastards nest,
Undaunted courage lies in a noble breast.

Actus 2. Scoena 3.
Doris and Antipater. Dor. YOur royal buildings bow your lofty side,
And scope to her that is by right your Queen:
Let your humility vpbraid the pride
Of those in whom no due respect is seen:
Nine times have we with Trumpets haughty sound,
And banishing sow'r Lea^en from our taste:
Observed the feast that takes the fruit from ground.
Since I fair City did behold thee last,
So long it is since Mariams purer cheek
Did rob from mine the glory. And so long
Since I returned my native Town to seek:
And with me nothing but the sense of wrong.
And thee my Boy, whose birth though great it were,
Yet have thy after fortunes proved but poor:
When thou were borne how little did I fear
Thou should be thrust from forth thy Fathers door.
Art thou not Herod's right begotten Son?
Was not the haples D^ris, H^rods wife?
Yes: ere he had the Hebrew kingdom won,
I was companion to his private life.
Was I not fair enough to be a Queen?
Why ere thou were to me false Monarch tide,
My lake of beauty might as well be seen,
As after I had lived five years thy Bride.
Yet then thine oath came pouring like the rain,
Which all affirmed my face without compare:
And that if thou might Doris love obtain,
For all the world besides thou did not care.
Then was I young, and rich, and nobly borne,
And therefore worthy to be Herod's mate:
Yet thou ungrateful cast me off with scorn,
When Heavens purpose raisd your meaner fate.
Often have I begd for vengeance for this fact,
And with dejected knees, aspiring hands
Have prayed the highest power to inact
The fall of her that on my Trophee stand^.
Revenge I have according to my will,
Yet where I wished this vengeance did not light:
I wished it should high-he^rted Mariam kill.
But it against my whilome Lord did fight
With thee sweet Boy I came, and came to try
If thou before his bastards might be placed
In Herod's royal seat and dignity.
But Mariams infants here are only graced,
And now for us there does no hope remain:
Yet we will not return till Herod's end
Be more confirmd, perchance he is not slain.
So glorious Fortunes may my Boy attend,
For if he live, he will think it does suffice,
That he to Doris shows such cruelty:
For as he did my wretched li^e despise,
So do I know I shall despised die.
Let him but prove as natural to thee,
As cruel to thy miserable mother:
His cruelty shall not vpbraided be
But in thy fortunes. I his faults will smother.

Antipat. Each mouth within the City loudly cries
That Herod's death is certain: therefore we
Had best some subtle hidden plot devise,
That Mariams children might subverted ^ee,
By poisons drink, or else by murtherous Knife,
So we may be advanced, it skils not how:
They are but Bastards, you were Her^ds wife,
And foul adultery blotteth Mariams brow.

Doris. They are too strong to be by us removed,
Or else reuenges foulest spotted face:
By our detested wrongs might be approved,
But weakness must to greater power give place.
But let us now retire to grieve alone,
For solitarines best fitteth moan.

Actus secundus. Scoena 4.
Silleus and Constabarus. Silleus. WEll met Iudean Lord, the only wight
Silleus wished to see. I am to call
Thy tongue to strict account.

Constable. For what despite
I ready am to hear, and answer all.
But if directly at the cause I guess
That breeds this challenge, you must pardon me:
And now some other ground of fight profess,
For I have vowed, vows must unbroken be.

Sill. What may be your expectation? let me know.

Constable. Why? ought concerning Salom, my sword
Shall not be welded for a cause so low,
A blow for her my arm will scorn t'afford.

Sill. It is for slandering her unspotted name,
And I will make thee in thy vows despite,
Suck up the breath that did my Mistress blame,
And swallow it again to do her right.

Constable. I prithee give some other quarrel ground
To find beginning, rail against my name:
Or strike me first, or let some scarlet wound
Inflame my courage, give me words of shame,
Do thou our Moses sacred Laws disgrace,
Deprave our nation, do me some despite:
I Am apt enough to fight in any case,
But yet for Salome I will not fight.

Sill. Nor I for ough^ but Salome: My sword
That owes his service to her sacred name:
Will not an edge for other cause afford,
In other fight I am not sure of fame.

Constable. For her, I pity thee enough already,
For her, I therefore will not mangle thee:
A woman with a heart so most unsteady,
Will of her self sufficient torture be.
I cannot envy for so light a gain,
Her mind with such inconstancy does run:
As with a word thou did her love obtain,
So with a word she will from thee be won.
So light as her possessions for most day
Is her affections lost, to me it is known:
As good go hold the wind as make her stay,
She never loves, but till she call her own.
She merely is a painted sepulcher,
That is both fair, and vilely foul at once:
Though on her outside graces garnish her,
Her mind is filled with worse then rotten bones.
And ever ready lifted is her hand,
To aim destruction at a husbands throat:
For proofs, Josephus and my self do stand,
Though once on both of us, she seemed to do at.
Her mouth though serpent-like it never hisses,
Yet like a Serpent, poisons where it kisses.

Silleus. Well Hebrew well, thou bark'st, but wilt not bite.

Constable. I tell thee still for her I will not fight.

Sille: Why then I call thee coward.

Constable: From my heart
I give thee thanks. A cowards hateful name,
Cannot to valiant minds a blot impart,
And therefore I with joy receive the same.
Thou know I am no coward: thou were by
At the Arabian battle the other day:
And saw my sword with daring valiancy,
Amongst the faint Arabians cut my way.
The blood of foes no more could let it shine,
And it was inameled with some of thine.
But now have at thee, not for Salome
I fight: but to discharge a cowards style:
Here gins the fight that shall not parted be,
Before a soul or two endure exile.

Silleus. Thy sword has made some windows for my blood,
To show a horred crimson phisnomie:
To breath for both of us me thinks twere good,
The day will give us time enough to die.

Constable: With all my heart take breath, thou sh^lt have time,
And if thou list a twelve month, let us end:
Into thy cheeks there does a palenes clime,
Thou can not from my sword thy self defend.
What need thou for Salome to ^^ght,
Thou have her, and may keep her, none strives for her:
I willingly to thee resign my right,
For in my very soul I do abhor her.
Thou see that I am fresh, unwounded yet,
Then not for fe^re I do thi^ offer make:
Thou art with loss of blood, to fight unfit,
For here is one, and there another take.

Silleus. I will not leave as long as breath remains
Within my wounded body: spare your word^,
My heart in bloods stead, courage entertaines,
Salomes love no place for fear afford^.

Constable: Oh could thy soul but prophecy like mine,
I would not wonder thou should long to die:
For Salome if I aright divine
Will be then death a greater misery.

Sille^ Then list, I Will breath no longer.

Constable: Do thy will,
I hateles fight, and charitably kill. I, I, they fight,
Pity thy self Silleu^, let not death
Intru'd before his time into thy heart:
Alas it is too late to fear, his breath
Is from his body now about to part.
How far'st thou brave Arabian? Silleus very well,
My leg is hurt, I can no longer fight:
It only grieves me, that so soon I fell,
Before fair Salo^s wrong^ I came to right.

Constable: Thy wounds are less then mortal. Never fear,
Thou shall a safe and quick recovery find:
Come, I will thee unto my lodging bear,
I hate thy body, but I love thy mind.

Sille^s. Thanke^ noble Jew, I see a courtiou^ foe,
Stern enmity to friendship can no art:
Had not my heart and tongue engagde me so,
I would from thee no foe, but friend depart.
My heart to Salome i^ tide so fast,
To leave her love for friendship, yet my skill
Shall be employed to make you favor last,
And I will honor Constabarus still.

Constable: I open my bosom to thee, and will take
Thee in, (...) friend, and grieve for thy complaint:
But if we do not expedition make,
Thy loss of blood I fear will make thee faint.

Chorus. TO hear a tale with ears preiudicate,
It spoils the judgment, and corrupts the sense:
That humane error given to every state,
Is greater enemy to innocence.
It makes us foolish, heddy, rash, unjust,
It makes us never try before we trust.
It will confound the meaning change the words,
For it our sense of hearing much deceiues:
Besides no time to Judgment it affords,
To way the circumstance our ear receiue^.
The ground of accidents it never tries,
But makes us take for truth ten thousand lies.
Our ears and hearts are apt to hold for good,
That we our selves do most desire to be:
And then we drown objections in the flood
Of partiality, it is that we see
That makes false rumors long with credit p^st,
Though they like rumors must conclude at l^st.
The greatest part of us preiudicate,
With wishing Herod's death do hold it true:
The being once deluded does not bate,
The credit to a better likelihood due.
Those few that wish it not the multitude,
Do carry headlong, so they doubts conclude.
They not object the weak uncertain ground,
Whereon they built this tale of Herod's end:
Whereof the Author scarcely can be found,
And all because their wishes that way bend.
They think not of the peril that ensu'th,
If this should prove the contrary to tru^^.
On this same doubt, on this so light a breath,
They pawn their lives, and fortunes. For they all
Behave them as the news of Herod's death,
They did of most undoubted credit call:
But if their actions now do rightly hit,
Let them commend their fortune, not their wit.

Actus tertius: Scoena prima.
Pheroras: Salome. Phero. Urge me no more Graphina to forsake,
Not twelve hours since I married her for love:
And do you think a sisters power cane make
A resolute decree, so soon remove?

Salome. Poor minds they are that honor not affects.

Phero: Who hunts for honor, happiness neglects.

Salom. You might have been both of felicity,
And honor too in equal measure seasde.

Phero: It is not you can tell so well as I,
What it is can make me happy, or displeasde.

Salome. To match for neither beauty nor respects
One mean of birth, but yet of meaner mind,
A woman full of natural defects,
I wonder what your eye in her could find.

Phero: Mine eye found louelines, mine ear found wit,
To please the one, and to enchant the other:
Grace on her eye, mirth on her tongue does sit,
In looks a child, in wisdoms house a mother.

Salom: But say you thought her fair, as none thinks else,
Knows not Pheroras, beauty is a blast:
Much like this flower which to day excels,
But longer then a day it will not last.

Phero: Her wit exceeds her beauty,

Salo: Wit may show
The way to ill, as well as good you know.

Phero: But wisdom is the porter of her head,
And b^res all wicked words from issuing thence.

Sal. But of a porter, better were yo^ sped,
If she against their entrance made defense.

Phero. But wherefore comes the sacred Ananell,
That hitherward his hasty steps does bend?
Great sacrificer you are arrived well,
Ill news from holy mouth I not attend.

Actus tertius. Scoena 2.
Pheroras. Salome. Ananell. Ananell. MY lips, my son, with peaceful
tidings blessed,
Shall utter Honey to your listening ear:
A word of death comes not from Priestly breast,
I speak of life: in life there is no fear.
And for the news I did the Heavens salute,
And filled the Temple with my thankful voice:
For though that mourning may not me pollute,
At pleasing accidents I may rejoice.

Pheror. Is Herod then revived from certain death?

Sall. What? can your news restore my brothers breath?

Ana. Both so, and so, the King is safe and sound,
And did such grace in royal Caesar meet:
That he with larger style then ever crowned,
Within this hour Jerusalem will greet.
I did but come to tell you, and must back
To make preparatiues for sacrifice:
I knew his death, your hearts like mine did rack,
Though to conceal it, proved you wise.

Salom. How can my joy sufficiently appear?

Phero. A heavier tale did never pierce mine ear.

Salo. Now Salome of happiness may boast.

Pheror. But now Pheroras is in danger most.

Salom. I shall enjoy the comfort of my life.

Pheror. And I shall loose it, loosing of my wife.

Salom. Joy heart, for Constan: shall be slain^.

Phero. Grieve soul, Graphina shall from me be tan^.

Salom. Smile cheeks, the fair Silleus shall be mine.

Phero. W^^pe eyes, for I must with a child combine.

Salom^ Well brother, cease your mones, on one condition
He undertake to win the Kings consent:
Graphina still shall be in your tuition,
And her with you be nere the less content.

Phero. What Is the condition? let me quickly know,
That I as quickly your command may act:
Were it to see what Herbs in Ophir grow,
Or that the lofty Ty^us might be sacked.

Salom. It Is no so hard a task: It is no more,
But tell the King that Consta: hid
The sons of Baba, done to death before:
And it is no more then Consta. did.
And tell him more that he for Herod's sake,
Not able to endure his brothers foe:
Did with a bill our separation make,
Though ^oth from Consta: else to go.

Phero. Believe this tale for told, I Will go from hence,
In Herod's ^are the Hebrew to deface:
And I that never studied eloquence,
Do mean with eloquence this tale to grace. Exit.

Salom. This will be Constabarus quick dispatch,
Which from my mouth would lesser credit find:
Yet shall ^e not decease without a match,
For Mariam shall not linger long behind.
First Jealousy, if that avail not, fear
Shall Be my minister to work her end:
A common error moves not Herod's ^are,
Which does so firmly to his Mariam bend.
She shall be charged with so horrid crime,
As Herod's fear shall turn his love to hate:
He make some swear that she desires to clime,
And seeks to poison him for his estate.
I scorn that she should ^iue my birth t'vpbraid,
To call me base and hungry Edomite:
With patient show her choler I betrayed,
And watched the time to be revenged by (...)
Now tongue of mine with scandal load her name,
Turn hers to fountains, Herod's eyes to flame^
Yet first I will begin Pheroras suite,
That he my earnest business may effect:
And I of Mariam will keep me mute,
Till first some other does her name detect.
Who Is there, Silleus man? How fares your Lord
That your aspects do bear the badge of sorrow^

Silleus man. He has the marks of Constabarus sword,
And for a while desires your sight to borro^

Salom. My heavy curse the hateful sword pursue,
My heavier curse on the more hat^full arm
That wounded my Sill^us. But renew
Your tale again. Has he no mortal harm?

Silleus man. No sign of danger does in him appear,
Nor are his wounds in place of peril seen:
He bides you be assured you nee^ not fear,
He hopes to make you yet Arab^as Queen.

Salom. Commend my heart to be Silleus charge,
Tell him, my brothers sudden coming now:
Will give my foot no room to walk at large,
But I will see him yet ere night I vow.

Actus 3. Scoena 3.
Mariam and Sohemus. Mariam. SOhemus, tell me what the news may he
That makes your eyes so full, your cheeks so blew?

Sohem. I know not how to call them. Ill for me
It Is sure they are: not so I hope for you.
Herod.

Mari. Oh, what of Herod? Sohem. Herod liue^.
How! lives? What in some Cave or forest hid^

Sohem. Nay, back returned with honor. Caesar gives
Him greater grace then ere Anthonius did.

Mari. Foretell the ruin of my family,
Tell me that I shall see our City burnd:
Tell me I shall a death disgraceful die,
But tell me not that Herod is returned.

Sohem. Be not impatient Madam, be but mild,
His love to you again will soon be bred:

Mar. I will not to his love be reconcilde,
With solemn vows I have forsworn his Bed.

Sohem. But you must break those vows.

Mar. I Will rather break
The heart of Mariam. Cursed is my Fate:
But speak no more to me, in vain ye speak
To live with him I so profoundly hate.

Sohem. Great Queen, you must to me your pardon give,
Sohemus cannot now your will obey:
If your command should me to silence drive,
It were not to obey, but to betray.
Reject, and slight my speeches, mock my faith,
Scorn my observance, call my counsel naught:
Though you regard not what Sohemus says,
Yet will I ever freely speak my thought.
I fear ^re long I shall fair Mariam see
In woeful state, and by her self undone:
Yet for your issues sake more temperate be,
The heart by affability is won.

Mari. And must I to my Prison turn again?
Oh, now I see I was an hypcorite:
I did this morning for his death complain,
And yet do mourn, because he lives ere night.
When I his death believed, compassion wrought,
And was the stickler twixt my heart and him:
But now that Curtaine's drawn from off my thought,
Hate does appear again with visage grim:
And paint^ the face of Herod in my heart,
In horred colors with detested look:
Then fear would come, but scorn does play her part,
^^d says that scorn with fear can never brook.
(...) now I could inchaine him with a smile:
^^d lead him captive with a gentle word,
^corne my look should ever man beguile,
^r other speech, then meaning to afford.
^lse Salome in vain might spend her wind,
^n vain might Herod's mother whet her tongue:
^n vain had they complotted and combinde,
For I could overthrow them all ere long.
Oh what a shelter is mine innocence,
To shield me from the pangs of inward grief:
Against all mishaps it is my fair defense,
And to my sorrows yields a large relief.
To be commandresse of the triple earth,
And sit in safety from a fall secure:
To have all nations celebrate my birth,
I would not that my spirit were impure.
Let my distressed state vnpittied be,
Mine innocence is hope enough for me. Exit.

Sohem: Poor guiltles Queen. Oh that my wish might place
A little temper now about thy heart:
Unbridled speech is Mariams worst disgrace,
And will endanger her without desert.
I am in greater hazard. Over my head,
The fattall axe does hang vnstedily:
My disobedience once discovered,
Will shake it down: Sohemus so shall die.
For when the King shall find, we thought his death
Had been as certain as we see his life:
And marks withal I slighted so his breath,
As to preserve alive his matchles wife.
Nay more, to give to Alexanders hand
The regal dignity. The sovereign power,
How I had yielded up at her command,
The strength of all the city, David's Tower.
What more then common death may I expect,
Since I too well do know his cruelty:
Twere death, a word of Herod's to neglect,
What then to do directly contrary?
Yet life I quite thee with a willing spirit,
And think thou could not better be imploi'd:
I forfeit thee for her that more does merit,
Ten such were better dead then she destroi'd.
But fare thee well chaste Queen, well may I see
The darkness palpable, and rivers part:
The sun stand still: Nay more retorted be,
But never woman with so pure a heart.
Thine eyes grave majesty keeps all in awe,
And cuts the wings of every loose desire:
Thy brow is table to the modest law,
Yet though we dare not love, we may admire.
And if I die, it shall my soul content,
My breath in Mariams service shall be spent.

Chorus. It Is not enough for one that is a wife
To keep her spotles from an act of ill:
But from suspicion she should free her life,
And bare her self of power as well as will.
It Is not so glorious for her to be free,
As by her proper self restrained to be.
When she has spacious ground to walk upon,
Why on the ridge should she desire to go?
It is no glory to forbear alone,
Those things that may her honor overthrow.
But it is thanke-worthy, if she will not take
All lawful liberties for honors sake.
That wife her hand against her fame does rear,
That more then to her Lord alone will give
A private word to any second ear,
And though she may with reputation live.
Yet though most chaste, she does her glory blot,
And wounds her honor, though she killes it not.
When to their Husbands they themselves do bind,
Do they not wholly give themselves away?
Or give they but their body not their mind,
Reserving that though best, for others pray?
No sure, their thoughts no more can be their own,
And therefore should to none but one be known.
Then she usurps upon another right,
That seeks to be by public language graced:
And though her thoughts reflect with purest light,
Her mind if not peculiar is not chaste.
For in a wife it is no worse to find,
A common body, then a common mind.
And every mind though free from thought of ill,
That out of glory seeks a worth to show:
When any's ears but one therewith they fill,
Does in a sort her pureness overthrow.
Now Mariam had, (but that to this she bent)
Been free from fear, as well as innocent.

Actus quartus: Scoena prima.
Enter Herod and his attendants. Herod. Hail happy city, happy in thy store,
And happy that thy buildings such we see:
More happy in the Temple where w'adore,
But most of all that Mariam lives in thee.
Art thou returned? how fares my Mariam? Enter Nutio.

Nutio. She Is well my Lord, and will anon be here
As you commanded.

Her: Muffle up thy browe
Thou days dark taper. Mariam will appear.
And where she shines, we need no^ thy dim light,
Oh have thy steps rare creature, speed thy pace:
And let thy presence make the day more bright,
And cheer the heart of Herod with thy face.
It is an age since I from Mariam went,
Me thinks our parting was in David's days:
The hours are so increast by discontent,
Deep sorrow, Joshua like the season stays:
But when I am with Mariam, time runs on,
Her sight, can make months, minutes, days of weeks
An hour is then no sooner come then gone.
When in her face mine eye for wonders seeks.
You world commanding city, Europes grace,
Twice has my curious eye your streets suruai'd,
And I have seen the statue filled place,
That once if not for grief had been betrayed.
I all your Roman beauties have beheld,
And seen the shows your Ediles did prepare,
I saw the sum of what in you excelled,
Yet saw no miracle like Mariam rare.
The fair and famous Liuia, Caesar's love,
The worlds commanding Mistress did I see:
Whose beauties both the world and Rome approve,
Yet Mariam: Liuia is not like to thee.
Be patient but a little, while mine eyes
Within your compast limits be contained:
That object straight shall your desires suffice,
From which you were so long a while restrained.
How wisely Mariam does the time delay,
Least sudden joy my sense should suffocate:
I am prepared, thou needst no longer stay:
Whose there, my Mariam, more then happy fate?
Oh no, it is Pheroras, welcome Brother,
Now for a while, I must my passion smother.

Actus quartus. Scoena secunda.
Herod. Pheroras. Pheroras. ALl health and safety wait upon my Lord,
And may you long in prosperous fortunes live
With Rome commanding Caesar; at accord,
And have all honors that the world can give.

Herod. Oh brother, now thou speakst not from thy heart,
No, thou have struck a blow at Herod's love:
That cannot quickly from my memory part,
Though Salome did me to pardon move.
Valiant Phasaelus, now to thee farewell,
Thou were my kind and honorable brother:
Oh haples hour, when you self stricken fell,
Thou fathers Image, glory of thy mother.
Had I desired a great^r suit of thee,
Then to withhold thee from a harlots bed,
Thou would have granted it: but now I see
All are not like that in a womb are bred.
Thou would not, had thou heard of Herod's death,
Have made his burial time, thy bridal hour:
Thou would with clamours, not with joyful breath,
Have showed the news to be not sweet but sour.

Phero. Phasaelus great worth I know did stain
Pheroras petty valor: but they lie
(Excepting you your self) that dare maintain,
That he did honor Herod more then I.
For what I showd, loves power constraind me show,
And pardon loving faults for Mariams sake.

Herod. Mariam, where is she?

Phero. Nay, I do not know,
But absent use of her fair name I make:
You have forgiven greater faults then this,
For Constabarus that against you will
Preserved the sons of Baba, lives in bliss,
Though you commanded him the youths to kill.

Herod. Go, take a present order for his death,
And let those traitors feel the worst of fears:
Now Salome will whine to beg his breath,
But I Will be deaf to prayers: and blind to tears.

Phero. He is my Lord from Salom diuorst,
Though her affection did to leave him grieu^:
Yet was she by her love to you inforst,
To leave the man that would your foes relieve.

Herod. Then haste them to their death. I will requite
Thee gentle Mariam. Salom I mean
The thought of Mariam does so steal my spirit,
My mouth from speech of her I cannot weane. Exit.

Actus 4. Scoena 3.
Herod. Mariam. Herod. ANd here she comes indeed: happily met
My best, and dearest half: what ailes my dear?
Thou do the difference certainly forget
Twixt Duskey habits, and a time so clear.

Mar. My Lord, I suit my garment to my mind,
And there no cheerful colors can I find.

Herod. Is this my welcome? have I longd so much
To see my dearest Mariam discontent?
What is it that is the cause thy heart to touch?
Oh speak, that I thy sorrow may prevent.
Art thou not Iuries Queen, and Herod's too?
Be my Commandres, be my Sovereign guide:
To be by thee directed I will woo,
For in thy pleasure lies my highest pride.
Or if thou think Iudaeas narrow bound,
Too strict a limit for thy great command:
Thou shall be Empress of Arabia crowned,
For thou shall rule, and I will win the Land.
I Will rob the holy David's Sepulcher
To give thee wealth, if thou for wealth do care:
Thou shall have all, they did with him inter,
And I for thee will make the Temple bare.

Mar. I neither have of power not riches want,
I have enough, nor do I wish for more:
Your offers to my heart no ease can grant,
Except they could my brothers life restore.
No, had you wished the wretched Mariam glad,
Or had your love to her been truly tide:
Nay, had you not desired to make her sad,
My brother nor my Grandsyre had not did.

Her. Will thou believe no oaths to clear thy Lord?
How often have I with execration sworn:
Thou art by me beloved, by me adored,
Yet are my protestations heard with scorn.
Hercanus plotted to deprive my head
Of this long settled honor that I wear:
And therefore I did justly doom him dead,
To rid the Realm from peril, me from fear.
Yet I for Mariams sake do so repent
The death of one: whose blood she did inherit:
I wish I had a Kingdoms treasure spent,
So I had nere expeld Hercanus spirit.
As I affected that same noble youth,
In lasting infamy my name inrole:
If I not mournd his death with hearty truth.
Did I not show to him my earnest love,
When I to him the Priesthood did restore?
And did for him a living Priest remove,
Which never had been done but once before.

Mariam. I know that moved by importunity,
You made him Priest, and shortly after die.

Herod. I will not speak, unless to be believed,
This froward humor will not do you good:
It has too much already Herod grieved,
To think that you on terms of hate have stood.
Yet smile my dearest Mariam, do but smile,
And I will all unkind conceits exile.

Mari. I cannot frame disguise, nor never taught
My face a look dissenting from my thought.

Herod. By heaven you vex me, build not on my love.

Mari. I will not build on so unstable ground.

Herod. Naught is so fixed, but peeuishnes may move.

Mar. It Is better sleightest cause then none were found.

Herod. Be judge your self, if ever Herod sought
Or would be moved a cause of change to find:
Yet let your look declare a milder thought,
My heart again you shall to Mariam bind.
How often did I for you my Mother chide,
Revile my Sister, and my brother rate:
And tell them all my Mariam they belide,
Distrust me still, if these be signs of hate.

Actus 4. Scoena 4.
Herod. What have thou here?

Bu. A drink procuring love,
The Queen desired me to deliver it.

Mar. Did I: some hateful practice this will prove,
Yet can it be no worse then Heavens permit.

Herod. Confess the truth thou wicked instrument,
To her outrageous will, it is passion sure:
Tell true, and thou shall escape the punishment,
Which if thou do conceal thou shall endure.

Bu. I know not, but I doubt it be no less,
Long ^ince the hate of you her heart did cease.

Herod. Know thou the cause thereof?

Bu. My Lord I guess,
Sohemus told the tale that did displease.

Herod. Oh Heaven! Sohemus false! Go let him die,
Stay not to suffer him to speak a word:
Oh damned villain, did he falsify
The oath he swore even of his own accord?
Now do I know thy falsehood, painted Diuill
Thou white Inchantres. Oh thou art so foul,
That Ysop cannot cleanse thee worst of evil.
A beauteous body hides a loathsome soul,
Your love Sohemus moved by his affection,
Though he have ever heretofore been true:
Did blab forsooth, that I did give direction,
If we were put to death to slaughter you.
And you in black reu^nge attended now
To add a murder to your breach of vow.

Mar. Is this a dream?

Her. Oh Heaven, that it were no more,
I Will give my Realm to who can prove it so:
^ would I were like any beggar poor,
So I for false my Mariam did not know.
Foul pith contained in the fairest rind,
That ever graced a Caedar. Oh thine eye
Is pure as heaven, but impure thy mind,
And for impuritie shall Mariam die.
Why did thou love Sohemus? Mar: they can tell
That say I loved him, Mariam says not so.

Herod. Oh cannot impudence the coals expel,
That for thy love in Herod's bosom glow^:
It is as plain as water, and denial
Makes of thy falsehood but a greater trial.
Have thou beheld thy self, and could thou stain
So rare perfection: even for love of thee
I do profoundly hate thee. Were thou plain,
Thou shoul'dst the wonder of Judea be.
But oh thou art not. Hell it self lies hid
Beneath thy heavenly show. Yet never were thou chaste:
Thou might exalt, pull down, command, forbid,
And be above the wheel of fortune plast.
Had thou complotted Herod's massacre,
That so thy son a Monarch might be stilde,
Not half so grievous such an action were,
As once to think, that Mariam is defilde.
Bright workmanship of nature sulli'd ore,
With pitched darkness now thine end shall be:
Thou shall not live fair fiend to cozen more,
With heavy semblance, as thou cousnedst me.
Yet must I love thee in despite of death,
And thou shall die in the dispight of love:
For neither shall my love prolong thy breath,
Nor shall thy loss of breath my love remove.
I might have seen thy falsehood in thy face,
Where coul'dst thou get thy stares that served for eyes?
Except by theft, and theft is foul disgrace:
This had appeared before were Herod wise,
But I Am a sot, a very sot, no better:
My wisdom long ago a wandering fell,
Thy f^ce incoun^ring it, my wit did fetter,
And made me for delight my freedom ^ell.
Give me my heart false creature, it is a wrong,
My guliltles heart should now with thine be slain:
Thou had no right to look it up so long,
And with usurpers name I Mariam stain.

Enter Bu: He: Have you designed Sohemus to his end?

Bu: I have my Lord Herod: Then call our royal guard
To do as much for Mariam, they offend
Leave ill vnblam'd, or good without reward.
Here take her to her death Come back, come back,
What meant I to deprive the world of light:
To muffle Jury in the foulest black,
That ever was an opposite to white.
Why whither would you carry her: Sold: you bad
We should conduct her to her death my Lord.

Hero: Wie sure I did not, Herod was not mad,
Why should she feel the fury of the sword?
Oh now the grief returns into my heart,
And pulles me peecemeale: love and hate do fight:
And now has boue acquired the greater part,
Yet now has hate, affection conquered quite.
And therefore bear her hence: and Hebrew why
Seize you with Lions paws the fairest lam
Of all the flock? she must not, shall not, die,
Without her I most miserable am.
And with her more then most, away, away,
But bear her but to prison not to death:
And is she gone indeed, stay villains stay,
Her looks alone preserved your Sovereigns breath.
Well let her go, but yet she shall not die,
I cannot think she meant to poison me:
But certain it is she lived too wantonly,
And therefore shall she never more be free.

Actus 4. Scoena 5.
Bu. Foul villain, can thy pitchie colored soul
Permit thine ear to hear her caules doom?
And not enforce thy tongue that tale control,
That must unjustly bring her to her too me.
Oh Salome thou have thy self repaid,
For all the benefits that thou have done:
Thou art the cause I have the queen betrayed,
Thou have my heart to darkest false-hood won.
I am condemned, heaven gave me not my tongue
To slander innocents, to lie, deceive:
To be the hateful instrument to wrong,
The earth of greatest glory to bereave.
My sin ascends and does to heaven cry,
It is the blackest deed that ever was:
And there does sit an Angel notarie,
That does record it down in leaves of brass.
Oh how my heart does quake: Achitophel,
Thou founds a means thy self from shame to free:
And sure my soul approues thou did not well,
All follow some, and I will follow thee.

Actus 4. Scoena 6.
Constabarus, Babus Sons, and their guard. Constable: NOw here we step our last,
the way to death,
We must not tread this way a second time:
Yet let us resolutely yield our breath,
Death is the only ladder, Heaven to clime.

Babus 1. Son. With willing mind I could my self resign,
But yet it grieves me with a grief untold:
Our death should be accompanied with thine,
Our friendship we to thee have dearly sold.

Constable. Still will thou wrong the sacred name of friend?
Then should thou never style it friendship more:
But base mechanicke traffic that does lend,
Yet will be sure they shall the debt restore.
I could with needless complement return,
It Is for thy ceremony I could say:
It Is I that made the fire your house to burn,
For but for me she would not you betray.
Had not the damned woman sought mine end,
You had not been the subject of her hate:
You never did her hateful mind offend,
Nor could your deaths have freed your nuptial fate.
Therefore fair friends, though you were still unborn,
Some other subtlety deuisde should be:
Were by my life, though guiltles should be torn,
Thus have I proved, it is you that die for me.
And therefore should I weakly now lament,
You have but done your duties, friends should die:
Alone their friends disaster to prevent,
Though not compeld by strong necessity.
But now farewell fair city, never more
Shall I behold your beauty shining bright:
Farewell of Jewish men the worthy store,
But no farewell to any female wight.
You wavering crew: my curse to you I leave,
You had but one to give you any grace:
And you your selves will Mariams life bereave,
Your commonwealth does innocence chase.
You creatures made to be the humane curse,
You Tigers, Lyonesses, hungry Bears,
Tea^e massacring Hienas: nay far worse,
For they for pray do shed their fained tears.
But you will weep, (you creatures cross to good)
For your unquenched thirst of humane blood:
You were the Angels cast from heaue'n for pride,
And still do keep your Angels outward show,
But none of you are inly beautifide,
For still your heaven depriving pride does grow.
Did not the sins of many require a scourge,
Your place on earth had been by this withstood:
But since a flood no more the world must purge,
You staid in office of a second flood.
You giddy creatures, sowers of debate,
You Will love to day, and for no other cause,
But for you yesterday did deply hate,
You are the wreake of order, breach of laws.
You best, are foolish, froward, wanton, vain,
Your worst adulterous, murderous, cunning, proud^
And Salome attends the latter train,
Or rather he their leader is allowd.
I do the sottishness of men bewail,
That do with following you inhance your pride:
It Were better that the humane race should fail,
Then be by such a mischief multiplide.
Chams servile curse to all your sex was given,
Because in Paradise you did offend:
Then do we not resist the will of Heaven,
When on your wills like servants we attend?
You are to nothing constant but to ill,
You are with naught but wickedness indude:
Your loves are set on nothing but your will,
And thus my censure I of you conclude.
You are the least of goods, the worst of evils,
Your best are worse then men: your worst then devils.

Babus second son. Come let us to our death: are we not blessed?
Our death will freedom from these creatures give:
Those trouble quiet sowers of unrest,
And this I vow that had I leave to live,
I would for ever lead a single life,
And never venture on a di^ellish wife.

Actus 4. Scoena 7.
Herod and Salome. Herod. NAy, she shall die. Die quoth you, that she shall:
But for the means. The means! Me thinks it is hard
To find a means to murder her withal,
Therefore I am resolved ^he shall be spared.

Salom. Why? let her be beheaded.

Her. That were well,
Think you that swords are miracles like you:
Her skin will every Curtlax edge refell,
And then your enterprise you well may ^ue.
What if the fierce Arabian notice take,
Of this your wretched weaponlesse estate:
They answer when we bid resistance make,
That Mariams skin their fanchions did rebate.
Beware of this, you make a goodly hand,
If you of weapons do deprive our Land.

Sal. Why drown her then.

Herod. Indeed a sweet device,
Why? would not every River turn her course
R^ther then do her beauty prejudice?
And be reuerted to the proper sourse.
So not a drop of water should be found
In all Iudeas quondam fertile ground.

Sal. Then let the fire devour her.

Her. It Will not be:
Flame is from her derived into my heart:
Thou nursest flame, flame will not murder thee,
My fairest Mariam, fullest of desert.

Salom. Then let her live for me.

Herod. Nay, she sha^ I die:
But can you live without her?

Sal. doubt you that?

Herod. I Am sure I cannot, I beseech you try:
I have experience but I know not what.

Salom. How should I try?

Her. Why let my love be slain,
But if we cannot live without her sight
You Will find the means to make her breathe again,
Or else you will bereave my comfort quite.

Sal. Oh I: I warrant you.

Herod. What is she gone?
And gone to bid the world be overthrown:
What? is her hearts composure hardest stone?
To what a pass are cruel women grown?
She is returned already: have you done?
Is It possible you can command so soon?
A creatures heart to quench the flaming Sun,
Or from the sky to wipe away the Moon.

Salo. If Mariam be the Sun and Moon, it is:
For I already have commanded this.

Her. But have you seen her cheek?

Sal. A thousand times.

Herod. But did you mark it too?

Sal. I very well.

Herod. What is it?

Sal. A Crimson bush, that ever limes
The soul whose foresight does not much excel.

Herod. Send word she shall not dye. Her cheek a bush,
Nay, then I see indeed you marked it not.

Sal. It Is very fair, but yet will never blush,
Though foul dishonors do her forehead blot.

Herod. Then let her die, it is very true indeed,
And for this fault alone shall Mariam bleed.

Sal. What fault my Lord?

Herod. What fault is it? you that ask:
If you be ignorant I know of none,
To call her back from death shall be your task,
I Am glad that she for innocent is known.
For on the brow of Mariam hangs a Fleece,
Whose slenderest twine is strong enough to bind
The hearts of Kings, the pride and shame of Greece,
Troy flaming Helens not so fairly shinde.

Salom. It Is true indeed, she lays them out for nets,
To catch the hearts that do not shune a bait:
It Is time to speak: for Herod sure forgets
That Mariams very tresses hide deceit.

Her. Oh do they so? nay, then you do but well,
Insooth I thought it had been hair:
Nets call you them? Lord, how they do excel,
I never saw a net that showed so fair.
But have you heard her speak?

Sal. You know I have.

Her: And were you not amazed?

Sal. No, not a whit.

Her. Then it was not her you heard, her life I Will save,
For Mariam has a world amazing wit.

Salo. She speaks a beauteous language, but within
Her heart is false as powder: and her tongue
Does but allure the auditors to sin,
And is the instrument to do you wrong.

Herod. It may be so: nay, it is so: she is unchaste,
Her mouth will open to every strangers ear:
Then let the executioner make haste,
Lest she inchant him, if her words he hear.
Let him be deaf, lest she do him surprise
That shall to free her spirit be assignde:
Yet what boots deafenes if he have his eyes,
Her murderer must be both deaf and blinde^
For if he see, he needs must see the stars
That shine on either side of Mariams face:
Whose sweet ^spect will terminate the wars,
Wherewith he should a soul so precious chase.
Her eyes can speak, and in their speaking move,
Often did my heart with reverence receive
The worlds mandates. Pretty tales of love
They utter, which can humane bondage weaue.
But shall I let this heavens model dye?
Which for a small selfe-portraiture she drew:
Her eyes like stars, her forehead like the sky,
She is like Heaven, and must be heavenly true.

Salom. Your thoughts do rave with doting on the Queen,
Her eyes are ebon hewde, and you will confess:
A sable star has been but seldom seen,
Then speak of reason more, of Mariam less.

Herod. Your self are held a goodly creature here,
Yet so unlike my Mariam in your shape:
That when to her you have approached near,
My self has often taken you for an Ape.
And yet you pra^e of beauty: go your ways,
You are to her a Sun burnt Blackamore:
Your paintings cannot equal Mariams praise,
Her nature is so rich, you are so poor.
Let her be staide from death, for if she die,
We do we know not what to stop her breath:
A world cannot another Mariam buy,
Why stay you lingering? countermaund her death.

Salo. Then you will no more remember what has past,
Sohemus love, and hers shall be forgot:
It Is well in truth: that fault may be her last,
And she may mend, though yet she love you not.

Her: Oh God: it is true. Sohemus: earth and heaven,
Why did you both conspire to make me cursed:
In cousning me with shows, and proofs vneu'n?
She showed the best, and yet did prove the worst.
Her show was such, as had our singing king
The holy David, Mariams beauty seen:
The Hit^its had then felt no deadly sting,
Nor Bethsabe had never been a Queen.
Or had his son the wi^est man of men,
Whose fond delight did most consist in change:
Beheld her face, he had been staid again,
No creature having her, can wish to range.
Had Asuerus see^e my Mariams brow,
The humble Jew, she might have walked alone:
Her beauteous virtue should have staid below,
Whiles Mariam mounted to the ^ersian throne.
But what auailes it all: for in the weight
She is deceitful, light as vanity:
Oh she was made for nothing but a b^it,
To train some haples man to misery.
I am the haples man that have been trainde,
To endless bondage. I will see her yet:
Me thinks I should discern her if she fainde,
Can humane eyes be dazde by woman's wit?
Once more these eyes of mine with hers shall meet,
Before the headsman do her life bereave:
Shall I for ever part from thee my sweet?
Without the taking of my latest leave.

Salo: You had as good resolve to save her now,
I Will stay her death, it is well determined:
For sure she never more will break her vow,
Sohemus and Josephus both are dead.

Herod. She shall not live, nor will I see her face,
A long heald wound, a second time does bleed:
With Joseph I remember her disgrace,
A shameful end ensues a shameful deed.
Oh that I had not called to mind anew,
The discontent of Mariams wavering heart:
It Was you: you foul mouthed Ate, none but you,
That did the thought hereof to me impart.
Hence from my sight, my black tormenter hence,
For had not thou made Herod vnsecure:
I had not doubted Mariams innocence,
But still had held her in my heart for pure.

Salo: I Will leave you to your passion: it is no time
To purge me now, though of a guiltles crime. Exit.

Herod. Destruction take thee: thou have made my heart
As heavy as revenge, I am so dull,
Me thinks I am not sensible of smart,
Though hiddious horrors at my bosom pull.
My head ways downwards: therefore will I go
To try if I can sleep away my woe.

Actus 4. Scoena. 8.
Mariam. AM I the Mariam that presumed so much,
And deemed my face must needs preserve my breath?
I, I it was that thought my beauty such,
At it alone could countermaund my death.
Now death will ^each me: he can pale as well
A cheek^ of roses, as a cheek less bright:
And dim an eye whose shine does most excel,
As Soon as one that casts a meaner light.
Had not my self against my self conspirde,
No plot: no adversary from without
Could Herod's love from Mariam have retirde,
Or from his heart have thrust my semblance out.
The wanton Queen that never loved for love,
False Cleopatra, wholly set on gain:
With all her slights did prove: yet vainly prove,
For her the love of Herod to obtain.
Yet her allurements, all her courtly guile,
Her smiles, her favors, and her smooth decei^:
Could not my face from Herod's mind exile,
But were with him of less then little weight.
That face and person that in Asia late
For beauties Goddess Paphos Queen was taken:
That face that did captive great Julius fate,
That very face that was Anthonius bane.
That face that to be Egipts pride was borne,
That face that all the world esteemed so rare:
Did Herod hate, despise, neglect, and scorn,
When with the same, he Mariams did compare.
This made that I improuidently wrought,
And on the wager even my life did pawn:
Because I thought, and yet but truly thought,
That Herod's love could not from me be drawn.
But now though out of time, I plainly see
It could be drawn, though never drawn from me:
Had I but with humility been grac'te,
As well as fair I might have proved me wise:
But I did think because I knew me cha^te,
One virtue for a woman, might suffice.
That mind for glory of our sex might stand,
Wherein humility and chastity
Does march with equal paces hand in hand,
But one (...) ^ingle seen, who sets by?
And I had singl^ o^e, but it is my joy,
That I was ever innocent, though sower:
And therefore can they but my life destroy,
My Soul is free from adversaries power.) Enter Doris.
You Princes great in power, and high in birth,
Be great and high, I envy not your hap:
Your birth must be from dust: your power on earth,
In heaven shall Mariam sit in Saraes lap.

Doris. I heaven, your beauty cannot bring you thither,
Your soul is black and spotted, full of sin:
You in adultry lived nine year together,
And heaven will never let adultry in.

Mar: What art thou that do poor Mariam pursue?
Some spirit sent to drive me to despair:
Who sees for truth that Mariam is untrue,
If fair she be, she is as chaste as fair.

Doris. I am that Doris that was once beloved,
Beloved by Herod: Herod's lawful wife:
It Was you that Doris from his side removed,
And robbed from me the glory of my life.

Mar: Was that adultry: did not Moses say,
That he that being matched did deadly hate:
Might by permission put his wife away,
And take a more beloved to be his mate?

Doris. What did he hate me for: for simple truth?
For bringing beauteous babes for love to him:
For riches: noble birth, or tender youth,
Or for no stain did Doris honor dim?
Oh tell me Mariam, tell me if you know,
Which fault of these made Herod Doris foe.
These thrice three years have I with hands held up,
And bowed knees fast nailed to the ground:
Besought for thee the dreggs of that same cup,
That cup of wrath that is for sinners found.
And now thou art to drink it: Doris curse,
Upon thy self did all this while attend,
But now it shall pursue thy children worse.

Mar: Oh Doris now to thee my knees I bend,
That heart that never bowed to thee does bow:
Curse not mine infants, let it thee suffice,
That Heaven does punishment to me allow.
Thy curse is cause that guiltles Mariam dies.

Doris. Had I ten thousand tongues, and every tongue
Inflamed with poisons power, and steept in gall:
My curses would not answer for my wrong,
Though I in cursing thee imployd them all.
Hear thou that did mount Gerarim command,
To be a place whereon with cause to curse:
Stretch thy revenging arm: thrust forth thy hand,
And plague the mother much: the children worse.
Throw flaming fire upon the baseborne heads
That were begotten in unlawful beds.
But let them live till they have sense to know
What it is to be in miserable state:
Then be their nearest friends their overthrow,
Attended be they by suspicious hate.
And Mariam, I do hope this boy of mine
Shall one day come to be the death of thine. Exit.

Mariam. Oh! Heaven forbid. I hope the world shall see,
This curse of thine shall be returned on thee:
Now earth farewell, though I be yet but young,
Yet I, me thinks, have known thee too too long. Exit.

Chorus. THe fairest action of our humane life,
Is scorniug to revenge an injury:
For who forgiues without a further strife,
His adversaries heart to him does tie.
And it is a firmer conquest truly sed,
To win the heart, then overthrow the head.
If we a worthy enemy do find,
To yield to worth, it must be nobly done:
But if of baser metal be his mind,
In base revenge there is no honor won.
Who would a worthy courage overthrow,
And who would wrestle with a worthles foe?
We say our hearts are great and cannot yield,
Because they cannot yield it proves them poor:
Great hearts are task't beyond their power, but seld
The weakest Lion will the lowdest roar.
Truths school for certain does this same allow,
High hartednes does sometimes teach to bow.
A noble heart does teach a virtuous scorn,
To scorn to owe a duty ouer-long:
To scorn to be for benefits forborne,
To scorn to lie, to scorn to do a wrong.
To scorn to bear an injury in mind,
To scorn a freeborn heart slaue-like to bind.
But if for wrongs we needs revenge must have,
Then be our vengeance of the noblest kind:
Do we his body from our fury save,
And let our hate prevail against our mind?
What can against him a greater vengeance be,
Then make his foe more worthy far then he?
Had Mariam scorned to leave a due unpaid,
She would to Herod then have paid her love:
And not have been by sullen passion swaide
To fix her thoughts all injury above
Is virtuous pride. Had Mariam thus been proved,
Long famous life to her had been allowd.

Actus quintus. Scoena prima.
Nuntio. WHen, sweetest friend, did I so far offend
Your heavenly self: that you my fault to quit
Have made me now relator of her end,
The end of beauty? Chastity and wit,
Was none so haples in the fatal place,
But I, most wretched, for the Queen t'chuse,
It Is certain I have some ill boding face
That made me culd to tell this luckles news.
And yet no news to Herod: were it new,
To him unhappy t'had not been at all:
Yet do I long to come within his view,
That he may know his wife did guiltles fall:
And here he comes. Your Mariam greets you well.

Enter Herod. Herod. What? lives my Mariam? joy, exceeding joy.
She shall not die.

Nun. Heaven does your will repel.

Herod. Oh do not with thy words my life destroy,
I prethy tell no dying-tale: thine eye
Without thy tongue does tell but too too much:
Yet let thy tongues addition make me die,
Death welcome, comes to him whose grief is such.

Nunti. I went amongst the curious gazing troop,
To see the last of her that was the best:
To see if death had heart to make her stoop,
To see the Sun admiring Phoenix nest.
When there I came, upon the way I saw
The stately Mariam not debased by fear:
Her look did seem to keep the world in awe,
Yet mildly did her face this fortune bear.

Herod. Thou do usurp my right, my tongue was framed
To be the instrument of Mariams praise:
Yet speak: she cannot be too often famed:
All tongues suffice not her sweet name to raise.

Nun. But as she came she Alexandra met,
Who did her death (sweet Queen) no whit bewail,
But as if nature she did quite forget,
She did upon her daughter loudly rail.

Herod. Why stopped you not her mouth? where had she words
To dark that, that Heaven made so bright?
Our sacred tongue no Epithet affords,
To call her other then the worlds delight.

Nun. She told her that her death was too too good,
And that already she had lived too long:
She said, she shamed to have a part in blood
Of her that did the princely Herod wrong.

Herod. Base picke-thanke Devil. Shame, it was all her glory,
That she to noble Mariam was the mother:
But never shall it live in any story
Her name, except to infamy i will smother.
What answer did her princely daughter make?

Nun. She made no answer, but she looked the while,
As if thereof she scarce did notice take,
Yet smilde, a dutiful, though scornful smile.

Her. Sweet creature, I that look to mind do call,
Full often has Herod been amazed withal.

Nun. Go on, she came unmoved with pleasant grace,
As if to triumph her arrival were:
In stately habit, and with cheefull face:
Yet every eye was moist, but Mariams there.
When justly opposite to me she came,
She picked me out from all the crew:
She beckned to me, called me by my name,
For she my name, my birth, and fortune knew.

Herod. What did she name thee? happy, happy man,
Will thou not ever love that name the better?
But what sweet tune did this fair dying Swan
Afford thine care: tell all, omit no letter.

Nun. Tell thou my Lord, said she.

Her. Me, meant fl^e me?
Is It true, the more my shame: I was her Lord,
Were I not made her Lord, I still should be:
But now her name must be by me adord.
Oh say, what said she more? each word she sed
Shall be the food whereon my heart is fed.

Nun: Tell thou my Lord thou saw me loose my breath.

Herod. Oh that I could that sentence now control.

Nun. If guiltily eternal be my death,

Her: I hold her chaste even in my inmost soul.

Nun: By three days hence if wishes could revive,
I know himself would make me often alive.

Herod. Three days: three hours, three minutes, not so much,
A minute in a thousand parts divided,
My penitencie for her death is such,
As in the first I wished she had not died.
But forward in thy tale.

Nun: Why on she went,
And after she some silent prayer had sed:
She did as if to die she were content,
And thus to heaven her heavenly soul is fled.

Herod. But art thou sure there does no life remain?
Is It possible my Mariam should be dead,
Is there no trick to make her breathe again?

Nun: Her body is divided from her head.

Her: Why yet me thinks there might be found by art,
Strange ways of cure, it is sure rare things are don:
By an inuentiue head, and willing heart.

Nun: Let not my Lord your fancies idly run.
It is as possible it should beseene.
That we should make the holy Abraham live,
Though he entombed two thousand years had been,
As breath again to slaughtred Mariam give.
But now for more assaults prepare your ears,

Herod. There cannot be a further cause of moan,
This accident shall shelter me from fears:
What can I fear? already Mariams gone.
Yet tell even what you will:

Nun: As I came by,
From Mariams death I saw upon a tree,
A man that to his neck a cord did tie:
Which cord he had designd his end to be,
When me he once discerned, he downwards bowed,
And thus with fearful voice she cride alowd,
Go tell the King he trusted ere he tried,
I am the cause that Mariam causeles did.

Herod. Damnation take him, for it was the slave
That said she meant with poisons deadly force
To end my life that she the Crown might have:
Which tale did Mariam from her self divorce.
Oh pardon me thou pure unspotted Ghost,
My punishment must needs sufficient be,
In missing that content I valued most:
Which was thy admirable face to see.
I had but one inestimable Jewel,
Yet one I had no monarch had the like,
And therefore may I curse my self as cruel:
It Was broken by a blow my self did strike.
I gazed thereon and never thought me blessed,
But when on it my dazzled eye might rest:
A precious Mirror made by wondrous art,
I prizd it ten times dearer then my Crown,
And laid it up fast foulded in my heart:
Yet I in sudden choler cast it down.
And pasht it all to pieces: it was no foe,
That robbed me of it; no Arabian host,
Nor no Armenian guide has used me so:
But Herod's wretched self has Herod crossed.
She was my graceful moytie, me accursed,
To slay my better half and save my worst.
But sure she is not dead you did but jest,
To put me in perplexity a while,
Twere well indeed if I could so be dressed:
I see she is alive, me thinks you smile.

Nun: If sainted Abel yet deceased be,
It Is certain Mariam is as dead as he.

Her: Why then go call her to me, bid her now
Put on fair habit, stately ornament:
And let no frown ore shade her smoothest brow,
In her does Herod place his whole content.

Nun: She Will come in stately weeds to please your sense,
If now she come attirde in robe of heaven:
Remember you your self did send her hence,
And now to you she can no more be given.

Herod. She Is dead, hell take her murderers, she was fair,
Oh what a hand she had, it was so white,
It did the whitenes of the snow impair:
I never more shall see so sweet a sight.

Nun: It Is true, her hand was rare.

Her: her hand? her hands;
She had not singly one of beauty rare,
But sueh a pair as here where Herod stands,
He dares the world to make to both compare.
Accursed Salome, had thou been still,
My Mariam had been breathing by my side:
Oh never had I: had I had my will,
Sent forth command, that Mariam should have did.
But Salome thou did with envy vex,
To see thy self out-matched in thy sex:
Upon your sexes forehead Mariam sat,
To grace you all like an imperial crown,
But you fond fool have rudely pusht thereat,
And proudly pulled your proper glory down.
One smile of hers: Nay, not so much a: look
Was worth a hundred thousand such as you,
Judea how can thou the wretches brook,
That robbed from thee the fairest of the crew?
You dwellers in the now deprived land,
Wherein the matchles Mariam was bred:
Why graspe not each of you a sword in hand,
To aim at me your cruel Sovereigns head.
Oh when you think of Herod as your King,
And owner of the pride of Palestine:
This act to your remembrance likewise bring,
It Is I have overthrown your royal line.
Within her purer veins the blood did run,
That from her Grandam Sara she derived,
Whose beldame age the love of Kings has won,
Oh that her issue had as long been li'ud.
But can her eye be made by death obs^ure?
I cannot think but it must sparkle still:
Foul sacrilege to rob those lights so pure,
From out a Temple made by heavenly skill.
I am the Villain that have done the d^ed,
The c^uell deed, though by another hand,
My word though not my sword made Mariam bleed,
Hircanus Grandchild did at my command.
That Mariam that I once did love so dear,
The partner of my now detested bed,
Why shine you sun with an aspect so clear?
I tell you once again my Mariams dead.
You could but shine, if some Egiptian blows,
Or Ethiopian doudy lose her life:
This was, then wherefore bend you not your brows,
The King of Iuries fair and spotles wife.
Deny thy beams, and Moon refuse thy light,
Let all the stars be dark, let Iuries eye
No more distinguish which is day and night:
Since her best birth did in her bosom die.
Those fond Idolaters the men of Greece,
Maintain these orbs are safely governed:
That each within themselves have Gods a piece,
By whom their steadfast course is justly led.
But were it so, as so it cannot be,
They all would put their mourning garments on:
Not one of them would yield a light to me,
To me that is the cause that Mariams go^.
For though they ^ame their Sa^urne melancholy,
Of sour behauiours, and of angry mood:
They ^ame him likewise to be just and holy,
And justice needs must seek revenge for blood,
Their Jove, if Jove he were, would sure desire,
To punish him that slew so fair a less:
For Laedaes beauty set his heart on fire,
Yet she not half so fair as Mariam was.
And Mars would deem his Venus had been slain,
Sol to recover her would never stick:
For if he want the power her life to gain:
Then Physics God is but an Empericke.
The Queen of love would storm for beauties sake,
And Hermes too, since he bestowed her wit,
The nights pale light for angry grief would shake,
To se^ chaste Mariam die in age unfit.
But oh I am deceived, she past them all
In every gift, in every property:
Her Excellencies wrought her timeles fall,
And they reioyc'd, not grieved to see her die.
The Paphian Goddess did repent her wast,
When she to one such beauty did allow:
Mercurius thought her wit his wit surpast,
And Cinthia enui'd Mariams brighter brow.
But these are fictions, they are vo^d of sense,
The Greeks but dream, and dreaming falsehoods tell:
They neither can offend nor give defense,
And not by them it was my Mariam fell.
If she had been like an Egiptian black,
And not so fair, she had been longer liude:
Her ouerflow of beauty turned back,
And drownde the spring from whence it was deriude.
Her heavenly beauty it was that made me think
That it with chastity could never dwell:
But now I see that heaven in her did link,
A spirit and a person to excel.
I Will muffle up my self in endless night,
And never let mine eyes behold the light.
Retire thy self vile monster, worse then he
That staind the virgin earth with brothers blood,
Still in some vault or den enclosed be,
Where with thy tears thou may beget a flood,
Which flood in time may drown thee: happy day
When thou at once shall die and find a grave,
A stone upon the vault, some one shall lay,
Which monument shall an inscription have.
And these shall be the words it shall contain,
Here Herod lies, that has his Mariam slain.

Chorus. WHo ever has beheld with steadfast eye,
The strange events of this one only day:
How many were deceived? How many die,
That once to day did grounds of safety lay?
It will from them all certainty bereue,
Since twice six hours so many can deceive.
This morning Herod held for surely dead,
And all the Jews on Mariam did attend:
And Constabarus rise from Saloms bed,
And neither dreamd of a divorce or end.
Pheroras ioyd that he might have his wife,
And Babus sons for safety of their life.
To night our Herod does alive remain,
The guiltles Mariam is deprived of breath:
Stout Constabarus both diuorst and slain,
The valiant sons of Baba have their death.
Pheroras sure his love to be bere^t,
If Salome her suit unmade had left.
Herod this morning did expect with joy,
To see his Mariams much beloved face:
And yet ere night he did her life destroy,
And surely thought she did her name disgrace.
Yet now again so short do humors last,
He both repents her death and knows her chaste.
Had he with wisdom now her death delaide,
He at his pleasure might command her death:
But now he has his power so much betraide,
As all his woes cannot restore her breath.
Now does he strangely lunatickly rave,
Because his Mariams life he cannot save.
This days events were certainly ordainde,
To be the warning to posterity:
So many changes are therein containde,
So admirablie strange variety.
This day alone, our sagest Hebrews shall
In after times the school of wisdom call.

FINIS.

