IVRISDICTION

REGAL,

EPISCOPAL,

PAPAL.

WHEREIN IS DECLARED

HOW THE POPE HAS INTRVDED Upon the Jurisdiction of Temporal Princes, and of
the Church. The intrusion is discovered, and the peculiar and distinct
Jurisdiction to each properly belonging, recovered.

Written by GEORGE CARLETON.

JOHN 18. 36. My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this
world, my servants would surely fight. LONDINI

Impensis Iohannis Norton. 1610.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVERAL Chapters of this Book.
THe state of the question. CHAP. I. That Kings in the time of the law of
nature had all Ecclesiastical power both of Order and Jurisdiction. II.
External coactiue Jurisdiction is a right belonging to Sovereign Princes
under the law. III. External coactiue Jurisdiction was not left by Christ to
his Church, nor practiced by the Church all that while that the Church was
without Christian Magistrates. IIII. Of the estate and Jurisdiction of the
Church from the end of the first three hundred years, until the year of
Christ 600. V. Of the estate and Jurisdiction of the Church from the year of
Christ 600. until the conquest of England. VI. How the Papal Jurisdiction was
advanced from the time of the conquest, and somewhat before, until the year
of Christ 1300. containing the means of raising that Jurisdiction by forgery,
Friars, Oaths: and the parts of the pretended Jurisdiction, Inuestitures,
Exemptions, laws imposed, Appellation, deposing of Kings, and absoluing their
subjects from faith and Allegiance. VII. How this Jurisdiction, after it was
thus declared by the Popes Clerks was refuted by the learned men of the Church
of Rome, and repressed by Councels. VIII.
TO THT MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, MY VERY GOOD LORD, THE Lord Archbishop of
CANTERBVRIE, his Grace, Metropolitan and Primate of al England, and one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
Job the man of God, (most Reverend Father in God) entering into the meditation
of the care, labor, danger and deliverance that we find in this present life,
compares it for danger to a warfare; for care and travel to the days of an
hireling: Job. 7. 1.
which estate as every member of the Church finds in this life, so the same
is much more apparent in the whole Church, which for the time of her warfare
here, as she is, so is called, militant. As this assured and expected warfare
from the beginning has kept the Church in continual exercise and watch
against many and strong adversaries: so toward the end of this warfare, that is
toward the end of this world, the adversaries growing more skillful, more bold
and desperate then before, the warfare must of necessity be made more
dangerous. The greatness of which danger may draw the governors of the
Church to a more sensible apprehension of their duties, who according to the
danger of the Church, cannot but understand that their care, industry,
vigilance, and courage must be increased for the preservation of the peace, and
good of the Church of God which they govern: so that the malice, industry and
desperate attempts of the adversaries, are to them so many prouocations
stirring the^ up more carefully to watch.

Which care has singularly appeared in your Grace, who as a General in this
warfare have given no rest to your self, but by preventing the purposes of the
enemies by espying their secrets, by answering their present incounters, by
encouraging inferiors, have declared your careful service in this warfare
setting the battle in order and encouraging every soldier in his proper
standing, and place: under this conduct have I undertaken this piece of service
for the opening the truth of ^urisdiction of late so much oppugned, defaced,
and confounded by the adversaries. Wherein as I can not promise any worth of my
service, so I shall be able with a good conscience to challenge the reward of
faithful and sincere dealing.

The question I confess, requires a man as skilful in distinguishing this
confused mass of Jurisdiction, which they now have cast upon the Pope, as
Archimedes was in examining the gouldsmithes fraud, who having received a
certain Weight of gould of Hiero King of Sicily to make a goulden Uitruuius
lib. 9. cap. 3.
crown which he would offer to his Gods; stoale away much of the gold, and put
silver in the place thereof, rendering to Hiero his true weight again. To
examine this fraud without melting of the crown, was a work to exercise the
great wit of Archimedes himself: such is this mass of Jurisdiction, wherein
fraudulent workmen (as they who confound gold, silver, coper, and brass
together) have taken the Jurisdiction of the Church, and of kings; and mingling
both together, adding much of their own dross thereto, have made it as a
deceiptfull crown to offer to their great God, to set it upon his h^ad. To
distingu^sh this confused ma^se, and to give to each his own right, was a thing
wherein I found the greater difficulty, because none of late years has trodden
this path before me, whose footsteppes might have directed me. For the question
of the Supremacy is handled learnedly and worthithily by others, who though
they have given some light to this question of Jurisdiction, yet they do it
but in some passages, not handling the question fully and purposely, but by
occasion sometimes falling into some parts thereof. Wherefore I thought it
would be a necessary service to the Church, if this thing might be truly
brought to knowledge, and the fraudulent confusion of t^is crown of
Jurisdiction standing upon the proud head of the Pope examined and
distinguished, the silver severed from the gold, and the dross from both.

As Jurisdiction lay thus confounded by those false workmen of Rome, so at the
first trial of it, when it was examined by unskillful and deceitful triars,
who fet the rules of their trial not from the truth but from ambition and
adulation, they taking upon them to be triars of truth, made things as bad or
far worse by their handling then they were before: and so wrapped this
question in new difficulties. For when Henry the eight took this title of
supreme head of the Church of England, though the sounder and more judicious
part of the Church then understood the words of that title so, as no offense
might justly rise by it: yet they that were suddenly brought from their old
opinion of perie, not to the love of the truth, but to the observance of the
Kings religion; retained a gross and impure sense of those words, as most
commonly by such is retained to this day. For when Stephen Gardener Bishop of
Winchester was at Ratisbon in Germany Calvin in Amos 7.
upon the Kings affairs, he there taking occasion to declare the meaning of
that title, supreme head of the Church given to king Henry the eight taught
that the King had such a power, that he might appoint and prescribe new
ordinances of the Church, even matters concerning faith and doctrine, and
abolish old: as namely that the King might forbid the marriage of Priests, and
might take away the use of the cup in the Sacrament of the Lords supper, and in
such things might appoint what he list. This manner of declaring the Kings
Jurisdiction, did so much offend the reformed Calvin in Amos 7. 13.
Churches, that Calvin and the writers of the Centuries Praefat. in Centro. 7.
do much complain thereof, and worthily, For the Bishop of Winchester sought
not like a curious triar of metals to severe the gold from the silver and
dross from both: but as he found this massy crown of Jurisdiction upon the
Popes head, so he took it with gold, silver, coper, dross and all: and set
upon the Kings head: So that the thing which procured so much offense, was not
the title, but the Bishops false and erroneous declaration of that title.

If any object against me: what then? will you take upon you to handle this
thing, better then such a learned and prudent Prelate? I answer, the Bishop
wanted neither wit nor learning for the opening of this point, but only a love
to the truth: which love when I shall bring to this question, I find my self
thereby so supported, that neither the perfections of other men, nor mine own
imperfections can dau^t me so much, as to cause me to give over the defense of
the truth. True it is, that a more skillful Archimedes might have been set on
this work, to distinguish the things that have lien so long confounded in this
question; or the common help of many might have been combined, wherein our
adversaries are now grown wiser in their generation then the children of
light. And though it seem to be true, that an evil cause has more need of
helps: yet there is no reason that they who have the handling of a good cause,
should in confidence of the cause neglect any help, that possibly they may
attain unto. Albeit we must confess that the arm of God has wonderfully
declared it self by weak means against great.

For if a man should look upon the means on both sides with an eye of flesh,
he would think as Vzziah did, When the Arc was shaken, that the 2. Sam. 6. 7.
Church could not possibly stand up by so weak means: For on the one side the
Pope shows himself with the riches of Saint Peter's great and potent
patrimony, with the help of so many great Princes, with the council and
policy of his Cardinals, with the armies of his Canonists, Priests secular and
regular, but especially in these later years, of his Jesuits, who glorying so
much of their learning, and filling the world with their vaunts, being
supported by wealth and policy, abounding with all worldly means that their
hearts can desire encouraged by preferments, march like armed troops entering a
battle: On the other side a company of poor men, Luther, Bucer, Zuinglius,
O^colampadius, Martyr, Calvin and such like, v^terly contemned of the Jesuits,
bringing no other furniture with them, saving a good conscience, learning, and
a love to the truth, seem to make a poor show without force, without glory.
If Gods truth were to ^e vpholden by humane means, or if the servants of the
truth were drawn to speak in the Church, as Lawyers are for their fees at the
bar: then what hope could we have to stand against the Jesuits the Popes
Lawyers, who by invincible clamours, facing and obstinacy, make not truth, but
victory the end they aim at.

But as there is great odds in the means on the one side, so there appears
no less difference in the success on the other side: For by these weak and
contemned means the world is subdued unto Christ, delivered from the bondage of
superstition, wisdom is justified of her own children, and the truth
triumphs in the sincerity and godliness of weak means, against the malice,
policy and strength of her prepotent adversaries.

Which success compared with the means on both sides, does manifest the arm
of God to be in the cause, that grows so much against the expectation of the
world and means. For what other power could make so weak means prevail so
much, against so great policy and strength, but the same power (though not in
the sam^ measure) which by a company of poor Fishermen (despised in the world)
subdued the whole world unto the obedience of Christ? As this success and
blessing by the presence of God, has been hitherto apparent in this cause: so
the Jesuits take order that the same success and blessing may continually
hereafter follow our cause, until it has rooted out all the adversaries that
make opposition against it: for what greater strength or advantage can be
given to our cause, then the wickedness of our adversaries does give? How
often does Moses declare to the Church of Israel, that the favor of God was
so much declared toward them, not for their own righteousness, but for the
wickedness of their adversaries? So that if we should stand still and look on,
and hold our selves in patience, our adversaries will work the means, by
their own strange cruelties in their Inquisitions, by their profane and
unclean conversation, by their gross Idolatry, by their horrible treasons and
conspiracies against the lives of Princes, by their devilish devises for
subversion of whole States at one blow, by their hypocrisy, falsehood and
aequiuocations, and by that most admirable and exquisit villainy that ever was
invented, in deprauing, corrupting, altering and changing all ancient
writers: by these, and the like practices of wickedness, they themselves will
work the means of our success, and of their own destruction. And if the
Prince of this world, and his first begotten had not blinded their eyes, and
their hearts, they could not choose but see, and acknowledge the experience of
Gods favor and protection mightily declared from heaven upon our cause our
Prince and State; and of late much increased and made apparent to all the world
by their own wicked practices.

Then the difference being so great in the means and in the success, so great
also between our conversation and theirs, must needs declare a great
difference between our hopes and theirs, our Religion and theirs: they have
raised the Princes and armies of the world against us, when they pretended
peace: we never used deceit or wrong against them: they have by barbarous
devises attempted to procure our utter subversion, we desire heartily their
conversion to God: they curse, revile, and baspheme us, we pray for them: this
difference may show, where truth and Religion is; and might if they entered into
the serious consideration of things, draw them to cease from all wicked
attempts, to follow and embrace one truth, and to worship one God with us.

But if there be no remedy, but that Princes and States must be oppugned by a
perpetual league of Conspiracy from Rome: if nothing can satisfy them but the
blood of Kings, then what remains but that the Princes of Christendom
prepare themselves to that great battle, which S. John says shall be fought in
the plain of the earth against Gog and Magog. When God shall raise the spirits
of princes Apoc. 20. 8. 9.
to that work, he will open the way and give the success: for fire shall come
down from God, out of heaven, and devour the enemies. Unto which service
there is nothing so effectual to animate the princes of Christendom, as is
this new and strange claim of the popes Jurisdiction over princes: which thing
because it is so much pursued by the Popes and their flatterers, and only by
them, as the great mark whereunto they address all their attempts; and the
very sum of all their Religion: therefore I have endeavored to open the whole,
to distinguish the parts, and to set this question in such a light as I could,
if not to satisfy all, yet at least to give an occasion to the judicious. I
was desirous to leave no part untouched, that all might come to a trial, and
am ready also withal, to bring my self to the trial, willing to learn and
to amend any error, after that it shall be manifested by the truth to be an
error: for which cause, I submit all to the judicious and godly censure of the
Church.

My care was also after my service to God, to perform herein a true service to
his Majesty, by opening the Jurisdiction of Kings: which I have done, not as
they use to do who serve the Pope, respecting no other rules of that service,
then his pleasure and their adulation, but I have disputed the Kings right with
a good conscience, from the rules of Gods word, knowing that the noble
disposition of his Majesty will admit of no service, whereby God or the truth
is prejudiced. All which as I commend to your Graces favor and protection, to
whom God has committed the care of his Church here, so with my hearty prayers,
I commend your Grace to the fa^our and protection of God; who enrich your heart
with his plentiful graces, that as for your proper comfort and direction, you
may enjoy them, so you may use them to the glory of God, and the comfort of his
Church through Jesus Christ.

Your Graces to be commanded in all duty,

GEORGE CARLETON.

An Admonition to the Reader.
IT may be thought strange, that so many are found to write in this
contradicting age, one contrary to another: the truth cannot be on both
sides, and therefore there is a great fault on the one side: the Reader that is
desirous to try where the fault is, may be entreated to mark with advised
observation some things, wherein our adversaries wanting either knowledge or
sincerity, have broken all the rules of right writing, to deceive such as
cannot judge (of which sort the greatest part consists) I do therefore
entreat the Readers, especially such as read my Book with a purpose to
answer it; to consider these things, wherein we challeng our adversaries for
evil dealing, in this particular Controversy: First, In setting down our
opinion, they make it not that which we hold, but another thing; and then make
large discourses in vain: they should understand our cause as we deliver it:
for we devise not their opinion, but take it out of their own books,
especially from the Popes Canons: Secondly, when they would refute us, they
bring their own Canon law, which was devised in prejudice of the freedom of
Princes, and is our adversary, and therefore cannot be our Judge: Thirdly,
When they produce the testimonies of ancient fathers, the abuse, for which we
challenge them, is, that they will not understand the question: for the fathers
write for the spiritual Jurisdiction of the Church above Princes; which thing
we never denied. But against the coactiue Jurisdiction of Prinees in matters
Ecclesiastical: which thing we hold, the Fathers never w^ote, but they are for
it. If these things were faithfully observed (as they are all perverted in this
cause by one that terms himself the Catholic Divine) and if the truth were
sought with conscience, and not prejudice maintained with resolution, men would
never presume so much upon the simplicity of the Readers, nor in the
confidence of their wit and learning, would they suffer themselves to be set to
the maintenance of any cause whatsoever. Let me farther entreat him that would
answer me, to enter into this short and serious meditation with himself,
thus: Either my purpose is to serve God for the truth, and then I may look for
a blessing upon my labors; or else to serve man though against the truth, and
then I may look for a curse upon my self and my labors: let this Meditation
rule thy pen and heart: I ask no more. Last of all let me entreat thee of
courtesy, to amend the faults escaped in printing, with thy pen, thus.

P. 2. Lin. 10. Or some others, superfluous. p. 13. l. 2. as, superfluous. p.
14. l. 29 for more read mere. p. 22. l. 28. the superfluous. p. 30. l. 15 for
teached r. touched. p. 52. marg. r. (...) p. 73. l. 28 r. against the
infringers of the privileges of the Sea Apostolic. p. 85. l. 19. thereto
superfluous. p. 98. l. 27. full superfluous. p. 105. l. 8. r. M. Luther. p.
107. l. 2. r. M. Luther. p. 108. l. 16. r. M. Bucer. p. 108. l. 20. r. M.
Antonius Flam. p. 109. l. 10. r. M. Chemnicius. p. 195. l. 19. Deposed by Pope
Stephen, r. deposed or his deposition allowed by the consent of Pope Stephen.
p. 198. l. 4. for the Bishops, r. some Bishops. p. 211. l. 11. for
opportunelyr. opportunity. p. 228. l. r2. some report the poison to have been
given in the bread, and some in the cup. p. 229. l. 31. for great r. greatest.
p. 234 l. 15. for Frederic r. Lodouic. p. 234. l. 22. for Rhenes r. Rense. p.
234. l. 27. for Rhenes r. Rense. p. 236. l 19. general superfluous. p. 250. l.
28. r. adhaerentium, and adhaerere volentium. p. 262. l. 21. for ver r. viri.
p. 272. l. 18. for choosing r. choosen. p. 272. l. 22. for to. r. in. p. 279. l.
30. no supe^fluous. p. 294. l. 16. for cultus r. cultu.

OF THE IVRISDICTION OF PRINCES, IN Causes and over Persons Ecclesiastical.
CHAP. I.
The state of the Question.

THe lawful authority and Jurisdiction of Kings in matters Ecclesiastical,
is now and has been for some ages heretofore much impugned by such, who by
usurpation having incroached upon the right of Kings, seek by all subtle and
colorable devises to maintain that by skill and some show of learning, which
they have gotten by fraud. All this mischief proceeds from the Bishop of
Rome, who usurping power, and taking to himself that honor whereunto God has
not called him, has brought all authority Ecclesiastical and Civil into
great confusion; by usurping the right both of the Church and of States. Now
our desire being to open the truth, and to declare the lawful right of Princes
and power of the Church: it seems needful first to set down what power is
given to the Pope by them that flatter him: so shall the right of the King and
of the Church better appear.

2 They yield to the Pope a fullness of power as they term it, from whence
all Spiritual Jurisdiction must proceed to others; some add also Temporal:
of Spiritual Jurisdiction De Romans Pontific. lib. 4. cap. 24
Bellarmine says [all Bishops receive Jurisdiction from the Pope] The like
some of them or some others teach also of Temporal power: the difference which
they observe is, that Spiritual power is derived from the Pope to all Bishops:
but Temporal power is given to execute some service. Augustinus Triumphus of
Ancona, who wrote about three hundredth years ago, at the commandment of
John 22. Pope, set forth of late by the authority and privilege of Gregory
13. did long before the Jesuits dispute this question of the Popes Sovereign
authority over Princes: since which time the Friars have closely followed Lib.
de potest. Eccles. q. 1. Art. 1.
his footsteps. His assertion is, Omnis potestas imperatorum and regum est
subdelegata respectu potestatis Papae. And again in the same place, Omnis
potestas saecularis est restringenda, amplianda, executioni mandanda ad
imperium Pap^. These and the like positions are now resolutely and stiffely
maintained by the Jesuits and others of that faction.

3. This agrees well with the Canon laws, which are the fundamental laws of
the court of Rome. For thus they say: Nos tam ex superioritate quam ad imperium
non est dubium nos Clement. lib. 2. de senten and re. iudic. Can. 2.
habere etc. That is, [we as well by that soueraignetie and right which without
all doubt we have to the Empire, as also by that power whereby we succ^ed the
Emperor in the vacancie of the Empire, and no less also by the fullness of
that power which Christ the King of kings, and Lord of lords has in the person
of Saint Peter granted to us though unworthy: declare all such sentences and
processes (made by Henry 7.) void and of Extrau. Com. lib. 1. de mayor. and
obed. c. vnam sanctam.
none effect] Thus says Clement 5. Pope against Henry 7. Emperor. To the
same purpose says Boniface 8. Pope, in a Constitution of his. Oportet glad^um
esse sub gladio, etc. That is [one sword must be under another sword, and the
Temporal authority must be subjected to the Spiritual authority: for when
the Apostle says: there is no power but of God, and the powers that are, are
ordained of God. They could not be ordinated, unless one sword were under
another: and a little after. Thus of the Church and of the power
Ecclesiastical is verified the prophecy of Jeremy, behold I have s^t thee
over nations, and kingdoms to pluck up and to root out, and to destroy and to
Ierem. 1. 10.
throw down, and to build and to plant. And again, we declare, we say, we
define, we pronounce; that it is necessary to salvation to believe that every
humane creature is subject to the Pope of Rome.] These be the laws of the
court of Rome Answer to the fifth part of Reports.
which some of late have so much adored as to call them Catholic Divinity,
and which for truth and certainty, and for authority over their consciences,
they hold comparable even with the holy Scriptures.

4. By all which we collect the doctrine of the court of Rome or the Popes
faction to be, that the Pope has all power Spiritual and Temporal above all
other whatsoever. This I call the opinion of the Court of Rome, or the Popes
faction, because we find the most learned of the Church of Rome to hold the
contrary. For concerning spiritual power, the best learned of the Church of
Rome, yea and whole councels maintain the Spiritual power of the Church, to be
above the Pope; as hereafter we shall declare. And for this Temporal power
above Kings and Emperors, claimed by the Popes in their Canon Law, maintained
by their flatterers: it seems so strange, so new and absurd, that they who
maintain it, are not as yet agreed upon the state of the question. For some
hold that the Pope has this power directly over Princes, as the Canonists, to
whom some of the Shoole-men may be added as Triumphus, and some of late called
Congregationis Oratorij, as Cardinal Baronius, Bozius, and such. Others
denying this direct power, hold that the Pope has the same power but
indirectly, as depending upon his Spiritual power; of this opinion is
Cardinal Bellarmine, and others: these both hold the same conclusion, but
differ in the manner of holding it. Others there be who are in some sort
content to allow the Popes Fatherhood in spiritual matters, in case lie would
not prove incorrigible, but utterly deny this power over princes, both direct
and indirect: of this opinion was Guil. Occham, Ma' silius Patauinus and other
learned men of the Church of Rome. And of late Guil. Berclaius a French Lawyer,
has with great learning refuted both the former opinions, of the Popes power
direct and indirect against Bozius and Bellarmine, and yet this man professes
himself to be resolved to live and die a Papist: so that on the one side stand
all the reformed Churches, and many of the best learned of the Church of Rome:
I may say all the Church of old and of late. On the other side stands the
Pope with his faction, that is, his flatterers: and this I call (with some of
former ages) the Court of Rome: this is the opinion of our adversaries.

5. Our positive sentence against this stands in two parts, as the Pope has
incroached on two sides, both upon the right of Kings, and of the Church.
Concerning the Kings right, we hold that in external coactiue Jurisdiction the
King has supreme authority in all causes and over all persons
Ecclesiastical as well as Civil. This is that which has been published by
Injunctions An. 1559 and Anno 1562.
diverse writings and ordinances, which by public authority have been
enacted and published; declaring that the King within hi Dominions has this
sovereign authority, and that herein there is no foreign power above the
King. The authority of the Church has been in like sort usurped by the Pope,
by drawing to himself a supposed title of the head of the universal Church:
by devising a strange authority in the fullness of power, by claiming a new
and strange privilege of his not erring judgment, and making himself the
only judge of controversies of faith. This power in judging and determining of
controversies of faith and religion, being partly in the Church, partly in the
Scriptures, the Pope has wrested from both; first extolling the Church above
the Scriptures, and then setting himself above the Church. Then, that the
limits of each power may be truly known, we give all spiritual power to the
Church, all external coactiue jurisdiction to the King: when each of these
shall have taken up his own right, there will not be so much left to the Pope,
as these great flatterers the Jesuits seek to heap upon him. Our purpose is
first, to dispute the right which Kings have in coactiue power over all persons
and in all causes even Ecclesiastical within his dominions: by persons
ecclesiastical we understand Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Rectors, and all
other set in calling and place Ecclesiastical: by causes Ecclesiastical we
understand causes Ecclesiastical of external coactiue Jurisdiction.

6. From this consideration of persons and causes, arise two great questions.
First, concerning the exemption of all causes Ecclesiastical, from the Kings
Jurisdiction: secondly, concerning the exemption of Ecclesiastical persons
from temporal audience and judicature. For the better understanding hereof, we
may proceed by some distinctions: for when our adversaries teach that the Pope
is the head of the Church: and we, that the King is the supreme governor of
the Church, though in some sound of words, these things seem not much to
differ: yet in truth there is great difference between their meaning and ours.
For they calling the Pope the head, to distinguish him from Christ, whom the
Apostle calls the head of Ephesians. 1. 22.
the Church, say that the Pope is the ministerial head: which devise was first
brought in by the Schoolmen: for among the ancients it was not known, but
all that speak of the head of the Church before, acknowledge none but Christ.
Concerning this devise of the ministerial head, we say with the ancient
Fathers that the Catholic Church is but one, and has one head, Christ Jesus:
because to one body there can be but one head, from whom grace is infused to
the whole body. This Catholic Church is as that head is, both perfectly known
to God, not to man: this then is but one in all times and places. But the
visible Churches or particular, are many at many times, in many places: and
therefore must have heads or governors, aunswerable to themselves: for many
Churches, many governors, These are either Spiritual governors or Temporal.
The spiritual government of the Church is committed to spiritual governors,
as first from Christ to his twelve Apostles, of whom none was above the rest in
this spiritual government or kingdom of Christ, as the Lord does often Mat^h.
18. 1.
expressly declare to them: from them to Bishops and Pastors, Ma^c. 9. 34.
Luke. 9. 46.
their successors. Temporal governors are such, as have the custody of
external coactiue Jurisdiction, both in Temporal and Ecclesiastical causes:
for the power of the Church, with all her spiritual Jurisdiction, never
reached to coaction. This was by God first given to Magistrates, and never
revoked, in all times practiced, but when the Church and Kings were oppressed
by the great power of Antichrist. When we call the King the supreme governor
of the Church, our meaning is, that he is appointed by God to be a Father and
preserver of religion, a keeper of Ecclesiastical discipline, and Isai. 49. 32.
as the Prophet Isaiah calls him, a nourcing father of the Church; he is the
sovereign in all affairs of coactiue Jurisdiction. Likewise this word Church,
is not taken in the same sense by them and us; for our adversaries saying, that
the Pope is the head of the Church: understand thereby the. Catholic Church
spread over the whole world, but we understand a particular Church, yielding
the King to be governor next and immediately under God of his own dominions,
and consequently of persons and causes within his own dominions: so that there
is much difference between their meaning and ours. Then we must come to such
an issue, wherein without equiuocating the question between us is set; for we
shall otherwise run into that fault which is so rife, with the Popes Clarks,
that Bellarmine himself confesses it. Notandum est (says he) multos De
eccles. militant. lib. 3. ca. 13
ex nostris tempus terere, dum probant quod Caluinus and caeteri haeretici
concedunt. This is most common among them to be large in disputing that, which
is not in question between us, and it is a sign of some ingenuitie to
confess it: but neither does himself for all his confession avoid it, neither
do they that write since, and depend upon his learning, shun it after so
fair warning; neither in truth can a false cause be maintained, in so many
books and large volumes as now they set out, unless they took this liberty
to themselves, to be large in disputing things which are not in question. The
question then is concerning the lawful authority of Kings in their own
dominions, touching this part of Jurisdiction which is called Ecclesiastical
coactiue Jurisdiction.

7. For better proceeding, let the distinction be remembered, which is usually
received of Ecclesiastical power: for all power Ecclesiastical is commonly
divided into power of order, and of Jurisdiction. The power of order, by all
writers that I could see, even of the Church of Rome, is understood to be
immediately from Christ, given to all Bishops and Priests alike by their
consecration: wherein the Pope has no privilege above other. Thus teach
Bonauentu^e in 4. sent. d. 17. q 1. August Triumphus lib. de potest. eccles.
qu. 1. ar. 1. Ioh. Gerson li. de potest. eccles. consid. 1. Cardinal. Cusanus
lib. de cathol. concord. 2. cap. 13. Cardinal. Contarenus tract. de eccles.
potest. pontificis Bellarm. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 22. This then being the
common confession of all, that the Pope has no more power herein, then any
other Bishop or Pastor, we move no contradiction in this. As they confess that
in this power the Pope has no praeeminence, but that it is given from Christto
all Bishops and pastors equally: so we confess that in this power the prince
has no part, and that Bishops and pastors have this power only from the
divine ordinance, and not from earthly princes: then our question is only; of
the power of Jurisdiction.

8. This power of Jurisdiction is diversely understood by the De potest. eccles.
qu. 1. art. 1
writers of the Church of Rome. Augustinus Triumphus does deliver it thus. [The
power of Jurisdiction is Temporal or Spiritual; and this power considered in
general is threefold; immediate, derived, or given to execute some service:
the power of Jurisdiction immediate of all things Spiritual and Temporal, is
only in the Pope. The power of Jurisdiction derived is in Bishops, to them
derived from the Pope: the power of Temporal Jurisdiction given to execute
some service for the help of the Church is in Emperors, Kings, and secular
princes: this power is not immediate from God, but is given first to the Pope,
and so to Kings for the use of the Church, and ^elpe of Pope and Prelates]. I
have delivered this in the ^ery words of Triumphus, whom in this thing others
follow: though of late some of the finer Jesuits, who hold the same, are
grown more cunning in the manner of delivering it. Bellarmine loath to leave
the opinion, and ashamed so grossly to propose it, deuiseth a mollification of
it thus. Asserimus Ponti^icem Lib. 5. de Romans pont. cap. 6.
vt ponti^icem, et si non habeat vllam mere temporalem potestatem: tamen habere
in ordine ad spirituale bonum summam potestatem disponendi de temporalibus
rebus omnium Christianorum. That is, [We aver that the Pope, albeit he has not
any power merely Temporal as Pope, yet has power supreme in respect of
Spiritual good, to dispose of all the Temporalties of all Christians. And in
the next Chapter concludes, that the Pope has authority to depose heretical
kings and princes; and answers to an objection, which I will set down in his
own words. Quod si Christiani non deposuerunt olim Neronem, Diocletianum,
Iulianum, Valentem and similes, i^suerat quia deerant vires temporales
Christianis. That is, [If Christians of old deposed not Nero, Diocletian,
Julian, Valens, and the like, this was because Christians then wanted Temporal
forces]. They will shortly without blushing tell us, that Jesus Christ also
submitted himself to the heathen Emperors, and to their deputies, because he
wanted power to resist them: for this they may say with some sophistical show
of reason, as well as that which they do say. Then his opinion is, that the
Pope as Pope has not any Temporal power, but yet the Pope and only the Pope
has Temporal power above all Kings and Emperors. This is one of the greatest
points wherein the Pope has incroached upon the right of Kings.

9. Besides this Temporal Jurisdiction, there is another part of Jurisdiction
called spiritual: which the writers of the Church of Rome divide into
internal, and external; internal they refer to the Sacraments only,
Gerson de potest. ecclesi. consid. 1. Bellar. de Romans pont. lib. 4. cap. 22.
Bellarmine in the place last cited, disputing of Jurisdiction, says, [there is
a triple power in the Bishop of Rome: first of order, secondly of internal
Jurisdiction, thirdly of external Jurisdiction: the first is referred to the
Sacraments, the second to inward government which is in the court of
conscience; the third to that external government which is practiced in
external courts: and confesses that of the first and second, there is no
question between us, but only of the third: De prima and secunda non est
question, sed solum de tertia; says he. Then of this we are agreed, that Lib.
4. cap. 22. de Romans Pont.
the question between us and them, is only of Jurisdiction in the third
sense, and therein especially of Jurisdiction coactiue in external courts:
binding and compelling by force of law, and other external mulcts and
punishments, beside excommunication: as for Spiritual Jurisdiction of the
Church, standing in examinations of controversies of faith, judging of
heresies, deposing of heretics; excommunication of notorious and stubborn
offenders, ordination of Priests and Deacons, institution and collation of
benefices and spiritual cures, etc. This we reserve entire to the Church,
which Princes cannot give or take from the Church. This power has been
practiced by the Church, without coactiue Jurisdiction: other then of
excommunication. But when the matters handled in the Ecclesiastical
consistory, are not matters of faith and religion, but of a civil nature,
which yet are called Ecclesiastical, as being given by Princes, and appointed
to be within the cognizance of that consistory; and when the censures are not
spiritual, but carnal, compulsiue, coactiue: here appears the power of the
civil magistrate. This power we yield to the magistrate, and here is the
question, whether the magistrate has right to this power, or Jurisdiction,
which is thus described by the Romanists. What is the Jurisdiction in question.
External Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, is a power coactiue given to govern
Christian people in contentious courts: this is the principal question which we
have here to search. Our English flatterers of the Pope that write now, and of
late have written, undertake to prove that this Jurisdiction is first and
principally in the Pope, and from him derived to Bishops, and that Kings have
not this power at all, or any part of it, unless by commission from the Pope:
our assertion is contrary, that this power of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
external and coactiue be^ongs to Kings only, and not to Ecclesiastical
persons, but as they ^aue commission from their Princes. And because we would
^ot be mistaken in the question, we will set down the words of the best of that
side, for better evidence and assurance, who take the question thus, and not
otherwise. John Gerson says, Potestas De potest. Eccleconsid. 4.
Ecclesiastica Iurisdictionis in foro exteriori, est potestas Eccl^siastica
coactiua, quae valet exerceri in alterum etiam i^uitum. Bellarmine speaking of
the same power, says it is, ad regendum populum Christianum i^ foro exteriori.

10. Then this is the thing which we are to prove, that Ecclesiastical
coactiue power, by force of law and corporal punishments, by which Christian
people are to be governed in external and contentious courts, is a power which
of right belongs to Christian Princes. Concerning the power of orders, and
institutions, of excommunication and deposition, and of internal Jurisdiction
in the court of Conscience, and in administration of Sacraments, and absolution
by power of the keys; this we give not to Princes: but Princes, as they are
preseruers of Religion, and nurcing fathers of the Church, are to see that
Bishops and all inferior ministers perform their faithful duties in their
several places, and if they be found faulty to punish them; because that
belongs to external Jurisdiction coactiue. Thus much may suffice for the
state of the question. For the manner of handling, I purpose to search the
right of Kings; first in the law of nature, secondly in the written law given
by Moses, continued until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: thirdly to
declare the confirmation of the same right by Christ and his Apostles, and the
Church succeeding, until that time that the Pope drew a new estate and
Jurisdiction to himself. After which time I purpose to observe how the Pope
has incroached, first upon the Bishops, then upon the right of kings, and last
upon the right of the Church and general Councels. By all which will appear,
how late, how new and strange that Jurisdiction is, which the flatterers of the
court of Rome now yield to the Pope.

CHAP. II.
Kings in the time of the Law of nature, had all power Ecclesiastical, both of
order and Jurisdiction.

IN the Law of nature we have not many examples of Kings, that governed a
people where the Church of God was planted: there is only mention of
Melchisedecke King of Salem, of Genesis 14. 19.
him it is said, Genesis 14. Melchisedecke King of Salem was a priest of the high
God. In his person these two offices, the kingdom and the priesthood were
joined; both which offices followed the prerogative of the birthright: for that
this Melchisedeck was Sem, is the received opinion of many interpretours:
wherein is some difference. Some take Sem to be the eldest son of Noah, but
others from a probable collation of Scriptures hold him to be the second son:
but whether he were eldest or not, it is apparent, and out of doubt by that
blessing, Genesis 9. that he had the birthright: for Canaan is made Genesis 9. 26, 27.
his servant, which is the ancient style and evidence of the birthright, as is
expressed in the birthright of Jacob; and Iaphet is persuaded Genesis 27. 29.
to dwell in the tents of Sem. Whereas therefore he has that honor above both
his brethren, the birthright is evidently confirmed unto him, Canaan being made
his servant, and Ia^het being directed to repair to his tents: for as then the
Church was in tents. Sem having the birthright confirmed by his fathers
blessing, as Jacob had by the blessing of Isaac afterward, has consequently
all those privileges confirmed to him which follow the birthright. The
privileges which in the time of the law of nature followed the birthright,
were these; The government or principality, the Priesthood, and a portion
answerable to maintain both these dignities: the two former were principal
prerogatives, the third followed as an adherent to them; a double portion
answerable to a double dignity. The princedome and double portion are
generally acknowledged to belong to the birthright: but the priesthood is not
so much manifested, and would therefore somewhat more be opened. I will here
briefly collect the reasons, which prove the priesthood to belong to the
birthright, as well as the princedome and double portion.

2. First from reason it is deduced thus, It cannot by reason be imagined, but
that God having a purpose to call a Church out of this world, did set up the
government and means whereby the Church might be instituted in the true
knowledge and wor^hip of God: therefore this government and those means were
set up in the law of nature, in those principalities which then stood. The
first principality that was set up to rule many families, was a kingdom; as
the first simply was in the government of a family: for before there could be a
commonwealth, there must be a city, or the collection of many families into
the lawful right of one society; and before there could be a city, there
must be particular houses and families: so that the first government that was
in the world among men, was the government of a family: now in the government of
a family, it is absurd to think, and impossible to prove, that the power of
government was in the multitude. This I observe the rather, because some of the
Popes flatterers of late, as others also to open a wide gappe to rebellions,
have written that the power of government by the law of nature is in the
multitude: but every man of reason carries thus much light and understanding
about him, as to judge of this thing without error. Because no man can
conceive in the first beginning any other government of a family, then by one
whom God and nature made Patrem familias, the father of the family. Now come
from the government of one family, to the government of diverse; when many
families were gathered together, the first government that was erected among
them, was that with which they were first and best acquainted: for as in
families, so in the collection of diverse families, one was in government, as
the father of the family was in his famiile. And what is a King by nature, but
the father of a great family? and what is the father of a family by nature,
but a little King? and therefore the first government of states by the law of
nature, was by Kings. These principalities were first erected for the good of
Gods Church; to minister as nourcing fathers to the Church. Thus were Kings
erected, not only by their authority to see that Gods service were
established, but by the law of nature to perform that service in their own
persons. And therefore as Adam had this care first, so it is testified of Seth
(to whom the birthright pertained after Cain was rejected) that in his time
Genesis 4. 26.
men began to call upon the name of the Lord, which declares that he
established the true worship of God in his days.

3. Another reason may be drawn from this blessing which Noah gave to Sem,
[blessed be the Lord God of Sem, and let Genesis 9. 26. 27.
Canaan be his servant: God persuade Iaphet that he may dwell in the tents of
Sem, and let Canaan be his servant.] In which words three privileges of Sem
are manifested. First that God is called the Lord God of Sem, Secondly that
Canaan shall be his servant: Thirdly that Iaphet shall repair to his tents. The
first and last are confirmations of the priesthood, the second a proof of the
primogeniture: then the priesthood is annexed to the birthright. Another reason
is from the example of Melchisedeck, who was both King and Priest. In which
example we consider that by the law of nature, before there was a positive law
to distinguish and separate these offices, both did naturally concur in one
person: for in this we understand the ordinary course held in the law of
nature. If wicked Kings neglected this godly order, it was because they were
wicked, and had shaked off the fear of God, and as much as in them was,
extinguished the light of nature. Another reason may be drawn from the
testimony of Moses, who witnesses that the Lord took the Levites to minister
in place of the first borne. [I have taken the Levites from among the children
of Israel. And the Leuits Number. 3. 12. and 8. 6.
shall be mine, because all the first borne are mine.] Upon which words Lyra
reporting the received judgments of the best interpretors Lyra in Number. 3. 12.
says. Ante lege^ datam ad primogenitos pertinebat offerre sacrificia: and a
little after, Leuitae successerunt loco eorum: and again to the same purpose,
Cultus diuinus ante legem datam In Number. 8. 16:
pertinebat, ad primogenitos Israel: and again, Sacerdotium. In Genesis 14.
suit annexum primogeniturae vsque a^ legem datam per Mosen.

4. By all which thus much appears; that by the law of nature, the first
borne stood in the ministry and service of God, to preach the knowledge of
God to others, and to execute his ordinances and sacrifices. And as the first
borne in families were thus to instruct and inform the whole family, so the
first borne in a national principality or kingdom were bound not only to
cominaund as civil magistrates, but to execute the holy ordinances of God as
the chief Priests of that nation, as is evident by these reasons, and by the
example of Melchisedeck. The same light may appear though much darkened, in
the ancient Plato in politic. Arist. 3. de repub. Cic. 1. de diuinat. Clem.
Alex. str. 8.
government of the heathen, for even heathen Kings are witnessed in old times,
to have been Priests of such gods as they served: which ancient combining of
these two offices in one person, came from the ancient practice in the time of
the law of nature, and from the light of nature which was received among the
heathen.

5. But here a question may be moved, If Kings by the law of nature were
Priests, and the law of nature stand always in force, not abrogated: why then
are not Kings now Priests? For answer, first we say, that it was altered by a
positive law of God, as hereafter we shall declare: and therefore the same
authority that instituted this thing, has also altered it. But it may be
replied, that the positive law of God which has altered this thing, was partly
ceremonial, partly judicial: for these two dignities of the princedome and
priesthood, which under the law of nature were combined in one person, were
divided under the law of Moses, and distinctly set in two persons. Moses
keeping the civil government, and Aaron the Priesthood. The government of
Moses and his successors being more civil, The Priesthood of Aaron and his
successors ceremonial; it follows that this ancient ordinance of the law of
nature was altered by such positive laws of God, which were either civil or
ceremonial: and consequently that this alteration takes not away the ancient
right.

6. If I might therefore in a matter of this nature declare my poor opinion,
leaving the censure hereof to the learned that are able to judge: I take it,
that as it is not simply unlawful that a King may be a Priest, and
nevertheless keep his kingdom: so I suppose this thing cannot be done
without not only a lawful, but also an ordinary calling from God, and from
Heb. 5. 4.
the Church: [For no man takes this honor to himself, but he that was called
thereto, as was Aaron.] And this cannot be done without an ordinary calling:
for when Kings were Priests, and the first borne sacrificers, as in the law of
nature; then they had an ordinary calling thereto: for that was then the
ordinance of God, and ordinary in the Church, which now is not. But if a man
were first ^ Priest, and afterward advanced to a kingdom by some Temporal
right: in this case it were assuredly unlawful for him to shake off his holy
estate, and betake himself wholly and only to his Temporal government, as some
Cardinals have done. Then by the law of nature the King had both the power of
order and Jurisdiction: and howsoever this is altered by a positive ordinance
of God, yet all is not taken away: there remains still that part of
Jurisdiction, so far as it stands in power coactiue, in respect whereof the
common law of this land 10. H. 7. 18.
says, the King is persona mixta, because he has both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal Jurisdiction.

7. This example of Melchisedeck both King and Priest, has much lifted up the
Pope and his flatterers: for of this they take especial hold, and think
hereby to prove the Pope to be King of the Church, because Melchisedeck was
both King and Priest. But to this we answer, Melchisedeck had both these
honors by a lawful and ordinary calling, but so has not the Pope: for his
Priesthood, we grant he had once thereto a lawful calling, both by local and
doctrinall succession: which doctrinall succession Irenaeus calls
successionem principalem: Tertullian, doctrinae co^sanguinitate^ cum Apostolica
Ecclesia: Jren. li. 4. ca. 43. Tertul. prescript.
but now have they forsaken that principal succession, and have nothing left
to glory in, but bare personal and local succession. Then to the office of a
Bishop, the Pope may show some color, though the color be now worn
thredbare: but to the princely office which he claims over the Church, he can
show neither calling nor color: so that the example of Melchisedek, which the
Popes parasites draw with such violence to him, does help him nothing, but
rather helps the cause of Christian Kings against him: for it is certain
that Kings were Priests by an ordinary calling before these two offices were
distinguished; but it can never be proved that Priests were Kings by such an
ordinary calling, after that these two offices were set in distinct persons. If
any man suppose that we have stretched the example of Melchisedeck too far,
because he was a type of Christ: I answer, this is nothing against my
purpose, that Melchisedeck was a type of Christ. For many men in their ordinary
standing and executing ordinary functions, did also bear some type
extraordinary: thus did Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, and others. I speak of
Melchisedeck, as I find him in his ordinary place, a King, and a Priest.

8. By all which we conclude, that under the law of Nature Kings were in the
beginning invested with all power Ecclesiastical both of orders and
Jurisdiction: and therefore these things are not incompatible by nature. All
this time which lasted about the space of two thousand and five hundred years,
Kings had Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction without question. And therefore this
Jurisdiction of Princes, which we have undertaken to examine, is found
aunswerable to the first government of the world, until the time of the law
given by Moses.

CHAP. III.
All external Jurisdiction coactiue, was a right belonging to Kings under the
Law.

NOw let us search what Jurisdiction in matters Ecclesiastical was found due,
and acknowledged to belong to the Kings right all that time under the Law. Then
we find by an especial commandment of God: these two offices of King and
Priest were distinguished, and set in two several persons: the one in Moses,
the other in Aaron. And the tribe of Leui was taken to the service of God, Number.
3. 12. and 8. 6.
in stead of the first borne by an express commandment: and the first borne
which in number exceeded the number of the Louites, were redeemed by five
shekels a man: for the number Number. 3.
of the first borne was taken 22273. the number of the Levites 22000. so that
the number of the first borne exceeded the number of the Levites by 273. These
were redeemed, and after that redemption, the first borne of other tribes were
discharged from the attendance of the service of God, and the Levites took up
their place. Now the Kings office and the Priests being thus distinguished, we
must consider what things did properly belong to each office.

2. First we find that Moses, who had the place of a King in government, as he
is also called a King; does consecrate Aaron Genesis 36, 31.
the Priest. Moses is commanded to consecrate him and Deuteronomy. 33. 5.
his son s Exodus 28. and performs it, Leuit. 8. therefore it is repeated,
Number. 3. These are the names of the sons of Aaron Number. 3. 3.
the anointed Priests, whom Moses did consecrate to minister in the Priests
office. Here then appears some Jurisdiction of Moses over Aaron. But this I
mean not to urge, for it may be thought extraordinailry to belong to Moses as
Gods Apostle or Ambassador and lawgiuer unto Israel: for in such great
chaunges, as was from the law of Nature to the written law, somewhat must be
admitted extraordinary: and this I could be well content to understand so:
though many doubts arise for the princes right, against the Priests. For first
it may be objected, seeing there was a Prince and a Priest set up distinct one
from the other, why should the Prince consecrate the Priest, and not the Priest
the Prince? But here we find that Aaron does not consecrate Moses to be
Prince, but Moses does consecrate Aaron to be Priest. Another doubt may be
moved, why Moses should consecrate not only Aaron, but his sons also. For
though we should admit the consecration of Aaron to be done by Moses of
necessity, as a thing extraordinary at the first beginning of this Priesthood:
yet this necessity appears not so much in Aarons sons: for they might have
been consecrated by Aaron, after that himself had been once consecrated by
Moses. And yet we find that the consecration of Aaron, and his sons, is done
altogether by Moses. These things though they make fair show for the Princes
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical over Priests, yet we purpose not to stand upon
them.

3. But when the Priest was once consecrated and ordained, and all things fully
perfected concerning his function, and two several and distinct functions set
up: then will appear without fail in Moses and his successors the right of
Princes, in Aaron and his successors the right of Priests. After all things
thus perfected, we find that all the laws which in truth proceeded originally
from God, were established by the authority of Moses: and this we find true,
not only in Judicial and Civil Laws, which were to rule that state; but
even in ceremonial and Moral Laws which were to rule the Church. There is
not so much as one ceremonial law established by the authority of Aaron, but
in all the name and authority of Moses is expressed: only we find concerning
Aaron, that if any doubt in the laws ceremonial did arise, for the
interpretation of those laws and of such doubts, the high Priest must sit as
judge. For the people are charged in matters that are hard, to consult with the
Priest and civil judge, Deuteronomy. 17. 8. etc. Which the learned interpreters
understand thus: that if the cause be mixed, partly Civil, partly Ceremonial,
or doub^full; that then both the Civil Magistrate and the Priest must jointly
determine it: but if the people have distinct causes, some Civil, other
Ceremonial, the Civil Magistrate must judge the causes Civil, and the Priest
must judge the causes Ceremonial: from the consideration of which place we may
draw certain inferences.

4. First, all Laws even Ceremonial, that is, Laws whereunto Spiritual or
Canon Laws are answerable, are established by the authority of the Civil
Magistrate. This takes away all authority of the Popes Canon law, in all
Christian kingdoms, where it is not established by the authority of Kings in
their kingdoms. For it is against all reason, and rules; whether we look upon
the light of nature, or upon the Scriptures, or the lawful practife of
authority since the Scriptures were written, that any Laws should be imposed
upon a Prince against or without his consent: as the Popes have endeavored to
impose the Canon Laws upon Princes. And this appears in the practice of
Christian Magistrates, so long as lawful authority stood up without confusion
in the world. But here we consider the fountain of that practice, which was
from Gods Law: wherein we see all Laws confirmed and established by the
authority of the Civil Magistrate. And if it could be proved, that in some
Laws Ceremonial the authority of Aaron was requisite, yet this helps them
nothing that plead for the Popes Canons. For these men would impose these
Canons upon Princes without their consent: but in all these Laws of Moses,
(wherein is a perfect pattern for all lawmakers) they cannot show one Law,
though never so nearely concerning the Church, which is established without the
authority of Moses the Civil Magistrate. If they object, these things were
all done by an especial commandment of God, I answer this does more
establish the authority of Princes, and confirm our purpose: for let them
answer, why God would have all these things established by the Civil
Magistrate, and not by the Priest? This then makes a greater and clearer
confirmation of the Princes right. Then the Church may interpret Scripture,
determine controversies of faith, but cannot establish a Law: the reason is,
because for the establishing of Laws, coactiue power is requisite, which is in
the Civil Magistrate, and not in the Church. And therefore the Canon Laws can
have no force of laws, but as they are received and established by Princes in
their several kingdoms. For neither can the law have the force of a law
without coactiue power, neither has the Pope any coactiue power in the
kingdoms of other Princes; but only in such places where himself is a
Temporal Prince.

5. Secondly we observe that the high Priest is appointed by God a judge for
interpretation of those laws that concern the Church, in questions of
conscience, in causes mixed, or doubtful. This might moderate the humors of
some, who in love to innovation would leave no place of judicature to
Ecclesiastical persons: for these things are insert into Moses law, taken
from the law of Nature, and not as things Ceremonial: which thing is apparent
from the end, use, and necessity thereof: for the things which had a necessary
use before the written law, and must have a necessary use after the abrogation
of that law, must be acknowledged to be taken from a perpetual law: because
there must be a perpetual rule for a perpetual necessity. This then being
perpetual and necessary (matters of question, and of Ecclesiastical audience
still arising) the hearing and judging of such things, belong to such as are
most skillful in those affairs. And hence is the judicature of fuch things
assigned to the Priest: which right of Ecclesiastical judgments and courts,
stands no less now due to them in the time of grace, then it was under the
law: because this office in iugdeing, hearing, and determining, is not here
given to Priests as a thing Ceremonial, but as I have declared, derived from
the law of Nature, as a perpetual service for a perpetual use.

6. Thirdly we consider that the laws Ecclesiastical are established by the
authority of the Civil Magistrate, but for interpretation of them the Priest
is appointed to judge. Hence rises the ground of Jurisdiction both Temporal
and Spiritual: we consider Jurisdiction here as our question imports,
authority coactiue in external judicature in the execution of laws. The
fountain of this authority is in him principally, by whose authority the law
is established, and without whose authority it is not. The execution of this
authority is in them that are appointed judges. And herein there is no
difference between Temporal and Ecclesiastical authority, I speak not now
of Spiritual government by the laws of God, executed within the court of
Conscience, but of Ecclesiastical government in the execution of laws
Ecclesiastical, wherein there is use of coactiue power. These two things being
in themselves, and in nature so distinct, if this one distinction might be
remembered, it is enough to answer all the confused collections of that
Catholic Divine, who wrote of late against the fifth part of Reports of the
Lord Cook. For all that he writes there, resting upon no other ground, then
upon the confounding of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical power, is answered in
one word, by this one poor distinction between these two powers. Now the
distinction is apparent: because in Spiritual government there is no coactiue
power: but in Ecclesiastical judicature there is coactiue power: which makes
an evident and famous difference in Jurisdiction: because this is most
certain, that all that Jurisdiction wherein coactiue power is used, is from the
Civil Magistrate. Then if these two governments, I mean Ecclesiastical and
Temporal, be directed by coactiue power, there is no difference in the point of
Jurisdiction between Temporal and Ecclesiastical authority. For the King
and only the King is to appoint judges in matters Temporal and
Ecclesiastical, the King has no more authority in reuersing the judgment of
the one, then of the other, being true, just, and lawful. So that the Kings
Jurisdiction stands not in a power to dissanull true and righteous iudgemens,
but in a power supereminent, by which he is charged: First, to confirm laws
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, Secondly, to place Judges for both causes,
Thirdly, to see that those judges of both sorts judge justly according to
right and equity, Fourthly, to punish them if they shall be found to give
unjust and corrupt sentences, Fifthly, and last of all, his Jurisdiction
appears in appellations.

7. But here a question will be moved, whether a man may appeal from an
Ecclesiastical judge to the Prince. For that one may appeal from a Temporal
judge, I suppose it is not doubted, at least I see no reason why it should be
doubted. But in a cause Ecclesiastical and from a judge Ecclesiastical to
appeal to the Temporal Magistrate, of this some Romish Doctors doubt. This
doubt which the Canonists have made, may be increased by that place, Deu. 17.
10. [Thou shall not decline from that thing which they shall show thee, neither
to the right Deuteronomy. 17. 12^.
hand nor to the left. And that man that will do presumptuously, not harkening
to the Priest that stands before the Lord thy God to minister there, or unto
the judge that man shall die.] It might seem to be collected hence, that there
is no appellation from the Priest, no though he should judge as some Rabbis
expound the words. I will declare their exposition because it sauoureth much
like the expositions of some Papists, where the text says, thou shall not
decline to the right hand, nor to the left, they expound it; that if the Priest
shall say thy right hand is thy left, or thy left is thy right: this sentence
thou must receive Verse 11.
and therein rest.

8. But this is a fond assertion, not only without reason, but against the
express words of the Scripture: for it is said, according to the law which
shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they shall tell thee,
thou shall do. Where we find two rules for these two kinds of Judges, the
Priest and the judge: the sentence of the Priest, must be according to the
written law: the sentence of the other according to the truth of justice and
judgment. If a man be able to show that he is wronged, he may undoubtedly
appeal to a Superior: now a man may be able to show that he is wronged, if
he can show that the Priest declineth from the law of God, which is appointed
his rule, or the Temporal judge from justice. And therefore if there be a
Superior in the land, he may appeal: but if there be no Superior, he is
without remedy; as when Hely was both Priest and judge: from him at that time
there could be no appellation. but where the form of a kingdom is
established, where one King is set up in lawful authority, by whose power
judges Spiritual and Temporal are placed in his dominions: here appears a
fountain of Jurisdiction, derived as it were into two inferior rivers: and
from these inferior powers appellation may be brought, if they shall not in
their sentences, keep their rules prescribed to them, the law and justice:
for the appellation being grounded upon the law of Nature, to moderate the
peruersitie and partiality of judges, it were an absurd thing to deny this in
causes Ecclesiastical, unless a man would suppose that persons
Ecclesiastical may not be corrupt in their judgments. Now if we shall once
grant appellations, then assuredly we confirm the Jurisdiction of Princes in
all matters wherein appellation may be made to them. And because Jurisdiction
is assuredly proved by appellation, we will for the farther manifestation of
the truth, seek to clear this point: the rather because our adversaries tell
us confidently, that in matters Ecclesiastical, all appellation belongs to
the Pope. The Popes say so, and they believe them: we hold that appellation in
causes Ecclesiastical is to be directed to the King, who is by God set over
the persons appellant.

9. In the Old Testament we have few examples, or none, that I remember; of
any that appealed from any inferior judge Ecclesiastical to the Sovereign:
but in the New Testament there is one example sufficient to confirm the truth.
S. Paul Act. 25. and 23.
being accused for causes Ecclesiastical, appealed from the high Priest to
C^sar. Therefore it is lawful in matters Ecclesiastical to appeal from judges
Ecclesiastical to the Civil Magistrate. The consequence rests upon this,
that Saint Paul herein did nothing but that which he might do justly and
lawfully: which thing I suppose the greatest enemy of Saint Paul's Doctrine,
will not deny: for he came up to Jerusalem with this profession and purpose.
[I am ready not to be bound only, Act. 21. 13.
but even to die for the name of the Lord Jesus. Neither durst he for saving of
his life, give a scandal to the Gospel.] The antecedent consists of these
two parts, First that the matters for which Saint Paul was accused, were
matters Ecclesiastical: Secondly, that therein he appealed from the high
Priest: both are witnessed by the express words of the Scripture. For Festus
^aith, [They brought no crime against him, but had certain Act. 25. 18 19.
questions against him of their own superstition, and of one Jesus which was
dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive.] These questions be out of doubt
Ecclesiastical, even in the judgment of our adversaries: that he appealed
from the high Priest, reskuing himself from his judgment, it is evident by
the words in the twenty three Chapter, where the Apostle speaks to the high
Priest, as to his judge. [Thou sit to judge me according Act. 23. 3.
to the law.] And when he was reskued from the Priests by Lysias, and sent to
Felix, and left by him to Festus: he never thinks of appealing from any of
the^e civil governors. But when Festus asked him, if he will go to
Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things, then P^ul utterly refusing the
highPriest Act. 25. 10.
appealed to C^sar: by which it follows that in matters Ecclesiastical, a
man may appeal from judges Ecclesiastical to the Sovereign Prince. Whereupon
this undoubtedly follows, that there rests Sovereign Jurisdiction in the
Prince. And therefore the Popes and their flatterers understanding well, that
Supreme Jurisdiction could never be proved to rest in the Popes, unless
first Appellation should be made to them, wrought by all subtilty, as hereafter
we shall declare (by right or wrong they neither cared nor spared) to cause
Appellations to be made to them: which thing when once they had obtained, that
in all causes Ecclesiastical Appellation might be made to the Popes: then and
not before, this opinion was r^olued, that Supreme Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction was in the Popes. And therefore we proving that Supreme and last
Appellation does by the law of God, belong to none but to the Sovereign
Prince; conclude undoubtedly that Supreme Jurisdiction belongs to him only.

10. Here a question may be moved, whether Saint Paul did well and orderly
when he appealed to Caesar, and whether Caesar was made judge of these
questions, which were Doctrines. We answer, Saint Paul had no meaning to make
C^sar judge of any point of faith. But whereas he was persecuted by the high
Priests, who sought his life; in this matter of coactiue power Saint Paul
gives Jurisdiction to Caesar. There is also a difference between that power
which heathen Princes have, and that which Christian Princes have: for heathen
Princes have all power coactiue whatsoever the cause be: and without this help
the Church could never deal in matters of this nature. Christian Princes
besides this coactiue power, have also, as appears in the government of
Israel, external discipline in matters Ecclesiastical.

11. Thus we have declared the distinct right of the King and the Priest, after
that they were distinguished by the written law of God: we have proved that
the Sovereign Jurisdiction coactiue rests in the Prince by a right which God
has given, and therefore may not be taken away by man. It follows to
consider, how this right has been accordingly exercised by the godly Kings of
Israel. Ios^ commanded the people I^s. 5.
to be circumcised, and not Eleazerus, the cause was Eccles^ticall, but to
command in such causes declares jurisdiction. 2. Sam. 6.
David reduces the Arc, he appoints Priests, Levites, Singers, 1. Paral. 16.
1. Paral. 24.
Porters to serve at the Tabernacle: he assigns Officers of the sons of
Aaron. All which being matters Ecclesiastical, the Prince as having sovereign
authority in both causes 2. Paral. 6.
ordains. Solomon builds the Temple, and consecrateth it. Asa remoueth
Idols, and dedicated the Altar of God that was 2. Paral. 15.
before the porch of the Lord. Iehosaphat abolisheth Idolatry, cutteth down
the groves, sends Priests and Levites, to teach in Towns and Cities: Sets
up Judges both civil and Ecclesiastical, and commands both to judge
according to godliness, truth, and Justice. Because in the words of
Iehosaphat, these things are distinctly delivered, we will observe the whole 2.
Chron. 19. 5
place. The words are these, And he set judges in the land throughout all the
strong Cities of Judah, City by City. And 6.
said to the Judges, take heed what you do, for you execute not the judgment
of man, but of the Lord, and he will be with you ^.
in the cause and judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon
you, take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God,
neither respect of persons nor receiving of reward.

Moreover in Jerusalem did Iehosaphat set of the Levites and 8.
of the Priests, and of the chief of the families in Israel, for the 9.
judgment and cause of the Lord, and they returned to Jerusalem. And he
charged them saying, thus shall you do, in the 10.
fear of the Lord, with a perfect heart. And in every cause that shall come to
you of your brethren, that dwell in your Cities, between blood and blood,
between Law and precept, Statutes and judgments: you shall judge them, and
admonish them, that they trespass not against the Lord, that wrath come 11.
not upon you and upon your brethren. And behold Amariah the high Priest, shall
be the chief over you in all matters of the Lord.

12. From which words, we collect thus much, concerning ^he Kings Jurisdiction,
and the things wherein it consists. first the King appoints and places
both Temporal and clesi^sticall Judges, and commands and charge them so
placed, to execute their functions faithfully, we infer upon this command in
both alike, that he has Jurisdiction over both causes. But here let me
remember a trifling objection, which Answer to the first part of reports, c. 9.
some of our adversaries have devised of late, they would distinguish between
command and Jurisdiction: For they deny not but that all sorts of persons are
under the Kings command and government: whom he may command, each to do their
Office, and yet they utterly deny the Kings Jurisdiction: and tell us that
command and Jurisdiction must not be hudled up together. Now let us consider
what hudling is in this, when the Kings command and his Jurisdiction are set as
things depending and cohaering one to the other. When we say the King may
command, we mean plainly as we speak, that the King has from God lawful
authority to command, and to punish them that break his command: This is the
common understanding of the Kings command, But these Romish sophisters when
they say the King may command, do not understand, neither will they acknowledge
at any hand, that the King has lawful authority from God, to punish the
breach of his command: for they utterly deny that the King has any authority
to punish a Clarke, though he should break his commandment. And call you this
a command? The King may command and go without, as the saying is. This is the
devils sophistry, taken up by men hardened against shame, content to stoop
down to gather up the meanest and basest shifts to dazell the simple. The
Jesuits resolve of this, as of a truth most soundly concluded in their
schools: That the King may not punish Ecclesiastical persons: that the Kings
Court may not hear, examine and judge them, though they should commit murders,
adulteries, robberies, or what other wickedness soever. And yet they tell us,
that the King may command them. Now to say one thing, and yet to let the world
see, that they are resolved in the contrary: this sauoreth strongly of the
spirit of illusion, when reason, learning, honesty and all fails, yet well
fare a bold and hardened face, which never fails this generation.

13. The truth is, if the King have not lawful authority to punish, he has
not lawful authority to command, and punish he cannot unless he has
authority to judge, or cause judgment to be done; so that they who take away
from the King power to judge persons Ecclesiastical, take from him power to
punish, and consequently power to command: but the Doctrine of the Papists this
day, (as shall hereafter appear in his due place) takes from the king power
to judge per sons Ecclesiastical, therefore, they rob him of power to punish,
and to command; for nothing can more strongly take away the Kings command,
then to deny him power to punish and to judge. And yet they are not ashamed to
tell us, that they deny not the kings command, but his Jurisdiction. Then to
leave these men with their absurd and perplexed contradictions: where the King
^ay command, he may judge and punish the breach of that command, and therefore
his Jurisdiction appears in his lawful authority and command. Then by this
charge and command of Iehosaph^, is declared his Jurisdiction in these causes,
wherein he has this authority to command: for otherwise the Kings command is
but as the word of a private man, or of a child, if he have not power to judge
and punish.

14. Moreover whereas Iehosaphat commands the Priests and Levites to judge
between blood and blood, Law and precepts, statutes and judgments: In things
that concerned questions of blood, as when blood was shed by casualtie, in
which case the party offending, had remedy by sanctuary, and the high Priest
was the immediate judge; as also in matters concerning laws, precepts, ^tutes,
judgments, that is ordinances, ceremonial or moral: In these things stood
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction which then was practiced in the Church, for to
take that distinction which we must often remember in this question, it is
confessed that all Ecclesiastical power is either of order or Jurisdiction. In
both which the King has a part, b^t differently: In the power of orders, the
Kings part and office, was to see that things of that nature were orderly done,
and the breach thereof punished, but himself was not to execute any thing,
whereunto the Priests were appointed, by the power of their orders, as to offer
incense, etc. Wherefore Vzziah was smitten with leprosy for meddling with that
part of 2. Chron. 26.
the Priests office. Now Jurisdiction is divided into power internal, which as
often we have said, belongs not to the King; and power external: which
power external when it is coactiue, is nothing but that which we call the
Kings Jurisdiction, though it be in matters Ecclesiastical. And this
Jurisdiction is here testified to be in Iehosaphat, and from him derived to
all, to all judges under him, both Temporal and Ecclesiastical. For as he
commanded the Temporal judges, so in like sort he commanded the
Ecclesiastical. And as the Ecclesiastical judges might reply (if they had
been such as now these are of the Roman Clergy) that Ecclesiastical
judgments were holy and the cause of God, and not of the King: so does the
King witness of Temporal judgments, for speaking to Temporal judges, he
says: you execute not the judgments of man, but of the Lord. Then Temporal
judgments are the Lords cause as well as Ecclesiastical, and herein they
differ not.

15. Now this Jurisdiction which is in coactiue power we prove to be in the
King, and only in the King. (I speak according to the form of the state of
Israel in those days whereof we now speak, aunswerable to which is the
Sovereign magistrate in any other state.) This right I say, we prove to be
only in the King, and from him derived to other judges both Temporal and
Spiritual, by these reasons: first the King, and 1.
only the King commands both judges to do their duties in their several
places, and has lawful power to punish them if they do otherwise: therefore
the Kings Jurisdiction coactiue is over both sorts alike. The antecedent has
two parts, the first drawn from the express words of the Scripture in this
text: the second follows by a necessity. For the command of a King is
ridiculous, and no command unless he have authority to punish. The
consequence follows by the very definition of Jurisdiction, which will prove
the second part of the antecedent. For this Jurisdiction for which we plead, is
defined by the most learned of the Church of Rome, authority coactiue. If it be
authority, it may command; if coactiue it may punish: then it follows, that
where Iehosaphat had first authority to command and last to punish, that
questionless he had this Sovereign Jurisdiction.

16. If against this any object, that the King may command in matters of
orders, of preaching the Word, administering the Sacraments, etc. In all these
things the King may lawfully command the parties to do their duties, and may
punish them if they do otherwise: and yet no man will put the Kings
Jurisdiction in these matters of orders, Preaching, Sacraments, etc. For
answer, let me entreat the reader with attention to consider these three
things: First to command, secondly to execute; thirdly to punish. Jurisdiction
stands wholly in the first and last, and nothing at all in the second: that
is, in authority and not in action. So that though the King should execute a
thing which belongs to his office, yet in the execution thereof, his
Jurisdiction should not appear, howsoever his wisdom, knowledge, and active
virtues might appear therein: for Jurisdiction is in the authority of
commanding, and power of punishing, and supereminence that rises from both.
And therefore in the preaching of the Word, administration of Sacraments, the
King has no part; because therein Jurisdiction stands not: these things
being matters of execution not of command: but the authority to command
these things, by making or urging laws for them: and to punish the
transgression by corporal punishments; this because it includes coactiue
power, is in the Sovereign Magistrate only. If the Magistrate should either
neglect his duty, as the heathen did; or command false doctrines to be
preached, as the Arian Emperors did: in this case the Church has warrant to
maintain the truth, but without tumults and rebellion, and rather in patience
to loose their lives then to forgo any part of the truth.

17. Another reason to prove this Sovereign authority 2.
coactiue to be only in the King, and from him respectively derived to both
sorts of judges, may thus be drawn. For the judges Temporal, there is not so
much question made: all the doubt is of judges Ecclesiastical, the chief of
which judges Ecclesiastical in the Church of Israel, was the high Priest. Then
this Jurisdiction whereof we speak must be confessed to have been principally
and originally, either in the king or in the high Priest: but in the high
Priest it was not, Therefore in the King it must be. That it was not in the
high Priest, we prove by these reasons. The high Priest is commanded,
corrected, punished and deposed by the King, and not the King by the Priest:
therefore the Sovereign Jurisdiction is not in the high Priest, but in the
King. Again, the high Priests did never practice coactiue authority, unless
when they were Sovereign Magistrates, as sometimes the high Priests in Israel
were, but as high Priest^ they had no such power: for the causes between blood
and blood; which were of their cognizance, are by the interpreters vnderdood
such cases, wherein a man was killed by chance, without the purpose, or
against the will of the offender: in which case the high Priest might grant
him the pr^uiledge of sanctuary: and so deliver him from the auenger of blood:
but he had no power coactiue to inflict death, or such punishments at his
pleasure: which truth was so constantly received and preserved in the Church
afterward, that even in the greatest power and highest ruff of Popery, the
Church of Rome did not take this full ^oactiue power, but only proceeded to
degradation, and then to deliver men up to the secular powers: which was a
^ecret confession that they had no right to this power coactiue, though they
had usurped many parts thereof.

18. A third reason to prove this authority to be in the Civil Magistrate,
is as I teached before, confirmed by the right 3.
of Appellations. For in matters of coactiue Jurisdiction, a man might appeal
from the high Priest to the King, as Saint Paul did to Caesar: which was
utterly unlawful for him to do, unless he might as lawfully have appealed to
a King, if that state of Israel had then been ruled by a King, as at other
times it was. For that right which Saint Paul gives to Nero, to hear
Appellations, he would undoubtedly yield to David, or Ezek^as, or any other
godly King in his own Dominions. Wherefore it follows, that either Saint
Paul must be condemned for yielding an unlawful power to Emperors: or Kings
must have the same privilege: which thing being admitted in matters
Ecclesiastical, does inuincibly prove the Kings Jurisdiction in such matters.
The same thing is also confirmed from those 4.
words of the Apostle, he is the minister of God: and, he bears Romans 13. 4.
the sword. If the Magistrate be the minister of God; then he has full
authority and Jurisdiction from God, whose minister and vicegerent he is: if
he bear the sword, he has all power coactiue: for coactiue power does
always follow t^ sword, which God has given to the Civil Magistrate to
bear. Therefore Ioh. Chrysosto^ says, Regi corp^ra commissa sunt, sacerdoti
anim^, re^ maculas corporum remittit, sacerdos maculas peccatorum: ill^ cogit,
hic exh^rtatur: ille habet arma sensibilia, hic arma spiritualia. Him. 4. de
verb. Esa. vidi dom. Then the true difference between the Magistrate and the
Priest, concerning this point, is; Ille cogit, hic exh^rtatur: so that coactiue
power is left wholly to the Magistrate. Ambros^ likewise speaking of the
authority of the Church, and of Bishops, says: Coactus (...) n^n noui, arma
enim nostra preces sunt and (...). ^at, i^ Aux^t: where he declares the
difference between these two powers, leaving nothing to the Church, but preces
and (...), wherein there is no coaction. In which sense Thomas Aquin^s faith:
vindicta quae fit auth^ritate publicae potestat^, s^cundum (...) iudicis,
pertieet ad iusticiam commutatiuam. 2. 2. qu. 8. art 1. Therefore vindicatiue
power or coaction belonges not to the Church, but the Magistrate that
exercises co^utatiue justice.

19. In regard of which high power Princes are called Gods. I Psalm. 82.
have said you are Gods. And because an adversary of late has Mat. Tortus
Papiensis.
told us, that this name is given as well to Ecclesiastical governors as to
Kings: we reply, that it cannot be showed that this name is given to
Ecclesiastical governors, but either where such governors have received
authority from the Civil Magistrate, or where themselves are the chief
Magistrates: so that it is a name given in respect of Sovereign power. For to
manifest the Sovereign emmency of the Prince, compare the Prince and Priest
together, and by this comparison we shall evidently know the truth: for we
find the Prince called a God, not only in respect of the people, but in
respect of the Priest also. Where the Lord himself speaks to Moses of Aaron
comparing their power and offices together, he says thus: [He Exodus 4. 16.
shall be thy spokesman unto the people, and he shall be as thy mouth, and thou
shall be to him in stead of God.] In this comparing of these two great offices,
Moses is the directour; Aaron Moses Legislator and interpres Dei.
the interpretour and preacher. Where the Prince or Soueraign Magistrate is
called a God, not only in respect of the people, as in diverse other
Scriptures: but in respect of the Priest, thou shall be to him, even to Aaron,
as a God. We find then that the Prince is called a God in respect of the
Priest, but we can never find that the Priest is called a God in respect of the
Prince. This declares a Sovereign authority of the Prince in matters of God,
and of Gods true Religion. For he who by his office is to establish true
Religion in his dominions, does herein represent a lively ex^mple, both of the
goodness and power of God: and therefore Magistrates are called Gods, as being
Gods Vicegerents for establishing of true Religion.

20. And this our Savior Christ confirms, for whereas Psalm. 82. They are
called Gods, I have said you are Gods; Our Lord expounds that place,
declaring in what sense they are so called. For he says: [If he called them
Gods, unto whom the Ioh. 10. 35.
word of God was given, and the Scripture cannot be broken, etc.] Then the
Magistrates who are here called Gods, are such to whom the word of God is
given. For further declaration of the truth, let this question be demanded: to
whom is the word of God principally given? to whose Sovereign custody is the
word of God committed? The words of our Savior Christ contain an answer, to
the Civil Magistrate. For it is certain that all that Psalm whence Christ
takes those words, is wholly and entirely understood of the Civil
Magistrates, and not of Priests or Ecclesiastical governors. Why then? and is
not the word of God given to Ecclesiastical governors as well as to Kings? Yes
verily, but diversely: for to Ecclesiastical governors the knowledge of the
word is given to publish by preaching. [For the Priests lips shall preserve
Malach. 2. 7.
knowledge, and they shall seek the law at his mouth; for he is the messenger
of the Lord of hosts.] Then if the question be asked, to whom is the word
given by the way of knowledge to preach and publish it? The answer is, to the
Priest: but Christ speaks not here of that manner of giving the word, but he
touches that Commission which is given to Magistrates. For to Magistrates it
is not given by way of especial knowledge to preach it; but by way of an
especial commission, to keep it, to establih it by authority, to command
obedience unto it, and to punish the violatours of it. This is the authority of
a Christian Prince, for he has called them Gods to whom the word was given:
Whom has he called Gods? Civil Princes: for of such, only of such, that
Psalm speaks. Why are they called Gods? Because they are Gods vicegerents by
their authority to establish Gods word. Therefore they are acknowledged to be
custodes vt^insque tabulae, for which cause it was an ancient ceremony in the
Church of Israel, that at the Kings Coronation the Book of God should be given
into the hand of the King, as we read in the Coronation 2. Reg. 11. 12.
of Ioash: Which thing is confirmed by a commaundemant in the Law, why was this
thing so solemnly commanded? so religiously Deuteronomy. 17. 18.
preached? but to show that God has committed the care of Religion principally
to the King, that by the utmost of his power and authority, it might be
established in his Dominions.

21. This does prove that Moses was a Prince and not a Priest, and Aaron a
Priest but not a Prince: because Moses is called Aarons God, but Aaron is not
called Moses his God, but his mouth. Which thing though it be so evident, as
that it seems to be the undertaking of an idle and vn-necessary discourse to
prove it: yet because many books are of late filled with this conceit, that
Moses was a Priest, which thing is taken as an especial ground to build up the
Popes temporal Monarchy: Let us in a few words refute this fancy. Franciscus
Bozius who undertakes to prove this, takes a foundation so rui^ous and
fallacious, that it is no marvel if his whole building be answerable, for he
concludes that Moses was a Priest properly so called because, Psalm. 99. it is
written, Moses and Aaron among his Priests, and Samuel among such as call upon
his name. The answer is easy and vulgarly known, for Cohanim (which word is
there used) signifies both Priests and Civil Psalm. 99. 6.
governors. It is used for Civil governors which stand in some honorable
place. 2. Sam. 8. 18 where the sonn^s of David So 2. Sam. 20. 26. Where Tharg.
has a Prince, or mighty.
are called (...) which cannot be translated Priests, as the Latin vulgar has
it. Though this word (...) sometimes be taken, for a Priest, yet it is certain
that David's sons were not Priests, but chief rulers about the King, as it is
expounded 1. Chron. 18. 17. Then we answer that no proof can be drawn from
this word (...) to prove Moses a Priest, because the word is ambiguous, applied
both to Priests and to Civil governors. And therefore the word is fitly
applied to Moses and Aaron, comprising both their Offices in one short word.
But that Moses was no Pri^st, we prove thus. If he were a Priest, it must be
either before that Aaron and his successors were assumed to that Office, or
after. Before the law assumed Aaron and his sons to be Priests Moses could
not be Priest, because the Priesthood was annexed to the birthright. But
Moses was not the first borne of Amram, but Aaron was the eldest, for we read
Number. 33. Aaron was one hundred twenty Number. 33. 39.
three years old when he died. But Moses out living Aaron was but one hundred
twenty years old when he dyed. Deuteronomy. 34. Deuteronomy. 34. 7.
Theresore Aaron was questionless the elder brother. If any object that the
birthright was sometimes taken from the eldest by an especial appointment of
God, as appears in Sem and Jacob; I answer, this cannot help in this point,
for Aaron was so far from loosing this privilege of his birthright, by any
appointment of God, that he had the Priesthood famously confirmed to him and to
his posterity. So that neither by the law of nature, nor by any precept of God,
can Aaron be said to loofe any privilege that belonged to the Priesthood. Then
before the institution of the Leuiticall Priesthood, Moses could not be Priest.
After the institution thereof, the Priesthood was so appropriated to Aarons
house, that none could be Priests but Aaron and his sons only. Therefore it
was not possible that Moses could be a Priest at all, either before the
consecration of Aaron, or after.

22 Another reason may be drawn from those places, which declare that Joshua was
appointed by God to succeed Moses, Number. 27. 17. 18.
Deuteronomy. 31. 14.
and to govern as he did. In all which places it appears, that Ios. 1. 17.
Joshua succeeded Moses in his place and function, and was that in Israel, in
his time, which Moses was before him. But it is certain that Joshua was no
Priest: therefore as certain that Moses was no Priest. For Joshua was the full
and entire successor of Moses. The same appears by the whole course of Moses
his government. Who commands as a Prince, is obeyed as a Prince, both by the
Priests and people. By which command in matters temporal and ecclesiastical:
if they suppose that a Priesthood is proved: by the same reason all the Kings
of Israel may as well be concluded to have been Priests. For they commanded in
all such things as Moses did. Some object that Moses sacrificed, Exodus 24. But
this objection is frivolous. For the words of the Scripture are against it. It
is expressly said, that Exodus 24. 5.
Moses sent young men to sacrifice: these were the first borne of the 12
Tribes. For this was before the institution of the Leuiticall Priesthood. If
any object that Moses did something which might seem to belong to the office
of a Priest: I answer, so did the Kings of Israel some things which might
seem to belong to the office of a Priest. For Josias, when all the people were
gathered together, read in their ears all the words of 2. Reg. 23. 2.
the book of the covenant. Which thing might seem to belong to the Priests
office. So true is that principle of our common Law, founded upon the profound
principles of divinity and good government: Rex est persona mixta; because he
has both temporal and ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

23 And thus have we declared the Kings right under the Law; from the precept
of the Law, and practice of godly Kings. Thus did Ezekiah, thus did Josiah, and
others: and in so doing, they usurped no unlawful power, but stood faithful
in the execution of that lawful right, which GOD committed to them. From this
commission they may not turn either to the right hand, or to the left. For as
it was a great sin in Vzziah on 2. Chron. 26.
the one side, to usurp the Priests office: so should it be a great sin on
the other side, for a King to neglect any part of a Kings office. From all
which, we collect the power of a Prince in matters ecclesiastical to stand in
these things. He is to establish all ecclesiastical Laws, for which no power
is sufficient without his. Neither is it reason that they should establish
Laws, in whom there is no power to defend and maintain the Majesty of those
Laws so made. He is to punish all transgressors of those Laws, he is to
appoint ecclesiastical Ministers their places, to be Judges in matters of
ecclesiastical Laws: and if they offend, to punish them, he may place and
displace according to their merits: So Solomon displaced Abiathar, and made
Zadock high Priest in his room. But because of late, suborned Mat. Tortus
speaking of this example, says, that Solomon did displace the high Priest as
he was a Prophet, not as he was a King: let us by the way open the vanity of
this shift. The fault that Abiathar had committed was worthy of death, as
Solomon says: [Thou art worthy of death.] But yet he showed him 1. Reg 2. 26.
mercy, because he had borne the Ark of the Lord before his Father David, and
had suffered in all things wherein David was afflicted. So that the thing which
Solomon did to Abiathar, he did as judge of life and death. To be a Judge of
life and death, was not the osfice of a Prophet, but of the King: therefore
Solomon did it not as a Prophet, but as a King. Again, the Prophets office was
extraordinary, but this thing is so far from an extraordinary example, that we
see rather that Solomon does mitigate the ordinary punishment of that crime
which Abiathar had committed. Moreover, to punish or to release the punishment
of treason, belongs not to the office of a Prophet, but of the King: but
Solomon in this action punishing the treason of Abiathar, releaseth some part
of it. All which prove the distorted shift of Tortus, to be so vain and
shameless, that the blushing Hat of a Cardinal, is not broad enough to cover
the shame. In these things, and in supreme appellation, stands
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, which by divine right was placed in these Kings,
and by them practiced.

CHAP. IIII.
External Coactiue Jurisdiction was not left by Christ to his Church, nor
practiced by the Church all that while, that the Church was without Christian
Magistrates: wherein is declared the Jurisdiction of the Church, and of
Bishops, that the power of excommunication proceeded not to Coaction.

NOw let us make search in the Church of Christians, wherein we will consider
first the state of the Church, after it was called by Christ and his Apostles,
and governed by the Fathers for the space of the first three hundred years: in
all which time no Christian was the Sovereign Magistrate. In this time it will
be to good purpose to search the Jurisdiction of the Church, for this is the
time wherein it will most clearly appear. And Christ that appoints all
times and states for his Church, appointed that all this time she should be
without Princes for her nourcing Fathers: that by wanting it so long, we might
understand the greatness of this blessing. But when the Church of Rome grew
insolent by abusing this blessing, taking the right of Princes from them, and
thereby removing the ancient bounds of the Ordinances which God had set of old,
then it was not to be marueiled, that such judgments followed of blindness
and ignorance among the people, of confusion and contempt upon Princes and
Kings: which judgments have been so famously apparent in the sight of the
world. But let us proceed to the examination of the Churches Jurisdiction, for
if we consider what Jurisdiction Jesus Christ left to his Church, it will
consequently appear what Jurisdiction is in Civil Princes: for all that
Christ gave not to his Church, remains with Princes.

2. The places from which they would prove Jurisdiction, Mat. 18. 18.
are these: Mat. 18. [Whatsoeuer you shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven.] And, [whosoeuers sins you retain, Joh. 20. 23.
shall be retained.] Now these places make no proof of this Jurisdiction which
is in question. For all Popish writers that I could see upon this question,
acknowledge these Scripturs not to be meant of external Jurisdiction coactiue,
which is our question, but of the inward power of remitting of sins,
practiced within the court of conscience by the power of Gods spirit, and
declared by the Priest, and ordinarily practiced in excommunication, or
otherwise. The greater condemnation deserves Answer to the fifth part of
Reports.
that Catholic Divine, who to disprooue the Jurisdiction of Princes, and to
prove the Popes pretended Jurisdiction brings these places of Scripture which
speak of neither. Other places they cite, as that: [Thou art Peter, and upon
this Mat. 16. 18.
rock will I build my Church: and I will give to thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven.] And, [ Simon love thou me? Joh. 20. 15.
feed my Lambs, etc.] These and such like places they bring to prove the
Popes Jurisdiction. All of this sort are thoroughly handled with exact judgment
and learning, in that worthy conference written by Doctor Raynolds of blessed
memory: which book as a gantlet of one of the worthies of our Church has lien
long between us, and the host of the Philistims: and none of our adue^saries
has had the courage to take it up and to answer it.

3. It is sufficient for us to plead, that none of the ancient Fathers did
ever expound these Scriptures thus; or did ever dream of such senses, as they
have found of late out of their own decretall Epistles. It is sufficient that
some of their own best learned writers, yea some of their most learned Popes,
before they were Popes; have with such learning and judgment refuted their new
devised expositions of these Scriptures, as that from themselves and out of
their own mouths, God has drawn testimonies to overthrow these carnal and
absurd expositions of Scriptures. John Gerson says, that these texts thus by
the Popes flatterers applied to prove his Jurisdiction, are Sermon. pro viagio
regis Romans direc. 1.
understood by them: Gross and non secundum regulam Euangelicam. And Aenaeas
Siluius, has with great life and learning overthrown Lib. de gestis Basil.
consil.
these gross and corrupt expositions: of whom we shall speak hereafter in due
place, where it will fully appear that these expositions of Scripture are by
the learned, free, and judicious men of that side, acknowledged to be invented
by flatterers, as the same Pope Pius the second, witnesses: to be new and
strange, and to be urged by miserable and wretched souls, which will not
understand that these challenges of their Jurisdiction, are nothing but either
the words of the Popes themselves; that would enlarge their fringes without
measure: or of their flatterers who being blinded by ambition, and carried with
the wind of vaineglory, do flatter the Popes in hope of reward. Though now
those flatterers have got^ the upper hand in the Council of Trent; and have
usurped the name of the Church, who before were always esteemed a base
company, standing for the Popes Jurisdiction against the grave and learned men
of that Church.

4. Then for the places of Scripture which they bring for this Jurisdiction, we
say with their own best learned men, that they are (in that sense wherein they
use them) new devises drawn of late by strange and absurd contortions into
this new flattering sense, by the Popes flatterers, against the ancient
expositions of the Fathers and Doctors of the Church. Concerning the
Jurisdiction which Christ left to his Church, let all the Scriptures be
searched, and there will nothing be found of external Jurisdiction consisting
in power coactiue: but all that Christ left was partly, yea principally, inward
and spiritual power, partly external for establishing doctrines of faith and
good order in the Church, by Councels, determinations, judicature, spiritual
censures, excommunication: deposing and dispatching of the disobedient, so
far as the Church could proceed without coactiue power. For by this
spiritual power without coaction, the Church was called, faith was planted,
diuils were subdued, the nations were taken out of the power of darkness, the
world was reduced to the obedience of Christ; by this power the Church was
governed for three hundred years together without any coactiue Jurisdiction.
But what coactiue power may work in the Church without this, we have a
lamentable experience in the present court of Rome, falling away from the
truth, and from the comfort of the spirit, and therefore from the true use of
the power of the spirit of God: when the Popes being destitute of this power of
the spirit, took upon them power above the Civil Magistrate, practicing
wholly coactiue power which they called Spiritual, when they had forsaken the
power of the spirit and rejected it from them.

5. The Jurisdiction which the Apostles practiced was partly from the
commission of Christ, spiritual: partly from the law of Nature, and from the
example of that government which was established in the Church of the Jews.
The things which belonged to Apostolical Jurisdiction, either concerned the
government of the ministry, or of the whole Church. Touching the government
of the ministry, these things belonged to the Apostles so long as they lived,
and afterward to Bishops their successors. First a power to ordain ministers,
Thus did 1.
Paul and Barnabas when they called Churches through Lycaonia, Pisidia, and
Pamphylia: [They ordained Elders in every Act. 14. 23.
Church.] Elders, that is, Pastors, Preachers to preserve the Doctrine
continually which the Apostles had once planted. And this charge to ordain
Elders or Priests, did the Apostles leave also to them that succeeded in the
government of the Church. This commission Saint Paul gave to Titus. [For this
cause I left thee in Crete, that thou should continue to redress Titus 1. 5.
the things that remain, and ordain Elders in every city, as I appointed
thee:] which ordaining signifies also institution in the place or cure they
ministered in.

6. The Apostles had also in themselves, and left to their successors, power
and Jurisdiction to command those Pastors 2.
which thus they had ordained, to preach the truth without mixture of false
doctrines. This power as Saint Paul had in himself, so he left the same to
Timothy, and consequently to others. [As I besought thee to abide still in
Ephesus, when I 1. Tim. 1. 3.
departed to Macedonia, so do, that thou may command some that they teach no
other doctrine.] These were the principal parts of Jurisdiction which the
Apostles left to their successors, to continue in the Church for ever. For the
end and use of this government is perpetual, as to ordain Preachers, and to
see that they so ordained, should teach the truth without heresy. It follows
certainly, that such governors as the Apostles themselves ordained in the
Church for these perpetual uses, are to remain perpetual governors in the
Church. Thus was the government of Bishops placed by the Apostles, to stand
and continue till the end of the world, because the Apostles placed such for
the ordination of ministers, and the preservation of true Doctrines. For they
who answer that these offices and places wherein the Apostles placed Timothy
and Titus, were either extraordinary, or to endure for a short time, do not
consider the end and use of these places: which end and use is neither
extraordinary nor temporary, but ordinary and perpetual. For ministers must be
ordained, and commanded to preserve the truth without heresy, as long as the
Church stands. Then the necessity and use of the ends, will prove the like
necessity and use of these governors, which by the Apostles were placed for
these ends.

7. Another part of this Jurisdiction, and depending upon the last, was that
which the Apostle leaves in commission to Tit. 1. 11.
Titus, (...), to stop their mouths. For which cause Apoc. 2. 20.
the Angel of the Church of Thyatira is reproved by Christ, because he
suffered a false Prophetess to teach, and to deceive the people, and to make
them commit fornication, and to eat meat sacrificed to idols. If Titus be
commanded to put some to silence, and the other reproved for suffering a
false teacher to teach; then the governors of the Church have authority and
Jurisdiction in these things: but how far it is extended, we shall consider
hereafter. But because it may be questioned whether (...) be to silence
ministers, or to convince them by argument. To this we 'aunswere, that albe it
we deny not conviction by reason to be also included in the word, yet there
is a further meaning of judicial proceeding by authority here understood;
which thing will appear by conference of this and other places. For Saint Paul
having first declared that Tit. 1. 5.
he left Titus at Crete to ordain Elders, describes what manner of men they
must be that are so to be ordained. For a 'Bishop 7.
must be unreprovable, etc. Then he declares that many 10.
be otherwise: for there are many disobedient and vain talkers, and deceivers,
etc. If the question be demanded, what shall be done to these deceivers? the
words immediately following contain an answer: whose mouths must be
stopped. So 11.
that the sense of these words is the same with that which he says to
Timothy, charging him; to command some that they 1. Tim. 1. 3.
teach no other Doctrine. Then the word contains not only conviction by
argument, but Jurisdiction also. For conviction by argument only would not
have served to suppress the false Prophetess of Thyatyra. And if a minister
be accused of heresy, or such like, he was to be judged by such as were set in
chief authority in the Clergy. For that there was a consistory and judicial
proceedings set up, it is evident; and no less evident that the Bishop was
judge. [Against an Elder (says S. Paul to Timothy) receive none accusation,
but under two or 1. Tim. 5. 19.
three witnesses.] Now he that is appointed to hear accusations, to receive
the testimonies of witnesses, is placed in a place of judgment with
Jurisdiction: and therefore has authority not only to convince by argument,
but also to proceed iudicially against false teachers, and to put them to
silence.

8. Thus far was Jurisdiction practiced over ministers, the things which
follow touched the whole Church. Another 4.
part of Jurisdiction practiced by the Apostles, touching the Church in
general; was to call Councels for the determination of such controversies, as
were raised up by them that troubled the doctrines of the truth, and peace of
the Church. Such was the Council gathered by the Apostles, Act, 15. Consisting
Acts 15. 6.
of Apostles and Elders, that is, of persons Ecclesiastical, wherein sentence
proceeded after good deliberation and great disputation. 7.
This is the greatest power or Jurisdiction of the Church: because the whole or
many chief parts together, is greater then any one part.

9. Further concerning the extension of this Jurisdiction, it cannot be denied
but that there is a power in the Church, not only internal, but also of
external Jurisdiction: of internal power there is no question made. External
Jurisdiction being understood all that is practiced in external Courts or
consistories, is either definitive, or mulctatiue. Authority definitive in
matters of faith and religion, belongs to the Church. Mulctatiue power may be
understood, either as it is referred to spiritual censures, or as it is with
coaction; as it stands in spiritual censures, it is the right of the Church,
and was practiced by the Church, when the Church was without a Christian
Magistrate, and since. But coactiue Jurisdiction was never practiced by the
Church, when the Church was without Christian Magistrates: but was always
understood to belong to the civil Magistrate, whether he were Christian or
heathen. We deny not but that the Apostles did sometimes take vengeance upon
the disobedient, but that was not by the material sword (in the power whereof
we place coaction) but by the spiritual sword, which always showed it self
in their Ministry, sometimes in an extraordinary manner, as in the striking of
Ananias and Saphira Acts. 5.
with present death: in the striking of Elimas the Sorcerer with blindness,
and such like. These were signs of extraordinary power, but we seek here
the ordinary Jurisdiction of the Apostles, which they left to their successors.

10 Upon these grounds joined with the assured knowledge of the History of
those times, the ancient Fathers deliver it as a truth never questioned, nor
doubted, that in the government of the Church, the Bishops are the undoubted
successors of the Lib. 5.
Apostles. Irenaeus speaking of heretics, says: Omnes hi posterior^s sun^
episcopis, quibus apostoli tradiderunt ecclesias. If Bishops were before any
heretics, they were questionless in the Apostles time, and by the Apostles
instituted, because some heretics Lib. 3. cap. 3.
were even in the Apostles time. Irenaeus says also: Habemus annumer are eos,
qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt episcopi in Ecclesiis. And a little after:
Quibus etiam ipsas Ecclesias committebant. And again in the same place: Quos
and successo es reliquerunt, Cyprian. Epist. 75.
suum ipsorum locum magisterij tradentes. Cyprian says, Potestas peccatorum
remittendorum Apostolis data est, and Ecclesiis, quas illi a Christo missi
constuuerunt* et episcopis qui eis ordinatio^e (...) successerunt. The same he
has also Epist. 69. Epist. ad Euagrium.
Hierome says, Potentia diuitiarum and paupertatis humilitas vel sublimiorem
vel inferiorem Episcopum non facit. Caeterum omnes Apostolorum successores
sunt. It were hard to kick against all these pricks. Against so evident
grounds of Scripture, so express testimonies of Fathers, to devise a new
government of the Church. Leaving the ancient and known government, which
has the testimony of those that lived in the first age, and heard and saw
those that were endued with miraculous gifts: (as Irenaeus testifies of
himself, that he heard those Lib. 5.
which spoke by the spirit in all languages, and saw them who Lib. 2. ca. 57.
often raised the dead to life again.) Leaving, I say, the testimony of
these, whose name and authority is so reverend in the Church, and striving for
a government which came but of late to the knowledge of men; seems to
proceed from affections too much blinded with the love of innovation.

11 But though this be true, that Bishops in the government of the Church
succeed the Apostles, yet we are cautelously to distinguish between the
things, wherein they succeed the Apostles: and those things which since the
Apostles times have been added to their government by godly Princes. For the
preservation of true doctrine in the Church, the Bishops are the great
watchmen. Herein they are authorized by God. If Princes withstand them in
these things, they have warrant not to obey Princes, because with these things
Christ has put them in trust. Therefore S. Paul says not, that it is the
Kings 1. Tim. 1. 3.
office, but the Bishops, to command that they teach no other doctri^e. Upon
which ground S. Ambrose was bold to withstand Valentinian Emperor. For
Ambrose, as the watchman of the Church of Millaine, would not suffer Auxentius
an Arian Bishop, to have any place to teach in his Diocese. Auxentius Ambrose
lib. 4. Epist. 32.
complained to the Emperor, as the contention grew thus between them, the one
like a vigilant watchman, seeking to remove all dangers from his flock, the
other like a Wolf seeking to spoil: at the earnest entreaty of Auxentius the
Emperor, willed that the cause between these two might be heard in the
Ecclesiastical consistory, and that the Emperor might sit as Judge in the
cause. This thing Ambrose utterly denied: and of this he writes thus to the
Emperor. Quando audisti Idem ibid.
cleme^tissime imperator, in causasidei, Laicos de Episcopo iudicasse? And
again: Sivel Scripturarum seriem diuinarum, vel catera tempora retractemus,
quis est qui abnuat in causa fidei, in causa inquamsidei, Episcopos solere de
imperatoribus Christianis, non imperatores de Episcopo iudicare? And in another
place: Volens Orat. in Auxent.
nunquam ius deseram, coactus repugnare non nout; arma enim nostra preces sunt
and lachrymae. This example of Ambrose his courage, is worthily commended by
all posterity, wherein this worthy man seems to direct a true rule of
obedience. For Iustina the Emperors mother, seeing she could not draw Ambrose
to favor the Arians, purposed to put him from the government of the Church.
Which thing would have been effected, if he had not refused to appear in the
Court, where the Emperor was to sit as Judge. There appeared in him courage,
godliness, and exact obedience, all truly tempered. He denies the Emperor to
be a sufficient Judge in a cause of faith and religion. In causafidei, in causa
inquam fidei. For this he repeateth precisely, desirous to be rightly
understood: he would rather die then admit such an example as to betray the
truth, and that commission and charge wherein GOD had set him. And yet if the
Emperor would by force do any thing, he denies that there is any power in
him, or in the Church to resist by force. The faith and right of the Church,
was not, in his judgment, to be maintained by force and arms, but by prayers
and tears. Thus resolute is this godly man in the cause of faith against the
Emperor: but in other causes he claims no privilege, no immunities, and
therefore in the same place he faith: Si tributum petit imperator non negamus,
agri Ecclesiae tributum soluunt. Athanasius ad solitar. vitam agentes; speaking
to Constans. the Emperor, says: Let religious Bishops persuade the Emperor,
that he corrupt not the Church, nor mingle the Roman Empire with
Ecclesiastical constitutions. And Hillarie Lib. ad Constantium August.
writing to Constantius, says to the same purpose: Prouideat and decernat
clementia tua, etc. Let your clemency provide and establish, that all Judges to
whom the care of public business belongs, may abstain from religious
constitutions. Thus did the ancient Bishops govern the Church, not suffering
any King or Emperor, to meddle with the determinations of matters of faith:
For of such matters are these testimonies to be understood, and only of such.
In like manner Chrysostom resisted Gaina general of the forces of Arcadius
Emperor. Who would have had a Church within Constantinople for himself and
the Arians. The Emperor was willing to gratify him, or Theodoret. lib. 5.
cap. 32.
not willing to displease him for his greatness; but John Chrysostom did
utterly deny it, as a thing unlawful. Thus by the warrant of Scriptures and
examples of Fathers we give to Caesar all coactiue power which is due to him:
but spiritual government we give not to him: this is that government which is
reserved to Bishops, as the Apostles successors. After which example Gregory
the first writes thus, Serenissimi domini animum Lib. 3. epist. 20.
non ignoro, quod se in causis sacerdotalibus miscere non soleat. Gregory
calls those causes with which the Emperors meddled not, causas sacerdotales:
meaning thereby the same which Ambrose calls causes of faith.

12. Besides this Spiritual government which is peculiar to Bishops, there is
also another part of government given to Bishops; which comes from Princes,
which Constantine first gave, as hereafter we shall declare. Of this
Chrysostom: says: I am vero pars illa, quam Episcopum tractare in iudicijs
conuen^t, infinita De sacerdotio lib. 3.
odia, infinitas offensiones parit; quae ipsa praet^r quam quod neg^tijs
quamplurimis plena est, tam multas etiam difficultaies affert, quam multas ne
forenses quidem iudices sustinent: and much August. epist. 9.
more to the same purpose. Augustine complains that he was too much troubled
with these matters of iudic ture. And Synosius professes that he can not
attend both businesses. Antiquum tempus (says he) tulit eosdem and sacerdo^es
and iudices, e^nim Aegyptij, Hebraeorumque gens multum temporis a saceraotibus
Synes. epist. 57.
gubernata est; and a little after, Non condemno Episcopos qui versantur in
negotiis, etc. Si qui vero sunt, qui a rerum diuersarum aggressione non
laeduntur, illi for sitan possunt simul and ^ fungi, and ciu^tatibus praeesse.

In all these parts of Episcopal Jurisdiction, which either by Apostolical
right or institution, or by the favor of Princes, have been given to them:
the Pope has intruded like a Fox, and maintains his intrusion like a Lion.
For as Christ left an equality Mat. 18. 1.
and paritie among his Apostles, often affirming and confirming Marc 9. 34.
that one of them should not be greater then another; Luc. 9. 46.
and yet the Apostles were in government above other Ministers: and that by
the institution of Christ himself: For the Lord after that he had chosen his
twelve Apostles, did choose also seventy Disciples [and sent them two and two
before him Luke 10. 1.
into every city where he himself should come] says S. Luke; then Christ
himself is the author of this order in the Church: which the Church has
since that time ever held, the Bishops succeeding the Apostles, as the
inferior Pastors succeeded the seventy Disciples: So the Apostles after them
left the like equality among Bishops, that one of them should not be above
another; and yet Bishops in government above other Ministers: for Jurisdiction
was never in the multitude, but in governors: the Bishops the^ being the
governors after the Apostles, the like Jurisdiction was in all. As Cypr. says,
Episcopatus vnus est cuius a Cypr. lib. de vnitat. Eccle.
singulis pars in solidum tenetur. And Hierom says, Vbicunque fuerit Hiero. ad
Euagrium tom. 2.
Episcopus sieve Romae, sieve Eugubij, etc, eiusdem meriti, eiusd^m est and
sacerdotij. Which power in Bishops the Pope has by surreption drawn to
himself, and now out of his fullness imparteth to Bishops at his pleasure; as
if he were the fountain of Jurisdiction.

13. As thus he has drawn their ancient right from Bishops: so has he
drawn from Temporal Princes that which of ancient right was theirs: we shall
better understand what he has taken from Temporal Princes, if we consider the
true limits be^weene the power of Princes, and the power of the Church. We say
therefore that the Jurisdiction of the Church was never extended to coactiue
power: because God has given all coactiue power to the Civil Magistrate, to
whom he has committed the sword. And as coactiue power belongs not to the
Church, so neither does it belong to the power of the Church, to erect or
establish, to dissanull or dissolve this coactiue power, as the Pope pretends
to do by excommunication, deposing Kings and freeing their subjects from their
faith and allegiance. This dissolution of coactiue power cannot belong to the
Church, because this is both Temporal and coactiue: the power of the Church
being Spiritual, cannot be called either Temporal or coactiue. Now that the
power exercised by the Pope in excommunication is Temporal and coactiue, is
the grant of Bellarmine: for he says that the Church of old did not depose
Nero, Diocletian, Julian, ^, Lib. 5. cap. 7. de Romans Pont.
etc. Quia deerant vires temporales: then he grants that in this present
practice of the Popes, there are vires temporales: what is this, but temporal
coaction? The Church in old time had all that power which Christ committed to
his Church, but then, by the confession of Bellarmine; the Church had no
coactiue power: therefore this coactiue power which the Pope uses by Temporal
force in deposing of Kings, was not by Christ granted to his Church, And if we
should yield Temporal coaction to the Church, what power is left to the
Magistrate? Thus we see the ancient hedge is plucked up, and the bounds are
changed, which of old stood between these two powers Civil and Spiritual.

14. Against this disordering of the ancient bounds we have the words of our
Savior Christ. [My kingdom is not John 18 36.
of this world, i f my kingdom were of this world, my servant would surely
fight, that I should not be delivered, etc. But because when these words are
urged against our adversaries, they look ascant upon them, as if they touched
them not: Let us consider how the kingdom of the Pope, and his pretended
Jurisdiction in deposing of Kings, is utterly overthrown by these words, which
declare the power properly belonging to Christ's kingdom, that is to his
Church. Christ answers here to Pilats question, Verse 33. [Art thou the
King of the Jews?] By which question it appears there was some suspicion and
fears, that Christ pretending for a kingdom, might conspire against the
state, and work the trouble and dissolution of the government established. For
as Herod when he heard that Jesus was borne the King of the Jews, was troubled
and all Jerusalem with him; and entered into such fears and suspicion, that
moved him to Mat. 2. 3.
kill all the young children from two years old and under: so the high Priests
suggested the same suspicions to Pilate. From this ground rises this question
of Pilate, Art thou the King of the Jews? To this he answers, my kingdom
is not of this world. From which answer applied to such a question, these
positions issue: It is against the nature of the kingdom of Christ to work
any trouble to the kingdoms of the world. And, that kingdom which works
trouble to the kingdoms of this world, is not the kingdom of Christ. Christ's
kingdom which is not of this world, is his Church, which is in this world, but
not of this world, as himself says, [If you were of Joh. 15. 19.
this world, the world would love her own, but because you are not of this
world, but I have taken you out of this world, therefore this world hates
you.] Then we reason thus: The government of Christ's Church breeds no
trouble, much less dissolution to the states of this world: but the
government of the court of Rome, (now commonly called, the Church of Rome)
breeds trouble and dissolution to the states of this world: therefore the
government of that court, is contrary to the government of Christ's Church: the
assumption is a confessed truth too well known, that the government of the
Popes court or Church, breeds trouble and dissolution to States by
excommunications. The proposition is proved by the answer of Christ to
Pilats fears: my kingdom is not of this world: whereby he satisfies Pilate
that he needed not fear any trouble, or dissolution of established authority
by him, for this was Pilats fear. So that if we admit that Christ did
answer to the purpose, and that Pilats fears and suspicions were removed by
his answer, it must be confessed that by that answer the State was secured,
that Christ's government would not raise any trouble to it, or procure the
dissolution thereof. And it must be well observed, that Christ thus securing
the present State, does not speak of his own person only, but undertakes
for all that belong to him, and his kingdom. Therefore he says not, I am not:
or, my person is not of this world: but, my kingdom is not of this world. Then
as he secureth this State from any trouble that they might fear from his
person, so he secureth all States of the world, during the time of this world,
from all troubles that they might fear from his members, and from his kingdom
which is his Church. Whereby it follows by strong evidence of reason that they
who put States in fear of troubles, or work the dissolutio^ of Civil
government (as the Pope does by excommunication) are not the members of Christ,
nor belonging to his kingdom.

15. This is further declared in the same place, by the words John. 18. 36.
following. [If my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants surely
fight that I should not be delivered to thee.] In which words we find that
Christ's servants may not fight, not stir up tumults, vproares and wars,
for the maintaining of their kingdom. Therefore that Kingdom for which they
raise so much war, is not the kingdom of Christ, not Christ's Church: nor
they that raise up such wars, Christ's servant. Christ forbids his
servant to fight for him, and his kingdom: the Pope commands his servants
to fight for him and his kingdom. Can you have two kingdoms more opposite?
two Kings more contrary?

16. This doctrine that the Church may not stir up any vproares or warr^s
against the Magistrate, has been always maintained by the ancient Fathers.
For we find that in the greatest persecutions, the ancient Bishops taught
Christians always to live in peace, and to pray for the Emperors and
governors, though they were persecutors, according to the commandment of
Christ; [Loue your enemies: and pray for them that persecute you.] Justin
Martyr says, [We pray that Mat. 5. 44.
Just. apol. 2.
you (speaking of the Emperor) may be found to have a good and sound mind with
your imperial power.] Pliny writing to Traian of the ancient manner of
Christians, says they assembled Plin. epist. li. 10.
to worfhip Christ, and bound themseluer in a Bond, not to set upon any wicked
practice, Sed ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent, ne sidem
fallerent. Contrary to which practice the Pope by his excommunication, deposing
of Princes, and discharging subjects from their oath and Allegiance, binds
men to raise wars and tumults, to break and violat^ Tertul. apo^. cap. 39.
their faith, and to commit many disorders. Tertullian says Cramus pro
Imperatoribus etc. That is, [We pray for Emperors, for their deputies, for
powers, for the State of this world, for the quiet and peaceable government of
things.] Contrary to which the Popes raise wars, make the government of
States tumultuous, and take away peace from the earth. Optatus Optat. lib. 3.
says, [For good cause does Paul teach, that we must obey. Kings and powers;
yea though an Emperor were such an one De ciuit. dei lib. 5. cap. 21.
as lived after the manner of the Gentiles.] Augustine says, [we are not to
yield this power to any but only to God, the power I say to give kingdoms
etc. Who gives earthly kingdoms Lib. de nature. boni aduers.
both to godly and ungodly.] And in another place he proves, that evil
Kings and Tyrants are to be obeyed, whereof (...). cap.? 2.
he gives a reason: because says he [Men consist of two Expositio quarund.
questionum ex epist. ad Romans proposit. 72.
parts, a body and a soul, as long as we are in this life, and need the
helps of this life, we must by that part which belongs to this life, be
subject to the powers of this world: but by that part whereby we believe in
God, we owe no subjection to man, but only to God.] Ambrose says, If the
Emperor Orat. in Auxent.
should command any thing unlawful: he would not obey, neither durst he
resist by force, but only bear with patience: Arma enim nosta sunt preces and
lachrymae. Gregory the first was so far from this tumultuous disposition of
his successors, that he held himself bound to obey the Emperor in the
promulgation of that law, which he thought the Emperor should not have made.
Ego quidem iussioni tuae subiectus (says he to the Emperor Maurice) eandem
legem per diuersas terrarum parts Lib. indist: 11. cap. 100.
transmitti feci, and quia lex ipsa omnipotenti deo minime concordat, ecce per
suggestionis meae paginam serenissimis dominis nunciaui: vtrobique ergo quae
debui exsolui, quia and Imperatori obedientiam praebui, and pro deo quod sensi
minime tacui. So far were these ancient Fathers from the new and strange
practices of disobedience and rebellion against Magistrates, which is now so
stiffely taught, and unmercifully executed by the Popes vassals under pretense
of Religion.

17. But they tell us, that the Pope uses only his spiritual censures: he
excommunicateth Kings for heresy or schism, and thereby deposes them, and
dissolueth the obedience of Subjects. I answer; excommunication as it is a
censure of Christ's Church, contains no coactiue power, that is no such power
as to depose Princes, or to dissolve the faith and allegiance of Subjects.
Which thing is proved both by the use of excommunication, and by the power of
the Church. First, if we consider the use of excommunication, we find it was
used in the Church of the Jews, and from them taken by the Church of
Christians. Then excommunication being found among the Jews in his full use
and force, all the kinds there of being distinctly observed by the learned
Jews, namely by Elias Leuita, who observes out of the writings of the
ancient Rabbines, three diverse Elias. Thisbet. verbo (...)
kinds of excommunication in use in the Jewish Church: it follows, that this
censure of the Church can be no farther extended in the Church of Christians,
then it was in the Church of Israel, where it was first instituted and
established. But in the Church of Israel, it was never extended to deposing
Kings, and destroying obedience of Subjects: therefore in the Church of
Christians, it may not be extended to these practices. What can be denied
here? For neither can they deny, but that the censures of the Church should
be of greatest power there, where they were first instituted: neither can they
deny, that excommunication was first instituted in that Church of the Jews:
neither can they show us, that any King of that Nation was at any time deposed
for pretended heresy, or for known and professed idolatry: though the Kings
there were often great idolaters: though the Priests were bold and courageous
in Gods cause: yet we never find that any Priest did by excommunication depose
the King, or destroy the bond of allegiance. This thing then being neither
practiced by the Jews, where these censures were in first and chief force,
nor by Christ and his Apostles, nor by the Fathers of the Primitive Church, nor
known in the Church for the space of almost a thousand years (as hereafter we
shall declare) we have great reason to conclude that excommunication, as it is
an Ecclesiastical censure, has no power coactine to alter any temporal
authority, to depose Kings, to destroy and dissolve allegiance, or to trouble
any lawful authority established in this world.

18 This will no less appear, if we consider the power which the Church has
always practiced, for coactiue power was a thing which the Chnrch yielded
always to the ^iuill Magistrate. And if the Bishops of Rome did sometimes
break out beyond their bounds: yet were they in those ancient times always
repressed by the authority of the Church. For, that we may take a short suruay
of the Jurisdiction of the Church, during the first three hundred years: so
long as the Apostles lived, no man doubts but that they ruled all, and that
the greatest Jurisdiction of the Church was in them, if we speak of spiritual
Jurisdiction. And if any one Apostle lived after the rest, there was more power
acknowledged to be in him, then in any one that lived in the Church in his
time. Now it is for an assured historical truth recorded by Eusebius, and
before him by Irenaeus (whom the full consent of the ancients follow herein)
that S. John lived after all the other Apostles were dead, and that he
continued in the government of the Church, until the times of Traian Emperor.
In which time the Bishops of Rome after Peter are recorded to be these Linus,
Anacletus, Clemens, E^aristus, Alexander. If the Bishop of Rome had then been
the head of the Church, the chief Pastor, the Monarch, the fountain of all
Jurisdiction, as his flatterers now make him: it must be confessed that
Alexander in his time, and Euaristus before him was S. John's head: and before
him Clemens, and before him Anaclet, and before him Linus. Did these rule and
govern S. John, or S. John them? shall we say that they had Jurisdiction over
S. John, or S. John over them? If these Bishops each in his time had
Jurisdiction over S. John, then there was an authority in the Church above the
authority of the Apostles. If they were governed by him, then the Bishop of
Rome was not the head of the Church. There is no sober spirit that can doubt of
these things: or can think that in those days any lived in the Church, who
was not under the Jurisdiction of an Apostle.

19 After Saint John's death, who was living in the year of Christ 100. and
after: in the Church of Rome, were Sixtus, Telesphorus, Hyginus, Pius,
Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, Victor. These governed the Church of Rome in
succession, by the space of one hundred years together. In which times they
seemed willing to put to their helping hands, to advance the Church of Rome.
For Satan having a purpose thence to raise Antichrist, began betime to work,
and to abuse those good men, as it was not hard for him to beguile better men
then they were, though we admit them to be good men, and holy Martyrs. Then
were they drawn into a love to advance their seat and Jurisdiction, yet so,
as neither in them is proved pernicious, neither was it thought by the church
to be very dangerous, seeing they yielded and submitted themselves in the end
to the grave and godly advise of the Church.

20 The things wherein the Bishops of Rome sought first to advance their power,
was by imposing ceremonies upon other Churches. Thus did Anicet contend for the
celebration of Easter: but was quieted by Polycarp; who for the peace of the
Eusebius. lib. 5. ca. 24.
Church, made a journey to Rome, and pacified Anicetus. And was so much
honored of Anicetus, that there he practiced the function of a Bishop, as
Eusebius reports, taking the story from Irenaeus. Thus was peace and love
then maintained on all sides, whilst the Bishops of Rome were content to be
ruled by others.

21 A little after, Victor grew more violent in the fame quarrel, and
excommunicated the Eastern Churches, which did not observe Easter after the
manner of the Church of Rome. But Uictor was resisted, and sharply reproved by
Polycrates Bishop Eusebius. ibid.
of Ephesus, and the roast of the Eastern Bishops, as also by Irenaeus Bishop
of Lions in France. These did freely reprove Victor, for that he regarded not
the peace of the Church: they declare that in ceremonies there was great
difference of old, and yet the Bishops lived in love and peace together: that
the differences in ceremonies, did not break the consent in faith: that these
differences were before the time of Victor: and that he was therein to follow
the examples of his ancients, who preserved love and peace, and the doctrines
of faith sincere, with some diversity in outward ceremonies. This was all that
the Bishops of Rome attempted in those days: wherein there appears no
Jurisdiction over others, but rather the contrary. For the godly Bishops of
Asia reproved them, and made them see and acknowledge their own rashness, and
caused them to desist: therefore the Church did not then acknowledge the Popes
Jurisdiction.

22 Between Victor and Syluester the first, succeeded 18. Bishops of Rome, in
the space of 100 years next. In which time there was no great attempt made for
superiority or Jurisdiction: only the Bishops of other Churches did honor the
Bishop of Rome, following the Apostles rule [In giving honor Romans 12. 10.
go one before another.] Which honor if they could have remembered as well to
give to others, as they did to receive from others, there could have risen no
question of Jurisdiction: but that which began in love and courtesy, was
afterward drawn to Jurisdiction. We deny not but some of the ancients have
yielded to S. Peter a Priority among the rest of the Apostles, because of his
great zeal and love to Christ and to his truth, and for his excellent
vert^es: and to the Bishops of Rome we find likewise that the ancients
yielded great and honorable titles, but this was in respect of their virtue,
learning, and integrity. For the ancients knew no other rule of favoring
men, but virtue: he was in the Church most honorable, and accounted chief in
succeeding the Apostles, whose life and conversation was most Apostolical.
Wherefore as the ancients gave this honor to the Bishops of Rome, for their
godly lives, to call them the Apostles successors, so when they found other
Bishops who in virtue excelled, they gave these titles Titles of honor given
to other Bishops as much as to the Bishops of Rome.
in as great honor to them, as ever was given to the Roman Bishop. For we
find these titles as much or more given to others, then we can find given to
the Roman Bishops. Basil writing to S. Ambrose, says of him, that he does
hold the Basil. Epist. 55.
stern of that great and famous ship, the Church of God, and that God had
placed him in the primary and chief seat of the (...)
Apostles. Of the Bishop of Rome, it is hard to find in all antiquity a more
honorable title, then this is of Ambrose. Now if S. Ambrose held the stern
of that ship the Church of God, and if he sat in the chief and highest seat
of the Apostles: it must follow, that an inferior seat was reserved for the
Bishop of Rome, as long as Ambrose lived: and that he was esteemed the
chiefest in Apostolical succession, who came nearest the Apostolical virtues:
or that they were (...), presidents alike in Christ's Church. And throughout all
the Epistles of Basil, we observe, that albeit he wrote often to the Western
Church, we find no such honorable mention of the Bishop of Rome: but
somewhat sounding to the contrary. For in the tenth Epistle, he notes the
pride and ambition, which then began to be espied in the Bishops of Rome:
complaining to Eusebius Bishop of Samosata, that the Church could have no help
(...).
from the pride and ambition of the West. Then concerning this title, to be
called the successor of the Apostles, it was sometimes given to the Bishops of
Rome, only in regard of their virtue, godliness, and faith which once
appeared in those Bishops. And so it is given to Ambrose and to other Bishops.
In this sense we understand those titles given by Sidonius Appollinaris Bishop
of Aruern, to diverse Bishops in France in his time. For writing to Pope Lupus
(as he calls him) a Bishop in France, he testifies that he had lived 45
years in the sea Apostolical. Lib. 6. Epist. 1.
Insede Apostolica nouem iam decursa quinquennia. And again to the same man he
says: Pater officium quod incomparabiliter eminenti Lib. 6. Epist. 4.
Apostolatuituo sine fine debetur, etc. The same title he gives also to
Fontellus, another Bishop in France, declaring that therein he greatly
rejoiced: Quod Apostolatus vestri patrocinium Lib. 7. Epist. 4.
copiosissimum confer vos comperi. And writing to the same Lib. 6. Epist. 7.
Fontellus: Ego quoque (says he) ad Apostolatus tui noticiam acced^.

23. Then by this Title Apostolical, no Jurisdiction will rise to the Bishops
of Rome, seeing the same is given to others, as well as to them. Neither was
there then in the Bishop of Rome any power above others, neither in the whole
Church was c^actiue power found. To prove this, Eusebius reports a Story,
which we wish to be well observed, because it makes an evident proof of the
Jurisdiction of the Church, which thing we seek: The Story is thus. Paulus
Samosatenus Bishop of Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 23. 24, 25. etc.
Antioche, taught that Christ was a mere man. To repress this wicked heresy,
a Council was gathered at Antioche. The Church was then without the help of a
Christian Magistrate. In chief account among them that lived in the Church at
that time, was Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, a man for his great learning and
godliness much renowned in the Church then, and always since: he was so aged
and weak at that time that he could not be present in the Council, but by
writing confirmed the truth against Paulus the Heretic. Among them that were
assembled there, was Gregorius Bishop of Caesaria, who had the gift of working
miracles: in which respect Basil makes honorable mention of him in diverse
places: Dionysius was then Bishop of Rome. The famous Bishops of the East had
diverse meetings against Paulus; the last meeting was in the time of Aurelianus
Emperor about the year of Christ, two hundred seventy and five. At what time
Paulus was fully refuted and repressed, especially by the labor, industry, and
learning Damnatur ab omnibus quae sub coelo sunt Ecclesiis Christi. Eusebius. ibid.
of Malchion: he was condemned says Eusebius of all the Churches of Christ
which are under heaven. After the conviction of this Heresy, the Council
wrote to Dionysius Bishop of Rome; and to Maximus Bishop of Alexandria, (for
Dionysius Omni Ecclesiae Catholicae quae sub Coelo est. ibid.
died before this Council ended, and Maximus succeeded him in Alexandria:) and
to all the Church of Christ under heaven. The Epistle is extant in Eusebius,
and was directed to these Bishops, that by them other Churches might have
knowledge of this thing.

24. After all this Paulus Samosatenus held the Church of Antioche, and gave no
place to Domnus, (whom the Council excommunicating and deposing Paulus, had
decreed should take his place.) The Bishops in this case were driven to seek
the aid of the heathen Emperor Aurelian; at the suit of the Council, the
Emperor commanded that the Church of Antioche should be delivered to him, to
whom the Church of Italy and the Bishop of Rome would write. By this it
appears that the Church had no Jurisdiction coactiue: for when the Bishops of
this Council had proceeded as far as they could, by Ecclesiastical
censures, (against all which censures Paulus held the Church by force) finding
that without coactiue power Paulus could not be repressed, and finding no such
power in themselves, they were forced to seek the Emperors help,
acknowledging thereby that all coactiue power rested in the Emperor. Moreover
by this we observe the beginning of that practice, which afterward drew the
opinion of Jurisdiction after it. For the Bishop of Rome had no authority then
over other Bishops, neither did he challenge any. And when some few of that
Sea, did seem to pretend some authority in matters of conformity and
ceremonies, as Anicetus, Victor, and some few other: they were quickly
repressed by the Church, and were content to be ruled by the Church. But
because the heathen and persecuting Emperors were content for the glory of
Italy, to give this honor to the Church there, and especially to the Bishop of
Rome, that other Bishops should find favor for his sake (as appears
evidently by this Story, wherein it is recorded that the Bishops of that
Council had no means to help themselves but by the Emperor, and the
Emperor not regarding the cause, only to honor the Bishop of Rome, referred
the matter to him), hence, as reason was, the Churches were compelled to make
much of the Bishop of Rome, and to seek his favor, without which they saw
the heathen Emperors would not be drawn to do them justice.

25. About this time, Stephanus Bishop of Rome threatened Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 4.
5.
likewise to Excommunicate some Bishops for rebaptising of heretics, but he
was repressed by Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria. Some also that were
excommunicate in Africa, came to Rome to seek the favor of Cornelius: who
without examination of the cause, received them to the Communion. Of which
thing Cyprian complains much: they sail to Rome says he, cum merce
mendaciorum. Against this he declares, Cyprian. Epist. 55
that it was ordained that neither the Bishop of Rome, nor any stranger should
be judge of the causes of their Church. And to Cornelius he writes thus: Quum
statutum sit ab omnibus, and aquum sit pariter ac iustum, vt vniuscuiusque
causa illic audiatur, vbi Ibid.
est crimen admissum, and singulis pastoribus portio gregis sit ascripta, quam
regat vnusquisque and gubernet, etc. Opo^tet vtique ^os, quibus praesumus; non
circumcursare, and episcoporum concordiam cohaerentem sua subdola and fallaci
temeritate collidere, sed agere illic causam vbi and accusatores habere, and
testes sui criminis possunt. That is, [Seeing it is decreed by all, and it is a
thing both equal and just, that every man's cause should be heard there, where
the crime was committed, and a part of the flock is appointed to each Pastor,
which each in several must rule and guide, etc Verily it behooves that they
whom we govern, should not gad and run about to others, nor by their crafty
and fallatious rashness break in sunder the coherent concord of Bishops: but
there ought they to plead their cause, where they may have accusers and
witnesses of their crime.]

26. Thus albeit the Bishops of Rome did seek some enlarging of their
authority, sometimes by giving countenance and patronage to criminous and
scandalous men, yet they were repressed and brought into order by the godly and
learned Bishops, that then lived in the Church: Who would not suffer the
privileges of the Church to be lost, or any title of Jurisdiction to grow,
where there was no right. Thus for the first three hundred years the Church of
Rome had no Jurisdiction over other Churches: but the Bishops there were
reverenced by other, partly for their wisdom, learning and godliness; partly
because the Emperors favored them above other: and because they were Bishops
of the chief city and seat of the Empire. For as they had some favor above
the rest with heathen Emperors, so they found much more favor from Christian
Emperors; which thing caused them to be regarded by other Bishops, but no
Jurisdiction was as yet acknowledged.

CHAP. V.
Of the estate and Jurisdiction of the Church from the end of the first three
hundred years, until the year of Christ, six hundred. Wherein is declared
that coactiue power was in the Christian Emperors: from whom the Church
received some parts of coactiue Jurisdiction. The Popes began to seek
Jurisdiction by forgerie.

Now let us consider the times that followed, when the Church had peace from
persecution and found the favor of Christian Emperors. In which time no
Jurisdiction will be found in the Church of Rome, above other; and all coactiue
Jurisdiction was acknowledged without question, to be in the Christian
Emperors; from whom the Church received some part thereof.

2. Constantine who did as much honor the Church, and was as much honored of
the Church, as ever any Christian Emperor: leaving therein an example, which
stands as yet alone without a match, did notwithstanding take all that to
himself, which is now called Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction coactiue, without
any let, or contradiction, nay by the general approbation of all that then
lived. When Caecilianus Bishop of Carthage was accused by Donatus and some
other of that faction, for delivering the holy Scriptures to the enemies of
Religion to be burned: Constantine commanded Caecilianus to come to Rome, with
a certain number of Bishops which accused Optatus lib. 1.
him, and other that might hear and understand the cause. And commanded the
Bishop of Rome, then Milciades, with Eusebius. li. 10. ca. 5
certain Bishops of France (to the number says Optatus of nineteen) to
hear and end the matter: the Bishops condemned Dona^us, who appealed from the
sentence: and albeit the Emperor was much offended at his appellation, yet he
could not choose but receive it. In all this process, the Emperors Sovereign
Jurisdiction appeared, the cause was a pretended crime of a Bishop: the
Emperor appoints judges, and received the appellation: which things declared
Jurisdiction.

3. Likewise after he had banished Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, and Theognis
Bishop of Nice, he wrote an Epistle to the people of Nicomedia, declaring the
just causes of their banishment, and signifies that his especial pleasure and
desire is, to have Bishops, castos, orthodo^os, humanos: and shutting up his
speech, he says: Quoasi quis audacter inconsulteque ad memoriam Theodoret.
lib. 1. cap. 19.
pestium illarum exarserit, illius statim audaeia ministri dei, hoc est, mea
exequutione coercebitur. Where we see Constantine uses coactiue Jurisdiction
over Bishops, he punishes them, he declares the true ground of his
Jurisdiction from the word of God, by which warrant he is placed the Minister
of God. This is that coactiue Jurisdiction over Ecclesiastical persons, which
did always belong to the Sovereign Magistrate, and was never by God given to
any other.

4. It was always held by all sober writers of the Church of Rome, as
hereafter shall be further declared, that in the Church there is no power above
the power of a Council. And yet this authority of a Council, so much and so
worthily reverenced could not restrain Constantine, but he upon good and just
causes brought the rash proceedings of some Councels to a new examination. For
when Athanasius was wronged by a Council of Arians, he complained to
Constantine. The Emperor Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 33. 34.
sent for all the Bishops of that Council, to render an account of their
proceedings before him: which declares that his Jurisdiction coactiue, was
above the power coactiue of the Council. For here we consider only
Jurisdiction coactiue, and not the matter or subject: for otherwise we
acknowledge, as before is declared, that the determinations of general
Councels, are matters of an higher truth and authority, then the Statutes or
decrees of any Emperor. But we speak here of that Sovereign Jurisdiction
coactiue, which has always appeared in the power of the civil Magistrate,
and wherein the Church had no more part, then that she received from the
liberality of godly Emperors: for as Kings receive the knowledge of faith and
Religion from the Church, and not the Church from Kings: so coactiue
Jurisdiction the Church receives from Kings, and not Kings from the Church.

5. There was no Council held in Constantines time, whether of Orthodoxe or
heretics, but either by the express commandment, or license of the
Emperor. Ruffinus says, he called the Council of Nice at the request of the
Bishops: Ex sacer Russin. h^tor. Eccle. li. 10. ca. 1
dotum sententia apud vrbem Nicaeam concilium Episcopale conuocat. Epiphanius
says that Council was obtained of the Emperor, at the suit of Alexander
Bishop of Alexandria. So Lib. 2. Tom. 2. here is. ^8.
the Bishops who then lived in the Church, held it to be of the Emperors right
and Jurisdiction to call Councels. Theodoret rehearses a Dialogue between
Constans the Emperor, and Liberius Bishop of Rome, who afterward for fear and
through weakness, and irksomeness of his exile, was drawn to subscribe to
Arianisme, as witnesses Hierom, Ruffinus, Platina, Hieron. in chron. and
catalog.
and other: In that Dialogue these words are worth the noting. Constans willing
Liberius to forsake the Communion Ruffi. li. 10. ca. 27
with Athanasius, and to condemn him; Liberius his answer Platin. Liberio.
is, Ecclesiastica iudicia cum summa iusticiae obseruatione fieri debent:
Theodoret. lib. 2. cap. 16.
quare situae pietati places, iudicium cogi impera, vbi si damnandus Athanasius
videatur, sententiam illum ordine modoque Ecclesiastico feratur: nam fieri
nequit vt condemnetur a nobis, de quo iudicium datum non sit. That is,
[Ecclesiasticall judgments ought to proceed with exact observation of justice.
Therefore if it please your Godliness, command a Council to be called,
wherein if Athanasius seem worthy to be condemned, let sentence pass against
him in Ecclesiastical order and manner. For it cannot be that by us he should
be condemned, seeing we have no authority to judge him.] The Bishop of Rome
here confesses, first, That Iudicia Ecclesiastica, Ecclesiastical judgments
are to be appointed and established by the Emperor; then he grants him
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and grants, that to call a Council belongs
to his Jurisdiction. Secondly, the Emperor cannot make a man an heretic, but
this must be done by a Council or by the judgment Ecclesiastical. This being
a thing not of coactiue Jurisdiction, but of knowledge in the word of God.
Thirdly, the Bishop of Rome renounceth all right and authority of judicature
upon Athanasius, therefore in those days he had no Jurisdiction over other
Bishops.

6. This mixed Jurisdiction which now is practiced by Bishops, Lib. 7. cap. 46.
began in the time of Constantine. So Nicephorus witnesses: Constantinus
Clericos omnes constitutione lata immunes liberosque esse permisit; iudiciumque
and iurisdictionem in eos Episcopis, si ciuilium iudicum cognitionem declinare
vellent, mandauit, and quod Episcopi iudicassent, id robur and autoritatem
sententiae omnem habere debere decreuit. That is: [ Constantine by an edict
granted the privilege of immunity to all Clerks, and granted to Bishops
judgment and Jurisdiction over Clerks, in case they would decline from the
courts of civil Judges: and he decreed that whatsouer the Bishops judged, that
should stand in all strength and authority of a decree.] Sozomen declares by
what occasion it grew first: For some began then to appeal from civil
judgments to Ecclesiastical, and some Bishops received the appellations:
which thing being approved by Constantine, gave great authority to this kind of
Jurisdiction. Episcopi (says Sozom. lib. 1. ca. 9. Tripartit. lib. 1. cap. 9.
he) in causis ciuilibus sententias pronuntiarunt, si qui a iudicibus ciuilibus
ad eorum autoritatem appellassent. Quam rem propter venerationem Episcoporum
adeo approbauit Constantinus, vt ratas haberi, p^tioresque quam aliorum iudicum
sententias, nec minus quam ab ipso imperatore essent pronunciatae, per
Magistratus and milites Magistratuum ministres ad effectum perduci lege
edixerit. That is: [Bishops pronounced sentence in civil causes, if any
appeaed to them from civil Judges. This thing for the reverence of Bishops
Constantine approved so much, that he ordained by Law, that these judgments
should be ratified, and of greater authority then the sentences of other
Judges: yea, to be held of ^o less force, then if the Emperor himself had
pronounced them, so to be executed by the Shriefs and their servants.]

7 By which it appears, that these courts with this Jurisdiction were
understood then, no other then the Emperors courts. The Emperor grants
this Jurisdiction, says Nicephorus, the Emperor ratifieth these judgments,
says Sozomen, the Emperor commands that the sentence of the Bishop should
be every where received, as if it proceeded out of his own mouth. Which words
are well to be observed. For the Emperor commands not, that the Bishops
sentence should be received as a divine sentence, but only as an humane: not as
proceeding from the mouth of God, but as proceeding from the mouth of the
Emperor. Now if these Courts were then so evidently proved to be the Emperors
Courts, our adversaries may acknowledge their own ignorance and folly, who
make declamations and many idle discourses, without solid proof, against them
that call Ecclesiastical Courts the Kings Courts: as if this were a thing new,
strange, and never heard of before these late years. Their error is that
common Sophisme which fills most of their books, which Aristotle calls
(...), compounding and confounding those things Arift. Elench.
which we distinguish, and which are distinct in nature. For in this word of
Jurisdiction, they confound these two distinct things, both that which is
spiritual Jurisdiction, yielded by us the right of the Church, and all that
also which Princes have given to Ecclesiastical Courts: such as these
privileges which Constantine gave to Bishops Courts, and other Princes since
have continued and enlarged. If these things be not distinguished, the truth
can never appear in this question: by this the Reader may understand, who they
are that hide and deface the truth by new varnishing of old rotten Sophismes.

8 Then all coactiue Jurisdiction came into the Church from the authority of
Princes; for as the power of the Church is internal and spiritual, so
external and coactiue power was the right of Princes. To this purpose Eusebius
reports a speech of Constantine at a banquet: calling himself a Bishop for
things external, as they were for matters internal. His words are these: Vos
quidem eorum quae intus sunt in Eccle sia agend^, ego vtro Eusebius. lib. 4. de
vita Constantini.
eorum quae extra hanc sunt, Episcopus a Deo sum constitutus. And whereas
Jurisdiction is best known by appellations, it has been often seen that from
the Pope men have appealed to a council, as hereafter we are todeclare, but
from a council we find no appellation to the Pope, but to the Emperor for some
personal wrong. Athanasius being unjustly condemned by the Synod of Socrat.
lib. 1. cap. 23.
Tire appealed to Cinstantine, as Socrates witnesses. In like sort Ambios.
Epist. ad Theodos.
Flauianus appealed to the Emperor, when the Synod of Capua had referred his
cause to Theophilus, and the Bishops of Egypt. Yea, the heretics themselves
in those days knew no means to appeal from the Emperor. Augustine says,
that Donatus August. Epist. 162. et ^libi.
did still appeal to the Emperor, being condemned by the Bishops and by
Synodes. And so religious were these ancient Bishops, in preserving the
Emperors Jurisdiction, and yet maintaining the truth without fear: that when
they were oppressed by Arians, and by the power of an Arian Emperor, yet they
would use no other means, then these direct means. And Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 2.
therefore the Bishops having a purpose to condemn the Arians, craved a
counsel of Valens, an Arian Emperor, who granted them a counsel at Lampsacum,
wherein they condemned the Arian doctrine. So that without the Emperor they
would not gather a counsel, though it were to conclude directly against the
Emperors purposes. Thus does Socrates report the calling of that council: but
Sozomen says, it was not obtained of Valens, but of Valentinian.

9. Besides these public and general Synods, there were also some more
private and particular, in calling whereof the Bishops had power. The Bishop of
the Diocese used to call a Synod of his Clergy, but could proceed no farther.
Provincial Synodes were called by Metropolitanes: but in a general Synod of
many Nations, the Emperor had always the right of calling it: as a King has
the only right of calling a Synod, of those Nations that are under his
government. For as the counsel of Nice was called by Constantine, so were all
the counsels of these next three hundred years, called by the Emperors that
governed at such times. Theodosius gathered the council of Constantinople
against the heresy of Macedonius, in the third Prosper in Chroni^is.
year of his reign, which was the year of Christ 383. says Prosper. The
council of Ephesus against Nestorius, was gathered by the authority of
Theodosius the younger: and the fourth general council at Chalcedon, by the
authority of Martianus and Valentinianus Emperors. Leo the first, was a great
man in these affairs, and he is the fittest to certify us of the truth,
against whose witness our adversaries have no reason to except. This Pope then
writing to the Emperor Theodosius, says: Pietas Leo. Epist. 12.
vestra apud Ephesum constituit Synodale concilium. And afterward declaring his
obedience and conformity thereto, says: Meum studium commodaui, vt Clementiae
vestrae studijs pareatur. Ibid.
And again: Ne autem pijssimi Principis dispositioni, nostra videatur Epist.
17.
praesentia defuisse, fratres meos misi, etc. he has the same also, Epist. 23.
ad Theodosium. Again, he writes to Pulcheria, to Epist. 24.
move the Emperor to command a council to be holden within Italy, declaring
that he wrote to the Emperor to entreat the same: Which thing he moves also
in other Epistles. And though he much desired this, that the Emperor would
have Epist. 31.
been entreated to hold a council within Italy, yet could he not obtain it,
and therefore was ready to obey the Emperor, attending his pleasure therein,
who appointed it in another place.

10 Which thing we observe, the rather because our adversaries oflate have
yielded this as a proper right to the Pope to call councels. Catholici munus
con^andi concilia generalia (says Bellarmine) ad Romanum pontificem proprie
pertinere volunt. Bellarm. de council. cap. 12.
And when they are driven by these open and evident testimonies, they shift it
thus: as to say, another may do it by the Bellar. Ibid.
Popes consent: but if the Pope neither appoint the place, nor no other by his
commandment or consent, then it is no council, but a conciliable. These be
vain and frivolous shifts of Friars. For it is true, that the Popes consent
was to these ancient councels, but no otherwise then as the consent of all
other Bishops. They consented because they could not choose, because they were
resolved to be obedient: but they could not appoint either place or time. For
Leo could not have it where he would, but it was where and when the Emperor
appointed.

11 Before the council of Chalcedon, there is the Writ of the Emperors
Valentinian and Martian, called Sacra: to call Bishops to Nicaea. But another
Sacra is sent to revoke that, and to call them to Chalcedon. So that all this
while the Emperors rule, as those that have Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. They
call councels, they punish offenders of the Clergy, they establish
Ecclesiastical Courts, they are acknowledged the nourcing Fathers of Religion,
the keepers and preseruers of both Tables, and of the discipline of the Church.
And therefore Leo writing Leo Junior. Act. 18. Synodus sextae.
to Constantinus Emperor, who called the sixth Synod, says thus: Cognouimus
quod sancta and vniuersalis maxima sexta Synodus, quae per Dei gratiam
imperiali decreto in regia vrbe congregata est, etc, [Wee know that the holy
and universal great sixth Synod, which by the grace of God is called and
gathered by the imperial decree, in the imperial City, etc.] And a little
after: Pietas vestra fructus misericordiae, potestas custos disciplinae. [Your
godliness is the fruit of Gods mercy, your power is the keeper of discipline.]
And again: Nec enim minor regnantium cura est praua corrigere, quam de
aduersarijs triumphare, quia einimirum potestatem suam seruiendo subijciunt,
cuius munere imperare noscuntur, etc. Vnde diuinitus praordinata vestra
Christianissima pietas, etc. Caput Ecclesia Dominum Iesum Christum veram
pietatis regulam amplectendo, etc. [For Governors ought to have no less care
to correct ungodly things, then to triumph over their adversaries: for they
submit their power to his service, by whofe power they are known to rule, etc.
Therefore your most Christian zeal preordained of God, etc. acknowledging our
Lord Jesus Christ the true rule of godliness, to be the head of the Church.]
Wherein the Bishop of Rome does acknowledge, first, that the general council
is to be called only by the authority of the Emperor, imperiali decreto.
Secondly, that the Emperors power is such a power, as is custos disciplinae.
He speaks here in an Ecclesiastical cause, and of Ecclesiastical affairs.
Now that power which is custos disciplinae Ecclesiae, what is it, but
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction? This word Jurisdiction was not then worn in such
use as now it is, but we see the ancients use words counteruailing it. The
Bishop of Rome acknowledges Ecclesiastical power and Jurisdiction to be in
the Emperor, when he yields him such a power as is preserver of the
discipline Ecclesiastical. Thirdly, he confesses that the care of the Church
and Church-gouernment for establishing the truth, does no less belong to the
office of a Prince, then to triumph over his foes in war. Fourthly, the
Bishop of Rome as then acknowledges no other head of the Church, then Jesus
Christ as appears by his words. To the same purpose Saint Augustine says,
Diuinitus praecipi regibus, vt in regno suo bona iubeant, mala prohibeant, non
solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum etiam quae ad diuinam
religionem. Contra Crescentium li. 3. cap. 51. That is, Kings are commanded to
estalish good things, and prohibit evil in their Kingdoms, not only in
things belonging to Civil society, but in such things also that belong to
divine Religion. Gregory the great following the footsteppes of his Fathers,
yields the fame authority to the King: For writing to Theodoricus King of
France, he says: Iterata vos per vestram mercedem adhortatione pulsamus, vt
congregari Synodum Regist. ca. 273.
iubeatis. This part of Jurisdiction for calling of Councels, is so fully
confirmed to be the Emperors right by the Aunceants, that Cardinal Cusanus
(sure no Lutheran) disputing of this privilege, concludes from the confessed
testimonies of Cusanus lib. de Cath. concordantia 3. cap. 19
the Aunceants, these two things: First, That Emperors and Kings by their
office must call Counc^ls, Secondly, that their office is likewise by coactiue
power, to see the things maintained and observed, which are defined in general
Councels.

12. Hitherto then have we found the Sovereign Jurisdiction always in
Christian Magistrates, and never in the Bishop of Rome. How then comes the
Bishop of Rome to this practice of Jurisdiction, which now he claims? Let us
here consider one Pageant of theirs, which will declare the first claim and
beginning of Jurisdiction, which they have so much increased since. The first
attempt was to win Jurisdiction over Bishops, the second was to get the same
power over Kings, and by that means over all. These we mean to open, with as
much brevity as we can, and the matter will bear. First then to bring Bishops
of other Nations under their power, a shameless devise was plotted by the
Bishop of Rome, discried and rejected by the ancient Fathers that then lived;
but yet so closely followed afterward by the Popes, that in the end it
prevailed. I will declare the story as it is delivered by their own writers,
who have collected the tomes of the Councels.

13. The sixth Council of Carthage was gathered in the Prosper in Chrenicis.
year of our Lord four hundred and twenty: against the heresy of Pelagius:
it lasted six years and more. In it were gathered two hundred and seventeen
Bishops, among whom was that worthy Father Saint Augustine, and others of
famous note, as Prosper, Orosius, and diverse other of great virtue and
learning. Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, Metropolitan of Africa was chief. In
the time of this Council, three Bishops of Rome succeeding one another, moved
great contention and quarrel with the Fathers of this Council for
Jurisdiction, which the Popes then began to claim, affirming that they had
Jurisdiction over the Church of Africa, which thing these Fathers of this
Council utterly denied: the contention began upon this occasion.

14. Apiarius a Priest of the Church of Sicca, in Africa, Council. Affrican.
cap. 101.
was for his infamous and scandalous life excommunicated not only by Vrbanus
Bishop of Sicca, but by a whole Synod of Bishops met together. This fellow
thus censured in Africa, fled to Zozimus Bishop of Rome, to him he complained
of wrong that the Bishops of Africa had done him, as he said. Zoz^mus without
examination of the cause, undertook to maintain him, and admitted him to the
Communion. After this understanding, that the Bishops of Africa were gathered
in their Synod, he sends to them Faustinus Bishop of Potentia, and with him
two Priests, Philip and Asellus. Them he charge to defend the cause of
Apiarius, to cause the Synod of Africa to recciue him to their Communion, to
excommunicate Vrbanus, Bishop of Sicca, or else to call him to Rome, unless
he will reform, that is, undo all that he had done against Apiarius. Further
he commands them, to draw the Council to yield to the Jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Rome, and to acknowledge it lawful for any Bishop or Priest, to
appeal from the sentence of their Metropolitan to Rome: he commands them
also to signify, that he sent his Legate into Africa, who might understand
the causes of appellants that were grieved. To effect this thing the better, he
charge them to declare, that the Nicen Council has given this Jurisdiction
to the Bishops of Rome: for proof hereof he delivers unto them in writing a
counterfeited Canon of the Nicen Council.

15. Faustinus coming to Africa with these instructions, and being admitted
into the Council, declared that he had from Zozimus a Commission which he
called Commonitorium; and withal he declared the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Rome, confirmed by a Canon of the Nicen Council. Aurelius Prosident Council.
Carthag, 6.
of the Council answered, let this Commission first be read which our brethren
have brought: hereupon Daniel the notary read, and recited the Commission
thus. [ Zozimus Bishop of Rome, to our brother Faustinus Bishop, and to our
fons, Philip and Asellus Priests: this business you know, you are to do all
things as if our presence were with you, nay because it is with you: and the
rather seeing you have both our express command, and the words of the Canons,
which for more full assurance we have added to this Commission. For thus (most
beloved brethren) it is decreed in the Council of Nice concerning the
appellation of Bishops.] (And then forsooth the forged Canon os the Council of
Nice follows thus.)

Placuit autem vt si Episcopus accusatus fuerit, and iudicauerint congregati
Episcopi regionis ipsius, and de gradu suo deiecerint eum, and appellasse
Episcopus videatur, and confugerit ad beatissimum Ecclesiae Romanae Episcopum,
and valuerit audiri and iustum putauerit Council. Carthag. 6. cap. 3.
vt reuocetur examen, s^ribere his Episcopis dignetur, qui infinitima and
propinqua prouincia sunt, vt ipsi diligentur omnia requirant, and iuxta fide^
veritatis definiant. Quo^ si is qui r^gat causam suam iterum audiri,
deprecatione sua mouerit Episcopum Roma^u^, vt e Latere suo presbyterum mittat,
erit in potestate Episcopi Romani, quid velit, and quid existimet: and si
decreuerit mittendos esse qui presents cum Episcopis iudicent, habentes
authoritatem eius a quo destinati sunt, erit in suo arbitrio. Si vero
crediderit sufficere Episcopos, vt neggtio terminum imponant, faciot quod
sapientissimo consilio suo iudicauerit. That is, [We thought good that if a
Bishop be accused, and the Bishops of that Province have given sentence, and
deposed him; if this Bishop seem to appeal and fly to the most blessed
Bishop of Rome, and desire to be heard: ^f he think good to revoke the
sentence, it may please him to write to those Bishops which are in that
Province, that they may diligently search the matter, and judge it truly. But
if he, that moves his cause may be heard again, shall by his petition entreat
the Bishop of Rome to send a Legate from his side, it shall be in the power of
the Bishop of Rome, to do what he thinks best. And if he decree to send
some, who with the Bishops of the Province may be present to judge, having
authority from him, from whom they are sent, it shall be in his pleasure. And
if he think that the Bishops of that Province may suffice to end the
business, let him do whatsoever in his most wise Council he judges best.]

Before I proceed in this narration, let some things of note be observed:
First, the Bishops of Rome were now grown from the honest and godly
conversation of their Ancestors, to admirable impudency that durst suborne a
Canon of the Nicen Council, and publish their own shame, in the sight of the
Church then, and leave an eternal monument thereof to the world, for ever
extant in public Councels. Secondly, the ground of the Jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Rome, is forgerie, famously attempted, and famously con^icted at that
present time. And yet this practice prevailed mightily afterward, this
unblessed devise of forgerie, being attempted in a number of decretall
Epistles, to draw in this Jurisdiction, a practice whereof no learned Papists
can speak or think without blushing, and yet such is their miserable
captivity, that they are willing to make use of that falsehood, whereof they
cannot think without a secret confession of forgerie. Thirdly, the ingenuous
reader cannot but see, and understand the vanity of the Popes flatterers, who
striving now for this Jurisdiction, would blasphemously draw it from
Scriptures, such as thou art Peter, etc. And feed my Sheep, etc. These
Scriptures were first drawn by the forged decretall Epistles to prove the
Popes Jurisdiction, and are now commonly drawn to the same purpose: but when
Zozimus, Bonifac^, and Caelestinus began first to contend for Jurisdiction,
they claimed it not from Scriptures: this devise was not then found out, but
they laid all the cause upon a forged Canon of the Council of Nice. So that
this is but a late kna^erie of the Popes flatterers, to countenance their new
found Jurisdiction by Scriptures.

16. When this Canon was recited by the notarie, the Fathers of the Council
were much offended and troubled at the absurdity thereof: there were then
present some of the best learned Divines then living in the world, they knew
well there was no such Canon, they never read it in any copies of the Nicen
Council, they never heard of this thing before: they resolved therefore not
only to deny the Canon, but to refute the falsehood of the Pope so famously,
that it might be known to all the world, and that the Church afterward might
take warning of the Roman ambition: therefore they answered for the present,
thus: that this Canon was not to be found in their books. And for a more full
and sufficient examination of this matter, they would send for the autentike
copies of the Nicen Council, before they could grant the Popes request. To
this purpose they writ a letter to Zozimus, which was presented Council.
Affrican. cap. 101.
to Boniface his successor, and is extant in the Tomes of the Councels.

17. Boniface first receiving these letters (for Zozimus was dead before they
returned) pursues the claim of Jurisdiction by corruption of the same Canon,
and with obstinate and resolute peruersitie maintains the falsehood begun by
his Predecessor. In the mean time two copies autentike of the Nicen Canons
were sent to the Fathers of the Council of Carthage, one from Cyrillus Bishop
of Alexandria: another from Atticus Bishop of Constantinople. These copies were
read, but no such Canon could be found, as the Bishop of Rome had foisted in:
the Fathers understanding the fact, and having taken the Bishop of Rome in a
flagrant crime, decreed that the true Canons of the Nicen Council should be
observed, rejecting this suborned and supposititious Canon. This decree they
sent to Pope Boniface: but Gods judgments hastily following these corruptors,
Boniface was dead before it came to Rome, and Caelestinus next succeeding
received it.

18. Caelestinus as stiff for this Jurisdiction as any of his predecessors,
maintained the cause by the same means, resolved with shame enough to stand
for the adulterated Canon: which pertinacy after open conviction, declares
that the policy of the Church of Rome began then to forsake religious
courses, and to rest upon falsehood and forgery to obtain their wills. And
therefore it is not to be marueiled, if the truth of Religion afterward for
saked them. Apiarius gave a new occasion to the Pope to work upon: for after
that this man was received unto the Communion by Zozimus and Boniface, he
returned to the Trabacens, where for his foul and scandalous life he was
excommunicated again. To recover this disgrace, he flies to his only refuge
the Bishop of Rome then Caelestinus, who receives him, admitting him to the
Communion; and directs his Legates Eaustinus, Philippus, Asellus, to Africa,
with a straight charge to draw the Council to yield to the demands of his
Predecessors: for want of other help, he furnishes them thoroughly with
impudency and inuict audacity: for what other virtues were left to maintain
such a cause? The Legates coming with this Commission, require of the Council
that Apiarius may be admitted to their Communion, and that they would be
content to submit themselves to the Roman Jurisdiction. The Fathers of the
Council produce the autentike copies of the Nicen Canons, which they had
procured from Alexandria and Constantinople: by which the Roman forgery was
evidently convinced. Here began a fresh contention, Faustinus resolved to
execute his Commission to his utmost power, exclaimeth against the Sea
Apostolic, against the violatours of the Nicen Canons. The Council protests
that they will embrace all true Canons, that they will yield to the Church of
Rome all true privileges: only in the lawful, warrantable, and necessary
defense of their own freedom, and of the Churches freedom, they must stand,
and therefore could not admit a forged claim without show of truth. As they
were in the heat of contention, the one side striving to impose the yoke of
their Jurisdiction upon the Church, the other resolved to stand close and
faithful for the freedom of the Church: behold of a sudden Apiarius the
firebrand of this contention, touched by the very finger of God, and drawn to
give God the glory, and so to end this contention; falls Council. Africa.
cap. 105.
down on his knees before them all, and confesses all those crimes to be most
true, which were objected against him: and with humble supplication craves
pardon of the Council. And so this Tragedy ended.

19. The Fathers of this Council having this experience of the Popes
corruption and dishonestie: write to Caelestinus to this purpose. They entreat
him not to trouble the Church, by Council. Affrican. cap. 105.
patronising such wicked men as Apiarius: that he would not accept of
appellations, made by such scandalous and condemned men, who would seek a
refuge for their wickedness at Rome: they declare that the Nicen
Canonsderogate nothing from the African Church: that the Fathers of the Nicen
Council saw Quaecunque negotia in suis locis vbi orta sunt, finienda: nec
gratiam spiritus S. vnicuique Prouinciae defut^ram.
with great wisdom, that all suits were to be ended in the places where they
began; that the grace of the holy Ghost should not be wanting to any Province;
that if any be offended he may appeal to a Provincial, or to a general
Synod; that transmaritim judgments ought not to be admitted, where witnesses
cannot be conveniently produced, either for sex or age: that to send any
Legates from the side of the Roman Bishop, is a thing found in no Synod
established; that the Canon of the Nicen Council, by which the Popes claimed
this Jurisdiction is not to be found in the autentike copies of that Council,
and therefore falsified. Last of all they admonish him, that he and his
successors must take good heed, Ne fumosum typhu^ saeculi in Ecclesiam
Christi, etc. That is, that they induce not the smoke of arrogancy to darken
the Church of Christ, which Church does bring the light of simplicity and the
bright day of humility to such as desire to see God. Thus write the Fathers of
that Council to Pope Caelestinus; intimating by what means, that smoke did
begin to rise to darken the Church which is prophesied in the Revelation, which
came out of the bottomless pi^t like the smoke of a great furnace. Upon these
Apoc. 9. 2.
reasons they make a decree, to prevent his ambitious desires, by which decree
they forbid all appellations to Rome, or to any other place from Africa: it is
extant in the Affrican Council, and this it is.

Item placuit vt presby teri, Diaconi, vel caeteri inferiores Clerici Council.
Africa cap. 92.
causis quas habuerint (si de iudicijs Episcoporum suorum questi fuerint)
vicini Episcopi eos audiant. [Moreouer it was thought good that Priests,
Deacons, or other inferior Clerks, if in their causes they complain of the
judgments of their Bishops, they shall be judged by the next adjoining
Bishops, etc.] And a little after, Quod si and ab ijs prouocandum putauerint,
non prouocent nisi ad Affricana Concilia, vel ad primates Prouinciarum suarum.
Ad transmarina autem qui putauerit appellandum, a nullointer Affricam in
Communionem suscipiatur. [And if they appeal from them, they shall not appeal
but to the Affrican Councels, or to the Primates of their Provinces. Whosoever
appealeth to outlandish places, shall be admitted to the Communion by none
within Africa.

This was not so much a new decree, as the maintaining of that ancient decreed
right, which Cyprian does mention, testifying that it was decreed even in his
time by all the Bishops of Africa, Cyprian. Epist. 55
Statutum est ab omnibus: that the cause should be there heard and examined,
where the fault was committed. This Canon which was thus established in the
Affrican Council, is for clearing of the truth, and preventing of these
ambitious courses, and claims of Rome, repeated and confirmed also in the
Mileuitan Council: where Saint Augustine was also present. Council. Mileuit.
cap. 22.
For it must be observed that the sixth Carthaginian, the seventh Carthaginian,
the Affrican, and Meleuitan Councels were held all about this time by the same
men: so great was the care and diligence of the Fathers, that by many Councels
as it were by so many lights, they might dispell the smoke of the darkness,
which they saw then rising out of the Church of Rome: which smoke after those
times quenched the light, and covered the sight of the Church, as a mist
covers the heavens.

20 Thus did these worthy Fathers dispell this smoke for that time, and reject
the yoke of the Popes Jurisdiction. In all this business S. Augustine had an
especial hand and head. And as long as he lived, the Popes could never
prevail. But the Bishops of Rome having thus once cast off all regard of truth
and modesty, were resolved to proceed on in this wretched course, and never
gave over, till at last they obtained their purpose. There is an Epistle of
Boniface the second, written after these times, extant in the Tomes of
councels, which whether it be true, or counterfeit (as much other stuff is of
this argument) we are to observe something out of it, because it concerns
this question. This Epistle is entitled, De reconciliationae Carthaginensis
Epist. 2. Bonis. 2. inter decreta eiusdem.
Ecclesiae, written to Eulalius Bishop of Alexandria: he certifieth the Bishop
of Alexandria of great joy, for as much as the Church of Carthage is now
returned, says he, ad communionem nostram: and receives all our mandates,
which by our Legates we send them. He signifies that supplications must be
made to GOD, that other Churches may likewise be brought home to the same
obedience. That the Bishop of Alexandria must give notice hereof to all the
brethren about him, that they cease not to give thanks for such benefits of
the heavenly favor. For, says he; Aurelius praefatae Carthaginensis
Ecclesiaeolim Episcopus, cum collegis suis instigante diabolo, superbire
temporibus praedecessorum nostrorum Bonifacij atque Coelestini contra Romanam
Ecclesiam coepit, etc. That is: Aurelius once Bishop of Carthage, began with
his colleagues, by the instigation of the devil, to wax proud against the
Roman Church, in the days of our predecessors Boniface and Coelestinus. But
Eulalius at this time Bishop of Carthage, finding himself for the sins of
Aurelius, cut off from the communion of the Church of Rome, has humbled
himself, and sought peace, and the communion of the Church of Rome by his
subscription, and together with his colleagues has by Apostolical authority
utterly condemned all Scriptures and Writings, which by any wit have been
framed against the privileges of the Church of Rome.

21 Whether this Epistle be forged or not, it comes all to one reckoning. For
if it be forged, let the Bishop of Rome take the shame of the forgery. If it be
the true writing of the Bish* of Rome, then he avouches that the holy and
worthy man of God S. Augustine, with Aurelius, and the rest of his colleagues
were stirred up by the instigation of the devil, to withs^and this Roman
Jurisdiction. We may the better bear the reproaches of the Romish Sinagogue,
when they sharpen their tongues and pens against the servants of GOD in our
times, seeing they laue done as much against the ancient godly Fathers. For
what can the late Popes say more against M. Luther, John Calvin, or any other
of the worthies of the reformed Churches, then this Boniface the second says
against holy S. Augustine, that he with the rest of his company were stirred
and instigated by the devil, to stand against the Jurisdiction of the Romish
Church? Then when we deny their Jurisdiction, we deny it with the Fathers:
when we are therefore condemned by the Pope and his Court, we are condemned
with the ancient Fathers, with them we suffer, with them we are reviled, and
condemned. The goodness of our cause, the fellowship of the ancient Saints,
the warrant of the truth, is able to support us against the impotent malice and
fury of these men, that have no other cause to be offended at us; then their
Fathers had against S. Augustine, and the rest of the ancient and holy
Fathers, who have resisted the Romish Jurisdiction, and therein have left a
worthy example to us, to follow their footsteps. Thus we see the Popes
Jurisdiction was first attempted by forgery, and afterward by falsehood, and
tyranny effected.

22 Other Churches were afterward in time drawn to the obedience of this
Jurisdiction. The Churches of Rauenna, Aquileia, and Millane, were long after
this brought under the same yoke by Pope Stephen the third, says Sabellicus.
But Epist. Stephan^ 3. apud Sabellicum.
Platina says, that Millaine was drawn to this obedience by Stephen the
ninth. If this be true, then Millain stood out till Platin. Stephano. 9.
the year of Christ nine hundred and forty. And thus the quarrel for
Jurisdiction was begun by Zozimus, maintained by Boniface, and Caelestinus, but
rejected by these Affrican Councels. The cause was much helped by some that
succeeded as Leo, and others. Who though in some things they were deceived, and
by the sleighty and subtle work of Satan drawn to do it, upon this so much
fancied Jurisdiction of Rome: Yet (as in charity we are to judge) they were
preserved by the mercy of God, from that shameless impudency of some of their
predecessors, and were content to leave things as they found them. And so the
Church of Rome stood until the time of Gregory the first.

CHAP. VI.
Of the state and Jurisdiction of the Church, from the year of Christ 600.
until the conquest of England. Wherein is declared how this Jurisdiction was
first refuted by the Popes, and after obtained by the succeeding Popes. How the
Popes resisted the Emperor, and surprised the Emperors Jurisdiction and
lands, and how some Emperors recover Jurisdiction again.

NOw we enter into those fatal times of our captivity: For we confess that
our Fathers were by a just judgment of God brought into a captivity far
greater then the Babilonian. Our Kings, our Bishops, our people, our Church,
and all were oppressed. And they that led us captives ask us, where was our
Church then? We answer, in captivity. For though the greatest number then
followed the pleasures and delights of Babylon, yet among them the true Israel
of God remained. And we are able, by the grace of God, to prove a true Church
to have continued in the doctrines of the truth, until God sent in his
wonderful mercy, a deliverance from this captivity. But this belongs to
another question.

2 After these times the Jurisdiction of Princes and of the Church, was
oppressed by the Pope. But before they came into that great oppression and
captivity, it pleased God, for better testification of his truth to all ages,
and for the confusion of this tyranny gotten and maintained by forgerie; to
cause one of the Popes to dispute this question with such zeal and courage,
that it remains an everlasting testimony against this Jurisdiction, and
against all his successors. For when John Bishop of Constantinople would have
had this title of Oecumenicall Bishop confirmed to him, Gregory the first
(questionless the best Pope that has been since his time) uses such reasons
against John, as are sufficient to prove, that no Bishop has right to that
Jurisdiction which now the Popes claim, and that he who usurps that place
above his brethren, is Antichrist. And if the judgment of Gregory, be
sufficient to determine this controversy, it will follow that Antichrist has
been raised up in the Church of Rome presently after Gregory, and has in the
succession of those Bishops sit there ever since: because since the time of
Gregory, they have taken and claimed this title, and thereby so much increased
in pride, ambition, and enormous practices against the Church, and against
states, that he that co^pareth these times with the former, shall find it
another state, then it was in the time of Gregory.

3 And because the Pope now glories in this title of universal Bishop, from
which title he would draw a Jurisdiction over all Bishops, Gregory herein is
peremptory, that whosoever takes that title, robs Christ of his place and
glory. For, says he: Sub vno capite omnes membra sunt Ecclesiae, sancti ante
legem, Lib. 4. indict. 13.
sub lege, sancti sub gratia: et nemo se vnquam vniuersalem vocari Epist. 82.
voluit. [All the Saints as members of the Church are under one head, the
Saints before the Law, under the Law, and under grace: and no man would ever
suffer himself to be called an universal Bishop.] This was then the learning
of the Church of Rome, that because Christ was the only head of the universal
Church, therefore no man may be. For the devise which after this the Friars
brought in, of caput ministeriale, was then unknown. The reason of Gregory is
well to be observed: because every man is a member of the universal Church, no
man can be both head and member of the same. And therefore he urges this
thing often; as namely where he says: Vniuersa sibi Epist. 36. lib. 4.
tentat ascribers, and omnia quae soli vni capiti cohaereut, videlicet Christo,
per elationem Pompatici sermonis, eiusdem Christi sibi studet membra subiugare.
That is: he seeks to ascribe all to himself, and whosoever as members are
knit to one only head, that is Christ, he deuiseth by the pride of this
Pompaticall title to subdue to himself. Thus says Gregory of him that sought
this title of universal Bishop. In many other places he proves the same: that
Christ is the only and sole head of the Church, and therefore no man can
challenge this title of universal Bishop, or head of the universal Church.
Whosoever does it, must bec that Antichrist that thrusts Christ out of his
place. For it is well to be observed, that the reasons of Gregory against the
claim of universal Bishop, or head of the universal Church, do as well
and truly refute all these names of pride now challenged by the Popes, as this
which then was challenged by John of Constantinople. For now these titles are
given to the Pope as his due style: Princeps Sacerdotum, Bellar. de Romans
Uicarius Christi, caput Ecclesiae, fundamentum Ecclesiae, Pont. lib. 2. cap.
31.
pater and doctor omnium fidelium, sponsus Ecclesiae, Episcopu^ vniuersalis.
All these being titles of the like pride and pomp, are alike condemned by
Gregory. Of this title of universal Bishop Gregory says so much, as might
justly deter all his successors from that or any of the like nature. For he
calls it: Vocabulum profanum, vanum, nomen vanitatis, vocabulum peruersum,
vocabulum elationis, scelestum, superstitiosum, superbum; Thus in diverse places
he sets out that title, and farther says that it is: Appellatio
nefan^inominis, profani nominis superbia, appellatio friuoli nominis, vanitas
stulti nominis, nomen Pompaticum. By all which terms dispersed in diverse parts
of his works, he has declared his zeal against the pride of them that take
such names upon them, declaring that the blasphemy of this name was a proof,
that Antichrist was rising in the Church. For he says, that he that takes
this name of universal Bishop, is the forerunner of Antichrist. For that
Antichrist must be Lord of the Clergy, Gregory witnesses, saying, Sacerdotum
ei praeparatur exercitus.

4. Now seeing that from these names of pride, they would prove the Popes
Jurisdiction: We answer, this proof is founded upon a rotten and ruinous
groundwork, seeing their ancient Popes have upon the same reasons grounded
the proof of Antichrist. After the death of Gregory, Sabinian succeeded, who
sat but five months and nineteen days. And then came Boniface the third,
who obtained of the Emperor Phocas, that title which Gregory had so condemned.
Then and never before was the Church of Rome made the head and Mistress of all
other Churches, and the Pope the chief Bishop of all Bishops. This was done in
the year of Christ six hundred and six. And this Boniface is accounted the
threescore and six Pope from Peter, as Caranza notes. Then we say, that
whatsoever Gregor^e has written against John Bishop of Constantinople, all
stands strong against Boniface the third, and all the Popes after him. For he
first obtained this Antich^istian name, and all the rest have enjoyed it, and
much increased both titles of pride and power answerable to those ticles.

5. But because Bellarmine would salve up the wound that Gregory has given to
all Pop^ after Boniface, let us briefly consider his shifts, and so proceed.
First he says, that by Gregory his words the Pope should not be Antichrist,
but only praecursor Bellar. de Romans
Antichrist^, the forerunner of Antichrist. Nam praecursor, Pont. lib. 3. cap.
13.
says he, non debet esse idem cum eo quem praecurrit, sed long minor. Si
ergopraecursor Antichristi est ille, qui se facit Epis^pum vniuersalem, ipse
Antichristus verus non horse faciet, sed aliquid maius. We answer: Boniface the
third, who first obtained this title in the Church of Rome, was the fore runner
of Antichrist, and began to his successors, but his successors increased that
dominion which Boniface began: For they were not only universal Bishops, that
is, Lords of Bishops, but they were also Lords of Kings: that is, more then
Boniface was: and therefore we yield, that the forerunner is less then
Antichrist in his height, and yet we say, that Gregory his words stand both
against the one and the other, unanswered by Bellarmin^. Another testimony of
Gregory, he would shift thus. Pariratione (says Bellarmine) Bellar. ibid.
cum ait Gregorius: Sacerdotum ei praepar^tur exercitus: non vult dicere
Sacerdotes vt Sacerdotes, ad exercitum Antichristi pertinere, sic enim seipsum
etiam in illo exercitu collocasset, sed Sacerdotes vt superbos Antichristo
exercitum praeparare. Granting all true that Bellarmine says, the wound is
not cured which Gregory has given to the proud Popes, and to their proud and
luxurious Priests: these falues of Bellarmine are so far from curing of the
sore, that they make it much worse. Moreover, Bellarmine sometimes would shift
it thus, as if John Bishop of Conftantinople, when he sought to be
Occumenicall Bishop, did not mean to be the chief of all Bifhops, as the Pope
is, but to be the only Bishop, that there should be no other Bishop in the
world but himself: so that he would infer that the thing which (...)
obtained, was not the very thing which Gregory so lately before, and so
hainously had condemned. We will therefore out of approved Histories briefly
show, that the honor which Boniface obtained, was no other thing, then that
dishonorable title which John Bishop of Constantinople sought to get, and which
Gregory so much reproved and abhorred.

6 And certain it is, that the thing which Gregory so sharply reproved, was
that which John (...). Now that Boniface obtained the same thing, they who
write thereof, bear sufficient witness. Paulus Diaconus says thus: Hic
(Phoca^) rogan^e Papa ^aub. VVarnefrid. P^uca.
Bonifac^o, statuit sedem Romanae Ecclesiae, vt cap^t esse^ omnium Ecclestar^m,
quia Ecclesia Constantinopolitana primam se omnium Ecclesiarum scribebat. That
is: [This man at the suit of Boniface, ordained that the sea of Rome should be
head of all Churches, because the Church of Constantinople wrote her self the
chief of all Churches.] Then by this testimony we find, that Boniface
obtained no other thing of Phocas, then that which John Bishop of
Constantinople had sought before. Abbas Vspergensis Vspergens. Chronic.
says. Post ^abinianum Bonifacius cligitur ad Pontisicatum: cuius rogatu
Phocas constituit se dcm Romanae et Apostolic^ Ecclesia caput esse omnium
Ecclesiarum, nam antea Constantinopolitana ^e scrit ^bat primam omnium. That
is: [After Sabmian Bonifau was chosen Pope, at whose suit Phocas ordained, that
the sea of the Roman Apostolic Church should be the head of all Churches: for
before this, the Church of Constantinople had writ her self the chief of
all.] Then this thing was granted by Phoc^s, at the suit of Boniface; and what
was granted? no other thing then John of Constantinople had sought before.
Platina witnesses the same thing: Bo^ifacius a Phoca imperatore obtinuit,
Platin. Bonifac. 3.
magna tamen contentione, vt seeds beati Petri Apostoli, quae caput est omnium
Ecclesiarum, ita and diceretur and haberetur abom^bus: quem quidem locum
Ecclesia Constantinopolitana sibi vendicare conabatur. That is: [ Boniface
obtained of Phoca^, but with great suit, that S. Peter's sea which is the head
of all Churches, so should be called and accounted of all: Which place the
Church of Constantinople sought to take to her self.] Then this was gotten by
the importunate suit of Boniface, and he obtained nothing, but that which John
Bishop of Constantinople had sought before. And thus the Writers that make any
mention of this thing, witness without question, that Boniface by importune
suit and great contention, obtained no other thing then that which the Bishop
of Constantinople had so lately sought, and which Gregory the first Pope had so
peremptorily condemned as a thing blasphemous, (...), prejudicial to the
government of Christ's Church, (...) Christ down, and raising Antichrist up,
and therefore utterly unlawful for any Bishop to seek or to hold. For that
herein was included that principality over Bishops, which Gregory also so much
condemned, no man makes question. Blondus says: ad huius (Bonifacij)
petitionem Phocas antistitem Romans principem Episcoporum omnium dixit. That is:
[At the suit of Boniface, Pho^as appointed the Bishop of Rome to be the Prince
of all Bishops.] And Nauclerus Vol. 2. Generat. 21.
says: Bonifacius insolentiam Patriarchae Constantinopolitani (...) se
appellantis, compescuit. Phocas enim Pontisicis suasione, publica, ac ad
^niuersum orbem dimissa sanctione, constituit, vt Romans Ecclesiae, Romanoque
Pontisici omnes orbis Ecclesiae obedrent. That is: [ Boniface repressed the
insolence of the Patriark of Constantinople, calling himself Oecumenicall. For
Phocas at the suit of the Pope, ordained by a public decree, published over:
he world, that all that Churches in the world should obey the Church of Rome
and the Bishop of Rome.] Then this matter is s^ evident the no shift can help
it, no cloak can hide the shame: so that either Gregory's works should have
been burned for Heresy, or this title of Oecumenicall Bishop, should not have
been taken up by the Popes.

7. And hence is the original of the Popes Jurisdiction over all Bishops, he
had once as much Jurisdiction over Bishops, as Phocas could give him. But who
gave him Jurisdiction over Princes? That part of Jurisdiction was not then
known in the world. But after this it crept in, the occasion thereof grew
thus. When the Empire was utterly decayed in the West, and so weak in the
East, as not able to keep Italy in obedience; though for a time rather by the
bare name and opinion of ancient government, then by any present strength,
they kept some command in Italy by their Exarches abiding at Rauenna:
Gr^gorie the second Pope, espying this weakness, and watching for an
opportunity to take the Empire at such disadvantage: to drive the Emperor
quite out of Italy, used the help of the Lumbards against him; and prevailed
so far that he gave the Emperors army the overthrow in a pitched field: and
slew Paulus the Exarch in battle, ^ac tempestate (says Palmerius) inter
'Pontificem and imperatorem maxima discordia fuit: quam ob In chronic. an. 726.
causam contra Pontific^m in Italiam missi sunt primum Paulus Exarch^s; mox eo
nterempto in eius locum substituitur Eutychus: sub quo vary pugnatum est
diuisa Italia. In quo bello Antipharium Longobaraorum ducem, auailia Pontifici
praebuisse Constat. That is, [At this time a great discord rose between the
Pope and the Emperor: for which cause first Paul the Exarch was sent to Italy,
but he was slain, and Eu^ychus sent in his place: under whom many battles were
fought with variable fortune, Italy being divided. In which war it is well
known, that Antipharius Duke of the Lombardes did aid the Pope against the
Emperor.] Nauclerus declares that one especial occasion of this breach
between Leo the Emperor, and Gregory the second Pope, was, that Leo
abolished images which were worshipped, and commanded the Pope to do so: whereat
the Pope was so enraged that he drew all Italy from the obedience of the
Emperor. Tantamque authoritatem tune habuerunt Romani Naueler. Vo^. 2.
generat. 25.
Pont. decreta (says Naucl^r) vt Rauennates primi, exinde Venetia, populi
atque milites, aperta^ in Imperatore^ Exarchumque rebellione^ pra se tulerint.
Ac eo processit rebellio, vt depositis Exarchi magistratibus, singulae
civitates, singula oppida proprios magistratus, quos duces apellabant, creare
and prasicere eurarent. [Such authority then had the Popes decrees, that first
the Rauennates, after that the Venetians did raise an open rebellion against
the Emperor and the Exarch. And this rebellion proceeded so far, that every
city, and every town put down the Exarches, and created proper Magistrates to
themselves, whom they called Dukes.] Thus fell the government of Italy into so
many parts every one catching what they could, as men use to do at a great
shipwreck. And the Pope was careful to provide that his part should not be
the least.

8. When thus the Pope had driven the Emperor out of all Italy, and by that
means had drawn Italy into as many Dominions in a, manner, as there were
great Cities; the strongest began to pray upon the weaker. Here began the fire
of emulation to kindle between the Pope and the Lumbards, for the Lumbards
were the strongest part of Italy then, and the Popes part was the second: all
other were weak in respect of these two; and these two thereto agreeing well
hitherto, so long as both conspired against the Empire: began now to fall at
variance about the dividing of the spoil. The Pope finding the Lumbards too
strong for him, in this parting of the spoil of the Empire; as before he had
used the strength of the Lumbards, to suppress the Emperor: so now following
the same art, called Pipin the Constable of France into Italy, by whose
power he repressed the Lumbards: and compelled Astulphus their King to receive
conditions of peace. Platina says, that Gregorius chief Secretary to the
Emperor, did meet Pipin as he came into Italy, and entreated him that if he
should overcome the Lumbards, he would restore the Exarchate of Rauenna to the
Emperor, to whom of right, said he, it belonged, (All that poor right that
then he sought to hold in Italy, detained as then by the Lumbards, but
presently falling unto the Popes share) and that he would not yield it to the
Pope. The answer of Pipin was, he came into Italy to gratify the Pope, and
that he would help him as much as he could. That which after the victory fell
to the Popes part, and to Rome, was says Platina, all that lies between
Padus and the Appennine, from Placentia, to the Venetian standing waters; and
whatsoever is contained between the river Isaurus and Appennine. Paulus
Aemylius says, all that which before was called Flaminia, wherein was Rauenna,
was hereupon commanded to be called Romandiola. The match by negotiation
between Pipin and the Pope was made thus: that all that which was recovered
from the Lumbards, being before parcel of the Empire, should be adjudged to
the Pope, and to Rome: and Pipin for his service should be made King of
France by the Pope, and Chilperic the lawful King should be deposed. All this
was accordingly performed; and Pipin was absolved from the Oath of Allegiance,
and so were all the Barons and people of France absolved from the Oath of
obedience: which before they Uspergensis Nau^ler.
had taken to Chilperic, or as some call him Hilderic, their King.

9. This Story I have briefly set down, that the ground of the Popes
Jurisdiction may be the better observed: for from such strange grounds, these
Roman Catholics draw the Popes Jurisdiction, and the parts thereof, as a man
of ordinary reason would least suspect: so capricious are they now grown. As
for example, from this fact of Pope Zachary, who absolved subjects from the
Oath of Allegiance to their true King; who would think that the Popes
Jurisdiction could be drawn? who would not rather judge that the Popes
arrogance, pride, usurpation, oppression, corruption might by this be proved?
And yet Augustinus. Anconitanus makes this fact the only ground and proof of
his Jurisdiction: we look for such a Jurisdiction as Christ left to his
Church, we look for proofs from Scripture: but we find no other Jurisdiction
proved, then the Jurisdiction of Antichrist, opposite to Christ's Jurisdiction,
and over Princes: for proofs out of the word of God, we find no other proofs,
then such as are drawn from the Popes rebellion and conspiracy against the
ancient Emperors, from their unjust usurpation, and oppression of lawful
Kings, from an impious power pretending authority to break and violate oaths,
and faith, and Allegiance of subjects. And this manner of proose is held so
strong, that nothing is more common among them then thus to prove Jurisdiction.
One of that rank would after the same manner prove this Iurisdicto^ by the
Popes dispensing against oaths and vows. For, says he, [ Edward the
Confessor An answer of a Catholic Divine to the fifth part of reports of Sir
Edward Cook P. 123.
had made a vow to go in person to Rome, but was dispensed by Pope Leo the
ninth, King John sued to Pope Innocentius the third, to be dispensed with all
for his oath: which he had made to the Barons of England. And Henry the
seventh procured from Pope Julius the 2. that notorious dispensation for Prince
Henry his son, to ma^ry the Princess Katherine of Spain, left by his
brother Arthur. Hereupon he infers thus, these alone are sufficient to show
what opinion was held from time to time by the Kings of England, concerning the
Popes Sovereign Supreme Jurisdiction in spiritual matters belonging to
conscience and directing of souls: thus far the Roman Catholic.]

10. If this kind of proof please them to prove the Popes Sovereign
supreme authority, ^hey may have enough thereof. For as Pope Za^harie
dispensed with the oath of Pipin, and all the French Barons, and subjects; so
do the Popes since practice this part of Jurisdiction with great feruency or
rather surie: they dispense with the oaths of subjects, they raise up
rebellions against true, natural, and lawful Kings, they advance usurpers.
This Jurisdiction we grant Popes have practiced but with shame enough, here
is the difference between them and us, between an evil cause and a good,
between impudency, and confidence in the truth: both they and we bring the
same examples, but to contrary ends: they bring these examples of the Popes
practices, to prove Jurisdiction: we urge the same examples to shame the Pope
with his Jurisdiction, Let the indifferent and ingenuous reader judge, whether
apply them to the true right and proper end. For let them answer us, if they
can, whence the Popes have authority to execute such a Jurisdiction, as they
have neither from Christ, nor from the Princes of this world? For certain it
is that to dispense with oaths, to stir up subjects against their natural
Princes; to move rebellions: is a power which the Pope has not received from
Christ, nor from the Princes of this world. From whence then has he it, let
them tell us, who make it a part of his Jurisdiction.

11. After this, Charles the great, son to Pipin, was made Emperor by Leo
the third Pope. At this time it appears, that the Jurisdiction which by the
Emperor before this, was usually practiced upon the Bishop of Rome, and other
Bishops began to be taken out of the hand of the Magistrate. For when Charles
hearing many complaints against this Leo, concerning his life and conversation,
called him to an examination in a great meeting of Bishops, it was answered by
a great acclamation: Sedem Apostolicam omnium Ecclesiarum caput, a nemine
Platin. Leone 3. Naucler. gener. 27.
(laico praesertim) iudicari debere. That is, [It is not meet that the
Apostolic Sea, the head of all Churches should be judged of any man,
especial a Layman.] This moved Ch^rles to omit the matter: so soon had they
learned to turn this power against the Emperor, which they had some two
hundred years before received from the Emperor This Jurisdiction then by this
time had received a great change; for in former times, as the inquisition of
false doctrines belonged to the care of Bishops, so the examination of the life
and manners of Bishops: belonged always to the Magistrate. So Solomon deposed
Abiathar. So Constantine banished diverse Bishops, and reformed the Clergy. The
godly Popes and Bishops in former times yielded this power to the Magistrate,
which God has given him; knowing that every soul is subject to them, even
Bishops, even Popes: yea, Apostles themselves. But now by the fall of the
Empire, Papacy rising, and a new strange image of the Empire, rising up in
the Papacy, this Jurisdiction was then in hatching, which afterward was brought
forth by a monstrous birth.

12. My purpose is, to note the occasions of alteration of Jurisdiction in the
Church of Rome; and how the Popes having cast off the Jurisdiction of the
Civil Magistrate, did in time draw to themselves a new form of Jurisdiction;
increasing the same by degrees. For whereas at the beginning as we have showed,
the Bishops of Rome with others, were under the coactiue Jurisdiction of the
Civil Magistrate: the absence and fall of the Empire gave opportunity to the
Bishops of Rome to raise themselves. The first beginning of their Jurisdiction,
was by getting appeals to be made to them: the enlarging and advancing of it,
was by obtaining the title of caput Ecclesiae, and universal B. The Pope was
not called caput Ecclesiae, but the Church of Rome got that title under Phocas,
the Pope got it by his flatterers long after. And in the time of Charles the
great, they had gotten in one foot farther into this Jurisdiction; for then
they began to refuse the coactiue Jurisdiction of the civil Magistrate. All
this while they were not come to the height and top of they Jurisdiction, to
practice coactiue power over and against the civil Magistrate, to depose
Princes, to raise up rebellions, to absolve subjects from their faith and
allegiance, though some of these things were a new founding, yet they were not
come to their perfection till after this time: as we purpose in order to
declare. And as we note their practices, so we must no less have an eye to the
men and means, which withstood them in these ambitious courses.

13 These attempts of Jurisdiction were then most famously withstood, when they
were brought to their full hight. For after that the Popes had begun to stretch
their Jurisdiction to the prejudice of Kings and Princes, then began the
opposition most to appear, learned men being stirred up to write, and
thoroughly to examine this question. Whereof my purpose is to speak farther in
the last Chapter of this Treatise. Here we will only note what resistance it
found at the beginning, before it was grown up to that hight, whereunto it
came in time. First, we find that both Charles the great himself, and other
Princes and Bishops, have withstood the Bishop of Rome herein; and seeking to
give every one his right, have given many parts of that Jurisdiction, which now
the Pope claims, to the civil Magistrate. For after that Charles had subdued
the Lumbards, as his father Pipin had done before him: and besieging Desiderius
King of the Lumbards, came to Rome from the siege, to know what he should have
for his travail, for recovering S. Peter's Patrimony, as the late Patrimony
of the Emperor faling to the Pope, then began to be called, (for the Pope had
promised to Charles for oppressing the Lumbards, and recovering this new
Patrimony, so much desired, so hotely pursued, so dearly bought, that he
should be made Emperor of the West, and the ancient authority and
Jurisdiction of the Empire should be restored to him.) For the better effecting
of these affairs, Charles having set a strong siege about Pauy, and taken
order with his Captains for that service; left the siege and came to Rome,
bringing with him a great number of Bishops and Abbots, to hold a Synod with
Pope Hadrian; and therein by all their industry and knowledge, to find out
what were the true and ancient privileges of the Empire, and what was the
Emperors Jurisdiction confessed. Pope Hadrian received Charles honorably, and
at his pleasure called a council. Wherein questionless some parts of the
ancient Jurisdiction were restored to Charles. For that Synod gave him power
to choose the Bishop of Rome, and in all Provinces of his government to inuest
all Archbishops, and Bishops. Thus much is acknowledged by as many witnesses in
a manner, as are Writers of the Story of this time. But of late some have
quarrelled against this Story, denying it to be true: which quarrel I purpose
to handle and discuss in the next Chapter, in his proper place. Theodoricus de
Niem writing of this council, and of the end and purpose of those that held
it, says, that this Synod was gathered purposely to search out the ancient
uses, laws, and customs of the Empire and Church: that each power knowing
their own limits, the one might not encroach upon the other. Celebrata est
(says Theodor. de Niem.
he) ab 153. viris religiosis, Episcopis and Abbatibus, etc. ab vniuersis
regionibus et oramibus almae vrbis, a cuncto eti^m Clero huius sanctae Romans
Ecclesiae, ex quirentibus vsus, leges, and mores eiusdem Ecclesiae et imperij.
That is: [It was celebrated by one hundred and fifty three religious men,
Bishops and Abbots, etc. by all the regions and degrees of the City of Rome, by
all the Clergy of this holy Church of Rome, making search and inquisition for
the uses, laws, and customs both of this Church and of the Empire.] Then we
see that Charles recovered some part of the ancient Jurisdiction of the
Empire. Which notwithstanding since his time, the Popes by invincible
contentions, wrested from the Emperors, chalenging it to be a part of their
own Jurisdiction, and charging the Emperors with Heresy and Schism for
practicing that right, which other Popes before them, acknowledged to be the
ancient right of the Empire.

14 And because to the Jurisdiction of Princes it belonged of old, both to
call councels and to confirm them, therefore Charles did not omit this part of
Jurisdiction, though as the event declared, it was much against the Popes
pleasure. He called a Synod at Frankford, wherein was condemned the doctrine of
worshipping of images, which doctrine the Pope had late before confirmed. The
occasion hereof grew thus. Leo Isaurus Emperor, being much offended that the
Saracines had that great and just exception against Christians, that they
worshipped images: called a Synod at Constantinople, wherein the Paulus Diacon.
worship of images was condemned, and the images burned. He sent also to the
Bishop of Rome, as then Gregory the second, commanding him to do the like, if
he would have his favor, says Paulus Diaconus. Gregory the second took this
in such indignation, that he rebelled against the Emperor, and raised all
Italy into a rebellion, by which means the Emperor lost all that then was
left in Italy. Gregory the second, in the mids of these stirs died, and
Gregory the third succeeded, who prosecuting the purpose of his predecessor,
called a Synod at Rome in the year seven hundred thirty three by Sigebert:
seven hundred Sigebert.
thirty nine by Palmerius. In this Synod the doctrine of Palmerius.
worshipping images was confirmed; Leo the Emperor was excommunicated and
deprived. Thus began the Pope to practice a new Jurisdiction, in deposing
Emperors. After this Constantine surnamed, or rather nicknamed, Copronimus,
in the year of Sigebert.
Christ, says Sigebert seven hundred fifty five, called a Synod at
Constantinople, wherein the worship of images was again condemned. But another
Synod was held at Rome by Pope Stephen the third, in the year of Christ seven
hundred threescore and eight, wherein the worshipping of images was again
approved. Which was more famously confirmed in the year of Christ seven
hundred four score and eight, by another Constanstine, and his mother Irene,
who called the second Nycen Synod, wherein Imagerie prevailed much by the help
of Pope Hadrian.

15. Upon these stirs, Charles the great was moved to call a Synod at
Franckford. Thither sent Pope Hadrian the acts of the second Nicen Synod, to be
approved there, and to direct this Synod at Frankford, if they would take any
direction from the Pope. But the Fathers of this Synod not regarding the Popes
direction, took a mean course between the Greeks, who destroyed and defaced
images, and the Church of Rome, which maintained the worship thereof. For they
decreed that it was not impious to set up images, but to give any worship to
them, this they held to be utterly against Christian faith, and to be a thing
received from the superstition of the Gentiles. This Synod was called and
confirmed by Charles the great. Then belike the Pope had not gotten all
Jurisdiction over Kings, which now he claims. For the Emperor called Synods:
not the Pope. Neither as then had he gotten Jurisdiction over all Bishops, In
Synodo Francsord.
because we see many Bishops were found in Germany, France, Aquitany, and
England (for all these Nations Charles names in his letter to Elepandus
Metropolitan of Tolet, as favoring and maintaining the truth against the
worship of images) which resisted the Pope in this matter: so that his great
and sovereign Jurisdiction was not then established.

16. About this time that most worthy, most religious, and learned King Alfred
reigned in England. Aser Meneuensis writing Aser praefat, ad Alphredum.
his life, entituleth him, Omnium Britanniae insulae Christianorum rectorem.
Which title does not much differ from that which is now in part given to the
King: supreme Governor of all persons Ecclesiastical. For whereas at this
day the discipline of the Court of Rome, exempteth Clerks from the Kings
Courts, and consequently from the Kings government, it appears that in King
Alfreds time, this thing was utterly unknown to the world: therefore this King
is called and acknowledged to be the Governor of all Christians within his
dominions. Now because Bishops and Clerks were Christians, he was hereby
questionless understood the governor of Clerks as well as of others. As then
all foreign government and Jurisdiction was excluded by that title, so now
there is no other thing sought but in like sort to exclude all foreign power
and Jurisdiction, whether the Popes or any other. At this time when n King
Alsred lived and reigned, the sense, judgment, and understanding of the world,
was no other; but that Kings were supreme governors of all persons and caufes
Ecclesiastical and Temporal within their own Dominions. Ivnderstand
government here, as throughout this question I have often admonished,
government or power coactiue: for this exemption of criminous Clerks from
their Kings Courts, was a thing unknown in the world in those days. And
therefore whereas it is commonly taken by our adversaries (who use to beg such
principles, as they cannot prove) that the religion, sense, and judgment of
the world ran wholly for the Jurisdiction, which now is practiced in the
Court of Rome, this we utterly deny. For we are able to show when the sense,
judgment, and religion of the Church, was against them, in every part of their
pretended Jurisdiction. For first whereas the Pope claims Jurisdiction over
Bishops, this is one part of his Jurisdiction, and is now the sense and
judgment of the Court of Rome, but in the times of the sixth and seventh
Carthaginian Councels, of the Affrican, and Mileuitan Synodes: at this time, I
say, and always before, the religion, sense, and judgment of the whole world
ran contrary. If any object, that these were not general Councels, but
provincial: I answer, we urge not their Canons only, to rule the Pope, but
their testimonies to know the truth of those times and before. For they made an
exact and diligent search through all the famous Churches of Christendom, for
the Popes Jurisdiction over Bishops, and having once so famously refuted that
Jurisdiction, we take and reverence their testimonies, which will for ever be
held honorable in the Church. Before these times, the religion, sense, and
judgment of the world was not, that any Bishop or Clarke of foreign Provinces
might appeal to Rome, which now is the sense and judgment of the Court of
Rome. The Pope claims now this Jurisdiction likewise, to depose Princes, to
dissolve and undo the obedience of subjects; this is now the sense and
judgment of the Court of Rome: but before the time of King Pipin, the sense
and judgment of the world ran always contrary. That the Pope is universal
Bishop; and the Church of Rome the head of other Churches, yea, the Pope the
head of the universal Church, is now the sense and judgment of the Court of
Rome: but this was not the sense, judgment, and religion of the Church of Rome
before the time of Gregory the first, as the same Gregory does sufficiently
witness. That criminous Clerks should be exempted from the Courts of their
Kings, is now the practice and judgment, sense and religion of the Court of
Rome; but before the year one thousand, this was not the sense and judgment
of the world. That the Pope is above a general Council, is now the sense, and
religion of the present Court of Rome: but it was not the sense and religion of
the Church of Rome before the time of the Council of Trent. In like sort of
any part of their Jurisdiction whereof here we speak, we are able to point to
the time, when it was not the sense, and judgment of the Church of Rome.

17. About the time wherein Alfred reigned (who began his reign in the year
of Christ eight hundred seventy two, and died in the year nine hundred.) The
Popes having already intruded upon the Jurisdiction of Bishops and Archbishops,
began to make many desperate attempts upon the Jurisdiction of Kings also:
but they were repressed where the Emperors had any power to resist; and though
they assumed Jurisdiction over Emperors, yet they brought not all to an
effect. Cran^zius Metrop. Crantzij lib. 2. cap. 29.
speaking of those times, says: The Emperor placed a Bishop in Monster: and
marvel not that a Bishop was appointed by the Emperor; for this was the
Custom of those times, when Emperors had power to place and displace Popes:
for there was no free election of Chapters, as now: the Apostolical
confirmation was not then necessary, for whomsoever the Prince did nominate,
that man was to be consecrated a Bishop by the next adjoining Bishops.
Concerning this Jurisdiction there was a long contention between the Papacy
and the Empire, this was the Jurisdiction which the two Henry's, the father and
the son; which the two Frederickes likewise, the Grandfather and the
Grandchild, sought long to defend and maintain: but the sword of the Church
prevailed, and forced the Emperors to relinquish their right to the Churches.]
By this it may appear, that before the year one thousand, the Popes entered
into no great contention with the Germane Emperors concerning this
Jurisdiction. But as the contentions between the two Henrics, and the two
Fredericks, and others, did fully open and reveal to the world the Popes
purpose for Jurisdiction: so when it was once revealed and fully known to the
world; it was denied and oppugned by the men of the best learning, that then
lived in the Church of Rome: which thing we are more fully to declare hereafter.

CHAP. VII.
How the Papal Jurisdiction was advanced from the time of the conquest and
somewhat before, until the year of Christ, one thousand three hundred. The
means raising that Jurisdiction is declared to be by Forgeries, Friars,
Oaths, and the parts of the Jurisdiction, inuestitures, exemptions, laws
imposed, appellation, deposing of Kings, and absoluing their subjects from
faith and Allegiance.

IN the time of William the Conqueror, about the seventh year of his reign,
Hildebrand was chosen Pope, named Gregory the seventh. This man advanced the
Popes Jurisdiction to an higher pitch, then ever it was before. Now all that
power which was extorted from Princes by such violent practices as Hildebrand
used, was afterward supposed to belong to the Popes Jurisdiction. And these
late Jesuits make no doubt to tell us, that all came from Christ, and his
Apostles: and that it was a thing never heard, that Temporal Princes should
meddle in such matters: and that the Religion, devotion, sense, and judgment
of all men ran wholly for it. We are therefore to observe, how the Popes
wrested Jurisdiction from temporal Princes. This thing will appear better, if
we take a suruay of these times, and of the means and parts of that
Jurisdiction, which we find challenged by the Popes in these ages.

2. At this time the Popes began first of all to strive for inuestitures. Pope
Gregory the seventh began this contention with Henry the fourth Emperor: which
was the occasion of great wars and bloodshed through Christendom,
especially in Germany. I will for the better understanding of these
proceedings, with breuity and fidelity report, out of the stories of this time,
in what state the Church of Rome then stood. In the Beno Cardinal. in vita and
gestis Hild^brand. Auent. lib. 5. Annal.
time of Henry the third Emperor, the Court of Rome was pestered with a sort
of men, infamous and prodigious: who taught Necromancy, practiced poisoning,
set up, as it were a school of unlawful Arts, abominable to God, and
pernicious to men. One chief of this profession was Theophilactus, which was
afterward Pope Benedictus the eight, called Benedictus the ninth. This
Theophilact was Master to Hildebrand in his Art Magic, who for his better
furtherance in that knowledge, was also instructed by Laurentius the Malfilan
Archbishop, and by John the Archpriest of S. John de porta latina. This
Theophilact gave himself wholly to the sacrifices of devils, with his
accomplices and scholars, as he had been i^structed by Gerbertus, which was
Pope Syluester the second. By these Masters and means Hildebrand aspiring to
the Papacy, joined himself in a strict league with one Brazutus, who poisoned
six Popes in the space of thirteen years: their names mine Author sets
down in order thus. Clemens (this was Clemens the second) Damasus Beno Cardinal.
2, Leo 9, Victor 2, Stepha^us 10. Benedictus (this Pope escaped the poison,
but was cast out by force and cunning of Hildebrand) Nicholaus 2. Thus he
practiced to make way for himself to the Papacy, by poisoning all that stood
in his way.

3. For redressing of these enormities Henry the third Emperor, was entreated
by the religious sort of Cardinals, to purge the Church of this hellish
rabble, that thus pestered it. The Emperor being drawn to seek some
reformation of these disorders, because many Popes usurped the Papacy at once,
he drove Theophilact to flight: Gregory the sixth, he shut up in prison, and
after that exiled him: he caused the Bishop of Sabinum to relinquish the
Papacy, and return to his own sea: and he set up Pope Clement. Hildebrand
was commanded to go into banishment with his Master Gregory the sixth. This
Gregory dying in banishment; Hildebrand (as the same Author says:) Perfidiae
simul and pecuniae ^ius haeres extitit. That is: [Was heir both of his
perfidiousnesse, and of his money.] The Emperors patience, pitiful and too
gentle nature is touched by the same Author: Nimia pietate deceptus, nec
Ecclesiae Romans nec sibi, n^c generi humano prospiciens, nouos Idolatras nimis
laxe habuit. That is: [His gentle nature deceived him, for he gave too much
liberty to these new Idolaters, neither providing well for the Church of Rome,
nor for himself, nor for mankind.] To make short: Hildebrand attaining a
release from banishment, came to Rome, and there falling to his old practice,
strove to make Brazutus Pope, of whose friendship he was assured; their mutual
familiarity being confirmed by many odious and bloody practices. This is that
Brazutus, by whose means six Popes were poisoned, as we have declared. But
Hildebrand perceiving that the Emperor and the Cardinals were wholly auersed
from a man so infamous, and odious: set up Alexander the second. Who perceiving
himself set up against the Emperors will, professed that he would not keep
the place, without the license and favor of the Emperor. For this thing he
was well beaten and buffeted by Hildebrand, who ruled all, and received the
revenues in the time of Alexander: and after his death, Hildebrand (says the
same Author) was chosen Pope, eadem hora a militibus, sine assensu cleri and
populi: in cuius electione nullus Cardinalium subscripsit. That is: [At the
same instant by Soldiers, without the assent of Clergy or people: none of the
Cardinals subscribed to his election.] Nauclerus d^clareth an ungracious
stratagem of his, suddenly practiced, to draw the Cardinals to consent to his
election. For when the Clergy and people were gathered together for the
celebration of the funeral Naucler. 2. generation 36.
of the former Pope, of a sudden a cry was raised among them, that S. Peter
had chosen Hildebrand for Pope. That this man may better be known, I will set
down the judgment of a Council gathered at Brixia, consisting of a great
number of Bishops and Abbots, out of Italy, Germany, France. These Prelates
meeting in a public Synod together, pronounce Hildebrand Auentin. lib. 5.
to be, Falsus monachus, magus, diuinaculus, somniorum Naucler. 2. generation.
37.
prodigiorumque coniector, male de religione Christiana sentiens. Primus omnium
(say they there) Pontificatum maximum contra morem maiorum, inuitis omnibus
bonis emit, etc. ius humanum diuinumque peruertit, falsa pro veris dooet,
sacrilegia, periuria, mendacia, homicidia, incendia, veluti benefacta indulget,
collaudat, ad haec perpetranda classicum canit, etc. Suauis homo Sacerdotes qui
vxores habent legitimas, sacrificos esse pernegat, interim tamen scortatores,
adulteros, incestuosos aris admouet. [A false Monk, a Magitian, a Witch, a
South-sayer by dreams and ostents, one that thought corruptly of Christian
Religion: the first that bought the papacy against the custom of his
ancestors, against the good will of all good men: he peruerteth all right
humane and divine, teaches falsehood for truth, he favors and commends as
things good and just thief things, sacriledges, periuries, lies, murders,
burnings, he exhorts and incourageth men to these outrages; a sweet companion
that denies priests that have lawful wives to say Service, but admits
whoremongers, adulterers, incestuous men to the Sacraments.] This is the
judgment of a full Council against his unholiness: as Auentinus and Naucler
report.

4. This is the man that began the contention for Jurisdiction with the
Emperor Henry the fourth. Tali dedicatore damnationis Tertul. apol. ca. 5
nostrae etiam gloriamur: qui enim s^it illum, intelligere potest non nisi
aliquid bonum grande ab Hildebrando damnatum. For of him we may justly use the
fame words in the cause of Princes, which Tertullian uses of Nero in the cause
of Christians. Hildebrand being made Pope began to move many contentions with
the Emperor, then being Henry the fourth: one special quarrel was for
inuestitures. For whereas before that time the ancient custom of the Empire
was (says Naucler) Naucler. Vol. 2. gener. 36.
that when a Bishop was dead, the chapter used to send a ring and the pastoral
staff to the Emperor, which the Emperor delivered to him whom he appointed
Bishop of that place: this ancient privilege of the Empire Hildebrand would
not endure, and therefore calling a Council at Rome, of one hundred and ten
Bishops, he cursed Henry the Emperor: and all Bishops that received
inuestiture at his hands, or any other Laymen. In this Council he removed
married Priests from Divine Service. But before he proceeded thus far, he
sent first to the Emperor, warning him to remove all Symoniacall Bishops from
their places: the good Emperor either supposing that this might proceed from
an honest zeal, or willing to declare that in him there should be no want in
reforming, did accordingly thrust out all such as were suspected of Symonie
from their Bishoprikes: but behold, Machiauell set to School. Hildebrand
having made all these Bishops thus hateful to the Emperor, and hating him:
presently restored every man to his place again; and to bind them sure to
himself against the Emperor, took an oath of them all, as mine author says:
Quos regi infestos reddiderat, eos sibi familiari amiciria econciliabat; Beno.
Cardin.
and multis and magnis iuramentis sibi fidos and obnoxios efficiens, prae alijs
exaltabat. That is, [When he had once made them to hate the Emperor, then he
reconciled them to himself in familiarity, and having made them so obnoxious
to himself, bound them by many and great oaths, to be true to him; these he
preferred above all other.] Giving the best preferments to them.

5. Having thus by subtlety spoiled the Emperor of his friends, of a sudden
without any lawful accusation, without Canonical citation, without Judicial
order; he thundreth out an excommunication against him, depriueth him,
absolueth his nobles and subjects from their oath of Allegiance. Whilst he
denounced this strange sentence, the Pue wherein he sat, being made says
Cardinal Beno of new and strong timber, of a sudden, brake in pieces.
Hildebrand thus triumphing over the Emperor, began to depose all such Bishops
as had received inuestitures from a Lay-hand: of this right of inuestitures we
shall speak in fit place. First, let us take a view and survey of that
Jurisdiction which we find practiced in this age, and of the means whereby
the Pope attained thereto. If first we consider the means which were used for
the winning hereof, the Jurisdiction will be more apparent, and better known:
which Jurisdiction we will also declare by the several parts and branches
thereof, so far as we are able to vnrippe them.

. I. Of the Forgeries whereby this Jurisdiction was first challenged.
6. THe Popes and the Court of Rome, perceiving well how much it made for the
advancement to that Sea, if they might be secured for the right and title to
this Jurisdiction which they purposed to challenge and practice: And
understanding that none would believe that they had any right to it, unless
they showed some antiquity for it: finding also that they wanted Scriptures,
and the testimony of the ancient Church: began a most desperate and vile
practice, to forge antiquities, devising certain writings, and fathering the
same upon the ancient Bishops of Rome; all was to make some show and title to
this Jurisdiction, whereof they were so much inamoured. In our days there is
less fear of danger from these forged Epistles, because they have been
thoroughly examined and refuted by many learned men, as Ma^silius Patauinus,
Laurentius Valla, Antonin. Archiep. Florent. Nicholaus Cusanus, Aenaeas
Siluius, Hieronymus Paulus Catalanus, Raphaell Volateranus: all before Master
Luther. In so much as the learned Papists are ashamed of this stuff, and
cannot deny the Forgery: but when first they were devised, (whether by
Anastatius Bibliothecarius, as some judge, or by some other trusty Champion of
the Court of Rome) they carried the world then into such an illusion, that we
may well judge, it proceeded from the deepenesse of Satan in subtlety and
falsehood, and was received with wonderful simplicity and ignorance of that
age. For when the fatal time was come that Antichrist must send up that smoke,
wherwithall the truth was darkened: then fell such a judgment upon the world,
that together with the darkening of Scriptures: learning, knowledge, and
judgment was decayed, and they did with greediness believe lies and
forgeries, who could not examine the truth. Then began they to publish new
decretall Epistles, under the names of Clemens, Anaclet, Euaristus, Sixtus,
Telesphorus, Higinus, Pius, Anicetus Soter, Eleutherius, Victor: and many
others. In whose names, certain Epistles are framed to claim this
Jurisdiction, but so absurd, the style so unfitted to the ages wherein these
Bishops lived, that the learned Papists themselves blush at the forgerie. The
argument of all these Epistles is in a manner one and the same, all plead for
Jurisdiction: and if this question might be determined by these testimonies,
then should they obtain their Jurisdiction without controversy. The things
which are most of all handled and repeated therein; are, the Primacie of the
Pope, the power and authority of the Church of Rome; exemption of Clerks, and
appellation to the Sea Apostolic: these are the things handled and repeated
over and over. The proof for all, is fet from, Tues Petrus and super hanc
petram, etc. And pas^e oues meas, and oraui pro te Petre: and such like
deprauations of holy Scriptures.

7. Here is the true ground of their Jurisdiction, thus they got it by
forgeries: and these forgeries in that age, (such was the ignorance thereof)
were nothing suspected: other men, who detested such vile practices measured
the minds of Popes in charity, by their own: who would ever have thought so
basely of Popes, that they would have entered into such di^onest practices?
Therefore this Jurisdiction was by many received, because they suspected no
falsehood, in such as should have been examples of virtue and godliness. But
when the knowledge of good learning was raised again, then began these
Epistles to be examined, and were found such as they are. Bellarmine speaking
of these Epistles, though glad he would be to maintain them if he knew how, yet
dares not deny them to be Lib. 2. Cap. 14. de Romans Pont.
forged. Nec indubitatas esse affirmare audeam: says he. But if you dare not
avouch them to be vnforged: why then dare you avouch that Jurisdiction of the
Pope, of which the world never took knowledge, before these Epistles had
devised proofs for it? And why dare you make use of such forgeries? For
Bellarmi^e confessing that he dare not justify them from suspicion of
forgerie: yet labors to take use of them, as pretending that they are
ancient: as though antiquity in falsehood could help? Or as if a robber and
murderer being taken in the manner and not able to justify his action, should
plead that Barrabas was an ancient robber and murderer; and think to help
himself by that plea. And because upon this rotten foundation the Popes
Jurisdiction is builded: let us observe some of the best and most substantial
proofs for Jurisdiction, out of these forged Epistles.

8. Anaclet is made to say thus for the privileges of the Anaclet. Epist. 1.
Church, such privileges as exemption of Clarks, and such like as were
introduced after the year one thousand. Priuilegia Ecclesiarum and sacerdotum,
sancti Aposteli iussu saluatoris intemerata and inuiolata omnibus decreuerunt
manner temporibus. That is, [The privileges of Churches and of Priests, the
holy Apostles decreed that they should remain inuiolated for all times. For
Jurisdiction, he says, Quodsi difficiliores ortae fuerint questiones, Ibid.
aut Episcoporum vel maiorum iudicia, aut maiores causae fuerint, ad
Apostolicam sedem si appellatum fuerit, referantur: quontam Apostoli hoc
statuerunt iussu saluatoris, vt maiores and difficiliores questiones semper ad
sedem deferantur Apostolicam, super quam Christus vniuersam construxit
Ecclesiam, dicente ipso Petro: tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram aedificabo
Ecilesiam meam. And again, Summi sacerdotes, id est Episcopi, a Deo sunt
iudicandi, non^ Anaclet. Epist. 2.
ab humanis aut prauae vitae hominibus lacerandi, sed potius ab omnibus
fidelibus portandi. This is often repeated that scandalous Clerks must not be
accused; yea, though one of them should live most inordinately: Licet sit
inordinatus, quia pro merit is subditorum Euarist. Epist. 2.
disponitur a Deo vita rectorum. For proof these Scriptures are brought, qui
vos tangit, tangit pupillam oculi mei, and nolite Eusebius. Epist. 1.
tangere Christos meos, and in prophetis meis nolite malignari. From this deep
Divinity Thomas Becket resisted Henry the second, and would not suffer the
King to execute justice against robbers, fellons, murderers, practisers of
Treason, if they were Clargie men: he defended them by these Scriptures, as we
shall declare hereafter. This witchcraft came from Rome, and from these forged
Epistles. Anaclet says again, Haec sacra sancta Romana, Anaclet. Epist. 3.
and Apostolica Ecclesia, non ab Apostolis sed ab ipso domino saluatore nostro
primatum obtinuit, and eminentiam potestatis super vniuer^as Ecclesias: and to
prove all, this is alleged, Tues Petrus, etc. Another says, Si quis vestrum
pulsatus fuerit in aliqua Sixtus. Epist. 2.
aduersitate, licenter hanc sanctam and Apostolicam appellet sedem, and ad eam
quasi ad caput suffugium habeat. And another, Iudicia Zepherin. Epist. 1
Episcoporum maioresque Ecclesiae causae, a sede Apostolica, non ab alia (sicut
Apostoli and sancti successores eorum statuerunt) cum alijs Episcopis sunt
terminandae. And to prove that scandalous men of the Clargie should not be
punished or examined by Laymen, this reason is often repeated in diverse
Epistles, that if since the Apostles times that course had been taken to
punish such, then few or none should now have been left alive in the Clargie:
which is a secret confession that all the Clargie of the Court of Rome were at
this time of evil and scandalous life and conversation. Marcellus as writing
to Maxentius the tyrant Marcel. Epist. 2.
is produced to say thus: Synodum absque huius sanctae sedis authoritate
Episcoporum (quanquam quosdam Episcopos possitis congr^gare) nonpotestis
regulariter facere, neque vllum Episcopum qui hanc appellauerit apostolicam
sedem damnare, autequa^ hinc sententia defintiua proccdat. These and such like
are their grounds of Jurisdiction, which need no refutation; for absurdities
carry always their own bane in themselves: this is refutation enough for such
things to make those things well known.

9. These testimonies for Jurisdiction drawn from these forged Epistles, may
give us occasion to observe. First, that the Bishops of Rome have long and
greedily gaped after this Jurisdiction, and to obtain their purpose herein have
made no bones at forgerie. As first they attempted that forgerie of a Canon of
the Nicen Councellin Saint Augustines time, but were then repressed: so the
devil to bring them to greater shame, moved them afterward to greater
forgerie in devising so many decretall Epistles, to establish this Jurisdiction
by this shameless attempt, which by other direct means they could not do.
Seconly, so greedily are they set upon this purpose, as men blinded 2.
with affection, that they consider neither manner, nor matter, nor coherence:
only the impotent love to this Jurisdiction carries them through thick and
thin: as in many things may be observed. I observe only that which touches
our question, for in these Epistles this Jurisdiction of the Church of Rome,
and appellation to that Church is maintained as from the institution of Christ
himself, out of these words: Tues Petrus, etc. Now these Epistles must be
supposed to be written long before Saint Augustines time, when Zoz^mus,
Boniface, and Caelestinus, claimed the same Jurisdiction by the forged Canon of
the Nicen Council: for before those times these Bishops lived, who are devised
the authors of these Epistles. If these Epistles had then been extant, why did
not the Popes claim their Jurisdiction by these testimonies, which were
supposed to be written so long before the Canons of the Nicen Council? What
needed they to have forged a Canon, if they had so fair evidences to show? And
why did they claim it by a Canon of the Council, when they might have laid
their claim directly from the commandment of Christ?

10. But if these Epistles were not then extant (as certainly they were not)
why should any credit be given to things so manifestly forged? Why should any
claim be made to Jurisdiction upon such false grounds. Thirdly, we observe
also the 3.
cursed obstinacy and affected blindness of the learned Papists, Bellarmine
and such who know well that these Epistles are forged, and* confess it:
knowing that this Jurisdiction of the Pope was never claimed iure diuino, as
from Christ's own institution, before these Epistles by forgerie invented that
claim: are so bewitched in the service of the Pope, and in this question of
Jurisdiction, that against learning, judgment, conscience and all, they hold
this Jurisdiction to be iure diuino, in the grossest sort; and maintain it no
otherwise then these confessed forgeries have taught them, by those
deprauations, corruptions and detortions of Scriptures, Tues Petrus, and such
like. An indifferent man would think, that either they should not confess
these forgeries; or confessing them, they should hate and abhor these grounds
of Jurisdiction, which only the forged Epistles have devised from Scripture.
Fourthly, by this we may 4.
look a little farther into the deepenesse of Satan, and behold how the Popes
Clerks lie plunging for Jurisdiction.

11. For the Council of Trent being awaked at the preaching of Master Luther
and other, and finding that the corruptions which were brought into the
doctrines of the Court of Rome could not be maintained by Scriptures, being
directly repugnant thereto: devised a very foul shift, to maintain all by
unwritten traditions. And for this purpose enacted a Council. Trid. sess. 4.
decret. 1
Canon, that the traditions of the Church of Rome, must be honored and
embraced with the like honor and reverence, as the holy Scriptures are
honored. Therefore they devise the word of God to be either written in
Scriptures, or unwritten in Traditions, which unwritten Traditions they
reverence for Gods word, no less then the holy Scriptures themselves. And if
you ask, how shall men try true Traditions, they answer there is no better
trial then the judgment of the Church of Rome. Ex tcstimonio huius solius
Ecclesiae sumi potest certum argumentum ad probandas Apostolicas Traditiones.
By these principles, Bellar. de verbo Dei non scrip. lib. 4. cap. 9.
if they might once have them granted, they think themselves able to conclude
any thing, to delude the holy Scriptures, and to set up profane, and Barbarous
forgeries in place of holy Scriptures. For if we deny this pretended
Jurisdiction, they will answer that it is grounded upon the word of God: if
we demand, what word they have for it? They tell us: Tu es Petrus, etc. and
such like. If we say the sense and meaning of those Scriptures do no way
maintain that Jurisdiction, the ancient Fathers never expounded them so: that
that sense was never drawn from these Scriptures, before these forged
decretall Epistles devised it. To this they will say, they take that sense of
Scriptures, which the Church of Rome takes, and the Pope, who only has
authority to give the sense of Scriptures. The sum and conclusion of all, is
this: the Traditions of the Church of Rome, are to be honored and reverenced
with the same honor as the holy Scripture: but these filthy, forged, and
corrupt Epistles contain the Traditions, yea, are the Traditions of the Church
of Rome: therefore these filthy forgeries of corrupt men, are to be honored,
and reverenced as the holy Scriptures.

12. Now though some men unlearned may be carried away with this vain show of
Traditions, yet we see not how their learned men can plead ignorance, or
excuse, who know that those expositions of these Scriptures, were first forged
in the decretall Epistles: these be their Apostolical Traditions, these be
matched with holy Scriptures. I appeal to the conscience of any Papist that
either is, or would be esteemed learned: whether these Epistles be not forged,
in his judgment? And whether the ground of their Jurisdiction be not hence
drawn? And whether this Jurisdiction which in these Epistles is maintained,
concerning appellation: was not repressed, and utterly denied by Saint
Augustine, and the rest of those ancients in the Cartheginian, Affrican, and
Mileuitan Councels? Perhaps it is not hard for a man of a leaden heart, and a
brazen forehead to rush through these difficulties after the Roman Catholic
manner without blushing; but let a man in humility and good conscience, set
himself to seek the truth herein, and to give God the glory, and it will be
impossible for him to wrestle out of these nets, but by confessing the
forgerie, and rejecting the Jurisdiction forged.

13. Moreover that it may it further appear; that this Jurisdiction is
esteemed all in all, and more then all by these men: and that all other parts
of their religion, are not so dear to them, as this: we may further observe,
that as the Pope ouer-ruled the Council of Trent, so the thing that swayed the
Pope, and forced him to resolve upon this course which now is established by
the Court of Rome, in the Council of Trent, was only the fear of loosing,
and care of maintaining this Jurisdiction. For before the Council of Trent
(which thing we shall hereafter by Gods help more manifest at good
opportunity) the Church of Rome stood so indifferently affected in the chief
points of religion: that if the respect and practice of the Pope had not misled
them, it may be well judged, they would have been more ready to assent to the
conclusions of Master Lut^r, and John Calvin, then to those that are
established in the Council of Trent: so indifferent stood the world before
that Council. For after that time that they had begun to challenge this
Jurisdiction, and before the Council of Trent, the Popes were always
afrighted at the name of a general Council; as Paul. Iouius winesseth,
otherwise a flatterer of the Popes: for he says thus. Paul. Iouius li. 2.
historiarum.
Id vnum concilij nomen supra caeteros insaelices humanarum rerum casus, maximo
terrori Pontificibus esse consueuit. That is, [The only name of a Council,
more then all other humane incident miseries is wont to be a great terror to
Popes.] He gives the reason there, why the Popes were so much afraid of
Councels, because says he, in them questions of faith and religion are
interpreted, and the Popes Jurisdiction censured and curbed. Ad castigandam
Iouius ibid.
sacerdotum luxuriam censorias leges condunt, ipsi Pontificices Pontificio iur^
(...) ei^rare suprema^ dignitat^, seque demum Pontificatu abdicare coguntur:
hoc metu armati reges, Pontifices terrent. That is, [Councels make laws to
chastise the luxuriousness of Priests. The Popes themselves circumuented by
the Popish law are compelled to resign the Suprea^e dignity, and to
relinguish the Papacy.

14. So that before the Council of Trent the Sovereign Jurisdiction was never
held to be in the Pope, seeing the Church being gathered together in a Council
did use to exercise Jurisdiction upon the Popes. For if the Popes were wont so
much to fear and fly a general Council in regard of censur^ng and
inhibiting their Jurisdiction; then must these conclusions follow: That the
Council of Trent was not a general Council, because the Pope was not afraid
of it: that the Popes themselves did acknowledge, that the Jurisdiction of a
Council was above their Jurisdiction: for otherwise why should the Pope be
afraid of a free Council? So that if the Council of Trent had been like to
those Councels which the Popes did so much fear; it might have given as good
satisfaction to true Christians, as now it does to the followers and flatterers
of the Court of Rome. And before that Council, there was great hope that it
might have bin so. For the minds of al good men were marueilously prepared to
peace, and to a mutual consent. And for the points of doctrine, if the Friars
and such as were by them infected, had not troubled all, the truth might have
prevailed. For Cardinal Contaren made a good preparation to the doctrine of
Card. Contaren. tract. de iustificatione.
justification: which being the greatest point in controversy, is handled by
him conformable to the doctrine of Luther and Calvin, and directly against that
which was concluded in the Council of Trent: this he wrote in the year one
thousand five hundred forty and one, a little before that Council. The
Cardinal therein teaches nothing, but that which was before him the known
doctrine of the Church of Rome: from which because the Council of Trent
swarued, therefore they made the separation, and not we. This wisdom and
moderation of Cardinal Contaren and others of that side, gave great hope to
Master Bucer, and some other of this side; to labor for an agreement and
mutual consent: and assuredly there was great reason to hope it. For if the
rest had been of that spirit and moderation which Cardinal Contaren, Georgius
Cassander, John Ferus, Master Antonius Flaminius, Espencaeus and many others, a
mutual consent would have been obtained. But will ye have the truth? the
points of faith and doctrine, were not the things which most hindered this
concord; for in these things many of that side were very conformable, and more
might have been drawn: but there was another thing which crossed all
peaceable purposes; this was the Popes Jurisdiction. If it had not been for
this Jurisdiction, the doctrine of Luther might have been easily granted: for
what taught he, which was not before him taught in the Church of Rome? I grant
that the contrary was also taught by Friars: for in the Church of Rome before
the Council of Trent, some taught after the manner of the new devised
doctrines which Friars brought in: others taught the truth preserving the
ancient doctrines in most points, till that time, as by their writings extant
appears. So that if the Council of Trent had been indifferently chosen of
learned men then living: and if their voices had not been forced and
forestalled by an oath of obedience to the Pope, and to satisfy his lust: (a
desperate practice declaring a desperate cause) things might have been as well
concluded against^ the Jurisdiction of the Pope, and faction of Friars, as now
all is for them.

15. And because we have so often mentioned, and are so The Council of Trent.
often to mention the Council of Trent, seeing we wholly reject it, and our
adversaries wholly rest upon it: it may be expected that we should give some
reasons why we disable it so much: I may answer, the reasons are in the
doctrines and conclusions themselves, which are thoroughly and worthily examined
by Master Chemnifius and others. But over and besides the falsehood of
doctrines, which are concluded there directly against the manifest truth of
holy Scriptures, we have also these just exceptions; that, that Council was
neither a general, nor a free, nor a lawful Council. General it was not,
because if we consider Not a general Council.
these Western parts of Christendom, for the benefit whereof that Council
is pretended to be gathered, the greatest part was excluded from that Council.
For all England, Scotland, Ireland, all France, and all Germany that are
Protestants, will make a far greater part, then all the rest that consented
to that Council: so that it was a Council held of a small part against the
greater part. The King of England by public writing, protested against it,
when first it was appointed by the Pope to be held at Mantua, the reasons which
King Henry alleged John Sleidan. lib. 11.
against it are these: [That it belonged not to the Pope to call Councels, but
to the Emperor and to the Kings of Christendom: that the Pope himself was to
be censured by the Council, and therefore Italy was no fit place for it: that
there was no caution made to him and his Ambassadors, and Bishops for their
safe conduct: that though there were public caution given, yet the practice of
Popes in breaking their faith, and violating public cautions, and sucking the
blood of innocent men was too well known. In fine the King gives advise to
all other Princes, and Magistrates, to govern their own people, to establish
true religion, to reject the Popes tyranny, as he had done.]

16. The French King made like Protestation against this Council of Trent, for
the Abbot of Bellosan the French Kings Ambassador, obtaining admittance into
the Council (though not without great difficulty) in the midst of that
assembly, against the expectation of many, delivered the Kings protestation
thus: [That it was neither safe nor fit for him to send his Bishops Sleidan.
lib. 22.
to Trent, that he held not that assembly for a public and general Council,
but rather for a private conuenticle; gathered not for the common good, but for
the pleasure and profit of some few: that neither he himself, nor any of his
kingdom should be bound by those decrees: and if need required that he would
use such remedy to restrain the Popes, as his Ancestors had used before.]
Thus did these Kings then protest against that Council especially because it
was called by the Popes authority, who had no right to call general Councels.
And both these kingdoms, and the Churches ther^in, have withstood the
authority of this Council: yea the French Church of Papists would never admit
the Council of Trent: so that it is not only dissallowed of us, but by a
number of them who professing to follow the ancient Church of Rome, yet
utterly reject this Council of Trent, as swaruing from the Church of Rome. Of
the Princes of Germany there is no doubt made, but that they would never
yield consent to it. Then general it cannot be, when as so many and so great
a part have withstood it: yea a far greater part then they can make who held
it.

17. And whereas in all ancient general Councels the freedom The Council of
Trent not free.
and liberty of Bishops, and of all that had voices in Councels was n^uer
impeached: in this Council of Trent it was quite otherwise, for none might be
admitted to have voice therein, but only such as should be bound in an oath of
bondage and slavery to the Pope. And therefore when the Ambassadors of
Maurice Duke of Saxony came to the Council and proposed from their Master
these petitions; [That the form of Sleidan. lib. 23
safe conduct might be made for his Divines, according to the form which the
council of Basil granted to the Bohemians, that is to say, that these
particulars might be expressed therein, that they also with other might have
deciding power, that in every controversy the holy Scriptures, the practice of
the ancient Church, the ancient Councels and Fathers agreeing with Scriptures,
and founding them upon Scriptures; might be admitted Lex diuina, praxis
Christi, Apostolica, and Ecclesiae primitiuae, vna cum consilijs doctoribusque
f^ndantibus s^ veraciter in eadem pro verissimo and indifferente iudico in hoc
Basiliensi consilio ad mittentur. consili. Basil. sess. 4.
and received for the most true and indifferent judge: (for thus much was
contained in the safe conduct granted by the Council of Basil to the
Bohemians) that there might be no proceeding till his Divines came: that when
they were come, all things precedent might be recalled, that the Council might
be free for all nations: that the Bishop of Rome might submit himself to the
Council, and remit that oath which he had taken of the Bishops which were of
the Council* that their voices might be free, and without such evident
partiality and prejudice as they brought with them, who were bound by oath to
do nothing against the pleasure of the Pope: these petitions Epist. 4.
were rejected, freedom utterly excluded; partiality and prejudice maintained
with resolution.

18. And that the same Council of Trent was not a lawful The Council of
Trent not a lawful Council.
assembly, it is no less evident; because it was not called by lawful
authority: for it was called only by the Popes authority, who never had
authority to call general Councels. And though Charles the fifth then
Emperor, was at the first drewen to yield a consent, yet the Pope would never
allow that the Emperor should have the authority to call the Council, and to
appoint the place (as always it was the Emperors Jurisdiction in ancient
Councels) but this Jurisdiction the Pope by usurpation drew to himself in the
Council of Trent: Insomuch that when the Emperor utterly dissallowing the
translation of the same Council to Bononia, wrote to them and sent his
Ambassador Vargas to protest against them that he would hold all as vain,
friuilous and unlawful whatsoever they did, tearming them not a Council, but
a Conuenticle: Montanus Sleidan. lib. 19.
the Popes Legate answered, that it should never be endured that the Civil
Magistrate should have authority to call Councels, or to appoint the place
thereof. To this purpose the Pope also writes to Charles, that the Emperor
has no right herein, Sleidan. lib. ^6
but the Pope himself is the man: Qui solus iure diuino and humano cogendi
(...), and decernendi de rebu^ sacris potestatem obtineat. This authority then
being utterly denied to the Emperor for calling the Council of Trent: we say
that Council was an unlawful assembly, because it was not gathered by the
authority of the Emperor, and of Christian Kings. And when it was thus
gathered, neither a general Council, nor a free, nor a lawful Council; yet
as it was with all these foul faults, it could not serve the Popes turn,
unless singular fraud and deceit had been practiced. Olaus Magnus was
entitled Archbishop of Vpsala, and blind Sir Robert a Scottishman was
entitled Archbishop of Armach in Ireland: so that for want of true Bishops,
some were set up only in name to fill up the number, and give voices.

19. And when all other shifts would not serve, the Pope still reserved one for
the last cast. The greatest part of them that were present, had a purpose to
curb the Popes Jurisdiction, especially the Spanish Bishops, who says Sleidan
were most diligent in this Council. These combined with those few Germane
Bishops which were there, resolved says he, Pontificis Romani potestatemintra
certos fines includere, nec illius aulae tantum S^eidan. lib. 23.
facultatis in omnes prouincias attribuere. That is, [To reduce the Popes
authority within some bounds, and not to yield such power to that Court over
all Provinces.] The Pope fearing such a thing before, provided that the greatest
part of Bishops, should be Italians: none might be admitted of any other
Nation, but such as were made obnoxious to the Pope, as well by some other
respects as by an oath. If any were observed to speak in the Council, with
some freedom (as some did) especial mark was taken of such: these were
withdrawn and recalled thence, that other might take their place. Of this the
Protestant Princes complain to Charles: Fuerunt in eo concessu pauci quidem
aliquanto liberiores in dicendo, sed inuenta ratio fuit, Sleidan. lib. 17.
vt ijs reuocatis atque summotis, alij summitterentur nequiores. That is, [Some
were in that company w^o used some freedom of speech: but a means was
invented to remove and recall them that other more servile might be in their
places.] The Pope thus giving continual direction to the Council, and
appointing by intercourse of messages continually traveling between Rome and
Trent, what should be concluded: (insomuch that a common proverb was then
taken up among them, that the holy Ghost traveled from Rome to Trent in a
packet) and finding that after all this, his purposes were cr^ssed by a
certain number of voices, the number being precisely brought unto him: began
to fly to his last reserved shift. For of a sudden he created thirteen
Cardinals in one day, all Italians; to whom having given uncertain titles, but
certain instruction, he sent them to the Council: whom the other Fathers of
the Council welcomed not knowing their end. At the next meeting the matters
being proposed as before, it was found that the voices of these that were come
so lately, did alter all; and east it at the Popes pleasure: and yet their
wretched policies rested not thus. If any were supposed to excel in
knowledge, gravity, learning, and godliness, they were (some before the
Council, that their presence should not hinder or disturb the Popes purposes:
some afterward) secretly taken away by poison: this was the end of that worthy
Cardinal Contaren, and Sleidan. lib. 14.
others: who for their eminency in virtue, were suspected of Lutheranisme. And
that the world might know and take full notice of the Popes end and scope in
calling this Council, that it was not the true faith and religion of the
Germans that he sought, but their blood, it is evident by his practice. For
whilst thus they held the Germans, and all the world in expectation of a
Council; the Pope in the mean time, raised an army and sent it against the
Protestants, to be joined with other armies prepared for their utter
destruction. The general of the Popes army, Octauius Farnesius (Graundchild
to Pope Paulus the third, by whom he was sent) departing out of Italy was
Sleidan. lib. 17.
observed to say, [That he would destroy so many Germans, that his horse might
swim in the blood of Lutherans. This is their holy Council of Trent,
consisting of a few, and those few bound by an oath to the Pope, restrained,
prohibited, poisoned, and at last with many shifts drawn to serve a purpose:
assembled without lawful authority, called by the usurped power of the Pope,
drawn and pulled by fraud and subtlety, ending in blood and wars: and
remaining the only cause of all the wars, which have been raised within
these western parts of Christendom since that time to this day.

. II. Of Friars, by whom this Jurisdiction was maintained.
20. MY purpose being to note the means by which this Jurisdiction has been
advanced: I think it needful after forgeries to speak of Friars. For they
have been the chief aduancers of this Jurisdiction, and the fittest
instruments that the Pope has found for his purpose. John Wiclife in diverse
places declares (out of assured knowledge of story, himself being near
those times, and therefore more able to judge thereof) that before the year of
Christ one thousand two VViclif^s complaint to the King and Parliament. art. 1.
hundred, there were no Friars in the world. About which time Dominicus a
Spaniard, and Francis an Italian began their new orders. Fasciculus temporum
sets their beginning about the year one thousand two hundred and four: and
that they were confirmed by Pope Honorius the third, about the year one
thousand two hundred and fourteen. Ordines quatuor mendicantium (says he)
videlicet Praedicatorum, Minorum, Augustinensium, Fasciculus temp.
and Carmelitarum consirmantur ab Honorio, praeponuntur Praedicatores Minoribus
in literis Papalibus, quia sex mensibus ante eos confirmatifuerunt. Matthaeus
Palmerius sets the confirmation of the Dominicans in the year one thousand
two hundred and sixteen. Of the Francisca^es, in the year one thousand two
hundred twenty and three: so that Wiclife has a good ground for that
assertion, that Friars were never known in the world before the year one
thousand two hundred.

21. This was the first thing that made the alteration of the Church of Rome
famous. For before the institution of Friars, the doctrines of the Church of
Rome stood sound and unchanged in most things. The alteration was afterward
wrought especially by these Friars, both in doctrine and Jurisdiction. For at
the first Friars were set up to oppress the old Priests, to alter the ancient
religion, and to exalt the Popes power in a greater measure then it was before.
In which business they have not been idle, but taking directions only from
the Pope, have brought in a great change in all things. Wiclife observed, that
Friars pursued, imprisoned, and burned Priests only for reproving their
sins. So that then questions of doctrine made not the quarrel between
Priests and Friars, but only the reproof of the corrupt and unclean lives of
Friars: as in corruption they began, so they continue. And this is testified by
others The first cause of persecution by Popes: not for doctrine, but for
Jurisdiction.
also, that the first cause of the Popes persecutions was not for doctrine, but
only for the Popes Jurisdiction. Reinerius writing against the Waldenses,
testifies thus much: that they differed from the Church of Rome in no point of
doctrine, but only they denied the Popes Jurisdiction. Haec secta Leonistarum
Reinerius
(for so they were called) magnam habet speciem pietatis (says he) eo quod
coram hominibus just viuant, and been omnia de Deo credant, and omnes
articulos qui in Symbolo continentur; solam Romanam Ecclesiam blasphemant and
oderunt. So that all the heresy which then was found in them, was only
against the Popes Jurisdiction, they swarued not from the doctrines of the
Church of Rome, but the Friars made the alteration from that ancient doctrine.
Then howsoever since that time some Popish writers, upon humor and partiality
have charged them in points of doctrine: yet the writers of that age, and near
it, even their adversaries, do therein justify them, and show that the quarrel
was not for points of doctrine, but only for the Popes Jurisdiction. And it is
worth observation, that the same Reinerius confesses that there was no origin
of this sect known, some, says he, asfirme that this sect has continued from
the time of Siluester: others think it continued from the time of the
Apostles, himself concludes that out of question, it is ancienter then any
other sect. Then out of doubt, they were much more ancient then Friars, and
Friars were raised up, pa^tly to this end, to pull them down.

22. And that this was an end of the institution of these orders: to make some
change in that ancient religion, which before stood in the Church of Rome in
some tolerable measure, and to vex and persecute the professors thereof, and
especially to bring in a new Jurisdiction of the Pope: it will better appear
if we consider what has been in the beginning of their institution, and since
observed of their innouations, liberty, luxuriousness, and what desolation
they have brought into the Church. That these men may better be known, I will
note what John Wiclife and some others have observed.

Friars taught (says Wiclife) that the King of England is not VViclife lib. de
sundam. legum Angl. cap. 36. page 42. 4.
Lord of the Clargie, but that the Pope is their Lord.

Friars so streitched the privileges of the Clargie, that though an Abbot and
all his covent ben open traitors conspiring Companit. page 9
unto death of the King and Queen, and other Lords; and enforce them to
destroy all the Realm: the King may not take fro them an halfpenny, ne
farthing worth.

When Parish-churches ben appropred to men of singular religion Ibid. page 14.
(that is to Friars) such appropriation is made by false suggestion, that such
religious men han not enough for lifelode and healing, but in truth they han
ou^rmuch.

Let me observe this by the way, as being now better instructed in the opinion
of John Wi^life, concerning tithes. Whereas he seems to be against tithes, it
is to be understood (as he does in diverse places open himself) against tithes
as then they were abused by Friars. For Friars then had power from the Pope to
appropriate tithes to their Couents, by which means tithes came into their
possession. This thing Wiclife thought unlawful, and would have had tithes
reduced to their ancient use again: now let us return to his observations.
Friars sayen, that their religion (founden on sinful men) is more perfect
Treat. against Friars page 19.
then that religion or order which Christ himself made. They sayen also that
begging is lawful, the which is damned of God, p. 24.
both in the old Testament and in the new. Friars after they p. 2^.
had procured impropriations, and left a poor Curat in place, drew also from
Curats their office and Sacraments: they got the confession of Lords and
Ladies. They pursuen true Priests, p. 55.
and letten them to preach the Gospel. Christ charge all his p. 3^.
Priests to preach the Gospel truly, and they pursuen them for this deed;
yea, to the fire: they will slay Priests, for they do Gods bidding. When the
King by his officers prisons a p. 40.
man, that is commonly done for great and open trespass, and that is good
warning to other misdoers, and some profit comes of the Kings Ministers: but
when Friars prisonen their brethren, the pain is not known to men, though the
sin were never so open and slanderous, and that does harm to other
Liegemen. Friars sayen, that they han more power then the p. 28.
Curat, and thus they make dissension and discord among Ch istian men. Friars
labor to root out true Priests that preach p. 30.
Christ's Gospel, themselves han their chamber and service like Lords or Kings,
and senden out idiots full of couetise, to preach not the Gospel, but
Chronicles, Fables, and leesings to please the people, and to rob them. And yet
for sending of those covetous fools that been limitors goes much Symonie, envy,
and much foul Merchandise. And who can best rob the poor people by false
begging and other deceits, that shall have this Judas office and so a nest of
Antichrists Clerks is maintained.

They show not to the people their great sins, and namely p. 31.
to mighty men of the world, but pursuen other true preachers, for they will
not gloss mighty men, and comfort them in their sins. Thus mighty men hire by
great costs, a false traitor to p. 32.
lead them to hell. Friars deceiuen the people in faith, and robben them of
Temporal goods, and make the people trust more in dead parchment, sealed with
leesings, and in vain prayers of hypocrites, that in case ben damned devils,
then in the holy help of God and their own good living. Friars pervert the p.
33.
right faith of the Sacrament of the Auter, and bringing in a new heresy,
saying there is an accident withouten subject: which heresy never came into
the Church, till the foul fend Satan was vnbounden after a thousand years.
Friars undo Parish p. 35.
Churches, by building other needless (meaning Abbeyes, and Priories, etc.)
They destroy the obedience of Gods law, and magnifien p. 36.
singular obedience made to sinful men, and in case to devils, (this is blind
obedience brought in by them) which obedience Christ insampled never, ne in
himself, ne in his Apostles.

Friars being made Bishops robben men by extorsion, as in punishing of sin for
money, and suffren men to lie in sin, they p. 37.
bear out the gold of our land to Aliens, and sometimes to our enemies, to get
of Antichrist false exemptions. They teach p. 38.
Lords and Ladies, that if they die in Francis habit, they shall never come to
hell. They are neither ruled by Gods law, ne p. 41.
laws of the Church, ne laws of the King. They ben the p. 42.
cause and procuratours of all wars. They say apertly, that if p. 45.
the King and Lords, and other standen thus against their false begging, etc.
they will go out of the land, and come again with bright heads: and look
whether this be treason or none. They teach and maintain that holy writ is
false, and so they Ibid.
putten falsnesse upon our Lord Jesus Christ, and upon the holy Ghost, and upon
the blessed Trinity. Friars teach that it is not p. 47.
lawful to a Priest, or any other man to keep the Gospel in his bounds and
cleanness, without error of sinful men, but if he have leave thereto of
Antichrist. Friars by hypocrisy binden p. 50.
them to impossible things, that they may not do, for they binden them over
the commandments of God, as they say themselves: (hence are works of
supererogation.) They burn p. 52.
Priests and the Gospel of Christ, written in English to most honor of our
Nation. They call the curse of God, the less curse; p. 53.
and the curse of sinful men, the more curse. They distroyen this p. 54.
Article of Christian men's faith: I believe a common or general Church. For
they teachen, that tho men that shall be damned, be members of holy Church: and
thus they wedden Christ and the devil together. They waste the treasures of
the p. 57.
land, for dispensations and vain Pardons. They ben most subtle and privy
procurators of Symonie, and most privily make Lords to maintain the Pope and
his robbing our land of treasure by his Pardons, Privileges, first fruits of
Benefices in our land; and Dis^es, and Subsidies.

23. By this we may in part see those innouations, which Friars brought into
the Church, raising a new Jurisdiction to the Pope, defrauding and robbing the
King of his ancient Jurisdiction: these are they who first taught, and
practiced obedience to another Sovereign then the King, conspiracy against the
life of Princes: impropriations, turning tithes first from their true and
ancient use: persecution for preaching the Gospel; exemptions; the use of
Legends in the Church, and reading of fables to the people: Symonie, flattery,
pardons, indulgences: the heresy of an accident without a subject: singular
and blind obedience; the use of commutation of penance into money: they were
instruments of wars and bloodshed, they invented works of supererogation, the
doctrine that reprobates are members of the Catholic Church: to rob the land
of money. These are the things in part which are observed by Wiclife to have
been first invented by Friars. Now whereas John Wiclife was reputed an
heretic, we find that this imputation was laid upon him especially by
Friars. For he was a professed enemy to them, and to their innouations,
holding with the Church of Rome, and maintaining no other doctrine, then that
which he found publicly maintained and received in the world, before Friars
altered it. Still he pleads the cause of the Priests against Friars, which
shows that he taught no otherwise then those Priests did teach. And albeit
the Friars did marueilouslly disorder the Church in his time, yet he
witnesses that the third part of the Clergy of England defended the truth
against Friars. Then the Friars being set up to alter the ancient doctrine
Confess. de Sacram. page 64.
and Jurisdiction, and to induce new: did labor herein thoroughly employing
their best skill and power, for the advancement of the Pope, and suppressing of
the truth. Herein the Jesuits succeed their forefathes, in this inheritance
of innovation, daily adding some new monsters, to those which these old Friars
left to their hands.

24. The University of Paris has likewise declared their judgment against
Friars, somewhat before this time wherein Wiclife lived. They gathered seven
Articles against Friars, which because they prove Friars to be the authors and
introducers of innovation in the Church, I will here set them down. [First, we
say, that Friars are not to be admitted into our Scholasticall Extat catalog
test. veritat.
society, except by our consent: because the society Tom. 2. p. 798.
ought not to be coact but voluntary. Secondly, because we have found by
experience, that their fellowship has been many ways hurtful and dangerous
to us. Thirdly, seeing they are of a diverse profession from ours: for they are
regulars, and we scholars; we ought not to be joined or mingled together in
one scholasticall office. For the Spanish Council says, Thou shall not plow
with an Ox and an Ass, thatis, thou shall not associate men of diverse
professions together in one office: for how can they agree together, whose
studies, vows, and purposes are diverse? Fourthly, because they raise
dissentions and offenses, but the Apostle says: we beseech you brethren that
you observe them, that is, that you discern such as make dissentions for the
doctrine which you have learned of the Apostles, and eschew them; for they
serve not the Lord, but their belly. Gloss. for they flatter some, they
backbite others, that they may fill their bellies: and by glosing words and
their benedictions they beguile the hearts of the simple. Fifthly, because we
fear least they be such as enter into houses, because they thrust themselves
into every man's house; they search and sift the consciences of men: and seduce
such as they find like women ready to be seduced. And who^ they have once
seduced, them they draw from the Councels of their own Prelates, to their
Councels: for they bind them by oath to their Councels, such the Apostle
commands to eschew. Sixthly, because we fear they are false Prophets, for
they are not Bishops, nor Parish Priests, nor their Vicars, nor by them
invited: yet they preach, being not sent, against the Apostle saying, Romans 10.
How shall they preach except they be sent. For they work no miracles, thereby
to witness that they may preach: the Church then ought to avoid such men,
being so dangerous. Seventhly, because they are curious, and having no lawful
calling in the Church, they busy themselves with other men's business, and
thrust themselves into other men's callings: and yet they are neither Apostles,
nor their successors; that is, Bishops, neither are they of the seventy and
two Disciples of the Lord, neither their helpers, or Vicars, as before is said.
Now the Apostle commands us to eschew such as will live so: saying, 2 Thessalonians. vlt. We declare brethren to you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
that you withdraw your selves from every brother that walks inordinately, and
not according to that tradition which they have received of us, etc.]

25. Thus have we set down the sincere judgment of that University, before
it was corrupted and infected with Friars. They have proved that Friars have
no lawful calling in the Church to preach, or administer the Sacraments;
because they have no institution of Christ or his Apostles. And howsoever since
those times the judgment of that University was changed, after they had once
received these serpents into their bosoms: yet the reasons which they have
brought against Friars, are vnchaungeably true, and will always prove that
which then they proved, that neither the old Friars, nor the new Jesuits, have
any lawful calling in the Church. As thus they have been the bane of the
Church in changing the old bounds: so they have been the ruin of Princes,
and the cause of great wars and bloodshed, yea of all the persecutions that
have been since. For before that time that the orders of Friars were brought
forth by a new and monstrous birth in the Church; there was no bloodshed nor
persecution offered by the Pope, nor the Church of Rome, for matters of
Religion. Berengarius was forced to a Recantation before, but no blood was
shed. But after that Dominicke had instituted the order of the Iacobites, or
preaching Friars; and Francis the order of the Minorites, professed beggars:
then began great bloodshed and persecution to be practiced upon men, that did
not allow the Popes Jurisdiction: in blood was it first founded, and so it has
been ever since maintained.

26. The first persecution began against them, that were called Albingenses:
whose opinions are made heinous by some that write affectionately since that
time; but by the writers of that time there appears no other thing wherewith
they were Albegesij, quorii dogma nemo ad hunc diem notus scriptor reliquit:
and cum haereticos eos vocent, genus tamen haereseos praetereunt. Naucler.
generat. 41.
charged: but only that they withstood the Popes pride and Jurisdiction; for
which they were persecuted. The Earl of Toulouse who favored them, was
deprived of his Earldom, his lands were given to Simon Monford: the forces
of the French and the Pope were raised against him: when they were not able to
vanquish him by force, by fraud and falsehood of the Friars and Popish Bishops,
they overthrew him. In this overthrow of the Earl, the industry and valor of
Dominicke is much celebrated by the stories of this time. Insomuch, as the
whole praise is attributed to him: of him Platina witnesses thus much. Quos
(Albingenses) Dominicus mira celeritate compescuit, Platin. Innocent. 3.
adiuuante etia^ Simone Monteforti: non enim disputationibus verum armis opus
fuit, adeo inoleuerat tanta heresis. That is, [Whom Dominicke did speedily
overcome, by the help of Simon Monford: for there was not so much need of
disputation, as of arms, that heresy was so rooted.] Then we understand the
end why Friars were instituted, by their first and chief employment: they were
founded in blood, in treacherous practices against Princes, for the service of
the Pope. Wherein we behold the ends of such. Councels as the Pope calls,
and wherein he is President: as the Council of Lateran, and the Council of
Trent. For as upon the time of holding the Lateran Council, the first Friars
were ordained, and allowed by the Pope; so upon the time of the Council of
Trent were the Jesuits confirmed to be an order by Pope Paul the third: after
both Councels, great wars and bloodshed followed through Christendom;
wherein the Friars were the Popes instruments, and the procurators of the
wars at both times, and ever since.

27. As these first orders of Friars increased in number, swarming like Locusts
under the Popes protection; he like an experienced Captain, prouidently
ordered his troops, and set them to their several taskes: some to writing of
books, some to the practices of state against Princes. By those that were set
to write, as Aquinas, Scotus, and such like, the alterations of doctrines were
brought into the Church of Rome first: so that herein appears their full and
final end, in raising up rebellions; first against God, and corrupting of the
truth: and then against Princes, by impugning their sovereign authority and
Jurisdiction. In both which practices, the Friars take continual direction
from the Pope, by whose power they were created, by whose authority they
stand, from whose spirit they breath, and for whose service they are devoted,
and resolved to spend their breath and blood. In these practices, the Jesuits
being the last brood, strive to surpass all other, for their audacious
corrupting of the truth, and outrageous interprises against the lives of
Princes. For which in the end, they will undoubtedly draw upon themselves the
anger of God, and of the Princes of Christendom. I have stayed the longer in
these descriptions, for the honor of the Jesuits, that their descent and
progeny, may be known: that we may behold the aduancers of the Popes
Jurisdiction: which Jurisdiction will the better appear, if the first and
chief aduancers of it, might be well known.

. III. Of Oaths exacted by the Pope.
28. ANother especial means of aduauncing this Jurisdiction, was practiced by
exacting Oaths: which is also much practiced now; because by experience they
find great use of it; an Oath being the greatest bond of humane society, and
the fittest means to engage men thoroughly in any cause: the first exacting of
Oaths, was from Archbishops, and Bishops, by which means their Allegiance was
strangely withdrawn from their Sovereign Princes. Whereas then first princes
for their own safety, and for the safety of their Country, used to exact an
Oath of Allegiance, as well of the Ecclesiastical, as Temporal subjects: The
Popes began to withdraw the Clergy from this obedience, and Allegiance; and so
far they prevailed, that the Friars taught, that the King of England was not
lord of the Clergy, but that the Pope was their lord: as we have declared from
Ioh. Wiclife. And now the Pope begins in these desperate days, to forbid
them of the laity, to take the Oath of Allegiance to their Sovereign: whereby
as they began to steal away the hearts of the Clergy first, from the true and
lawful obedience of their Sovereigns; so now proceeding in the same course
with the laity, what will they leave to Kings in the end? And because this
contains an especial mystery of Jurisdiction, therefore we think it
needful to be plainly opened.

29. That Kings did out of duty and Allegiance, exact an Oath of their
subjects, even of Bishops; and had the same yielded as a due homage to them,
and confirmed also by decrees of Councels: it is well and worthily observed of
late, by that book written most learnedly and exactly, entitled, Tripliei
nodo triplex cuneus. Where this use is confirmed from the practice of the
fourth Toletan Council, held in the year six hundred and thirty: and from
the fifth Toletan Council, held about the same time. And from the sixth Toletan
Council held in the year six hundred seventy and six. And from the tenth
Toletan Council, gathered in the year, six hundred ninety and sour: as
also from the Council of Aquisgrane, in the year eight hundred thirty and
six. We may add (though it be needless) some few and small observations
thereto. It appears, that this practice of taking an Oath of Allegiance of
subjects, is drawn from the law of nature, as necessary for the preservation
of States, and it seems to be as ancient as the government of States. For
Lycurgus the first founder of the State of Plutarch Lycurgo.
Lacedemon, having once well ordered that State by good laws: took an Oath of
them all that they should preserve those orders till his return from the
Oracle: that is always. If any think that this was not an Oath of Allegiance
to the State, I suppose it will be hard to distinguish between an Oath to
preserve the laws, or to be true to the laws; and an Oath to be true to the
State. For it is certain, that the State of Lacedemon, was preserved by those
laws in great honor and felicity, for the space of five hundred years, as
the same Author reports: Or as he says in another place, for six hundred
Plutarch. ibid.
years; and upon the breach of those laws came in the ruin Plut. Agesil.
of that State, as the same Author does often observe. This declares the
antiquity of this Oath, as proceeding from the law of nature; which yields
this help to States for the necessary preservation of themselves. For which
cause it has been practiced, whenever the State thought it needful: for
after the kings were driven out of Rome, L. Brutus, and Collatinus Tarquinius
being chosen Consuls: Valerius Publicola grew so offended, because himself was
not respected in that choice, that he retired from the Senate, and from all
public action to a private life. This thing drew the Senate into some
suspicion of his Allegiance. Wherefore Brutus the Consul called all the Senate
to a solemn Oath of Allegance: which Oath Valerius first of al others took
Plutarch. Publicola.
most cheerfully. Thus in the danger of the State, they had recourse to this
practice as the most lawful, and assured help of States. And Scipio Africanus
is much commended in the Roman Liui. Plutarch. Scip.
stories, for using this practice in the danger of that State: for when he
understood that some had a purpose to forsake the State, he caused them to
take an Oath to be true to the State, and not to forsake it. After the same
manner was this Oath of Allegiance yielded by the Church of the Jews of old.
For Josephus reports, that Augustus Caesar required an Oath of Allegiance;
which Oath, says he, all the nation of the Jews did take, saving only the
Pharisees. And therefore these Pharisees, he describes to be seditious and
intolerable stirrers in States, even such as the Friars proved afterward. The
words of Josephus, though they be long, yet I will set down; because they open
the practice of this Oath of Allegance, the consent of the ancient Church of
the Jews, and the seditious and pestiferous practice of the Pharisees, that the
Jesuits the brood of these Vipers may the better be known: his words are
these.

[There was a sort of men among the Jews, glorying in Joseph. antiquit. lib.
17. cap. 3.
the scrupulositie and subtlety of the law, by hypocrisy and simulation,
counterfeiting the holy worship of God, by whom women were much moved and
drawn, etc. These were called Pharisees, who had great power, either to help,
or to hurt the kings State. For they were troublesome, seditious, the stirrers
of wars, injurious and immoderate prouokers of trouble without cause or ground.
For when the whole nation of the Jews bound themselves by an Oath to be
faithful and true to Caesar, and to obey him, only these Pharisees did not
swear: these were in number somewhat above six thousand, whom the King
punished with a mulct pecuniarie: which sum of money the wife of Pherora
disbursed for them. But they, to recompense this her great liberality, took
upon them the foretelling of things to come, as men forsooth endued with divine
inspiration: they prophesied that K. Herod's end was at hand, decreed by the
divine Majesty, and the end of all his issue, and kindred: and that this woman
their Benefactour with her husband Pherora, and the children descending of
them, should be Kings. When this practice of the Pharisees, came to the Kings
knowledge, he killed them as stirrers of sedition and traitors to the State.]
Thus fa^re Josephus, Whereby we understand that this Oath of Allegiance, was
well approved of the Church of the Jews, and only denied by the seditious
Pharisees, who then inueigled women and weak men, and by such means stirred
rebellions, as now their successors the Jesuits do. In like manner was this
Oath practiced in the Church of Christians, as appears by the testimonies
before cited, and by these that follow. The second Synod of Rhemes was
gathered about the year nine hundred and ninety: against Arnulphus Archbishop
of Rhemes, Synod. Rheme cap. 5.
where it was witnessed of that Archbishop; that in the presence of the Kings,
and Bishops and Clergy, and people, he was of his own consent bound by an
Oath, that to the utmost of his skill and power, he would be true and faithful
in Council and aid to his Prince: the manner and form of his Oath is set
down thus. Ego Arnulphus gratia Dei praeueniente Rhemorum Ibid. cap. 6.
Archiepiscopus promitto regibus Francorum Hugoni, and Rotberto me sidem
purissimam seruaturum, consilium and auxi lium secundum meum scire and posse in
omnibus negotijs praebiturum: inimicos ^oru^ nec consilio nec auxilio ad eorum
infidelitatem scienter adiuturum. And so it proceeds with a long execration
upon the breaker.

30. Nauclerus does likewise observe, that Frederick Barbarossa Naucler. Vol.
2. generat. 39.
Emperor, perceiving that the Pope by his excommunications practiced secret
conspiracies, drawing subjects from Allegiance, from faith and obedience; to
prevent these new and subtle practices did exact an Oath of Allegiance of all
Bishops under his Dominions: commanding the Popes Agents to be excluded from
Germany, unless he sent for them. The same exclusion of the Papal Legates was
often used by the Kings of England and France, after that these Princes
perceived, that the end of such Legacies was to strengthen the Popes
excommunications, and to stir the people to rebellions, or to rob the land
of tr^asure. The same Frederick did also forbid his subjects to appeal to
Rome, and to go thither. By this iniunction of Frederick, the Popes Legate
being forced to trudge home, returning to Pope Hadrian, made a grievous
complaint; the Pope hereupon wrote a letter to the Emperor; which because it
opens the Popes meaning concerning the Oath of Allegiance, I will here set it
down.

Hadrian the fourth, servant of Gods servants,
to Frederick Emperor of Romans, health and Apostolical blessing.
31. THe law of God promises a long life to them that Naucler. 2. generat. 39.
honor their parents, and threatens the sentence of death to such as curse
their Father or Mother. And we are taught by the voice of the truth it self,
that he that exalts himself, shall be brought low. Wherefore my son
beloved in the Lord, we marvel not a little at your wisdom, for that you
seem not to yield so much reverence to S. Peter, and the Church of Rome, as
you ought to do: for in The Popes singular humility.
the letters which you wrote to us, you set your name before curs: wherein you
do incur the note of insolency, that I may not say arrogancy. What shall I
say of the Allegiance by you promised and sworn to S. Peter and to us? How can
you keep that Allegiance, seeing that you your self require homage and
Allegiance of those that are Gods? That are the sons of the most high? (that is
Bishops) and you have held their hallowed hands in your hands: and manifestly
declaring your self contrary to us, you shut out our Cardinals, not only out
of your Churches, but even out of your Cities: Repent therefore, repentwe advise
you: for whilst you seek the Crown and Consecration at our hands, we fear
that seeking more, you will loose that which you have.


32. By this we perceive the Popes meaning, in denying that Kings ought to
exact an Oath of Allegiance of Clerks: especially of Bishops, for they finding
that the Oath of Allegiance draws subjects to the obedience of Princes,
resist it by all possible means: because the Popes seek Sovereign
Allegiance: which cannot be performed both to the Pope, and to Princes: so that
if the Popes purposes stand, civil obedience to Princes cannot stand. And
howsoever the Jesuits cavil at the late Oath of Allegiance by Parliament
enacted, quarrelling against it, as if it were not a mere Civil Oath: yet
this is but their friuoulous exception, for it is evident by this Epistle of
the Pope, that an Oath of mere Civil Allegiance, stands against the Popes
purposes. For this Oath which Frederick exacteth, The like Oath was exacted of
all the Cities of Italy, under the Empire, by Henry the fifth Emperor.
was for mere Civil Allegiance; and yet the Pope denies that the Emperor
ought to take such an Oath of Bishops: the reason was that which John Wiolife
descried, because Bishops must be the Popes subjects, not the Kings. This was
also a part of that quarrel, wherewith Thomas Becket troubled the State in his
time; for he having first taken the Oath of Allegiance Naucler. 2. gener. 38.
to King Henry the second; afterward repenting, sought Houeden. part poster.
to be absolved of the Pope.

33. Then this Oath of Allegiance to Kings, was in use before we find it
exacted by the Pope: the Pope did first exact it of Archbishops. The first that
I can find to bind himself in an Oath to the Pope, was Boniface termed the
Germane Apostle, Archbishop of Mentz, an English man by birth named Winefride.
For Pope Gregory the second, desirous to draw the Germans under the yoke of
his ceremonies (the Christian religion being long before planted among them)
sent this Winefride, otherwise called Boniface, to reduce all to the obedience
of Rome as much as might be. For this purpose he exacted an Oath of Boniface,
the form of the Oath is extant in Auentinus, thus: [In the name of our Lord
and Savior, Leo being Emperor, Auentin. Ann. lib. 3.
etc. I Boniface promise to thee S. Peter, which wast the chief of Christ's
Apostles, and to Gregory who now represents thy person, and to all thy
successors by the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, etc. I vow by this
thy holy body, that I will follow the sincere truth of Christian piety, as
long as my life and strength last, I will keep concord, I will shun persons
excommunicated, I will give notise of lying sects, of pestiferous errors
against the decrees of our Elders, to the Bishop of Rome.] This Oath carries a
show of great moderation, being compared with the forms of those Oaths which
succeeding Popes exacted.

34. We declared before how Hildebrand caused the Emperor Henry the fourth,
to displace certain Bishops: and presently after that he had made a breach
between the Emperor and them, he restored them all to their several places
again; and exacted an Oath of them, to be true to him, the form of that Oath
I find not: but it seems that then an Oath was exacted much in prejudice of
Princes. For Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, by reason of that Oath which
then the Popes exacted, was enboldened to raise a contention with William
Rufus, about inuestitures. And Thomas Becket by virtue of the like Oath,
contended with Henry the second: for that upon the quarrel for inuestitures,
Bishops were strictly tied to the Pope by an Oath, we find in the contention
which was between Pope Paschalis the second, and Henry the fifth Emperor. For
when Henry the fifth had been set up by the Pope, to raise wars against his
own Father, and had at the Popes instigation, robbed him of his Empire and
life: he himself found afterward the same measure at the Popes hands, which
his Father had found before him; for claiming the right of inuestitures as
belonging to the ancient right of the Empire, he was denied: the matter brake
out into a tumult, in which tumult Pope Pascbalis was taken, and being in the
Emperors power, granted and confirmed unto him the right of inuestitures.
From which grant the Pope revolted afterward, and showed himself more
vehement in this quarrel, then any before him. After some stirs and
contention, the Pope held a Synod at Trecae in France: this Synod was held in
the year one thousand one hundred and seven. Wherein the Bishops of Germany
were suspended by the Pope, for doing any part of Vspergens.
Episcopal function, (says Vspergensis) because, favoring the Emperor, they
were not present in this Synod. And Auentinu^ Auentin. lib. 5.
says, that all they that were present, were bound by an Oath to the Pope, to
obey him herein: A singulis Episcopis, says he, iusiurandum exactum, futuros
in potestate Romani Pontificis. That is, [An Oath was exacted of every Bishop,
that they should be in the power, and at the pleasure of the Pope.]

35. Thus were Kings robbed of their strength, when Bishops were by an Oath so
bound to the Pope, that what he commanded, they must do. And if the Pope
listed to quarrel Princes for their ancient rights and privileges, it was
enough for him to say, those privileges of Princes were matters
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, and must therefore belong to the Pope: and not
to Temporal Princes. What thing could more weaken Princes, and bring them to
that poor state, that the Pope might triumph over them, as he did, then this
subtle practice whereby Bishops, who before with other subjects held their
Allegiance inuiolated to their Sovereigns; were now by a new policy of Popes,
brought by Oath to the Popes subjection, and forced to violate their Allegiance
to their Princes. Consider then what service Princes may expect from
Popishbishops, who are so bound by Oath to the Pope, that they can do no
service either to God, or their Prince (if it be against the Pope) but they
must violate their Oaths. And this is the great bond of their spiritual
Jurisdiction, as they call it. The Popes have wrested from Princes their
ancient right by violence, excommunications, wars, and great bloodshed:
these rights of Princes thus withdrawn from them, the Popes hold as matters of
their Jurisdiction: and to strengthen them herein they bind Bishops and other
chief of the Clergy, by Oaths to themselves, against their own Kings: these
practices set the Pope in the possession of this Jurisdiction.

36. Onuphrius speaking of that Oath which all Doctors Onuphr. in Pio 4.
took that were to be made Bishops, does at large set down the form of it:
and among other particulars, this: Romano Pontifici B. Petri Apostolorum
principis successori, ac Jesus Christi vicario, veram obedientiam spondeo* ac
iuro. This Oath was ministered to all that proceeded Doctors: which was the
cause that some men of great worth and learning, refused to take that degree M.
Gilpin.
in those days: for besides other dangers, it brought two great mischeifes
upon them, that took it. The first concerning Allegiance of subjects to their
kings; the second concerning Bishops or Doctors that might be called to a
Council. For if a quarrel fall between the King and the Pope, it is hard for
any man to be* a true subject to the King, that takes such an Oath to the
Pope. Especially when the Pope must interpret that obedience which is vowed
and sworn to him, in such a sort, as that it includes a contradiction to the
faithful service and Allegiance, which every Subject owes to his King.
Moreover, if a Council should be called to determine Religious affairs, and
to reform the abuses of the Court of Rome, how can sincerity and
indifferency be expected of them, that are aforehand bound by Oath to the
Pope, and engaged so far Pius 2. ad M^guntin. capit.
that as a Pope charge the Bishops of Germany, they cannot speak the truth
against the Pope, but they break their Oath. And therefore since this Oath was
exacted of the Clergy, there were never such free, sincere, and holy Synodes
held, like to those which were in former times. But of all Oaths or vows,
Chemnit. exampart. 1. cap. 1.
that is the most servile, which the Jesuits by virtue of their Order profess
to the Pope, that they will serve him, as Christ's Ex A^dradio.
Vicar.

37. These Oaths by the Pope were first exacted of Archbishops, though in
process of time, they came to be farther imposed. To this purpose there is a
Canon in the Decretals of Gregory the ninth, which Canon because it opens
somewhat, both of the reason and antiquity of this Oath, I will set down De
elect. and elect. potest. cap. 4. Significasti.
the whole. Thus it is: Significasti Reges and regni maiores admiratione
permotos, etc. That is: [You signified to me by your Letters, Apocrisiarius, id
est, responsalis negotiorum Ecclesiast little.
that the Princes and Barons of the Kingdom, were moved with admiration, that
the Pall was offered you by our Apocrisiaries, (that is Chaplanes) with this
condition, that you should take that Oath which they brought you written from
us. Hinc marus Epist. 3. Nostrates capcllanum appellant. Idem ibid.
Let them in like sort marvel at our Lord Jesus Christ in this cause: Who
committing the charge of his sheep to Peter, put thereto a condition: saying,
If thou love me, feed my sheep. Now if the creator of consciences, and
searcher of secrets used this condition, and that not once, but the second time
and again, till he had made him sorry: What care then ought we to have that so
great a Prelateship of the Church be not by us committed to our brethren,
whose consciences we know not. They object that all Oaths are prohibited by
the Lord, and that this practice of exacting Oaths, is not found either
established by the Apostles of Christ, or by Councels. What then is that which
the Lord adds as next following: That which is Hoc enim ampliu^ vt Exigamus,
malum nos,, illo permittente compellit.
more then this is of evil. For evil compels and forces us (the Lord
permitting) to exact this which is more. For is not this evil, to start from
the Church, and obedience of the Sea Apostolic? And to break out against the
constitutions of Canons? Which many have done, after their Oath to the
contrary. We are therefore compelled by this evil, and by necessity Hoc
nimirum malo, ac necessitate compellimur, iuramentum pro fide, pro obedientia,
pro vnitate requirere.
to exact an Oath for Fealty, for Obedience and Unity. They object that this
thing is not established by Councels: as though any Councels may prescribe a
Law to the Roman Church, seeing all Councels are by the Authority of the
Bishops of Rome enacted, and have their strength. And in their Canons the Popes
Authority is manifestly excepted.]

38. The Reader may be entreated hence to observe: First, that this Oath in the
time of Paschalis the second, who wrote this (for Gregory the ninth Collected
it from him) was received with great admiration, both of Temporal Lords, and
of the Anno 1099.
Archbishop himself, as a thing never practiced before that time. Then we have
the antiquity of imposing such an Oath. Secondly, we observe this cursed
boldness of the Pope, in perverting Scriptures to serve his pride and lust.
Without which blasphemous abuse of holy Scriptures, this Jurisdiction could
neither at first have been imposed; nor since maintained. Thus he handles
all the Scriptures that he meets withal, as in these few words two diverse
Scriptures. Thirdly, he grants that evil compelled him to this, God only
permitting, which is as if he should say: The devil compels and drives him
to it, God only permits. He who acknowledges thus much, is wittingly and
willingly the servant of the devil, and of that evil which by his own
confession compels him. Fourthly, he rejects the authority of the
Apostles and Councels, as being himself above them. Fifthly, his reason is to
be noted, drawn from Scripture: Christ says, That which is more then this is
of evil; therefore the Pope may exact an Oath of Archbishops. And the Popes
Canons having once expounded this Scripture thus; it must always be the true
sense of it: For that say they is the true sense which the Pope gives.
Sixthly, where we find this Oath exacted of an Archbishop, accounted a thing so
strange by the Barons of the land: We collect that the Pope at the first
required this Oath of Archbishops only, which was the cause that moved many
Archbishops to join with the Pope in the pursuit of this new Jurisdiction
against their own Sovereigns. And hence we see a reason, why Anselme
withstood the King against the liking and consent of all the Bishops of the
land, as we shall hereafter declare: Because this Oath was exacted of
Archbishops, Anselme had taken it. For (as by this Canon it appears) it was
conveyed with the Pall to the Archbishops, if they will have the Pall, besides
the other price, they must take this Oath. But the Bishops as then had not
taken the* Oath, which made them freer to withstand Anselm. Seventhly, and last
of all, observe what kind of Oath the Pope required: An Oath of Allegiance, And
therefore the sum and purpose of that former Canon, is thus set down in the
Edition of Gregory the thirteenth. Electo in Archiepiscopum seeds Apostolica
Pallium non tradet, nisi prius praestet fideluatis and obedientiae iuramentum.
That is, [The Sea Apostolic will not deliver the Pall to any Elect for
Archbishop, except he first take an Oath of Fidelity and Obedience.] Then the
Oath which the Pope requires, is an Oath of Allegiance. By this the purpose,
reason, Antiquity, and honesty of this Oath may the better appear.

39. Besides this Oath which Popes have exacted of the Clergy, they have
labored to bring the Emperors also unto their obedience by an Oath: There is
the form of an Oath set D. 63. cap. 33.
down, Did. 63. as exacted by Pope John the twelfth, of Otho the first
Emperor: but because in that distinction there is much counterfeited stuff
thrust in, as that Canon which begins Ego Ludouicus, etc. which Carolus
Molinaeus has by irrefragable proofs manifested to be forged; therefore this
is to be suspected to be of the same kind. And this thing seems so unlikely,
that there is no reason to receive it, without better story, then the Popes
Canons: For Otho the first was a Prince of great worth, wise and valiant; and
John the twelfth, a Pope that deserves no better Titles of the
Historiographers, then a Monster and a Beast. Neither was this Emperor at any
time in the power of that Pope, but the Pope in his; for John the twelfth
helped Beringarius and his son, against Otho, which caused Otho to bring an
Army against him: And as Luitprandus Luitprand. lib. 6. cap. 6.
says, Iuramentum Othoni Papa Johannes supra pretiosissimum corpus Petri
praestitit, se nunque Beringario and Aberto eius filio auxiliaturum. Naucler
says, that this John (whom he also calls a Naucler. 2.
Monster and a Beast) having intelligence that two Cardinals Generat. 33.
wrote to Otho, to call him to Rome, cut off the nose from the one, and the
hand from the other. Then for any Oath that Otho should take to the Pope, we
find nothing in Story but the contrary. True it is, that Henry the fourth
Emperor was forced by Hildebrand to such an Oath: for this Emperor being by
him excommunicated, his Nobles and Bishops falling from his obedience, was
driven to come bare-foote with his wife and little son, in a sharp frost to
Canusium (where the Pope then lay) and to stay at the gates of the City all
night: and though in greatest humility he entreated pardon, yet Hildebrand was
so busied (forsooth in company of his Harlots) that the Emperor Naucl. Gener
at 36.
was forced to attend three days in this grievous affliction, before he might
have access to his holiness. And when he Schardius bypomn.
came before him, he must be contented to be bound by an Oath to stand to the
Popes judgment: that at the pleasure of the Pope, before the trial of his
cause, he should be ready either to leave or to retain his Kingdom: that he
should use no Princely habit or ornament in the mean time: that he should
not undertake any part of government: that he should not exact an Oath of
Allegiance of his own subjects: that he should never revenge this wrong upon
the Pope. When he had thus hampered the Emperor with an Oath, and with such
strange and merciless conditions (such is the Popes mercy where he is Master)
behold a stratagem, a president of humility, godliness, patience, mildness
of a Pope, he set up Rodolph Duke of Sueuia against him in battle.

40. The Popes having once extorted an Oath of the Emperor, were desirous upon
such presidents to make laws: for they had no other means to build up their
Jurisdiction: therefore when as first by force they extorted some Oaths,
afterward they set such examples in their Canons, and last of all they
expounded those Oaths, which sometimes Emperors took, to be Oaths of
Allegiance to the Popes. For this purpose there is a Canon in the Clementines:
Clement the first confesses that Henry the seventh Emperor, refused the Oath
which he would have imposed upon him: and so do other stories witness, that
the Emperor refused to take that Oath. But Naucler. Gener. 43.
if we will believe Clement in his Canon, Henry afterward yielded to that Oath,
but would not acknwledge that it was an Oath Lib. 2. tit. de iuramentis.
of Allegiance, because the Emperors never swear Allegiance See the answer to
this Canon, cap. 8. by Marsilius and Occham.
to Popes, but Popes to Emperors: therefore Clement in that Canon, declares
that these (which some Emperors yielded to some Popes) were Oaths of
Allegiance. Declaramns (says he) iuramenta praedicta fidelitatis existere and
censeri debere: That is, [We declare that the foresaid Oaths are, and must be
accounted to be, Oaths of Allegiance.]

41. By this we see how highly they would advance the horns of this
Jurisdiction. And still we find this confirmed, that the Oath which is given
to the Pope, is understood an Oath of Allegiance. And to certify us yet more
fully of their meaning; it is set down not only as a law in their Decretals,
but published as an ordinary Ceremony, which al must take knowledge of. In the
book of their Ceremonies it is said that an Oath is to be ministered to all
Emperors, before their Coronation, and before they enter the territories of
the Roman Church. The Oath is there thus set down: [I will exalt the Pope,
secundum meum posse, and vitam: he shall neither loose Sacrar. ceremon lib. ^.
sect. 5. cap. 2.
member nor honor by my will, council, consent, or exhortation: In Rome I
will make no Decree, or ordination of any thing that belongs to his Holiness
without his council.] In the same book and place before cited, it is said
that Frederick the third Emperor took that Oath.

42. In this Mystery of Oaths they have proceeded so far, as to exhibit an
Oath not only to the Clergy, but to the temporal subjects of other Princes,
whom they may poison and pervert, by reconciling them to the Pope; which as it
is a practice most dangerous to them that are so taken, and ensnared as Birds
in the net of their own destruction, so is it no less pernicious for such
Princes from whose obedience these are drawn: whereby the Pope seems to
bring the question of Jurisdiction to an issue with the Princes of
Christendom, whether he shall overthrow them, or they him: for it is not
possible that both should stand up together: for what is left to Princes, if
their Crowns and the hearts of their subjects be taken from them? Or what is
it, that Princes can have a more tender feeling of, then of their Crowns, and
of the hearts of their subjects? And what is more forcible to steal away the
hearts of subjects from their Prince, then to bind them with an Oath of
Allegiance to another Prince? Then these men that have bound themselves by an
Oath to the Pope; how is it possible they should perform true Allegiance to
the King? For that the Oath which is exhibited to the Pope, is an Oath of
Allegiance and fidelity; the Popes themselves by their Decretals have assured
us. And if you will seek it out, this you shall find to be the true reason,
why Pope Paulus the fifth in his late Breues has forbidden the Recusants of
this land, to take the Oath of Allegiance to the King, because they have taken
an Oath of Allegiance to the Pope. Now it is not possible that a man should
perform Allegiance to two Sovereigns: if one be vassal to the other, happily
one may hold Allegiance to two; as for example, a Tenant may swear homage to
his Landlord, and to his Prince also: but this cannot be done to two
Sovereigns. August. Anconit. lib. de potest. Eccles. q. 22. art. 3. and 4.
And if one shall take an Oath of Allegiance to diverse Lords, it is concluded,
that if the Pope be one of those Lords, he must be obeyed before all other
whatsoever. Then it is not a Fatherhood in the Church, that the Pope strives
for, but a power over Princes, by weakening and undermining their authority,
withdrawing the hearts of subjects: exacting an Oath of Allegiance of all whom
they can reconcile: and not permitting their Conuerts to take an Oath of
Allegiance to their own Sovereign Princes. And because we find that moderate
and conscionable Papists, as Master Heart in the conference with Doctor
Reynolds, and such like, being driven to understand the cause aright, cannot
choose but justify our cause, and will not yield to the Pope, a Princehood over
the world, but only a Fatherhood of the Church: not granting to him John Heart
Epist. to the Reader, and chap. 7. diuis. 7.
a power to depose Princes: confessing also that the power which we give to
Princes, is not understood of themselves, for they, before they will understand
our cause, think that we mean to give as much to the Prince, as they do to
the Pope: Heart. chap. 10. diuis. 2
therefore we have reason to rest herein assured, that if the Jesuits entered
not into the Popes battles with a Pontifical fury, the Pope would utterly be
forsaken in this, wherein all moderate spirits have already forsaken him: or if
he would relinquish this part of the quarrel, which he maintains against
temporal Princes, happily he might make himself much more stronger then he
is, or possibly can be by following this co^rse; But as the end is not
Religion, but a worldly Principality that they shoot at, so the means which
they use, are not the courses of moderation, conscience and religion, but of
force and fury; they will have all, or loose all. Wherein the wisdom of the
Jesuits will be called into great question, for setting the Pope upon such
desperate courses, at least for being the only instruments of these new and
furious practices, which doubtless will in the end make an end of his Kingdom.

. IIII. Of Inuestitures.
43. Having spoken somewhat of the means, whereby this Jurisdiction was
sought, we are now to speak of the parts of this Jurisdiction, as we find
the same practiced at this time, when it was at his height. The parts of this
Jurisdiction so much pursued by Popes, we gather to be these: power over
Bishops, power over general Councels, Inuestitures, exemption of criminous
Clerks, the Popes power in giving laws, appellation; and last of all, a power
to depose and deprive Kings: In all which the Pope has proceeded d^ facto, to
practice that power whereunto he never had right. The two first we purpose not
to speak of here, because of the first we have spoken already, Chapt. 5. Of
the second we purpose to speak in the last Chapter; the rest are here to be
handled in Order: and first of Inuestitures.

44. The first Pope that claimed Inuestitures, was Hildebrand. William
Malmsbury says, Hic (Hildebrandu^) quod alij i^usitauerant palam e^tulit,
excommunicans electos qui Inuestituras (...) de manu Laici per annulum and
bacu^m accipere^: Malmsb. l. 3. de gestis reg.
That is [He openly by excommunication thrust out them that had taken
Inuestitures of Churches from a Lay hand, by a Anglor.
Ring and a Staff: which thing before Hild^bi and other Popes had not done.]
Whereunto all the Histories of this time give consent, declaring that the first
claim that the Popes made for Naucler. 2. gener 36. and generat. 36.
Inuestitures, was begun by Hildebrand: And because that the Popes were so
peremptory herein, raising and continuing so great and so long a contention
about this thing, therefore it is thought by many that this right of
Inuestitures was the Churches right, and consequently the Popes. And that
Emperors and Kings did usurp it by invasion and intrusion, first, privately,
and then more publicly: We are therefore to seek out this point, to whose
right Inuestitures did auncie^tly belong, whether to Kings or to Popes. Now
that they were a part of the ancient right of Emperors and Kings, it is
witnessed by Gratian: for he brings an ancient testimony which does
witness, That Pope Hadrian did entreat Charles the great to come to Rome, and
defend the affairs of the Church; and that there the Emperor held a Synod,
in which this ancient right was confirmed to him by Pope Hadrian: H^drianus
autem Di^tin. 63. cap. 22. Hadrian^s.
Papa cum vniuersa Synodo, Carolo ius and pot^statem eligendi pontificem, and
ordinandi Apostolicam sedem, dignitatem quoque patritiatus ei concesserunt: Et
Episcopos per singulas* prouincia^ ab eo Inuestituram accipere defi^iuit, vt
nisi a rege laudet^r and I^uestiatur Episcopus, a nemine consecretur. That is,
[Pope Hadrian with the whole Synod granted to Charles the right and power of
choosing the Pope, and ordaining the Sea Apostolic, and the privilege of the
Roman Nobility; and defined that Bishops through all Provinces should take
Inuestitures from him: that a Bishop should be consecrated by none, unless
he were first invested by the Emperor.] Thus much is also testified by
Sigebert and many more. The same is confirmed by Sigebert an. 774
Pope Leo, who grants this to be the right of Otho the first, as Hadrian did
to Charles: for thus says Leo: Othoni primo Leo. 7.
Te^tonicorum Regi eiusque s^ccessoribus, etc. perpetuam facultatem Did. 63.
cap. 23. In Synedo.
^ligendi successorem, and summae sedis Apostolicae Pontificem, ac per hoc
Archiepis^opos se^ Episcopos, vt ipsi ab eo Inuestituram accipiant. [To Otho
the first, Germane Emperor, and to his Successors, etc. We grant the choosing
our successor, the Bishop of the chief Apostolic Sea, and by this to choose
Archbishoppes and Bishops, that they may receive Inuestitures from him.]

45. In both these Decrees, as well of Hadrian as of Leo, there is Anathema
denounced to the violators thereof: Now Hildebrand was the first violator of
them. The things which the Popes decree in their Consistory, in a full Synod,
under Anathema, are things which must be unchangeably kept, or else there may be
errors and uncertainty in the Decrees of his Holiness, which the Jesuits will
not confess. But some of late presume, that the Popes first granted these
Inuestitures to temporal Princes, and that they have no greater right or Title
to them, then from the Popes gift: and the same authority, say they, which gave
them, may revoke this gift. We answer, this was yielded to Charles when he was
first made Emperor, as the ancient right of the Empire. This is proved first,
because in the same Distinction of Gr^tian this is often called antiqua
consuetudo, Did. 63. cap. 18. and 21.
and prisca con^uetudo: and cap. 18. Pope Stephen answers that he deferred
the consecration of a Bishop, Quod imperialem nobis, vt mos est, absolutionis
minime detulit. Epistolam. And a little after, Uestr^ solertia, imperial^, vt
prisca dictat consuetudo, percepta licentia, and nobis, quem ^dmodum vos scire
credmus* imperiali directa Epistola, tunc voluntati v^strae de hoc parebimu^.
And again: Non debet ordinari qui electus fuerit, nisi prius de^retum generale
introducatur in regiam vrbem, secundum antiquam consuetudinem, vt cum ^ius
scientia and iussion^ debeat ordina^io prouenire. Then the Bishops of Rome
themselves grant, that this was the ancient use and custom of the Empire.
The same is also confirmed from the reason that drew Charles, then from the
siege of Ticinum to that Synod, it was to have the ancient rights of the
Empire confirmed to him. Which thing is declared by diverse Histories,
especially by Theodoricus de Niem, who testifies that the reason which drew
Charles to Rome at that time was, to have the right and ancient uses of the
Empire clearly known. There was, says he, a Synod holden by Pope Hadrian,
and one hundred fifty three Bishops and Abbats, exquirentib^s Theodor. de Niem
de inuestituris.
vsus, leges, and mores eiusdem Ecclesi^ and Imperij That is: [Making search of
the uses, laws, and customs of the same Church, and of the Empire.] For all
that could be proved to be the ancient privileges of the Empire, was Charles
to have then to be confirmed to him, but then were Inuestitures confirmed to
him: therefore they were part of the ancient privileges of the Empire.

46. Hincm^rus Archbishop of Rhemes, lived and wrote about the year eight
hundred sixty. At what time without any question the ancient practice was
continued of choosing Bishops by the consent of the King. For he writing to the
Bishops of France, says of the manner of choosing Bishops. Consensu Epi^t. 4.
ad Episc. Franc. cap. 5.
principis terrae, qui res Ecclesiasticas diuino iudicio ad (...) and
defendendas suscepit, electione cleri atque plebis, quisque ad Ecelesiasticum
regime^* absque vlla venalitate ^rouehi debet. That is: [By the consent of the
Prince of the land, who by the Divine ordinance has undertaken the defense and
preservation of Ecclesiastical causes: and by the election of the Clergy and
people ought every one to be promoted to the Ecclesiastical government without
Simony.] This then is the ancient right of every Prince within his own
dominions. As the same Hincmarus Ibid.
says afterward: Principi terrae magnopere prouidendum est, ^e in his Deus
offendatur, per quos religio Christi^na consistere debet. Marsilius Patauin.
has a testimony, which if it were of doubtless Defen^or. pac. part. 2. cap.
25.
authority, might move some doubt. For he says, that Pope Simplicius did
forbid Inuestitures to be taken at a lay hand, albeit, says he, by that
decree it is manifest, that his predecessors Simplicius was Pope an. 467.
exhibiting all due and humble reverence to Princes, did use to take
Inuestitures from Laymen. It is manifest by this, that Marsilius had seen a
decree of Simplicius to this purpose. Which if it were the true decree of
Simplicius, then were Inuestitures acknowledged the Princes right, long before
Charles: but if that decree were forged, as doubtless it was, with many more:
Let the Roman forgery be acknowledged, and the Masters of that mint known.
Howsoever, it is out of question that Inuestitures were acknowledged the
ancient right of the Empire by Ha^rian: yielded to Charles; granted also by
diverse Popes, as is apparent by their express confessions, of whom some were
more ancient then Charles the great, and some since.

47. The reason why it should belong to temporal Princes is so great, that it
moved Popes, Emperors, and Kings, to enter into the greatest and hottest
contentions, the one to purchase a new title; the other to retain their
ancient right. For until the time of Constantine, we find little or no
mention at all of these things, because the Jurisdiction was then unmixed, this
power coactiue was not then practiced by the governors of the Church. But when
Constantine had enriched the Church, given place and authority to Bishops:
adding unto that power which they had, a new part of Jurisdiction, which they
had not before Cap. 5.
(as we have declared.) And by this example of Constantine, other Emperors and
Kings adding thereto; so that a temporal Lordship was added in the end to
a*Bishoprick: (which thing was first instituted by Otho the second Emperor, in
the opinion of Cardinal Cusanus. For writing of this Otho, he says: This
Otho was Emperor An. 967.
C^edidit perpetuis temporibus imperio subiectis p^cem dar^ posse, si
temporalia dominia ^am Romans Ecclesiae, quam alijs adiungerentur, Cusan. de
Cathol. concordantia. lib. 3. ca. 27.
cum certi serui^ij obseruatione, tunc enim cultus diuinus augmentaretur,
religionem in magnam reuerentiam exaltandam credidit, quando sanctissimi
Episcopi magnae potentiae alijs Principibus intermiscerentur: A mixed
Jurisdiction thus being committed to Bishops: Then was it good reason, that
Bishops having received such an external coactiue power from temporal
Princes; that these Princes should be well secured of their fidelity to them,
for so much of their authority, as they received from such Princes.

48. This example of government, the first Christian Princes set up in the
Church, drawn from the government of the Church of Jews, as we have said: so
that Christian Kings have the same power over Bishops, which the godly Kings of
Israel had over the Priests in that state. From this ground rises
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which being taken by the first Christian
Emperors, from the example of the state of Israel, was continued by them and
their successors, without: question or contradiction, till the time of
Hildebrand. For Gregory the first, speaking of this ancient right which
Emperors had in his time and before, declares that this right of theirs in
placing of Bishops, was an order so ancient, so established, that the contrary
thereof was never known or heard of in the Church. And therefore writing to
Constantia August^, he says: Salonit^ ciuitatis Episcopus me ac responsali meo
nesciente, ordinatus est: E^ facta res est, quae sub nullis anterioribus
principibus e^nit. Quod eg^ Lib. 4. regist. indict. 13. cap. 7^.
audiens, ad eundem praeuarica^orem qui (...) ordinatus est, protinus misi, vt
omn^no missarum (...) celebrar^ nullo (...) praesumeret, nisi (...) a
serenissimis Dominis (...), si h^ fieri ipsi iu^sissent. That is: [The Bishop
of S^lone, was ordained without the knowledge of my self and my Chaplain: And
that thing is done which never happened under any of the former Princes. Which
when I understood, I sent presently to that (...) which was inordinately
ordained, that he should not in any case presume to celebrate Mass, unless
first I might understand of my most serene Lords (the Emperors) whither they
commanded this.] Which testimony ^is also cited Des^. 63. to prove that the
Emperors ought to choose Bishops, as Hadrian acknowledged the right to Charles,
and L^o to Otho. Gregory says, that the Bishop who i^truded upon that Church
not only without his knowledge, but also without the consent of the Emperor,
should not be suffered to exercise his function, before that he might
understand whether the Bishop had the Empero^s consent herein: he says also,
that this practice of intruding without the Emperors consent, was a thing
never practiced under any Prince before that time. Facta res est quae sub
nullis anterioribus principibus euenit. For that these words are referred to
that intrusion without the Emperors knowledge, it is evident, because he says
not that this was never practiced under any Pope, but not practiced under any
Prince; and that he will send to the Prince, to know whether the Prince
commanded this thing: and therefore he calls him a Praeuaricator that
presumed to cross this ancient right of Princes.

Then he condemns a number of his successors for Pr^uaricators. Gregory knew
well what he wrote, having the perfect Register of things of this kind, done
between the time of Constantine, and his time; therefore his testimony makes
fair and full evidence, that this was the right of Christian Magistrates, long
before Pope Hadrian did yield it to Charles. The same thing is also witnessed
by the twelfth Toletan Counsel, Council. Tolet. 12. cap. 6.
which was h^ld in the time of Pope Agatho in the year six hundred and
eighty, that is long before that time wherein Hadrian yielded this right to
Charles, as the old right of the Empire.

49. But Cardinal Baroniu^ stricken with a strange fury in this question of
Inuestitures, ventureth upon a new and desperate course, denies all
Antiquities, and brings a more shameless handling to these things, then ever
was brought by any man before him: He denies the whole, with all the parts of
it, that is reported of Hadrian yielding this to Charles: but most of all he
breaks all rules of patience and moderation against Sigebert, because among
many, he also has reported this Baron. Annal. an. 774.
Story: Sige^ert (says he) like an Impostor, first devised and forged this
tale, that Pope Hadrian yielded Inuestitures to Charles; and this he wrote in
the favor of a s^hismaticall Emperor. Why Baronius should put upon Sige^ert
Imposture and subornation, we see no reason; unless it be that he thinks,
that if (...) could be put to silence herein, there could no proof appear in
all Antiquity for Inuestitures. If this be^ his meaning, he is much dec^iued:
for before this word Inuestiture was in use, the Princes right was always
acknowledged. Long before Sigebert, the twelfth Council of Toledo remembered
this thing, as we have declared: and before that Council Hincmarus; and before
Hincmarus, Gregory the first witnesses, that it was a custom in his time so
ancient, that the contrary had never been heard of under any Christian
Princes. Then if we should ad^it that Sigebert had been silent, yet the right
of Princes in this thing, is sufficiently proved against the Pope.

50. But let us hear what the Cardinal can say for himself: We must needs
examine his proofs, because diverse other do rest upon his judgment, and
deliver it peremptorily, that Sigebert has devised this tale, and that there
was no such thing in truth. Because the Discourse of Baronius is long, I will
gather his reasons, and will leave out nothing material, that he has brought
for himself. First he tells the Reader, that when he has heard all the
matter, he will be forced to cry out, O Scelus, O impostura* O Frau^. I suppose
that this will prove true in the end, that when the Reader has heard all, he
will exclaim, O villainy, O k^auerie, O cousenage: But why? For, says (...) [
Sigebert perceiving that he could not prove this by former Historiographers,
what did he? Forsooth in the favor of a schismatic Emperor, who challenged
Inuestitures, he thrust into his Chronography by fraud these words: Postea
rediens Carolus, Papiam c^pit, it erumque Roman redijt, Sy^odumque constituit
cum Hadriano Papa, alijsque 15* 3. religiosis Episcopis and abbatibus, in qua
Hadrianus Papa cum vniuersa Synodo tradidi^ ^i ^us eligendi pontisicem and
ordinandi s^dem Apostolicam, dignitatemque patritiatus: Insuper Archiepiscopos,
Episcopos per singulas prouincias ab eo inuestituram accipere defini^it, vt
^isi a rege laudetur and Inuestiatur, a nemine consecretur.] Is it any rea son
that a man who for almost five hundred years has always been reputed an
honest man, should now be called by a passionate Cardinal a Knave? Was there
ever any man before Baronius that put this imputation upon Sigebert? His memory
in all ages since he wrote has been famous for his learning, gravity,
wisdom, and integrity: Sigebertus borum temporum s^riptor (says A^entinus
Auenti^. lib. 5.
speaking of those times wherein he wrote) vir alioquin etiam vt quisq^ illa
tempest^te esse poterat, omnis diuini hum^nique i^ris consult^ssimus. That is [
Sigeb^rt a writer of these times, a man most skillful in all humane and divine
Law, as any other whatsoever that could be found in that time.] Then it is not
likely that he should now be found dishonest* that in so many ages has passed
for an honest man: And if the testimony of others that witness with him the
same thing, be sufficient to clear him, he will be cleared by a great Jury,
and a firm verdict.

51. Frosard writing the French Story, and collecting the actions of Charles
the great, out of the ancient Stories of that nation (and where can the actions
of the French Kings be better Frosard. i^ Charlemain. fol. 80.
known, then by the Stories of that nation?) says thus [ Charles came to Rome
at the request of the Pope, and there kept Easter. And before he went away
there was a Council of one hundred, fifty and three Bishops and Abbots:
there Pope Hadrian by the consent of all the Council, gave him the honor to
choose the Pope, etc. and that Archbishoppes and Bishops should hold and have
their Seas by him.] Functius has Funct. comm. A^ 772.
the same story. Huldericus Mutius witnesses as much. Sabellicus says,
Hadriano autore decretum vt Carolus rex qui op^ime Mutius l. ^e Germanorum
morib. 7.
esset de Romana (...) and Italia meritus, Pontificem l^geret, etc. Par illi
potesta^ de patritiat^ dando, de Episcopis prouinciatim Sabel. Ennead. 8. l. 8.
eligendis, vt omnia demum irrita haberentur, nisi quae Carolus probasset.
Walthramu^ Bishop of Naumburg says, Hadrianus Papa collaudantibus Romany
and pl^na Synodo etc. Carolo M. and VValthram. l. de Inuestitur. Episc.
eius successoribus etc. sub anathemate concessi^ patr^tiatum and inuestituras.

(...). I must entreat the Readers patience. For I am forced to cite these
witnesses only for the justifying of Sigebert, which otherwise might have been
spared; if Baroni^s had not brought Sigebert, as it were to hold up his hand
at the bar: irreverently raking up the ashes of the dead, and disquieting the
grave of a man that ^as buried with honor, and has res^ed so many ages
without disturbance, until the profane hands of Baromus light upon his grave.
It would be a matter of just reproof and reprehension in us, not to be as
courteous to the dead, as they are cruel against them: not to be a^ careful
for preserving antiquities, as they are to deface all a^cient monuments that
stand against them: not to be as resolute for the truth, as they are impudent
to maintain f^lshood. I must therefore proceed in producing witnesses, who
lived some since that time, and some before: that (...) testimony may be
justified, his honesty cleared: and that the world may see by what strong
faction and passion, Histories are now written to defend the Popes Jurisdiction
by defacing all ancient records that stand against it. (...) de Lupold de iure
Regni and Imper. ca. 1.
Babenberg has written a book, de i^re Reg^i and Imperij Rom^ni, in which he
has the same story, that Charles came into Italy at the request of Pope
Hadrian, and that H^drian granted inuestitures Fascicul. tempor. an. 7^4.
to Charles in a Synod held at Rome. ^asciculus temporum written by
Rollewinkins Warner, says likewise of H^drian: Iste Hadrianus etc* i^s Carolo
super ordinatione sedis Apostol^ and institutione Episcoporu^, Abbatum, etc. in
(...) al^ concilio dedit. Marsilius Pataui^s in diverse places does witness the
same Mars^l. de tranflat. Imperij.
thing, but more expressly in his book d^ translatione Imperij, where he says
thus: Tune Hadrianus benefi^ijs temporalibus dicti Principis allectus, 153
Episcoporum and Abbat^m concilium R^ma congregauit ibique cum vniuersa Sy^odo
dedit ei ius, ^c. And so declares the same thing, that inuesti^res were
confirmed to Rodulph. de Col^mna lib. de translat. Imp. Hartman. Shedell.
Ch^rles. Rodulohus de Colum^ writes a book of the same argument, wherein he
witnesses the same thing. The Story which is called Registrum mundi, written
by Hartm^s Shedell, says that Charles went from the siege of Pauy to Rome.
Pascha in Mat. Palmer. an. 776.
vrbe celebrare constituit, assumptis se^um (...) and Abbatibu^ etc. inde
Synodum habuit. Mat Palmerius speaks to the same Ranulph. Polycron. lib. 5.
ca. 6.
purpose. Ranulphus in his Polychronicon says likewise, Hadrianus concilium
(...) in vrbe Roma cum Cl. patribus (...) Martini Chronic. an. 779. extat Ms in
bibliothec: Mertone^sis Collegij Oxon.
Ca^lo cui concessum est tunc ius in^lectione Romans Pontificis, and ordinandi
sedem Apost^licam, etc. To the same purpose speaks Martinus, who is entitled
Pap^ Primarius Capellanus. (...) in speculo Historiali has the same narration
at full, of the Vincent. in Speculo Hist. lib. 23. ^a. 168.
siege of Papia, of Charles his coming to Rome, of the privileges granted to
Charles by Pope Hadrian in a council, among which inuestitures are expressly
named.

53. Nauclerus has the same Story at large, declaring that Naucler. volum. 2.
Gener. 23.
Pope Hadria^ held a council of one hundred and fifty three Bishops and Abbats,
by which Synod inuestitures were yielded to Charles. Upon which grant, says
he, the French Kings to this day hold the same privileges in diverse Provinces,
and namely in Prouincijs Ce^omanensi Rotomagensi and R^mensi. What greater
evidence can we seek to prove that this thing was done, then such confirmation
from such witnesses, and from such privileges of the kingdom of France, that
in the midst of Popery continued from that first privilege. The same Author
witnesses, Naucle. g^er. 38.
that when Henry the fifth Emperor came to Rome to appease this controversy,
for Inuestitures between the Empire and the Papacy, which was first raised by
Hildebrand: that the Emperor entreated no more, then that which in public
records was continued the custom from Charles the great. Imperator, says he,
volens vti consuetudine and authoritate praedecessorum suorum, petebat sibi
seruari ea quae pri^ilegijs Carolo M. and successoribus in Imperio iam per 300
annos and amplius concessa and obseruata fu^runt. Ex quibus priuilegijs licite
per (...) ann^li, and virgae Episcopatus and Abbatias conferebant. [The
Emperor desi^ous to use the custom and authority of his predeces^ours,
required that those privileges should be reserved for him which were granted
to Charles the great, and to his successors in the Empire, and observed now
for 300 years and more. By which privileges it was lawful for the E^perours
to confer Bishoprics and Abbacies, by Inuestiture of a ring and a sta^e.]
When the Emperor did show these privileges, and claimed nothing but that
which by public records was confirmed to him: did any man then object that
Sigebert had corrupted those evidences? When the Pope nor no man for him would
or could plead this corruption then, it is too late and too gross for
Cardinal Baronius now to bring that plea. Against these known privileges of
the Empire, Pope Paschalis at that time pleaded nothing but Synodale decretum,
says mine Author: a late decree Naucler. ibid.
that the Pope himself had made.

54. Then we have witnesses of all sorts, of all times since Sigebert. But if
Baronius sit as Judge in this cause, he will say all these are not able to move
him. For all these wrote since the time of Sigebert, and had the narration from
him, who by fraud and imposture put it into his Chronography, as he is also
charged to put the History of Pope Ioane a woman into his book. And I am
persuaded that the Cardinal is more passionate in this particular against
Sigebert, because he recites also the Story of Pope Ioane. For if they can
convince him of a lie in any one thing, his report may be justly weakened for
other things. For Pope Ioanes matters I meddle not, I leave them to him who has
M. Cook.
of late learnedly and painfully handled the same. I am now to clear Sigebert
from forgery in this point of Inuestitures. And because Baronius does
peremptorily assure us, that no man before Sigebert did write it: we are to
search the times before him. A man would think that the Cardinal so skillful in
Story as Baronius is taken to be, affirming so confidently that before Sigebert
none wrote thus: and thereupon charging Sigebert of forgery (the most heinous
crime that can be committed by a writer of records) should be sure of one of
these two things, that either in truth no Story before Sigebert has mentioned
this; or if any have done it, to expunge them so, that the truth might never
come to knowledge. And to say the truth, all his confidence (as likewise all
the confidence of that side) consists in this new found unblessed devise of
expunging ancient Authors. And yet for all their expurgatoriall tables and
shameless shifts, this truth will not be hid. We must therefore declare, who
has written the same thing before Sigebert.

55. First, we produce Gratian Did. 63. ca. 22. who records the lame thing,
as before we declared. Nay, says Baronius, Gratian wrote after Sigebert, and
has transcribed this narration word for word out of Sigebert. That Gratian
wrote after him, it is not altogether so clear, for there is some doubt of the
time when Gratian wrote. And if he wrote after him, it was not long after, for
they lived together in one time. And Gratian so much respecting the Popes
authority as he does, so well read in antiquities as he was, is very unlikely
to take a tale from Sigebert, which he saw not confirmed by ancient writings,
or to receive a slight report from one of his own time, and one of the Popes
enemies, (as Baronius would make Sigebert.) But where he says, that Gratian
transcribed this from Sigebert, this we utterly deny: for that which Gratian
says hereof, if it be compared with that which Sigebert writes, cannot
appear transcribed, because there are diverse words in the one narration, which
are not in the other. Moreover, Gratian cites another Author for it then
Sigebert. Let Baronius be Judge, and Gratian the witness. Gratian cites the
Ecclesiastical History for this narration, thus: Ex Historia Ecclesiastica,
and then he sets down the Story. But Sigebert wrote no Ecclesiastical
Story: therefore Gratian does not transcribe this word for word out of
Sigebert. The proposition is evident in all Editions of Gratian, yea even in
the Edition of Gregory the thirteenth, which the same Gregory commands to be
preserved without addition or change in any thing. Ne cuiquam liceat Gregorius
13.
eidem operi quicquam addere vel immutare, vel inuertere, nullaue Pr^fat. ad
corpus i^ris Canon.
interpretamenta adiungere, sed prout in hac nostra vrbe Roma nunc impressum
fuit, semper and perpetuo integrum, and incorruptum conseruetur. In this
Edition, that is with such caution and authority set forth, this place of
Gratian is cited, out of the Ecclesiastical Story. Now that Sigebert wrote no
Ecclesiastical History, all men know his book is entitled thus, Sigeberti
(...) Chronographia. Baronius acknowledges so much, and calls it Sigeberts
Chronography. Neither was it his purpose to write an Ecclesiastical History,
but a short and very succinct Chronography: neither has it ever been taken
and reputed for an Ecclesiastical History. Then Gratian citing an
Ecclesiastical History, cites not Sigebert, but some other. And this is
enough to clear the matter against Baronius, that Gratian did not transcribe
it from Sigebert.

56. From whom then did Gratian transcribe it? I say Baronius is refuted,
though I could not answer this question. But if we must answer, and make a
further search: I answer, that Gratian cyted this assuredly from Anastasius
Bibliothecarius; who wrote the story of the Church, and the Popes lives.
Anastasius is extant in Print, A^. one thousand, six hundred and two,
Moguntiae. This was long after that Baronius had undertaken, that none before
Sigebert wrote thus. In this Edition of Anastasius there are diverse references
in the Margent to the Annals of Baronius: so that we are not to look for any
help from this Edition; Baronius having done his lust upon it, and so many
eyes watching, and hands working, to see that nothing may come to light, which
may disprove that which Baronius has once with such confidence undertaken. But
these works of darkness, though never so cautelously handled, will be found
out, and bring shame upon the workers. For Platin. Pascal. 1.
Platina witnesses that Anastasius Bibliothecarius wrote this, that Pope
Hadrian yielded this right to Charles the great. His words are these:
Bibliothecarius scribit Lodouicum liberam eligendorum Episcoporum potestatem
Paschali (...), cum antea ^a quoque in re Imperatores consulerentur: quam
potestatem ab Hadriano Pontifice Carolo concessam, idem author refert. That is,
[ Bibliothecarius writes that Lodouic granted to Pascalis the free choice of
Bishops, when as before that time the consent of the Emperors was required
in this thing: which power the same author Bibliothecarius declares that Pope
Hadrian gave to Charles.] Then we are certified that Anastasius wrote it. And
though this late Printed Anastasius have it not, yet that does not impair our
cause, but our adversaries: and does testify before God, Angels and men, the
execrable impiety of them who like Giants fight against God, and truth,
expunging and defacing ancient Records. Then Platina assures us that
Anastasius wrote it, and therefore Sigebert was not the first reporter of it.

57. Theodoricus de Niem does also witness, that this same narration was
transcribed by him, out of an ancient Copy written so long before his time,
that for age the Books and places where they were kept were almost consumed,
hac scripta reperiuntur (says he) i^ antiquissimis Bibliothecis, and poene
praenimia Theodoric. de Niem.
vetustate, consumptis: In which Books he found it written thus: Carolus rex
ingressus Italiam, Papiam obsedit etc. Post haec reuersus est Romam, vbi
constituta est sancta Synodu^ a beato Papa Hadriano in Palati^ Lateranensi,
videlicet in Ecclesia sancti Saluatoris, qua reuerendissi^e celebrata est ab
153. viris religiosis Episcopis, abbatibus etc. ab vniuersis regionibus and
ordinibus almae vrbi^, ^ cuncto etiam clero huius sanctae Romans Ecclesiae,
exquirentibus usus leges, and ^res eiusdem Ecclesi^ and imperij: Where the same
testimony for Inuestitures follows at large. This man's Theodoricus de Niem
styled Apostolicus scriptor by Cuspinian. Fred. 1.
credit has not been called in question, for ought that I could find: and
there can be no reason to except against him, being the Popes Register, or in
some chief place under him for writing. And the better to declare the truth
and fidelity of this man, it is worth the observing, that he has with exact
care recorded where he found these antiquities, naming the place where these
books might have been seen of all men, at that tim^ when he wrote, for
before his book he writes thus: Incipit The book is extant in the Library of
Queens College, Oxon.
descriptio de Inuestitura Episcopatuum regum Teutonicorum ex quodam
antiquissim^ libro Florentino per me Theodoricum de Niem Lit^rarum
Apostolicarum scriptorem and abbreuiatorem reperto, dum Dominus Papa Johannes
23. illi^ cum curia sua resideret, fide liter extracta, and sequitur de verbo
ad verbum prout in dicto libro videbatur scriptum.

58. This man then living in the time of John the three and twentieth, being
the Popes Register or Secretary, or in some such office, deals faithfully:
For this extreme impudency was not then known in the world, which is now so
much practiced in the Court of Rome. We have also declared from the testimony
of Nauclorus (whom John Reuclin, a man so much reverenced for learning in his
time, did so much reverence for fidelity, and diligence, as appears by that
Preface which the same Reuclin has set before Nauclers history) that this
question of the Emperors right for Inuestitures came to a hearing and
examination between Henry the fifth Emperor, and Pope Paschalis the second,
where the Emperor showed records, proouing for three hundred years before his
time, the custom of Inuestitures to have been continued from Charles the
great. On the other side for the Pope, there could nothing be showed, but
Synodale decretum: Some decree which Hildebrand or some Pope after him did
make. Moreover upon that Canon of Gratian, which before we cyted there is
reference to Iuo Carnotensis, Lib. 8. de Election. Romans Pont. So that it
seems that Iuo also wrote this before Gratian. Howsoever it be, we have
witnesses enough to prove Sigebert an honest man, and yet have we just cause to
exclaim: O s^lus, O impostura, O fraus! For when we find the mouth of
antiquity stopped, the testimonies of approved writers partly rejected as
impostures, only because they make against the Popes Jurisdiction: partly
expunged by sacrilegious hands, and malicious and cruel hearts, that the truth
by all means may be defaced, and falsehood adored and maintained by a
generation, framed and fashioned to vanity and untruth; Apoc. 9.
appearing with the countenance and hair of women, that is, of Harlots for
their impudency, with the teeth of Lions for their cruelty, with the tails of
Scorpions, for their stinging and expunging of ancient Authors, leaning the
Marks of their poisoned strokes in all books which they handle: have we not
then just cause to exclaim, O profound villainy, O admirable cousenage, O
Antichristian imposture, drawn from the depth of Satan's policies! And what
could make Baronius so confident to assure that none before Sigebert wrote
thus; but a sure confidence and repose in the expunging of Anastasius? And yet
has he not so expunged that Author, but that the true marks of that
Narration remain still in his book, as presently we shall declare. But behold
into what wretched times we are now fallen: for we cannot write for the truth
without fears, least we should by conuincing falsehood give an opportunity to
falsifiers to work more falsely. For who can warrant us that this which we have
produced, shall not hereafter be clean expunged out of these Authors, that no
memory in antiquity may remain against them? And when they have corrupted all
ancient Records, and their posterity shall triumph in the wickedness of
their Fathers; then our hope is that Christ from heaven will show himself, and
will not suffer that Kingdom long to endure, which stands up by no other
supporters then falsehood and ungodliness. These outrageous practices against
the truth, cannot but raise up the spirits of GODS children, to an earnest
longing and expectation of Christ's coming to deliver his truth, out of this
captivity and filthy prison wherein unrighteous men seek to hold it down
suppressed.

59. Baronius proceeds: and tells us that Eginhardus says, that Charles
came but four times to Rome, then Baronius labors to prove, that this thing
could not be done at any of those times. We answer; It is enough for our
purpose if Charles came but once to Rome: for all those Authors which I have
cyted do prove, that this was done in his first journey to Rome, before he
went to the Saxon wars. And if he thinks reason to deny the truth of this
Narration, because Eginhardus does not mention it: I answer, Eginhardus writes
very succinctly, and had no purpose to record all particulars. For he does not
mention that Charles the great did erect the University of Paris by the help
of Al^win an English man, and John Mailrose a Scottish man, and yet this is
recorded by others, whose credit is nothing impaired by the silence of
Eginhardus. Baronius does also observe, that all that wrote before him, did not
refel Sigebert for an Impostor, but only say that those things were granted by
Hadrian, but revoked by other. We answer, it had been much more for his
credit, if he also had kept the same moderation, which all before him have
done. But now for an especial service to the Pope, he has by his own
confession pulled up an old hedge, which no man stirred before him, and
therefore it is no marvel if a Serpent bite him: and Eccles. 10. 8.
that in stead of a grave and faithful Historiographer, he purchase the just
imputation of a factious writer, stuffed with invectiues, betraying, professed
partiality, an evil heart, a corrupt and pernicious resolution, to deface all
antiquity that stands against his purposes.

60. But he proceeds, and asks how this Council should be called of a
sudden? And whence should so many Bishops and Abbots be so soon gotten
together? A goodly question. These trifling objections serve to no other end,
but to help to convince him, that dare contradict so many witnesses with so
small show of reason. But as in the examination of thieves and Felons many
things fall from themselves at unawares, by which their falsehood is convicted,
so by this question he draws an inevitable conviction upon himself: for
Charles purposing to hold a Council, brought these Bishops and Abbots with
him to Rome. And thus Anastasius witnesses; for they have left such marks in
the Printed Anastasius, as do plainly show wh^re he was stunge with the
Scorpions tail. For thus says this printed Anastasius: Dumper sex mensium
spatium ipse Francoru^ Rex Papia demoraretur, in obsidione ipsius ci^itatis,
magnum Anastas. Biblioth. ad An. 772.
desiderium habens ad limina Apostolorum approperandi etc. Tunt abstollens
secum diu^ sos Episeopos and Abbates, and iudices etc Cum pluribus exercuibus
Romam per Thusciae parts proper auit. That is [Whilst Charles stayed six
months in the siege of Pauie, having a great desire to approach to the doors
of the Apostles, etc. Then taking with him diverse Bishops, and Abbots, and
Judges, etc. He came: by the parts of T^uscia with many Armies to Rome.] Where
we see, that they who expunged Anastasius (as Thieves use to do in the like
case) have left such marks behind them, as are sufficient to convince them:
For to what end did Charles bring so many Bishops, and Abbots, and Judges with
him to Rome? This shows evidently that he had a purpose to hold a Council.
And because Baro^ius asks this question, whence came so many Bishops and
Abbots of a sudden? We can soon answer him: Anastasius witnesses, that
Charles brought them with him, as purposing this thing aforehand. But we ask
him a question which he will never assoile us, Why did Charles bring so many
Bishops and Abbots to Rome? Anastasius witnesses, that he brought a number
of Bishops and Abbots to Rome: so that either Bar^ius and the Expurgatours
should have spared Anastasius, and not expunged that which he had written of
the holding of this Council, or this should have been also expunged, which he
writes of the preparation of that Council. Again these words which are left
in Bibliotheoarius, of Charles his coming from Pauy, do further convince
Baronius, and detect the purpose offalsifying: for Baronius will not admit that
Charles came to Rome at this time from Pauie, because Eginhardus faith, he was
but four times at Rome, and this could not be done at his first journey,
because from the expugnation of Pauie, he went presently to the Saxon wars:
and thus he proceeds, vexing his reader with wind, and words lighter then
wind. Though he be deeply to be charged for this light and vain reasoning,
yet his great and gross fault wherein he was so grossly ouerseene, is, that
in cutting Anastasius, he cut not deep enough: For Anastasius in the words
that are left, does expressly declare, that Charles came from the siege of Pauie
to Rome, which Baronius denies and that he brought many Bishops and Abbots
with him. Thus both by cutting out of Anastasius, that which Platina witnesses
he wrote, and by leaving in Anastasius that which does prove so much, and
testify their falsehood: they are convinced to be corrupters of antiquities,
and new forgers of novelties.

61. Baronius perceiving that all this that he has said will not help him,
unless he proceed further to refute likewise all that Gratian says in the
next Canon, In Synodo: goes on, and undertakes also to refute it: For what
other thing can he do, that has once broken the bounds of modesty and
moderation, but proceed to a resolution in impudency? Gratian cyteth the Canon
of Pope Leo, who gave Inuestitures to Otho as Hadrian did to Charles. Baronius
denies that Pope Leo wrote so, as Gratian cyteth him: what authority can be
produced to satisfy these men? We bring the testimonies of Popes, we bring
them cyted by such as were the greatest maintainers of the Popes Jurisdiction,
and yet it will not satisfy: Why? No reason is brought, but it stands not
with the liking of the Court of Rome in these days. He says, that the name of
Inuestitures was not known in that age, wherein Charles lived: But how does he
prove that? No proof is brought: and what need he bring any proof, seeing
there are many that are ready, to take all that he says without proof?
Concerning the name of inuestitures, the Ciuilians are herein resolved, and
peremptory, that it came from the Laws of the Lumbards, as did also all the
Laws, De feudis. For of these things there is nothing found in the ancient
Roman Laws, nor in the later Imperial Laws, until the government of the
Lumbards was raised. And therefore it is certain, that before the government
of the Lumbards was erected in Italy, this word Inuestiture, can not be proved
to have been in use. But seeing by the Lumbards it came in, and the Lumbards
were at their highest before, and in the time of Charles the great (for they
were overthrown by Charles, after that they had reigned two hundred and four
years in Italy, and had possessed all Italy in a manner, except only Palmerius
An. 776.
the City of Rome, as diverse Authors do witness) it can not Naucler. gener.
23.
be chosen but that in the time of Charles this word was in use. And when we
have of the one side good reason, the testimony of histories, the judgment of
Lawyers, concurring with the express words of the Popes Canons which use the
same word: shall it be thought a sufficient refutation on the other side, to
say the word was not then used, and bring no reason thereof? Then this thing
was used in Charles his time, and the name of Inuestitures known. The same
thing was used long before Charles his time, but not under the name of
Inuestitures. This name, and the ceremony of a staff and a ring came in by
the Lumbards. Then whether we consider the thing without this new name and
ceremony, or with it: we find it always the Princes right. Thus Sigebert is
justified, the truth tried, and the Knave known.

62. Now to come to the Kings of England, as their authority was no less then
the authority of other Princes in their Kingdoms, so more we seek not. And
therefore whereas a certain Catholic divine, tells us, that Henry the
first challenged Answer to the fifth part of Reports.
Inuestitures, as used by his father and brother before him, whereof yet (says
he) we find no express proof, or example in any of our Histories, that they
had used them, much less that they were lawfully granted: how strange is this
dealing? beseeming none but such as he is. For is not this proof good and
sufficient, when the King chalengeth no more, then that which was in fresh
memory and use in his brothers days, and fathers? When we find so many
testimonies of Story, of Councels, of Popes, that there was no other right of
giving Inuestitures known through Christendom, then the right of Princes:
shall base persons quarrel the testimony of a King, founded upon such
proofs? Let the world judge of the learning of him who writing he knows not
what, will tell us that the sense, devotion, and judgment of the world, was
never to the contrary: fancying conclusions like a dreamer, not proving like a
disputer. Now touching the particular of Henry the first, it is certain that
he began no new custom, but Pope Paschalis the second, began to debar him
from that ancient custom and right, which he and his Elders had always used.

63. For thus Roger Houeden reports: In the year of Houeden. Henric. 1.
Christ one thousand one hundred and three, a great dissension grew between
King Henry and Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury: because the Archbishop would
not consent that the King should give Inuestitures of Churches. Neither would
he consecrate those Bishops to whom the King gave them. Because the Pope had
forbid him and all the rest to do so. Quia Apostolicus (says he) sibi and
omnibus interdixerat. And again he says: Quibusdam ad hoc nitentibus, vt Rex
eas faceret more patri^ and fratris sui, non iuxta praeceptum and obedientiam
Apostoliei. [Because the Pope had forbidden him and the rest, etc. Some
persuaded that the king would make Inuestitures after the custom of his father
and brother: and not according to the precept and obedience of the Pope.] Where
note, that it is not the Kings allegation, that this was his fathers, and
brothers right; but it is a truth acknowledged by Ho^eden, maintained by the
Barons, denied by none. Against which, there was nothing then known, but only
the new Precept of Pope Paschalis. The same Author declares also, that these
customs and prerogatives were not imposed by the King, but sought out with
exact care and diligence by the Bishops and Barons jointly. For speaking of
these customs in the time of Henry the second, he records an Epistle which
the Bishops of the Province of Canterbury wrote to Thomas 'Becket, wherein they
testify thus much: Ne super his Rog. Houeden. Henric. 2.
contentionis funis tra^eretur in posterum, noticie publica delegari, ad
iuratis itaque per sidem, and per eam quae in Deum spes est, maioribus natu
Episcopis, alijsque Regni maioribus, retroacti temporis insinuato statu,
dignitates requisitae palam prolatae sunt, and summor^ in Regno virorum
testimonijs propalatae. [Least this occasion of contention should proceed any
farther hereafter, it was brought to public trial. Therefore the most
ancient Bishops, and other Barons of the Kingdom, took an Oath by their
faith, and by that hope which they have in God to make a true search, whereupon
looking into the times past, the privileges of the Kingdom were sought out,
and published, and divulged by the testimonies of the greatest persons in the
Kingdom.] Then these customs and ancient privileges of the Kings, were
sought out by the grauest, and most learned of the Bishops and Barons: they
were sworn to deliver the truth, as they should find it in the ancient
Records of the land. After all these express proofs a masked Roman
Catholic tells us, that no proof hereof is found in all our Stories. If
this man's Catholic divinity were examined (as when opportunity serves it
shall be) it will appear, that it consists of extreme confidence and
impudency patched up with a few smooth words, without knowledge of Divinity,
or of solid learning.

64. After this Calixtus held a council at Rhemes, wherein he condemned all
Inuestitures taken from a lay hand. With this Pope, Henry the second King of
England, met in conference at Gisars in France. The King pressed the Pope,
that he might no^ be disquieted in his ancient right, that the ancient Laws
and customs of his Kingdom, might be kept inviolable, as in the time of his
progenitors they were. The Pope having nothing to say against these ancient
customs, drew the King into another matter, entreating the Kings favor for
Thurstinus Archbishop of York, that he might be restored to his place, for the
King had deprived him. The King answered, that he had sworn the contrary. The
Pope replied; but I am Pope, and if you will do as I bid you, I will absolve
you from your Oath. Ego Apostolicus sum, and sifeceris quod ego postulo, ab
Houed. Henric. 2.
hac fidei sponsione te absoluam. This was the old practice of abusing Kings.
And it was not much to be meruailed, if some kings were then blinded, when they
were led by such guides. Houeden does likewise declare, that the Decrees of
that Council of Rhemes, were sent to the Emperor Henry. The Emperors answer
was: Nihil in his se praetermissurum quod sui iuris esset, This was Henry the
fifth.
suorumque sibi contulit antiqua consuetudo progenitorum. That is: [That he
would loose no part of that his right, which the ancient custom of his
progenitors had conferred upon him.] And afterward, says Houeden, other
things he granted; Ultimum vero, scilicet Inuestituram rerum Ecclesiasticarum,
concedere noluit. [The last thing, that is to say Inuestitures of
Ecclesiastical dignities, he would in no case grant.] Then it appears that
antiquity, custom, and the right of their progenitors stood for the Princes of
this age, and against them was nothing but the bare will, and new commandment
of the present Popes, herein falling away not only from the ancient use
before, but from the sense, knowledge, confession and judgment of the ancient
Popes.

65. I stay the longer upon this point, and am more willing to search the truth
herein, because it is a matter of especial importance concerning this question
of Jurisdiction, which we seek to know. For Robert Persons the masked
Catholic divine confesses in effect thus much, that if we can prove that
Inuestitures belong to temporal Princes, we have in his judgment
questionless obtained the cause for which we strive. Let Answer to the fifth
part of Reports, page 171.
me set down his own words. [Three things, says he, do concur in making of
a Bishop by divine and Canon law, to wit, election, confirmation, and
consecration. The first, to wit election, when it is justly made, does give
right to the elected to pretend the second and third, etc. Yet can he not upon
his only Election, exercise any part of his office of a Bishop either in
Jurisdiction or order. But when he has the second part which is confirmation,
and induction to the benefice, which is properly called Inuestiture; then has
he Jurisdiction upon those people, and may exercise the Acts thereof by
visiting, punishing, or the like: but not the Acts of order, until he have
consecration also, that is to say, he cannot make Priests, nor administer the
Sacrament of confirmation, etc. And a little after he says: the second which
is confirmation and giving of Jurisdiction, must only proceed from him, that
is the fountain of all spiritual Jurisdiction under Christ, which is the
Bishop of Rome, or some Metropolitan or Bishop under him, that has
authority and Commission from him. Thus much the Catholic Divine.]

66. I forgive many particular escapes in this short discourse, not spending
time in the examination of by-points, I would meet him there, where he
thinks himself strongest. For where he says, confirmation, which also he
calls induction, or which properly, as he grants, may be called
Inuestiture, gives Jurisdiction: this we yield. And then here we join issue
with old Sir Robert, in that part of his Collection, whereon he lays his
greatest hold; and are content to try the whole The issue of the quest. of
Inuestitures.
cause thereon: whether Inuestiture, which by his confession, and the doctrine
of his Church, and the consent of all, gives Jurisdiction, belong of ancient
right to the Pope, or to temporal Princes. If he be able to prove by any
ancient, full, clear, unsuspected witness, that the Popes within the space
of the first thousand years, or before Hildebrand, either had that right, or
did practice, or so much as challenge that right: I will for my part yield the
cause, and will confess mine error, if thus much be evidently euicted. But
seeing we have proved by undoubted Histories, by the consent of Popes
themselves, by the Decrees established in Councels, that this was an ancient
right of temporal Princes, called Prisca consuetudo by Pope Stephen, Antiqua
consuetudo by another: that the contrary was never heard of under any
Christian Prince, confessed by Gregory the first: Then has he reason either to
yield us the cause wholly, or to revoke his words again, that Inuestiture
gives Jurisdiction.

67. Then the right of Inuestitures standing as the ancient right of our
Kings, being never questioned in Christendom, before the time of Pope Gregory
the seventh, never questioned in this land before the time of Henry the first,
that King had reason to plead the use of his father and brother for himself;
because it being a thing quietly possessed by them, was, out of doubt,
peaceably inioyed before them, because before them the Popes never made title
thereto. Now concerning the tumults, wars, blood, and confusion in
Christendom, both in the Church and temporal states, which for this quarrel
the Popes procured, for fifty years together, as Malmsbury witnesses; of
this it is not my purpose to speak. It is enough for me to Malmsb. Hen. 1^
open the time when it began, and before which time it was never challenged by
any Pope, and to declare that the Popes late practice is condemned by the
Judgment of the ancient Church.

. V. Exemption of criminous Clerks.
68. Our purpose being to take a survey of that Jurisdiction which we find
challenged by Popes, at and somewhat after the time of the Conquest of England,
at what time the Popes power was at the highest: we are to consider in the next
place Exemption of criminous Clerks; for as Inuestiture of Bishops began
then to be claimed, so about these times crept exemption of the Popes Clerks,
which is taken to be another part of this Jurisdiction. My purpose is not to
speak of lawful exemption of the Clergy: for both Divine and humane laws
approve such immunities, without which, how could the Clergy attend upon their
heavenly business? These immunities which Emperors and Princes have given to
the Church, the Church ought to enjoy without disturbance, and to withdraw such
immunities, were high sacrilege and impiety against God and his Church. But
the question is not of these immunities which Christian Kings have given to the
Church, but of those immunities, which the Pope without the leave or authority
of Princes, has bestowed out of his fullness of power upon the Clergy which
live under the government of other Princes, by which the Clergy inioyed a
protection from punishment for any sin: This is the thing for which they are
not ashamed to strive even at this day, as earnestly as they did in the midst
of blindness. This thing will be better known if we search the original
foundation of this error, from the beginning, and the occasion by which it
grew in the Church. For now this opinion is, and for some late hundred years
has been so rooted in the Court of Rome (that the Clergy though never so
much offending by murder, treason, theft, robberies, or such like, is
privileged from all temporal Courts of Princes, and punishment from the
Laity, unless first the Church proceed against them, and make them no Clerks)
that they are persuaded both of the truth and antiquity hereof, as of a point
of faith: the occasion grew thus.

69. The first ancient and famous Emperors did out of their godly and zealous
affections: and as we may well judge, upon good reasons to help the Church,
and to preserve discipline, join the aid of their coactiue laws, to the
spiritual censures of the Church: ordeining that whosoever by the governors
of the Church could not be brought to obedience and order, should by the
severity of temporal punishment be reduced to obedience. The usual punishment
which. Emperors did inflict upon Clerks, was deportation: So did Constantine
the great punish Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, and Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 20.
Theognius Bishop of Nice. And albe it some were threatened Sozomen. lib. 1.
cap. 16.
with capital punishment, as appears by a Letter which Constantine wrote to
the Bishops of the Nicen Council, recorded by Socrates, and inserted in the
first Tome of Councels: yet the usual censure of the Emperor was exile. This
kind of punishment was often inflicted by other Emperors upon Bishops: the
examples are famously known, and acknowledged, I need not to speak of them.
Insomuch that it began to be enacted by Emperors to be a law, that all of the
Clergy that offended might know their punishment: for that Constantine by
whose authority the sixth Synod at Constantinople was held, in a Decree Synod.
sexta. action. 18.
inserted in that Council, says: Si quidem Episcopusest, vel Clericus, vel
monachico circundatus habitu, deportationis paenam exsoluet. Car^omannus in a
French Synod decrees imprisonment: Tom. 2. Council.
Si ordinat us presbyter fuerit, duos annos in carcere permaneat. These
punishments were inflicted upon such Clerks, as would not be ordered by
Ecclesiastical censures of their Bishops; for so Guntranus does testify, a
French King, by whose authority the Council of Matiscan was held: Quicunque
Sacerdctum Council. Matis^n
(says he in a Writ added to that council) aut saecularium in intention
mortifera perdurantes crebrius admoniti, si se emendare neglexerint, etc. alios
canonica seueritas corrigat, alios ligat^s paena percellat. And a little after
he says: Conuenit vt iustit^ae and ^quitatis in omnibus vigore seruato,
distringat legalis vltio iudicum, quos non corrigit canonica praedicatio Sacer
dotum.

70. Then the ancient practice was, that the temporal Magistrate should punish
such as offended of the Clergy, as well as of the Laity. Concerning the
antiquity of this exemption of Clerks from temporal Courts: we find no
president for it, all the while that the Emperors had any government and
command in Italy. But when the Pope was able to meet the Palmer. Chron. An.
726.
Emperor in battle, and give him the worse, then began the authority of the
civil Magistrate to decay in Rome, and fell at Naucler. gener. 25.
the last into contempt. And the Pope having cast off the yoke of obedience,
which before he held to the Emperor as to his Sovereign, began to take an
authority to himself, which neither God nor man had given him. Hence proceeded
that usurpation of power to give Laws to other. Pope Nicholas the first, in
the eight hundred and threescore year of Christ, writes in his Epistle to the
Emperor Michael, in another style, then his predecessors had used to write to
Emperors before. Among other things contained in th Epistle, whereas the
Emperor had written for a Clarke that had offended him, and was fled to the
Pope; whom the Emperor required to be sent back again to Constantinople, Pope
Nicholas to this makes this answer. [Wee have from the great power of Peter
and Paul right and Epistol. Nicolai. ad Michael. imperatorem.
power to call Clerks from any other Diocese, if we think good, and to
inuit them to us. This is our right: but Christian Emperors have no right at
all to make any inquisition for Monks, unless it be in favor to pity them.]

71. Here we observe the difference between the spirits of Popes in this time,
and the spirits of ancient Popes who held the doctrine of obedience, as the
Fathers then did, drawing the doctrine from the Scripture and examples of
Christ and his Apostles. Christ when he was unjustly condemned, exempted not
himself from the punishment of the civil Magistrate, and yet he wanted no
power to have done so, if he would. These late Roman counterfeit Catholics,
when by their rebellious doctrine and bloody practices, they have justly (...)
the Magistrate against them, yet forsooth will deny him authority to punish
them. Saint Paul teaches: Let every soul be subject Romans 13. 1.
to the higher powers. S. Peter teaches the same doctrine, Submit your selves
to all manner ordinance of man. The Fathers 1. Pet. 2. 13.
received this doctrine from the Scriptures, and preserved it faithfully in the
Church. Chrysostom, and after him Oecumenius expounding that place of ' Paul,
say thus: Omnem animam Chrysoft. and Oecum. in Epist. ad Romans 13. 1.
instruens, sieve Sacerdos sit quispiam, sieve monachus, sieve Apostolus, vt
Magistratibus subdatur: nam haec subiectio non euertit piet^tem. A learned man
of late (which also was Pope) speaking of these words, Omnis anima subdita sic,
etc. says: Nec animam Aenaeus Siluius in gestis con^il. Basiliens.
Papaeexcipit. So does God sometimes draw testimonies for the truth, out of the
mouths of them that oppugn it. The ancients held this truth up in great
sincerity. Gregory Nazianzen says: Homines cuncti etc. All men are ordered in
subjection In orat. ad subdit. et imperat. irasc.
under the higher powers. He that says all men includes the Pope and his
Clerks. Augustine says: Generale pactum est societatis Lib. 3. cap. 8.
confess.
humanae obedire gregibus suis. Leo the first says: Ad imperialem pertinet
potestatem v^ perturbatores Ecclesiae, pacis, and Leon. Epist. 80. ad Julian.
Coens. Episcop.
reipub. quae Christianis principibus merito gloriatur, inimici, sollicitius
comprimantur. These troublers of the peace of the Church and state, of whom he
speaks were Clergy men. For in that Epistle Leo writes against certain of
the Clergy, who embraced the error of Eutyches. Then in the time of Pope Leo,
this was not the doctrine of the Church of Rome, which now these Roman
Libertines have brought in. Gregory the first writes to the same purpose:
Potestas super omnes homines dominorum meorum Lib. 2, indict. 11. cap. 100.
pietaticaelitus data est, vt qui bona appet^nt adi^uentur, vt caelorum via
largius pateat, vt terrestre Regnum coelesti Regnofamuletur. In the same
Epistle, he induces Christ thus speaking to the Emperor: Sacerdotes meos tuae
manui commisi. Then Gregory knew no other doctrine but that Priests were
subject, and by Christ subjected to the Magistrate. And whereas the Emperor
commanded a law to be executed, which Gregory misliked: he writes thus to the
Emperor. Ego quide^ iussioni tuae subiectus eandem Ibidem.
legem per diuersas terrarum parts transmitti feci: That is, [I being subject
to your command, have caused that law to be sent to diverse Provinces: but
because the law consents not with the law of Almighty God, behold I have
signified the same by my letters to your most excellent Lordship: so that on
both parts I have paid what I ought, for I have yielded obedience to the
Emperor, and have not co^cealed what I thought for God.] Then Gregory knew no
exemption, he accounts himself among them that owe subjection and obedience
to Emperors.

72. Concerning the punishment of Heretics and Schismatiques that were
criminous, there was no other means known in S. Augustines time, then the
coactiue power of the civil Magistrate. For thus he says: Si nec hoc volunt
Donatistae, etc. [If the Lib. 1. cap. 6. contra Epist. Parmeniani.
Donatists will not grant this power to the Emperor, why do they acknowledge
the force of the Laws to be justly executed against other malefactors, and
deny the same to be done against heretics and Schismatics, seeing by the
Apostolical authority they are all alike numbered with the same fruits of
iniquity? Must not these humane ordinances regard such things? Why then does he
bear the sword? etc.] Thus says Augustine: And in the same place he declares
that there is one law imperial general against all that profess themselves
Christians, but are not true Catholics, but keep private conuenticles, that
either he that ordains such a Clerk, or the Clerk so ordained, should loose
ten pounds of gold, and the place where such conuenticles were kept, should be
forfeited to the Emperors Exchequer. And again he says thus. In E^angel. Ioh.
tractatu. 2.
M^rantur quia co^mouentur potestates Christianae aduersus detesta^dos
dissipatores Ecclesiae. Si no^ ergo mouerentur, quomodo redderent ratione^ de
Imperio suo, Deo? And much more he says to this purpose. From these few places
of August. we observe: First, that in his time there was no doubt made among
Catholics, but that the Magistrate should punish criminous Clarks, by his
coacti^e power. Otherwise they could not render to God an account of their
government: which stands full against the doctrine of the present court of
Rome. 2. That they who first sought privileges and exemptions from the sword
of the Magistrate were Donatists. wherein the Court of Rome succeeds them,
taking other errors from other filthy heretics, and this from the Donatists.

73. This was the ancient Doctrine: but now at Rome they teach the contrary.
Bellarmine says, that such Clerks as are within the Dominions of any King,
are not subjects to that King, meaning that they are the Popes subjects, and
therefore not the Kings. He says also that Clerks owe no obedience to Kings,
neither by Gods law, nor man's. Non sunt amplius Reges Clericorum superiores,
and proinde non tenentur iure* Diuino, nec humano, Bel^arm. l. de Clericis. ca.
28.
eis parere, nisi quantum ad leges directinas. That is [Kings are not now any
more Sovereigns of Clerks; and therefore Clerks are not bound to obey them
by Gods Law or man's law, unless it be in respect of laws directive.] What
his meaning is by laws directive, he expounds thus: That Princes have no
coactiue power over the Clergy, but only power directive. If the Prince
direct some things for the good of the Commonwealth, Clerks (says he) are to
obey such directions; Ibid.
but he adds: Nec volumus dicere his legibus teneri Clericos obligatione
coactiua, sed solum directiua, vt sunt leges principum: quanquam ijsdem
legibus, vt ab Eeclesia approbantur, and rataehabentur, etiam coactiua
obligatione teneantur. [Wee grant not, says he, that Clerks are bound by
these laws of Princes, in a bond coactiue, but only directive, as they are
laws of Princes. Albeit the same Laws being approved and ratified by the
Church, binds Clerks in a bond coactiue.] By this new and admirable
doctrine, Princes hane no coactiue power over their Clergy, but the Church has
coactiue power over them: by the Church he means the Pope here: and therefore
comparing the laws of Princes with the Popes Canon laws, he says; Legi
Canonicae etiam in causis criminalibus c^dere debet lex imperialis. That is,
The imperial law ought in matters criminal to Ibid.
give place to the Canon law: by which doctrine we find, that they tread the
paths, and fill up the measure of their forefathers the old Friars:
maintaining that which John Wiclife observes was first begun by Friars: that
the King was not Lord of the Clergy, but the Pope was their Lord. Thus a new
King is raised up over the Popes Clerks, and the Scripture is verified which
says: And they have a King over them, which is the Apoc. 9. 11.
Angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek
he is named Apollyon.

74. The Laterane Council was held in the year one thousand, two^hundred, and
fifteen. It is decreed in the same Council, That Heretics being condemned,
should be delivered over to the secular power: from which time these pretended
privileges have grown so great, and swollen up so big, that not being able
to hold together, they are burst in the midst, having drawn upon themselves
the just vengeance of God, and of Magistrates, so procuring their own ruin.
But because Bellarmine cyteth a few testimonies to prove the exemption of
Clerks from secular judgments, we may first breefly examine them, and so
proceed. He cyteth thus; Council. Ibid. cap. 3.
Mileuitan. Can. 13. and Matiscon. Can. 8. These places he quoteth, producing
no words. He cyteth also other places thus: Sulpitius lib. 2. Sacrae histor.
refert. ^. Martinum aliquando dixisse nouum esse and inauditum nefas, vt causam
Ecclesiae iudex saeculi iudicaret. Item Ambrosius Epist. 78. ad Theophilum. et
August. Epist. 162. These places are cyted or quoted by Bellarmine, barely
without the Authors words. We answer in a word: All this touches nothing
our question, of exempting criminous Clerks from temporal Courts: for these
places speak not one word of this thing.

75. The first place, Council. Mileuit. can. 13. to prevent such busy fellows
of the Clergy, which carried their causes to Rome (as then some did) ordained,
that every Clerk should be governed by his own Superior. What is this to the
purpose? This is all which that Canon says. The next Canon of the Matiscon
Council says, that if one Clerk had a matter against another Clerk, he
should not complain to the secular Judge, but to the Bishop: This makes as
little to the purpose. Afterward he cites for exemption from punishment, these
places; (...) Chalced. can. 9. Si Clericus aduersus Clericum habet negotium non
relinquat Episcopu^ suum, and ad saecularia iuaicia non rec^rrat, etc. Council,
Agathens. can. 32. Clericum nullus praesumat apud saecularem iudicem, Episcopo
non permittente pulsare, etc. Council. Carthag. 3 can 9. ^oletan 3. can. 13.
Matiscon. cap. 8. These testimonies speak as little for him as the other. The
9. Canon of the Chalced. Council speaks not of the immunities of criminous
Clerks, but only prescribes how one Clerk should accuse another before the
Bishop, and not before the civil Judge. And this is the purpose of all the
other places cyt^d out of Council. Agathens. Cartbag. Toletan, and Matiscon, all
speak of one thing: Only here, one part of their known knavery is to be
opened: for he cyteth Council. Agathens. can. 32. thus; Clericum nullus
praesumat apudsaecularem iudicem Episcopo non permittente, pulsare. Mark good
Reader a work of darkness, an example of Romish impudency: by true, sound,
and unsuspected Records, these privileges which now are in question between
us, cannot be proved to have been established of old, or to have any
testimony of antiquity, but by virtue of their expurgatoriall tables, they are
able to show us this ancient Canon of the Council of Agatha, corrupted by
themselves. For the Canon which Bellarmine cyteth of this Council, and the
masked Romish Catholic Divine takes from Bellarmine, in some later Editions
has these words as they are cyted by him: but in the first incorrupt Edition
of Councels, set forth by Peter Crab, the words of that Canon are thus set
down: Clericus nec quenquam praesumat apud saecularem iudicem Episcopo non
permitente, pulsare. And thus it is read by them that aunciently cite the same.
Now this agrees well with the ninth Canon of the Chalced Council, which
ordeyneth that if one Clerk will accuse another, it must be before his
Bishop; if he will accuse the Bishop, it must be in a provincial Synod:
if he will draw a Metropolitan to answer for some things which he has done,
it must be either before the Primate, or before the Bishop of Constantinople.
All this we grant to be orderly established, the things intended are matters
of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, which are to be heard in such Courts: but our
question is of Clerks that are convinced to be murderers, or Traitors, etc.
Whether such are to be exempt from trial at Common Law: Of which exemptions
these ancient Bishops never dreamed.

76. It is moreover to be noted, that diverse of these places which he cites,
as that from Sulpitius of S. Martin, and from Ambrose, etc. are understood of
another thing, and not of exemption of Clerks at all. For the ancient
Bishops, as before I have declared, thought it not lawful that matters of
faith and doctrine should be determined in civil Courts by civil Magistrates.
This is true: and this is that which those testimonies speak of; but what is
this to criminous Clarks? that Robbers, Traitors, murderers of the Clergy
should be protected by reason of their Order from trial in Kings Courts: this
is a doctrine never known to the ancients. It was first known in England in
the days of Henry the second, stirred seditiously by Thomas Becket Archbishop
of Canterbury, when as before that time it was never heard of in this land. The
manner hereof I will briefly recite out of Roger Houeden.

77. In the year of Christ 1163. the contention concerning Houeden. Henric. 2.
exemption of Clerks, grew famous between King Henry the second and Thomas
Becket Archbishop: Rex volebat (says Houeden) Presbyteros, Diaconos,
Subdiaconos, and alios Ecclesiae Thomas Becket stood for this privilege of
holy Church, that although one of the Clergy had committed felony, murder or
treason, yet might not the King put him to death as he did the Laymen. Fabian.
Part. 7. cap. 237.
rectores, si comprehensi fuissent in latrocinio, vel murdra, vel felonia, vel
iniqua combustione, vel in his similibus: ducere ad saecularia examina, and
punire sic^t and laicum. Contra quod Archiepiscopus dicebat, quod si Clericus
in sacris ordinibus constitutus, vel quilibet alius rector Ecclesiae
calumniatus fuerit de aliqua re, per viros Ecclesiasticos and in curia
Ecclesiastica debet iudicari. Et si conusctus fuerit, ordines suos amittere,
and sic al^enatus ab officio and beneficio Ecclesiastico, si postea
forisfecerit, secundum voluntatem Regis and baliuorum suorum iudicetur. That
is: The King required that Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, and other Rectors of
Churches, if they were taken in murder, robbery, felony, burning of houses, or
such like, should be brought to secular Courts, and there punished as Laymen
were. Against this the Archbishop affirmed, that if a Clerk being within holy
Orders, or any other Parson of a Church were accused of any thing, he must be
judged by Ecclesiastical Judges in the Ecclesiastical Court: and if he were
convict, he should loose his orders. And so being excluded from office and
benefice Ecclesiastical, if after this he incurred the like fault, then might
he be judged at the pleasure of the King and his Officers. Thus far Houeden.

78. This manner of degrading and afterward delivering criminous Clerks to the
Secular power, crept in about the time of the Conquest. Bellarmine pretending
greater antiquity for it, Bellarm. lib. de Clericis cap. 28.
can neither bring reason nor testimony for his opinion. For whereas he says,
Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia was first deposed Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 20.
by the Nicen Council, and afterward banished by Constantine, by this offering
to prove, that they must first be delivered to the Secular power, before the
Magistrate may punish, and reproves Calvin for not considering thus much: We
answer, Bellarmine shows his skill in shifting, and hiding the truth to
deceive the simple. For Calvin in that place which he cites against this
Romish immunitie, proves two things. First, that Institut. lib. 4. ca. 11.. 15.
coactiue power is in the hand of the Prince, and not of the Church. Ecclesia
cogendi non habet potestatem, de civilly coactione loquor, says he. Secondly,
that criminous Clerks had no immunities from the civil Courts of Princes. Now
that Bellarmine says, Eusebius was first deposed by the Council, and then
banished, is nothing against Calvin, but for him. For the Church did not
inflict the coactiue punishment of banishment, but the Emperor. And Calvin
proves at large in the same place, that Kings and Emperors have no authority
to judge in causes of faith; Producing the example of Ambrose, who in such a
cause resisted the Emperor Valentinian. Such a cause was that of Eusebius: the
Emperor knew not whether he was in fault or not, before the Church had judged
the cause. But Caluines judgment, and our question stands in two things,
against which Bellarmine does not so much as speak one word. First, that
coactiue power was not then in the Church, but in the Emperor: Secondly, that
criminous Clerks were then punished by the Magistrate. Eusebius is not there
proposed as a criminous Clerk, but as an example wherein the coactiue power of
the Magistrate appeared. But now they say, if a Clerk be proved to be a
felon, murderer, traitor, etc. the Kings Courts may not censure this man,
before he be degraded. Against these immunities we speak, for which
Bellarmine offers not any proof. Let the manner of Bellarmines answering be
considered: for it is easy for him thus to answer Calvin, and all
Protestants, when he touches not the point in question: but singling out of
some piece from the whole, wresteth that also from the true intent, that he may
shape a misshapen answer to it. Then we say, that before those desperate
times, wherein John Wiclife says, and often affirms, that Satan was loosed:
no man claymed such a beastly privilege, as to be exempt from the Kings Laws
for murder, treason and such like. Godliness, reason, and the light of Nature
seems to be extinguished in these men, that being contented to take the
benefit of Laws, will not be contented to be ordered by Laws. This has
forced some Statut. 25. Ed. 3. de prouisoribus.
Princes and States to ordain Laws that such should be out of the Kings
protection. Thus did that noble Prince Edward the third, King of England.
Wherein the King seemed to open the true way to his successors, to deal with
these men, for seeing as then they did, so now they do deny themselves to
Bella^m. lib. de clercis. cap. 28
be the Kings subjects; and affirm that neither by Divine nor humane right,
they are bound to obey the King with his coactiue Laws: and that they are
only under the subjection of the Pope: that for no crimes they are to be
examined in the Kings Courts: is it not great reason that the protection of the
King, and of his Laws should be denied to them that reject both?

79. Houeden declares also, that in the year one thousand Houed. Henry 2.
one hundred sixty four, the King called a Synod, and required the Bishops
upon their allegiance, to receive his Graundfathers Laws, to use and observe
them. Thomas Becket answered for him and the rest, they would keep all the
Laws of his auncetours: Saluo in omnibus or dine suo, and honor dei, and
sa^cta ecclesi^. This clause was thought new, scrupulous, and offensive. The
King would have him yield without exception, but the Archbishop would not. In
this contention Philippus a Legate from the Popes side, came into England, by
him the Pope and all the Cardinals commanded the Archbishop to yield to the
King without exception: whereupon he did so, but afterward revolted from that
promise. Hence a new contention began: but being again persuaded, he promised
obedience to the Kings Laws. The King to hold fast this slippery Merchant,
required all the Bishops to fet to their approbation, and seals to those
Laws. Hereunto when other assented, the Archbishop swore that he would never
set his seal to them, nor allow them. Afterward the Archbishop suspended
himself from celebrating Mass, and desired to go to Rome, but the King
denied him. The Bishop of London accused him of Magic. The King perceiving his
rebellious disposition, required the Barons to give judgment of him, that
being his subject, would not be ruled by his Laws. Cito facite mihi iustici^m
de illo, qui homo Houed. ibid.
meus ligius est, and stare iuri in curia mea recusat. As the Barons were
attending this service, and now ready to give sentence: I prohibit you (quoth
the Archbishop) in the behalf of Almighty God, to give sentence upon me, for I
have appealed to the Pope. And so he departed, Omnibus clamantibus, says mine
Houed. ibid.
Author, quo progrederis prodi^er? exspecta and ^ iudicium tuum. The Archbishop
after this stole away out of the land, changing his apparel and name, for he
called himself Deerman. The Archbishop thus conueying himself out of the
land, came to the Pope, and showed him a Copy of these Laws, which the King
called his Grandfathers Laws. When the Pope heard them read in the presence
of his Cardinals and diverse others, he condemned the Laws, and excommunicated
all that maintained them. Condemnauit illas in perp^tuum, and ana^hematizauit
omnes, qui ea^ tenerent, and al^quo modo fauerent, says Houeden.

80. Thus did the Popes then stir to advance their spiritual Jurisdiction
(as they called it) to such an height, that the Kings of the earth, who are set
up by God to judge the world, could not execute justice and judgment upon
offenders; might not be suffered according to the commandments of God, to
take vengeance of murderers, robbers, incendiaries, traitors; might not
execute that office, for which only they bear the sword. Now because the
devotion, sense, and judgment of all ages, is pretended to be for the Popes
Jurisdiction, and against the Kings: let us observe the judgment of the men
that lived at this time. We shall find in all this question of Jurisdiction,
and of these exemptions in particular, that the king was justified and the
Archbishop condemned. The Kings ancient Jurisdiction acknowledged, the Popes
new Jurisdiction, and the Archbishops disobedience disallowed and abhorred of
all. For all the Bishops of the Province of Canterbury, wrote a letter to the
Archbishop, the letter is extant in Houeden. Therein they entreat him to yield
to the King: they commend the Kings care and zeal for the Church. They
testify that the king requires no more of him, then the due honor which his
ancestors have always had. Rex a Domino constitutus pacem prouidet
subiectorum Houeden Annalpag. 292.
per omnia, vt ha^c conser^et Ecclesijs, and commissis sibi populis, dignitates
regibus ante se debitas and exhibitas sibi vult exhiberi and exigit. [The King
ordained by God, provides his subjects peace by all means, that he may
preserve this in the Churches, and people under him, he requires and exacteth
that Jurisdiction, which was due and exhibited to the Kings which were before
him.] They charge him with rashness, and furious anger for suspending and
condemning the Bishop of Salisbury and the Deane, before any question of their
fault was moved. Ordo iudiciorum nouus (say they) hic est, huc vsque legibus
and eanonibus vt speramus incognitus, damnare primum, and d^ culpa postremo
cognoscere. [This is a new proceeding of judgments, and as we hope unknown
in Laws and Canons to this day; first to condemn a man, and last of all to
know the fault.]

81. And that the justification of the King in this cause, and the condemnation
of the Archbishop might be made more evident to all the world; the same
Suffraganes, that is, all the Bishops of the Province of Canterbury, wrote to
Pope Alexander the third, to whom they give a worthy and famous testimony of
the Kings justice, temperance, and chastity: declaring that the King could not
be suffered to execute his Princely office, nor effect his good and godly
purposes in execution of Justice, for the filthiness of some of the Clergy.
Rex (say they) fide Christian ssimus, in copula ^oiugalis castimonij
honestissimus, pacis and iusticiae co^se^uator and dilata^or inco^parabiliter
strenuissimus, hoc vo^ is agit totis, in his feruet desiderijs, vt de regno suo
tollantur scandala, cu^spurci^ijs suis eliminentur peccata, pax totum obtineat
atque iustitia etc. Qui cum pacem regnisui enormi insolentium quorundam
Clericorum excessu, non medio^riter turbari cognosceret etc. That is, [The King
in faith most Christian, in the bond of matrimonial chastity most honest, for
preservation and dilatation of peace and justice, without comparison the
stoutest, does with great zeal and affections desire this, that scandals may
be removed out of his Kingdom, that sins with their filth may be banished,
etc. and finding the peace of his Kingdom not a little troubled with the
enormous excess of some insolent Clerks, etc.] And thus they proceed,
declaring wherein those strange exemptions stood, which then began first to be
known in the world. For, say they, if a Clerk should commit murder, etc. the
Archbishop would have him punished only by degrading, but the King thought
that punishment not sufficient for establishing of peace and order, and for
execution of justice. Hi^ non dominationis ambit^, non opprimendae Ecclesia
libertatis intuit^, sed solummodo pacis affectu eo Rex progressus est, vt regni
sui consuetudines regibus ante se in regno Angliae a personis Ecclesiasticis
obseruatas, and pacifice and reuerenter exhibitas Dominus noster Rex deduci
vellet in medium. That is, [Hereupon not through ambition of Domination, not
with any purpose to oppress the liberties of the Church, but only in a zeal
of peace the King proceeds thus far, as that he will have the customs of
his Kingdom now brought to open knowledge, which Ecclesiastical persons have
observed, and peaceably and reverently exhibited unto the Kings of the kingdom
of England before him.] And a little after, Haec est Domini nostri regis in
Ecclesiam Dei toto orb declamata crudelitas, hac ab eo persecutio. That is
[Now this is the cruelty of our Lord the King, that is so much spoken of
through the world against the Church; this is that persecution that he
raises.] Then it is an ancient complaint of these Romish Catholics, to call
the just, lawful, godly, and necessary execution of justice, cruelty and
persecution: this complaint has been ever since continued by them; and most
of all where there is least cause, even in the mild and merciful government
of the late Queen of famous memory. What cruelty did they impute to her? What
persecution to her Government? When they are not able to prove that one man
was executed for Religion, but for treason: Which was so much the more
dangerous, because it was masked with the visard of Religion: but Religion is
not, nor ever was the cause why our Kings punished the Popes Clerks, but only
Jurisdiction. For when the Pope will stretch his Jurisdiction so far, as to
include coactiue power, and to exclude Kings from the government of their
Subjects, drawing the Clergy from the obedience of their Kings, to the
obedience and subjection of the Pope; drawing the subjects of other Kings under
his subjection by an Oath of Allegiance: and hereupon persuading all that will
hearken to him, that they may not yield an Oath of Allegiance to their own
Princes: the Popes Jurisdiction being drawn to these points (as now by the
confession of themselves they are) the question between the Pope and Christian
The issue of exemptions.
Princes, is not of Religion, but of Jurisdiction, of civil and coactiue
Jurisdiction; and the sum of all is this; Whether the Princes of Christendom
shall be free Princes, or the Popes Vassals?

82. By this which we have declared, we see the cause of our Kings justified
against the Archbishop, and the exemption of Clerks (for which the
Archbishop strove, and which since that time is claimed to be an especial
privilege of that Church) to be condemned by the chief of the Clergy, by all
the Bishops of that Province: and that even to the Pope himself. Which thing
the Bishops of the English Church would never have done, unless they had
been well assured that the Kings cause was good, and that the contrary opinion
was a pernicious nouelty, a late vpstart device in the Church. But howsoever
the Popes Clerks pretended their new forged privileges, yet the Kings of this
land held still their old course in the ancient manner of execution of
justice against them that offended. And therefore Henry the second by law
commanded, R^g. Houed. H^nr. 2.
as Houeden says, that the Bishops of London and Norwich should be summoned,
that they might be before the Kings Justices to answer, for that they against
the statutes of the kingdom did interdict the land of the Earl Hugh

83. This exemption of Clarks was a new practice in the time of Marsilius of
Padua, and not so new as pestiferous, occasioning the ruin of States, and
being as a fury sent abroad from hell to disorder all government. For thus he
complains of it. Quibus non contenti, sed saecularium contra Christi and
Apostolorum praeceptum, appetentes fastigia, in legum Lationes seorsum ab ijs
Defensor pacis part. 2. cap. 23.
quae Ciuium vniuersitatis sunt, proruperuut. Omnem clerum ab his decernentes
exemptum, civil s^hisma and principatuum supremoru^ pluralitat^m inducentes ex
ipsis, etc. Haec pestilentiae Italici regni radix est and origo, ex qua cuncta
scandala germinauerunt, prodeunt, and qua stante nunqua^ ciuiles ibidem
cessabunt discordiae, etc. That is, [Not content herewith they (the Popes)
seeking the honor of secular government, against the commandment of Christ
and his Apostles, have taken upon them the ordaining of Laws and Canons, other
then such as serve for the common good. They decree that all the Clergy are
exempt from temporal Princes, hereby inducing a plurality of Soueraignties,
etc. This is the root and spring of the pestilence of the Empire, from whence
all scandals grow, and which standing, civil discord shall never have an end,
etc.] Thus were these exemptions then found, and acknowledged to be the
pestilence and ruin of all states, especially of the Empire: And his reason is
well to be observed, because, says he, it brings in Pluralitatem supremorum
principatuum, quam velut impossibilem humanae quieti demonstrauimus: he proves
the plurality of Sovereignty a thing impossible to stand with the quiet and
peaceable Government of the world. Now this exemption must either induce a
plurality of Soueraignties, when the Pope is one Sovereign, and the Prince
another, which is impossible in nature (says Marsilius) or else it denies the
Kings Sovereignty to establish the Popes, which thing can never be endured by
any Prince.

. VI. Of the Popes power in giving laws.
84. ANother thing whereby this new Jurisdiction of the Pope was so highly
advanced, was, giving of Laws to Princes, and their subjects; whereas before
Princes had given laws to him. Marsilius in the words last cyted in the end
of the last Paragraffe, speaking of these laws, says: They now break out into
a practice of Jurisdiction, taking upon them to make laws, separat and
distinct from such laws, as are for the common and public good of all:
meaning the Canon laws: which because they intend only the private
advancement of the Pope, and not the public good of the Church: being also
made only by the authority of the Pope, and not by the public consent of the
Church: therefore he does not account them laws, but Oligarchicall, and
tyrannical Decrees; these laws are to be considered, because they make so
great a show of the Popes Jurisdiction.

85. The Church before, was governed by Bishops and Metropolitanes, in such
order, that the affairs of every particular Diocese were ordered by the
Bishop, or by a Synod of his calling: the affairs of the Province were
determined by the Metropolitan, or by a Provincial Synod of his calling:
from an Episcopal Synod, a man might appeal to a provincial Synod; and
from a Provincial Synod, to a national: but from a provincial or from a
national Synod, none might appeal to the Bishop of Rome for which thing
diverse Decrees were made in provincial Synodes, as we have before declared. As
the Bishops were Governors, so the laws whereby they did then govern the
Church, were the Canons of ancient Councels; especially of those four most
famous Councels of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon: For that the
Canons of these Councels were held for the laws of the Constitutio Iustiniani
quint. Synod. act. 1.
Church, it appears by a Constitution of Justinian, extant in the fifth
Synod, held at Constantinople: wherein Justinian the Memnae Patriarchae.
Emperor declares that A^thimus was deposed from the Bishoprike of
Constantinople by Pope Agapetus, and a whole Synod with him consenting, for
that he had departed from the doctrines of those four holy Synodes, the Nicen,
the Constantinopolitan, the Ephesian, and the Chalcedonian: The Emperor also
declares, that he being deposed by the Church, should be banished by him,
joining his coactiue power to the spiritual Jurisdiction of the Church. This
is the meaning of the imperial Constitutions that are in this manner set forth
by Emperors of religions and doctrinall matters: For the Emperors never took
upon them by their authority to define matters of faith and Religion; that they
left to the Church: but when the Church had defined such truths against
Heretics, and had deposed those Heretics; then the Emperors concurring
with the Church by their imperial Constitutions, ( Sicque Diuina (...) and
^umana concurrentia (says Justinian in the same place) vnam consonantiam
rectis sententijs fecere:) did by their coactiue power give strength to the
Canons of the Church: And thus was the Church then governed, by the Canons of
ancient approved Synodes for matters of faith and doctrine; and by the
Constitutions of Christian Princes for matters of external coactiue
Jurisdiction. That Constantine by whose 6. Synod. subscriptio sacrae. ante
action. 1.
authority the sixth Synod was held at Constantinople, declares that the Canons
of the five general Councels (adding this second Constantinopolitan, to the
other ^ouce) were the rules or Canons of the Church.

86. So long as those Canons of ancient Councels stood for Church laws,
executed by the Bishops who were the Governors, so long the Government of
the Church stood up in peace, order and Godliness; one Bishop incroached not
upon the Jurisdiction of another: But after that the Pope had intruded upon the
Jurisdiction of the Church, and was grown so great as that by coactiue power
he was able to maintain his intrusion: then began he to give laws, such as
are comprised in the Decretals of Gregory the ninth, who was Pope in the year
one thousand, two hundred and thirty, the first publisher of those laws, which
were continued by (...) the eight* (...) fifth, John the two and twentieth,
(...) by some other Popes unto the year one thousand, four hundred and
eighty, for then lived Sixtus the fourth, whose Decrees are published in that
part that is called extra^. Commun. since which times those laws have been in
some force in diverse nations, where they did not cross the imperial laws of
those nations, nor the Jurisdiction of the Kings thereof. Now seeing that the
Popes Jurisdiction is so much set forth and advanced by these Canon laws, let
us in few words examine how he came to this Jurisdiction to give laws, and by
what right he maintains it. If any man have right to make and give laws,
this right must either be from God given him, or from men, who have had this
right before in themselves; for every man cannot give this right, but only
such as have it, and have power to give it: But the Pope received not this
right of giving laws to all Churches from God; for God has no where given any
such Commission to him. The ancient Bishops of Rome, either did not claim any
such Jurisdiction, or if any were carried by leuity, and ambition out of their
bounds, they were presently recalled and repressed by the godly Bishops of
that age: As Anicet was by Polyc^rp, Victor by (...), Poly^rates and the other
Bishops of Asia, Zozimus, Boniface, and (...) by S. Augustine and the
Affrican Bishops: so that the Bishops of Rome could never be suffered to
make laws to the Church, for one thousand, or twelve hundred years after
Christ: therefore this right was not from Christ.

87. For if it had been from Christ, then should the Pope have been suffered
to have practiced the same, before twelve hundredth years were expired. For the
godly ancient Fathers did never withstand the Bishop of Rome, in any
Jurisdiction which he could claim from Christ. But in this thing it is known
that they withstoode him: therefore this Jurisdiction whereunto after so many
hundredth years, he intruded himself, against the judgment of the ancient
Fathers (who resisted him herein) is not from God. Neither can this right be
claimed from man, because they who challenge it, will have it to be a divine
right, not humane. And they quarrel us for that we admit, that temporal
Princes may have such Jurisdiction: so that they utterly deny that this
Jurisdiction is derived from any humane power. Now he (...) to execute
Jurisdiction which is neither given him from God, nor man: must needs be
convinced to be an intruder, and to come in his own name, and consequently to
fulfill that Scripture: I came in my Fathers John. 5. 43.
name, and you receive me not. If another shall come in his own name, him you
will receive. Which the ancient Fathers expound of the coming of Antichrist
in his own name. And what more pregnant proof can be brought of this his
coming in his own name, then is this intruding himself into a Jurisdiction,
which he had neither from God, nor from the Princes of this world. And because
the Pope after one thousand and two hundred years, had no more right to give
Laws to the Church, then in former ages he had; therefore this Jurisdiction is
unlawful, which by these Laws he practices. Wherein only defacto, he is
found to do that, whereunto he never had right.

88. Moreover, if Bellarmine have declared the true conditions of just and
lawful Laws, it will follow that the Canon Laws are no just Laws.
Bellarmine confesses that four conditions Bellarm. lib. 4. cap. 15. de Romans
Pont.
are required in a Law, to make it just: the first is drawn from the end, for
it must be referred to the common good: for herein says Aristotle, a King
differs from a tyrant; because a Arift. Ethic. lib. 8. cap 10.
King respects the common good of his subjects, but a tyrant looks only
upon his own private profit: and thus says Bellarmine does a just Law differ
from a tyrannical Law. Then are the Popes Canon Laws proved tyrannical and
unjust, because they respect not the common good, but the private wealth of the
Pope, as all those do that draw all appellations to him. The second condition,
which in Bellarmines judgment makes a Law just, is drawn from the efficient.
For it must be from a man that has full authority. Nemo enim potest legem
imponere B^llar. ibid.
^nsibi subdi^o, says he. By this it will likewise follow, that the Popes
Canons are no just Laws, because the Pope has no authority to make such
Canons, binding them that are not his subjects, as we have declared before. The
third condition that makes a Law just, is drawn from the matter, says (...),
for it must not forbid virtue, nor command vice: but the Canon Laws are such
as forbid virtue and command vice; as appears by all those Canons that
proceed with their non obstante. I will note one example of many. There is a
Canon that runs thus. Quum aliquibus recipiendi aliquem in Canonicum De
Rescriptis. cap. 14. 6. Decreta. lib. 1.
alicuius Ecclesiae, non obstantibus ciusdem Ecclesiae, priuilegijs,
consuetudinibus, vel statutis ^uramento, confirmatione Apostolica, vel
quacunque firmitate alia roboratis, per nostras literas concedimus facultatem,
etc. That is: When we grant power to any by our letters to receive any to be
a Canon in some Church, notwithstanding the privileges of that Church, the
customs to the contrary, or statutes confirmed either by Oath, or by
Apostolical confirmation, or by any other strength, etc. By this Law, as by
many other, it appears, that the Popes Canons allow that men should go
against their own Oaths when the Popes letters do command them so to do.
Which is a forbidding of things honest, just, and godly, and commanding things
evil and unlawful. Therefore these Laws forbid virtue, and command vice,
and are consequently no just Laws in the judgment of Bellarmine.

89. The last condition that in Bellarmines opinion is required to make a Law
just, is drawn from the form: Because says he, the Law must keep that
proportion in distributing honors, which the Subjects have in the
Commonwealth. For example says he, if the Pope should make a Law, that only
rich and noble men should be made Bishops, and not poor and mean men
otherwise more learned and more worthy, this Law were simply unjust: but it is
certain that the Popes Laws are such. I speak not here of their corrupt
practice, which since the Canon laws came in, was never found without strong
and strange Simonie: but I speak of their Laws, which command it. For who
made that Law which says, Pallium non datur nisi Did. 100. cap. 2.
fortiter postula^i: The Pall is not given to any man, unless he make a strong
suit. What is meant by a strong suit, they know best that have purchased Palls
at the Popes hand. But it is certain that a poor man did never purchase a
Pall, therefore poor men, though more learned then the rich purchaser, are
excluded from this honor by the Law, that allows none to make suit, but such
as can make strong suit, then the Law is unjust by Bellarmines confession. It
is also an unjust and an ungodly Did. 40 Si Papa.
Law, which says: Though the Pope should draw innumerable souls with himself
down into hell, yet no mortal man may presume to say to him, Sir why do you
so? It is an unclean Law, which so strictly denying the marriage of Priests,
yet does allow them to have Concubines. Many other Laws there be Did. 34.
cap. 4.
of this form. So that by all those conditions which Bellarmine will have to
be requisite in all Laws that be just, the Popes Law^s are found to be
unjust. By all which is euinced, that the Pope comes in his own name, makes
Laws to rule those Subjects, over whom he has no authority; respects
therein his own ends, takes up a new Jurisdiction which has been denied by
the ancient Bishops, and which was unknown in the world all the while, that
the Popes lived under the obedience of the Emperors, as other Bishops did
under several Princes.

7. Of Appellation.
90. ANother part of this pretended Jurisdiction, stood in appellation to the
Pope. This they have challenged, but it has always been denied by the Kings
of this land, as being a thing prejudicial to the ancient Laws and customs
of the Kingdom. The first question about appeals in this land, that I can
find, began by Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, in the time of William
Rufus. For after that some breach was made between the King and the
Archbishop, the Archbishop Anselme desired leave to depart the land, to go
to Rome for his Pall. The King perceiving that he had a purpose to appeal to
the Pope, Answered, That if he should appeal to Pope Urban, or any other
(for at that time two strove for the Papacy) without his leave, then should he
falsify his allegiance. The King reasoned thus, says Malmsbury: Malmsbury.
lib. 1. de geftis P^ntif. Angl.
Consuetudo Reg^imes est, a Patre meo instituta, vt nullus praeter licentiam
Regis appelletur Papa. Qui consuetu^ines Regnitollit, potestatem quoque and
toronam Regni violat, qui coronam mihi aufert, inimicitias and infidelitatem in
me agit. For there was contention between the King and the Archbishop: First,
because the Archbishop would nominate a Pope without the Kings leave, Secondly,
because he would appeal to the Pope. Concerning this matter of appeal, the
same Author a little after declares that there grew an hot contention between
them. Anselme his answer was, Tues Petrus and super hanc Petram, etc. And
therefore (quoth he to the King) the obedience which I offer to S. Peter's Vicar,
is not against mine allegiance to the King. Thus had the Popes with a strong
kind of poison, as it were so enchaunted those words of holy Scripture, as to
make them serve for a cloak of disobedience, and breach of allegiance to
temporal Princes. Anselme being further urged by the King, that he had
promised to keep all the customs of his kingdom, and he was bound to
perform allegiance, answers thus. [What Malmsb. ibid.
do you tell me that I break mine allegiance to the King, by appealing to
the Sea Apostolic? I grant I promised, but conditionally, that I would keep
those customs which are agreeable to the laws of God, and honesty. And
therefore where you Quod dicis me fidem excedere quod praeuaricatis
consuetudinibus tuis sedem appello Apostolicam. etc.
tell me that I have broken mine allegiance, by preuaricating your laws in
appealing to the Sea Apostolic; saving your honor it is not true, if another
had spoken it. For the faith which Iowe to the King, I have it from the faith
of God, whose Vicar is S. Peter, to whose Sea I appeal: with much stir and
strife to this effect Anselme held his resolution stiffely.]

91. Now let the Reader be entreated to compare these times with the times of
the Affrican Council, and Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury with Augustine
Bishop of Hippo. S. Augustine with the rest of the Affrican Council condemned
appellations to Rome, as standing against godliness, order, the freedom of
the Church; as quenching the light of simplicity, as inducing darkness,
pride and ambition into the Church. Now that which in Saint Augustines time was
ungodly, can it be made godly, and lawful in Anselmes time? Yet Anselme we see
makes this thing the cause of God. Augustine condemned appellations to Rome
simply, without consideration of disobedience to Princes. What then would he
have done, if thereunto had been added the commandment of his Prince against
such Appellations? Anselme standing for Appellation to Rome, which Augustine
denied, and withstanding the just and (...) commandment of his Sovereign,
has no other co^ to cast over the matter, then the pretense of God and Saint
Peter's Vicar. If this obedience had been required of God to Saint Peter's Vicar
in Anselmes time, Why was not the same required and yielded in Saint Augustines
time? This is the difference between the opinions brought in by men, and the
truths of God: that the one stands always the same in the Church without
change, the other has his times of rising and falling, as this opinion of
Appellation to the Pope, which was so strongly rejected by Augustine, found a
time to rise up between the pride of the Popes, and the servile flattery of
some Bishops. And what greater sign of pride in the Pope, and flattery in
his servants, then to resume these old condemned privileges, and therewithal
to patch yp a Jurisdiction standing so directly against the judgment and
practice of the ancient godly Fathers?

92. And yet was Anselme as resolute in this, as Augustine was in the
contrary: But herein a great difference appeared (which might much sway the
judgment of indifferent readers, if there were no other means to inform
them) that Saint Augustine standing against appellations to Rome, had herein
the full consent of all his fellow Bishops, not one dissenting. But Anselme
standing for appellations to Rome, stood alone without the consent of so much
as one Bishop: which thing I report for the honor of the Church of England,
and of all the Bishops of England at this time; who herein resisted their
Archbishop, standing for the ancient liberties of the Church. William
Malmsburie witnesses thus much: In his exequendis (says he) omnes Episcopi
Angliae Primati suo suffragium negarunt. That is, [In the execution of these
things, all the Bishops of Malmsb. ibid.
England denied their consent to their Primate.] This shows that
Archbishoppes were made the Popes servants before Bishops were: the reason
was, because the Archbishoppes used to purchase a Pall from the Pope, which
Pall Anselme had not yet at this time of his variance with the King, obtained;
for Malmsbury says, he first asked leave to go to Rome for the Pall. Now the
Pope in granting the Pall conveyed an Oath of Allegiance with it, as before
we have observed, which was the reason that moved our Archbishopps to stir
such rebellious tumults against the Kings of this land: Such was this faction
which Anselme maintained for the Pope against the King, wherein he was
condemned by all the Bishops of England in the question of Appellation, as
Thomas Becket was after this time condemned by all the Bishops in like sort,
in the question of Inuestitures.

93. And therefore Henry the second had just cause to publish that law which
Roger Houeden calls grave edictum and execrabile, against the Pope,
beginning, Si quis inuentus fuerit literas Houed. Henr. 2.
vel mandatu^ ferens Domini Papae etc. capiatur, and de eo sicut de regis
traditore and regui, sieve dilatione fiat iusticia. That is [If any be found
bringing in the Popes Letters or Mandat, etc. let him be apprehended, and let
justice be executed without delay upon him, as upon a traitor to the King and
Kingdom.] In the same law it is said; Item generaliter interdictum est, ne
quis appellet ad Dominum Papam. That is [It is simply by law prohibited, that
no man appeal to the Pope.] This was not a new law now invented by Henry the
second, but an ancient law now renewed, and upon a just occasion put in
execution: for William Rufus, as before we have declared, urged this law
against Anselme, proouing it to be one of his Fathers laws, and auerring that
such appeals did stand against the ancient laws and customs of his
Kingdom; so that the Kings Jurisdiction in such matters, was maintained by the
ancient laws of this land.

94. But because the antiquity of the laws of our land is questioned by our
adversaries, though this thing belong not to my profession, yet let me in a few
words declare what I have met with in Stories concerning this point: that it
may appear, that the laws of this land are much more ancient, then that
Religion which now is called the Religion of the Church of Rome. King William
Rufus the Conquerours son, declares as Malmsbury witnesses, that it was a
custom of this kingdom Malmsb. l. de gestis Pontif. Ang or.
confirmed by his father, that without the Kings license no man might appeal
to the Pope. Now these laws and customs which William the Conqueror did
publish and confirm, were the ancient laws and customs of the Saxons before
him: not first invented by the Conqueror, though enacted and established
Houeden. Hen. 2.
by him. For Roger Houeden writing of these laws which the Conqueror enacted,
says, that the King being once in mind to establish the laws of the Danes,
was after much and earnest entreaty of the Barons, persuaded to yield that the
laws of King Edward the Confessor, should be retained still. The Barons
(says Houeden) urged the King, Pro anima regis Eduardi, qui et post diem suum
concesserat coronam and regnum, and cuius erant Leges: Unde Concilio habito
praecatui Baronum tandem acquieuit, ex illa ergo die visa authoritate veneratae
per vniuersam Angliam corroboratae and confirmatae sunt prae caeteris patriae
legibus Pro visa authoritate, legendum fortasse, sua authoritate.
leges Eduardiregis; quae prius inuentae and Constitutae erant in tempore
Adgari aui sui. [For King Edwards soul, who bequeathed him his Crown and
Kingdom after his death: and whose laws they were: whereupon holding a
Parliament, he yielded at last to the Barons request: from that day forward the
laws of King Edward were by his authority honored, established, and confirmed
through all England; which laws were before found out, and enacted in the time
of Edgar, Grandfather to King Edward.] After this, Houeden enters into a large
discourse to prove, that the laws which the Conqueror established, were King
Edwards laws, which laws, says he, were called King Edwards laws, not
because he invented them first, but because after they had been buried in
some neglect, lying unregarded and not put in due execution for the space of
three score and eight years after Edgars death (for so many years are
between King Edgars death, and S. Edwards Coronation) he revived them: And
thus much he confirms that the laws established by the Conqueror, were S.
Edwards laws, and the same which were in use here in the days of that
peaceable King Edgar.

And it is not without good reason collected, that the same laws proceeded
from King Alphred: for he, like another Justinian is reported to have compiled
certain volumes of Balaeus. Cent. 2.
laws, not only from the laws of the Britains, Saxons, and Danes, but also
of the ancient Grecians and other: Besides that he translated into the Saxon
tongue those laws, which were called the Molmucin laws, and also the Martia^
laws, the one of Dunwallo Molmucius an ancient British King, the other so
named of Martia Proba an ancient British Queen. And that William the
Conqueror established the Saxon laws, it is likewise testified by Henry
Huntingdon, who says thus: Saxones pro viribus paulatim terram bello
capessentes, captam obtiuebant, obtentam aedificabant, aedificatam legibus
regebant: Nee non and Normanici cito and breuiter terram subdentes sibi, victis
vitam and libertatem legesque antiquas regni iure concesserunt. [The Saxons by
a strong hand overcame the land in time by war, built as they over came, and as
they built governed it by laws: The Normans also quickly subduing the land
under them, yet granted by the right of the Kingdom, lise and liberty, and
the ancient laws to them whom they subdued.]

95. Then whereas William Rufus maintained the laws and customs of his
father, against the Pope, and Henry the first the laws and customs of his
brother and father, and Henry the second, the laws and customs of the
Kingdom, used by his Grandfather Henry the first, or any other afterward
referring themselves to the same laws: the laws and customs of which they
speak, are the ancient laws and privileges of this land, confirmed by the
Conqueror, received from King Edward, proceeding from King Edgar, and before
him from King Alphred: And are therefore of much greater antiquity, then the
Popish Religion lately concluded in the Council of Trent, as many parts of
that Religion were. Then it appears that the ancient laws of this land did
forbid an appeal to Rome: neither is that to be much marvelled; for why should
it be thought strange, that an appeal to Rome was utterly forbidden by the
Church and State of England, feeing long before that time we find the same
thing forbidden by the Church of Africa. After this time wherein Appeals to
Rome were forbidden in England, we find that in France the same thing was
prohibited by the law which the French call the pragmaticall Sanction: for in
the year one thousand, two hundred, threescore and eight, Jews the ninth
French King, called S. Jews, ordained the pragmatical Sanction, wherein all
the oppressions of the Church of Rome are utterly forbidden, that none of those
things be practiced in France, unless it be by the express and free consent
of the King, and Church of that Kingdom. Thus have Kings always prescribed
against the Pope in matters of Jurisdiction, as the Church in like sort has
prescribed against the Pope, in matters of faith and Religion, as hereafter in
the last Chapter shall be declared.

. VIII. Of deposing and depriving Kings, and dissoluing the Oath of
Allegiance, wherein consisted the highest pitch of this pretended Jurisdiction.
96. THE last and greatest point of this Jurisdiction, wherein the strings of
this authority were stretched up to the highest, was that their practice of
Deposing Kings, and discharging Subjects from their Allegiance: By which
practice the Church was confounded, the States of the world ouerturned, Kings
robbed of their right, subjects of their faith and truth, every nation scourged
with wars and bloodshed: and in the common vexation of all Christendom,
only the Popes state, and worldly glory increased, who could not otherwise
rise, but with the ruin of the Church and States. In this place therefore I
will, as breefely as I can, pass through by way of short History, the practice
of the Popes, in deposing of Kings. That it may be apparent to the world, that
we are so far from being afraid to confess this power, which they so much
boast of; that we are rather ready to publish it to the world. For hereby all
men which have any understanding of that power which Jesus Christ left to his
Church, may know the Tyranny, usurpation, pride, vainglory, ambition, and
madness of him who exalts himself in the Church against God, and against
them that are called Gods. Wherein we may learn to be armed with patience to
suffer for a time, whatsoever the lust of proud and bloud-sucking Popes have
leave to do for the sins of our Princes, and people, and Churches. For their
time is set and drawing to an end, and nothing has been done, but that which
is forewarned in the Scripture. So that by these ambitious and bloody
practices, we shall find how the Scriptures are fulfilled.

97. For one Scripture says, that a star must fall from heaven, Apoc. 9. 1.
11.
who must be a King of the Locusts, which is called also the Angel of the
bottomless pit, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek Apollyon, that
is a destroyer. Which Prophecy of his destroying power, is verified most
apparently in this practice of excommunicating Kings, and loosing the knot of
obedience. Whereby confusion and destruction is brought upon all Kingdoms of
Christendom. Hereby he is proved to be a destroyer, an exterminator, an
excommunicator. Therefore the vulgar translation adds significantly, Latin
habens nomen exterminans. Another Scripture says: The ten Kings Apoc. 17, 13.
shall give their power and authority to the beast. Though the Kings of
Christendom did never directly yield to the Pope this authority over their
own Kingdoms, and over themselves, that the Popes might depose and displace
them at his pleasure: yet this they gave him in effect, and by consequence. For
they gave him so much, that he might upon their own grant challenge this, and
they who had granted him so much, had no reason to except against his
challenge. For though the King which was to be deprived, denied the Pope this
power, yet such Princes did yield it to him, to whom the Pope had given the
Kingdom of the deposed Prince: he did yield it, who should use the benefit of
the Popes usurped power. For example: though the late Kings of France have
always denied, that the Pope had any Authority to depose the French Kings, yet
the Kings of France have given him this power. For the former Kings yielded it,
as Pipin, and Charles. For they had no other title to the Kingdom, then from
this power of the Pope. Therefore they yielded that the Pope had power and
authority to give Kingdoms, and in that sense gave their power and authority
to the beast. So that when these first French Kings, honored the Pope with
this undue honor, though then they seemed to receive Kingdoms from him, yet
the Scripture looks farther into these practices, then they did which
practiced them. For they respected only themselves, their own present
greatness: but in receiving such power from the Popes, they gave, in truth,
their power and authority to the Popes. For how could they in justice deny,
but that the same power which deposed other Kings to raise them, might as well
have deposed them to raise other. Thus most of the Kings of Christendom gave
their kingdoms to the Popes. That this new and strange power of Antichrist may
better appear, I will open the beginning and continuance of the Popes practice
herein.

Leo Iconomachus.
98. THe first Prince upon whom the Pope began this practice, was Leo the
Emperor, whom Platina calls Leo the third, he was called Iconomachus for
defacing of Images. This Prince was deposed by Gregory the third, who was Pope
in the year seven hundred ninety six. Pope Gregory the second prepared the
way thus. When Leo the Emperor being much offended at the superstitious and
foul abuse of Images, which he saw daily then growing in the Church, did
utterly deface Images in Churches, and commanded Pope Gregory the second, then
Bishop of Rome to do the like, the Pope took Nau^l. vol. 2. generat. 25.
his advise in such indignation, that he raised all Italy in rebellion against
him. So the Emperor lost his hold in Italy, and a number of little States
were raised in Italy, every City striving to make it self a free State.
Gregory the second having done thus much died, and left the place to Gregory
the third, who P^at. Gregor. 3. Onuphr.
succeeded him. This Pope as soon as ever he was chosen, by the consent of the
Roman Clergy, deprived Leo the third Emperor, from the Empire, and from the
communion of the faithful, for the same cause: to wit, for defacing Images
which were set up in Churches to be worshipped. This was the ground of the
Popes proceeding against the Emperor, which is to be observed. By this we see
the state of Rome clean changed, for whereas the Emperors at the first were
persecutours, and the Bishops of Rome were such as suffered for righteousness:
Now had they changed places, for the Popes were become persecutours, and the
Emperors were such as suffered for righteousness. For what was the Emperor
Leo his fault in breaking down and defacing Images, after that he found that
divine worship was exhibited to them, other then that so much commended zeal
of Ezekias in breaking down the brazen Serpent? so that if we look upon this
fact of the Emperor (which was the occasion why the Popes so proceeded against
him) there can nothing appear but the Popes persecution, and the Emperors
suffering for righteousness. Pope Gregory the third, after this called a Synod
in Rome, wherein the worship of Images Platin. Greg. 3. Onuphr. annot. ibid.
was established, and all excommunicated that held the contrary. All Italy,
says Onuphrius, fell away from the obedience of Leo the Emperor, with the
City of Rome, and other Western parts of the Empire, which were before subject
to the Emperor, excepting Sicily, and a part of Liguria, and a little corner
of Calabria. All this the Emperor lost at once by the practice of Popes.

99. Now because we consider these beginnings of the Popes persecutions, (for
he began with the Emperor, whom thus he driued out of Italy, putting him from
all government in Rome, and after took up his place and government) let us
here remember an ancient tradition of the ancient Fathers, who wrote before
these times with freedom. For they are al resolved upon this, as upon an
Apostolical tradition, that Antichrist must drive the Emperor out of the
government of Rome and Italy, and take up his place and seat. Tertullian does
Tertull. lib. 3. contra Marcion. Lib. de resurr. carnis.
often repeat this sentence, Romanus status cedet Antichristo. That is: [The
Roman Empire must give place to Antichrist.] And in another place he says:
Qui nunc tenet teneat, donec de medio fiat. Quis? nisi Romanus status. That is:
[Hee that now withholds, shall withold till he be taken out of the way:
Who is that? the Roman Empire.] And upon those words of the Apostle: [He that
now withholds, shall withold until 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
he be taken away:] The ancient Fathers writing, do with an admirable consent
agree upon this, that the thing which the Apostle says, did withold, and
should withold for a time, was the Roman Empire. For the Empire of
Antichrist must be raised up in the same place, where that Empire stood that is
in Rome. And therefore Hierome writing of those words of the Apostle, except
there come a departing first, and that that man be disclosed: says, Nisi
venerit discessio primum, vt omnes gentes Hieronim. Ad Algasiam.
quae Romano Imperio subiacent, recedant abeis. That is: [Vnlesse a departing
first come, that all the Nations which now are subject to the Empire of Rome,
may depart from that subjection.] Therefore he says, that the Apostle left
this tradition which he thought not good to commit to writing. Remember you not
that when I was with you, I told you of these things, says the Apostle. If
any man ask why the Apostle thought good rather to commit this thing to their
memory, then to writing: to this the same Author Saint Hierome answers in
the same place: Si aperte audacterque dixisset, non veniet Antichristus, nisi
prius Romanum deleatur Imperium, iusta causa persecutionis in orientem tunc
Ecclesiam consurgere videbatur. That is: [If Saint Paul had said plainly and
boldly, Antichrist shall not come, unless the Roman Empire be first
destroyed, this might have ministered a just cause of persecution to the Church
then rising.] Then the Apostle would not speak this thing directly for fear
of drawing a persecution upon the Church, but committed it to their memories:
Remember you not that when I was yet with you, I told you? If any man demand
this question; why then, do you admit some Apostolical traditions? I answer.

100. Let these two limitations be remembered, and then I know not why
Apostolical traditions may not be admitted. First, it must have an evident
ground in the Scripture: Secondly, it must have the consenting testimony of
ancient Fathers, confirming it to be an Apostolical tradition. These two
conditions are both kept, in this particular which now I speak of; and in the
baptising of Infants. But to take a tradition from the bare testimony of any
Church, without a ground of Scripture, and the testimony of the ancient
Fathers, bearing witness that it was an Apostolical tradition: this we
utterly refuse as unwarrantable. Concerning this particular, the rest of the
Fathers yield the like consent to these. Ambrose says: Non prius veniet Ambr.
in 2 Thessalonians. 1.
Antichristus quam Regni Romani fiat defectio. Augustine says: Quidam putant
hec de Imperio dictum fuisse Romano, and propterea August. lib. 20. ca. 19. de
Ciuit. Dei.
Paulum Apostolum non ^d aperte scribere voluisse, ne calumniam videlicet
incurreret, quasi Romano Imperiomale optauerit. And in the same place: Tantum
qui modo tenet teneat, donec de medio tollatur: non absurd de ipso Romano
Imperio creditur. Another of the ancients says thus: Vt qui tenet nunc teneat
donec de medio Comm. in 2 Thessalonians 2. sub nomine Hieronymi.
fiat. Donec Regnum quod nunc tenet de medio auferatur, priusquam Antichristus
reueletur. John Chrysostom, and Oecumenius, summing his words, say thns,
writing upon that Scripture. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Solum est qui modo retinet. Thronus
videlicet, and Regnum Romanorum, quodnunc impedimento est donec cesset,
finemque accipiat, ^uncreuelabitur iniquus ille, hoc est Antichristus. Vbi enim
Imperium Romans fuerit dissolutum, tunc Antichristus rebellione irruet, ac
obtinere conabitur non hominum solum, verum Dei Imperium. Romanorum autem
Imperium ipse Antichristus perfect abolebit. Quemadmodum (...) Medorum
Imperium a Babylonijs dissolutum est, and Babyloniorum a Persis, Persarum
quoque a Macedonibus, and Macedonum a Romany; it a and Romanorum ab
Antichristo, and Antichristi a Domino nostro. [That thing which withholdeth, is
the Roman Empire, which now stays the matter till it cease and come to an
end. Then shall that wicked man be revealed, that is, Antichrist. For when the
Roman Empire shall be destroyed, then shall Antichrist by rebellion invade,
and shall seek to draw to himself not only the power of men, but of God
also. And Antichrist shall utterly make an end of the Roman Empire. For as the
Empire of the Medes was destroyed by the Babylonians, and that of the
Babylonians by the Persians, and that of the Persians by the Macedonians, and
that of the Macedonians by the Romans: so shall that of the Romans be
destroyed by Antichrist, and that of Antichrist by our Lord Jesus Christ.

101. By all which we find by the consenting judgment of the Fathers, that
Antichrist must rise up upon the ruin of the Roman Empire. And finding the
power and government of the ancient Roman Emperors to be utterly ruinated
by Gregory the second, the title of the Empire to be taken away from those
Emperors by Gregory the third: the rule of the City of Rome (which was the
ancient seat of the Empire) taken up and surprised by the Pope: the Cities of
the Empire near adjoining to Rome, to be brought under the subjection of the
Pope: by conferring the Prophesies of Scripture interpreted by the Fathers,
with these events which by History are truly recorded, laying one thing to
another, the conclusion is evident. My purpose is not to speak of Antichrist;
but only passing through these Stories of the Popes temporal exaltation, I
thought it a small labor for the Reader to compare the Prophesies of
Scripture, and the judgment of ancient Fathers with the event, which fell out
in the time of the two Gregory's, the second and third. Before which time the
Popes never entered into such furious attempts against their Sovereign Lords
the Emperors. For they yielded exact obedience to Emperors from the time of
the first Christian Emperor, until the time of Gregory the first. All which
while they refused not to be ruled, commanded, directed by the Emperors as by
their Sovereigns, not only in civil affairs, but even in matters concerning
the external Discipline of the Church, as calling of Councels, and confirming
them: punishing and censuring disorderous Clerks and Bishops, that offended
the Imperial Laws, and such like. In such things the Emperors ruled, the
Popes obeyed: no striving, no threatening, no casting off of the yoke appeared
all this while. But after that Phocas had granted to Beniface the third Pope,
the title of Oecumenicall Bishop, and that the Church of Rome should be head of
all other Churches: then began that star to fall from heaven, falling from
Apoc. 8. 10. and 9. 1.
the simplicity of truth and from sincerity of obedience, into pride, ambition,
and noisome lusts; and never ceased rolling downwards till at last it fell into
the deep practices of the bottomless pit. Thus when they began to fall, they
had one fall after another. They fell not into the practice of deposing
Princes, Anno 733.
until the time of Gregory the third.

Childeric or Chilperic.
102. THe Popes having proceeded thus far in deposing the Emperor, thought
all their labor lost, unless they might have those Territories made subject
to themselves, from which they had expulsed the Emperor: Their fear was, that
either the several Cities would procure their own Freedom, or that some that
were strongest would surprise all the rest, and so a small part might come to
the Popes share. The Lumbards were then strongest in Italy, and had soon
gotten the rest under their Dominion: To prevent their rising, and to enrich S.
Peter with a new Patrimony, the Popes after they had used the power of the
Lumbards against the Emperor, so now against the Lumbards begin to call new
aides into Italy, drawing first Pipin, and then Charles against the Lumbards,
by whose means they obtained their purpose: Pipin was made Harman. An. 752.
King of France for this service, and Childeric the right King was deposed by
Pope Stephen says Harmannus Contractus: other attribute this to Pope Zachary.
Childeric was shaven and thrust into a Monastery. After all this there stuck a
scruple in the conscience of Pipin, for he had taken an Oath of Allegiance to
Childeric his Sovereign; this scruple the Pope undertook Vsperg. An. 753.
to remove: For, says Vspergensis, Pope Stephen absolved him of his Oath,
which in former times he had taken to his Sovereign Childeric. Thus were these
great affairs ordered and disordered, the Emperor deposed, his subjects
raised in rebellion against him, the Pope exalted and enriched by the spoils
of the Empire, the French king deposed, his subjects absolved from their Oaths
and Allegiance, another set up in the kingdom. These were practices which
before this time were never attempted by Popes: From these beginnings and
examples the succeeding Popes took light, and made rules of their Government;
and therefore after this, the world could take no rest for the Popes. Moreover
after these examples of Pipin and Charles, they who through ambition aspired
without right or Title to kingdoms, have devoted their service wholly to the
Pope. And what holds the Spaniard so stiff in Popery, but only an hope that
by the Popes authority he may enlarge his Dominions in the same sort? It is to
be noted also, that they who thus offer their service to the Pope, are honored
by him, as the only defenders of the Church, whereas none have spoiled the
Church more then these: for Paulus Aemylius records, that Carolus Martellus
(father to Pipin) being then Constable of France, robbed the Churches and
Monasteries of France at his pleasure, promising that if he should obtain
victory against the Sarracins, he would bountifully repay all: But after most
great and rich victories, he not only repayed nothing, but thrust also the
Bishpppes from their Seas, held the Seas empty to pay soldiers; which thing
brought a foul confusion upon the Church of France: yet this man for his
service to the Pope was accounted a great defendor of the Church.

Henry the fourth Emperor.
103. THe ancient manner of choosing Popes, was by the Emperors consent,
after that Emperors became Christian: This was practiced from the time of
Constantine, till Hadrian the third, says Platina, who makes this Hadrian the
first, who altered this ancient manner: he took the opportunity of the absense
of Charles the gross then Emperor; Anno 884. Platin. Hadrian 3.
who was so encumbered with the wars of the Normanes that he could not attend
this business. But Onuphrius in his Chronicle of Popes, sets John the fifth
to be the first Pope that was chosen without the Emperors commaundem^nt and
appointing: both may be well reconciled: for Onuphrius speaks of the Popes
under the ancient Emperors: Platina of the Popes Anno 685.
under the French and Germane Emperors, for from Constantine till John the
fifth Pope, no Pope was chosen without the Emperors consent: from John the fifth
Pope, till Charles the first, no Pope was chosen by the Emperors consent:
Charles the first recovered the ancient rights of the Empire, as before we
declared: from his time till Hadrian the third, no Pope was chosen without the
Emperors consent: from Hadrian the third, the consent of the Emperor was not
required, if Pla^ina say true: others witness, that the Popes were always
chosen by the consent of the Emperor, till Hildebrand. The Popes thus striving
to cast off the ancient yoke, when Gregory the seventh was chosen Pope, he
added unto this practice of rejecting the Emperors consent, many more
practices, by blood, fraud, devilish pride and Necromancy aspiring to the
Papacy, and was at last made Pope, not only without the consent of the
Emperor, Beno.
but without the consent of the Cardinals also, only a company of armed men
with some few of the Clergy, gave out that Hildebrand Naucl. gener. 36
was chosen Pope by S. Peter, he was much furthered by one Maude a Gentlewoman
of great riches then in Italy, with whom he had great familiarity.

104. Henry the fourth Emperor called a Council at Worms to repress
Hildebrand: The Bishops of that Council Auent. l. 5.
condemned Hildebrand for intruding into the Papacy, and for his infamous and
prodigious conversation, and adiudgedhim to be deposed. Hildebrand upon the
knowledge of these news excommunicated the Emperor, deprived him of Government,
absolved his subjects from their Oath of Allegiance. The Emperor of a sudden
being robbed of his friends and subjects by the practice of them whom
Hildebra^d had set to negotiate this matter, was driven to the greatest
debasement of himself, that has bin heard of, barefoot in a sharp Frost in
deep Winter, three days attending at Canusium with his wife and child before
he was admitted to the Popes presence: when he was admitted, and had craved
pardon: his censure was, to stand at the mercy of Hildebrand: Which when he had
confirmed by an Oath, the Pope absolved him, but afterward set up Rodolph Duke
of Sueuia in war against him. Rodolph being thus stirred up to Rebellion
against his Sovereign, was so wounded in a battle, that being carried to
Merseburge without hope of life, called the Nobles and Bishops that had
favored him; and in their presence beholding Vsperg. An. 1080.
his right hand which was smitten off in the battle, This, quoth he, is that
hand by which I confirmed an Oath of mine Naucl. gener. 37
Allegiance to my Master Henry: this have I gotten by following your Council,
return you to your Master, and keep your first faith, as for me, I go to my
Fathers.

105. The Emperor after this, gathered a Synod at Brixia: The Bishops of
Italy, Lumbardy, Germany meeting there, condemned Hildebrand for a disturber of
Christendom, a disorderer of the Church, a periurous, sacrilegious Incendiary,
a Witch and Necromancer. The Emperor besieged him in the Castle of S. Peter,
but Hildebrand understanding that the Emperor Auent. l. 5. Usperg.
used to resort to S. Mary's Church to pray, set a knave above the place where
he used to pray, to throw down a great stone upon him, and to kill him.
Whilst the varlet was setting the stone for that purpose, down comes the
stone and the traitor with it, who was crushed to pieces therewith. After that
Hildebrand had set up many such practices against the Emperor without effect,
he betook himself to flight: And ^andring like a Vagabond without comfort,
without help, without hope, though brought to a most pitiful estate, yet
pitied of no man, traveling under the unsupportable burden of a restless
conscience, he died for grief at Salernum. By all which we see, that this new
and monstrous practice of deposing Kings, was resisted by the Emperor, as
pestiferous against his estate, disclaimed by Bishops, as a thing strangely
disordering the Church and civil States, and justly revenged by God, as a
thing abominable. The Chronicles observe, as it is noted in Vspergensis, Fol.
226. that this Henry the fourth had fought three score and two pitched battles,
in number surpassing M. Marcellus and Julius Caesar, of whom the one fought
thirty, the other fifty.

Henry the fifth.
106. WHen Hildebrand and Rodolph both conspiring against Henry the fourth,
were both overthrown, the succeeding Popes maintaining the same policy and
practice (for it were pity but that these Apostolical practices were well
known) raised Henry the fifth in arms against his father Henry the fourth:
this old Emperor being weary of troubles, and desirous to have some repose,
made his Naucl. gener. 37
purpose known, that he would resign all government to his son, and go
himself in person to visit the Sepulcher of Christ: but the son was stirred
up by the Popes to rebel against his Father, before he had undertaken that
journey. To color his rebellion, he protested that he sought not his Fathers
Throne for desire of dominion, neither wished he the deprination of his Lord
and Father: but if his Father would be subject to Saint Peter and his
Successors, then would he yield him the Empire. The end of this contention was
this. The old Emperor was surprised, imprisoned by his son, and so died.
There is an Epistle of this Emperor extant in Naucler, wherein he complains
that he was betrayed against all humane and divine Laws, being invited by his
son to a Treaty of peace, after faith and assurance given for his life and
honor, coming peaceably to Mentz, was surprised treacherously. After all this
Henry the fifth coming to Rome, found no more favor then his Father had done.
For Paschalis the second contended with him so earnestly for Inuestitures
(which was the quarrel for which his Father felt so much the Popes anger) that
thereupon a tu^ult was raised, in that tumult Pope Paschalis was taken. Who
being in the Emperors power, confirmed the Emperors Jurisdiction, and
disclaimed the right of Inuestitures, yielding it to the Emperor in that sort,
as his ancestors had used the same in former times.

107. At this time the Cities of Italy took an Oath of aleageance to the same
Emperor. But after all this grant of Pope Nauc *er. gener. 38.
Paschalis, no bond being sufficient to hold fast a Pope, he called a Council
at Rome; wherein he condemned all that himself had done in yielding
Inuestitures to the Emperor: and excommunicated the Emperor. The Emperor to
prevent the dangers that might ensue, came again into Italy: and sent
Ambassadors to the Pope, to try if these matters might be brought to a
peaceable end. The Pope in the mean time calls a Council at the Lateran. In
this Council Pope Paschalis excusing that fact of his for yielding
Inuestitures to the Emperor, desired all that were present to pray for him,
that God would forgive him. For, says he, that writing which I made, which is
Naucler. ibid.
called a privilege, I do here condemn under an everlasting curse, and pray
that all you will do the same. There followed a general acclamation, Fiat,
fiat: that is, be it so. Then Bruno Bishop of Signinum, faid: We have cause to
thank God that we have heard the Pope from his own mouth condemn this
privilege. Which is not a privilege, but rather a prauiledge, because it
contains prauity and heresy. Whereupon another stood up and said: If that
privilege contain heresy, then he who made it is an heretic. Caietan
being moved with the sharpness of that speech, answered: What? do thou in
this Council, in the hearing of us all, call the Pope an heretic? that
writing was not heresy, but it was evil. Nay, quoth another, it was not
evil, etc. Paschalis by his hand commanding silence, appeased the clamor,
and told them that heresy never entered into the Church of Rome. This I have
declared, that the Reader may understand, what grave matters are handled in
some Popish Councels. In this Council the excommunication against the Emperor
was renewed. Whereupon such a ruin and vastation of Italy followed, that
nothing could be seen there for a time, but bloodshed, burnings, robberies:
the State and Church confounded, the true heirs turned o^t of their
possessions; robbers and oppressors thrust in. All this moved not the Popes,
to remit Inuestitures. The Emperor perceiving that nothing could move the
Popes, to loose so beneficial a Pray, no not the common calamity of
Christendom: was persuaded to yield to the Pope in the end, in respect of the
miseries that followed this contention. And so resigned Inuestitures to the
Pope. Whereupon peace followed for a time.

Frederick Barbarossa.
108. FRederick the first, surnamed Barbarossa is highly commended by the
Writers of that age, and of them that followed, for a Prince of great worth,
wisdom, and valor. When he came into Italy the Pope met him, not with a
purpose to honor him, but by him to be revenged upon the King of Sicily, with
whom the Pope was at variance. Frederick received the Pope with great
reverence, and as he lighted from his horse, Funct. lib. 10. Chron.
held the left stirrope. This was made a great quarrel against Frederick, and
though he made his reasonable excuse, that this was the first time that ever
he served in that sort, and might therefore be pardoned for any thing
unskillfully done: that the office proceeding from good will, it made not much
matter on which side he came, that came to reverence him: yet the Pope would
not be satisfied; but showed himself so much offended, that the Emperor began
to be somewhat moved; so that the parting was with some stomach on both sides.
The next day the Emperor meeting the Pope, held the right stirrope, to please
him: and when they were set, the Pope thus began. The Princes of ancient times
your predecessors, when they came to make petition for the Imperial crown,
were wont by some worthy office to promerit the favor of the Church of Rome;
that by preventing the blessing, they might declare by some egregious service
that the Crown was due to them. Thus did Charles by overthrowing the Lumbards,
Thus did Otho by defeating the Berengarij, Thus did Lotharius by repressing the
Normanes. So must you do, and repress the King of Sicily with the Normanes,
and restore Apulia to us and the Church: and then you shall see what we will
do for our part. The Emperor understanding well how unreasonable the motion
was, that Apulia, which was by right a part of the Empire should be taken from
the King of Sicily at the Emperors charges, and bestowed upon the Pope; yet for
that time did give a moderate answer, that he would go into Germany and
return with fresh forces for that service, because these which were with him
were much decayed.

109. This mention of the King of Sicily, draws us to speak somewhat of him,
our purpose being to observe the practice of Popes in deposing of Kings.
William King of Sicilia, held also Apulia, as he received it from his Father
Roger, to whom it came from Robert Guiscard, who first drove out the Moors
from thence, and won the possession thereof. This King William of Sicily
deposed.
William because he would not give Apulia to the Pope, for enlarging of Saint
Peter's Patrimony, was excommunicated by Pope Hadrian the fourth deposed from
his Kingdom, his subjects discharged of their Oath and Allegiance. And
because William stood upon his strength in his own just defense against the
Pope, therefore the Pope would gladly have set Frederick the Emperor against
him. In the end William in fear partly of Naucler. genesis 39.
Frederick, but especially of Immanuel the Greek Emperor (whose Orator
Palaeologus, promised to drive William out of Italy, and to give the Pope five
thousand pound weight of gold, if three Haven Towns of Apulia might be given
to his Master by covenant after the victory) was driven to compound with the
Pope: and being thus forced thereto, did acknowledge that he An. 1155.
held both those Kingdoms of the Pope.

110. When Frederick the Emperor understood that the Pope had made a league
with William, and confirmed him in both the Kingdoms, after that he had moved
Frederick to undertake the wars against him: was not a little grieved
thereat, considering also other greeuances and oppressions of Germany.
Whereupon he began to execute some severe discipline against certain dissolute
persons of the Clergy, at which the Pope grew highly offended: hereupon some
sharp letters passed between them, as before we declared. But when the
Emperor. 3.
prepared a journey into Italy with an Army, the Pope fearing the worst, made
means, and was reconciled to him. A little after when Frederick besieged
Crema, some Cities of Italy conspiring against him, the Pope followed the first
opportunity of rebellion, and excommunicated the Emperor and cursed him.
Naucler declares the motive that drew the Pope to excommunicate Naucler.
generat. 39.
the Emperor. Data pecunia immensa Domino Hadriano Papae vt imperatorem
excommunicaret. A huge sum of money was given to Pope Hadrian, to
excommunicate the Emperor. These be the Apostolical censures, and these be
the means that draw his holiness to depose Princes. Pope Hadrian shortly
after at Anagnia, walking abroad to take the air, as he would have drunk a
little water in a spring, a fly falling in to his mouth, stuck so fast in his
throat, that no help of Ph^sicke prevailing to remove her, he was choked
therewith, and died.

111. I may not omit what Johannes Flasboriensis, a Writer in this time,
observes of this Hadrian, as from him Naucler Naucle. ibid.
reports. This John affirms, that he heard Hadrian confess thus much: [No
man lives in the world more miserable then the Pope of Rome: In this Sea have
I found so many miseries; that in respect of this present estate, all the
bitterness of my former Est Romulo succedere in Parricidijs, non Petro in
ouibus pascendis.
life seems pleasure and happiness: This ambition to seek the Papacy, even
by shedding our brothers blood, this is to succeed Romulus in Paricide, not
Peter in feeding.] By this autentick testimony of Pope Hadrian a witness
without exception, we see what it is to be a Pope. Marcellus the second as
Onuphrius Onuphr. vita Marcelli. 2.
reports in his life: gave the like censure of the Papacy, adding thus much:
[That he saw no means how any Pope could be saved.] These are the testimonies
of the Popes themselves, who deserve to be believed speaking of a matter
whereof they had so great experience. After the death of Hadrian, Alexander the
fifth being chosen Pope, renueth the excommunication against Frederick,
thundering out great curses upon him, and sent letters abroad to all Princes
and people to raise tumults against him. The Emperor to pacify the troubles
of Christendom which were growing by the Schism, which then began between
this Alexander and Victor the fourth, entreated the French King in some
convenient place to meet him, and to bring Alexander, as he would also bring
Victor to this meeting, that matters might be composed, if it might be, and
troubles prevented. The meeting was appointed at Diuion. Thither came Frederick
and Uictor. Thither came Henry the second King of England, and William King of
Scotland. But Alexander was so much afraid of this meeting, that he persuaded
Philip the French King, who had promised to meet the Emperor here, to
practice a trick which better beseemed a shifting Pope, then an honorable
Prince. The devise was, that the French King should come to the place before
the Emperor was come, and wash his hands in the River that ran by the place;
and by the voice of a Criar, should call the Emperor three times, and as if
this were the keeping of his promise, afterward he should depart. When the
Emperor and the Kings of England and Scotland were come to the place, and
heard what the French King had done: they were much offended that the King
should so Popishly disappoint his promise, therefore they willed Victor to
return to Rome, and went their ways.

112. I pass by Fredericks journey to the holy land, his wars there, how
Pope Alexander sent his Image to the Souldian; how being taken prisoner when he
would have dissimulated his estate, he was known by his picture: how after his
return he raised an Army, and led the same into Italy against Alexander: how
against the Venetians, who took part with Alexander, he sent his son Otho:
how his son was taken prisoner: which estate of his son gave Alexander the
advantage, and made the Emperor content to yield. The conclusion Naucl.
gener. 40 reports this as done before Frederick his expedition to the holy
land.
was: The Emperor must come into Saint Mark his Church in Venice, and there
humbly seek absolution at the Popes hands. Frederick did so: The Pope
commanded him to ask pardon prostrate on the ground; the Emperor suspecting
no contumely, did so. The humble, mild, and mortified Vicar of Christ, having
the Emperor thus prostrate before him, set his foot upon the Emperors neck,
using those words: Super Aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis, and conculcabis
Leonem Psalm. 91. 13. Thou shall walk upon the Aspe and Serpent, thou shall
tread under feet the Lion and Dragon. Not to thee, but to Peter. Both to me
and to Peter.
and Draconem: The Emperors answer was, Non tibi, sed Petro: The Pope
replied, Et mihi and Petro. These be examples of the Popes power in
excommunicating Emperors: from which examples they draw the claim of a right
which they pretend to have. The Popish writers hope that men will be persuaded
by the examples of the Popes power, that this power was given to S. Peter, and
in him to all Popes, because there appears such Christian moderation,
humility, and mildness therein. Though there be nothing in Scripture for
them, but all against them; though the ancient fathers expressly denied the
Popes to have Jurisdiction over other Bishpopes, yet they doubt not but they
shall find some that will rest persuaded, that Christ left this fullness of
power to the Popes, which contains Sovereign Jurisdiction, not only over
all Bishops, but over all temporal Princes also.

Henry the sixth, and Philip.
113. HEnry the sixth Emperor succeeded Frederic. This Naucl. gener. 40.
Cuspinian vita Henrici and Philippi.
Henry left a young son Frederic an Infant, yet elect to be Emperor, and
committed his education and weldoing to the trust of Pope Innocens the third,
leaving the Empire to his brother Philip until the child should grow to age.
Pope Innocent this trusty tutor, purposing the destruction both of Philip and
young Frederick set up another Emperor, which procured great vexation and
trouble to them, and to all Germany. And first he quarrelled Philip, that he
stood under an old excommunication of Celestinus; but afterward making
semblance of favor and reconciliation with him, he sent the Bishop of
Sutrium, to demand pledges (certain men whose eyes his brother Henry had
plucked out). The Bishop came and received the blind pledges, and at the
earnest request of Philip, absolved him from the excommunication. The Pope when
he had gotten these blind men, made public show of them to move envy
against Philip: that done, he excommunicated the Bishop of Sutrium for
absoluing Philip without his commandment: the Bishop was deprived, and so
stood deprived all the days of his life. Then labored the Pope to stir up
Bertholdu^ Duke of Zaringia against Philip, whom he would have obtruded to the
Electours: But Berthold utterly refusing to rebel, sent his Nephews to Philip
for Hostages of his Faith and Allegiance, and came himself and swear
Allegiance to him: at which the Pope taking great indignation, brake out into
these words: Either shall the Pope pull the Crown from Philip, or Philip shall
pull the Miter from the Pope. And sent therefore to Otho son to Henry Leo, a
Prince more noted for boldness, pride and ambition, then for wisdom and
moderation.

114. To this man the Pope Innocent sent a Crown, and set him up against
Philippe for the Empire, excommunicating Philippe, and pulling all helps from
him that possible he could, and so filled the world with wars. As Philip and
Otho were thus plunged in wars, all Princes and people troubled; there was
not a Bishopric, or Ecclesiastical dignity, or Parish Church which was not
made litigious; and in the common miseries of Christendom, and confusion of
the Church, the Pope only rejoiced, increasing his wealth by the ruins of the
Church: the calamity of all men was turned to his happiness. To express this
true felicity of the Pope, and the Court of Rome, in the misery and vexation of
all the world, mine Author breaks out into these words: [O our mother Rome,
Abbas Uspergens. Philippo. 1.
rejoice, because the Cataracts of earthly treasures are opened, that unto thee
Rivers may flow, and Mountains of silver may be brought in great abundance to
thee: be thou joyful for the iniquity of the sons of men, because in
recompense of so much mischief as from thee proceeds, the price returns to
thee. Let thine heart be merry for the discord and dissension that troubles
all other, but helps thee; for out of the infernal pit it breaks to heap
up much money as a reward to thee. Thou have that which always thou have
thirsted after, and longed for: Now may thou sing this song, that thou have
overcome the world, not by thy Religion, but by the malitiousnesse of men. That
which draws men to thee, is not thy devotion, or a pure conscience, but
impudency and boldness, to commit all wickedness, and hope of impunity: for
their hope is to defend and maintain any wickedness where thou art the Judge,
and when the price is prepared.] Thus far Uspergensis, making some what bold
with that innocent Pope Innocentius. In this contention which the Pope raised,
Otho had the helps of the King of Bohemia, the Lantgraue of Thuring, the
Bishop of Colon: these inclined to him being drawn as well by the Popes
cursing of Philip, as also for that they saw that Otho was strong by means of
his Uncle Richard King of England. But at last Otho being wearied with the
wars, and perceiving Philips affairs to prosper, was content to hear of
peace.

115. The Pope himself after all his malice thus spent, made a motion of
reconciliation between them, upon this condition, that Philips daughter should
be given in marriage to Richard the Popes brothers son, newly created Earl
of Thuscia, Spoletum, and Marchia Anconitana, hoping that these lands and
Titles which then his Nephew inioyed only by the Popes favor, and at his
will, might by this means afterward pass by right of inheritance. The Pope
seemed to be so earnest for this match, that Uspergensis says it was promised.
Here is descried one end of the Popes excommunications and absolutions, and of
raising wars in Christendom, that they might by troubling Christendom draw
some advantages to themselves. The Popes motion was scorned of the Princes, and
the daughter of Philip was given in marriage to Otho, and Articles agreed on
that Philip during his life should govern, and after him Otho.

Otho the fourth.
116. PHilip the last Emperor being murdered by the practice and hand of the
County Palatin Wittlespach, Germany fell within the power of the Popes
vexation more then before: Hoc vno Philippo p^rempto (says Naucler) Naucl.
gener. 41.
Germania summis insidijs Pontificis Romani agitata, vires pene suas omnes in
sese experta est truculenter: That is, This one Prince Philip being dead,
Germany vexed with the great and most fraudulent deceits of the Pope, did feel
in a manner all his force and power against it. Otho after this, coming to
Rome, Innocentius the third who had set him up in arms against Philip,
entertained him with great show of favor, but this love was turned shortly into
greater hatred: For whilst Pope Innocent was somewhat too busy in exacting an
Oath of Otho, and sti^red up or heartned some of the Citizens of Rome against
the Germans, the Romans drew to a tumult, and killed one thousand and a
hundred Germans, who suspected no harm. Otho Suspectum habens Romans
Pontificem, ne quid in eo tumultu occasionis ci^ibus prestitisset. Naucler.
being much moved at this Romish entertainment, first moved that in some
peaceable manner mends might be made: but perceiving them to be enraged, that
they seemed more ready to give him a new onset, then to offer or to accept
peace: he departed out of the City, and finding by suspicions and
presumptions that Pope Innocent had given some occasion and heartning to the
Citizens in that tumult: he resolved to be revenged upon the Pope, and entered
into the lands of S. Peter's Patrimony, making great wast and desolation where
he came. Wherefore Pope Innocent excommunicated him, and absolved all Prelates,
Lords, and all the people that were subject to the Empire from that Oath of
Allegiance, which they had taken to Otho, commanding all men not to call him
or account him Emperor, nor in any thing to yield obedience to him.

117. Otho being thus excommunicated and cursed by the Pope, proceeded on in
the same course, denying that the Pope had any power over the Emperor, or to
dispose of the Empire, and therefore notwithstanding all that the Pope had
done, still he did bear himself as Emperor. And coming into Germany, he
held a Diet at Norinberge, where he opened to the Princes of Germany, the
manifold and fraudulent practices of Multiplices Romans Pontificis contrase
ostensas callidetates exponens, quam unjust ab illo insectaretur, declarauit.
Naucl. Naucl. gener. 41.
the Pope against him: and mine Author reports, that there he made this
speech: [Now is the time come, O Princes, for you to show your courage and care
of the Empire, and for the administration thereof; for to you, only to you,
belongs this right of disposing of the Germane Empire: therefore it must be
your care to prevent these troubles. This we confess to be in your power, and
of your right to create an Emperor, or to depose him, to set him up or pull
him down, and that herein the Pope has no Jurisdiction: when any trouble
arises in the Empire, you have the power and right to redress it. Now then
like true Germans defend your own right, show your courage and strength in
the maintenance of your Country laws, and of the imperial dignity: either now
maintain your own right, or else you shall loose all: for if by your facility
you permit the Pope to dispose of the Empire at his pleasure, you shall soon
find most assuredly that your power in the choice of an Emperor shall be
utterly overthrown and brought to nothing.] Thus did Otho then reject the
Popes power: but the Pope was too subtle and too strong for him, for he set up
Frederick the son of Henry the sixth against him, to whom the Princes of
Germany were bound in an auncien^ Oath of Allegiance, The memory of which bond
did so prejudice Otho that he was forsaken, and Frederick was made Emperor.

Frederick the second.
118. FRederick the second, purposing to demerit the Popes favor, and to
assuage the insatiable thirst of blood and wars: gave many great and rich
gifts to the Pope, granted much land, and many territories in Italy to the
Church of Rome: but nothing could assuage the spirit that ruled in the Popes.
For after all this kindness of the Emperor, the Pope (then Honorius the
third) gave favor and encouragement to two Earls of Thuscia, Richard (or as
Vspergensis calls him Matthew) and Thomas, notorious enemies of the Emperor,
and convict of Treason against him. Whom when Frederick pursued in battle,
they betook themselves to the protection of the Pope as their surest refuge.
The Emperor followed them within the Popes territories: he declared also his
right to Sicily and Apulia, and the ancient Privileges which those Kings had
always used for Inuestitures, which privileges in his nonage Naucl. gener.
(...).
(who was left to Innocent the third, as to a faithful Tutor) were surprised
by the same Innocent, taken from his mother Constantia, himself being young and
not able to make resistance. As thus Frederick sought to maintain his right,
Honorius draws out this new and strange weapon against him, excommunicating,
and depriving him, raising up his subjects against him, persuading them to
shake off their faith, Oath, Allegiance, and all respect of the Emperor. The
Lumbards he stirred up in rebellion against the Emperor, procuring thereby
great prejudice to the Empire (says Naucler) and defeating the purpose of the
journey, which Frederick intended to the holy land; and in the beginning of
these furious attempts, he was cut short by Death.

119. Gregory the ninth who succeeded, began there, where Honorius left. And
because he sought a pretense for his fury, he Naucl. gener. 4^ Cuspinian. vita
Frederici. 2.
accused the Emperor, for that he had not performed his vow of that journey
to Jerusalem, whereunto he was drawn by Honorius (Though this journey he
performed afterward) Thus the Pope neither conuicting him, no^ conuenting him,
nor once hearing him, thundered out his bolt of excommunication. When the
Emperors Ambassadors entreated that they might be admitted to render reasons
of his stay, they could not be admitted, but the Pope doubled and redoubled his
excommunication. Frederick to mitigate this mon^trous rage, undertook the
journey to Jerusalem, and performed the service with great labor and no less
glory. But now behold the true reach of the Popes excommunications, and
exhortations to the holy service. As soon as ever the Emperor was gone to
Asia, then the Pope declaring why he so much desired his absence, raised forces
and sent them to subdue Apulia to bring it under his subjection. The Soldiers
which were signed with the Cross for the holy wars he stayed, and them he
spoiled of their provision. Froderick in the mean time recovered Jerusalem,
(...), Ioppe from the Sultan, with other Towns, and wrote to the Pope of his
success: but the Pope suppressed those news, and gave forth that Fr^derick
was slain, t^ the end that he might with greater ease surprise certain Cities
of Apulia, which stood faithful to Frederick. He slew with barbarous cruelty
the Germane and French soldiers newly returned from the Eastern wars, least
they should t^ll the truth of the Emperors good success. And when Frederick
sent to him to be absolved for his service (as Cuspinian. Fred. 2.
the Pope had promised to absolve him, if once he would take that journey)
this now he utterly denied. And moreover as Naucler reports, he enjoined
the Knights that were called Templarians and Hospitularians, with a strict
commandment, to use Frederick no otherwise then a public enemy. This
practice of turning the Soldiers which were crossed for the holy wars to the
Popes purposes, was much used by the Popes, and the common use of it made the
Princes of Christendom understand, that the Popes used the pretense of the
holy wars, when they would bring to effect some particular of their own. Thus
were great preparations of the French and Germans gathered Naucler. genesis 41.
by Innocent the third and Honorius the third, under pretense of the wars of
Jerusalem: but turned wholly against the Emperor of Constantinople: to reduce
that Church to the obedience of Rome. Thus were other preparations and ^uch
money collected: pretended for the holy wars: but turned by Ma^m the fourth
against Peter King of Arragon. Thus were the like preparations pre^ended for
the same wars, but employed by John the two and twentieth against Lodouick
Duke of Bauare. Prascrip^o sacrorum armorum ali^ spectauit (says Paulus
Aemyl. in vita Philippi Longi.
Aemylius) Pontifex hostem iudioarat Lodoui^um B^uariae ducem.

120. Frederick returning into Italy from the East, after all these wrongs
having both cause and means, opportunely offering it self to revenge his
wrongs: yet resolved not to be drawn from his mild course. He made m^anes to
be reconciled to the Pope: the Pope would not hear of reconciliation, unless
he would give him one hundred and twenty thousand ounces of gold. This was the
price of his absolution. That the Princes of the world might know, that his
excommunications stand in blood, cruelty and ambition: his absolutions in
covetousness. Frederick being thus absolved, was received by the Pope in a
banquet, but all was counterfeit cheer. For no sooner was Frederick returned
into Germany, but presently he understood that the Princes of Germany had
received directions from the Pope, to c^use none of his family Emperor after
him; that the Pope had conspired with his enemies to deiect him from the
Empire. Frederick prepared an Army to repress the Lumbards, who had conspired
against him, and took many Cities in Lumbardy, Vmbria, and Hetruria. The Pope
(being one of the same conspiracy) was so offended at Frederick, that he
thundered out now the third time his excommunication against him, discharging
all his Subjects from their faith and allegiance. He made a league with the
Venetians; and he called the Lateran Council, wherein the purpose was to
depose Frederick. He commanded also the heads of Peter and Paul to be carried
through the City in solemn Procession. And calling the people together in
Saint Peter's Minister, he made an Oration to them full of commiseration*
stirring them up to fight against the Emperor, and to take the sign of the
Cross as against an enemy of Christ, promising everlasting life to all that
took Arms against him.

121. The Emperor (in whom it appeared that the greatest patience once broken
is turned into the greatest fury) understanding that the Pope, whom he had
always sought to mitigate, was not to be drawn by kindness or fair means,
hearing also that against himself as against a Turk or Sarracine the Cross
was given: brought his Army before the City of Rome; and joining battle
against his enemies, put them to an overthrow, but especially he declared his
indignation against such as had taken the Cross. For he commanded that they
should be cut in the manner of a Cross. Some had their heads cloven in four
quarters crosse-wise. The Clergy had first a c^owne cut off to the quick, and
then were deeply crossed with a sword; that as they were called, so they might
be in truth signed with a Cross. The Emperor also understanding that the
Popes Legates were sent out to call the Bishops of England and France to the
Council, kept watch in all the ways that none might come to the Council. He
took diverse Cardinals and Bishops that were coming by ship: some he
drowned, others he hanged; among whom was the Popes brother. Pope Gregory
having thus raised up the quiet spirit of this Prince into such a rage, and
knowing no way how to appease him, or to rid himself out of these troubles,
which himself had procured, for grief died.

122. C^lestinus the fourth succeeding, would alfo have succeeded Gregory in
the same hereditary spirit of rebellion, and savage cruelty, but a sudden
death and short government would not suffer him to perform his purpose: for
within eighteen days of his Election he was poisoned. In his place came
Innocentius the fourth, who of a most inward friend of the Emperor, became a
most mortal foe, and surpassed all his predecessors in spiritual fury
against the good Emperor: for when Bald^in King of Jerusalem, and Raymond
Earl of Tholous labored to establish peace between the Empire and Papacy,
and had procured for that purpose a meeting: the Pope aided by the Fleet of
Genua, gave them the slip and came to Lions in Fr ance, where he called a
Synod. In this Synod the Pope caused Fred ericke to be cyted personally to
appear, and to answer to such things as should be objected against him. The
Emperor appeared not, but sent thither Thaddaeus Suessanus a famous Lawyer in
those days: among other that the Emperor sent, Naucler names also Petrum de
Vineis, a learned and eloquent man at that time. These pleading for the
Emperor, declared that he was hindered by such impediments, that personally he
could not be present, and therefore they required with great submisnes on the
Emperors behalf, that a convenient time might be assigned to him, wherein he
might come and answer. This reasonable petition was denied: the Pope drew out
his terrible tool, excommunicating the Emperor, absoluing all Princes of the
Empire from their Oath and faith, moved them to make choice of a new Emperor,
alleging many causes falsely devised, as blasphemy, perjury, sacrilege, and
such like.

123. Frederick after he heard of these proceedings against him, made ready
for a journey to Lions: but as he was in the way, understanding that they whom
he had banished from Parma, were returned thither by the Popes practice, and
taking the Town by force, had given a great overthrow to the other Citizens:
fearing least this example might draw other Cities to the like revolt: he gave
over the journey to Lions, and wrote Letters to the French King, and all
Prelates refuting the Popes frivolous objections, declaring the justice of his
cause and his Pet. de Uineis l. 2. Ep. 10. and 20. Cuspinian. vit. Fred. 2.
innocence. Innocentius regarding neither justice nor innocence, pursued him by
violence, malice, open wars, secret conspiracies, seeking all means that his
unholy head could invent to take away the life of Frederick. As he was taking
his recreation in hauking at Grossetum by the Sea shore, near to Sien, the
Pope drew his own servants to a conspiracy: the conspiracy was detected, and
the traitors had the reward of their treason. Innocentius who could not rest
till he had done some Pontifical exploit against the life of this Prince,
stirred up the Princes of Germany to thrust down Frederick, and to set up
another: first was set up Henry Lantgraue of Thuringia; this Anno 1247.
man besieging V^mes was wounded by the shot of an Arrow, and shortly after
resigned both his life and the Empire. After this was William Earl of Holland
set up: this man was slain in the wars which he had gaged against the
Frisians: neither of these says Naucler, were numbered among the Emperors. At
last after so many secret traps laid for the life of this Prince, (behold the
end of the Popes malice, where strength fails) the Emperor was destroyed by
poison.

King John of England.
124. THe King of England sped no better then others, for by this unbridled
power of usurped Jurisdiction King John with the whole Kingdom was brought
into great trouble and perplexity: these troubles grew upon a quarrel of
Election between the Monks of Canterbury, and the Suffraganes, in the seventh
year of King John: for after the death of Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury,
the Monks without the knowledge of the King, or respect of the Suffraganes,
chose Reynold the Subpriour of the house, to be Archbishop, who secretly went
to Rome to have this his election confirmed by the Pope: but stay was made at
Rome, because he showed not Letters commendatory from the King. The Monks
perceiving that without those letters commendatory, they could not proceed,
made request to the King that they might choose another whom the King might
commend: this the King liked well, and commended John Gray the Bishop of
Norwich, being his Chaplain, and President of his Counsel (as Hollinshed
says, but Mat. Paris whom he cyteth, has not so much) The Monks gladly
obeyed the Kings request, and mad^ choice of this man: but the Pope refusing
both, thrust upon them Stephen Langton, commanding and compelling so many of
those Monks of that Covent, as were then at Rome, to choose him: the King was
herewith much moved, because Stephen Langton was brought up under the French
King, and bound to him: between whom and King John there was at that time much
war and dissension, wherefore the King banished the Monks that had chosen
Stephen, and wrote to the Pope, that he had no reason to admit Stephen to such
a place in his Kingdom, a man promoted by the French King, and at his
command. This contention continuing, the Pope sent to the Bishops of
England, commanding them to put the King and his land under the sentence of
interdiction, denouncing him and his land accursed. The Bishops to whom the
Pope wrote (being by this time become the Popes subjects and s^ruants and not
the Kings, which is the end which the Pope seeks by his Jurisdiction)
denounced the interdiction, and then fled to Rome: King John seeing many fall
from his obedience to the obedience of the Pope, drew his people to an Oath of
Allegiance. After this came Pa^dulph Legate from the Pope, who after that he
had been here a while, was commanded by the Pope to repair to the French
King, there with Stephen Langton to take Council, and to stir up the French
to make wars upon King John. Thus King John was depriu^d of his Government,
his subjects absolved from their Allegiance, by which practice many revolted
from him; so that he was left weak; and when the Pop^ had thus weakened him,
then he set up the French King in arms against him. The issue was this: The
King circumuented by these practices of the Pope and oppressed, being also
bereaved of all help, was forced to deliver his Crown to Pandulph, and
received it from him again, as from the Popes hands. And thus was Stephen
Langton made Archbishop: this was done in the fifteenth year of King John.
An. Dom. 1213.

The Earl of Tholous.
125. WHen Frederick the second lived, so persecuted by the Pope, as we have
declared: a new and strange generation rose up of a sudden, never seen in
the world before, starting up like those armed Soldiers, which the Poets feign
to have sprung up suddenly of the Serpents teeth being sowed by Cadmus. Such a
serpentine generation of Friars were newly hatched at this time: the first
founders of them were Francis and Do^inick. For the Popes having a purpose to
raise themselves above the Church, and above Kings and Emperors; as both by
their profession and claim in the Canon Law, and by their practice was
apparent; and for this purpose thundering out their excommunications upon every
occasion, practicing this power in deposing Princes: found themselves much
crossed in these courses by Bishops, and especially by the Bishops of Germany;
who stood out for a long time faithful in the Church, and courageous against
the Popes tyranny. Auenti^us gives many testimonies of the courage of the
German Bishops (as elsewhere also we have observed of the English Bishops) for
he writing of the times of Frederick the second, the Bishops then says he,
were not as now they are addict to the service of the Pope, given to idleness
and pleasure, but learned, industrious, loving Christ, and declaring their love
by feeding their flocks diligently. These were not for the Popes purpose. For
in diverse Synodes they censured the Popes folly and ambition freely, and
withstood his tyranny. Then was the Church so governed by Bishops, all matters
so judged and determined, that the Pope might advise, but he could not by
authority attempt any thing in the Province of any Bishop: things being guided
by truth, law, the judgment of the wisest and best learned in the Province;
and by the Council and common consent of the Clergy of that Province. Who had
reason to know the estate of their Church and Province, better then the Pope,
or any stranger could do. This godly order in the Church, the Pope had a
purpose to confound: to opp^esse the Bishops authority, and to draw all power
to himself. Hoc i^stitutum (to use the words of Aue^tinus) tollere and
antiquare, Episcoporum autoruatem Labefactare, ad vnius cu^cta potestatem
redigere complacitum est.

126. This being the purpose of Popes: for the better effecting of it, it was
thought fit and expedient to raise up new Sects of Friars, which might be
wholly at the devotion and direction of the Pope; to dissolve the discipline of
the Church; to mollify and corrupt the ancient rigor of Bishops, to alter
the ancient doctrines, and bend them to the Popes purposes: and to be resolute
and desperate Ministers for establishing the Popes authority and Jurisdiction
oue^ Kings; though it were to the wrack and common disordering of Christendom.
For these purposes were Friars established at this time. And they wrought
effectually to these ends. For the gravity, integrity, true honor, courage,
constancy; and ^eputation of Bishops was never utterly overthrown, till Friars
became Bishops, then came these corruptions into Bishops Courts. Then and
never before, came in these sordidous censures to punish sin with pecuniary
mulcts in Bishops Courts, as John Wiclif does witness, then and by them crept
in the great corruptions of doctrine. And because when the Pope had
excommunicated and deposed Princes, the Bishops in former times were not only
cold in executing the Popes fury, but sometimes withstoode those attempts as
new, rash, and bloody: the Friars were c^eated to be the firebrandes of
Christendom for all the Popes furious enterprises.

127. The first service which the Friars did perform to the Pope, was in the
execution of his excommunication against the The Earl of Tholous.
Earl of Toulouse. The manner thereof by Matthew Paris, and other Writers, is
described thus. Raimundus Earl of Toulouse was much envied by the Pope, for
favoring them who then were called A^bigenses. The Pope without examination of
his cause, without judicial proceeding against the Earl, excommunicated Simon
Montford Ea^le of Leister, when peace was concluded between Henry the third
King of England and the Barons, fled from England to France* and put himself
in the service of the French ^ing. ^ian. Anno 1245.
him, and gave his lands to Simon Montford. Which gift when Simon claimed in a
parley before the Popes Legate: the Earl defended his right, and entreated the
Cardinal the Popes Legate, to come to his Cities. And if he found any that
held any erroneous point of doctrine, he promised it should be reformed. And
h^rein the Earl promised his best help and assistance to the Cardinal. So
confident was the Earl, knowing that no error in doctrine could be found in
his people, knowing also that the quarrel was not then for doctrine, but only
for Jurisdiction. And this thing the Cardinal well understanding, would not
make any examination of their Doctrines. Only it was concluded, that the Earl
and his people must be undone, and no other agreement might be admitted but
this: that the Earl must depart from his inheritance, and suffer his people to
be at the Popes pleasure. The Legate having a purpose to raise great sums of
money through France for this service, applied that business, and in the
mean time this new generation of Friars were sent and dispersed in every
corner of France, to incite men to take the Cross, and fight against the
Albigenses.

128. But especially and above all other the new start-vp S. D^inick was a man
of great use and employment in this service. He went like a firebrand through
France, and stirred up both Princes and people to take the Cross, and to fight
against the Earl and his people, as against Turks and Saracines. The French
King himself took the Cross. The King and the Cardinal raised an Army of
fifty thousand fighting men besides Wagganers, Victualers, etc. And came before
Auinion the Earls chief City. In the siege there were two and twenty thousand
of French slain and drowned; the Citizens valiantly defending the City. In the
mean time King Philip died, and King Jews who succeeded him, died also in the
Camp before Auinion. The Cardinal perceiving that the City was so well
defended, that all the loss fell on the besiegers; seeing that by direct
means he could not prevail: he put of the Lions skin, and put on the skin
of the Fox, and so prevailed by falsehood in the end. For he took a solemn
Oath, that if the people would let him in, and the Bishops who were with him:
they would only examine them of their faith and Religion, and would attempt no
other thing. The people being well assured, that for matters of faith and
Religion, nothing could be found against them: assented to the motion of the
Cardinal. Whereupon the gates were set open to the Cardinal, and so the City
was betrayed. For with the Cardinal and Bishops, the French Soldiers thrust
in, and took the City. By this means was Auinion brought first under the
Popes yoak^; and made afterward the chief City of his residence for a time.
For Clement the fifth in the year one thousand three hundred and five,
transl^ted the Popes seat to Auinion from Rome: where it remained for the
space of threesco^ and fourteen years.

129. Though afterward the Earl repairing his Army gave the French diverse
overthrows, yet could he never recover this great loss. Fasciculus Temporum
witnesses, that because tho Albigenses were overthrown by them that bare the
Cross, therefore the Pope instituted a new Order of Friars, called Cr^ciferi.
In all this action the industry and valor of Do^nick is much celebrated by the
Stories of this time: the whole praise of this overthrow is attributed to him:
Of him Platin^ witnesses thus much; Quos (Albing^nses) Dominicus (...) ^ritate
Platin. Innoc^nt. 3.
compescuit, adiu^ante etiam Si^one Montiforti: non enim disputationibus verum
armis opus fuit, adeo (...) t^nia haeresis. That is, Dominick did tame the
Albingenfes in a marvelous short time, by means of the Army which Si^on
M^ford brought: For that heresy was so rooted, that there was no use of
Disputation, but of armed provision against them. Then we see that the first
Order and Institution of Friars, was founded in blood and treacherous
practices, against the State of Princes that withstood the Popes Jurisdiction.
And herein the Popes end may appear in advancing Friars, not by disputations
to search out a truth, but by force and arms to oppress the Popes
adversaries, and so to fill Christendom full of blood and rebellions.

Conradus and Mamphred Kings of Sicily.
130. THe next Prince that felt the stroke of the Popes T^derbolt, was
Mamphred King of Sicily: Sicily with Naples being the ancient right of the
Empire; the Popes having gotten so much of that which before was the Emperors,
were desirous to have this also to help the patrimony of poor Saint P^ter.
After the fall of the Empire, the Moors had taken Apulia and Sicily, and held
those l^ndes by force, until one Robert Guiscard coming out of France with
an Army, drove out the Moors, and first won the Dominion of Apulia, and
after in like sort of Sicily. The Kingdom of Sicily he gave to his brother
Roger: Rog^r left it to William. These men possessed it by the right of
Conquest, driving thence the and Infidels: But the Pope, having no other Title,
but because he must succeed the Emperor in Italy; first excommucated and
deposed William. After this Otho the fourth, whom the Pope raised up in
rebellion against Philip, got the Dominion of Sicily: for which he was also
excommunicated by the Pope, and deposed. After him Conradus son to Frederic
the second obtained the Kingdom of Sicily, and Apulia: for which Pope Innocent
the fourth deposed him from the Empire, and set up Guillia^, Lantgraue of
Thuring* commanding the Princes to make choice of him. Conrad being
excommunicate and deposed, maintained his right by strength of arms, but was
secretly taken away by the practice of poison. This was supposed to be the
practice of Mamphred.

131. Mamphr^d the bastard son of Frederick* the second, took and held
possession of these Kingdoms after the death of (...). T^is man was also
excommunicated by the Pope, and deposed: the Pope seeking always to bring this
Kingdom under the obedience of the Church of Rome. Pope Ur^an the fourth, a
Frenchman borne, finding his own power too weak to effect this Mastery over
Sicily and Apulia, gave these Kingdoms (which never were his to give) to
Charles brother Ann^ 1263.
to the French King Jews the ninth, who was called S. Jews: This was the
beginning of those troubles, which afterward brought so great wars and
bloodshed, and thereby wel-nigh the utter ruin of Italy.

Charles King of Sicily, and Conradinus.
132. FOR Charles coming with an Army into Italy, at the Popes motion, joining
battle with Mamphr^d, overthrew him, and slew him in battle near to
Beneuentum. Pope Clement the fourth succeeding Urban the fourth, understanding
that after the death of Mamphred Couradinus the son of Conradus, then but
young, prepared forces in Germany to reco^er his inheritance of Sicily: made
Charles brother to the French King the Vicar of the Empire to give him ^trength
against Conradinus; and wrote Letters to all Christians, forbidding all men to
write to Conradinus as to the King of Sicily. And to the Princes of Germany he
wrote likewise, forbidding them under the terrible pain of excommunicati^ to
choose Conradinus Emperor: by which means the (...) was without a Sovereign
Magistrate for the space of two and twenty years: In which time Alphonsus King
of Spain, and Richard Earl of Cornwall brother to Henry the third King of
England contended for the Empire. These had the titles of the Emperor bestowed
upon them by their friends, but the Emperor was not placed till Rodolph Count
of Habspurge was chosen. In the mean time Charles grew strong in Italy, being
made by the Pope, Vicar general of the Empire.

133. When Conradinus understood th^se practices of the Pope against him,
perceiving that the Popes had a resolution to root out the seed, and utterly
to extinguish the blood of Frederic, he wrote a lamentable Epistle, deploring
his own fortunes, and the Popes iniquities. [ Innocent the fourth (says he)
has overthrown me an innocent man: for Conradus my father, King Epist.
Conradin. apud Naucler^ Generat. 43.
of Sicily left me young and tender in the custody of the Church: then Pope
Innoc^ntins pretending my wealth, professing himself a trusty Tutor, invaded
the whole Kingdom, and when once he had gotten the possession thereof, he
sought unmercifully to extinguish my name and blood, dividing my lands and
Countries, and distributing the same among his own kinsemen and Nephews.
After his death Alexander succeeding, invited others into the possession of
that Kingdom, excluding m^. After his death Vrbanus dealt very inurban^ly: for
he drew Mamphred in, excluding my self the true heir. The same Pope
disanulling that match with Mamphred, drew Charles to undertake the business
against my self. After his death Clement used all indemency against me,
setting up another King: and not content herewith, thundreth out his Processes
against me, thinking it a small matter that against God and against Justice, he
has robbed me of my Kingdom; unless he proceed also to take the title from
me. Last of all, he has established Charles Vicar of the Empire to prejudice
and defeat me by all means.] Thus does he complain: by which complaint we may
understand somewhat of the Popes purposes. Conradinus gathered an Army, and
came into Italy: the Pope as he passed by Quem cum Pontifex transeuntem
vidisset, prophetica voce vsus, adolesce^s dixit, hic tanquam victimam ad
caedem ducitur. Naucler.
((...) foam do witness) did prophecy his death, which was not (...) for him
to do, when he had so strongly prepared the means thereof: Conradinus
therefore was overthrown by Charles: and so was all the blood of Frederick.
And thus was that noble line of the Dukes of Sueuia utterly extinguished.

134. When Charle^ had at the Popes suggestion made this destruction in the
house of Sueuia: the Popes not knowing how to live in peace and quietness,
began to turn their malice upon Charles. And first Pope N^cholas the third,
only fearing that Charles should be too great in Italy, having no quarrel
against hi^, took from hi^ the o^fice of Deputy of Hetruria: pretending that,
R^dolph Emperor was therewith so much offended, that unless Charles would
deliver up into his hands that regiment, he would not undertake the journey to
the holy land, se^ing that place belonged to the Emperor by right. But when
the Pope had gotten this both from the Emperor and from Charles* together with
(...), (...), the Exarch of Rauenna: he kept all, says Platina, in his own
custody, and thither he Plati^. Nichol. 3. Naucl. gener. 43
sent his Nephew. Thus must all the world be troubled that principalities may
be procured to the Popes bastards. This ^ope, says (...), had a desire to
create two Kings in Italy of the Vrsini: one of Hetruri^ against the French
forces now placed in Sicily and Naples: the other to be King of Lumbards
against the Germans and imperial forces. But first for the more speedy
overthrow of Charle^, whom the former Popes had drawn into Italy as into a
trap, he conspired against him, laboring by all his power to throw him out;
and therefore gave his Kingdoms to Peter King of Arragon. The great offense
between Pope (...) and Charles grew (says (...)) q^ia (...) a^entiri noluit vt
su^s consanguineus contraheret cum (...) Pontificis. [ Charles would not agree,
that his kindred should match with the Popes kindred.]

P^ter King of Aragon.
135. PEter King of Aragon, being thus drawn in, to the quarrel of Sicily by
Pope Nicholas the third, (For says Naucler the Pope, persuaded Peter to take
the Kingdom of Sicily in the right of his wife Constance, who was the daughter
of Mamphred, and Niece to Conradinus) brought an Army into Sicily and invaded
the Kingdom. But Martin the fourth, who succeeded Pope Nicholas,
excommunicated Peter, deposed him, depriving him also of the Kingdom of
Aragon. Thus were these Princes first drawn into bloody wars by the Popes, who
sometimes invited them, and laughed upon them as loving friends, sometimes
plunged them in blood as taking a delight in their destruction. Let the Princes
of Christendom once awake and consider the savage nature of this wild beast,
that is not only drunk with the blood of Saints, but fed also fat with the
blood of Princes. Thus the Popes filled all Christendom full of blood with
their excommunications. Are these Christ's Vicars? are these the censures of
Christ's Church? Martin then excommunicated Peter, gave his Kingdom to such as
would invade it, absolved his Sub^ects from their faith and allegiance,
Platin. Mart. 4.
drew those that had taken the Cross for the wars of Jerusalem, to fight
against Peter. And when Marti^ was dead, Ho^orius the fourth did redouble his
curses upon Peter. After all these curses, and so much blood and wars
procured by the Popes to the vexation of Christendom, yet Peter maintained his
challenge and held those Kingdoms.

Philip the French King.
136. BOn^face the eight, pretending to advance the holy wars, (for this was
not the least policy of that Sea to send Princes abroad, that in the mean
time they might suck their Kingdoms, and draw the sinews thereof to Rome) for
this purpose sent the Bishop of Ariminum to Philip the fair, the French King.
The Bishop having used all persuasions he could by fair means, and finding
the King nothing moved with all that he alleged, from persuasions he fell
to threatenings. The King being much offended at his threatenings: and because as
some add, the Bishop had ravished an ingenuous maid, threw the Bishop in
prison: Others say he apprehended Naucler.
the Bishop, Quod esset paterinus (...). Whatsoever the cause was of the
Kings offense, Boniface was highly displeased, and sent the Archdeacon of
Narbon, to command the King to acknowledge that he held his Kingdom of the
Church of Rome, or else to denounce the Anathema against him, and obsolue
Mandans regi recognitionem regni facere sedi Apostolicae. Naucler.
all French men from their Oath of Allegiance. When the Archdeacon arrived at
Paris, the King would not permit his Bulls to be published. The Popes letters
were taken from him, and burned with fire. The King also understanding the end
of the Popes earnest motion for his journey to Jerusalem, to be that in his
absence he might draw great treasures out of France to Rome; published an Edict
wherein it was made unlawful for any to depart out of France to Rome, or
thither to carry money. Whereupon Boniface cursed Philip to the fourth
generation, absolved his Nobles, and gave his Kingdom to Albert the Emperor,
inuesting Albert by his letters into the Kingdom of France: but Albert
protested that he would not stir against the King, unless he might have
tha^ Kingdom Naucl. gener. 44.
confirmed to him and to his heirs. No quoth the Pope, that may not be as long
as Iezebell lives: meaning Elizabeth wife to Albert, a woman of great fame and
honor, whom he hated for no other cause, but for that her brethren and
ancestors had done valiantly against the Sea of Rome.

137. Against this furious attempt of Boniface, Philip the French King in an
Assembly at Paris appealed from the Pope to a general Council: this appeal
is diversely reported: All agre^ Naucl. gener. 44. Platin. ^onif. 8.
that he appealed from the Pope. Platina confounds the Narration thus:
Adsede^ Apostolicam tum, vt ipse dicebat, (...) futuru^ que Concilium
appellauit. That is, [He appealed to the Sea Apostolic then vacant as he
said, and to a Counc^ll which should after this be held.] Naucler delivers it
thus: Rex (...) congregari f^cit Paritijs omn^s Praelatos Franci^ nec non
Barons, and facto Concilio, pro sui iustificatione appellauit ab illa sente^^a
se excusando, and contra Bonifacium inuehendo, etc. That is [The French King
gathered a Council at Paris of Prelates and Barons, and for his own
justification he appealed from that sentence, excusing himself, and inueighing
against Boniface.] This man then has nothing of any appellation to the empty
Sea: but the appellation was as diverse were about these times, from the Pope to
a general Council: this appeal was sent by Sarra Columna a Nobleman of Rome,
and one Nogarelius a French Knight, a man faithful to the King. The pretense
was diuulged that they should go to publish the Kings appeal against Naucl.
gener. 44. Plat. Bonif. 8.
the Popes Decree, but Sarra having another secret purpose came into Italy in
the habit of a servant: gathered closely by the help of his friends a band of
soldiers, and with great secrecy and silence came to Anagnia where the Pope
lodged then in his fathers house. Sarra breaking up the doors, took Boniface
in bed, bound him, and brought him to Rome; where after a few days in great
sorrow and desperation, he ended his wretched life. Ranulphus says, that he
was set upon an Horse unbridled, with his face turned to the horse tail, and
so running Polychron. l. 7. cap. 39.
to and fro, was famished with hunger, and died like a Dog: as the common
saying was of him, that he entered like a Fox, reigned like a Lion, and died
like a Dog. It may be truly said of all the Popes that lived since the year
of Christ one thousand, which Naucler observes of this Pope: Imperatoribus,
Regibus, Principibus, nationibusque torrorem potius quam religionem inij cere
conab^tur, dare regna and auferre pro arbitrio, etc. [He sought not so much to
pla^ Religion, as terror in Emperors, Kings, Princes and nations: to give and
take away kingdoms at his pleasure.] Where he does truly describe the fruit
of the Popes excommunications: it is not for planting of Religion, but for
striking a terror in Princes, and breeding a confusion in the world: and
therefore it is no censure of Christ's Church* because all these censures plant
Religion without confusion of Princes, and disordering of the world.

138. Finding in Story two Epistles, one from Boniface to this Philip, the
other from Philip to Boniface, I thought good to set them down, they are but
short.

Boniface servant of Gods servants,
to Philip the French King: fear God and keep his commandments.
We will have you to understand, that you are subject to us, both in
spiritual and temporal affairs: No collation of Benefices or Prebends
belongs to you: and if you have the vacation of any, reserve the fruits
thereof to the successors: if you have made any collation, we judge that such
shall be of no validity that are to come, and those that are past we revoke:
reputing all Heretics that think otherwise. Dated at Later an, etc. The
answer was thus returned:


Philip by the grace of God, King of France,
to Boniface bearing himself as Pope, health little or none at all.
YOur singular fooleship may understand, that in temporal Fatuitas vestra.
affairs we are subject to none: that the collation of Churches and Prebends
pertains to us by royal prerogative, and the fruits thereof during the
Vacation: that the collation already made, or hereafter to be made, are of
just force and validity; and thatwe will defend the possessours thereof against
all men: reputing all foolish and mad men that think otherwise.


Henry the seventh.
139. HEnry the seventh Emperor was much favored at the Anno 1038.
first by Clement 5. Pope, for that Clement was highly offended with Philip the
French King, who then sought the Empire: the hatred of Philip drew favor to
Henry; but as passion ruled the Pope, so pride ouer-ruled the passion, and
turned this favor into greater hatred: for when Henry came to order the State
of Italy, at that time grievously troubled and vexed for want of the Emperors
presence, and had twice ouerthrown Ruperi (or as some call him Robert) King of
Sicily, the son of Charles Platin. Clem. 7.
(whence grew a new vexation of Italy between these two P^inces, and, as
Platina says, the blame was laid upon Clement, who had called the Emperor
with an Army into Italy) he came to Rome for the Imperial Crown, as Clement
had invited him thereto. But because the Popes must be always like
themselves, Clement first denied his Coronation, afterward he consented upon
condition, that Henry should take an Oath of Allegiance to the Pope. This the
Emperor refused as being a thing strange, and without example. Here is
descried an other end of these excommunications: the Popes purpose to bring
Kings and Emperors under them in respect of temporal Jurisdiction, therefore
they required of Emperors an Oath of Allegiance. Clement the fifth in one of
his Canons, makes a long process to prove that Henry took an Oath of
Allegiance, Clem. de sent. and re iudic. pastoralis.
and that such an Oath is due to the Pope from Emperors.

140. Clement pursuing his hatred against Henry, advanced the Title of Robert
to Sicily, whom the Emperor had by an ordinary process of law condemned for
Treason, and declared an enemy to the Empire. The Popes exception against Henry
was, that the Kingdom of Sicily belonged not to the Empire; but he alleged,
says Platina, that it was the Popes right to bestow the Kingdom of Sicily on
this side and beyond Pharus, upon whom he pleased, or to take it from whom he
would: hence began great stirs to grow between the Pope and Emperor: The
Emperor pursuing his right, brought an Army into Italy; and coming to
Bonauentum, his purpose was there to rest himself a few days, and to betake
himself to prayer and fasting, and other good works, that his lawful labors
and purposes might be blessed of God, intending on the feast of the assumption
to take the holy Sacrament. The Bishop of Trent his Confessor was absent at
that time, being sent to Pope Clement: Anno 1313.
but there was one sent back in his room a Iacobin Friar of S. Dominicks
Order, suborned for to work a feate: this man at that time administering the
Sacrament, having mingled Adamantin dust, which is thought to be the strongest
poison, in the flower whereof the Eucharist was made, gave it so prepared
Cuspinian, Naucler. Plat.
to the Emperor: the poison was so strong, that the Emperor presently
perceived the danger; and when the Mass was ended, he called the Friar, and
said to him; O Sir, depart quickly, for if my servants shall know what a
mischief you have done upon me, you should die a miserable death: but God
forgive you. And so the Friar escaped, and the Emperor died.

Lodouicus Bauarus.
141. AFter the death of Henry the seventh, the Princes Electors were at
variance for a successor: some were for Frederi^ke Duke of Austria, others for
Lodouic^ Duke of Bauare: John the two and twentieth Pope, apprehended the
occasion to dash one of these Princes against the other. First he rejected
Frederic^ with great contumely; for when Frederick Naucl. gener. 45
had sent a Bishop to move the Pope to ratify his Election, and the Bishop
eloquently declared the Nobility of Frederick, and his valiant Progenitors,
using that speech; Fortes cr^antur fortibus and bonis: the Pope with
Pontifical arrogance, answered, that Solomon the wisest man that ever was,
begot a most foolish son. Against Lodouicke likewise he pretended a quarrel,
for that he took more upon him then belonged to his place: and sometimes
seeming to favor the one, and sometimes the other, at last he promised
Frederick that he would make him Emperor, if he would bring an Army into
Italy to reueng him of Maphaeus and of his sons called Vicounts. By this
means great wars were raised up in Italy, and in Germany: the two Princes.
Lodouicke and Frederick met also in a battle fought from Sun rising to
Sun setting, wherein Lodouicke had the victory; Frederick was taken prisoner.

142. Whereupon Pope John without lawful process, excommunicated Lodouicke in
his Consistory at Auinion, and declared him to be schismatic, heretical,
and rebellious against the Church; and deprived not only Frederick himself
of all his Dominions as much as in him lay, but deprived also all Clerks that
should give him council or aid. Against this excommunication the Emperor
appealed: the form of which Appellation is to be well observed; for albeit
some write that he appealed from the Pope misinformed, to the Pope truly fo^d,
and to a general Council; yet this is but the relation of such as favored
the Popes Jurisdiction, thinking that no appeal could be made from the Pope
simply: And therefore no relation of others can satisfy us in this point so
well, as the very authenticke writ of Lodouicke himself, wherein he declares
his appeal: which writ or declaration is set down at large in Naucler, from
whence I would observe some things which the Emperor declares concerning the
Popes Jurisdiction; for therein he touches many points of his Jurisdiction,
and takes exception against such parts of Jurisdiction which the Pope
claimed, partly in prejudice of the temporal Magistrate, partly in prejudice
of the Church. For the question of Jurisdiction was better studied by learned
men in the time of this Emperor, then ever it was since.

143. Lodouick then understanding by men of great learning in humane and
divine laws, which that age brought forth, that the Pope had incroached upon
the right of temporal Princes, and upon the Jurisdiction of the Church: and
that he ought to be governed i^ temporal affairs by the Emperor, in
spiritual affairs by the Church, appealed from the Pope to a general
Council, and to the Catholic Church: thus the Emperor declares his appeal;
appellauimus ad futurum generale Concilium, and ad sanctam Catholicam
Ecclesiam. This was done Naucl. gener. 45. Anno 1338. Paralipom. Usperg.
in an Assembly held at Franckfort, published as a Decree against the Processes
of John the two and twentieth: which Decree though it be somewhat large, yet
because it contains the just claim of the temporal Magistrate, against the
pretended Jurisdiction of the Pope, I must draw at least the sum of it to
give some satisfaction to the Reader: He declares the Popes claim, for he
claimed that he had temporal Jurisdiction over Princes: that the imperial
power was from the Pope: that he that is chosen King of the Romans has no
Jurisdiction by his sole Election until he be anointed, consecrated and
crowned: that in temporal matters the Pope has a fullness of power. This was
first the Popes claim; whereunto the Emperor answers [That this stands
against the ancient Canons of the Church, against law, and against reason.]
He cyteth for this diverse Canons, to prove that the Emperor has not his
power from the Pope, but from God alone. Against each of the foresaid Positions
he cyteth diverse Canons out of the Decrete of Gratian. Secondly, Pope John the
two and twentieth objected against the Emperor, that he the said Pope had
annihilated the Emperors Election; and that therefore the Emperor had no right
to administer the imperial laws, but that this administration belonged by
right to the Pope. To this the Emperor answers: [That this stands against
the liberties of the Empire, and against the liberties of them that are
Electors, against the laws and liberties of all the Princes and subjects of
Germany.]

144. And whereas thirdly the Pope obiecteth, that he has excommunicated all
that shall adhaere, perform obedience and reverence to the Emperor, and says
that the judgment of the Pastor, whether it be just or unjust is to be
observed. To this the Emperor answers [That these denunciations are of none
effect: for it is a rule, that if a Prelat in commanding or forbidding, shall
not keep the form prescribed by the Canons, they who disobey him, do not
incur the sentence of excommunication. Now the Canons, and the Church do
take from the Pope power in temporalities, which power John the two and
twentieth usurps: this is one of those cases wherein the sentence of a Prelat
is not to be feared. Another reason is, because by law that sentence is of no
force, where there is an express error in the sentence: as if a subject
should be commanded not to obey his Superior: or if something should be
commanded against God, or against holy Scripture. Now it is manifest that John
the two and twentieth has commanded the subjects of the Empire, not to obey
us, whom they are bound to obey by the laws of God and man. Another reason is,
because it is a thing confessed, that the sentence which is given after a
lawful appeal, is void and of no strength: but it is well known that from
John the two and twentieth, and his Processes against God, and justice, we
appealed to a general Council, and to the holy Catholic Church: which
appellation was brought to the knowledge of the said John before he published
Excommunication against them that favor us.]

145. If it be said the Pope has no Superior, and therefore no man may
appeal from him. To this the Emperor answers thus: [It is manifest by the
Catholic doctrine, that the Pope in matters of faith is subject to Councels.
16. did. sicut in tex. and in Gloss. 25. q. 2. sunt quidam. 19. di.
Anastasius. 40. di. Si Papa. Moreover in matters of divine right, a Council is
above the Pope. Thus then we have appealed to a Superior, that is to a
general Council, against our adversaries who impugn us, the Empire, the
Catholic faith, which the holy Church of Rome handles.] This is the sum of
that Decree which the Emperor published against the Pope: it was dated at
Franckfort the eighth of August, Anno one thousand three hundred thirty and
eight. The process of this worthy Prince gives us occasion to consider some
things which declare the sense, judgment and Religion of the Ghurch of Rome at
this time. By the Church of Rome I understand these Western parts of
Christendom, for so I find it termed here, and other-where separate and
distinct from the Pope.

146. For first by this appeal from the Pope to a general Council, we find
that it was the judgment and common received sentence of that age, that a
general Council is above the Pope, may judge the Pope, censure and depose him:
this is here declared and confirmed: this was not only the doctrine of the
Church then, but long after it continued, and was never denied by the Church of
Rome, before the Council of Trent, as hereafter we shall declare. Moreover we
find a distinction observed by the learned men that held this Assembly (that
is by the Prelates of the Empire, for so the Decree runs, De concilio ac
assensu Praelatorum omnium, etc. And many other learned men of Christendom,
yea many Friars which were here assembled, especially the Minorites, who were
then oppressed by the Pope) The distinction, I say, between the Pope and his
flatterers on the one side, and the Church of Rome on the other side. For the
Emperor appealeth from the Pope, to the Church: and this was a practice used
by diverse, as hereafter we shall observe. Then the Pope and his flatterers did
not represent the Church of Rome, as now they pretend to do. Again we
observe that the Emperor being defamed for heresy and appealing to a general
Council, as he denies the Pope to be his Judge, so he refuses not to be
judged by the Church: for as S. Ambrose says, Imperator intra Ecclesiam, non
supra Ecclesiam est. Then the authority of the Church binds the greatest
members Ora.. in Auxent.
thereof, even Kings and Emperors. If our adversaries object against us and
our Church: why then do you give to the King the Title of supreme head or
Governor of the Church? We answer, such objections proceed from an obstinate
and wilful ignorance in mistaking of our doctrine. For when the question is of
Jurisdiction external coactiue, we give to the King the place of a supreme
Judge: but if the question be of faith and Religion, we say the King is no
Judge, but to be judged by the Church: as we see godly Princes have been, and
namely this worthy Prince Lodouicke, who being accused of heresy by the Pope,
appealeth to the Church.

147. Last of all we observe in the sense and judgment of this Emperor, and
of the learned men that were assembled with him, that in the point of
Jurisdiction no such thing is left to the Pope as he claims. For in matters
of faith, the Jurisdiction is in the Church, as here it is acknowledged: in
matters of coactiue power the Jurisdiction is in the Emperor; as all these
learned men did yield in this Council, and after the Council did maintain
by their writings. For we find the same truth maintained by William Ockham,
Marsilius Patauinus, Michael Caesina, and many more, who with great courage and
learning did maintain the Emperors Jurisdiction herein against the Popes
usurpation. This wisdom and moderation of the Emperor in defending his
right, not only by force of Arms, but by learning and judgment, moved the
Pope who succeeded John the two and twentieth; that is, Benedict the twelfth,
in spite of malice to give him many ho^orable testimonies: to promise to
restore him by absol^ ag^ine to this place. But the Pope did but fraudulently
put him off from day to day: which thing when the Emperor perceived, he called
a Diet of the Empire at Rensium, where he did with that wisdom, courtesy,
and liberality bind the Princes Electours to him, that they took a solemn
Oath to maintain the liberties of the Empire, and decreede that all the
processes of John once Pope, against Lod^uick were of no force: and that the
Pope ought not to attempt such things against the Emperor, seeing their
Jurisdictions were so much distinct.

148. Clement the sixth sucoeeded Benedict the twelfth: this Clement falling
into deeper fits of rage against the Emperor, then his Predecessors had done,
commanded Letters to be Cuspinian. Naucler.
fixed upon the Church doors, filled with threatenings and curses against
Lodouicke, if within three days he did not make satisfaction to God and the
Church (by the Church understanding himself) and utterly desist from
administration of the Empire. When three days were expired, he pronounced him
contumacious, and thundered out his excommunication. The Emperor sent his
Ambassadors, c^auing pardon, promising satisfaction for any thing he had done
amiss to the utmost of his power: whereupon the Pope prescribed him a form of
reconciliation: hard, shameful, dishonorable; that he shall confess against
himself all heresies and errors: that he shall relinquish the Empire, and
commit himself, his children, and all his goods to the Popes mercy. This the
Ambassadors sealed and confirmed: But when this form of reconciliation
prescribed by the Pope, came to the Emperors fight, he sent copies thereof
abroad to all the Princes: and presently called a Diet at Franckfort: the
Princes judged the presumption and pride of the Pope to be intolerable, and
therefore rejected this prescribed form of his, as being devised to the bane
and ruin of the Empire; and promised the Emperor assured and faithful aid,
if he would maintain the liberties of the Empire, as he had done. The Pope
like a Tiger disappointed of his prey, en^red into a deeper con^piracy against
(...), purposing an utter extirpation of him and his posterity, as the Popes
his predecessors had done before, to the house of Sueuia, exter^ninating all
the feed and posterity of the Frederickes.

149. And therefore this Clement at Mass curses Frederi^k again, renueth all
the processes of John the two and twentieth against him, declares him to be
heretical and schismatic: Anno 1346. Naucl. gener. 45.
deposes him from the Empire, and commands the Princes to proceed to a new
Election. To effect his purpose the better, he remoueth Henry de Wirtenberg
from the Archbishopricke of Mentz; this man was deposed because he favored
Lod^uick, and in his place he set Gerlac his Chaplain. Gerlac the new
Archbishop calls the Princes to Rhenes: and to go thorough with his
business which* the Pope had given him in charge, corrupted the Archbishop
of Colon, and the Duke of Saxony with great sums of money, to confent to the
Election of Charles son to the King of Bohemia. They did so: and Charles was
elected ^t Rhenes: and afterward crowned at Bouna. But after this, when
Lodouicke ^oned the Princes Paralipom. Vsperg. An. 1346
of Germany to Spire, there was not one found in all the Cities of Rhene,
Sueuia, Franconia that regarded the election of Charles, or the Popes process.
The administration of Mentz was by Lodoui^ committed to another. After that
Lod^ had thus with great moderation and courage maintained his estate, against
the Pope and Charles, so that his adversaries had no hope to preu^ile against
him by force; the next news was, Lodo^icke was of a sudden f^d dead. This is
the singular luke of those Princes, that falling into the offense of the Pope,
will not be overcome by force. Some write that he was poisoned as he was to go
on hunting, that by the agitation of his body, the poison might work more
effectually.

Charles the fourth.
150. AFter the death of Lodouicke, Charles the fourth, whom the Pope advanced
to the utter ruin, not of Lodouicke only, but of that Empire, did by the
instinct of his Ghostly father lay the Empire in the dust so low, that it
never rose up to any such height, as before him it held. At his Coronation the
Pope bound him with an Oath never to come to Rome, nor to make longer abode in
Italy then the Pope himself thought good. Now to make Charles to waste and
consume Cuspinian. vit^. Guntheri.
the reuennues of the Empire, this cunning was used: diverse competitours of the
Empire were set up against him: to (...) one competitor he gave two and twenty
thousand Marks, and two imperial Towns in Thuringia: to Frederick Marquess
of Misna, ten thousand Marks. There were at Cuspin. in vit^. Caroli.
Millain at this time, they who were called Vicounts, who grew great and
practiced their tyranny, oppressing the Cities of the Vicecomites.
Empire. The Pope desired that they should be repressed, but so that himself
might be advanced: and therefore by the help of Charles he got many Cities out
of their hands: Charles being thus drawn to dilapidate the reuennues of the
Empire, dealt also secretly with these Vicounts, to whom for a great sum of
money he sold Millain, and confirmed them in a perpetual Auentin. l. 7. Naucl.
gener. 46
Office, to be Vicars of the Empire: after which time, these Vicounts rose to a
great Dominion in Italy. The Kingdom of Arles which O^ the first had conferred
upon the Empire, he delivered to the French King for a great dinner at a Town
^eere to Auinion. Sixteen Cities of Sueuia part of the Empire he sold to the
neighbor Princes: Bopardia and Wesali a imperial Cities, he morgaged to Cuno
Archbishop of Triers. Lusatia he confirmed to the Kingdom of Bohemia for
ever, corrupting the Archbishop of Magdeburg for a great sum of money to
sell the right of his Church: for the Archbishop before that time, held Lusatia
of the Empire. That Wenceslaus his son, a man given to idleness* riot; and
pleasure, might be chosen Emperor after him, he practiced a new Nauel. gener.
46 AEnaeas Siluius. hist. B^hem. cap. 33.
example, promising to every Electour an hundredth thousand Crowns: and wanting
money to perform this promise, to some he morgaged the reuennues of the
Empire: to the Palatine of Rhene he morgaged Caesarea Luthrea, Oppenheim,
Odenheim, Ingolheim for an hundredth thousand crowns: By this means the Majesty
of the Empire was thrown so flat on ground, that since it could never hold
up the head. This the Pope long sought, and at last by means of his unblessed
son Charles effected.

Wenceslaus.
151. AT this time began a schism in the Church of Rome between Urban the
sixth, and Cl^ent the seventh. This was the greatest schism, the most terrible,
and Ann^ 1379.
longest that ever was in that Church: it held fifty years, and could s^arce
be appeased by two general Councels of Pisa and Constance. In this schism
Wencestaus favored Urban: in whose behalf he sent his Ambassadors to
Clement, whom Clement used without all clemency; for in a savage manner he
Naucler.
tortured them with exquisit tortures. After this Boniface the ninth devised a
new practice to rob the Churches of Christendom, imposing the use of Annates
upon all Benefices: that whosoever obtained a Benefice, should pay one half
years profit Anno 1400. Na^cl. gener. 47.
to the Pope: some say that John the two and twentieth first devised this
robbery. Whosoever invented it, the Popes like insatiable Harpyes devising all
means to bring confusion and misery upon the Church, to satisfy the
Horse-leach that will never be filled, increasing in covetousness, increased
these Annates in times, and brought them to first fruits: raking one whole
years profit away from the Incumbents: Wherein of these Harpyes we may say,
as the Poet says of those other Harpyes: Vestigia fada relinqu^t: But the
godly Princes of Christendom Virgil. AEn. li. 3.
are to be entreated in the behalf of God, to remove these greeuances from the
Church, which the insatiable covetousness of Popes brought in. And seeing they
have removed the Harpyes themselves, why should they leave the marks of their
abominable covetousness to the eternal oppression of the Church? Why should
these unclean spoils be found in the hands of godly Princes? It would be the
eternal honor of our Princes, not to change the oppressor, but to remove
the oppression. It was the honor of this land, that when the Pope had
oppressed all other Churches, only the Church of England was free: Hanc
consuetudinem omnes ad^isere, praeter Anglos, says Naucler. It was first
imposed in the year one thousand and four hundred: it was not used in England
when Naucler wrote, as he witnesses: that is not before the year one thousand
five hundred, so odious an abuse, so lately bred might soon be removed, if the
cup of these sweet wines, wherein the Pope began, had not beguiled many men.

152. When Boniface the ninth had begun this oppression: much money was thereby
gathered from the Clergy throughout the Emperors Dominions: the money being
thus collected, was detained by the greedy Emperor Wenceslaus from the more
greedy Popes. This turned the hearts of the Popes against him: therefore
Gregory the ninth deposed him and set up Rupertus Count Palatine of Rhene
against him.

George King of Bohemia.
153. AFter the death of Ladislaus King of Bohemia* who died without issue, two
great Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungaria, with the Duchy of Austria being
vacant: many Princes sought the Kingdom of Bohemia: Charles Naucler.
King of France, whose daughter Ladislaus married, would have placed one of
his sons. Casimire King of Polonia having married a sister, sought it in her
right: so did Guilliam Duke of Saxony, who married the elder sister of
Lad^slaus: Sigismund and Albert Dukes of Austria were in good hope: and
Frederick the Emperor would have had the administration of the Kingdom,
because the homage due to the Empire had been neglected. When the day of
Election came, (...) was chosen King, and afterward confirmed by Frederick the
Emperor; but Paul the second, finding that this George favored Platin. Paul. 2.
the Hussites, or as Platin^ says, daily withdrew himself from the body of
Christianity (meaning from the obedience of the Pope) did excommunicate and
depose him, setting up Mathi^ King of Hungary against him. Mathi^ gave the
Bohemians Palmer.
a great overthrow in the year one thousand, four hundred and (...): and with
such mortal hatred was Pope (...) set against this King, that he sent many
Bishops to negoci^te these wars, and to raise up the Hungarians and
Germans against him; and so far prevailed, that he e^tinguished all the
posterity and descent of George, and would, says (...), utterly have rooted
out all the name and memory of the Heretics, unless the Polonians had stayed
(...). For the Polonians Platin. Paul. 2.
claimed the Kingdom of (...) as due to them: (...) being already busied
enough with the wars of the Turk, thought good not to draw new trouble^ upon
himself by provoking the Polonians. Thus the Pope rested at that time
contented with the blood of George, and his children, seeing the power of his
malice could then proceed no further.

King John of Nau^rre.
154. POpe Julius the second, the scourge of Christendom in his time, used the
like courtesy to John King of Navarre; for when this Vicar of Christ (...)
raised wars against the French King, John King of Nau^rre held, as he had
reason, with the French King, being a Frenchman by birth, and having the
greatest part of his pa^imony in France. (...) King of Arragon then favored
the Pope. This (...) prepared war against the French King: and to turn the
minds and speech of all men upon the French wars from that purpose, which
secretly he intended, he entreated Henry the ^ighth King of England, to send
him an Army to help him in the wars of Fran^e. King Henry having married the
daughter of Ferdinand, sent him six thousand footmen: these came to the
Frontiers of France, and there stayed long for the army of Ferdi^nd: who for
his better passage into France, required of John King o^ Navarre (through
whose Dominions he was to pass) that he would deli^er up to his hands, three
of the strongest Castles that he would demand; the request as unjust was
denied by the King of Navarre: Ferdina^d refers the matter to the Pope. The
Pope I^lius not regarding the justice or injustice of the cause, pronounces
the King of Navarre a Schismaticke and Heretic, for favoring the French
King: and therefore depriueth him of his kingdom, and gives his Nebress. lib.
1. cap. 3.
right to Ferdinand. Who thereupon sent his army of a sudden against the King
of Navarre, who fled into France. Thus was the kingdom^ of Navarre surprised,
and no title pretended saving only the Popes excommunication.

The state of Venice.
155. IT were too long to recompt all the mischiefs and miseries, that the
Popes Excommunications have brought upon Christendom; I have collected the
chief and most eminent, and will end this discourse with the memory of that
affliction and desolation which the Pope brought upon the Venetians. Iul^s the
second, following the steps of his predecessors, brought an army before
Bononia, besieged the town, and took it. The family of the Bentiuoli he
utterly ruinated, killing some, banishing other: When thus he had overthrown
the Bentiuoli. Then he set himself in like sort, to root out the Venetian
name: Ad venet^ (...) excidiu^, says (...). The better to effect the malice
against the Onuphr. Iul. 2.
Venetians, he drew (...) the Emperor, the French King, the King of Spain,
the Duke of Ferrara, and the Duke of Mantua into a league: when first himself
had excommunicated and c^sed them, he set all these upon them at once. The
Pope made choice of a fit time to do them the greatest hurt he could: for a
little before this the state of Venice was brought so low, that a weak enemy
might soon have ^dangered them; having had their whole army brought unto
Internecion at Abdua: after that overthrown in a great battle, by Jews the
French King; their chief generals, Liuianus taken prisoner; Petilianus put to
flight. The Pope took the advantage of this their weakness, and seeing them
falling, labored to thrust them headlong, that they might never be able to rise
again. M^ximilian took Verona, Vicetia, Padway, Carni; the French King
surprised Bergamum, Brixia, Cremona, and Crema: the Spaniard wan Tranum,
Monopolis, and Barletta in Apulia. The Popes share was Rauenna, Ariminum, and
all Aemilia. The Duke of Ferrara got Rodigium: and the Duke of Mantua Asula.
Thus was that noble state brought in manner to utter ruin.

156. Julius having thus satisfied his malice, and obtained his purpose in some
measure against the Venetians, being led by a spirit that would give him no
rest, began to turn his furious wrath in like sort against (...), contrary to
his faith often promised, and confirmed in the public assembly of the States.
And so furious was this Vicar of Christ, that himself led the Army, using
these words, as he went out of Rome: that seeing Saint Peter's keys would not
prevail, he would try what Saint Paul's sword could do: and so he threw the
keys into Tiber.

157. And thus when the Princes of Christendom shall recompt their miseries,
the spo^le and desolation of their kingdoms, the ruin of ancient houses, the
vexation of their subjects, the circumuention of their persons, the ex^irpation
and extermination of many noble families, the bloody war, and by reason of
wars, all the troubles and calamities of Christendom: then must the Pope
come to remembrance (with his excommunication as a firebrand in his hand, taken
out of the infernal pit, and carried in the hands of these furies) who only
has brought all these troubles upon the Princes of the earth: so that since
the time that he began to exercise his excommunication against Princes, there
has not been much wars in these western parts of Christendom; but such as
the Pope himself has raised, dashing one Prince against another; when first
he had cast them into a deadly sleep to make them insensible of the wrongs
which he has done them: but when they are awaked out of their sleep, they
will remember all. For the Popes as the great conspiratours against the States
of Princes, have set Friars their resolute creatures to practice all secret
treasons against the persons of Princes. And because this cannot be done
without great bloodshed, they come resolved to shed blood like hungry wolves:
so headlong are they carried herein, seeking a temporal Jurisdiction over
Princes, secretly by the conspirac^e of Friars, openly by their
excommunications: that if the world should stand long, before the Pope with his
Babylon be overthrown, we have reason to think that the Popes will in time
utterly cast off and reject the mask of religion, wherewith they cover their
practices now, and will in plain terms quarrel the Princes of Christendom,
for their Temporal right and Jurisdiction. And then will the Princes think it
is time for them to awake.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein is declared what opposition this Jurisdiction found in the Church,
after it was thus established by Popes: It was confuted first by particular
learned men: then by general Councels.

1. AFter that this Jurisdiction, thus devised and maintained, began to be
well known in Christendom: men of learning and judgment began to be moved
with the novelty, and examined the whole matter with care and industry: the
occasion which first moved them to examine this question, was the defense of
this strange Jurisdiction: first claimed by the Popes, and afterward more fully
disputed and maintained by ^ugustinus Triumphus (...): who was set on work
upon this task by the Pope. For in the end of his book we find this written:
(...) i^ su^ma d^ (...) Ecclesiastic^ ^dita a fr^tre (...) Triumpho (...), in
sacra (...) magistro, (...) Eremit ^rum sancti Augusti, (...) 22. (...) M. A^.
(...). 1320. Where we find from what spirit this defense of this new
Jurisdiction proceeds, con^ing from the especial direction of the Pope. This
(...) proceeds herein according to his direction, concluding all Jurisdiction
both Spiritual and Temporal, to be from the Pope.

2. Which thing though it seemed strange, new, absurd: yet in truth (...)
could no less then publish (for he labors not so much to prove it, as to
publish it) the Popes challenge having undertaken the business. For the Popes
before this had begun to prescribe in their Canons so much, that their
flatterers had their rules now prescribed to them, ^ow far they must stretch
their consciences for the mainetenance of Jurisdiction. For ^ither they ^ust
maintain all that the Popes had taken upon them, or else give over the cause
as desperate. From this spirit and direction, Triumphus enters into this
cause, as an hireling speaking for his fee: taking this ground, that the Pope
is as directly lord of the whole world in Temporalibus: as he is the head of
the universal Church in (...); and that he has directly Sovereign authority
in respect of such his worldly Dominion over all Emperors, Kings and Princes
to dispose of them and their kingdoms. This opinion is now strongly maintained
by the Jesuits, and has been of late by Tho. Boz^us, Francisc. Bozius, Card.
Baron^us, Zecchus Carerius, and other. But because Triumphus is, as I take it,
the first Friar that has handled this question on the Popes behalf; and the
learned men that first wrote against the Popes Jurisdiction, have been moved
thereto by his writings, as al^o because the book is rare to be had: I will
set down some of his (...) po^itions; that the Reader may the better
understand what it is which they seek, and what is that against which these
learned men that I am hereafter to produce, do oppose themselves.

3. One po^ition of (...) is this: (...) Qu. 1. art. 1.
and (...) ^st (...) ^ De^ (...) and alijs Pr^latis Ecclesi^ i^ quib^ residet
potest^ (...): which he pro^eth by such reasons, as need no other re^utation,
saving only the (...) Justin. (...).
recital thereof. For it was truly said of (...) Martyr, that to know and
truly to understand an absurd reason, is a sufficient refutation thereof. His
reason is: (...) potesta^ est data in (...) alteri, per qu^m habet instit^i,
regulari, ordinari atque (...) si ^ona sit: and per quam habet iud^cari si
(...) sit: sed talis est potestas s^cularium Imperatorum, regum, etc. Quia per
potestatem Pap^ habet institui, regulari, ordi^ari si b^a fit, and p^r ipsam
habet condem^ari and iudicari ^i mala sit. [That power is given for service to
another, by which it must be instituted, o^dered and confirmed being good, and
judged being evil: but such is the power of secular Emperors and Princes etc.
For by the Pope it must be instituted, ruled, and ordered being good, and by
him it must be condemned and judged being evil.] All the proof that he
brings for this, is: that Pope Z^chary deposed the French King C^ilperic and
set ^p (...) in his place. A^ other reason is this: Illa p^testas est i^ (...)
alteri* ^i (...) ^delitatis pr^stat, and ab ea (...) esse ^ne quod habet: sed
omnis potestas saec^arium Principum, Imperator^, and ^iorum ^st ^alis* Did.
63. Can. cum tib^ (...). [That power is given and subjected for service to
another to whom it yields an Oath of Alleagean^e, acknowledging all that it
has from the same: but such is all the power of temporal Princes, Emperors,
and such like.] Again he says thus: S^ (...) quandoq^e (...) ^mperatores
de^isse aliqua (...) sum^is (...), sicut (...) ^edit Sil^estro: h^c non est
(...), ^os d^re quod s^m est, sed restituere qu^d inius^ and ty^annice ^blatum
(...). [If sometimes we find that some Emperors have given some ^emporalities
to Popes, as (...) ga^e to Siluest^: we must not think that they gave that
which was their own, but only restored that which unjustly and tyrannically
was taken from Popes.] These things are such that in the judgment of all men,
that are not destitute of judgment, need no re^utation. He says also in the
same place: Potest^ omnis (...) and (...) sub^legata respectu (...) Pap^. [All
power of Empero^s and Kings, is to them delegated by the Popes power.] This is
the Jurisdiction which is fought, a temporal Jurisdiction over Princes: this
doctrine was devised only to maintain the practice of the Popes
excommunication. And as this new and strange doctrine was found out for the
defense of that new and strange practice, so the manner of the defense is no
less strange: for he declares that this Jurisdiction for which he pleads so
much, is not in the Pope as he is a Priest or Bishop, but as he is a Prince.
It follows then in his confession that this Jurisdiction is proper to
Princes, and not to Priests. For thus he says: Papatus est nomen
Iurisdictionis, and no^ ordinis. That is [The Papacy is a name of Jurisdiction,
Q. 4. Artic. 2.
and not of Order.] And again, Potest Papa habere omnem potestatem pertinentem
ad Papam, and tamen ^arere potestat^ ordinis. That is [The Pope may have all
Jurisdiction belonging to the Pope, and yet be no Priest.] This new doctrine
teaches great wonders: that the Pope may have all Jurisdiction, and be no
Priest. The Jesuits and our own Popish Countrie-men cry out against us, for
giving Jurisdiction to such as are no Priests, but only temporal Princes. It
will be hard for them to accuse us, and defend their own Doctors.

4. Because this manner of maintaining the Popes Jurisdiction is gross to set
him above temporal Princes in temporal Jurisdiction, therefore diverse since
this time have sought to mollify this harsh manner of speech, by a distinction
which they have found out of late, between Power direct over Princes and
indirect: These men say that the Pope has power to depose Princes, not
directly, but indirectly, in respect of some spiritual good. But when they
come to the application of this distinction, it appears nothing but a Miste
to dazzle the eyes of men, wherein there is no simplicity or truth. Bellarmine
is one of those that admits this Distinction, upon which Distinction
granted by Cardinal Bellarmine, Master Blackwel thinks he has a good
ground for taking the Oath of Allegiance. And when B^llarmine reproves him
for that, he answers him by his own Distinction: a reasonable answer; and
yet such is the Mist of this Distinction, that you can hardly tell whether of
these two speaks more cunningly. For Bellarmine says, that the Pope has
power to depose Princes not In ordine ad spirituale bonum. l. 5. c. 6. de Romans
Pont.
directly, but in respect of some spiritual good: but when Master Blackwell
says, that in his particular case the spiritual good of Catholics was
respected. This Bellarmine will deny: for he will say that no private man must
be judge of this spiritual good, but only the Pope. Now let the Pope be
Judge, and then this Distinction is as good as nothing: for whenever the Pope
deposes a Prince, or discharges his subjects from their Oath of Allegiance,
he will judge it to be for some spiritual good. So that in this understanding,
and sense of Bellarmine there is no real difference between direct power and
indirect.

5. In like sort when Master Blackwell says, the Pope has power to depose
Princes indirectly, or in respect of some spiritual good, and judges the
taking of the Oath of Allegiance to respect a spiritual good end, giving this
reason: because the Examination of M. George Blackwell. Epist to Bellarmine.
refusal of this Oath would bring upon us the ruins of Catholic families and
the lamentable extirpation of the whole Catholic estate among us: We say the
case of this man, and of those that depend upon him, is much better then the
case of them that refuse the Oath: but yet to draw them a little further into
the love of obedience, let us note the imperfection of his defense. We commend
his action, and speak here only of his manner of defending it; for the reason
that draws him to obedience, and to take this Oath, is not a conscience of
that commandment of God, which commands obedience to Magistrates: but the
danger of Catholics, and of himself; which proves an indirect obedience. So
that in pleading for a verbal distinction of power, direct or indirect, they
descry a real distinction of obedience direct or indirect. Now there is not
much difference between these three opinions of them that hold the Popes
direct power, and his indirect power, and that say his power is to respect the
present danger of the Catholics. For whatsoever Triumphus brings under his
direct power, that Cardinal Bellarmine will reduce under indirect power: so
that though they differ in the manner how this power comes to the Pope,
directly or indirectly, yet they both are agreed that the Pope has this power;
and this is also Master (...) judgment. For remove the danger of his
Catholics, and then he has nothing to say against this power of the Pope, so
that the question is not how he has it, but whether he has this power or not?
Unto which question all Romance Catholics answer affirmatively, and we
negatiuely.

6. Thus did those learned men conceive the question that first began to handle
it: these later distinctions came in by such as would hide themselves in a
miste, and seem to say something when they say nothing. Now let us declare the
(...) of those men that first came to the handling of this question of the
Popes power, after that it was fully made known to the world, by the Popes
decrees, and the writings of (...) Tri^phus. The first occasion that set men on
work upon the stud^e of this question, was partly, as I have said, the
writings of (...); but this occasion was ^otoriously promoted by the unjust
vex^ions which the Popes offered to Lodo^icke Duke of Bau^re Emperor, in
prosecuting of their pretended Jurisdiction over Kings* and Emperors. This
Emperor being persecuted by the Popes, as before we have declared, was
desirous to know the judgments of the best learned men that then lived in the
world; who with (...) did search out, and by learning did ou^rthrowe this new
sophi^ent right. The chief of them who then wrote against the Popes
Jurisdiction was Ma^sitius (...), and (...) Oc^. Of these and of some other
that in one p^rt or other have con^uted this Jurisdiction of Popes, I am now to
speak in order.

. I. Obser^ations out of the writings of Marsilius Pat. against the Popes
Jurisdiction.
7. MArsili^s about the year of Christ, one thousand three hundred twenty and
four, set ou^ that book which he Intituleth, (...) pacis, wherein he shakes
the rotten and ruinous reasons of such as maintained this Jurisdiction: because
the book is written with great learning and judgment, I will record here
some obse^uations of his: for it seems that he had a purpose to re^ute that
former work of Triump^us, though the truth is, he names not Triumph^s
throughout all his book: concerning this point of Jurisdiction, one especial
ground which he lays, is this. Ab ^fficio Part. 2. cap. 4.
principat^s si^e (...) jurisdiction is, (...), so^ coactiu^ (...) cuiuslibet
in hoc s^lo, Christ^s seipsum and Apost^los exclusit, and (...) v^luit. That
is, [Christ has excluded, and purposed to exclude himself and his Apostles
from principality* or contentious jurisdiction, or regiment or any coactiue
judgment in this world.] Which thing he prou^th at large, both by Scriptures
and Fathers because Christ ^aith, his kingdom is not of this world; by which
words coactiue Jurisdiction is excluded: as was the doctrine of Christ, such
was his example of obedience: for he was always subject to the coactiue power
of the Magistrate. Thus by the ^ound and clear Scriptures, with the
expositions and judgment of the ancient Fathers, he resu^eth that nouelti^
which had no other ground then the Popes decretals.

8. Therefore he examineth the authority of the Popes de^retals, and gives a
learned and iuditious distinction, declaring thereby how the Pope may be
obeyed or not obeyed, commanding against the Emperor: for says he, if the
Emperor command any thing against the law of God, and the Pope command
things agreeable to that law: thou must ou^ of doubt obey the Pope, and not the
Emperor. But if the Emperor command something according to his imperial law
and the Pope command something according to his decretals against the imperial
laws: no man subject to the Emperor, ought in such things to obey the Pope.
Which thing he proves at large, because the civil Magistrate bears the
sword; because he is the Minister of God, the revenger of disobedience: because
every soul is subject to him. Which things says he, are not spoken of any
spiritual Governor but of the Temporal Magistrate. For the Goue^nours to whom
in coactiue Iu^isdiction we must obey, are such as by armed power defend their
Countries and people, which in no case can agree to a Bishop or Priest.

9. By such reasons he proceeds, and proves infallibly his purpose, and
conclusion that no spiritual Governor has from Christ any Jurisdiction
coactiue; but this power is left wholly in the hands of the civil Magistrate.
And thus does cut in sunder the sinews of their disputations, who plead for
the Popes Jurisdiction: which Jurisdiction they make to consist in power
coactiue. Of the Popes decretals (which then were lately devised Laws against
the ancient Jurisdiction of the Church, as also against the Jurisdiction of
Princes) he says: Vt ipsi fabulantur in s^is decretalibus, qu^ secundum
veritatem nihil Part. 2. cap. 5.
aliud sunt, quam ordinationes quaedam Oligarchicae, quibus in nullo obedire
tenentur Chrsti fideles, in quuntum h^smodi. That is, [As they babble in their
decretals, which in truth are nothing but certain Oligarchicall ordinations,
to which Christians are in no case bound to obey, as they proceed from the
Pope.] Wherein he delivers thus much, that these Canon laws or decretals,
ought to have no force among Christians, unless they be confirmed by the laws
of the land, and by Princes in their Dominions: so many as Princes shall think
fit for the government of the Church in their proper Dominions, may be
established, and being established ought to be obeyed, but not as the Popes
laws use, but as the laws of those Princes: for that is it which Marsilius
says, the decretals are not to be obeyed, in qua^tu^huiusmodi. Now that all
coactiue power is by God delivered to the Temporal Magistrate, he proves
solidly from these words; he is the Minister of God to take vengeance: by
vengeance Romans 13. 4.
all coactiue power is understood. Neither does he deny but that the Church
governors may execute coactiue power: but then they must have it from Princes,
and from such Temporal powers which have the same. Which being expressly and
distinctly written by him three hundred years ago, is no other thing then that
which we now maintain: at which our adversaries seem to wonder, as at some
new doctrine never heard before; when the same truth, after the sa^ manner
been maintained by the learned men that have handled this question before us.
Nec in quenquam presbyterum (says he) aut Part. 2. cap. 5.
non pres byterum con^enit coacti^am in hoc saeculo Iurisdictionem habere,
quenquam Episcopum, si^e Papam, ^isi eadem si^i per humanum legis^atorem
concessa fuerit, in cui^s potestate semper est hanc ab ipsis reuocare. That is,
[No man, Priest or not Priest, can have Jurisdiction coactiue in this world,
Bishop or Pope: unless it be granted to them by the humane lawmakers, in whose
power it is at his pleasure to recall it from them.]

10. Concerning the right of calling Councels, his determination is this: If a
cause of religion rise in question, the Pope, says he, may signify the same
to the chief Temporal Governor: but the authority of gathering and calling
the Council, belongs to him that has coactiue Jurisdiction; and ought to
be gathered by his coactiue precept. When it is gathered, he leaves the first
and chief seat therein to the Bishop of Rome: he gi^eth him the honor to
propose the matter; to collect all together that is spoken: to communicate the
things determined to others; and to excommunicate the transgressors. And all
this to do, not at his own pleasure, or upon his own head; sed ex concilij
sententia: only by the direction of the Council. This principality he
yields to the Bishop of Rome, and to that Church, so long as thus it
stands, and so long as it does nothing to the contrary whereby this honor
may be justly withdrawn. Secundum qu^m modum (says he) Part. 2. cap. 22.
Romanae vrbis quamdi^ extiterit, obicemque ad hoc non apposuerit populus ille
etc. poterit licite ac debebit i^m ^ict a principalitas in Episcopo and Eccle^a
continue reseruari. That is, [According to which manner this principality may
lawfully and ought to be reserved always, for that Bishop and that Church as
long as it thus stands, and does nothing to the contrary. This honor (if the
Pope would have held himself contented therewith) might long time enough been
reserved unto him. But when this could not content him, but he must have all
Jurisdiction over the Church, and over secular Princes: if he find not that
honor yielded to him which he expects, he may thank himself; because he
has procured his own contempt, and by usurpation of undue honor, he has
lost that, which though it was not due to him, yet from some custom was given,
and might have been continued to this day, if himself had not caused the
Church to withdraw it: For (says mine Author,) Licet circa (...) Eccl^sia,
(...) Episcopi and Ecclesiae fidelium neque diuina Part. 2. cap. 22.
neque (...) leg^ aliq^ obligarentur (...) is aut institutis Ecclesia vel (...)
R^manorum, plusquam ^ (...): (...) ^e (...) and rationabili (...), qua fideles
in vnitate amplius seruabantur, eo quod tune fideli (...) legislatore ipsos in
ordine reducente, (...) in v^itate seruante, etc. That is, [Albeit about the
beginning of the Church, other Bishops and Churches of believers were not bound
by any divine or humane law, to obey the mandates of the Church or Bishop of
Rome, rather then the contrary: yet this profitable and reasonable custom
prevailing, by which believers were better kept in unity, because they wanted
then a Christian Magistrate to reduce them to order and preferue them in
unity: therefore they were afterward bound, as by a divine law to this
obedience, in things honest and lawful.]

11. But because the Popes and their flatterers did cover all their practise^
with pl^nitudo (...), as with a mist: therefore he does with great light of
learning and truth, dispell that mist: This says h^ is, Lo^us (...), ^nde
etia^ paral^gismus, qu^ reges and principantes ^o sing^los coactiua (...)
subiectos (...) tr^xit origine^. That is, [This is a Sophisme, whence that
Paralogisme drew his beginning, by which they strive to draw Kings and Princes,
and all other under their subjection by coactiue Jurisdiction.] And therefore i^
he belaboreth ex^ctly and at full to open this fallacion of fullness of power:
the su^e whereof is this. By a pretended fulne^e of power the Pope without
ground or reason, only led thereto by pride and ambition, intruded upon the
right of Jesus Christ, and upon the right of the Church, and upon the right of
Temporal Princes, wresting all authority to himself, and this he calls
fulness of power. ^or i^by fulness of power be understood that power whereby all
men and all creatures are commanded and directed to what end the commau^der
will: this power is given only to Jesus Christ, and to no other man: according
to that Scripture; all power is given unto me in heaven and in ^arth. Mat. 28.
18**
But if by fullness of power, be understood power to preach, to excommunicate,
to bind, to loose, to interpret Scripture, to determine controversies; this
power is in the Church: partly in Bishops, partly in doctors, partly in
Councels, and not more in the Pope then in another Bishop. Last of all, if by
this fullness of power be understood Sovereign Jurisdiction coactiue, then it
is in Temporal Princes. Marsiliu^ makes more parts hereof* b^t I draw him
summarily, and presume that to these three heads all that he says may be
reduced.

12. And therefore whereas the Pope claims such ^ power, intruding upon the
right of each of these, he says: Ex vn^ Part. 2. cap. 23.
(...) in (...) ^ransiuit Roman^s (...). That is, [The Pope has from one
presumption passed into another. The same Author declares how the Popes
proceeded in these their incroachings upon Jurisdiction. First, says he, they
made some Ibid.
constitutions to govern the Clergy: then they proceeded by way of
exhort^tion and entreaty, to persuade the laity to keep fastes, and to
abstain from meats. When they saw that laymen did willingly receive such
observations, the^ they proceeded to ordain the same things as laws, and to
denounce exco^municatio^ against the transgr^ssours thereof. And all this was
done, says Ibid.
he, Su^ (...) and diuin^ cul^us speci^. That is, [Vnder a show of godlin^sse,
and the worship of God.] The same Author adde^h, Cres^ente autem (...) ipsis
app^ (...) ampli^ domi^di, attendentib^s deuoto^ fideli^ (...) ignauia^ and
diuin^ (...), qui ad ^a (...) sacerdote^ indicebantur* obligari credeban^ (...)
aetern^; praesumpseru^t (...) Episcop^ Roma^i, cum suo clericoru^ coetu,
^ligarchica quaedam edicta (...) actus (...), etc. That is, [But as the
appetite of ruling, farther continually increased in them, when they saw that
de^ote Christians were kept in fear with such proceedings, through
slothfulness and ignorance of Gods worship: which (Christians ignorant)
thought themselves bound under the pain of eternal damnation, to all that was
enjoined them of the Priests: then the Bishops of Rome with their Clergy
presuming further made certain Oligarchicall Edicts concerning civil actions.
Thus says he, the Bishop of Rome began first to practice expemptions. And
that he might draw a number of the Laiety into the love of those practices, he
extended these exemptions to diverse companies of Lay persons, and so defrauded
the Magistrate of due honor and obedience, and brought in that confusion
whereof the same Author complains thus: H^c est pestilentiae Italici
regniradix and origo, ex qua cuncta scandala germinauerunt prodeunt etc. Qua
stante, nunquamciuiles ibidem cessa^ discordiae, p^testatem enim hanc ad quam
paulatim and latenti pr^aricatione subintrauit ex consuetudine aut abusione
verius, dudum detinuit Romans Episcopus, eandem sibi per principem reuocari
formidans, and merito propter commissos excessus: creatione^ atque (...) Romans
Principis omni maligna sollicitudi^ vitat. That is [This is the root and
fountain of the pestilence which troubles the Empire, from whence all
scandals grow and proceed, and which standing, civil discords shall never
cease in Italy, for the Pope fearing that this power may be revoked by the
Emperor, and that deservedly for the excess committed therein: into which
power he has by little and little stolen by secret preuarication of custom,
or to say more truly, of abuse, having holden it some while: he hinders the
creation and promotion of the Emperor by all malice and spite.] Whereupon, says
he, some Popes have broken out into such impudency, as in their Decretals is to
be seen, that they a^ouch that the Emperor is bound to them in an Oath of
Allegiance, as if the Emperor were under them subjected by coactiue
Jurisdiction.

13. Then Marsiliu^ has discovered the reason why the Popes have so much
opposed themselves against the Emperors, to be, because they were afraid least
the Emperors should call them to a reckoning for their Exemptions, for the
abuse of their excommunications, for intruding themselves into the office of
the civil Magistrate, and taking a new authority upon themselves from
themselves without warrant of the Emperor. This is that thing which caused
them to stir so much against Emperors, and at last to procure the decay of
the Empire so much, as at this day they have made it so weak, that now they
are out of the fear thereof. Other things for breuities sake I omit: this is
sufficient to understand what reason learned men had then to withstand the
Popes Jurisdiction. This book of Marsilius was never answered, and hereafter
is not like to be. But John the two and twentieth, against whom this book was
intended, did in stead of aunswering, condemn this worthy Writer: which thing
was much more easy for him to do.

. II. William Occham and Michael Cezena.
14. BUT the truth could not be supp^ssed thus. For other learned men devoted
to the service of the truth, entered into a further search of this Jurisdiction,
among whom Michael Cezena and William Occham were famous. The occasion which
stirred them up to make search of this point, was this: Michael Cezena General
of the Order of the Minorites refuted three Constitutions of Pope John the two
and twentieth; Ad conditorem Canonum: Cum inter: and, Quia quorundam. These he
refuted and sent his books abroad against these Constitutions; whereupon John
the two and twentieth deprived him, and disabled him from taking any other
dignity. But Michael appealed from the Pope.

15. Here arose the question, whether a Christian might appeal from the Pope.
William Occham once a worthy fellow of Merton College in Oxford, undertook
this question, and disputes it thoroughly, in that book which he intitleth
Opus nonaginta dierum. He concludes that a man may and might appeal from the
Pope, and that a Council is above the Pope. And says, that many more learned
men wrote diverse books at that time, for confirmation of the same truth,
wherein they allege strong reasons to prove their purpose, and answer all
doubts. Cap. 1.
De ista materia (says he) plures libri prolixi sunt editi, in quibus
praedicti (...) motiua adducunt quam plurima, obiectiones refellunt, and quae
possunt oriri dubia, declarare nituntur. That is [Of this matter many long
books set forth, wherein these foresaid Disputers, allege many reasons,
refute objections, and seek to clear all doubts that can rise.] Of the Pope
he says thus: Ioh^es 22. co^scius (...) suor^ ad iudici^ generalis concilij
ve^ire recusat. That is [Pope John the two and twentieth, his own consci^nce
accusing himself of his errors, refuses to come to the judgment of a
Ge^erall Council.] Thus the Pope has ever bin afraid of a General Council,
since the time that first he usurped Jurisdiction. The same Author confuteth
the Cap. 2.
Constitutions of John the two and twentieth, first by Scriptures, then by
Canons of Councels, and testimonies of holy Fathers, and last of al by the
determination of the Church of Rome. And for this question of Jurisdiction,
because the Popes then began to challenge temp^rall Jurisdiction over Princes,
his assertion Cap 93.
is; ^eatus ^etrus non fuit vicarius Christi, quantum ad officium reg^i
temporalis, nec in ^omporalibus qusb^e. That is [S. Peter was not Christ's Vicar
in respect of a temporal Kingdom, nor in respect of any tempo^alities
whatsoever.] Which Assertion he proves thus: If it were so that S. ^eter were
Christ's Vicar in temporal Dominion, then should S. Peter have Jurisdiction
over Emperors and Kings: but this the Popes themselves Did. 96. cap. cum ad
verum
deny, for Pope Nicholas says thus: Quu^ ad ver^ ve^tum est, nec Imperator
iura sibi Pontificat^s, etc. That is: When we come to know the truth, neither
has the Emperor taken upon him the right of the Pope, nor the Pope usurped
the title of the Emperor, for one Mediator of God and man Jesus Christ has
distinguished the Offices of both these powers by their proper actions and
distinct dignities. Ex hi^ (says Occha^) datur (...) quod Romans Pontifex ex
successione Petri non habet Iurisdictionem temporalem super (...). That is,
[Hence we may understand, that the Pope by succeeding Pet^r has no temporal
Jurisdiction over the Emperor.

16. Against this determination he moves some obiectious or rather takes the
^easons of (...) Triumphus, and makes them his objections, though he suppress
the name of (...). The obiectious are these: First, The Pope deposes Kings,
15. qu. 6. cap. ali^. Secondly, The Pope trauslated the Empire, Extra. de
Elect. cap. venerabilem. Thirdly, The Emperor Cap 93*
takes an Oath of Allegiance. These are the reasons of Augusti^ Triumphus,
whereunto he answers thus. To the first he says: Ration^ eriminis habet
spiritual^m Iurisdictionem, non temporalem. That is [In respect of some fault
he has spiritual Jurisdiction, but not temporal.] Then all the Jurisdiction
which the Pope or any other Bishop has, is only spiritual in his opinion,
in respect of sin which may be censured by spiritual censures. But a power
to depose Kings includes temporal Jurisdiction. To the second he says: The
Pope translated the Empire: Non in q^antum successor Petri, sed authoritate
Romanorum qui sibi potestatem huinsmodi concesserant: That is [Not as the
successor of Peter, but by the authority of the Romans, who granted him that
power.] To the third he says; the Emperor that first took an Oath of
Allegiance, did it from devotion and humility, and therefore afterward refused
it. Marfilius answers to this last objection somewhat otherwise, for he
utterly rejects the testimony of that Canon, that witnesses that the
Emperor took an Oath of Allegiance. Inta^tum Part. 2. cap. 22.
vero ipsorum quidam prorupit a^daciam (says Marsil.) vt in suis edectis
expresserit, Romanum Principem sibi iurame^o fidelitatis astringitanquam
coacti^a I^risdictione subiectum, vt ex suarum narrationum quas decretales
appellant derisibili and contempt^ prorsus inuolucro Septimo de Sent. etc. lege
secund. de Sent.
septimo de Sent and re i^dicata palam se inspicientibus offert. That is [One
of them (to wit Clement the fifth) has broken out in such impudency in his
Edicts, that he affirms the Emperor is bound to him by an Oath of
Allegiance, as subject to him in coactiue Jurisdiction, as is openly to be
seen in 2. de Sent. and re ^udic. out of that ridiculous and most contemptible
collection of their Narrations, which they call Decretals.]

17. But to return to William Occham and Michael Cezena in whose cause Occha^
was engaged: Michael was deposed by This Narration is w^ten by Occh^m, and
extant in his worke^.
John the two and twentieth, in June in the year of Christ, one thousand three
hundred twenty and eight: in his behalf letters were directed to the Chapter
of the Minorites, assembled in Parpinian and Auinion in the year one thousand
three hundred thirty and one. These letters were subscribed by Henricus de
Chalchem, Fran^iscus de Esculo, and Guilielmus de Occham: not only these men
favored his cause, but those two famous Universities Oxford and Paris did
approve the same. Whereupon Michael being arrested by the Pope did appeal
from the Pope. Consider the nature of his appeal: for it opens the sense and
judgment of learned men then living, being approved by the greatest learned
men then living; and by all the learned men of that order in England and in
Paris, for so it is said there. Quae determinatio fuit etiam ab omnib^s
Magistris and baccalarijs in sacra pagina de Parisijs and de A^glia dicti
ordinis approbata, and V^iuersis Christi fidelibus destinata. That is [Which
determination was also approved of all the Masters and Bachelours in Divinity
of the said order of Paris and England, and directed to all Christians:] I will
set down the form of his Literae recitatoriae gestorum fratris Michaelis
Cezenae, inter opera Guilielm. Octham.
appeal as in the same place I find it expressed, and thus it is: Habito
prius magno and maturo consilio, ab ipso Domino Iohanne, and a dicta eius
assertione, and arrestation^ infratempus Legitimum meo nomine, and omnium
fratrum mihi adh^rentium Uolentium, ac dict^ ordinis, secundum quod tradunt
Canonic^ sanctiones, ad sanctam Romanam Ecclesiam Catholicam and Apostolicam
appello. That is, [After great and mature deliberation first had, I appeal
from the same Pope John, and from his said assertion, and arrest, within
lawful time for my self, and for all my brethren that do adhaere or will
hereafter adhaere to me, and for the said Order according as the Canonical
Constitutions do allow, unto the holy Roman Catholic and Apostolic
Church.] In which place he professes that he does this by the example of
diverse other who had done the like before.

18. From whence I would observe some things declaring the sense, judgment and
religion of the men that then lived. And first where he says, that he does
this by great and mature deliberation, and that herein he has the approbation
of diverse learned men, of diverse Universities, and that he does it by the
examples of such as were before him: we note that this is not the judgment of
one man, but of the most famous learned men of this age. For farther
confirmation hereof, we observe also that Naucler speaking of this particular,
and of the cause of Lodouicke Emperor, says, that many learned and godly men
of Nauel. ^ner. 45
Christendom held that Pope John the two and twentieth was an Heretic,
convict of assured errors. Iohannem Papam, says he, magni and multi theologi
scientia and vita probatidogmatizabant esse haereticum, propter cersos errores.
And speaking of the learned men that wrote against the same Pope, he names
Dantes and Occha^ among other. This agrees with that which Occha^ witnesses
of this Pope, that his own conscience accusing himself of his errors, he durst
not come to the judgment of a general Council. Then I note not here only
the judgment of these learned men, but the sense and judgment of
Christendom, of a general Council, of the Church of Rome. For Cezena and
Occham (who was combined with Cezena in this cause) would never have appealed
to the Church of Rome, or to a general Council then representing that Church,
unless they had been fully secured herein, that the Church to which they
appealed had condemned the errors of the Pope from whom they appealed. They
then knowing the sense and judgment of that Church, appealed from the Pope to
it ^ which thing is further also confirmed by that which he says in his
appeal, Secundum quod tradunt Canonic^ sanctiones: as the Canonical
Constitutions deliver: then the Canons of the Church allow and approve such an
appeal, howsoever since this time the Popes have alte^ed the Canons and
discipline of the Church, yet then this discipline was in force, and
acknowledged through Christendom, that the Pope might be censured in a
general Council.

19. Another thing which we observe in this appeal, is a remarkable
distinction famously observed in the sense, judgment and religion of the men
of this age between the Church of Rome and the Court of Rome. For Ceze^a after
that he has appealed from the Pope to the Church of Rome, complains much of
the Court of Rome, as being wholly governed by the Pope: from whence he
appealing to the Church of Rome, declares evidently that by the Church of
Rome, he understood another thing, then that which our adversaries now call by
that name, an assembly whereof the Pope is the head, which are wholly to be
guided, governed and directed by the Pope. This is now commonly called the
church of Rome: but at this time wherein Ceze^ lived, the Church of Rome was
understood to be a free, lawful, holy general Council assembled of the
Churches of these Western parts of Christendom. This is the Church of Rome
which our forefathers have so much honored. The sentence of this Church they
reverence, (...) authority of this Church they acknowledge, appealing from the
Popes sentence as unjust, re^ecting his authority as unlawful, still resting
in the judgment of the Church of Rome. This declares that the Pope may be
separated from the Church of Rome, though not from the Court of Rome. Now
separate once the Pope from the Church of Rome, as by these appeals it must so
be understood, and then it follows by infallible ^nference, that the Church
of Rome (as now it is commonly known by that name) is no other thing then that
which ^se learned men called the Court of Rome: and that this pr^ent Church of
Rome is not that which our fathers called the Church of Rome. It is not the
same thing: for from that Church of Rome the Pope might be separated, from this
he cannot. From the Pope to that Church a Christian might appeal^, which
sentence was justified by the most learned that then lived: From the Pope to
this Church there is no appeal. Thus much I observe from this appeal, and
from the appeal of Lodou^ the fourth Emperor, which before we have declared,
being to the same end, and agreeing in the same form with this, being from the
Pope to a general Council, which also he calls the holy Church of Rome. In
which same manner did Philip King of France appeal from Pope Boniface,
besides diverse other who used the same course, as Michael Cizena witnesses.

20. Hence rises this Corollary, that the reformed Churches have made no
separation from the Church of Rome, but only from the Court of Rome* And that
the Pope and his Court, that is Friars and Canonists who depend wholly upon
him, terming themselves now the Church of Rome, have made the separation, and
have altered the ancient bounds of the Church, and plucked up the old hedge
which was the partition between the Church and Court of Rome. Thus they
reteyning only the name, have changed all things and turned them vpside down.
So that albeit that which I shall say, may seem a strange Paradox, yet it is a
truth which will every day be more and more Paradox.
known and confessed. The ancient Church of Rome, y^ even that Church of Rome
which stood in the world before the Council of Trent, can now be found no
where in the world but among Protestants. Marsilius P^. observed the beginning
of this alteration, thus: Apud M^rnos Ecelesi^ (...) importat Part. 2. cap. 2.
ministros Presbyteros Episc^ etc. (...) Ecclesi^ Rom* ^rbis ho^ (...)
obtinuit, cuius ministri and pra^identes sunt Pa^a R^ and Cardin^ ipsius, qui
(...) ex usu quod^ ^runt dici (...). [The Church imports as much as
Ministers, Priests, Bishops in late use, etc. as the Church of the City of
Rome has now obtained this name, whose Ministers and Governors are the Pope
and his Cardinals, who now from a certain use are called the Church.] But that
use was but late brought in, especially by Friars: for the ancient use of
this, which was also long continued among many, and the best in the Church of
Rome, he declares to be thus: Sec^ (...) Ecclesi^, and (...) and pro^ (...),
etc. de Vniuersitate (...) and (...) Christi. [But according to another
signification, and that most truly and properly, and answering to the first
imposition of this name: the Church is called the Universal company of all
faith^ull believers which call upon the name of Christ.] Then the Church of
Rome, as the Pope is the Governor thereof, was observed to be but a particular
Church, and not the Catholic Church which contains all Believers.

21. Occham has also written another Book, Entitled. Super potestate su^i
Pontifieis (...) quo^ decisiones. From whence I will observe some things
concerning our question of Jurisdiction: disputing of that which the Friars and
flatterers of Popes called (...) potestatis: he handles it so, that in the
conclusion, he puts the Pope down as low, as the flatterers extolled him up
on high: For thus he says. Principatui optimo repugnare videtur, quod
principans illam habeat plenitudinem Quest. 3. cap. 5.
potestatis etc. Nam omnes subditi h^benti talem plenitudinem sunt serui
secundum strictissimam significationem vocabuli, serui. That is, [It seems to
be utterly against the nature of the best Government, that the Governor should
have this fulness of power, etc. For all that are subjects to him that has such
fullness, are his slaves according to the most strict understanding of a
bondslaue.] And because the Pope then began to flatter himself strangely, and
to swell with those words of pride: that he was to judge all men, but no man
might judge him; no man might accuse him: Occham represseth this swelling
vanity thus. Papa potest ab homine accusari, destit^i, and deponi: Quest. 3.
cap. 6.
omnis enim accusatio est coram iudice facienda. Nec de hoc debet Papa
perturbari, ne contra doctrinam Christi Apostolis pro se and propraelatis
Ecclesiae traditam velit tanquam sal infatuatum mitti for as and ab omnibus
conculcari, ne contra praeceptum eiusdem velit pro salute eius corporis mystici
vt membrum putridum amputari, ne desideret ipse potestatem qua se ex charitate
correptum quamuis etiam Ecclesiam non audiret, tanquam Ethnicus and publicanus
non si^at se vt carnes putridas resecari, and vt ouem scabiosam repellenda^ a
stabulis, and expurgandum vt fermentum quod totam massam corrumpit: sed velit
vt sibi parcatur, vt vniuersa Ecclesia ad interitum perducatur. Quae omnia a
desiderio Papae qui a^imam suam tenetur pro subditis ponere, conuenit exulari.
That is, [The Pope may be accused, forsaken, deposed by a man: for all
accusation must be before the judge. Neither must this thing trouble the Pope,
otherwise he might s^eme to make himself unprofitable salt, good for nothing
but to be trod underfoot against the doctrine of Christ delivered to his
Apostles for themselves, and for the Prelates of the Church: and against the
commandment of Christ, to be cut off like a rotten member, for the
preservation of his mystical body. And so he might seem to desire such a
power, by which being reproved in charity, albeit like an heathen and
Publican he should not hear the Church, yet he would not suffer himself to be
cut of like dead flesh, and like a scabbed sheep to be driven from the folds,
and to be purged like leaven that corrupts the whole lump. But he should by
this seek that for sparing him, the whole Church might be brought to ruin.
All which ought to be far from the Pope, who ought to give his life for his
flock.] Then this man foresaw, and in some sort foretold all that mischief
which fell upon the Church by the Popes claim of this strange Jurisdiction:
which Jurisdiction, if once it should be obtained by the Pope; then has Occham
plainly foretold, that which since this time by too great experience we have
found, that the Pope would hereby prove unsavory salt good for nothing but to
be trodden underfoot of men; a rotten member cut off from the body of the true
Church: as rotten flesh to be cut off for the preservation of the whole, as a
scabbed sheep to be kept from the fold, as old leaven to be purged from
corrupting and infecting the whole lump. And that for sparing him the
universal Church must be brought to desolation and overthrow. All this
William Occham foresaw, all this we have found by lamentable experience too
true: and all this followed upon his intrusion into this Jurisdiction.

22. Through this book William Occham was driven to carry himself cunningly
for fear of the Popes greatness, moving many questions and doubts, and
reasoning after the manner of the schools on both sides, making no professed
determination or conclusion: but he leaves such strength of reason on the one
side, and takes away all objections on the other side, that any man may
infer the conclusion, and understand the reason why himself did not
conclude. For thus he says in the end of that book. Haec breu^er conferendo,
allegendo, and disputando sunt dicta; non vt certa veritas in dubium reuocetur,
sed vt aliqua habeatur occasio, etc. Quid autem sentiam de praedictis, non
expressi, quia hoc (vt puto) veritati non prodesset. That is, [These things
have we said, by conferring, alleging, disputing; not that a known truth
should be called into question, but to give an occasion, etc. I have not
declared what mine opinion is of these things; because (as I take it) that
would not help the truth.] Another book William Occham Intituleth, Dialogus:
from whence I will cite only one Sillogisme, contained in few words, but so
strongly and soundly collected, that it may make an end of all this
controversy: his words are these. Papa non (...) a Jurisdiction (...) and
(...)* (...) Lib. 3. ^ract. 2. cap. 33.
iudicumqua^ fuerat Christus and Apostoli: sed C^ristus and (...) fuerunt ab
imp^ratore quantu^ ad Iurisdictione^ c^actiuam (...). That is, [The Pope is no
more exempt from the Jurisdiction of the Emperors, and other secular judges
then Christ and his Apostles were: but Christ and his Apostles were judged by
the Emperor, in respect of coactiue Jurisdiction: therefore so the Pope ought to
be judged.] This Syllogis^e to this day was never answered: In respect of which
sound and pithy handling of these things, as Occh^ was surnamed Doctor
inuincibilis in argu^nto: so the Ex regi^tro collegij Mertonens.
sense and judgment of learned men was wholly for Occham. Insomuch that
Naucler witnesses, that this worthy William Occh^ threw down all the Popes
Temporal Dominion in the dust, and carried the glory in all these
disputations: wherein many learned men followed him. For he speaking of Da^es
that learned Florentine, says that this Dantes also wrote a Book, De
Monarchia; wherein he proves that the Empire has no dependence of the Pope:
which opinion Antoninu^ reprooueth for an error. But Occha^ has confirmed this
which (...) took to be an error. (...) secundu^ Naucl. gener. 45.
ipsum Antoninum, magi^ d^ffuse prosecutus est Occham ordi^is (...), quasi ad
(...) deducens (...) Papae and (...), in te^orali domin^, quamobre^ multi ver^
doctissim^ (...) questiones disputaban^ de potestat^ (...). That is, [Which
error as Antoninus takes it, Occha^ a Minorite has most largely handled,
reducing the power of the Pope and of Prelates, concerning Temporal dominion,
as it were to nothing. Wherefore many men of greatest learning, did then
dispute of Jurisdiction Eccle^iasticall.]

23. By all which we see the Popes Jurisdiction ouerthrown by men of the
greatest learning, even then when he thought himself strongest: for this part
of his pretended Jurisdiction which touches the deposing of Princes was never
better handled, then at this time in the mids of the Popes kingdom, by these
men. And shall it be thought strange in us now, to maintain the same truth,
which then these worthy men durst maintain? Or shall it not be imputed either
as damnable ignorance in us not to know, or as extreme weakness and want of
courage, not to profess and maintain as much now against the Pope, as these
worthy men did then? More we cannot say, then they have said in this point of
Jurisdiction: For they have proved by invincible reasons, that in
tem^oralibus, in temporalties the Pope has no Jurisdiction over Princes: that
in ^pirit^libus, in spiritualties the Pope is ^ubiect to the censure of ^
gen^rall Council. This is the truth which ever has been maintained against
the Pope: more then this we seek not.

. III. Robert Grosthead and John Wiclife.
24. AFter Willi^ (...), let us come to that famous Bi^hop of Lincoln, Robert
(...): It is to be lamented that more of his writings were not preserved; by
so much as we have extant, it appear^th that with great courage, learning, and
integrity he withstood the Popes pretended Jurisdiction: for his lea^ing
(...). calls him the true great ^lark. VViclif: complaint. page 14.
The contention which ^xercised him most, was about the Popes p^ouisions: for
the Pope would by his provisions (and this was also a part of his Jurisdiction
proceeding out of the pretended fullness of power) place strangers, commonly
some of his own bastardes, under the name of his Nephews, and of these
sometimes young children. Thus in the best and greatest Ecclesiastical charges
and benefices, as they became void he thrust in such as had neither learning
nor honesty, will or skill to disch^rge the du^tie which that place required
by preaching. This being of it self a thing hateful and abominable: Grosth^d
conceiving of the thing ^s it was in truth, resolved in his Diocese to admit
no such v^gratious practice. And ther^ore when the Pope had written to him in
this sort for one of his Nephews: (...) withstood the Pope, and would not place
him. And hereupon he wrote to the Pope: the letter is extant in Mat. Paris, out
of which I will rehe^rse some things, that the excellent spirit of that man may
be the better observed: and his zeal against the intolerable practice of the
Popes Jurisdiction. For these provisions were then defended by flatterers as
proceeding from the fullness of power, the fountain as they called it of all
Jurisdiction against which Grosthead disputes thus.

25. Apostolica mandata non sunt necesse possunt alia quam Apostolorum Mat.
Paris. Henric. 3. 37. ^n. 1253.
doctrina and ipsius Domini nostri Jesus Christi, Apostolorum magistri ac
Domini. That is, [The Apostolical mandates are no other: neither may they be
any other then the doctrines of the Apostles, and of our Lord Jesus Christ,
master and Lord of the Apostles.] By this rule which Grosthead prescribes to
the Pope, we are ready to receive any mandate from him. And the things which we
reject, we reject upon no other ground, then as this worthy Bishop did, because
they are not consonant to the Apostolical doctrines. And whereas the Pope had
written to him for a provision to be sped in his Diocese, he proceeds thus.
Ipse Do^inus noster Jesus Christus ait, qui non est mecum, contra me est:
contra ipsum autem non est nec esse potest Apostolicae sedis sanctitas
diuinissima: non est igitur praedictae literae tenor Apostolicae sanctitati
consonu^* sed absonum and plurimum discors. Primo quia de illius literae and ei
consimilium superacucmulato non obstante, nec ex legis naturalis obseruandae
necessitate inducto patet cataclysmus, inconstanciae, audaciae, in^erecundiae,
mentiendi fallendi, etc. Praeterea post peccatum Luciferi, quod idem erit in
fine temporum ipsius filij perditio^is Antichristi, quem interficiet Dominus
spirit^ oris sui, nec est, nec esse potest alterum genus peccat^ tam aduersum
and contrarium Apostolorum doctrinae, and Euangelicae, and ipsi Domino Jesus
Christo tam odibile, and tam abominabile, quam ani^as curae pastoralis officij
and ministerij defraudatione mortificare and perdere. That is, [Our Lord Jesus
Christ himself says, he that is not with me, is against me: now against him
the most divine holiness of the Apostolic sea is not, nor cannot be:
therefore the tenor of the foresaid letter is not consonant to the Apostolical
holiness, but dissonant, and altogether repugnant, First, because the way is
opened to an inundation of inconstancy presumption, shamelessness, lying,
cousening, etc. By reason of the non obstante in that and such like letters
often heaped up, not proceeding from any necessity of the observation of the
natural law: Moreover, after the sin of Lucifer, which also shall be the
sin of Antichrist, the son of perdition in the end of the world, whom the
Lord shall kill with the spirit of his mouth: there is not, nor can be any
other kind of sin so repugnant and contrary to the Apostolical and
Euangelical doctrine, to our Lord Jesus Christ, so odious, and so abominable, as
this sin is to kill and destroy the souls of men by defrauding them of the
care of the pastoral office and ministry.]

26. The beginnings of M. Luther with Pope Leo the tenth, were much more mild
then this: but he proceeds and condemns this sin, and the Popes letters
by Scriptures; declaring that they bring in such confusion into the Church:
which could be practiced by none, but sueh as are under the same condemnation
with Lucifer and Antichrist. Pe^ores sunt Lucifero, says he, and Antichristo
proxim^ores; and in hac (...) gradatim quanto magis superex^ellentes, qui ex
maiori and diu^nori po^estate sib^ diuinitus in aedifica^mem non in
destructionem tradita, magis tenentur ab Ecclesia de^ tales interemptores
pessimos excludere and extirpare. That is, [They are worse then Lucifer, and
next to Antichrist: and in this badnesse they rise in a greater degree of evil
so much the more, by how much they are more excellent, who from the greater and
more divine power that is given them for edification, not for destruction, are
bound the more to exclude and root out these wicked distroyers from the Church
of God.] And therefore he auerreth that the Pope cannot command such a sin
as this, to be done, [So hateful and detestable, so abominable to Christ, so
pernicious to man. For this were an utter defection from power and
Jurisdiction, a corruption, and abuse thereof, and a remotion from the throne
of glory; and a session in the chair of pestilence, and in eternal shame in
hell, next in place to those two great Princes of darkness, Lucifer and
Antichrist.] And because in such things no man ought to yield his obedience,
but is bound to disobey: therefore he says thus, [Out of duty and obedience,
and out of the love of union with the body of Christ; I utterly reject and
resist these letters, especially because they urge me to such a sin, as is
evidently abominable to God, and pernicious to man; and because they are
contrary to the holiness of the sea Apostolic, and against the Catholic
faith: Filialiter and obedienter non obedio, contradico, rebello. And unto that
Sophistical shift of Plenitudo potestatis, whereby they used to cast a color
over these practices, he answers in such a sort, as gives a short rule of
understanding this fullness of power, for thus he says. Breuiter autem
recolligens dico, Apostolicae sedis sanctitas non potest nisi quae in
aedi^icationem sunt and non in destructionem: haec est enim potestat is
plenitudo, omnia posse in aedificationem. That is, [Briefely recollecting what
we have said, we say, the holiness of the sea Apostolic cannot do any
thing: but that which is for edification, and not for destruction: for this is
fullness of power, to be able to do all things for edification.] In which
sense who would have denied the Pope a fullness.

27. When this letter came to the Pope, Nonse capiens prae ira (says mine
Author) quis ait est iste senex delirus, surdus, absurdus, qui facta audax and
temerarius iudicat? Per Petrum and Paulum nisi me moueret innata ingenuitas,
ipsum in tantam confusionem praecipitarem, vt toti mundo fabula foret, stupor,
exemplum and prodigium. Nonne r^x Anglorum noster est vassallus? and vt plus
dicam, mancipium, qui potest eum nutu nostro incarcerare and ignominiae
mancipare? That is, [The Pope not being able to hold for anger, said, who is
this foolish, deaf, absurd old man, that with such rash presumption judges
our acts? By Saint Peter and Saint Paul, if mine ingenuous good nature did not
stay me, I should hurl him into such a confusion, that he should be the fable
of the world, an astonishment, an example, a monster. Is not the King of
England our vassal, or to say more, our slave? who is able at our beck to
imprison him, and to appoint him to ignominy? But the Cardinals appeased his
holiness, especially Cardinal Egidius Hispanus, who fearing that the Pope
might prosecute some courses of extremity against him (as afterward he did)
told him, that it was not fit to use that man hardly. [The things which he
writes (quoth the Cardinal) are true, we cannot deny them, or condemn him:
he is a Catholic and holy man: more religious, more holy, of a more excellent
life then we are: there is not thought to be a greater Prelate this day living,
no nor comparable to him. All the Clergy of France and England know this to
be true: he is esteemed also a great Philosopher, in the Latin and Greek
languages famously learned, a man zealous of justice, a reader of Divinity in
the schools, a preacher to the people, a lover of chastity, a hater of
Symonie, etc.] The Cardinals therefore advised the Pope to dissimulate the
matter, least some tumult Mat. Paris.
might arise, says mine Author.

28. And mark well, why they feared that a tumult might rise in the Church
about this matter, this reason Mat. Paris relates in these words. Consilium
dederunt Cardinales Domino Papae, vt omnia haec conniuentibus oculis sub
dissimulatione transire permitteret, ne super hoc tumultus excitaretur, maxim
propter hoc quia scitur quod quandoque discessio sit ventura. That is, [The
Cardinals gave this advise to the Lord Pope, that he would wink at all these
things, and pass by them as dissimulating, least a tumult might arise:
especially for this cause, because it is well known that once there shall come
a departure.] Let this be observed, It was written long before M. Luther was
borne. The Pope and the Cardinals knew long before, that once a departure
should be made from the obedience of the Pope: and therefore Robert Grosthead
did put them in great fear, least he might be the man that might work this
departure. Then it seems in the judgment of the Cardinals, that he who first
should work this departure, must be an excellent godly and learned man, such
one as Grosthead was then known to be. But if Grosthead had done that thing
then, which upon the like occasion Luther did afterward: we should have heard
him reviled for the rankest heretic, the most wicked and ungracious man that
ever lived: as now Luther is by them, who vs^ to curse where God blesses, and
to bless where God curses. Then they were in fear of Grosthead, and thought
that this departure could not be done but by some such excellent man. And what
has M. Luther done, but that which Grosthead was provoked to do? or who could
do otherwise that keeps Grostheads principles.

29. The godly zeal of this man is further declared by Mat. Mat. Paris. ibid.
Paris, who records certain Discourses and actions of his against the Popish
practices. Improbos Romanistas, says he, praceptum habentes Papale vt eis
prouideretur, quasi venenum odit serpentium Dicebat enim quod si animarum
custodiam ipsis traderet, Satan^zaret: vnde saepius proiectis literis Papalibus
bullatis, talibus mandat is praecis^ contradixit. [The wicked Romanists that
brought the Popes letters for provisions, he hated as the poison of serpents;
for he said, if he should commit the custody of souls to them, that then he
should play the devils part. Wherefore often he threw away the Popes bulled
Letters, precisely contradicting such commandments.] The same Author notes
a memorable saying that Grosthead was wont to use: No^ liberabitur Ecclesia ab
Aegyptiaca seruitute nisi in ore gladij cruentandi. That is [The Church shall
not be delivered from this Egytian bondage, but by the edge of the bloody
sword.] By all which we see the excellent spirit of this man against the spirit
that ruled in the Popes, and against their Jurisdiction: neither are we to
think that Grosthead followed any other religion then that which his fathers
followed before him: this is the religion, sense and judgment of the world
then, that is, of all godly and judicious that then lived.

30. But was not Bishop Grosthead of the same faith and Religion with the
Church of Rome? Yes verily, and so will I be, if you grant me his conditions
and exceptions: for he puts two clauses very memorable, by which he will
condition with the Church of Rome, or any other particular Church whatsoever.
First, That the doctrines of that Church, be the doctrines of Christ and his
Apostles: Secondly, That so we may regard the Church of Rome, that we be sure
to hold unity with the true Church, the body of Christ. These excellent and
famous men that have heretofore lived in the unity of the Church of Rome, have
been willing, we confess, to yield so much to the Pope, and that particular
Church, as they might do holding unity with the true body of Christ. But if
the unity with the Roman Church do draw them away from the unity with Christ's
body: then have they always been resolved to give over the unity with that
particular Church. This confirms that which before I observed in the
Distinction between the Church of Rome and the Court of Rome, because we see
many learned and worthy men of our forefathers were of the Church of Rome, that
is, held the bond of unity with it, who were professed enemies to the Court of
Rome. Now the Pope and his flatterers have forsaken that unity with the Church
of Rome which stood in Apostolical doctrines and unity with the true body of
Christ, howsoever they boast of the name, and have nothing now to show for
themselves but the pride and faction of the Court of Rome.

31. Now come we to the time wherein lived John Wiclif, another of the worthies
of Merton College in Oxford: his adversaries would blot him with the name of
an Heretic: some things are untrue wherewith they injuriously charge him;
some things are true, which they unjustly call Heresy. In this question of
Jurisdiction, as he received the truth from Occham, his Senior in Merton
College, so he delivered the same faithfully. Speaking of the Kings
Jurisdiction as well over the Clergy as Laity, he says, [The chief
Lordshippe in this land of all temporalties both of secular men and religious
pertain to VViclifs complaint. Artic. 2.
the King of his general Government: for else he were not King of all
England, but of a little part thereof. Therefore the men that busien them to
take away this Lordshippe from the King, as don Friars, and their sautors, in
this point been snarper enemies and Traitors, then Frenchmen, and all other
nations.] Wiclif labored worthily to descry and refute the errors concerning
Jurisdiction that in his time came creeping in, introduced Lib. de fundam.
legum. Angliae ca. 36. page 424.
by Friars. For he witnesses that the Friars taught thus: Rex Angliae, non est
rex totius Angliae, sed regulus paruae partis, super residi^um vero
mortificatum est Papa Dominus; Veruntamen non est disp utandum (inquiunt) de
hac materia, quousque fuerit in effectu potentius stabilita: sed tolerandae
sunt iniuriae dominorum saecul^rium quousque arriserit opportunit as temporis.
That is [The King of England is not King of all England, but Lord of a little
part: over the residue in a dead hand the Pope is Lord, but, say they, there is
no disputing of this matter, until it be powerfully brought in effect; In the
mean time they say, the injuries of temporal Lords must be borne, until an
opportunity fauo ur them.] This is plain dealing: The Friars declare, what is
that thing at which they have long aimed. For what other meaning have their
pretended exemptions, then by making a revolt from the obedience of their
soueraigns, to become wholly the Popes servants and creatures?

32. But this late generation of Friars, I mean the Jesuits exceeding these
old Friars in admirable practices in the blood and destruction of Princes and
states; are yet so confident in their wit and eloquence, that they think
themselves able to persuade the Kings of the earth to account them among good
and loyal subjects. The old Friars dealt more plainly; they professed not
obedience to Princes: these profess more and would color their deep devises
in destruction of Princes with impudency and dissimulation, as if they meant
not the same things which daily they practice. Now that which Wiclif taught
against these wicked and profane opinions of these old Friars, was no other
thing then the judgment of the learned Divines which lived before, and in his
time: for he brought in no novelties, but the Friars introduced the novelties
in Religion and Jurisdiction. And that Distinction which before we observed
between the Church of Rome, and the Court of Rome, he confirms as a thing
notori^usly marked in his time; for of the Church of Rome he says thus:
Protestor public quod amando and venerando Romanam Ecclesiam, matrem meam,
desidero and procuro defensionem omnium priuilegiorum suorum. That is [I De
veritat. Scriptur. pa. 196
protest publicly, that loving and honoring the Church of Rome, Ireuerence
my mother, and procure the defense of all her privileges.] But of the Court of
Rome, or that particular Church of Rome which was governed by the Pope, he
says much otherwise, not doubting but that the judgment of the particular
Church of England might in many things be preferred, before that particular
Church of Rome guided by the Pope. Fieripotest (says he) quod Dominus Papa
foret ignarus legis scripturae, Ibid.
and quod Anglicana Ecclesia foret long praestantior in iudicio veritatis
Catholica, quam tota ista Romana Ecclesia collecta de istis Papa and
Cardinalibus. That is [It may come to pass that the Lord Pope may be ignorant
of the law of Scripture, and that the Church of England may be more excellent
in the judgment of the Catholic truth then all this Roman Church collected
of the Pope and Cardinals.] Then in those days there was not much attributed
to the Popes not erring judgment, or to the authority of that Church which was
wholly governed by the Pope; seeing the Pope might be ignorant of the law of
God, and the Church of England might have a more excellent judgment in the
truth, then that particular Church of Rome. That which Wiclif says might come
to pass, the world sees Chapt. 7.. 2^
and acknowledges that since that time it is come to pass: That Friars were
the introducers of Novelties, we have already showed out of John Wiclifes
observations. In this sort things stood until the time of the Council of
Pisa which was held some twenty years after John Wiclifes death.

. IIII. The Popes Jurisdiction overthrown by Councels.
33. THus have we heard the judgment of learned men against the Popes
Jurisdiction, after that the same Jurisdiction began to be practiced: these
have refuted especially that part of his claim, which was in temporalibus. Now
we will consider another part of his pretended Jurisdiction, which was in
spiritualibus: in this we find his feathers as well pulled, as in the former;
so that when both temporal and spiritual Jurisdiction is pulled from him, and
when Princes take their own right in temporalties, and Councels in spiritual
Jurisdiction: the Bird will be left naked between them, that was so glorious
with the feathers of others.

34. Before the time of the Council of Trent, this has bin always
acknowledged and preserved a truth in the Church, that the authority of a
Council is above any particular whatsoever, whether he be the Bishop of Rome
or any other. This was never once brought in question the first thousand
years: but when the Popes had framed a Ladder of their supposed Jurisdiction
to clime above Princes; and Friars began to puff up the Sails of the Popes
pride by the wind of their flattery: then began some question to be made of
the authority of a Council: The Friars hoisted up the Pope above the Council,
but there were always in the Church of Rome some remaining, yea a great
number, and sometimes as the best part so the strongest, who held and
maintained the ancient true Jurisdiction of a lawful, free general Council
to be above the Pope, and to have authority to depose the Pope, or otherwise to
censure him, as in their wisdom they thought meet. This question of the
Jurisdiction of a Council had often been moved, as we find by the appeals
of Emperors and Kings, and others from the Pope to a general Council: but it
came not to be put in execution before the Council of Pisa, which was gathered
upon this occasion.

35. After a ^ong schism in the Church of Rome, Gregory Naucl. gener. 47.
the twelfth was choosing during the schism; Gregory took an Oath as soon as
he was elected, to take away the schism by all possible means, and wrote to
Benedict the thirteenth, inuiting him to a mutual abdication for peace:
Benedict returned an answer to the same words back again: As the Popes
colluded together without any sincere purpose of abdication, the question began
to be moved of the authority of the Church, which might order them both,
because the Church is above all; even the Popes are subject to this power: and
therefore it was thought fit that a general Council should be called,
representing the Church of these Western parts. The Council was summoned to
meet at Pisa: the Bishops, Prelates and Princes being orderly summoned, and
meeting here in the year one thousand four hundred and eight, proceeded
against both the Popes, deposed and deprived them; condemning them both for
Heretics and Schismatickes, commanding all Christians not to take them for
Popes, or yield obedience to them. In this Council there was great
disputation of the authority of a Council: and it was determined, none
contradicting, says mine Author, that the Council had authority to depose
the Popes persisting in a scandal, and to choose another. This was the ground
and occasion of calling the Council of Constance not long after this.

36. This Council of Pisa is much commended* by John Ioh. Gerson lib. de
auferibilitate Papae.
Gerson, and by the Council of Constance, as the same Author Gerson does
witness; Where he says also that the Church of England sent learned men to
that Synod at Pisa: who as they came through Paris were entertained with an
Oration of the same Gerson then Chauncellor of the University of Paris,
declaring the consent of that University with them. Then we have the Council
of Pisa, and herein the judgment of the Church of England concurring with many
other Churches against the Popes Jurisdiction. The same will likewise appear
by the Council of Constance.

37. The Council of Constance was called by the commandment of Sigismund
Emperor, in the year one thousand four hundred and fourteen, for the same
end. For the Synod of Pisa had deposed the two Popes that maintained the
schism, and chosen a new Pope Alexander the fifth, but the other two held
their places by force, and there were now three Popes: after Alexander 5.
death, John the three and twentieth was chosen: this man came to Constance, and
showed himself willing to be deposed, so that the other two in schism might
be ordered and pulled down from the places which they held: but this John
finding that the Council had a purpose after that he was deposed to choose
another, and not himself; fled away from the Council, and refused to be
ordered by it: but he was apprehended and brought back again: so his life
and conversation being examined by the Council, he was deposed: but when he
sent Charles Malatesta to approve the sentence of the Synod, and to make for
him, and in his name a free abdication of the Papacy: he died for grief that
Malatesta had performed that commission so roundly and so quickly.

38. The other two Popes Gregory and Bened^ct stood up mainteining the schism
all this while. To order them Sigismund Emperor took great pains with the
Kings of England, France and Arragon. Gregory yielded to be ruled by the
Synod, but Benedict stood out stiffely a long time, who in the end also was
deprived, and pronounced an Heretic and Schismaticke. It is observed that
there was nothing concluded in this Council without the consent of the five
Nations. The Synod having thus deposed all those other Popes, made choice of
Martin the fifth: And to prevent such schisms and the troubles which grew by
them, it was decreed in the same Synod, that such Synodes should be often
called; the first should be called five years after this: the second seven
years after the first; the third ten years after the second; and so from
ten years to ten years continually. This order and Jurisdiction of the
Church declared in Synodes, did so terrify the Popes that they sought by all
means to defeat it, they could not endure such a Jurisdiction above
themselves, to call them, censure them, depose them, as this Synod had thrown
down three Popes at once. Therefore the Popes after this labored by all
means how they might oppress the authority of a Council, (which they could
never do before the Council of Trent) and all these parts of Christendom on
the other side labored to maintain the authority of the Council above the
Pope.

39. For the better confirmation hereof, this Synod declares the authority
and Jurisdiction of a general Council thus: Declarat ( haec sancta Synodus)
quod ipsa in spiritu sancto legitime Sess. 5.
congregata, Concilium generale faciens, and Ecclesia^ Catholicam representans,
potestatem a Christo immediate habet, cui quilibet cuiuscunque fuerit status
vel dignitatis, etiam si Papalis existat, obedire tenetur in his quae pertinent
ad fidem and extirpationem dicti schismatis and reformatione^ dictae Ecclesiae
in capite and in membris. That is [This holy. Synod declares, that they being
gathered in the Holy Ghost, making a general Council, and representing the
Catholic Church, have power immediately from Christ, to which every man of
what s^ate and dignity soever, though he be a Pope, is bound to obey in those
things which pertain to faith, and the extirpation of schism, and reformation
of the Church in the head and members.] And presently after this, they declare
and define these points, that every man of what condition soever, though he be
a Pope, that shall not obey the ordinances, statutes, or precepts of the Synod
shall be duly corrected and punished: that Pope John the three and twenty (for
this was decreed at the beginning before John was deprived) shall not
transfer the Court of Rome, or any other public officers thereof, or compel
them directly or indirectly to follow him, without the consent of this Synod.
And if he shall fulminate any censures Ecclesiastical against such officers,
or any other adhaering to this Synod; all shall be void and of none effect:
neither shall it be lawful for any man to obey any such censures: That all
Translations of Prelates, all deprivations, reuocations, monitions,
Ecclesiastical censures, all processes and whatsoever is done or shall be done
by the said Pope in prejudice of the said Council, etc. shall be void, vain,
and of none effect.

40. According to the Decree of this Synod, Pope Martin the fifth, after five
years called a Synod at Pauie: thither came they that were sent by the Pope,
and expected the nations without whose presence a general Council could not
be held. But the plague increasing greatly in that town, they changed the
place of this Synod to Seen: where Pope Martin perceiving that Benedict began
to stir again; to prevent troubles, dissolved this Synod, and according to
the Decree of the Synod of Constance, appointed the place of another Council
after seven years to be holden at Basil; and when the appointed Anno 1430.
time came, he sent Cardinal Iulianus to Basil for the furthering of the
same. This is the only Pope of late that was not affraide of a general
Council; he was elected by a Council, he kept the Decrees of that Council
with great commendation, and lived in that moderation, that he seemed not to be
affraide of the censure of a Council. Martin having proceeded thus far,
only to show himself willing to call the Council of Basil, died. Eugenius
the fourth succeeded, who did strive by all means to defeat the Council of
Basil: but by the authority of Sigismund the Emperor that Synod proceeded;
thither came the Prelates of those nations, without whose consent a general
Council of these parts of Christendom cannot be held.

41. This Synod of Basil thus gathered, among other things agreed upon
certain conclusions concerning this Jurisdiction; the Conclusions are these:

1. Veritas haec de potestate Concilij generalis, vniuersalem Ecclesiam Sess.
38.
representantis super Papam and quemlibet alterum, declarata per Constantiense
and hoc Basiliense generalia Concilia, est verit as fidei Catholicae. 2.
Veritas haec quod Papa Concilium generale, etc. actu legitime Congregatum etc.
nullatenus sine eius consensu potest dissoluere, aut ad aliud tempus prorogare,
aut de loco ad locum transfer, est veritas fidei Catholicae. 3. Veritatibus
duabus praedictis pertinaciter repugnans, est censendus h^reticus. That is,
1. [This truth of the Jurisdiction of a general Council representing the
Catholic Church that is above the Pope or any other, as it is declared by the
general Councels, that of Constance and this of Basil, is a truth of the
Catholic faith. 2. This truth that the Pope cannot in any case without the
consent thereof dissolve a general Council, etc. lawfully and actually
gathered etc. or proroge it to another time, or transfer it from one place to
another, is a truth of the Catholic faith. 3. Whosoever does with pertinacy,
resist these two foresaid truths, is to be adjudged an heretic.]
These conclusions they set down against that Jurisdiction which the Pope
claimed, whom they called G^briel Condelmerius, otherwise called Eugenius the
fourth, against which conclusions no man then contended, saving the Pope and
his flatterers, who are therefore adjudged Heretics by the Council. In the
five and fortieth Session of this Synod of Basil there are other conclusions
added, to declare the pertinacy of Eugenius the fourth, condemned by that
Council: and first they declare or testify that not in their own judgments
only, but in the judgments of all that before them were men of knowledge and
learning in the Church; this was ever maintained, that the Pope must be subject
to a general Council: Sess. 45. decretum quinque conclusionum.
Ne^ vnquam aliquis peritorum dubitauit (says that Synod) summum Pontificem
in his quae fidem concernunt, iudicio eorundem Conciliorum vniuersalium esse
subiectum. Then they declare how Eugenius first labored to dissolve this
Synod without the consent of the Synod. But after many admonitions he revoked
that dissolution, declaring it to be void and of none effect: and so gave
great hope of peace to the Church. But after this again, he attempted the
second dissolution of the same Council, which after many admonitions he would
not revoke: wherefore these five conclusions are declared against him: First,
The first dissolution of this holy Synod of Basil, pretended by Eugenius the
present Pope, from the fullness of Apostolical power (as he says) attempted,
is repugnant to the two foresaid truths. Secondly, Eugenius the present Pope,
did in form of law prescribed unto him, iudicially revoke all errors
repugnant to the two foresaid truths, after the first pretensed dissolution or
translation, being admonished, and commanded by the Synod so to do. Thirdly,
The pretensed dissolution or translation of this holy Synod of Basil repugnant
to the two foresaid truths, attempted by Eugenius after he was cyted upon the
point of reformation, proceeding (as he says) out of the fullness of power in
case it should proceed against himself, or any of his Legates Presidents:
this should contain an inexcusable error in faith: Fourthly, The second
pretensed dissolution or translation of this Synod, repugnant to the two
foresaid truths, does prove the said Eugenius to be a relapse, falling again
into his revoked and condemned error: Fifthly, This second dissolution or
translation repugnant to the two foresaid truths, as also the contumacy of
Eugenius, and his long perseverance therein, and the open rebellion of the said
Eugenius, after that he was admonished by the Synod to revoke that pretensed
dissolution or translation; and also the erection of another Congregation under
the name of a general Council to fortify that pretensed dissolution, and
that during the time of this holy Council of Basil: all these are evident
testimonies of the pertinacy of the same Eugenius, and so evident that they
need not the clamor of any other accuser.

42. Upon these grounds this Council deposed Eugenius the fourth, and elected
Amadeus Duke of Sauoy, who was called Felix the fifth. But Eugenius resisted by
force, and held himself as Pope, the Synod not being strong enough for him
by coactiue power, though in spiritual Jurisdiction it was above him: yet
would not this Council acknowledge Eugenius to be the Pope, but Felix. In the
mean time Eugenius dies, and Nicolaus the fifth was chosen in his place. All
this while the Council of Basil stood up: so that a new Schism was like to
rise; but all was compounded thus: Felix the fifth should abdicate the office
which he was content to do, seeing Eugenius was dead who was deposed by the
Synod: Nicolaus should be acknowledged and confirmed Pope. This Nicolaus thus
confirmed, should by his bull approve and confirm all the things done and
concluded in the Council of Basil: all this was performed, and Pope Nicolaus
by his Bull makes a solemn confirmation and approbation of this Synod: which
Bull is annexed to the Synod: bearing date Calend. Iul. 1449. But the Synod
seemed not much to respect this confirmation, because they rested upon that
authority which the Church has from Christ.

43. Now let us consider how this Synod prescribed against the Popes
Jurisdiction so much, that if the reformed Churches by the power and godly
labors of their Princes, might once obtain that which they have so long
wished, a general, free, lawful holy Council: they would not desire much
more freedom therein then was practiced in this Synod of Basil. For first
concerning the safe conduct for coming to the Council, and manner of
proceeding, there is so much granted by this Council to the Bohemians, whom
the Council invited to a disputation, that more then this, none will desire.
For besides the safe conduct for coming and going freely and safely, they are
agreed upon the judge of controversies: admitting that judge which only was
always acknowledged the judge in all general Councels: for the Pope was never
acknowledged Saluus conductus Boemorum conc. Basil. sess: 4.
to be the judge. This Synod of Basil admitting herein the manner of
proceeding held in ancient Councels, rejects the Pope, and admits another
judge, in these words. Lex diuina, praxis Christi Apostolica and Ecclesiae
primitiuae vna cum concilijs doctoribusque fundantibus se veraciter in eadem,
pro verisfimo and indifferente iudice in hoc Basiliensi concilio admittentur.
That is, [The law of God, the practice of Christ's Apostles, and of the
primitive Church, together with Councels, and doctors founding themselves
truly upon the same, shall be admitted for the most true and indifferent
judge, in this Council of Basil.] Now this is far from the judgment of our
adversaries, who will admit no other judge of controversies, save the Pope
only. We have the judgment of the Church against them, both of old time, and
at this time of late: and before the Council of Trent it was never otherwise.

44. Moreover, whereas the Pope sent his Legates to this Council of Basil,
requiring that they might be admitted as Presidents of the Council in his
place: this the Council granted, limiting the same grant with these
conditions: that these who thus were admitted Presidents of the Council in the
place of Pope Eugenius, should be in that place without all coactiue
Jurisdiction: that the manner of proceeding by disputations Ibid. sess. 17.
should stand inuiolate: that all the Council being equally divided Sine omni
Jurisdiction coactiua.
into four deputations, nothing should be concluded but that which was
confirmed by three deputations at the least: that the things thus confirmed
should be enrolled by the Presidents or one of them: that if they refused to
inroll such things, then should it be lawful for any other man, which was in
one of the deputations, to do it: which must after this be brought to the
congregation, and read there and publicly approved before it be concluded.
They condition also that all the Acts of the Council shall be done and
dispatched in the name, and under the seal of the Council.

45. Further in these late Councels there is no memorable mention of the five
nations. There was free access for all nations that would come, but there is
especial mention of five nations, because these were the principal nations of
these western parts: they are named in the first session of the Council of
Basil, Italy, Britain, Germany, France, and Spain: nothing might be
concluded unless it were first diverse times published in the presence of the
five nations, and by the general consent of them, confirmed. If things had
passed in this manner in the Council of Trent, that free access might be
given to all nations; that the Scriptures with the Fathers founding themselves
upon Scriptures, might be admitted the only judge of controversies; that the
Pope should have no coactiue authority, that nothing should be concluded, but
by the consent of the five nations; then would we admit that Council to be
free and general: but because in stead of these, the contrary was practiced in
Trent, that no judge could be admitted there, but the Pope; that none might
have access to that Synod, but they who were first bound in an oath to the
Pope; that therein the Pope practiced coactiue power, that nothing could there
be concluded but by the direction of the Pope: therefore when we reject the
Council of Trent, we do no more then onr forefathers did in the Council of
Basil, and before that in the Council of Constance, and before that in the
Council of Pisa. We are the children of them that held these Councels: whom
seeing we find to be so peremptor ily bent against the Pope, and against the
proceedings of the late Council of Trent, have we not warrant following the
footsteps of our forefathers, utterly to reject and to condemn the Popes
Jurisdiction which we have now found to be so late, so basely bred, without
antiquity, honor, honesty or liberty? Against the Popes pretensed
Jurisdiction, what can we say more, then has been already concluded by these
Councels?

46. For they have concluded that a Council has authority above the Pope:
that the Church may correct and has corrected Popes: Ecclesia Catholica
Saepenumero summos Pontificos, Concili. Basil.
Sess. 12. decretum citat* contra Papam.
sieve a fide delirantes, sieve prauis moribus notorie Ecclesiam scandalizantes
correxit, and iudicauit. Neque vbi de fidei periculo aut scandalo religionis
Christianae agebatur, Romany Pontificibus pepercit. They have concluded that
the Popes may err as well as other men. Certum est Papam errare posse. [It is
certain that Ibid.
the Pope may err, and in the same place it is said: experience Responsio
Synodal. de authorit. concilij generalis super Papam and quoslibet.
proves it, for we have often found and read that the Popes have erred: this
Christ declares if thy brother offend against thee, dic Ecclesiae, tell the
Church, and if he hear not the Church, let him be to thee as an heathen or
Publican: this compriseth all men, even Peter and his successors. This Paul
declares, that resisted Peter to the face, and before all: then he said it
openly in the Church, and to the Church, which he said before all. The Popes
that have not heard the Church, have been accounted as heathen and Publicanes,
as we read of Anastasius and Liberius.] And a little after, answering to a
testimony of Thomas Aquinas, who held the Pope, Peter's successor, and Pastor
of the universal Church, they say thus: De singularibus Ecclesijs and personis
id intelligendum est, non de universally Ecclesia, quae saepe obedientiam justice
de causis Romany Pontificibus subiraxit: vt Marcellino, Anastasio, Liberio,
Ioha. 12. Benedict. 9. Benedicto 13. Iohanni 23. That is, [That is to be
understood of particular Churches and persons, not of the Universal Church;
which many times upon just occasions has withdrawn obedience from the Bishops
of Rome: as for example, from Marcellinus, Anastasius, Liberius, John the
twelfth, Benedict the ninth, Benedict the thirteenth, John the twenty three.]
They have in like sort concluded, that the Popes Government in the Church is to
be admitted, not that he rule at his pleasure, but according Epist. Synodal.
responsiua ad inuectiuam Eugenij.
to the doctrine of Saint Peter. Ut ipse Ecclesiam Dei salubriter regat, non
quidem vt pro libito voluntatis suae cuncta peragere velit, spre^is canonibus
sacrorum conciliorum, sed iuxta beatiss. Petr^ doctrinam, sic regat non vt
dominans in clero, sed vt formafactus gregis: Romanus enim Pontifex est
vniuersalis Ecclesiae minister, non Dominus. That is, [That he may soundly rule
the Church of God, not that he should do all things according to the lust of
his own will, rejecting the Canons of holy Councels; but according to the
doctrine of Saint Peter: let him so rule, not as a lord over the Lords
inheritance: but as examples to their flocks: for the Bishop of Rome is the
Minister of the Universal Church, and not the Lord.] They have concluded, that
if this Jurisdiction be granted to the Pope which he claims, Epistola
Synodal. ad universe. Christi fidel. de obediendo council. gener.
and which his flatterers pretend for him, that by this means the way is laid
wide open for Antichrist. Aperite oculos and videte, qualis ex hoc daretur
ingressus Antichristo? That is, [Open your eyes and behold what an entrance by
this means would be made for Antichrist.] So that they who yield any
authority and reverence to these Councels, must needs acknowledge, that the
Popes Jurisdiction is laid down in the dust.

47. Now let Bellarmine come with his fine distinctions, and tell us that these
Councels are partly confirmed, partly reiocted, Lib. 1. de Council. cap. 7.
partim confirmata, partim reprobata: these be pleasant heads that can take of
these Councels what pleases them, and reject all that is against them: but let
them collude with their own consciences as they list, they are not able to
answer that which we urge, or any way to shift us off: for we do not urge
these conclusions as decrees of Councels: (though against them they may justly
stand for such, but we do not produce them to that end) but only to declare
the religion, sense, and judgment of Christendom, what it was at this time,
and before: what was the doctrine of the Church, concerning Jurisdiction: What
the wisest, the most learned and best men in Christendom then taught: What was
the judgment of the Church of Rome then: This is evidently declared by these
Councels, and that we may urge no more but this, by this we have enough to
prove that the Church of Rome then stood fully against the Popes Jurisdiction.
If they tell us that Eugenius and they who followed him was the Church, and not
these that were gathered in Basil: I answer, this does more and more confirm
that which I have observed between the Church of Rome on the one side, and the
Pope with his flatterers on the other side: who albeit they have gotten the
upper hand by force and fraud, yet let them know the baseness of their birth
and progeny: they are but a late vpstart generation, beginning when Friars
began: lifted up by the wind which themselves did raise, for increasing the
Popes pride: crossed and contradicted, yea refuted and condemned by the learned
and godly that lived in the Church of Rome: never fully prevailing before the
Council of Trent. Then let them not demand of us such f^iuolous questions,
where was our Church before M. Luther? for we are able to show both our Church,
and their Church, the antiquity and not interrupted continuance of the one,
and the base vpstart and late rising of the other.

. V. John Gerson.
48. Having thus far declared the judgment of the Church of Rome, assembled
in diverse Councels: now let us consider how in particular, the learned men of
these ages stood affected in this question: and who they were that took part
with these Councels to advance the authority of the Church above the Pope: for
they who followed the Pope in this faction were only Friars and flatterers;
but on the other side were these, as then, the great lights of Christendom for
learning, that I may of many remember a few.

49. First John Gerson, a man of great authority in the Council of Constance:
who has written diverse books, wherein he prefers the authority of a
Council, before the Popes authority, and speaks much otherwise of
Jurisdiction, then the Court of Rome uses now to speak. His book De
potestate Ecclesiastica, was pronounced and approved in the Council of
Constance, in the year of Christ, one thousand four hundred and seventeen;
as in the end thereof appears: from whence I will observe some things,
declaring his judgment in our question of Jurisdiction. First he describes
that spiritual power which Christ has left to his Church, thus: Potestas
Ecclesiastica Gerson de potest* Eccles. consid. ^.
est potestas quae a Christo supernatur aliter and specialiter collata est suis
Apostolis and discipulis, ac eoru^ successoribus legitimis vsque ad fine^
saecul^, ^d aedificatione^ Ecclesiae militantis secundu^ leges Euangelicas pro
(...) faelicitatis aeternae. That is, [Ecclesiasticall power, is a power
supernaturally and especially given by Christ to his Apostles and Disciples,
and their lawful successors unto the end of the world, for the edification of
the Church Militant, according to the Evangelical laws, for the obteining of
eternal life.] This power we acknowledge with Gerson, nay with all the
ancients, who speak no otherwise of the power which Christ has committed to
his Church. But then we wish that our adversaries might understand how they
wander in ignorance and confusion: confounding this power which is spiritual,
executed secundum leges Euangelicas, with that power which is coactiue and
executed secundum leges Canonicas. It is their common manner to confound these
things, and thereby to perplexe themselves and their readers: but of all that
ever I read, Answer to the fifth part of Reports.
he surpasses; who calls himself the Catholic divine: for confused and
unlearned handling of these things. Then the power which Christ left to his
Church, is practiced secundum leges Euangelicas: this is the true power of the
Church. But our question has been altogether of Jurisdiction coactiue,
executed not secundum leges Euangelicas, therefore not given by Christ to his
Church: but belonging to such laws, to whom all coact^ue power peculiarly
belongs.

50. Of this coactiue power, the same Gerson says thus: De potest. Eccles.
consid. 4.
Potestas Ecclesiastica Iurisdictionis in foro exteriori, est potest as
Ecclesiastica coactiua, quae valet exerceri in alterum etiam inuitum. That is,
[Ecclesiasticall power of Jurisdiction in the exterior Court, is an
Eccle^iasticall power coactiue, which may be exercised against another, though
it be against his will.] And a little after, speaking of the same coactiue
power, he says: Potestas haec Iurisdictionis Ecclesiasticae adeo vicina est
Iurisdictioni faeculari and politicae, quodlaicis imo and mulieribus pleruinque
and in multis casibus communicari potest executio vel commi^ti. That is, [This
power of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, comes so near to secular and Civil
Jurisdiction, that the execution hereof may be communicated or committed for
the most part, and in many cases to Laymen, yea even to women.] Then this
power is not from Christ directed to Church-gouernours, which may be executed
by Laymen, and women. For Christ gave no Jurisdiction to his Church, which may
be executed by such. Now if this coactiue Jurisdiction may be executed by
Laymen: why not by Magistrates? If by women, (of which thing most of the
Popish writers are agreed) how then stands it against the laws of nature,
and grace, the Civil and the Canonical laws, and I know not what other
laws, as the Catholic divine tells us, that a woman should have this
Jurisdiction? for if a woman may be a Magistrate, it must needs follow that a
woman may have that power which God has given to Magistrates.

51. Gerson speaking of the power of the Church, not this coactiue, but that
which is given, secundum leges Euangelicas, declares that it is founded upon
the text of Mat. 18. Dic Ecclesiae, Ibid. consid. 4.
etc. Funda^ur in hoc textu, says he, Plenitudo potestatis gladis spiritualis
and executio eius in Ecclesia super quemlibet Christianum, quiest frater
noster, etiam si Papa fuerit: nec accipiendum hic, dic Ecclesiae, id est Papae;
quia Christus Petro loquebatur qui non dixisset sibi ipsi. That is, [The
fullness of the spiritual sword above any Christian that is our brother,
though he be a Pope, is founded upon this Text: neither must we take it so,
tell the Church, that is the Pope: for Christ spoke this to Peter, who was not
bidden to tell it to himself.] He declares also, and much complains that
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was by the practice of Popes, intruding upon
Civil Government; so strangely confounded, that a man could not in those days
decerne the difference between the right of the Church and of Princes.
Potestatem Ecclesiasticam confundit magna caligine ^upiditas Ibid. consid. 8.
ambitiosa, quaerens quae sua sunt, and quae crescentibus benefic^orum
dotationibus impudenter excreuit: Ita vt vix decerni modo possit, quid ex
primaria institutione Christi, vel inuariabil^ iure diuino tenendum sit. That
is, [Ambitious coueteousnesse seeking her own, and impudently enlarging her
power as the dotation of benefices increased, has confounded the
Ecclesiastical power with a great mist: So that now it may scarsely be
decerned, what we are to hold of the first institution of Christ, or by the
inuariable divine law.] Then this Jurisdiction was by the Popes hurled into
such a confusion, that men of the best learning were much troubled with
distinguishing this confused mass. And so far did this confusion grow by
means of the Canonistes extolling* the Popes Jurisdiction without measure,
that the same Author was forced to complain bitterly thereof thus: Hinc ^
quiuocatio per dominos iuristas, qui loquentes de plenitudine Ibid. consid. 10.
Ecclesiasticae po^estatis Papalis, solum loqui videntur de potestate
Iurisdictionis: ex qua locutione videtur haec absurditas sequi, quod pure
Laicus, imo and foemina posset esse Papa, and habere plenitudinem
Ecclesiasticae potestatis. That is, [Hence comes equivocation induced by my
masters the Canonists, who speaking of the fullness of the Papal
Ecclesiastical power, seem to speak only of the power of Jurisdiction: by
which speech this absurdity seems to follow, that a pure Layman, yea a woman
may be Pope, and have the fullness of Ecclesiastical power.

52. And thus, I trow, they will bring their Jurisdiction to a fair issue:
that if we should grant it, as they claim it, this inference must also go
with it; that a Lay man or a woman may be Pope; were it not much better to give
to each his own right, to the Magistrate all power coactiue, to the Church
power over the souls of men according to the laws of the Gospel: then to
follow all these absurd fancies, by taking away from the Church and Magistrates
their distinct rights, and casting a new, unlawful, confounded Jurisdiction
upon the Pope? And that we may understand how the Papal Jurisdiction grew only
by the Popes flatterers, of such knaves he says thus: Adulatio negat
Papa^posse Simoniacam committere, quoniam sua sunt omnia Ecclesiastica bona:
concedit quod super (...) est, potens ab altero Ibid. consid. 12.
ius suum tollere, and quod nec ab eo appellari, neque eum iudic^aliter
euocari, nec obeaientiam ab ^o sub^rahi: hic (...) symbolum fide^ condere, hic
solus causas eiusdem fidei tractare potest. Solus definitiones, regulas, leges,
and Canones condit: alioquin quic quid per alios definitur, statuitur etc.
irritum est, fallor si non ante celebrationem huius Concilij Constantiensis sic
occupauerat mentes plurimorum ista traditio, vt oppositorum dogmatizatio
fuisse^ de heretic^ prauitate vel notata, vel damnata. That is [Flatterie
denies that the Pope can commit Simony, because al Ecclesiastical goods are
his: it grants that the Pope is above law, able to take from a man his
right, and that neither an appeal may be made from him, neither may he be
called iudicially to trial, nor obedience be drawn from him: he only must
make Articles of faith: he only must determine the causes of faith: only he
must make definitions, rules, laws, and Canons: otherwise whatsoever is
defined, ordained by other, etc. it is void. I am deceived if before the
celebration of this Council of Constance this tradition did not possess the
minds of most men, insomuch that they who taught otherwise, were noted, or
condemned for heretical prauity.]

53. In these words some things are obseruable: First, That this unlimited
Jurisdiction is given to the Pope only by base fellows, flattering knaves,
against the judgment of the learned and grave men of the Church of Rome, and
against the judgment of these Councels: Secondly, that the judicious and grave
men of this age, as Gerson and such like, yea all that were assembled in this
Council, were noted by these base flatterers, and suspected or condemned of
heresy. The Pope and his flatterers wanted no good will then, to have made
them al heretics. And it is to be observed that the heresy which most of all
troubled the Pope with his flatterers, stood in this pretensed Jurisdiction:
for this is the cause wherefore flattery, as Gerson says, would have imputed
heretical prauity to the Council: Thirdly, and last of all, the distinction
between the Church of Rome and the Court of Rome, whereof we have so often
spoken, is here again confirmed. For these flatterers stood for the Popes
Jurisdiction against the Church of Rome here assembled in a Council: but
howsoever they have prevailed since, we see here that by the Church of Rome,
they were accounted then but a base company of flatterers. These be they who
afterward prevailed in the Council of Trent, lifting up the privileges of the
Pope above the Church: And this is that Church on the other side, which then
was in danger to be pronounced heretics by the Pope, and these who are marked
and branded, not by me, but by Gerson, Cusanus, Aeneas Siluius, and the rest of
both these Councels of Constance and Basil, to be no better then a generation
of base flatterers.

54. Then there is no great thing done, or at which the world may marvel, when
we see the reformed Churches at this day accounted heretics by the Pope and
his flatterers: for this was a thing long looked for. The Church did bear the
pride of the Pope, the ignorance and insolency of his flatterers, as long as
she could endure it. And when there was no remedy, made a separation indeed
from the Pope, and his flatterers, holding on still in the ancient ways of
our fathers, who have from time to time made resistance against the Pope and
his servants: from which ancient way of our forefathers, from their
profession, sense, judgment and religion, the Council of Trent has made a
famous defection, having declined and turned aside from the ancient and
constant profession of the truth, in doctrine and Jurisdiction, unto these new
and strange devises taken up of late, and invented by Friars and flatterers of
the Court of Rome. This defection which the Pope has made from the Church, and
the Church from him, was long before looked for: and diverse did speak of it,
before it came to pass: as Mat. Paris declares, that some feared it might
have been done by Bishop Grost head, so Cardinal Cusanus declares, as
hereafter we are to show, how the Church may depart from the Pope.

55. The same Gerson says also: Concilium generale potestatem Sermon. pro viagio
reg. Romans direc. 1
a Christo immediate habet, cui quilibet cuiuscunque status etiamsi Papalis
existat obedire tenetur, in his quae ad fidem and extirpationem schismat is
pertinent. That is, [A general Council has power immediately from Christ;
whereunto every man is bound to obey in things concerning faith, and the
extirpation of Schism, of what state soever he be, though a Pope.] And he
adds thus much: Saluberima haec determinatio lex fundamentalis and velut
infallibilis aduersus monstrosum horrenduque offendiculum, quod positum erat
per multos determinantes ex texibus gross non ad regulam Euangelicam acceptis,
etc. generale concilium totum a Papa robur immeditate sumere. That is, [This
most sound determination is a sundamentall law, and as it were infallible
against that monstrous and horrible offense, which is given by many, concluding
from texts grossly understood, and not according to the Evangelical rule,
etc. That a general Council receives all strength immediately from the Pope.]
In which words he observes that the Popes flatterers, who brought in this
Papal Jurisdiction above the Church and Councels, did induce hereby a
monstrous and horrible offense in the Church. This offense, says he, was
given by such as would prove this Jurisdiction from certain texts of
Scripture, as: Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram aedisicubo Ecclesiam meam:
and, oraui pro te Petre, etc. And such like which are wire-drawen to
countenance this Papal Jurisdiction. Which texts, says Gerson, are grossly
taken by these flatterers, and not according to the rule of the Gospel. And
seeing we find that the Jesuits at this day have no other ground for the
Popes Jurisdiction, then the same texts by them and their forefathers distorted
into a wrong sense, as it is observed by our forefathers against them: let the
Jesuits know themselves to be the generation of those that have distorted the
holy Scriptures, and thereby brought a monstrous and damnable offense into the
Church. Gerson presenly after this declares, that against these flatterers,
the reverend Cardinal Cameracensis (whom he calls his worthy master) did
write in defense of the truth. Scripsit (says he) super hanc materiam
reuerendiss. pater dominus Cardinalis Cameracensis praceptor meus inclytus:
which book of Cameracensis, if it be extant (for I could not see it, though I
much desired) I suppose might make these flatterers to be better known, and
the right of the Church more strongly confirmed.

56. Gerson proceeds, and of that Jurisdiction which the Lib. de auferebilit.
Pap. consid. 8.
Pope claims by imposing his Canon laws upon other Princes, he says: Papa
non debet (...) vt Canones positi aut alienae traditiones humanae^nuariabiluer
obseruentur per omnes nationes. That is, [The Pope ought not to strive to
impose his Canons, or that other humane traditions be kept inuariable of all
nations.] Where he declares that this imposing of the Popes Jurisdiction upon
other nations, gave occasion to the Greeks to make a separation from the
Latins, and daily ministers occasions of contention through Christendom. In
the same Book which he Intituleth, De ^uferibilitate Papae, he holds
positiuely, that howsoever in some other respects there might be some use of a
Pope, yet concerning this our question of Jurisdiction, the Pope with all his
pretensed Jurisdiction might be utterly removed from the Church, his position
is: Auferibilis est Papa Ibid. consid. 15.
per gener^le concilium perpetuo, (...) adtempus, quoad ea omnia quae sunt
^urisdictionis. That is, [The Pope may be removed by a general Council,
either for ever, or for a time, in respect of all things pertaining to
Jurisdiction.] Now if the Pope may be removed from the Church, in respect of
Jurisdiction, then the Canonists are quite put down, who hold that the very
essence of the Papacy stands in Iurifdiction. Further concerning this
question of Jurisdiction, the same John Gerson has made a Treatise, wherein he
hand^eth this question, An liceat in causis fidei a summo Po^tifice appellare?
Wherein he determines, that a man may appeal from the Pope.

. VI. Cardinal Cusanus.
57. SOmewhat after this wrote Cardinal Cusanus, who offered his Book De
concordantia Catholica, to the Council of Basil: submitting himself and his
labors to the judgment of that Council. It appears that about this time
there were some motions and consultations of a revolt from the Pope and Court
of Rome: which consultations were moderated then for a time, by such learned
men as were in greatest estimation: but afterward upon the like reasons it
brake forth. Cusanus disputes this point in an Epistle written to Roderic de
Treuino, ^rator to the King of Castile. Wherein he Written. An. Dom. 1442.
seems first to dissuade the separation, producing that out of Augustine,
Nullam posse causam dari ob quam necessarium sit ad schisma per^enire. That is,
[That no cause can be given for which it may be necessary to come to a
schism.] But after much dispute, at last he resolves that the case may be
such, that the Church may well depart from the Pope: Quando sacer Princeps
(says he) contra sanctorum patrum statuta aliquid praesumit, vbi non constat
eum ex causa (...) aut necessitatis moueri, sed ex aliqua particulari indig^a
causa, time ipse in priora Petri mandata offendit, exiens vires potestatis
suae. Quapropter non esset incon^eniens, si pertinaciter in hoc persisteret, Ab
eo recedi posse per Ecclesia^. That is, [When the holy Prince presumes against
the laws of holy Fathers, where it appears that he is not moved thereto
because of the public good, or necessity, but from some particular of his
own and an unworthy cause; then has he first offended against the former
precepts of Peter going beyond the limits and strength of his power. Therefore
if he persist therein incorrigibly, it is nothing inconvenient for the Church
to depart from him.

58. Then if a Pope make a departure first from the Mandates, Doctrines, and
faith of Saint Peter, thus going out of the bounds of his power: in this case
it is the judgment of the grave Cardinals of Rome, who lived and wrote long
before M. Luther was borne, that the Church might make a separation from the
Pope. John Gerson says as before we heard, that this separation may be for a
time, or for ever. Now then whereas this separation is made from the Pope by
the reformed Churches, there is nothing done but that which the Church had in
consultation to do long before, in case the Pope should persist in his pride
and transgressions, and show himself incorrigible. So that it is no marvel
if the Church which has so long before thought of this departure, being
thereunto so much provoked by the intolerable ambition of the Pope, has once
performed that thing, which was so long in consultation: especially seeing the
Church has for the same, both the warrant of holy Scriptures, which does fully
not only prophecy of this departure, which the Pope has made from the truth,
and consequently which the Church was to make from the Pope: but also gives
express commandment to the people of God to depart from thence; Go out of
her, my people. And besides this Apoc. 18. 4.
warrant of holy Scriptures they had also the judgment of the Church before
them: which Church whether we consider it in particular members, as the learned
men, principal instructours and preseruers of doctrine: or in general
Councels; has as we see oftentimes declared herself to be wearied with
bearing the Popes proud and ambitious Jurisdiction; and has been in great
consultation to cast off the yoke of this Egyptian bondage.

59. Now from that book which this Cardinal Cusanus wrote De (...) Catholic^,
we will observe some things, Lib. 2. cap. 13. de Cathol, Concord.
wherein he declares his judgment against this Papal Jurisdiction. And first
he disputes against them that think the Pope has more power then other
Bishops. Oportet primum, si hoc verum foret, Petrum aliq^d a Christo
singularitatis recepisse, and Papam in hoc successorem esse: sed scimus quod
Petrus nihil plus potestatis a Christ^ accepit, alijs Apostolis 21. d. in nouo
24. q. loquitur. That is, [First if this be true, it must be granted that
Peter received some singular power from Christ, and that herein the Pope is his
successor: but we know that Peter received no more power from Christ, then the
other Apostles 21. d. in nou^ 24. q. loquitur. And of this spiritual
Jurisdiction, he says thus: Cum potestas ligandi and soluendi, in qua fundatur
omnis Ecclesiastica Ibid.
Iuris^ictio, sit immediate a Christo, quia ab illa potestate ligand^ and
soluendi, sit diui^a Iurisdictionis potestas, patet omnes Episcopos and forte
etiam presbyteros aequales esse quoad Iurisdictionem. That is, [Seeing the
power of binding and loosing, in which all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is
founded, is immediately from Christ: and because the power of divine
Jurisdiction is from this power of binding and loosing; it is evident that all
Bishops (perhaps also all Priests) are equal in respect of this Jurisdiction.]
And again he says: Quod universal concilium proprie captu^ scilicet quod
vniuersam Ecclesia^ representat, sit supra Patriarchas and Roman. Pontificem,
credo ^ubium esse non debere. That is, [I hold it a truth not to be doubted,
that a general Council properly taken, that is as it represents the
universal Church, is above Patriarchs, and the Bishop of Rome.] And again,
Papa per Synodum in criminibus etiam alijs quam h^resi Ibid. cap. 17.
i^dicari potest. That is, [The Pope may be judged by a Synod for other crimes
also besides heresy.] Now for the Jurisdiction Ibid.
of the civil Magistrate, the same Author speaks thus: Imperator
Christianorum in sua praesidentia est Christi vicarius. Ibid. lib. 3. cap. 5.
That is, [A Christian Emperor in his office, is Christ's Vicar.] And again:
Omnis rex and Imperator habet officium Publicum ad Publicam vtilitatem or
di^atum: Publica vtilitas est pa^ad quam ordinantur iusticia and iusta praelia:
principium autem pacis est ad ^inem (...) ^rigere subdit^s, and media illum
(...) sunt sacra instit^ta religionum: quare prima cura Imperialis in (...)
obseruandis ver^ur. That is, [Euery King and Emperor has a public office,
ordinate to the public good: the public good is peace, whereunto justice and
just wars are ordinated: the fountain of peace to direct subjects to an
eternal end; the means to obtain that end the holy ordinances of religion:
wherefore the first and chief care Imperial consists in the observation of
those ordinances.] And therefore he says: Imperator curam custodiae gerit: And
again, isto modo imperator dicitur aduocatus vniuer^alis Ecclesiae, and custos
sides orthodoxae: Which thing he proves by the ancient practice of the Church,
because in the Chalcedon Council the Emperor Martia^us is called, custos
fidei: and the Emperor Basilius in the beginning of the eight Council says,
that the government of the Church was by the providence of God committed to
his hands.

60. The same Author speaking further of the office of Kings, and of their
Jurisdiction in Church affairs, and in Councels says: Debent r^ges and
principes Synodos congregare iuxta admonitionem Ibid.
sancts Gregorij ad Theodoricum regem Francorum, ex registro, 273. Iterata vos
per vestram mercedem adhortatione pulsamus vt congregari Synodum iubeatis. That
is, [Kings and Princes ought to gather Synodes according to the admonition of
Gregory writing to Theodoricus the French King; ex registro 273. We move you
with our redoubled petition, that even for that reward that is reserved for
you, you will command that a Synod may be gathered.] Another part of the
office of a Prince, is says he, Confirmare and custodire in concilijs (...).
which thing he proves by diverse ancient authorities: and concludes that
Emperors have ever had this authority. He says that in this thing he had
made diligent search, and had found this practice continued in all general
Councels until the eight Synod inclusiuely. In which search, says he, I
find by the acts of all general Councels, as well in Chalceon, Ibid cap. 13.
as in Constantinople, Nice Ephesus, that either the Emperor was present in
person, or some judges his Vicegerents: and those not above twenty, seldom
fifteen: but when the Emperor Reperio eum semper presedisse. cap. 16.
himself was present in person, I find says he, that he was always
Presedent of the Council: no other secular Prince has right to be present in
the Council, saving the Emperor. Laici non habent vocem Synodalem sed tantum
audire debent.
Unless the Emperor appoint some to be present: but being present they have
no voice in the Council, but may sit only to hear: this he proves by that
testimony of Ambrose, in the cause of faith, Bishops are the judges and not the
Emperors. lib. 3. cap. 17.


61. And whereas this ancient Jurisdiction of Princes was so disordered by the
Pope, that by Papal intrusions and encroachments, the Princes had well-nigh
lost their right, and temporal Jurisdiction turned into spiritual
Jurisdiction; of this he much complains, and opens the true cause of all
this disorder to be in the insatiable covetousness of the Court of Rome: for
thus he says: Rabidus appetitus ad ipsa terrena Ecclesijs annexa Dominia,
Episcopis ambitiosis hodie inest etc. de temporalibus omnis cura, de
spiritualibus nulla. Non fuit ista intentio Imp^ratorum, Lib. 3. cap. 24.
non volebant spiritualia a temporalibus absorberi etc. dum vacant Ecclesiae
semper in periculo schismat is existunt etc. Si perelectionem prouidendum est,
ambitio procurat di^isionem v^torum. Si per curiam facilius persuadetur pro
plus offerente: and omnia ill^ grauamina adueniunt pauperibus subditis: curia
attrahit quicquid pingue est, and id quod Imperium contulit, and pro Deicultus,
and bono publico ordi^auit sanctissime, auaritia and cupiditate exorta
palleatis rationibus and nouis adinuentionibus totaliter peruertitur: and
Imperiale efficitur Papale, and spirituale temporale. That is [Such a ravenous
appetite is in ambitious Bishops at this day, toward the temporal Dominions
annexed to Churches, etc. all their care is for the temporalties, not for
spiritual matters: this was not the meaning of Princes, they meant not that
the spiritual labors should be devoured by temporalties, etc. Whilst the
Churches are vacant, there is always some danger of a schism etc. If they
proceed by election, ambition procures a division of the voices: If by the
Court, he that brings most is best heard, and soonest prevails. And all
these greeuances come upon the poor subjects, whatsoeueris fat and rich, the
Court of Rome draws to her self; and that which the Empire as well for the
worship of God, as for the public good has conferred upon the Church, and
ordained to an holy end, all is utterly perverted through filthy covetousness,
and certain painted reasons, and new inventions are devised to color it. And
thus the Imperial right is now made Papal, and temporal right is made
spiritual.] Then these be the observations of the learned men of the Church of
Rome long before us, that the Pope had intruded upon the Emperors right: now
what soever the Pope had once practiced, that must be called spiritual: Thus
the Jurisdiction of the Emperor being once by cunning or force wrested from the
Emperor, being found in the Popes hand it was presently called spiritual
Jurisdiction; as he does most truly observe, Imperiale efficitur Papale, and
spirituale temporale.

62. By all which we find the judgment of this man to be directly against the
Popes pretensed Jurisdiction, and for the right of temporal Magistrates: when
we find the Cardinals of the Church of Rome, to write thus before the time of
the contention, and before M. Luther was borne: we are not so much to consider
their private judgments in these things, as the received judgment of the
Church wherein they lived, that is the Church of Rome: from the judgment of
that Church they departed not; but in these things do faithfully deliver unto
us the judgment of the same Church, standing against the judgment of the
Pope, and his Court, consisting of Friars and flatterers. Thus we see the cause
of the Reformed Churches thoroughly justified by this learned Cardinal, their
separation from the Pope and the Court of Rome warranted, because the Pope has
first made the separation from the profession of Saint Peter, and from the
faith of holy Scriptures, and the idugement of ancient fathers: In which case
he grants that the Church may depart from the Pope, and thereby does justify
the separation that is made.

. VII. Aeneas Siluius.
63. AT this time wrote Aeneas Siluius, afterward called Pope Pius the second:
he has written a book of the acts and proceedings of the Council of Basil:
from which I will note some things, wherein the judgment of this man may
appear, concurring with the judgment of the Church of Rome in his time, but
repugnant to the Pope and his flatterers. First handling that Text, Tues
Petrus, and super hane Petram, etc. he says thus: A quibus verbis ideo placuit
exordiri, quod aliqui verba h^c ad extollendam Rom Pontificis authoritatem Lib.
1. de gestis ^asil. council.
solent adducere, sed vt stati^ patebit alius est v^rborum Christi sensus. That
is, [With which words I thought good to begin, because some use to allege
these words to extol the authority of the Bishop of Rome: but as it shall
soon appear there is another sense of Christ's words.] Who are they who in the
judgment of this man, do pervert the words of Christ? Let the Jesuits
answer, and let them give us some reason, able to satisfy a man of reason,
why that cause should not be held damnable, which is condemned by their own
writers: their Bishops, their Cardinals, their Popes? Let them not tell us
that this Pope Pius was of another mind afterward, when he was Pope: and before
he was Pope he might err; but after he was once Pope he could not err: these
be plain collusions of them who write such things, and illusions of such as
believe them. For it is not possible that any man should write, or speak or
think such things from conscience: Shall I think that any learned man can
think in conscience this to be true, that the Pope cannot err, when I hear
the testimony of the Church so full against it? When I hear such as come to
be Popes, refute it before they come to that place? When I hear such as have
been in the place, exclaim in the extremity of desperation, that no man in
the world lives more miserably then the Pope, that to be a Pope, is to succeed
Romulus in Parricide, not Peter in feeding; that no Pope can be saved: when
all this is proved by the Church of Rome, confessed by Popes themselves; after
all this to say the Pope cannot err, is nothing but collusion. No man can be
drawn to such an opinion by conscience, but by such worldly respects as do
bind, and blind, and lay waste the conscience of them that will not love the
truth.

64. (...) Siluius proceeds, and out of S. Hierome expounding those word;
p^rtas inferi, the gates of hell, he proves that they are to be understood of
sins. And declares that great sins and malignant spirits cannot prevail
against the Ibid.
Church. Quod de Romans Pontisice, says he, qui homo est, nemo dixerit: nec
illis praestemus aures qui illa verba Christi (^raui pro te Petre ne deficiat
fides tua) nolunt ad Ecclesiam referri. That is, [Which thing no man can say of
the B. of Rome, who is a man: neither are we to hearke^ to the^ who will not
have those words of Christ understood as spoken to the Church, when he says,
Peter I have prayed for thee, that thy faith failenot.] Where he proves out of
S. Augustine, that those words are to be referred to the Church. And that they
cannot be understood o^ the Bishops of Rome, he is resolved and gives such
reasons as may resolve any other, that will not wilfully blindfold himself (as
many do that the blind doctrine of Jesuits may work more powerfully in them)
For says he, Romani Episcopi aut haeretici, aut infecti vitijs sunt reperti.
That is, [The Bishops of Rome have bin found either Heretics, or vicious men.]
And concerning this Jurisdiction he says: Omnis anima potest atibus
sublimioribus subdita sit: nec excipit animam Papae. That is, [The Apostle
says, let every soul be subject to the higher powers: he excepteth not the
soul of a Pope.] And again, Maxim Romans Pontisicem subiectu^ Ecclesiae verba
Christi ostend^nt, quum Petru^. futurum Papam ad Ecclesiam remittat: dic
Ecclesiae. And afterward, Si haereti^us est qui Romanae Eocle siae primatum
aufert etc. quanto magis haereticus erit, qui Ecclesiae detrahit^ qua Romana
and omnes aliae continentur. In which words we find, that by the Church of Rome
he understands not the Catholic Church dispersed over the world: but only a
particular Church among many other, having only in his judgment this
privilege, that in respect of other Churches it had a Primacy: This he says,
not for the Pope, but for the Church of Rome: which Church he holds but a
part of the Catholic Church. For if we understand the Church of Rome, that
particular Church, which of old has bin governed by the Roman Bishops, this
is but a particular Church: of this particular, the B. of Rome is the chief,
and head inspirituall matters. But if by the Church of Rome, we understand an
a^sembly, or united consent of these western Churches, among which the Church
of Rome has bin honored as a Mother Church: in which respect all these Churches,
as they are united, are sometimes called the Roman Church. In which sense also
I find that distinction observed between the Church of Rome and the court of
Rome. In this sense the particular Church of Rome is understood a part and
member of this, and the Pope has always been understood as subject to this
Church, and not above it.

65. Now that distinction which before we have observed between the Church of
Rome on the one side, and the Pope with his flatterers on the other side: is
noted also by the same Author. For of the Church he says thus: Opini^ omnium
mortuorum est, si opinio vocari debet, quae idoneis confirmatur authoritatibus,
Ibid.
quia Romans Pontifex universally (...) subiectus exist^. That is, [It is the
opinion of all that are dead before us, if it may be called an opinion; which
is confirmed by such pregnant authorities, that the Pope is subject to the
universal Church.] In which words, he declares the judgment of the Church
which was before his time. But speaking of the Pope with his flatterers, he
says: Sunt aliqui sieve auids gloriae, five quod (...) praemia Ibid.
exspectent, qui perigrinas quasdam and omnino nouas praedicare doctrinas
caeperunt, ipsumque summum Pontificem ex Jurisdiction sacri concily demere non
v^rentur: excaecauit ^os ambitio. That is, [There be some who either because
they are greedy of glory, or because by flattery they hope for rewards, begin
to preach certain strange and altogether new doctrines, they are not afraid
to exempt the Pope out of the Jurisdiction of an holy Council: ambition has
blinded them.] This is the religion which the Jesuits would make so ancient:
here is their high antiquity. In the time of Aenaeas (...) (who wrote in the
year one thousand four hundred and fifty) their religion is called an
absurd, a new and a strange doctrine: herein Siluius is a witness without
exception for so much of their religion, as concerns the Papal Jurisdiction:
which is in sum all the religion of the Jesuits. When thus it is marked, and
marked by a Pope, their mouths are stopped for ever. For he does deliver the
sense, judgment, and religion of the Church in his time, faithfully and
freely, against which testimony no exception can be taken.

66. And that these men that have brought in this new, strange, monstrous
religion may be thoroughly known, and no doubt or scruple left behind; he
describes them thus: Alius dicit quod primam sedem nemo i^dicabit, quod (...)
Augusto, neque ab omni clero, nec a regibus etc. iudicars valeat: (...) ^ere
non veretur Romans Pontifice^ quamuis animas (...) ad inferos trahat, nullius
reprehensioni fore subi^ctum. Nec considerant miseri, quia qu^ praedicant
tantopere verba, aut ipsa^ summorum Pontificum sunt suas fimbri^s extendentium,
aut eorum quieis adulaba^tur. That is, [One says that no man may judge the
first sea, that he may not be judged, either of the Emperor, nor by all the
Clergy, nor by Kings, etc. Another is not ashamed to affirm, that though the
Pope should draw innumerable souls with himself to hell, yet no man ought to
reprove him. Neither do these wretches consider, that these doctrines which
thus they would adu^nce, are either the words of the Popes themselves,
enlarging their fringes, or the words of their flatterers.] Then in his
judgment it is clear, that the Church on the one side held the truth even
till his time, in this point of Jurisdiction: and on the other side, the Pope
and his flatterers maintained, as he calls them, new and strange doctrines
of Jurisdiction: It is well to be observed that (...) Silui^ before he was Pope
could so freely condemn this Papal Iurisdion: And was he trow you, a
Lutheran? verily so was the Church in his time: for he does deliver not so much
his own private judgment, as the judgment of the Church in his time, and in
the times before him. For he says it was the judgment of all that lived and
died in the Church before him, (...) mortuoru^: that the Pope is to be judged
by the Church, by a Council; and that therefore the Council is above the
Pope. This, faith he, is the opinion of all that lived and died in the Church.
And yet he knew well that Friars and flatterers had before his time maintained
the contrary: but these he regarded not, because the Church then regarded them
not; they were but of base and vile account in respect of the Church: and so
much the more vile, because against the judgment of the ancient Church,
against the rules of interpretation, against honesty and conscience they had
drawn some textes of Scripture to maintain this Papal Jurisdiction. These are
they whom these learned men call, (...), miserable and wretched souls, who
will not understand that all this which they bring for the Popes Jurisdiction,
is nothing but the vain words of the Popes themselves, or of their flatterers.

67. Now seeing the Pope with his flatterers has much prevailed since this
time, against the expectation of these learned men: must we not conclude that
they have herein made a departure from the Church: that they are but
flatterers, who now follow the Pope: that they were never accounted otherwise
by the grauer sor^ of the Church of Rome: that their opi^ions are new and
strange. Th^n with what countenance can the successors of Aen^ (...) p^t upon
v^ the imputation of heresy, who follow the ingenuous, free and sincere
judgment of the same Siluiu^; leaving these opinions which are confessed by
him to be new* fond, strange, unreasonable devises of base flatterers, and
maintaining the (...) truth, which by the testimony of these men always
continued in the Church. This man with many mo^, will be raised up in the day
of judgment, against this present generation consisting only (even by the
confession of their own Bishops, Cardinals, and Popes) of the Pope and his
flatterers, forsaking the fellowship of the Church* (...) is the ground of
their conscience. For let me speak only of this part of their religion which
now I handle, that is Jurisdiction: and what ground can any man find here,
whereupon he may rest his conscience? Let them not bring us an idle and
impertinent discourse of their three conuersion^, which in good time by the
grace of God will be reu^rsed, but let them come to the point, and let them
show in this particular, what ground of conscience, any man may have to rest
on, for the Popes Jurisdiction: which was crossed, contradicted and inhibited
by the ancient Fathers, confuted by the learned men of the Church of Rome,
condemned by the Council of the Church of Rome, maintained by none, ^ut such
as are thus notoriously branded with the ignominious titles of flatterers.

68. And because the Pope and his flatterers (for sp^aking of them, I must use
this name and style which so many writer^ of the Church of Rome have used
before me, let them not blame me, or think that I (...) them: I use but the
words of these other writers whom I have cited) These men I say, being driven
in argument from all helps, having no means to answer the learned that
disputed against them; did use to fly for help to these words of the Gospel.
Thou art Peter, and to thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven:
and, I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith fail not; and such like: the
same Author declares that they did altogether abuse and pervert these places
of Scripture, against the sense of the words, and against the expositions of
the ancient doctors. For thus he says: E^ quia huiusmodi dicta solutionem
habent, recurrunt statim ad Euangelium: tu es Petrus, and tibi dabo claues
regnic^lorum: and rogaui pro te Petre ne deficiat fides tua, and duc in altum
rete, etc. Qu^ om^ia hi homines miro modo sublimant, expositionibus sanctorum
doctorum omnino posthabuis. That is, [And because these words containing their
reasons, a^e all answered, they fly presently to the Gospel: thou art Peter,
and to thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and, I have prayed
for thee Peter that thy faith fail not, and cast thy net into the deep, etc.
All which these men after a marvelous manner: raise up to extol the Pope,
rejecting altogether, and casting behind the^ the expositions of an^ient
doctors.] Then we have one Pope full of our side; for he assures us, that this
new and strange wresting of these textes to advance the Popes Jurisdiction,
stands wholly against the expositions of the ancient Fathers. Aenaeas
Siluiu^ in the same book, speaks much in the honor of the French Cardinal
of Arles, as an especial admirer of his virtues. Lodouicus Ibid.
Cardinalis Arelatensis, says he, Uir omnium con^tantissimus and ad
gubernationem generalium concilior^m natus. That is, [A man of all other, most
constant, and one that was borne for the government of general Councels.] One
testimony I would produce of this Cardinal, and then we have three Cardinals
for us, Cameracensis, Cusanus, Arelatensis. This Cardinal, in the mids of the
Council of Basil, professed that the doctrine of the Popes Jurisdiction over
general Councels, was a new doctrine, and strange at that time in the Church.
^ardinalis Arelatensi^, Ibid.
says he, ai^ Eugenianos nuntios implesse Galliam, qui (...) doctrinam
praedicantes authoritatem Romani Pontificis supra generalia concilia
magnifacerent.

69. After all this, when we find that Cardinal Bellarmine and the rest of
the Friars and flatterers, have nothing to say for the Popes Jurisdiction, but
that which is condemned by these learned men, as a new and strange doctrine
in the Church; have no other reasons to maintain this their new doctrine, then
the perverting of these texts of Scriptures, which distorting of Scriptures is
expressly censured by the said learned men, as standing against the natural
sense of the words, and against the expositions of the ancient Fathers, writing
of those Scriptures: when we find not one or two, or a few; but the cry of the
whole Church against them: who is able by any show of learning to avoid our
conclusion; that they who thus maintain this Papal Jurisdiction, are the
followers of their forefathers, that is only Friars and flatterers. And that
we who deny this Papal Jurisdiction, giving to the Church on the one side,
and to Sovereign Princes on the other side; their proper, distinct, ancient
rights respectively belonging to each of them, are the followers and the
children of our forefathers, that is the true, ancient, unchanged Catholic
Church.

FINIS.

