THE SVRVEY OF CORNWALL.

Written by Richard Carew of Antonie, Esquire.

AVT NVNC AVT NVNQVAM
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by S. S. for John Iaggard, and are to be sold near
Temple-barre, at the sign of the Hand and Star. 1602.

To the Honorable, Sir Walter Raleigh Knight, Lord Warden of the Stannaries,
Lieutenant General of Cornwall, etc.
THis mine ill-husbanded Survey, long since begun, a great while discontinued,
lately reuiewed, and now hastily finished, appealeth to your L. direction,
whether it should pass; to your correction, if it do pass; and to your
protection, when it is passed. Neithervnduely: for the same entreats of the
Province, and persons, over whose bodies, and estates, you carry a large, both
Martial, and civil command, by your authority, but in whose hearts, and
loves, you possess a far greater interest, by your kindness. Your ears,
and mouth, have ever been open, to hear, and deliver our gricuances, and your
feet, and hands, ready to go, and work their redress, and that, not only,
always, as a Magistrate, of your self, but also very often, as a suitor, and
solliciter to others, of the highest place. Wherefore, I, as one of the common
beholden, present this token of my private gratitude. It is duty, and not
presumption, that has drawn me to the offering; and it must be favor, and
not desert, that shall move your Lordship to the acceptance: and so I take
humble leave, resting no less willing to serve you, then under you.

Your Lordships poor kinsman. Richard Carew of Antonie.

To the Reader.
WHen I first composed this Treatise, not minding that it should be published
in Print, I caused only certain written copies to be given to some of my
friends, and put Prosopopeia into the books mouth. But since that time, master
Camdens often mencioning this work, and my friends persuasions, have caused my
determination to alter, and to embrace a pleasing hope, that charity, and good
construction rests now generally in all Readers. Albeit, I well know, how
Opere in vario, no less then in longo, fas est obrepere somnum. And I
acknowledge, this playing work to come so far short, of satisfying, even my
self (though Suus cuique placet partus) as I have little reason, to expect the
applause of any other.

Besides, the state of our Country has undergone so many alterations, since
I first began these scriblings, that, in the reuiewing, I was driven, either
likewise to vary my report, or else to speak against my knowledge. And no
marvel, for each succeeding time, adds, or reaueth, goods, and evils,
according to the occasions, which it self produces: rather a wonder it were,
that in the ceaselesse revolution of the Universe, any parcel should retain a
steadfast constitution. Reckon therefore (I pray you) that this treatise
plotteth down Cornwall, as it now stands, for the particulars, and will
continue, for the general. Mine Eulogies proceed no less, from the
sincerity of a witness, then the affection of a friend: and therefore I hope,
that where my tongue has been good, no man's eye will be evil: and that each
wel-minded Reader will wish a merry passage, to this my rather
fancie-sporting, then gaine-seeking voyage.

Farewell.
The Prosopopeia to the Book.
I Crave not courteous aid of friends,
To blaze my praise in verse,
Nor, proud of vaunt, mine authors names,
In catalogue rehearse:
I of no willing wrong complain,
Which force or stealth has wrought,
No fruit I promise from the tree,
Which forth this blooth has brought.
I curry not with smoothing terms,
Ne yet rude threats I blaste:
I seek no patron for my faults,
I plead no needless haste.
But as a child of feeble force,
I keep my fathers home,
And, bashful at each strangers sight,
Dare not abroad to rome,
Save to his kin of nearest blood,
Or friends of dearest price,
Who, for his sake, not my desert,
With welcome me entice.
THE SVRVEY OF CORNWALL.
The first Book.
COrnwall, the farthest Shire The name.
of England Westwards, has her name by diverse Authors diuerfly derived. Some
(as our own Chroniclers) draw it from Corineus, cousin to Brute, the first
Conqueror of this Island: who wrestling at Plymmouth (as they say) with a
mighty Giant, called Gogmagog, threw him over Cliffe, brake his neck, and
received the gift of that Country, in reward for his prowess: Some, as
Cerealis, (no less mistaken perhaps in that, then in his measures) from Cornu
Galliae, a horn or corner of France, whereagainst nature has placed it: and
some, from Cornu Walliae, which (in my conjecture) carries greatest likelihood
of truth.

For what time the Saxons, after many bloody invasions Anno Dom. 586.
as Pirates, began at last to plant their dwellings, and take root in this
Island, as Conquerors, the Britons, by them supplanted, were driven to seek
their safeguard in the waste Moors, craggie Mountains, and wild Forests of
Wales and Cornwall, where the Countries barrenness barred their pursuers from
victuals, and the dangerousnesse of the passages laid them open to privy
invasions. Such as had in this sort withdrawn themselves, the Saxons termed
Welshmen, by interpretation strangers, for so they were to them, as they to the
Country: and their place of abode they called Welshland, sithence turned to
Wales, even as by the same reason, they give still the same name to Italy. Now,
Cornwall being cast out into the Sea, with the shape of a Shape.
horn, borrowed the one part of her name from her fashion, as Matthew of
Westminster testifies, and the other Flores Hist.
from her Inhabitants: both which conjoined, make Cornuwalliae, and contrived,
Cornwall: in which sense, the Cornish people call it Kernow, derived likewise
from Kerne a horn. Neither needs this composition to be accounted any way
uncouth, seeing the same is made familiar unto us by the like in other
Countries, as of Herbipolis in Germany, Lombardie in Italy, Paleocastrum in
Crete, and Neoportus in Carniola: all which with many other, are likewise
compacted of double languages.

This ill-halsening hornie name, has (as Corneto in Italy) opened a gap to the
scoffs of many, who not knowing their own present condition, or at least
their future destiny, can be contented to draw an odious mirth from a public
infamy. But seeing the wisest Enditer, has directed the pen of his holiest
writers to use this term, not only in a good meaning, but also in a
significant sense, and to sanctify the thing it self in sundry parts of his
service: such iesters dishonest indiscretion, is rather charitably to be
pitied, then their exception either angerly to be grieved at, or seriously to
be confuted.

I am not ignorant, how sorely the whole story of Brute, is shaken by some of
our late writers, and how stiffely supported by other some: as also that this
wrestling pull between Corineus and Gogmagog, is reported to have befallen at
Dover. For mine own part, though I reverence antiquity, and reckon it a kind
of wrong, to exact an ouer-strict reason for all that which upon credit she
delivers: yet I rather incline to their side, who would warrant her
authority by apparent verity. Notwithstanding, in this question, I will not
take on me the person of either Judge, or flickler: and therefore if there be
any so plunged in the common flood, as they will still gripe fast, what they
have once caught hold on, let them sport themselves with these conjectures,
upon which mine auerment in behalf of Plymmouth is grounded. The place where
Brute is said to have first landed, was Totnes in Cornwall, and therefore this
wrestling likely to have chanced there, sooner then elsewhere. The Province
bestowed on Corineus for this exployt, was Cornwall. It may then be presumed,
that he received in reward the place where he made proof of his worth, and
whose Prince (for so with others I take Gogmagog to have been) he had
conquered, even as Cyrus recompensed Zopirus with the City Babylon, Herodotus.
which his policy had recovered. Again, the actiuitie of Deuon and
Cornishmen, in this faculty of wrestling, beyond those of other Shires, does
seem to derive them a special pedigree, from that graund wrastler Corineus.
Moreover, upon the Hawe at Plymmouth, there is cut out in the ground, the
pourtrayture of two men, the one bigger, the other lesser, with Clubbes in
their hands, (whom they term Gog-Magog) and (as I have learned) it is renewed
by order of the Townsmen, when cause requires, which should infer the same
to be a monument of some moment. And lastly the place, having a steep cliffe
adjoining, affords an opportunity to the fact. But of this too much.

Cornwall is seated (as most men account) in the Latitude of fifty degrees,
and thirty minutes: and in the Climate.
Longitude of six.

The Shire extends in length to about seventy Length and breadth.
miles: the breadth, as almost no where equal, so in the largest place, it
passes not thirty, in the middle twenty, and in the narrowest of the West
part, three. The whole compass may hereby be coniectured.

It bordereth on the East with Deuon, divided therefrom, Borders
in most places, by the river Tamer, which springing near the North Sea, at
Hartland in Deuon, runs through Plymmouth Haven, into the South. For the
rest, the maine Ocean sundreth the same, on the North from Ireland, on the West
from the Islands of Scilley, and on the South from little Britain. These
borders now thus straightned, did once extend so wide, as that they enabled
their enclosed territory, with the title of a kingdom. Polidore Virgil
allotteth it the fourth part of the whole Island, and the ancient Chronicles
report, that Brute landed at Totnes in Cornwall, a Town now seated in the
midst of Deuon. Moreover, until Athelstanes time, the Cornish-men bare equal
sway in Excester Anno Dom. 937.
with the English: for he it was who hemmed them within their present limits.
Lastly, the encroaching Sea has rauined from it, the whole Country of
Lioness, together with diverse other parcels of no little circuit: and that
such a Lioness there was, these proofs are yet remaining. The space between
the lands end, and the Isles of Scilley, being about thirty miles, to this day
retains that name, in Cornish Lethowsow, and carries continually an equal
depth of forty or sixty fathom (a thing not usual in the Seas proper
Dominion) save that about the midway, there lies a Rock, which at low water
discovers his head. They term it the Gulf, suiting thereby the other name
of Scilla. Fishermen also casting their hooks thereabouts, have drawn up
pieces of doors and windows. Moreover, the ancient name of Saint Michaels
Mount, was Cara clowse in Cowse, in English, The hoare Rock in the Wood: which
now is at every flood encompassed by the Sea, and yet at some low ebbes,
roots of mighty trees are discryed in the sands about it. The like
ouerflowing has happened in Plymmouth Haven, and diverse other places.

In this situation, though nature have shouldred Commodities of the site.
out Cornwall into the farthest part of the Realm, and so besieged it with the
Ocean, that, as a demie Island in an Island, the inhabitants find but one way of
issue by land: yet has she in some good measure, counteruailed such
disadvantage, through placing it, both near unto, and in the trade way between
Wales, Ireland, Spain, France, and Netherland. The neerenesse helps the^,
with a shorter cut, less peril, and meaner charge, to vent forth and make
return of those commodities, which their own, or either of those Countries
do afford: the lying in the way, brings foreign shipping to claim succor
at their harbors, when, either outward, or homeward bound, they are checked by
an East, South, or Southeast wind: and where the horse walloweth, some hairs
will still remain. Neither is it to be passed over without regard, that these
remote quarters, lie not so open to the invasions of foreign enemies, or
spoils of civil tumults, as other more inward parts of the Realm, which being
seated nearer the heart, are sooner sought, and easlyer ransacked in such
troublesome times: or if the Countries long naked sides, offer occasion of
landing to any adverse shipping, her forementioned inward natural strength,
increased by so many Lanes and Enclosures, straightneth the same to a preying
only upon the outward skirts by some petty fleetes: For the danger of farther
piercing, will require the protection of a greater force for execution, then
can there be counteruailed with the benefit of any booty, or conquest, were
they sure to prevail. And if to be free from a damage, may pass for a
commodity, I can add, that the far distance of this County from the Court,
has heretofore afforded it a Supersedeas from takers and Purueyours: for if
they should fetch any provision from thence, well it might be masked with the
visard of her Highness prerogative, but the same would very slenderly turn to
the benefit of her Majesty's house keeping: for the foulness and vneasinesse
of the ways, the little mould of Cornish cattle, and the great expense of
driving them, would defaulke as much from the just price to the Queen, at the
delivering, as it did from the owners at the taking. Besides that, her
Highness shipping should heerethrough be defrauded of often supplies, which
these parts afford unto them.

Upon which reasons, some of the Purueyours attempts, heretofore through the
suite of the Country, the solicitation of Sir Richard Gremuile, the credit
of the Lord Warden, and the graciousnesse of our Sovereign, were revoked and
suppressed, and the same under her Highness privy Seal confirmed.
Notwithstanding, when her Majesty made her pleasure afterward known, that
she would have a general contribution from every Shire, for redeeming this
exemption, Cornwall opposing duty against reason, or rather accompting duty a
reason sufficient, yielded to undergo a proportionable rate of the burden. So
they compounded to furnish ten Oxen after Michaelmas for thirty pound price:
to which, by another agreement with the Officers, they should add forty
marks of of their own. Upon half a years warning either party might repent
the bargain. This held for a while: but within a short space, either the
carelessness of the Justices in imposing this rate, or the negligence of the
Constables in collecting it, or the backwardness of the Inhabitants in paying
the same, or all these together ouerslipped the time, and withheld the
satisfaction. Hereon down comes a Messenger with sharp letters from the
Officers of the Green cloth. The conclusion ensued, that his charges must be
borne, and an higher price disbursed for the supply. Thus it fares too and
fro, and the Cornishmen seem to hold a Wolf by the ears: for to make payment
the people are unwilling, as in a charge heretofore unusual, to undergo the
managing hereof, the Justices strain courtesy, as in a matter nothing
plausible, and appertaining to ouer-many partners, for the well effecting, and
yet to break they are both afraid, suspecting that a heavier load will follow,
if this composition be once set at large.

These commodities go not unaccompanied with their inconveniences: for to
Cornwall also has Pandora's Disco^modities of the site.
Box been opened. One is, that the far distance from the higher seats of
Justice, rippeth a wider gap to intruding injuries, and increases the charge
and time of procuring their redress. Which due occasion of discouragement, the
worst conditioned, and least cliented Petiuoguers, do yet (under the sweet
bait of revenge) convert to a more plentiful prosecution of actions. The
ordinary trade of these men is, where they perceive a spark of displeasure
kindling, to increase the flame with their bellows of persuasion. Has such a
one abused you, says he? Anger him a little, that breaking out into some
outrageous words, you may take advantage thereof; and you shall see how we will
hamper him: I warrant you he shall fetch an errand to London, and bear part of
your charges too. After the game has been brought in by this Winlesse, the
poor soul is bound not to release his adversary, without his Attournies
consent, who plieth the matter with so good a stomach, as he eats the
kernel, whilst they fight about the shell. At last, when the fountain of his
Clients purse is drawn dry, by his extrauagant fees of Pro consilio, pro
expeditione, pro amicitia Vicecomitis. etc. besides the packing between the
Vndersheriffe and him, of docketing out Writs never sued forth, the mediation
of friends must shut up the matter in a comprimise. Another discommoditie
grows, that whereas London furnishes all provisions (even Tynne, and such
other arising in the same Country) of best stuff, fashion, store, and
cheapnesse: the hard procuring, and far carriage, adds an extraordinary
increase of price to the Cornish buyers: and for matters of benefit, or
preferment, by suits at Court, either the opportunity is past, before notice
can arrive so far: or the following there, and loss the whiles at home, will
require a great and assured gain in the principal, to warrant the hope of a
saving bargain in the appurtenance.

Touching the temperature of Cornwall, the air Temperature.
thereof is cleansed, as with bellows, by the billows, and flowing and ebbing
of the Sea, and therethrough becomes pure, and subtle, and, by consequence,
healthful. So as the inhabitants do seldom take 2 ruthful and reauing
experience of those harms, which infectious diseases use to carry with them.
But yet I have noted, that this so piercing an air, is apter to preserve then
recover health, especially in any languishing sickness which has possessed
strangers: neither know I, whether I may impute to this goodness of the air,
that upon the return of our fleet from the Portugal action, 1589. the
diseases which the Soldiers brought home with them, did grow more grievous, as
they carried the same farther into the land, then it fell out at Plymmouth,
where they landed: for there the same was, though infectious, yet not so
contagious, and though pestilentiall, yet not the very pestilence, as
afterward it proved in other places.

The Spring visits not these quarters so timely, as Spring. Summer.
the Eastern parts. Summer imparteth a very temperate heat; recompencing his
slow fostering of the fruits, with their kindly ripening, Autum re brings a
somewhat Autu^ne.
late Harnest specially to the middle of the Shire, where they seldom inn
their Corn before Michaelmas. Winter, by reason of the Southes near Winter.
neighbourhead, and Seas warm breath, favors is with a milder cold then
elsewhere, so as, upon both coasts, the Frost and Snow come very seldom, and
make a speedy departure. This notwithstanding, the Country is much subject to
storms, which fetching a large course in the open Sea, do from thence
violently assault the dwellers at land, and leave them uncovered houses, pared
hedges, and dwarfe-growne trees, as witnesses of their force and fury: yea,
even the hard stones, and yron-baires of the windows, do fret to be so
continually grated. One kind of these storms, they call a flaw, or flaugh,
which is a mighty gale of wind, passing suddenly to the shore, and working
strong effects, upon whatsoever it incountreth in his way.

The Cornish soil, for the most part, is lifted up into Earth.
many hills, some great, some little of quantity, some steep, some easy for
ascent, and parted in sunder by short and narrow valleys. A shallow earth does
cover Form.
their outside, the substance of the rest, consists ordinarily in Rocks and
Shelfe, which makes them hard for manurance, and subject to a dry Summers
parching. The middle part of the Shire (saving the enclosures about some few
Towns and Villages) lies waste and Quality.
open, shows a blackish color, bears Heath and spirie Grass, and serves
in a manner, only to Summer Cattle. That which bordereth upon either side of
the Sea, through the Inhabitants good husbandry, of enclosing, sending, and
other dressing, carries a better hue, and more profitable quality. Meadow
ground it affoordeth little, pasture for Cattle and Sheep, store enough,
Corn ground plenty.

Hills of greatest name and height are, Hinxten, Rowtor, Hills.
Brownwelly, S. Agnes, Haynborough, the four Boroughs, Roche, Carnbray, and
the two Castellan Danis.

In the rest of this earthy description, I will begin with such mynerals as her
bowels yield forth, and then pass on to those things, of growing, and feeling
life, which upon her face do relieve themselves.

These mynerals are not so deep buried by nature in the entrails of the
earth, nor so closely couched amongst Minerals
the Rocks, but that desire of gain with the instrument of Art can dig them
up: they may be divided into stones and metals.

Quarrie stones are of sundry sorts, and serve to diverse purposes. For
walling, there are rough, and Slate: Stones.
the rough makes speedier building the Slate surer. For Windows, Dornes, and
Chimnies, Moore stone carries chiefest reckoning. That name is bestowed on it,
by the Moors or waste ground, where the same is found in great quantity,
either lying upon the ground, or very little under. This stone answers the
charge of fetching, with the fairenes of his whitish color, containing
certain glimmering sparkles, and counteruaileth his great hardness in
working, with the profit of long endurance, nature having ordained the same, as
of purpose, to withstand the fretting weather. There are also three other sorts
of stones, serving to the same use, and hewed with less, though differing
labor: Pentuan dug our of the Sea Cliffes, and in color somewhat
resembles gray Marble, Cara(...)use black, not unlike the Ieat, the third
taken out of inland Quarries, and not much differing from the Eastern free
stone.

The Sea strond also in many places, affords Peeble-stones, Peeble.
which washed out of the earth, or falling from the Rocks, and there lying
loose, are, by often rolling of the wanes, wrought to a kind of roundnesse, and
serve very handsomely for pauing of streets and Courts.

For covering of houses there are three sorts of Slate, Slate.
which from that use take the name of Healing-stones. The first and best Blew:
the second, Sage-leafe colored, the third and meanest Gray. The Blew, and so
the rest, are commonly found under the walling Slate, when the depth has
brought the workmen to the water. This Slate is in substance thin, in color
fair, in weight light, in lasting strong, and generally carries so good
regard, as (besides the supply for home provision) great store is yearly
conucied by shipping both to other parts of the Realm, and also beyond the
Seas, into Britain and Netherland.

They make Lyme, moreover, of another kind of Lyme stones.
Marle stone, either by burning a great quantity thereof together, with a
fervent fire of Furze, or by maintaining a continual, though lesser heat,
with stone Cole in smaller Kills: this is accounted the better cheap, but that
yields the whiter Lyme.

Touching metals: Copper is found in sundry places, but with what gain to
the searchers, I have not Metals.
been curious to enquire, nor they hasty to reveal. For at one Mine (of
which I took view) the Owre was shipped to be refined in Wales, either to
save cost in the fuel, or to conceal the profit.

Neither has nature denied Silver to Cornwall, Silver.
though Cieero excluded the same out of all Britain: and if we may believe
our Chroniclers reports, who ground themselves upon authentical Records, king
Edward the first, and king Edward the third, reaped some good benefit thereof.
But for our present experience, what she proffereth with the one hand, she
seems to pull back with the other, whereof some Gentlemen not long sithence,
made trial to their loss: howbeit, neither are they discouraged by this
success, nor others from the like attempt.

Tynners do also find little hoppes of Gold amongst Gold.
their Owre, which they keep in quils, and sell to the Goldsmithes oftentimes
with little better gain, then Glaucus exchange.

Yea it is not altogether barren of precious stones, and Pearl: for Dyamonds
are in many places found Dyamo^ds
cleaving to those Rocks, out of which the Tynne is dug: they are polished,
squared, and pointed by nature: their quantity from a Pease, to a Walnut: in
blackness and hardness they come behind the right ones, and yet I have known
some of them set on so good a foil, as at first sight, they might appose a not
unskillful Lapidarie.

The Pearl (though here not aptly raunged) breed Pearl.
in big Oysters, and Muscles, greater in quantity, then acceptable for
goodness, as neither round nor Orient. Perhaps Caesar spoiled the best beds,
when he made that gay Coat of them, to present his graundame Venus.

Cornwall is also not altogether destitute of Agates Agates.
and white Coral, as by credible relation I have learned. Coral.


But why seek we in corners for petty commodities, when as the only
mynerall of Cornish Tynne, opens Tynne.
so large a field to the Countries benefit? this is in working so pliant, for
sight so fair, and in use so necessary, as thereby the Inhabitants gain
wealth, the Merchants traffic, and the whole Realm a reputation and with
such plenty thereof has God stuffed the bowels of this little Angle, that (as
Astiages dreamed of his daughter) it ouerfloweth England, waters
Christendom, and is derived to a great part of the world besides. In
travailing abroad, in tarrying at home, in eating and drinking, in doing ought
of pleasure or necessity, Tynne, either in his own shape, or transformed into
other fashions, is always requisite, always ready for our service: but I
shall rather disgrace, then endeere it by mine ouer-weake commendation, and
sooner tire my self, then draw the fountain of his praises dry. Let this
therefore suffice, that it cannot be of mean price, which has found, with
it, Dyamonds, amongst it Gold, and in it Silver.

The Cornish Tynners hold a strong imagination, that in the withdrawing of
Noah's flood to the Sea, the same took his course from East to West, violently
breaking up, and forcibly carrying with it, the earth, trees, and Rocks, which
lay any thing loosely, near the upper face of the ground. To confirm the
likelihood of which supposed truth, they do many times dig up whole and huge
Timber trees, which they conceive at that deluge to have been ouerturned and
whelmed: but whether then, or sithence; probable it is, that some such cause
produced this effect. Hence it comes, that albeit the Tynne say couched at
first in certain strakes amongst the Rocks, like a tree, or the veins in a
man's body, from the depth whereof the maine Load spreads out his branches,
until they approach the open air* yet they have now two kinds of Tynne
works, Kinds of works.
Stream, and Load: for (say they) the foremencioned flood, carried together
with the moved Rocks and earth, so much of the Load as was in closed therein,
and at the asswaging, left the same scattered here and there in the valleys and
ryuers, where it passed; which being sought and dug, is called Streamworke:
under this title, they comprise also the Moore works, growing from the like
occasion. They maintain these works, to have been very ancient, and first
wrought by the Jews with Pickaxes of Holme, Box, and Hearts horn: they prove
this by the name of those places yet enduring, to wit, Attall Sarazin, in
English, the Jews offcast, and by those tools daily found amongst the rubble
of such works. And it may well be, that as Akornes made good bread, before
Ceres taught the use of Corn; and sharp stones served the Indians for Knives,
until the Spaniards brought them Iron: so in the infancy of knowledge, these
poor instruments for want of better did supply a turn. There are also taken
up in such works, certain little tools heads of Brass, which some term
Thunder-axes, but they make small show of any profitable use. Neither were the
Romans ignorant of this trade, as may appear by a brass Coin of Domitian's,
found in one of these works, and fallen into my hands and perhaps under one of
those Flauians, the Jewish workmen made here their first arrival.

They discover these works, by certain Tynnestones, lying on the face of the
ground, which they Finding the works
term Shoad, as shed from the maine Load, and made somewhat smooth and round,
by the waters washing and Streamworkes.
wearing. Where the finding of these affords a tempting likelihood, the
Tynners go to work, casting up trenches before the^, in depth 5. or 6. foot
more or less, as the loose ground went, and three or four in breadth,
gathering up such Shoad, as this turning of the earth does offer to their
sight. If any ryner thwart them, and that they resolve to search his bed, he
is trained by a new channel from his former course. This yields a speedy
and gaineful recompense to the adventurers of the search, but I hold it little
beneficial to the owners of the soil. For those low grounds, beforetime
fruitful, having herethrough their wrong side turned outward, accuse the
Tynners injury by their succeeding barrenness.

To find the Loadworkes, their first labor is also employed in seeking this
Shoad, which either lies open on Loadworkes.
the grass, or but shallowly covered. Having found any such, they conjecture
by the sight of the ground, which way the flood came that brought it thither,
and so give a guess at the place whence it was broken off. There they sincke a
Shaft, or pit of five or six foot in length, two or three foot in breadth,
and seven or eight foot in depth; to prove whether they may so meet with the
Load. By this Shaft, they also discern which was the quick ground (as they
call it) that moved with the flood, and which the firm, wherein no such Shoad
does lie. If they miss the Load in one place, they sincke alike Shaft in
another beyond that, commonly farther up toward the hill, and so a third and
fourth, until they light at last upon it. But you may not conceive, that every
likelihood does ever prove a certainty: for diverse have been hindered,
through bestowing charges in seeking, and not finding, and many undone in
finding and not speeding, whiles a fair show, tempting them to much cost,
has, in the end, failed in substance, and made the adventurers Banckrupt of
their hope and purse.

Some have found Tynne-workes of great vallew, Dreams.
through means no less strange, then extraordinary, to wit, by dreams. As
in Edward the sixts time, a Gentlewoman, heir to one Fresculierd, and wife to
Lauyue, dreamed, that a man of seemly personage told her, how in such a
Tenement of her Land, she should find so great store of Tynne, as would serve
to in rich both her self and her posterity. This she revealed to her
husband: and he, putting the same in trial, found a work, which in four
years, was worth him welneere so many thousand pounds. Moreover, one Taprel
lately living, and dwelling in the Parish of the hundred of West, called S.
Niot, by a like dream of his daughter (see the luck of women) made the like
assay, met with the effect, farmed the work of the unwitting Lord of the
soil, and grew thereby to good state of wealth. The same report passes as
current, touching sundry others; but I will not bind any man's credit, though,
that of the Authors have herein swayed mine and yet he that will afford his
ear to Astrologers and natural Philosophers, shall have it filled with many
discourses, of the constellation of the heavens, and the constitution of men's
bodies, fitting to this purpose.

There are, that leaving these trades of new searching, do take in hand such
old Stream and Loadworks, as by New working.
the former adventurers have been given over, and oftentimes they find good
store of Tynne, both in the rubble cast up before, as also in veins which the
first workmen followed not. From hence there grows a diversity in opinion,
amongst such Gentlemen, as by judgment and experience, can look into these
matters; some of them supposing that the Tynne grows; and others, that it
only separateth from the consumed offall. But whosoever reads that which
Francis Leandro has written touching the iron mynerals, in the I Will Deser. Ital.
of Elba, will cleave perhaps to a third conceit: for he avouches, that the
trenches, out of which the Owre there is dug, within twenty or thirty
years, become alike full again of the same metal, as at first, and he
confirms it by suitable examples, borrowed from Clearchus, of Marble, in Paros
Island, and of Salt, in India, deducing thence this reason, that the air and
water replenishing the void room, through the power of the universal agent,
and some peculiar celestial influence, are turned into the self substance;
and so by consequence, neither the Owre grows, nor the earth consumes away:
and this opinion, Munster in his Cosmographie, does seem to underprop,
affirming, that near the City of Apoloxia in Dalmatia, the veins whence
Brass is dug, are filled in like manner. So does he report, that near
Ptolomais, there lies a round valley, out of which glassie Sand being taken,
the winds fill the pit again, from the upper part of the adjoining mountains;
which matter is converted into the former substance, and that even Metals
thrown into this place, do undergo the like Metamorphosis.

The color both of the Shoad and Load, resembles Color.
his bed, as the Sea sand does the Cliffes, and is so diuersified to reddish,
blackish, duskie, and such other earthy colors.

If the Load wherein the Tynne lies, carries a foot Bigness.
and half in breadth, and be not ouerbarren, it is accounted a very rich
work: but commonly the same exceeds not a foot, unless many Loads run
together.

When the new found work intiseth with probability of profit, the discouerer
does commonly associate Manner of setting on work adventurers.
himself with some more partners, because the charge amounts mostly very
high for any one man's purse, except lined beyond ordinary, to reach unto: and
if the work do fail, many shoulders will more easily support the burden.
These partners consist either of such Tinners as work to their own behoose,
or of such adventurers as put in hired laborers. The hirelings stand at a
certain wages, either by the day, Hire.
which may be about eight pence, or for the year, being between four and
six pound, as their deserving can drive the bargain: at both which rates they
must find themselves.

If the work carry some importance, and require the travail of many hands,
that has his name, and they their Ouerseer, whom they term their Captain:
such are the Pel, Whilancleuth, in English, The work of the Ditches: Pulstean,
that is, The myrie head: Grueg braaz, The great Borough: Saint Margets, and
many surnamed Balls, which betoken the Vales where the works are set on foot.

The Captains office binds him to sort each workman his task, to see them
apply their labor, to make Captain.
timely provision, for binding the work with frames of Timber, if need exact
it, to place Pumpes for drawing of water, and to give such other directions. In
most places, their toil is so extreme, as they cannot endure it above four
hours in a day, but are succeeded by spells* the residue of the time, they
wear out at Coytes, Kayles, or like idle exercises. Their Calendar also
allows them more Holy Days, then are warranted by the Church, our laws, or
their own profit.

Their ordinarietooles, are a Pick-axe of iron, about Tools.
sixteen inches long, sharpened at the one end to pecke, and flat-headed at the
other, to drive certain little iron Wedges, wherewith they cleave the Rocks.
They have also a broad Shouell, the utter part of iron, the middle of Timber,
into which the staff is slopewise tastned.

Their manner of working in the Loadmines, is to follow the Load as it lies,
either sidelong, or downright: Manner of working.
both ways the deeper they sincke, the greater they find the Load When they
light upon a small vein, or chance to leese the Load which they wrought, by
means of certain strings that may hap to cross it, they begin at another
place neere-hand, and so draw by guess to the maine Load again. If the Load
lie right down, they follow it sometimes to the depth of forty or fifty
fathom. These Loadworkes, Diod. sicl. 5. cap. 8. seems to point at, where
he says, that the Inhabitants of Velerium Promontorie, dig up Tin out of
rockie ground. From some of their bottomes you shall at no one days discrie the
Stars: the workmen are let down and taken up in a Stirrup, by two men who
wind the rope.

If the Load lie slope-wise, the Tynners dig a convenient depth, and then
pass forward under ground, so far as the air will yield them breathing,
which, as it begins to fail, they sink a Shaft down thither from the top,
to admit a renewing vent, which not withstanding, their work is most by
Candlelight. In these passages, they meet sometimes with very loose earth,
Conueyance.
sometimes with exceeding hard Rocks, and sometimes with great streams of
water.

The loose Earth is propped by frames of Timberworke, Loose earth.
as they go, and yet now and then falling down, either presses the poor
workmen to death, or stops them from returning. To part the Rocks, they
Rocks.
have the foremencioned Axes, and Wedges, with which, mostly, they make speedy
way, and yet (not seldom) are so tied by the teeth, as a good workman shall
hardly be able to hew three foot, in the space of so many weeks. While they
thus play the Moldwarps, unsavory Damps do here and there distemper their
Damps*
heads, though not with so much danger in the consequence, as annoyance for
the present.

For conueying away the Water, they pray in aid Water.
of sundry devices, as Addits, Pumps and wheels, driven by a stream, and
interchangeably filling, and emptying two Buckets, with many such like: all
which notwithstanding, the Springs so incroche upon these inventions, as in
sundry places they are driven to keep men, and some-where horses also at
work both day and night, without ceasing, and in some all this will not serve
the turn. For supplying such hard services, they have always fresh men at
hand.

They call it the bringing of an Addit, or Audit, when they begin to trench
without, and carry the same through Addit.
the ground to the Tynworke, somewhat deeper then the water does lie, thereby
to give it passage away.

This Addit, they either fetch athwart the whole Load, or right from the
branch where they work, as the next valley ministers fittest opportunity,
for soonest cutting into the Hill: and therefore a Gentleman of good knowledges,
deduceth this name of Addit, Ab aditu ad aquas. Surely the practice is cunning
in device, costly in charge, and long in effecting and yet, when all is done,
many times the Load falls away, and they may sing with Augustus bird, Opera
and impensa periit. If you did see how aptly they cast the ground, for
conueying the water, by compassings and turnings, to shun such hills and
valleys as let them, by their too much height or lowness, you would wonder how
so great skill could couch in so base a Cabin, as their (otherwise) thick
clouded brains.

As much almost does it exceed credit, that the Tynne, for and in so small
quantity, dug up with so Manner of dressing.
great toil, and passing afterward through the managing of so many hands, ere
it come to sale, should be any way able to acquit the cost: for being once
brought above ground in the stone, it is first broken in pieces with hammers;
and then carried, either in waynes, or Breaking.
on horses backs, to a stamping mill, where three, and in Sta^ping.
some places six great logges of timber, bound at the ends with iron, and
lifted up and down by a wheel, driven with the water, do break it smaller.
If the stones be ouer-moyst, they are dried by the fire in an iron cradle or
grate. Drying.


From the stamping mill, it passes to the crazing mil, which between two
grinding stones, turned also with Crazing.
a water-wheele, bruseth the same to a fine sand: how beit, of late times they
mostly use wet stampers, and so have no need of the crasing mils for their best
stuff, but only for the crust of their tails.

The stream, after it has forsaken the mill, is made Washing.
to fall by certain degrees one somewhat distant from another; upon each of
which, at every descent lies a green turfe, three or four foot square, and
one foot thick. On this the Tinner lays a certain portion of the sandy
Tin, and with his shouell softly tosseth the same to and fro, that through
this stirring, the water which runs over it, may wash away the light earth
from the Tin, which of a heavier substance lies fast on the turfe. Having so
cleansed one portion, he sets the same aside, and begins with another,
until his labor take end with his task. The best of those turfes (for all
sorts serve not) are fetched about two miles to the Eastwards of S. Michaels
Mount, where at a low water they cast aside the sand, and dig them up: they are
full of roots of trees, and on some of them nuts have been found, which
confirms my former assertion of the seas intrusion. After it is thus washed,
they put the remnant into a wooden dish, broad, flat, and round, being about
two foot over, and having two handles fastened at the sides, by which they
softly shogge the same to and fro in the water between their legs, as they
sit over it, until whatsoever of the earthie substance that was yet left, be
flitted away. Some of later time, with a sleighter invention, and lighter
labor, do cause certain boys to stir it up and down with their feet,
which works the same effect: the residue, after this often clensing, they
call black Tynne, whichis proportionably divided to every of the adventurers,
Sharing black Tynne.
when the Lords part has been first deducted upon the whole.

Then does each man carry his portion to the blowing Melting.
house, where the same is melted with Char-coale fire, blown by a great pair
of Bellows, moved with a water-wheele, and so cast into pieces of a long and
thick squarenesse, from three hundred to four hundred pound weight, at which
time the owners mark is set thereupon. The last remove, is to the place of
Coynage, which I shall touch hereafter. I have already told you, how great
charge the Tynner undergoes, before he can bring his Owre to this last mill:
whereto if you add his care and cost, in buying the wood for this service, in
felling, framing, and piling it to be burned, in fetching the same, when it is
coaled, through such far, foul, and cumbersome ways, to the blowing house,
together with the blowers, two or three Months extreme and increasing labor,
sweltring heat, danger of skalding their bodies, burning the houses, casting
away the work, and lastly their ugly countenances, tanned with smoke, and
besmeared with sweat: all these things (I say) being duly considered, I know
not whether you would more marvel, either whence a sufficient gain should
arise to counteruaile so manifold expenses, or that any gain could train men
to undertake such pains and peril. But there let us leave them, since their
own will does bring them thither. During the Tinnes thus melting in the
blowing house, diverse light sparkles thereof are by the forcible wind, which
the bellows sends forth, driven up to the thatched roof. For which cause the
owners do once in seven or eight years, burn those houses, and find so much
of this light Tynne in the ashes, as pays for the new building, with a
gainefull overplus. A strange practice (certes) for thrifts sake, to set our
house on fire: Others do frame the Tunnels of the Chimnies very large and
slope, therein to harbor these sparkles, and so save the burning. This
casualtie may be worth the owner some ten pound by the year, or better, if
his Mil have store of suitors. But sithence I gathered sticks to the building
of this poor nest, Sir Francis Godolphin, (whose kind help has much advanced
this my playing labor) entertained a Duch mynerall man, and taking light from
his experience, but building thereon far more profitable conclusions of his
own invention, has practiced a more saving way in these matters, and besides,
made Tynne with good profit, of that refuse which the Tynners rejected as
nothing worth.

We will now proceed, to take a view of the orders and customs most generally
used among the Tynners.

Their works, both Stream and Load, lie either in several, or in wasirell,
that is, in enclosed grounds, or in cominons. In Several, no man can search
for Tynne, Several.
without leave first obtained from the Lord of the soil; who, when any Mine is
found, may work it wholly himself, or associate partners, or set it out at a
farm certain, or leave it un wrought at his pleasure. In Wastrell, it is
lawful for any man to make trial of his fortune Wastrel.
that way, provided, that he acknowledge the Lords right, by sharing our unto
him a certain part, which they call toll: a custom sauouring more of
indifferency, then the Tynners constitutions in Deuon, which enable them to
dig for Tynne in any man's ground, enclosed, or unclosed, without license,
tribute or satisfaction. Wherethrough it appears, that the Lawmakers rather
respected their own benefit, then equity, the true touch of all laws. The
Wastrel works are reckoned amongst chattels, and may pass by word or Will.
When a Mine is found in any such place, the first discouerer aymeth how far
it is likely to extend, and then, at the four corners of his limited
proportion, diggeth up three Turfes, and the like (if he list) on the sides,
which they term Bounding, and within that Bounds.
compass, every other man is restrained from searching. These bounds he is
bound to renew once every year, as also in most places to bestow some time in
Working the Mine, otherwise he loses this privilege. The work thus found
and bounded, look how many men doc labor therein, so many Doales or shares
they make thereof, and proportionably divide the gain and charges. Doales.
The Lord of the soil is most-where allowed liberty to place one workman in
every fifteen for himself, at like hand with the adventurers, if he be so
disposed.

They measure their black Tynne, by the Gill, the Measure.
Tapliffe, the Dish and the Foate, which contains a pint, a pottell, a
gallon, and toward two gallons.

Towns specially privileged for the Coynages, are Towns for Coynage. Times.
Helstan, Truro, Lostwithiel, and Liskerd. The times of Coynage come twice in
the year, Viz. about Midsummer and Michaelmas: but because it falls out
very often, that the Tynne which is wrought, cannot be blown and brought
thither, against the limited days, there are, in favor of the Tynners,
certain later times assigned, which they term Post-coynages. Post-coynage.
Officers.


The officers deputed to manage this Coynage, are, Porters, to bear the Tynne,
Peizers to weigh it, a Steward, Comptroller, and Receiver to keep the account,
every of which have entertainment from her Majesty, and receive a fee out of
the coined Tynne.

For the manner of Coynage: the Biockes or pieces of Coynage.
Tynne, are brought into a great room ordained for that purpose, and there
first poized, then tasted, that is, proved whether they be soft Tynne or hard,
and after, marked with her Majesty's stamp. To the hard (less worth by fifty
shillings in the thousand then the soft) the letter H. is added, e're it come
from the blowing house. Each thousand must answer forty shillings to the
Queen, which with the other incident fees being satisfied, then, and not
before, it is lawful for the owner to alienate and distract the same.

But about the price there grows much ado, between the Merchants and the
owners, before they can Price.
iumpe to an agreement. The Merchant unfolds his pack of strange news,
which either he brought with him from London (where most of them dwell) or
forged by the way, telling what great likelihood there is of wars, what
danger of Pirates at Sea, how much of the fore-bought Tynne lies on their
hands, etc. The owner, on the other side, stops his ears against these
charms, answers his news with the Spaniards, Credo en Dios, encounters his
reasons, with the present scarcity and charges of getting and working Tynne,
and so keeping up the price, Iniquum petit, vt aequum ferat. In the end, after
much bidding, and loving, varying, and delaying, commonly that Merchant who
has most money to bestow, and that owner who has most Tynne to sell, do make
the price, at which rate the Merchant is bound to yield present payment for so
much Tynne as shall be brought him, and, of necessity, must bargain for ten
thousand at the least. Others notwithstanding are not bound to buy or sell at
this price, but every man left at liberty, to make his best market.

The Tynne so sold, has usually amounted heretofore to the worth of thirty or
forty thousand pound in money, and carried price between twenty and thirty
pound the thousand, sometimes higher and sometimes lower, according to the
quick vent and abundance, or the dead sale and scarcity; wherein yet some
have observed, that this so profitable, and vendible a merchandise, rises not
to a proportionable enhauncement, with other less beneficial, and affected
commodities, and they impute it partly to the Eastern buyers packing, partly
to the owners not venting, and venturing the same.

Here I must either crave or take leave of the Londoners, Tynne Usury of
Marcha^t Londoners.
to lay open the hard dealing of their Tynne Merchants in this trade. When any
Western Gent. or person of account, wants money to defray his expenses at
London, he resorteth to one of the Tynne Merchants of his acquaintance, to
borrow some: but they shall as soon wrest the Clubbe out of Hercules fist, as
one penie out of their fingers, unless they give bond for every twenty pound
so taken in lone, to deliver a thousand pound weight of Tyn at the next
Coynage, which shall be within two or three months, or at farthest within half
a year after. At which time the price of every thousand, will not fail to be
at least twenty three, prehaps twenty five pound: yea, and after promise
made, the party must be driven (with some indignity) to make three or four
errands to his house, or he shall get the money deli^ered. In this sort, some
one Merchant will have 5. hundred pound out beforehand, reaping thereby a
double commodity, both of excessive gain for his lone, and of assurance to
be served with Tynne for his money. This they say is no Usury, forsooth,
because the price of Tynne is not certainly known beforehand: (for once only
within these twelve years, of set purpose to escape the penalty of the Law,
they brought it a little under twenty pound the thousand:) but if to take
above fifty in the hundred be extremity, whatsoever name you list to give it,
this in truth can be none other, then cutthroate and abominable dealing. I
will not condemn all such as use this trade, neither yet acquit those who
make greatest pretense of zeal in Religion: and it may be, that some upon
by-respects, find somewhat friendly usage in Vsance, at some of their hands: but
the common voice says, that for the most part, they are naught all.

And yet how bad soever this fashion may justly be Of Country dwellers.
accounted, certain of the same Countrymen do pass far beyond it, as thus:
The Merchant, that he may stand assured to have Tynne for his money, at the
time of Coynage or deliverance, besides his trade of lone abouementioned,
lays out diverse sums beforehand, unto certain Cornishmen, owners of
Tynworkes, or otherwise of known sufficiency, who are bound to deliver for
the same, so many thousands of Tynne, as the money shall amount unto, after the
price agreed upon at the Coynages. To these hungry flies, the poor laboring
Tynner resorteth, desiring some money before the time of his pay at the
deliverance: the other puts him off at first, answering he has none to spare:
in the end, when the poor man is driven through necessity to renew his suite,
he falls to questioning, what he will do with the money. Says the Tynner, I
will buy bread and meat for my self and my household, and shoes, hosen,
peticoates, and such like stuff for my wife and children. Suddenly herein,
this owner becomes a petty chapman: I will serve thee says he: he delivers
him so much ware as shall amount to forty shillings, in which he cuts him
half in half for the price, and four nobles in money, for which the poor
wretch is bound in Darbyes bonds, to deliver him two hundred weight of Tynne at
the next Coynage, which may then be worth five pound or four at the very
least. And as mischief still creepes onward, this extreme dealing of the
London Merchant and Country chapman, in white Tynne is imitated (or rather
exceeded) by the wealthier sort of Tynners themselves in the black, by laying
out their money after thus much the mark: which trade, though subtle and
dark, I will open as plainly as I can.

A foot of black Tynne (as is before said) contains in measure two gallons;
the weight uncertainly follows the goodness, A foot of good Moore-tyn,
(which is counted the best sort) will way about fourscore pound. Of the Mine
Tynne (which is meaner) fifty two pound: of the worst fifty pound. Two pound
of good black Tynne, being melted, will yield one of white: twenty eight or
thirty foot of the best, forty: of the middle, 52. of the meanest, a
thousand. Now the wealthier sort of Tynners, laying out part of their money
beforehand, buy this black Tynne of the poor laborers, after so much the
mark: that is, look how many marks there are in the price, made at the
Coynage for the thousand, so many two pence halfepenie, three pence, or four
pence, partly after the goodness, and partly according to the hard conscience
of the one, and necessity of the other, shall he have for the foot: as if the
price be twenty six pound, thirteen shillings and four pence the thousand,
therein are forty marks: then shall the poor Tynner receive of him who
deals most friendly, for every foot of his best black tynne (of which as
was said, about thirty will make a thousand) forty times four pence; viz.
thirteen shillings and four pence, which amounts to twenty pound the
thousand: whereas that foot at the price, is worth above five pence the mark.
Likewise will he pay for the meaner black Tynne (of which about forty foot
will make a thousand) three pence the mark, which is ten shillings the foot,
and so shall he have also after twenty pound for the thousand: for the worse
they give less, rateably. By which proportion, how uncertain soever the
goodness of the Tynne, or the greatness of the price do fall, their gain of
a fourth part at least rises always uncertainly. Whereto adding, that they
lay out beforehand but a portion of the money due, and that only for some
small time, you shall find it grow to the highest degree of extremity.

But whether it proceeds from this hard dealing, or for that the Tynners
whole family give themselves to a lazy kind of life, and depend only upon his
labor and gaynes; which often ill succeeding adventures, and such ouer-deare
bought Tynne daily impair, or from both these together; once it has been
duly observed, that the parishes where Tynne is wrought, rest in a meaner
plight of wealth, then those which want this dammageable commodity: and that
as by abandoning this trade, they amend, so by reviving the same, they decay
again; whereas husbandry yields that certain gain in a mediocritie, which
Tynneworkes rather promise, then perform in a larger measure.

Let us now examine what course of Justice is held for deciding such
controversies as befall in Tin causes, Privileges, and course of Justice for
Tynne causes.
and with what privileges they are endowed and encouraged.

After such time as the Jews by their extreme dealing had worn themselves,
first out of the love of the English Inhabitants, and afterward out of the
land it self, and so left the Mines unwrought, it happened, that certain
Gentlemen, being Lords of seven tithings in Blackmoore, whose grounds were best
stored with this Mineral, grew desirous to renew this benefit: and so upon
suit made to Edmond Earl of Cornwall, son to Richard king of the Romans, they
obtained from him a Charter, with sundry Privileges: amongst which, it
Charter.
was granted them to keep a Court, and hold plea of all actions, life,
lymme, and land excepted: in consideration whereof, the said Lords accorded to
pay the Earl a halfpeny for every pound of Tynne which should be wrought; and
that for better answering this tax, the said Tynne should be brought to
certain places purposely appointed, and there peized, coined, and kept, until
the Earls due were satisfied. Again, the Lords of these Tithings, were, for
their parts, authorized to manage all Stannerie causes, and, for that intent,
to hold Parliaments at their discretion, and in regard of their labor, there
was allotted unto them the toll-Tynne within those Tithings, which their
successors do yet enjoy. This Charter was to be kept in one of the Church
steeples, within those Tithings, and the Seal had a Pick-axe and Shouell in
faultier graven therein. This I received by report of the late master William
Carnsew, a Gentleman of good quality, discretion, and learning, and well
experienced in these mynerall causes, who avouched himself an eyewitness of
that Charter, though now it be not extant. Howbeit, I have learned, that in
former time, the Tynners obtained a Charter from king John, and afterward
another from king Edward the first, which were again expounded, confirmed and
enlarged by Parliament, in the fiftieth year of Edward the third, and lastly
strengthened by king Henry the seventh.

King Edward the firsts Charter, grants them liberty of selling their Tynne,
to their best behoof. Nisi (says he) nos ipsi emere voluerimus. Upon which
ground certain persons in the Reigns of K. Edward 6. and Queen Marie, sought
to make use of this preemption, (as I Preemption.
have been informed) but either crossed in the prosecution, or defeated in
their expectation, gave it over again which vain success; could not yet
discourage some others of later times from the like attempt, alleging many
reasons how it might prove beneficial both to her Highness and the Country,
and prejudicial to none save only the Merchants, who practiced a far worse
kind of preemption, as has been before expressed. This for a while was hotely
onsetted and a reasonable price offered, but (upon what ground I know not)
soon cooled again. Yet afterward it received a second life, and at
Michaelmas term 1599. the Cornishmen, then in London, were called before some
of the principal Lords of her Majesty's Council, and the matter there debated,
by the Lord Warden, in behalf of the Country, and certain others deputed for
the Merchants, who had set this suite on foot. In the end it grew to a
conclusion, and Articles were drawn and signed, but they also proved of void
effect.

Last of all, the said Lord Warden, in the beginning of November 1600. called
an assembly of Tynners at Lostwithiel, the place accustomed, impanelled a Jury
of twenty four Tynners, signified her Majesty's pleasure both for a new
imposition of six pound on every thousand, that should be transported (over
and above the former forty shillings, and sixteen shillings already payable)
as also that her Highness would disburse four thousand pound in lone to the
Tynners, for a years space, and be repayed in tynne at a certain rate.

By the foreremembred ancient Charters, there is assigned a Warden of the
Stanneries, who supplieth the place, both of a Judge for Law, and of a
Chancellor for conscience, and so takes hearing of causes, either in Forma
iuris, or de iure and aequo. He substituteth some Gentlemen in the Shire of
good calling and discretion, to be his Vice-Warden, from whom either party,
complainant or defendant, may appear to him, as from him (a case of rare
experience) to the Lords of the Council, and from their Honors to her
Majesty's person: other appeal or remoouing to the common law they gaynsay.

The Gayle for Stannery causes is kept at Lostwithiel, and that office is
annexed to the Comptrolership. Gayle.


The Tynners of the whole shire are divided into Quarters
four quarters, two called Moors, of the places where the Tynne is wrought,
viz. Foy moore, and Black moore: the other, Tiwarnaill and Penwith. To each of
these is assigned by the L. Warden, a Steward, who keeps his Court once in
every three weeks. They are termed Stannery Courts, of the latin word
Stannum, in English Tynne, and hold plea of whatsoever action of debt or
trespass, whereto any one dealing with black or white Tynne, either as
plaintiff or defendant, is a party. Their manner of trial consists in the
verdict given by a Jury Iuries.
of six Tynners, according to which the Steward pronounces judgment. He that
will spare credit to the common report, shall conceive an ill opinion touching
the slippings of both witnesses and Jurors sometimes in these Courts: For it
is said, that the witnesses have not sticked now and then to fasten their
evidence, rather for serving a turn, then for manifesting a truth, and that
the Jurors verdict has sauoured more of affection then of reason, especially,
in controversies grown between strangers and some of the same parts. And such
fault-finders voutch diverse causes of this partiality: One, that when they are
sworn, they use to add this word, my conscience, as the Romans did their Ex
animi meisententia, which is suspected to imply a conceyted enlargement of
their oath. Another, that the variety of customs, which in every place
(welneere) differ one from another, yields them in a manner an unlimited
scope, to auerre what they list, and so to close the best Lawyers mouth with
this one speech, Our custom is contrary. And lastly, that they presume upon a
kind of impunity, because these six men's iuries fall not within compass of
the Star-chambers censure, and yet the L. Wardens have now and then made the
pillory punishment of some, a spectacle, example, and warning to the residue.
For mine own part, I can in these Tynne cases, plead but a hearesay
experience, and therefore will only infer, that as there is no smoke without
a fire, so commonly the smoke is far greater then the fire. Strange it were,
and not to be excepted, that all poor Tynne Jurors and witnesses, should in
such a remote corner always conform themselves to the precise rule of
uprightness, when we see in the open light of our public assizes, so many
more judicious and substantial persons now and then to swerve from the same.

In matters of important consequence, appertayning to the whole Stannery, the
L. Warden, or his Vnderwarden, uses to impannell a Jury of four and twenty
principal Tynners, which consist of six out of every quarter, returnable by
the Majors of the four Stannery towns, and whose acts do bind the residue.

Next to the liuelesse things, follow those which partake a growing life, and
then a feeling. Things of life.


The women and children in the West part of Cornwall, do use to make Mats of a
small and fine kind of bents there growing, which for their warm and well
Growing. Mattes.
wearing, are carried by sea to London and other parts of the Realm, and serve
to cover floores and walls. These bents grow in sandy fields, and are knit from
over the head in narrow bredths after a strange fashion.

Of herbs and roots for the pot and medicine, Cornishmen enjoy a like portion
in proportion with other Herbs.
Shires, which somewhere also receives an increase by the sowing and planting
of such as are brought thither from beyond the seas. The like may be said of
roots and sallets for the table, save that (I suppose) Cornwall naturally
brings forth greater store of Seaholm and Sampire, then is found in any other
County of this Realm. The Seaholme root preserved either in sirrup, or by
cauding, is accepted for a great restoratiue. Some of the gaully grounds do
also yield plenty of Rosasolis. Moreover natures liberal hand decketh many of
the sea cliffes with wild Hissop, Sage, Pelamountayne, Maiorum, Rosemary, and
such like well-sauouring herbs.

In times past, the Cornish people gave themselves principally, (and in a manner
wholly) to the seeking of Tynne, and neglected husbandry: so as the neighbors
of Deuon and Sommerset shires, hired their pastures at a rent, and stored them
with their own cattle.

As for tillage; it came far short of feeding the Inhabitants mouths, who
were likewise supplied weekly at their markets from those places, with many
hundred quarters of corn and horseloades of bread. But when the Tynne works
began to fail, and the people to increase, this double necessity drove them
to play the good husbands, and to provide corn of their own. Labor brought
plenty, plenty, cheapnesse, Corn.
and cheapnesse sought a vent beyond the seas, some by procuring license, and
more by stealth (if at least the common brute do not wrong them with a
slander) so as, had not the Imbargo with Spain (whither most was transported)
foreclosed this trade, Cornwall was likely in few years, to reap no little
wealth by the same. And yet, whosoever looks into the endeavor which the
Cornish husbandman is driven to use about Dressing the ground
his Tillage, shall find the travel painful, the time tedious, and the
expenses very chargeable. For first, about May, they cut up all the grass of
that ground, which must newly be broken, into Turfes, which they Breaking.
call Beating. These Turfes they raise up somewhat in the midst, that the wind
and Sun may the sooner dry them. The inside turned outward dries more
speedily, but the outside can better brook the change of weather. After they
have been thoroughly dried, the Husbandman pileth them in little heaps, and so
burns them to ashes.

Then do they bring in Sea sand, of greater or lesser Sanding.
quantity, partly after their neerenesse to the places, from which it is
fetched, and partly by the good husbandry, and ability of the Tiller. An
ordinary Horse will carry two sackes of Sand, and of such the borderers on the
Sea, do bestow, 60. at least, in every Acre, but most Husbands double that
number. The Inland soil requires not so large a proportion, and in some
places, they sow it almost as thin as their Corn: for if they should strew
the same very thick, the ground would become ouer-rancke, and choke the Corn
with weeds. A little before plowing time, they scatter abroad those
Beat-boroughs, and small Sand heaps upon the ground, which afterward, by the
Ploughes turning down, give heat to the root of the Corn. The tillable
fields are in some places so hilly, that the Oxen can hardly take sure footing;
in some, so tough, that the Plough will scarcely cut them, and in some so
shelfie, that the Corn has much ado to fasten his root. The charges of this
Beating, Burning, Scoding and Sanding, ordinarily amounts to no less then
twenty shillings for every Acre: which done, the Tiller can commonly take but
two crops of Wheat, and two of Oats, Crops.
and then is driven to give it at least seven or eight years leyre, and to make
his breach elsewhere.

Of Wheat there are two sorts, French, which is bearded, and requires the
best soil, recompencing Kinds of grain.
the same with a profitable plenty: and Notwheate, so termed, because it is
vnbearded, contented with a meaner earth, and contenting with a suitable gain.

Rye is employed only on those worst grounds, which will bear no Wheat.
Barley is grown into great use of late years, so as now they till a larger
quantity in one Hundred, then was in the whole Shire before: and of this, in
the dear seasons past, the poor found happy benefit, for they were
principally relieved, and the laborers also fed, by the bread made thereof;
whereas otherwise, the scarcity of Wheat fell out so great, that these must
have made many hungry meals, and those outright have starued. In the
Westerne-most parts of Cornwall, they carry their Barley to the Mill, within
eight or nine weeks from the time that they sowed it; such an hasty ripening
do the bordering Seas afford. This increase of Barley tillage, has also
amended the Cornish drink, by converting that gain into Malt, which (to the
il relishing of strangers) informer times they made only of Oats.

I have been always prone to maintain a Paradox, that dearth of corn in
Cornwall (for with other Shires I will not undertake to meddle) so it go not
accompanied with a scarcity, is no way prejudicial to the good of the
Country; and I am induced thus to think, for the reasons ensuing: There are
no two trades, which set so many hands on work, at all times of the year, as
that one of Tillage. The Husband man finding profit herein, is encouraged to
bestow pains and charges, for enclosing and dressing of waste grounds, which
therethrough afterward become also good for pasture. With the ready money,
gotten by his weekly selling of corn, he sets the Artificer on work, who
were better to buy dear bread, being but a part of his meat, and which he
cou^teruaileth again, by raising the price of his ware, then to sit idly,
knocking his heels against the wall. Their objection, who fear least the
transporting of much away, will leave too little at home, I answer with this
observation: When the price of corn falls, men generally give over surplus
Tillage, and break no more ground, then will serve to supply their own
turn: the rest, they employ in grazing, wherethrough it falls out, that an
ill kerned or saved Harvest, soon emptieth their old store, and leaves them
in necessity, to seek new relief from other places. Whereas on the other
side, if through hope of vent, they hold on their larger tillage, this
retains one years provision underhand, to fetch in another, which upon such
occasions, my easily be left at home: and of this, what Cornishman is there,
that has not seen the experience?

For Fruits, both wild, as Whurts, Strawberies, and Raspies, and longing to
the Orchard, as Pears, Plums, Fruits
Peareplummes, Cherries, Mulberies, Chessenuts, and Walnuts, though the meaner
sort come short, the Gentlemen step not far behind those of other parts; many
of them conceiving like delight to graffe and plant, and the soil yielding it
self as ready to receive and foster. Yet one special privilege, which the
neerenesse to the South, the fitness of some grounds standing upon lyme
stones, the well growing of Vines, and the pleasant taste of their Grapes, do
seem to grant, I have not hitherto known by any to be put in practice, and
that is, the making of Wines: the trial would require little cost, and
(perhaps) requite it with great advantage.

For fuel, there grows generally in all parts great Fuel.
store of furze, of which the shrubby sort is called tame, the better grown,
French, and in some, good quantity of Broom. The East quarters of the Shire
are not destitute of Copswoods, nor they of (almost) on intolerable Woods.
price: but in most of the West, either nature has denied that commodity, or
want of good husbandry lost it. Their few parcels yet preserved, are
principally employed to coaling, for blowing of Tynne. This lack they supply,
either by Stone cole, fetched out of Wales, or by dried Turfes, some of which
are also converted into coal, to serve the Tynners turn.

Timber has in Cornwall, as in other places, taken an Timber.
universal down fall, which the Inhabitants begin now, and shall hereafter
rue more at leisure: Shipping, howsing, and vessel, have bred this
consumption: neither does any man (welnere) seek to repair so apparent and
important a decay. As for the statute Standles, commonly called Hawketrees, the
breach of the sea, and force of the weather do so pare and gall them, that
they can pass under no better title then scat-crowes.

Among creatures of a breathing life, I will only note Brething life.
such as minister some particular cause of remembrance.

Touching venomous Worms, Cornwall can plead no such Charter of natures
exemption as Ireland. The Worms.
country people retain a conceit, that the Snakes, by their breathing about
a hazell wand, doemake a stone Snakes stones.
ring of blew color, in which there appears the yellow figure of a Snake,
and that beasts which are stung, being given to drink of the water wherein this
stone has been soked, will therethrough recover. There was such a one bestowed
on me, and the giver auowed to have seen a part of the stick sticking in it:
but Penes authorem sit sides.

This mention of Snakes, calls to my remembrance, how not long since, a merry
Cornish Gentleman tried Martin Trewynard.
that old fable to be no fable, which shows the dangerous entertayning of
such a ghest. For he having gotten one of that kind, and broken out his teeth
(wherein consists his venom) used to carry him about in his bosom, to set
him to his mouth, to make him lick his spittle, and when he came amongst
Gentle women, would cast him out suddenly, to put them in fear: but in the
end, their vain dread proved safer then his foole-hardinesse: for as he once
walked alone, and was kissing this gentle playfellow, the Snake in good
earnest, with a stumpe, either newly grown up, or not fully pulled out, bit
him fast by the tongue, which therewith began so to rankle and swell, that by
the time he had knocked this foul player on the head, and was come to his
place of abode, his mouth was scarce able to contain it. Feign was he therefore
to show his mishap, and by gestures to crave aydin earnest of the Gentlewomen,
whom he had aforetime often scared in sport.

Of all manner vermin, Cornish houses are most pestred Rats.
with Rats, a brood very hurtful for devouring of meat, clothes, and writings
by day; and alike cumbersome through their crying and rattling, while they
dance their gallop gallyards in the roof at night.

Strangers, at their first coming into the West parts, do complain that they
are visited with the slow Lice.
sixe-legged walkers, and yet the cleanely home-borne find no such annoyance.
It may proceed from some lurking natural effect of the Climate; as we read,
that the trauailers who pass the Equinoctial, do there lose this manlike
hunting vermin, and upon their return recover them again.

The other beasts which Cornwall breeds, serve either for Venerie, or
meat, or necessary uses. Beasts of Venery persecuted for their case, or
dammagefeasance, are Marternes, Squirrels, Foxes, Badgers, and Otters.
Profitable for skin and flesh, Hares, Conies and Dear. The Fox planteth his
dwelling in the steep cliffes by the sea Foxes.
side; where he possesses holds, so many in number, so dangerous for access,
and so full of windings, as in a manner it falls out a matter impossible to
disseyze him of this his ancient inheritance. True it is, that sometime when he
marches abroad on forraying, to reuittaile his Male pardus, the Captain
hunters, discovering his sallies by their Espyals, do lay their souldier-like
Hounds, his borne enemies, in ambush between him and home, and so with Har and
Tue pursue him to the death. Then master Reignard ransacketh every corner of
his wily skonce, and besturteth the utmost of his nimble stumps to quit his
coat from their jaws. He crosses brooks, to make them lose the sent, he
slippeth into couerts, to steal out of sight, he casts and coasteth the
Country, to get the start of the way; and if he be so met, at he find
himself ouermatched, he abides, and bids them battle, first sending the
mire of his tail against their eyes, in lieu of shot, and then manfully
ofosing at hand-blowes, with the sword of his teeth, not forgetting yet, the
whiles, to make an honorable retraict, with his face still turned toward the
enemy: by which means, having once recovered his fortress, he then gives the
Fico, to all that his adversaries can by siedge, force, mine, sword, assault,
or famine, attempt against him.

The Otters, though one in kind, have yet two several places of haunt: some
keep the Cliffes, and there Otters.
breed, and feed on Seafish; others live in the fresh ryuers, and trade not
so far down, who being less stored with provision, make bold now and then
to visit the land, and to break their fast, upon the goodmans Lambs, or the
good wives pultrie.

Of Conies, there are here and there some few little Warrens, scantly worth the
remembering.

Cornwall was stored not long since with many Parkes of fallow Dear. But king
Henry the eight being persuaded Dear fallow.
(as it is said) by Sir Richard Pollard, that those belonging to the Duke,
could steed him with little pleasure in so remote a part, and would yield him
good profit, if they were leased out at an improoued root did condescend to
their disparking. So four of them took a fall together, to wit, Carykullock,
Liskerd, Restoxmel and Lanteglos. Howbeit, this good husbandry came short of
the (...) promise, and the Kings expectation where through the one was sh^^^
for the attempt, and the other discontented with the effect. Not withstanding,
as Princes exampls are ever taken for warrantable precedents to the subjects:
so most of the Cornish Gentlemen preferring gain to delight, or making gain
their delight, shortly after followed the like practice, and made their Dear
leap over the Pale to give the bullockes place.

Parkes yet remaining, are in East Hundred, Poole, Sir Parkes.
Jonathan Trelawnyes: newly revived, Halton, M. Rouses, lately impaled: and
Newton, M. Coringtons, almost decayed. In West Hundred, Boconnock, Sir Reginald
Mohuns. In Powder Hundred, Caryhayes, M. Treuanions. In Stratton Launcels, M.
Chamonds. In Kene-Hundred, Trela warren, M. Viruans: and Merther, M. Reskymers.

Red Dear, this Shire breeds none, but only receives Red dear
such, as in the Summer season raunge thither out of Deuon: to whom the
Gentlemen bordering on their haunt, afford so course entertainment, that
without better pleading their heels, they are feign to deliver up their
carcases for a pledge, to answer their trespasses.

Beasts serving for meat only, are Pigs, Goats, Sheep, and Rother cattle.
For meat, draught, and plowing, Oxen: for carriage, and riding, horses: for
guard, attendance, and pleasure, Dogs of sundry sorts.

What time the Shire, through want of good manurance, lay waste and open, the
Sheep had generally Sheep.
little bodies, and course fleeces, so as their Wool bare no better name, then
of Cornish hair, and for such has (from all auncientie) been transported,
without paying custom. But since the grounds began to receive enclosure and
dressing for Tillage, the nature of the soil has altered to a better grain,
and yields nourishment in greater abundance, and goodness, to the beasts
that pasture thereupon: So as, by this means (and let not the owners
commendable industry, turn to their surcharging prejudice, least too soon
they grow weary of well doing) Cornish Sheep come but little behind the
Eastern flocks, for bigness of mould, finenesse of Wool, often breeding,
speedy fatting, and price of sale, and in my conceyte equal, if not exceed
them in sweetness of taste, and freedom from rottenness and such other
contagions. As for their number, while every dweller has some, though none
keep many, it may sum the total to a jolly rate. Most of the Cornish sheep
have no horns, whose wool is finer in quality, as that of the horned more in
quantity: yet, in some places of the County there are that carry four
horns.

The Deuon and Somerset shire grasiers, feed yearly Cattle.
great droues of Cattle in the North quarter of Cornwall, and utter them at
home, which notwithstanding, Beef, Whitsull, Leather or Tallow, bear not any
extraordinary price in this County, beyond the rate of other places: and yet,
the opportunity of so many Havens, tempts the Merchants (I doubt me, beyond
their power of resistaunce) now and then to steal a transportation, and
besides, utters no small quantity for the reuitailing of weather-driuen
ships. Some Gentlemen suffer their b^^stes to run wild, in their Woods and
waste grounds, where they are hunted and killed with Cross howes, and Pieces,
in the manner of Deene, and by their fierceness, and wariness, see me to have
put on a part of the others nature. Each Ox has his several name, upon which
the driuers call aloud, both to direct and give them courage as they are at
work.

The Cornish horses, commonly are hardly bred, Horses.
coursely fed, low of stature, quick in travel, and (after their growth and
strength) able enough for continuance: which sort prove most serviceable for a
rough and hilly Country. But very few of them (through the owners fault)
retain long this their natural goodness. For after two years age, they use
them to carry sackes of Sand, which boweth down, and weakneth their backs,
and the next Summer they are employed in harrowing, which marreth their pace.
Two means that so quail also their stomachs, and abate their strength, as
the first rider finds them ouer-broken to his hands. Howbeit now, from
naught, they are almost come to naught: For since the Statute 12. of Henry the
eight, which enableth every man to seize upon horses that pastured in Commons,
if they were under a certain sise, the Sherifes officers, reckoning themselves
specially privileged to poll in their masters year, have of late times,
whether by his commandment, or sufferance, accustomed to drive those waste
grounds, and to seize on those not voluntariestatute-breaking Tits, so as
nature denying a great harace, and these carrying away the little, is rests,
that hereafter, not the dammes Foale, but the dames Trottens, be trusted unto.
This consideration has made me entertain a concelte, that ordinary
Husbandmen should do well to quit breeding of Horses and betake themselves to
Moyles: for that is Moyles.
a beast, which will fare hardly, live very long, draw indifferently well,
and carry great burdens, and has also a pace swift, and casie enough, for
their Mill and market service. By which means, look what is abated from the
usual number of Hacknies, should (with a gainefull recompense) be added to
their goodness: and hereof this quarter has already taken some experiment.
For, not long sithence, it happened that one brought over an he Ass, from
France, because of the strangeness of the beast (as every thing where it
comes first, serves for a wonder) who following his kind, begat many monsters,
viz. Moyles, and for monsters indeed, the Country people admired them, yea,
some were so wise, as to knock on the head, or give away this issue of his
race, as uncouth mongrels.

Amongst living things on the land, after beasts, follow Birds, who seek
harbor on the earth at night, Birds.
though the air be the greatest place of their haunt by day.

Of tame Birds, Cornwall has Doves, Geese, Ducks, Peacockes, Ginney duckes,
China geese, Barbary hens, and such like.

Of wild, Quail, Rail, Partridge, Fesant, Plouer, Snyte, Wood-doue,
Heathcocke, Powte, etc.

But, amongst all the rest, the Inhabitants are most beholden to the
Woodcockes, who (when the season Woodcockes.
of the year affords) stock to them in great abundance. They arrive fast
on the North-coast, where almost every hedge serves for a Road, and every
plashoote for Springles to take them. From whence, as the moist places which
supply them food, begin to freeze up, they draw toward those in the South
coast, which are kept more open by the Summers nearer neighborhood: and when
the Summers heat (with the same effect from a contrary cause) dries up those
plashes, nature and necessity guide their return to the Northren wetter soil
again.

Of Hawks, there are Marlions, Sparhawkes, Hobbies, Hawks.
and somewhere Lannards. As for the Sparhawk, though she serve to fly little
above six weeks in the year, and that only at the Partridge, where the
Faulkner and Spanels must also now and then spare her extraordinary
assistance; yet both Cornish and Deuon shire men employ so much travail in
seeking, watching, taking, manning, nusling, dreting, curing, bathing,
carrying, and mewing them, as it must needs proceed from a greater folly,
that they cannot discern their folly herein. To which you may add, their
busy, dangerous, discourteous, yea, and sometimes despiteful stealing one from
another of the Eggs and young ones, who, if they were allowed to air
naturally, and quietly, there would be store sufficient, to kill not only the
Partridges, but even all the good-huswiues Chickens in a Country.

Of singing Birds, they have Lynnets, Goldfinches, Ruddockes, Canarie birds,
Blacke-birds, Thrushes, and diverse other; but of Nightingals, few, or none at
all, whether through some natural antipathie, between them and the foil (as
Pliny writes, that Crete sostereth not any Owls, nor Rhodes Eagles, nor
Larius lacus in Not. Hist. li. 10.
Italy Storkes) or rather for that the Country is generally bare of covert and
woods, which they effect, I leave to be discussed by others.

Not long sithence, there came a flock of Birds into Cornwall, about Harvest
season, in bigness not much exceeding a Sparrow, which made a foul spoil of
the Apples Their bills were thwarted crosse-wise at the end, and with these they
would cut an Apple in two, at one snap, eating only the kernels. It was taken
at first, for a forboden token, and much admired, but, soon after, notice
grew, that Gloucester Shire, and other Apple Countries, have them an
ouer-familiar harm.

In the West parts of Cornwall, during the Winter season, Swallows are found
sitting in old deep Tynneworkes, and holes of the sea Cliffes; but touching
their Swallows
lurking places, Olaus Magnus makes a far stranger report. Lib 9. Chapter 29.
For he says, that in the North parts of the world, as Summer wears out,
they clap mouth to mouth, wing to wing, and leg in leg, and so after a
sweet singing, fall down into certain great lakes or pooles amongst the
Canes, from whence at the next Spring, they receive a new resurrection; and he
adds for proof hereof, that the Fishermen, who make holes in the Ice, to dip
up such fish with their nets, as refort thither for breathing, do sometimes
light on these Swallows, congealed in clods, of a slymie substance, and that
carrying them home to their Stoues, the warmth restores them to life and
flight: this I have seen confirmed also, by the relation of a Venetian
Ambaffadour, employed in Poland, and heard auowed by trauaylers in those parts:
Wherethrough I am induced to give it a place of probability in my mind, and of
report in this treatise.

After having thus laid open every particular of the land, natural order
leads my next labor, to be employed about the water, and the things
incident thereunto: Water.
the water I sever into fresh and salt.

Touching fresh Water, every hill wel-neere sends Fresh springs.
forth plentiful, fresh, clear, and pleasant springs, all profitable for
moystning the ground, and wholesome for man's use, and diverse by running through
veins of metals, supposed also medicinable for sundry diseases; of which
more in their particular places. These springs, (as several persons
assembling, make a multitude) take advantage of the falling grounds, to unite
in a greater strength, and beget Ryuers, which yet are more Rivers.
in number, and swifter in course, then deep in bottom, or extended in
largeness. For they work out their bed through an earth, full of Rocks and
stones, suting therethrough, the nature only of some special fishes, of which
kind are, Minowes, Shoats, Eeles, and Lampreys. The rest are common to other
Shires, but the Shote in a manner peculiar to Deuon and Cornwall, in shape and
color he resembles the Trowt: howbeit in bigness and goodness, comes
far behind him. His baits are flies and Tag-wormes, which the Cornish
English term Angle-touches. Of the Ryuers and Havens which they make, occasion
will be ministered us to speak particularly in the next book; and therefore it
shall suffice to name the chiefest here in general, which are on the South
coast: Tamer, Tauy, Liner, Seaton, Loo, Foy, Fala, Lo. On the North, Camel,
Halae.

Of fresh water Ponds, either cast out by nature, or Ponds.
wrought out by Art, Cornwall is stored with very few, though the site of so
many narrow valleys offers many, with the only charge of raising an head.
But the Oceans plentiful beams darken the affecting of this S^a.
petty starlight: touching whose nature and properties, for his saltness in
taste, strength in bearing, course in ebbing and flowing, the effects are so
well known to the vulgar, as they need not any particular relation; and the
causes so controuersed amongst the learned, as it passes mine ability to
moderate the question: only this I will note, that somewhat before a tempest,
if the seawater be flashed with a stick or Oar, the same casts a bright
shining color, and the drops thereof resemble sparckles of fire, as if the
waves were turned into flames, which the Sailors term Briny. Briny.


Amongst other commodities affoorded by the sea, the Inhabitants make use of
diverse his creekes, for griste-milles, by thwarting a bancke from side to side,
Salt mils.
in which a floud-gate is placed with two leaves: these the flowing tide
opens, and after full sea, the weight of the ebb closes fast, which no
other force can do: and so the imprisoned water pays the ransom of dryuing
an vnder-shoote wheel for his enlargement.

Islands, S. Nicholas in the mouth of Plymmouth, S. George before Loo, S.
Michaels Mount, and the Isles of Scilley.

Havens on the South coast there are, Plymmouth, Loo, Foy, Falmouth, Helford,
and the Rode of Mountsbay. On Havens.
the North, S. Ies, and Padstowe, of which more hereafter.

Diverse of these are daily much endammaged by the earth which the Tynners cast
up in their working, and the rain floods wash down into the rivers, from
whence it is discharged in the havens, and shouldreth the sea out of his
ancient possession, or at least, encrocheth upon his depth. To remedy this, an
Act of Parliament was made 23. H. 8. that none should labor in Tynneworks,
near the Deuon and Cornish havens: but whether it aimed not at the right
cause, or has not taken his due execution, little amendment appears thereby
for the present, and less hope may be conceived for the future.

Yet this earth being through such means converted into sand, enricheth the
husbandman equally with that Saud.
of Pactolus: for after the sea has seasoned it with his salt and fructifying
moisture, his waves work up to the shore a great part thereof (together with
more of his own store, grated from the cliffes) and the Tillers, some by
Barges and Boats, others by horses and waines, do fetch it, and therewith
dress their grounds. This sand is of diverse kinds, colors, and goodness:
the kinds, some bigger, some lesser; some hard, some easy. The colors are
answereable to the next Cliffes. The goodness increases as it is taken
farther out of the Sea.

Some have also used to carry up into their grounds the Ose or salt water
mudde, and found good profit thereby, though not equalling the sand.

To this purpose also serves Orewood, which is a Orewood
weed either growing upon the rocks under high water mark, or broken from the
bottom of the sea by rough weather, and cast upon the next shore by the wind
and flood. The first sort is reaped yearly, and thereby bettereth in quantity
and quality: the other must be taken when the first tide brings it, or else
the next change of wind will carry it away. His use serves for barley land.
Some accustomed to burn it on heaps in pits at the cliffe side, and so
converted the same to a kind of wood, but the noy some favor has cursed it
out of the country. This Floteore is now and then found naturally formed like
rufs, combs, and such like: as if the sea would equal us in apparel, as it
resembles the land for all sorts of living creatures.

The sea strond is also strowed with sundry fashioned Shelles and Nuts.
and colored shells, of so diuersified and pretty workmanship, as if Nature
were for her pastime disposed to show her skilin trifles. With these are found
moreover, certain Nuts, some what resembling a sheep kidney, save that they
are flatter: the outside consists of a hard dark colored rind: the inner
part, of a kernel void of any paste, but not so of virtue, especially for
women trauayling in childbirth, if at least, old wives tales may deserve any
credit. If I become blameworthy in speaking of such toys, Scipio and Lelius
shall serve for my patrons, who held it no shame to spend time in their
gathering.

But to carry you from these trifles, you shall understand, that Cornwall is
stored with many sorts of shipping, (for that term is the genus to them all)
namely, Shipping.
they have Cock-boats for passengers, Sayn-boats for taking of Pilcherd,
Fisher-boates for the coast, Barges for sand, Lighters for burden, and Barks
and Ships for traffic: of all which severally to particularize, were
consectari minutias, and therefore I will omit to discourse of them, or of the
wrackes proceeding from them, to their great damage, and the finders petty
benefit, to Wrack.
whom, he that in ioyeth the Admirals right, by the common custom allows a
moytie for his labor.

But though I shun tediousness herein, I fear lest Fish.
I shall breed you Nauseam, while I play the fishmonger: and yet, so large a
commodity may not pass away in silence. I will therefore, with what briefnes
I can, show you, what they are, when they come, where they haunt, with what
bait they may be trained, with what engine taken, and with what dressing saved.

Herein we will first begin with the Peall, Trowt, and Sammon, because they
partake of both salt and fresh water, breeding in the one, and living in the
other.

The Trowte and Peall come from the Sea, between Trowte and Peall.
March and Midsummer, and pass up into the fresh ryuers, to shed their spawne.
They are mostly taken with a hooke-net, made like the Eastern Weelyes, which
is placed in the stickellest part of the stream (for there the fish chiefly
seeks passage) and kept abroad with certain hoopes, having his smaller end
fastened against the course of the water, and his mouth open to receive the
fish, while he fares up by night.

The Sammons principal access, is between Michaelm Sammons
as and Christmas: for then, and not before, the ryners can afford them
competent depth. A time forbidden to take them in, by the Statute thirteen of
Richard the second: but if they should be allowed this privilege in Cornwall,
the Inhabitants might utterly quit all hope of good by them, for the rest of
the year. They are refettest (that is fattest) at their first coming from the
Sea, and pass up as high as any water can carry them, to spawne the more
safely, and, to that end, take advantage of the great raynie floods. After
Christmas, they return to the Sea, altogether spent and out of season, whom,
as the spring time commethon, their fry do follow: and it has been observed,
that they (as also the Trowt and Peall) haunt the same ryuers where they first
were bred. Upon the North coast, and to the Westwards of Foy, few or none are
taken, either through those ryuers shallowness, or their secret dislike. To
catch them, sundry devices are put in practice: one is, with the hook and
line, where they use Flies for their bait: another, with the Sammon spear, a
weapon like Neptunes Mace, bearded at the points. With this, one stands
watching in the dark night, by the deep pooles, where the Sammons work their
bed for spawning, while another makes light with a waze of reed. The Sammon
naturally resorteth to the flame, playing in and out, and there through is
discerned, strooken and drawn on land by a cord fastened to the spear. The
third and more profitable means of their taking, is by hutches. A head of
Fagots, or stones, is made acrosse theryuer, and his greatest part let out,
through a square room therein, whose upper side gives passage to the water by
a grate, but denies it to the fish, and the lower admits his entry, through
certain thick laths, couched slope-wise one against another, but so narrowly,
as he can find no way of return, while the stream tosseth him hither and
thither, and the laths ends gall him, if he stumble on the place.

They use also to take Sammons and Trowts, by groping, tickling them under the
bellies, in the Pooles where they houer, until they lay hold on them with
their hands, and so throw them on land. Touching these, one scribbling of the
river Lyner, rymed as ensues:

THe storehouse of Suns cheuisance,
The clock whose measures time does dance,
The Moons vassal, the Lord of chance,
Oceanus;

Ereyeeres compass his circle end,
From bugie bosom, where they wend,
His scaly brood to greet does send,
His wife Tellus.

Some hail but with the coasting shore,
Some multiply the Harbors store,
Some far into the ryuers bore,
Amongst therest.

A threefoldrowt, of Argus hew,
Kind to increase, foes to eschew,
With Lyners supple mantle blew,
Themselves reuest.

What time, enricht by Phoebus rays, It is said, that the fish comes, when
the Alder leaf is grown to the breadth of a groate.

The Alder his new wealth displayes
Of budded groates, and welcome pays
Unto the Spring,

The Trowts, of middle growth begin,
And eygall peizd, twixt either finne,
At wonted host Dan Lyners Inn,
Take their lodging.

Next, as the days up early rise,
In com's the Peall, whose smaller sise,
In his more store, and often supplies,
A praise does find.

Lastly, the Sammon, king of fish,
Fills with good cheer the Christmas dish,
Teaching that season must relish.
Each in his kind.

And of the Sammon in particular.
Now to the Sammon, king of fish, a trice,
Against whose state, both skill and will conspire,
Pain brings the sewell, and gain blowts the fire,
That hand may execute the heads device.
Some build his house, but his thence issue bar,
Some make his meashie bed, but reaue his rest:
Some give him meat, but leave it not digest,
Some tickle him, but are from pleasing far.
Another troop com's in with fire and sword,
Yet cowardly, close counterwaite his way,
And where he does in stream, mistrustiesse play,
Veiled with nights robe, they stalk the shore aboard.
One offers him the daylight in a waze,
As if darkness alone contrived wiles:
But new Neptune, his mate, at land, the whiles,
With forked Mace, dear school's his foolish gaze.
Poor Fish, not praying, that art made a pray,
And at thy native home find'st greatest harm,
Though dread warn, swiftness guide, and strength thee arm,
Thy neerenesse, greatness, goodness, thee betray.
In the Havens, great store, and diverse sorts of fish, Haven fish.
some at one time of the year, and some at another, do haunt the depthes and
shallowes, while the lesser fly the greater, and they also are pursued by a
bigger, each preying one upon another, and all of them adcustoming, once in the
year, to take their kind of the fresh water. They may be divided into three
kinds, shell, star, and round fish. Of shell fish, there are Wrinkles, Limpets,
Cockles, Muscles, Shrimps, Crabs, Lobsters, and Oysters.

Of flat fish, Rays, Thorn-backes, Soles, Flowkes, Dabs, Playces.

Of round fish, Brit, Sprat, Barn, Smelts, Whiting, Scad, Chad, Sharkes,
Cudles, Eeles, Conger, Basse, Miller, Whirlepole, and Porpose. The general way
of Taking general.
killing these (that is the Fishermans bloody term, for this cold-blouded
creature) is by Wears, Hakings, Saynes, Tuckes, and Tramels.

The Wear is a frith, reaching slope-wise through Wear.
the Ose, from the land to low water mark, and having in it, a bunt or cod
with an eye-hooke, where the fish entering, upon their coming back with the
ebb, are stopped from issuing out again, forsaken by the water, and left dry
on the Ose.

For the Haking, certain stakes are pitched in the Haking.
Ose at low water, athwart some Creek, from shore to shore, to whose feet
they fasten a Net, and at fulsea draw the upper part thereof to their stops,
that the fish may not retire with the ebb, but be taken, as in the Wears.

The Said is a net, of about forty fathom in length, Said.
with which they encompasse a part of the Sea, and draw the same on land by
two ropes, fastened at his ends, together with such fish, as lights within his
precinct.

The Tucke carries a like fashion, save that it is narrower Tucke.
meashed, and (therefore scarce lawful) with a long bunt in the midst: the
Tramel differs not much from the shape of this bunt, and serves to such use
as Tramell.
the Wear and Haking.

The particular taking of sundry kinds of fishes, is almost as diverse as
themselves. Wrinckles, Limpete, Particular taking
Cockles, and Muscles, are gathered by hand, upon the rocks and sands. Many of
the Crabs breed in the shells of Cockles, and of the Lobsters in those of
Wrinkles, as my self have seen: being grown, they come forth, and live in
holes of Rocks, from whence, at low water, they are dragged out, by along
crook of iron.

The Shrimps are dipped up in shallow water by the shore side, with little
round nets, fastened to a staff, not much unlike that which is used for daring
of Larkes.

The Oysters (besides gathering by hand, at a great ebb) have a peculiar
dredge, which is a thick strong Oysters.
net, fastened to three spils of iron, and drawn at the boats stern,
gathering whatsoever it meets, lying in the bottom of the water, out of
which, when it is taken up, they cull the Oysters, and cast away the residue,
which they term guard, and serves as a bed for the Oysters to breed in. It is
held, that there are of them male, and female. The female, about May, and June,
have in them a certain kind of milk, which they then shead, and whereof the
Oyster is engendered. The little ones, at first, cleave in great numbers, to
their mothers shell, from whence, waxing bigger, they weane themselves, and
toward Michaelmas, fall away. The Country people long retained a conceit,
that in Summer time they wear out of kind (as in deed the milkie are) but some
Gentlemen making experiment of the contrary, began to eat them at all
seasons, wherethrough, by spending them oftener and in greater quantity, by
spoiling the little ones, and by casting away the unseasonable, there ensued a
scarcity, which scarcity brought a dearth, the dearth bred a sparing, and the
sparing restored a plenty again. They have a property, though taken out of
the water, to open against the flood time, and to close upon the ebb, or
before, if they be touched, the which, not long sithence occasioned a
ridiculous chance, while one of them through his sudden shutting, caught in
his own defense, three young Mice by the heads, that of malice prepensed, had
conspired to devour him, and so trebled the valor of the cleft block, which
griped Milo by the hands.

Nature has strowed the shore with such plenty of these Shel-fishes, as
thereby she warranteth the poor from dread of staruing: for every day they
may gather sufficient to preserve their life, though not to please their
appetite, which, ordinary with us, was miraculous to the Rochellers in their
siedge 1572.

After Shel-fish succeeds the free-fish, so termed, because he wants this
shelly bulwark.

Amongst these, the Flowk, Sole and Playce follow the tide up into the fresh
rivers, where, at low water the Country people find them by treading, as
they wade to seek them, and so take them up with their hands. They use also to
poche them with an instrument somewhat like the Sammon-speare.

Of Eeles there are two sorts: the one Valsen, of best taste, coming from the
fresh rivers, when the great rain floods after September do break their
beds, and carry them into the sea: the other, bred in the salt water, and
called a Conger Eele, which afterward, as his bigness increases, ventreth out
into the maine Ocean, and is enfranchised a Burgess of that vast
commonwealth: but in harbor they are taken mostly by Spillers made of a cord,
many fathoms in length, to which diverse lesser and shorter are tied at a little
distance, and to each of these a hook is fastened with bayt: this Spiller they
sincke in the sea where those Fishes have their accustomed haunt, and the next
morning take it up again with the beguiled fish.

For catching of Whiting and Basse, they use a thread, so named, because it
consists of a long small line with a hook at the end, which the Fisherman
lets slip out of his hand by the Boat side to the bottom of the water, and
feeling the fish caught by the sturring of the line, draws it up again with
his purchase. The Porposes are shaped very big and black. These chase the
smaller schoels of fish from the main sea into the havens, leaping up and
down in the water, tail after top, and one after another, puffing like a fat
lubber out of breath, and following the fish with the flood, so long as any
depth will serve to bear them; by which means they are sometimes intercepted:
for the Borderers watching until they be past far up into some narrow
creek, get below them with their Boats, and cast a strong corded net athwart
the stream, with which, and their loud and continual showting and noise
making, they fray and stop them from retyring, until the ebb have abandoned
them to the hunters mercy, who make short work with them, and (by an old
custom) share them amongst all the assistants with such indifferency, as if a
woman with child be present, the babe in her womb is gratified with a
portion: a point also observed by the Spearehunters in taking of Sammons.

Now from within harbor, we will launch out into Fish on the coast.
the deep, and see what luck of fish God there shall send us, which (so you
talk not of Hares or such uncouth things, for that proves as ominous to the
fisherma^, as the beginning a voyage on the day when Childermas day fell, does
to the Mariner) may succeed very profitable: for the coast is plentifully
stored, both with those foreremembred, enlarged to a bigger size, and diverse
other, as namely of shelfish, Sea-hedge-hogs, Scallops and Sheathfish. Of flat,
Brets, Turbets, Dornes, Holybut. Round, Pilcherd, Herring, Pollock, Mackrell,
Gurnard, Illeck, Tub, Breame, Oldwife, Hake, Dogfish, Lounp, Cunner, Rockling,
Cod, Wroth, Becket, Haddock, Guilthead, Rough-hound, Squary Scad, Seal,
Tunny, and many others, quosnunc, etc.

The Sheath, or Rasor-fish, resembles in length and bigness a man's finger,
and in taste, the Lobster, but reputed of greater restoratiue.

The Sea-hedge-hogge, of like or more goodness, is enclosed in a round shell,
fashioned as a loaf of bread, handsomely wrought and pincked, and guarded by an
utter skin full of prickles, as the land Vrchin. But the least fish in
bigness, greatest for gain, and most in number, is the Pilcherd: they come to
take their kind of the fresh (as the rest) between harvest and Alhallontyde,
and were wont to pursue the Brit, upon which they feed, into the havens, but
are now forestalled on the coast by the Drouers and Sayners. The Drouers hang
certain square nets athwart the tide, thorovv which the schoell of Pilchard
passing, leave many behind entangled in the meashes. When the nets are so
filled, the Drouers take them up, cleanse them, and let them fall again.

The Sayners complain with open mouth, that these drouers work much
prejudice to the Commonwealth of fishermen, and reap thereby small gain to
themselves: for (say they) the taking of some few, breaks and scatters the
whole schoels, and frayeth them from approaching the shore: neither are those
thus taken, marchantable, by reason of their brusing in the meash. Let the
crafts-masters decide the controversy.

The Said, is in fashion, like that within harbor, but of a far larger
proportion. To each of these, there Saynes.
commonly belong three or four boats, carrying about six men apeece: with
which, when the season of the year and weather serves, they lie houering upon
the coast, and are directed in their work, by a Balker, or Huer, who stands
on the Cliffe side, and from thence, best discerns the quantity and course
of the Pilcherd: according whereunto, he cundeth (as they call it) the Master
of each boar (who has his eyestill fixed upon him) by crying with a loud
voice, whistling through his fingers, and wheazing certing diuersified and
significant signs, with a bush, which he holds in his hand. At his
appointment they cast out their Net, draw it to either hand, as the Schoell
lies, or fares, beat with their Oars to keep in the Fish, and at last,
either close and tucke it up in the Sea, or draw the same on land, with more
certain profit, if the ground be not rough of rocks. After one company have
thus shot their Net, another begins behind them, and so a third, as
opportunity serves. Being so taken, some, the Country people, who attend with
their horses and paniers at the Cliffes side, in great numbers, do buy and
carry home, the larger remainder, is by the Merchant, greedily and speedily
seized upon. They are saved three manner of ways: by fuming, pressing, Saving.
or pickelling. For every of which, they are first salted and piled up row by
row in square heaps on the ground in some seller, which they term, Bulking,
where they so remain for some ten days, until the superfluous moisture of the
blood and salt be soked from them: which accomplished, they rip the bulk, and
save the residue of the salt for another like service. Then those which are to
be ventred for France, they pack in staunch hogsheads, so to keep them in
their pickle. Those that serve for the hotter Countries of Spain and Italy,
they used at first to fume, by hanging them up on long sticks one by one, in a
house built for the nonce, and there drying them with the smoke of a soft and
continual fire, from whence they purchased the name of Fumados: Fumados.
but now, though the term still remain, that trade is given over: and after
they have been ripped out of the bulk, reffed upon sticks, and washed, they
pack them orderly in hogsheads made purposely leake, which afterward they
press with great waights, to the end the train may soke from them into a
vessel placed Train.
in the ground to receive it.

In packing, they keep a just tale of the number that every hogshead
contains, which otherwise may turn to the Merchants prejudice: for I have
heard, that when they are brought to the place of sale, the buyer opens one
hogs-head at adventures; and if he find the same not to answer the number
figured on the outside, he abateth a like proportion in every other, as there
wanted in that. The train is well sold, as employed to diverse uses, and
welneere acquiteth the cost in saving, and the saving sets almost an
infinite number of women and children on work, to their great advantage: for
they are allowed a penny for every lasts carriage (a last is ten thousand) and
as much for bulking, washing, and packing them, whereby a lusty huswife may
earne three shillings in a night; for toward the evening they are mostly
killed.

This commodity at first carried a very low price, and served for the
inhabitants cheapest provision: but of late times, the dear sale beyond the
seas has so increased the number of takers, and the takers iarring and Venting.
brawling one with another, and for closing the fishes taking their kind within
harbor, so decreased the number of the taken, as the price daily extends to
an higher rate, equalling the proportion of other fish: a matter which yet I
reckon not prejudicial to the Commonwealth, seeing there is store sufficient
of other victuals, and that of these a twentieth part will serve the Countries
need, and the other nineteen pass into foreign Realms with a gainefull
utterance.

The Sayners profit in this trade is uncertain, as depending upon the seas
fortune, which he long attends, and often with a bootlesse travail: but the
Pilcherd Merchant may reap a speedy, large, and assured benefit, by
dispatching the buying, saving and selling to the transporters, within little
more then three months space. Howbeit, diverse of them, snatching at wealth
ouer-hastily, take money beforehand, and bind themselves for the same, to
deliver Pilcherd ready saved to the transporter, at an vnder-rate, and so cut
their fingers. This venting of Pilcherd enhaunced greatly the price of cask,
whereon all other sorts of wood were converted to that use: and yet this
scantly supplying a remedy, there was a statute made 35. Eliz. that from the
last of June 1594. no stranger should transport beyond the seas any Pilcherd or
other fish in cask, unless he did bring Caske.
into the Realm, for every six tons, two hundred of clapboord fit to make
cask, and so rateably, upon pain of forfeyting the said Pilcherd or fish. This
A cte to continue before the next Parliament, which has revived the same,
until his (yet not known) succeeder.

The Pilcherd are pursued and devoured by a bigger kind of fish, called a
Plusher, being somewhat like the Plusher.
Dog-fish, who leapeth now and then above water, and therethrough bewrays
them to the Balker: so are they likewise persecuted by the Tonny, and he
(though not very often) taken with them damage faisant. And that they may no
less in fortune, then in fashion, resemble the Flying fish, certain birds
called Gannets, soar over, and stoup to prey upon them. Lastly, they are
persecuted by the Hakes, who (not long sithence) haunted the coast in great
abundance; but now being deprived of their wonted bait, are much diminished,
verifying the proverb, What we lose in Hake, we shall have in Herring. These
Hakes and diverse of the other forerecited, are taken with threads, and some of
the^ with the boulter, which is a Spiller of a bigger size. Upon the North
coast, where want of good harbors denies safe road to the fisherboats, they
have a device of two sticks filled with corks, and crossed flatlong, out of
whose midst there rises a thread, and at the same hangs a sail; to this
engine termed a Lestercock, they tie one end of their Boulter, lo as the wind
coming from the shore, fills the sail, and Lestercocks.
the sail carries out the Boulter into the sea, which after the respite of
some hours, is drawn in again by a cord fastened at the nearer end. They lay
also certain Weelves in the Sea, for taking of Cunners, which therethrough are
termed Cunner-pots. Another net they have long and narrow meashed, thwarted
with little cords of wide distance, in which the fish intangleth it self, and
is so drawn up.

For Bait they use Barn, Pilcherd, and Lugges. The Lugge is a worm resembling
the Tagworme or Angletouch, Bait.
and lying in the Ose somewhat deep, from whence the women dig them up, and
sell them to the Fishermen: They are descried by their working over head, as
the Tagworme. And, for lack of other provision, the Fishermen sometimes cut
out a piece of the new taken Hake, near his tail, and therewith bait their
hooks, to surprise more of his Canniballian fellows.

The Seal, or Soil, is in making and growth, not unlike Seals.
a Pigge, ugly faced, and footed like a Moldwarp, he delights in music, or
any loud noise, and thereby is trained to approach near the shore, and to show
himself almost wholly above water. They also come on land, and lie sleeping in
holes of the Cliffe, but are now and then waked with the deadly greeting of a
bullet in their sides.

The Fishermens hooks do not always return them good prise: for often there
cleaves to the bait, a certain fish like a Star, so far from good meat,
as it Star-fish.
is held contagious.

There swimmeth also in the Sea, a round slymie substance, called a Blobber,
reputed noisome to the fish.

But you are tired, the day is spent, and it is high Blobber.
time that I draw to harbor: which good counsel I will follow, when I have
only told you, in what manner the Fishermen save the most part of their fish.
Some Saving.
are polled (that is, beheaded) gutted, splitted, powdered and dried in the
Sun, as the lesser sort of Hakes. Some headed, gutted, iagged, and dried, as
Rays, and Thornbackes. Some gutted, splitted, powdered, and dried, as Buckhorne
made of Whitings, (in the East parts named Scalpions) and the smaller sort of
Conger, and Hake. Some, gutted, splitted, and kept in pickle, as Whiting,
Mackrell, Millet, Basse, Peall, Trowt, Sammon, and Conger. Some, gutted, and
kept in pickle, as the lesser Whitings, Pollocks, Eeles, and squarie Scads.
Some cut in pieces, and powdered, as Seal and Porpose. And lastly, some boiled,
and preserved fresh in Vinegar, as Tonny and Turbet.

Besides these flooting burgesses of the Ocean, there Sea foul
are also certain flying Citizens of the air, which prescribe for a corrodie
therein; of who^ some serve for food to us, and some but to feed themselves.
Amongst the first sort, we reckon the Dip-chicke, (so named of his diuing, and
littleness) Coots, Sanderlings, Sea-larkes, Oxen and Kine, Seapies, Puffins,
Pewets, Meawes, Murres, Creysers, Curlewes, Teale, Wigeon, Burranets, Shags,
Ducke and Mallard, Gull, Wild-goose, Heron, Crane, and Barnacle.

These content not the stomach, all with a like sauorinesse, but some carry a
rank taste, and require a former mortification: and some are good to be
eaten while they are young, but nothing tooth-some, as they grow elder. The
Guls, Pewets, and most of the residue, breed in little desert Islands, bordering
on both coasts, laying their Eggs on the grass, without making any nests,
from whence the owner of the land causes the young ones to be fetched about
Whitsontide, for the first brood, and some weeks after for the second. Some
one, but not every such Rock, may yield yearly toward thirty dozen of
Guls. They are kept tame, and fed fat, but none of the Sea kind will breed out
of their natural place: Yet at Caryhayes, master Treuanions house, which
bordereth on the Cliffe, an old Gull did (with an extraordinary charity)
accustom, for diverse years together, to come and feed the young ones (though
perhaps none of his allia^ce) in the court where they were kept. It is held,
that the Barnacle breeds under water on such ships sides, as have been very
long at Sea, hanging there by the Bill, until his full growth dismiss him to
be a perfect foul: and for proof hereof, many little things like birds, are
ordinarily found in such places, but I cannot hear any man speak of having
seen them ripe. The Puffyn hatcheth in holes of the Cliffe, whose young ones
are thence ferretted out, being exceeding fat, kept salted, and reputed for
fish, as coming nearest thereto in their taste. The Burranet has like
breeding, and, after her young ones are hatched, she leads them sometimes
ouer-land, the space of a mile or better, into the haven, where such as have
leisure to take their pastime, chase them one by one with a boat, and stones,
to often diuing, until, through weariness, they are taken up at the boats
side by hand, carried home, and kept tame with the Ducks: the Eggs of diverse
of these Fowls are good to be eaten.

Sea-fowle not catable, are Ganets, Ospray (Plynyes Haliaectos.)

Amongst which, lacke-Daw (the second slander of our Country) shall pass for
company, as frequenting Cornish Chough.
their haunt, though not their diet: I mean not the common Daw, but one
peculiar to Cornwall, and therethrough termed a Cornish Chough: his bil is
sharp, long, and red, his legs of the same color, his feathers black, his
conditions, when he is kept tame, ungracious, in filching, and hiding of money,
and such short ends, and somewhat dangerous in carrying sticks of fire.

After having marched over the land, and waded Inhabitants.
through the Sea, to discover all the creatures therein insensible, and
sensible, the course of method summoneth me to discourse of the reasonable, to
wit, the Inhabitants, and to plot down whatsoever, noteworthily, belongs to
their estate, real, and personal, and to their government, spiritual, and
temporal. Under their real state, I comprise all that their industry has
procured, either for private use, or intercourse, and trasfike.

In private life, there comes into consideration, their Tenements, which
yield them sustinance, and Teneme^ts
their houses, which afford them a place of abode. Every tenement is parcel
of the demaynes, or services of some Manor. Commonly thirty Acres make a
farthing land, nine farthings a Cornish Acre, and four Cornish Acres, a
Knights fee. But this rule is ouerruled to a greater or lesser quantity,
according to the fruitfulness, or barrenness of the soil. That part of the
demaines, which appertains to the Lords dwelling house, they call his Barten,
or Berton. The tenants to the rest hold the same either by sufferance, Will, or
custom, or by co^uention. The customary tenaut holds at Will, either for
years, or for lives, or to them and their heirs, in diverse manners according
to the custom of the Manor. Customarie Customarie.
Tenants for life, take for one, two, three, or more lives, in possession, or
reuersion, as their custom will bear. Somewhere the wives hold by widows
estate, and in many places, when the estate is determined by the Tenants death,
and either to descend to the next in reuersion, or to return to the Lord, yet
will his Executor, or Administrator detain the land, by the custom, until
the next Michaelmas after, which is not altogether destitute of a reasonable
pretense.

Amongst other of this customarie Land, there are seventeen Mannours,
appertaining to the Duchy of Duchy tenure.
Cornwall, who do every leuenth year, take their Holdings (so they term
the^) of certain Comissioners sent for the purpose, and have continued this
use, for the best part of three hundred years, through which, they reckon a
kind of inheritable estate accrued unto them. But, this long prescription
notwithstanding, a more busy then well occupied person, not long sithence, by
getting a Checquer lease of one or two such tenements, called the whole right
in question, and albeit God denied his bad mind any good success: yet another
taking up this broken title, to salve himself of a desperate debt, prosecuted
the same so far forth, as he brought it to the iutty of a Nisiprius. Hereon
certain Gentlemen were chosen and requested by the Tenants, to become suitors
for stopping this gap, before it had made an irremediable breach. They repaired
to London accordingly, and preferred a petition to the then L. Treasurer
Burleigh. His L. called unto him the Chancellor, and Coife Barons of the
Exchequer, and took a private hearing of the cause. It was there manifestly
proved before them, that besides this long continuance, and the importance,
(as that which touched the undoing of more then a thousand persons) her
Highness possessed no other lands, that yielded her so large a benefit in
Rents, Fines, Heriots, and other perquisites. These reasons found favorable
allowance, but could obtain no thorough discharge, until the Gentlemen became
suppliants to her Majesty's own person, who, with her native and supernatural
bounty, vouchsafed us gracious audience, testified her great dislike of the
attempter, and gave express order for stay of the attempt: since which time,
this barking Dog has been musled. May it please God to award him an utter
choking, that he never have power to bite again.

Herein we were beholden to Sir Walter Raleghs earnest writing, (who was then
in the Country) to Sir Henry Killigrews sound advice, and to Master William
Killigrews painful soliciting (being the most kind patron of all his
Country and Countreymens affairs at Court.)

In times past, and that not long ago, Holdings were so plentiful, and
Holders so scarce, as well was the Landlord who could get one to be his
Tenant, and they used to take assurance for the rent by 2. pledges of the same
Manor. But now the case is altered: for a farm, or (as we call it) a
bargain can no sooner fall in hand, then the Survey Court shall be waited on
with many Officers, vying and reuying each on other; nay they are taken mostly
at a ground-hop, before they fall, for fear of coming too late. And over and
above the old yearly rent, they will give a hundred or two hundred years
purchase and upward at that rate, for a fine, to have an estate of three lives;
which sum commonly amounts to ten, or twelve years just value of the land.
As for the old rent, it carries at the most, the proportion but of a tenth
part, to that whereat the tenement may be presently improued, and somewhere
much less: so as the Parson of the parish can in most places, dispend as much
by his tithe, as the Lord of the Manor by his rent. Yet is not this dear
setting eueriewhere alike: for the western half of Cornwall, comes far
short of the Eastern, and the land about Towns, exceeds that lying farther
in the Country.

The reason of this enhaunsed price, may prove (as I guess) partly, for that
the late great trade into both the Indies, has replenished these parts of the
world, with a larger store of the Coyne-currant metals, the^ our anceltours
enjoyed: partly, because the banishment of single-liuing Votaries, younger
marriages then of old, and our long freedom from any sore wasting war, or
plague, has made our Country very populous: and partly, in that this
populousnes has enforced an industry in them, and our blessed quietness given
scope, and means to this industry. But howsoever I aim right or wide at
this, once certain it is, that for these husbandry matters, the Cornish
Inhabitants are in sundry points swayed by a diverse opinion, from those of
some other Shires. One, that they will rather take bargains, at these
excessive fines, then a tolerable improued rent, being in no sort willing to
over a penny: for they reckon that, but once smarting, and this, a continual
aching. Besides, though the price seem very high, yet mostly, four years
tillage, with the husbandmans pain and charge, goes near to defray it.
Another, that they fall every where from Commons to Enclosure, and partake not
of some Eastern Tenants envious dispositions, who will sooner prejudice their
own present thrift, by continuing this mingle-mangle, then advance the Lords
expectant benefit, after their term expired.

The third, that they always prefer lives before years, as both presuming
upon the Countries healthfulnesse, and also accounting their family best
provided for, when the husband, wife, and child, are sure of a living. Neither
may I (without wrong) conceyle the just commendation of most such wives, in
this behalf: namely, when a bargain is so taken to these three, it often
falls out, that afterward the son marieth, and delivers his
yeruing-goods (as they term it) to his father, who in lieu thereof, by his
wives assent (which in many ancient deeds was formal) departs to him and
his daughter in law, with the one half of his Holding in hand.

Now, though after the fathers decease, the mother may, during her life, turn
them both out of doors, as not bound by her own word, and much less by her
husbands: yet I have seldom or never known the same put in practice, but true
and just meaning has ever taken place.

Yet another unconscionable quirk some have of late time pried into, viz. in a
ioynt-lease to three intended by the taker and payer, to descend successively
and entirely, one of them passes over his interest to a stranger, who by
rigor of law shall hold it during the lives of the other twain.

The ordinary covenants of most conuentionary. Tenants are, to pay due Capons,
do harvest iournyes, Conuentionary Tenants.
grind at the Mill, sue to the Court, discharge the office of Reeue and
Tithing-man, dwell upon the Tenement, and to set out no part thereof to
tillage, without the Lords license first obtained. Which conditions are yet
enlarged or restrained, according to the Demifors humor.

Usual it is for all sorts of Tenants, upon death, at least, if not surrender,
or forfeyture, to pay their best beast for a Heriot: yea, if a stranger,
passing through the Heriots.
Country, chance to leave his carkase behind him, he also must redeem his
burial, by rendering his best beast which he has with him, to the Lord of the
soil: or if he have none, his best Jewel; or rather then fail, his best
garment then about him, in lieu thereof. But this custom has been somewhat
shaken, in coming to trial, and labors of a dangerous Fever, though the
Cornish Gentlemen use all possible remedies of almost fas et nefas, by pleading
the 11. points of the Law, to keep it on live.

The free Tenants services, are ordinary with those of other places, save that
they pay in most places only fee-Morton releefes, which is after five marks
the whole Knights fee, (so called of John Earl first of Morton, then of
Cornwall, and lastly King of this Land) whereas that of fee-Gloucester is five
pound. And to accomplish this part, I have here inserted a note of the Cornish
Knights fees and acres, which I received from my learned and religious kinseman
Master Robert Moyle.

Record. Feod. Milit. in Cornub. fact. Anno 3. H. 4. vt sequitur.
HEnricus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae and Franc^^ and Dominus Hiberniae, dilectis
nobis Vicecom. and Escaetori nostris in Com. Cornub. ac Iohanni Colshil, and
Iohanni Tremayn seniori collectoribus auxilij 20. solidorum, de quolibet feod.
Milit. tento de nob. sine medio in Com. praedicto ad Blanchiam primogenitam
filiam nostr ammaritand, iuxta formam statuti, anno regni Domini Edwardi nuper
Regis Angliae, Aui nostri 25. edict. assignai. salutem. Quasdam euidentias,
quas de libris, rotulis and memorand, Scaccarii nostri exhiberi fecimus pro
informatione vestra, super captione inquisitionum diuersorum feodorum in Com.
praedicto, viz. de rubro libro vnam scedulam, and duos rotulos de euidentiis
nuper collectoribus auxilii pradicti, auo nostro ad filium suum primogenitum
milit. faciend. anno Regnisui 20. concessi vobis mittimus, sub pede sigilli
nostri, mandantes, vt inspect. euidenc. praed. vlterius inde tam per casdem
evident. quam per Inquisitiones super praemiss. per vos capiend. pro commodo
nostro faciatis, quod de iur e per vos videatur faciend: It a quod euidenc.
prad. vna cum toto facvestro in premiss. and hoc breue ad Scaccarium nostrum
super compot. vestrum proxim. de eodem auxilio redend. Baronibus de dicto
Scaccario nostro ibidem libera^dum habeatis. Test Iohanne Cokayn apud
Westmonast. 30. die Ianua. Anno Regni nostri 2. Rotl. memorum de anno 3.
Hillar. record.

Hundred de Penwith.
WIll. de Campo Arnulphiten. 7. feod. and di. in Luduon trewedryn, Maien and
Kellemeke. Will. Basset ten. 1. feod. in Tihidi and Trenalga. Mich. de Bray
ten. 2. parts vnius feod. in Bray. Alanus Bloighon ten. 2. feod. in Tremall
Haeres Marcide Walestbren ten. 2. parts feod. in Veno. Episcop. Exon. ten.
dimid. feod. in Lauestli. Haeres Iocei Dynnan ten. 1. feod. in Gorten. Comes
Gloc. ten. 4. part. vnius feod. in Draynneck. Idem Comes ten. 1. feod. in
Couerton. Idem Comes ten. 1. feod. in Binnerton. Idem Comes ten. 5. part. 1.
feod. in Loigans. Haeres Ties ten. dimid. feod. in Alwerton. Marchio Dorset.
ten. 4. feod. in Trenwel.
Hundred de Lysnewith.
WIll. de Botriaux tenet in isto Hundred in Walebreux. 1. feod. Idem Will. ten.
in Polruman di. feod. Idem Will. ten. in Wolueston 1. feod. Idem Will. ten. in
Tresciward 1. feod. Idem Will. ten. in Worthauale 1. feod. Reginald de Ferrar
in ead. Hund. 7. feod. Will. de Witha and Johan. de Crammon tenent in Trewint
and Westdisart 1. feod. Idem Will. de Campo Arnulphi ten. 1. feod. in Heliset.
Idem Will. ten. in Oterham 1. feod. Idem Will. in Donneghny Crugplegh di. feod.
Simon Giffard ten. 1. feo. in Donneghny de la Bruer. Henric. de la Pomerey ten.
in Lesnewith and Treuyghan di. feod. Rogerus de Crammon ten. in Moteland 1.
feod. Omnia praedicta feod. sunt feod. Mortanne. Haeres Iocei Dinan ten. in
Over rescradeck and nether rescradeck di. feod.
Hundred de Stratton.
HErbertus de Pyn ten. in Middeland 3. feod. Idem ten. in Bear 1. feod. in
Deuon. Idem ten. in Alwington in Deuon 2. feod. Idem ten. Mar wonchurch 1.
feod. Idem ten. in Pensenteinon, Trethewy and Westory 2. feod. Comes Gloc. ten.
2. magna feod. in Kilkham land. Ranulphus de Albo Monasterio tenet in Stratton
1. feod. Thomas de Wamford ten. in Efford 1. feod. Henric. de Killigreu ten. 1.
feo. in Orchard marries. Johannes de Cobbeham in Lancols 1. feod. quod Abbas
and conuentus de Hartland tenent in pur. and perpet. elem. Idem ten. in Wiston
and Scrpeknol 1. feod. Idem ten. in burgo paruo Ponte knol. and Sunondsham 1.
feod. quod Abbas and conu. praed. clam. tenere in pura and perpet. elem. Idem
ten. 3. part. 1. feod. in Turlebere. Idem ten. 1. feod. and 6. part. 1. feod.
in Hilton simul cum Ferewil in Deuon. Rogerus de Carmmon ten. 1 feod. in
Hormecot and Refcher. Rex ten. 1. feod. in Bostinne. Idem ten. Lamaylwen 1.
feod quod Oliuerus de Crammon ten. Idem ten. in Nantoige 1. feod. di. feod.
Iohanna Lengleis ten 1. feod. in Wadfaste. Guilielmus de Campo Arnulphi ten. 1.
feod. in Pennalim. Idem ten. 1. feod. and 2. parts 1. feod. in Wike. Prior de
Lanceston ten. 1. feod. in Borton. Haluethus Maliuery ten. di. feo. milit. in
Tamerton. Omnia praedicta feod. sunt parua feod. praeter 2. feod. in Kilkam
land.
Hundred de East.
IOhanna de Rame ten. 1. fe. magnum de Seniock. Nicholaus Danne ten. 1. partem
feod. dict. feod. de Mortimer in Tregantle de Modeton. Idem Nich. ten. 1.
magnum feod. de Abbate de Tauistauk. Idem Nich. ten. 1. mag. feod. in Trecan
and Trecurnel and Churleton de praedict. Abbate. Idem Will. de Bodbrand ten. 2.
parua feo. de Morteynne in Penhangle de Trematon. Idem Will. ten. 1. paru.
feod. dict. feod. de Morteynn in Karkeil de Trematon. Rogerus de Tredenick ten.
in Tredenick 5. part. 1. parui feod. prout ibid. Rogerus de Ferrar ten. 2.
parua feod. dict. feod. de Mortyn in Penpol de Tremerton. Idem ten. 1. paru.
feod. in Haston de Tremerton. Idem ten. 1. paru. feod. in Westuenton de
Tremerton. Idem ten. di. paru. feod. dict. feod. de Mortyn in Thelebridge in la
rode. Idem ten. 3. part. vnius paru. feod. in Croketon de Tremerton. Idem
Calistock 1. paru. feod. and est in manu regis. Idem aqua de Tamar di. feod. in
manu reg. de honor de Tremeton. Idem Rogerus de Inkepenne ten. 2. paru. feo.
Mortynn in Halton. Galfrid. de Earth. ten. di. paru. feod. ibid. Idem Galfrid.
de Grove ten. 3. part. vnius di. feod. paru. de Mortyn ibid. Idem Nic. de
Merton ten. 1. paru. feod. Mortyn in Treualuare and in Trekinward. Will. de
Botriaux ten. di. paru. feod. de Mortyn in Penhele de rege. Thomas Lercedekne
ten. 4. part. 1. feod. paru. in Treuris de rege. Baro de Stafford ten. di.
feod. paru. dict. feod. de Mortyn de rege in Kallilond. Episcop. Exon. ten. 1.
mag. feod. Gloce. de rege. Ric. de Trenaga tenet ibid. paru. feod. de Willi.
Botriaux. Regin. de Beuil ten. ibid. paru. feod. in Tredawil de Will. de
Botriaux. Idem Prior de Minstre ten. 1. paru. feod. Mort. in Polifant. Idem
Nic. Danne ten. 3. part. 1. feod. paru. dict. feod. de Mor. in Legh.
Hundred de VV est.
CArdynan Penlyn ten. pro duobus feod. paru. dict. feod. de Morteyn in custodia
regis. Ric. de Scriseaux ten. 3. paru. feod. de Mort. in Laurethon, Kilgather
and Lansalwys. Will. de Bodrigan ten. paru. feod. in Trethim Bessant. Manerium
de Liskerd est di. paru. feod. Mort. and est in manu reg. Tho, de Cruptus ten.
2. paru. feod. in Cruphs and Caruaton. Matheus de Trethake ten. 2 par. feod.
Mo. in Trethake, Lamlewarn, Trelewarn and Denant. Mathilda de Hewisch ten. di.
part. feo. in Meuely. Ioh. de Wellinton and Reg. Querquius ten. 5. part. 1.
feod. in Fawyton.
Hundred de Trigger.
ROb. Thomy ten. di. feod. in Bliston dict. feod. Mortyn. Idem Nico. de Bindon
ten. in Penrosburdon di. feod. Mort. Rob. de Cheyndut ten. in Bodannan 4. part.
1. feo. Mort. Ioh. filius Will. te. in Kinnarght 4. par. 1. feo. Mor. Idem ten.
in Tregradeck, 4. part. 1. feod. Mor. Henricus Camel ten. in Belionnus, 1.
feod. Mor. Polroda. Robert. de Brunn ten. in Delisonbol 1. feod. Mort. Matheus
and Agnes de Trehauk ten. in Trehome di. feod. Mort. Robertus Giffard te. in
Lannomunnus di. fe. Mor. Robertus de Helligan ten. ibi. 2. feo. dict. fe. Mort.
Johannes de Tinten ten. in Tynten and in Trewinneck 1. feod. Mort. Ioh. de
Seneschal te. in Helland, 4. part. 1. fe. Mort. Haeres de Walesbren ten. in
Lamail wen 4. part. 1. feod. Mort. Ric. de Rescarreck ten. in Rescarretunus 4.
part. fe. Mort. Dom. de Lancarffe ten. ib. 5. part. 1. feo. di. fe. Mort. Dom.
de Portguin ten. ib. di. feod. Mort. Siluester de Tregamuran ten in Tregonen 1.
feod. magnum. Johannes Darundle ten. in Treawset, and in Trenbeith 1. feod.
Mort. Episcop. Exon. ten. in Eglosel 1. feod. mag. Ioh. Tracy and Hugo Peuerel
tenent in Tremscord and Hamatethy, 2. feod. Mort. Ricard. de Scriseaux ten. in
Kilkoid 2. feod. and di. Mort. Johannes de Guillez ten. in Trenderet. 1. feo.
Mor. Barth. de Cant. ten. ibid. di. feod. Mort. Ioh. fill. Will. ten. in Haumal
di. feod. Alanus Blughon ten. in Polrodon Donnat 2. feo. Mort.
Hundred de Pider.
Johannes de Vinfrauil ten. ratione Aliciae vxoris suae, 1. mag. feod. in
Laherne. Ric. de Hiuoisch ten. ibid. mag. feod. in S. Idy. Rosamunda de la
forest ten. ibid. mag. feod. in Treueald. Bartholomeus de Bercle tenet dimid.
mag. feod. in Trewoleck. Johannes de Tregage tenet dimid. mag. feod. in
Trenurdre. Episcop. Exon. te. 5. part. mag. feod. in Dinbegh. Rad. de Berthei
ten. ibid. 1. paru. feod. Henric. Ties te. 4. part. mag. feod. in Trewarnayl.
Item Rex ten. 4. part. 1. mag. feod. in Trewarnayl. Ela de sanct. Colano ten.
ibid. di. paru. feo. Mort. Ric. de sanct. Colano ten. ratione Holdae vxo. eius
ibid. di. paru. feod. Mort. Rob. Thomy ten. in Caruaton 4. part. 1. paru. feod.
Barth. de Berckle te. in Tremor di. paru. feo. Ioh. Darundle ten. di. paru.
feod. in Treloy. Johannes Hamelyn te. di. paru. feod. in Trekinnen. Rad.
Darundle te. di. paru. feo. in Trekinnen. Regin. de Botriaux ten. 5. part.
paru. feod. in Cutfordferle.
Hundred de Powder.
WIll. de Campo Arnulphi ten. in Tiwardraith 1. feo. vnde Prior ten. 3. acr.
and di. ibi. Idem Will. ten. in Bodrigan Pennarth and Cargois 3. feod. Idem
Will. ten. in Gouely 1. feod. Idem Will. ten. in Prideas 1. feod. Idem Will.
ten. in Lishiestick 1 feod. Idem Will. ten. in Treuerlynwater di. feod. Idem
Will. ten. in Bodenda 4. part. 1. feod. Idem Will. ten. in Treuerbindren 5.
par. 1. feod. Idem Will. ten. in Tronneck 5. part. 1. feod. Idem Will. ten. in
Tronalgerthan 4. part. 1. feod. Episcop. Exon. ten. in Caniwerez 1. feod. Idem
Episcop. ten. in Trenel 1. feod. Idem Episcop. ten. in Taluren 1. feod. Idem
ten in Fentengullyn di. feod. Idem ten. in Tremnel di. feod. Idem ten. in
Trelonck. di. feod. Henr. de la Pomeray ten. 3. part. 1. feo. in Hellarna. Ioh.
de Riparys ten. in Mauntayn di. feod. Idem ten. in Trethak 1. feod. Steph. de
Belloprato ten. in Treuewith and Trewithy di. feod. paru. Serlo de Lauladro
ten. ibid. and in S. Goriann and in paru. Luntyan 1. feod. and di. paru. Rad.
de Killigreu ten. ibid. 1. feod. paru. Will. de Bodrigan ten. in Tremodret and
in la roche 3. feod. paru. Serlo de Lauladro ten. in Alet 3. part. 1, feod.
Will. Stanley and Comes de Rivers ten. 1. feod. mili. Mo: in Elerky. Haeres
Iocei Dynnan ten. in Eglosroset in Trelewith 1. feod. Will. Baillisbury vaca.
vxo. suae ten. in Blanchelond 1. feod. Henr. fill. Maugi de Killigreu ten. in
Trewyn 3. part. 1. feod. Ric. de Hiwisch ten. in Trenasanstel di. feod. Idem
ten. in Gloures. 1. feod. Haeres Iocei Dynnan ten. in Argallez 1. feod. paru.
Idem ten. in Fountomon 3. part. 1. feod. paru. Haeres Thomae de Prideas ten. in
Boswyghergy 2. part. 1. feod. paru. Mat. de Trethake ten. in Tragameddon 2.
feo. par. Rex ten. aquam de Fawe pro 2. feod. and 3. part. 1. feo. Henricus de
la Pomerey ten. 12. feod. in Tregony.
Hundred de Kerier.
WAlter. Wailisbury and Isolda vxor eius te. 3. feod. in Rescronges dicta feod.
Mortan. Iohannis de Riparys te. in Rosewike 1. feo. Mort. Episcop. Exon. ten.
di. mag. feod. in Minstre. Rogerus de Carminon ten. 20. part. 1. feo. Mort.
extra 10. part. illius 20. in Wynnenton, Marthyn and Tamerton. Thomas Durant
ten. in Penzenguans, 1. fe. Mort. Johannes fill. Will. ten. di. feod. in
Arworthel per Cartam Edwardi quondam Com. Cornub. dict. feod. Mor.
Euidentiae extractae de rubro libro de Scaccario, 143.
Cornub.
RObertus de Cardinan 71. feod. milit. Reginaldus de Valle torta 59. de honor,
de Tremeton. Thomas de Middleton 10. de honor de Midd. Will. de Botterill 12.
milit. Robertus fill. Walteri 11. milit. de feod. Ric. de Lusti auunculi sui.
Robertus de Peuerel 9. milit. de feod. eiusdem. Ric. fill. Ric. 1. feod, and 3.
part. cum haere de Willi. Rupe. Rad. Bloyon 7. Arehennaund. Flandrensis 7.
milit. Robertus de Tintagle 5. milit. Henricus fill. Will. 4. milit. Will. de
Albemarley. milit cumrelict. Robert. de Bikehat. Radulphus de Treat. 1. milit.
Ric. Wallensis 2. milit. Will. de Bosco Roardi 2. milit. Johannes de monte
acuto. Henricus de Pomeray. Henricus de Herys 1. Pharanus Warebras 1. milit.
Barth. fill. 1. milit. Gilbertus Anglicus 1. milit. Simon Pincerna 1. Ric.
filius Iuonis 1. Ric. Buzon. 1. Henricus fill. Com. 1. Huardus de Bekelege 1.
Walterius de Dunstan vil. 1. milit. Hastul de Sullinge 4. part. Robertus de
Mandeuil 1. milit. Alicia de Valletorta 1. milit.
Seriantes.
PEtrus fill. Ogeri 40. in Cabulion per vnam Capam de Gresenge in aduentum dict.
Regisin Cornubiam. Rogerus Cithared 5. pro portanda illa Capadum Rex fuerit in
Cornubia, Johan. de Pencoit vnam acram in Lametyn prec. de 5. s. fac. ibid.
custodiam per 40. dies. Rog. de Bodmel 1. acram prosequela in Com. Rob.
Espiakelin duas acras and furuum in Lanceneton, vt eat in excercitum cum rege
stipendiis ipsius Regis.
Extenta acrarum Cornub. facta coram Salom. de Ross. and sociis suis Justice.
itinerant. apud Launceston a die Paschae in 3. septimanas anno Reg. Edw. 12.
Hundred de Penwith.
Decunar. de Tihidi. 70. Redwory 14. Acras. Couerton. 45. Treruffe. 1.
Dreyneck. 5. Bennerton. 45. Gurlyn. 15. Loygans. 9. Tenent de Tregony. 9.
Penuerthy. 8. Vthno. 8. Prior Mich. 8. Treynwal. 20. Luddeuan. 55. Lanistly 28.
Acr. di. Alwarton. 64. Tresruss. 3. Marehel. 23. Tresundryn. 20. Maen. 15.
Bree. 8. Kelyneck. 24. Warewil. 25. Tredyne. 1. Trewannard. Kelision. 6.
Tredeny. 3. Sum. 532. Acr.
Hundred de Kerier.
Talgollon. 6. Pensignans. 6. Kenel 1. di. Arwothel. 9. Restrongas. 21. Penryn.
21. Treros. 6. Minster. 12. Trewotheck. 6. Trenaweth. 9. Trelan. 9. Rosewike.
30. Lysard. 12. Tredaneck. 6. Tucays. 6. Clehar. 6. Carmynow. 18. Wymanton. 12.
Trebrabo. 24. S. Mawgan. 9. Helston. 30. Methele. 15. Trenhale. 6. Godolghan
13. als. Epo. 9 Pengirsick. 6. Rogearon. 9. Wenna. 9. Trelew. 9. als. 1. Ac,
Exo Presprinick. 6. Trelybey. 9. Luceas 31. als. 31. Ac. Ex. Sum. 397. Acr. and
dimid.
Hundred de Pider.
Deci. de naushike pro. 6. Kalestek. 4. Elineas. 24. Dygimbris. 39. Treloy. 9.
Trewenneck. 3. Trewoleck. 9. Bodwenek. 9. Rialton parua. 57. Trenowith. 3. S.
Isy. 14. Lanheyl Tinten. 18. Methean. 2. Trewarnayl. 51. Carantock. 18.
Ryalton. 18. Lanhernow. 18. Pawton. 120. Aldennow. 21. Lantallen. 4. Tremore.
6. Banhedrck. 9. Retergh. 9. Trewynnian. 3. Meyndy. 6. Treworder Bilcon. 12.
Meddes^hole. 9. S. Peran. 3. Eliquyn. 6. Cargoule. 39. Porthe. 9. Carnaton. 14.
Tregennow. 9. Tremblithe. 4. Gluuian. 3. Withiel. 15. Ryalton magna. 57.
Cotford fell. 15. Berthey. 24. Cragantallen. 3. Sum. 700. Acr.
Hundred de Powder.
Decuna de Tregaire. 93. Inde alloc. 20. Ac. pro. do. Deuon. Blanchelond. 11.
Argallas. 6. Trenoweth. 9. Kestel and Coran. 6. Treworeck and True. 24
Tremodreth. 18. Treueruen and Poldu. 15. Eglosros. 3. Crogith and Caryheges. 9
Treuanion. 6. Lanhaddron. 4. Trelueck. 1. Trelewith. 6. Tewynton. 33. Trogony
Pomeray. 32. Tredack. 20. Gouily. 9. Pennarth. 9. Trenyeck and Golours.
Trethewy. 6. (7. di. Boswiththe. 20. Trenance priour. 12. Killiuregh. 2.
Landegy. 9. Tregamedon. 6. Alet. 12. Berthey Brune 3. Growith and Trewithgy.
Treworeck. 9. (30. Tybeft and Penkeuel. 42. Treueruyn 3. Nantyan. 36. Boderdek
20. Brithion. 8. Lanestek. 6. Elerky. 42. Werneckbosueleck. 4. Cargoul. 8.
Tretherf. 3. Pentewyn. 3. S. Goron. 6. Beranel. 36. Trenananstle. 8.
Tregarreck. 14. Maresk 36. pro reg. alloc. 2. Bodrugan. 9. Treualgarthyn. 3.
Lauada. 1. Pridiaux. 12. Tywascreth. 36. Penfentimow. 6. Kenewyn. 1. Sum. 573.
Acr. and dimid.
Hundred de Trigg.
Egloshayl. 7. di. Penpout. 21. Lannousun. 18. Bendeuy. 36. Namail. 3. Hundr.
de Trig. 9. Trelindret. 1. di. Tinten. 12. Trenesquit. 18. Peterow. 6.
Boddannan. 27. Deliodbol. 6. Bliston. 33. Canta. 1. di. Broneyr. 2. Rugog. 9.
Delioner. 9. Polroda. 15. Killigen. 9. Portligwyn. 1. di. Roscarreck Bighan. 3.
Tregradeck. 16. Lancarff. 6. Pentir. 1. di. Trewornar. 18. Penrosburdon. 12.
Killigint. 18. Tridiseck. 18. Heligan. 9. Reskarrekam. 9. Linnoban. 66.
Bodymel. 12. Trehaneck. 6. Hellaund. 6 Tamitethy. 12. Lanowseynt. 18. Sum. 473.
and dimid.
Hundred de Lesnewith.
Hellesland. 57. Treualga. 18. Treuilla. 3 Cracampton. 12. Dysard. 6.
Wolueston. 9. Cydmonth. 7. Powndstock. 9 Donneny. 18. Treseward. 7. di. Bochym.
21. Boleny. 8. Treglasta. 35. Mokelound. 8. Treuerueth. 9. Wortheual. 29.
Lesnewith. 24. Ebsett. 21. S. Genys. 10. Whalsborow. 8. Otterham. 12. Tremayl.
6. Sum. 337. and dimid.
Hundred de Stratton.
Decena de Middeland. 68. Launceles. 20. Thurlebere. 12. Weke. 15. Wadfast. 17.
Wyldsworthy. 4. Tamerton. 8. Harnacot. 9. di. Morton. 2. Kilkampton and
Allerton. 68. Stratton. 21. Marwyn-church and extra. 2. di. Loghe. 2. Corg. 1.
Fanceston. 8. Pennalym. 17. Efford. 21. Bear. 3. Hilton. 20. Forkeston and
Brendon. 4 Witston and S. Petnel. 2. Boyton and Bradbridge. 9 dimid. Bryard. 5.
Sum. 341. Acr. and dimid.
Hundred de East.
Penheal. 36. Item ibid. 1. Tredawel. 13. Trelosk. 14. Tauestok. 27. Modeton.
9. Cauilond. 44. Launcelond. 50. Polisaund. 6. Trefrys. 18. Lawytton. 80.
Haston. 7. Landilp and leghe. 14. Killaton. 20. Treuaga. 13. Trenymel. 12.
Penpol. 24. Treuartha. 3. Landreyn. 3. Clemyslond. 50. Halton. 18. Newton. 16.
Trematon. 80. Lanrake. 100. Sheuiek. 100. Tregilla. 12. Penquite. 11. Carnedon.
8. Rame. 20. Bennalua. 20. Penhasgar. 26. Thorleton. 5. Cranydon. 24.
Buysworek. 10. S. Germyn. 37. Hamer. 7. Sum. 927.
Hundred de West.
Cardinan. 24. Breuigon. 6. Treuellawan. 15. Lanrethow. 12. Estdraynez. 6.
Tremethert. 24. Recradock. 9. Lutcot. 24. Pendryn. 6. Killigath. 9. Plenynt. 9.
Manely. 12. Polscoth. 1. dimid. Botylet. 9. Killigoreck. 9. Baurylen and
Hamiteth. 3. Fowyton. 30. Treueruyn. 6. West Draynez. 6. Laskerd. 18. Crutour.
9. Trelowya. 6. Trenant. 6. S. Wynow. 4. dimid. Bocunek. 12. Treuilias. 3.
Trethu. 6. S. Wot. 3. Perpol. 24. Losnewith. 6. Trethewy. 3. Penquite. 9.
Boccalawar. 6. Tallan. 6. Trethek. 6. dimid. Langonet. 6. Rathwil. 1. dimid.
Brothok. 3. Penfran. 9. Colmettyn. 6. Kelly and Mighstow. 3. Sum. 353. Sum.
tot. 5555. dimid. Acr.
Nomina Baron, and Militum ex Rotulis de feodis Militum; vel de Scutagio
solutis Regi Richardo primo: In libro rubeo Scaccarii.
Cornubia.
WAlterus Hay 20. M. per Agn. vxorem suam. Nicholaus filius Galfridi 10. M.
Willi. Boterell. 12. M. Alanus Blundus 7. M. Geruasius filius Willi. 5. M.
Willi. frater Comitis 4. M. Willi. filius Ric. 5. M. Rad. de Rupe 3. M. Willi.
Oliver. 1. M. Henricus de Tredeleberg. 1. M. Richardus filius Iuo. dim. M.
Johannes de Soleigny. Stephanus Flandrensis. 7. M. Alanus de Dunstauill. 1. M.
Rogerus Anglicus. 1. M. Regium de Valletorta 51. M. Secundum quod Lucas filius
Bernardi Senescallus eius mandauit per litteras Baron. de Scaccar. in Anno
sexto Regis Richardi. Robertus de Cardin. 71. M. Secundum quod Senescallus
eiusdem mandauit Baron. eodem anno 6. R. 1. Galfridus de Lacell. qui habet med.
feod. q. fuerunt Richard. de Lucy in hoc Com. 9. M. sicut Ric. filius Willi.
Senescallus eius mandauit per breue, Anno regni Regis Richardi octauo.
Cornubia. Anno 40. Henr. tertii.
Illustri viro, Domino Henrico, Dei gratia, Regi Angliae, Domino Hiberniae,
Duci Nor. Aquitan. and Com. Andeg. vicecomes Cornubiae, salutem, cum omni
reuerentia and obsequio. Ad mandatum vestrum, nomina illorum qui ten. quindecim
libratas terrae vel plus, and tenent per seruitium militare, and milites non
sunt, excellentiae vestrae praesentibus transmitto, videlicet.

THomas de Tracy, cuius terrae in Cornubia valent 40. libras and plus. Rogerus
de Mesy. 16. li. Stephanus de Bellocampo. 15. li. Henr. filius Henr. de la
Pombre. 30. li. Robertus de Carmeneu. 16. li. Willi. filius Roberti. 15. li.
Marc. le Flamanc. 16. li. Willi. Wise. 16. li. Iordanus de Hacumb. 14. li.
Robertus de Draenas. 15. li. Philippus de Valletorta. 40. li. Richard. de
Grenuile. 50. li. Henricus de Dones. 15. li.
Nomina Militum, and aliorum hominum ad Arma, Anno Regni Regis Edw. filii Regis
Edw. 17.
JOhannes de Treiagu vicecomes.
Nomina militum de Com. Cornubiae, tam infra libertates quam extra.
WIlli. de Botriaux. Reginaldus de Botriaux. Rad. de Albo Monasterio. Richard.
de Campo Arnulphi. Henricus de Campo Arnulphi.
Le Petit.
THomas Lercedekne est in Vascoma in sericium Regis. Johannes de Alneto.
Johannes de Tynten. Willi. de Ferrers. Robertus Bendyn. Reginaldus de Mohun.
Robertus filius Willi. impotens miles coronator Domini Regis. Johannes de
Carmenou. Otto de Bodrugan peregrinatus est ad San. Iacobum licentia Domini
Regis.
Nomina hominum ad Arma in Com. Cornubiae.
Johannes de Dynham. Rad. de Bloyen. Willi. Basset. Oliuerus de Carminou.
Henricus de Peng. Rogerus de Reskymmer. Johannes de Lambron. Johannes le Scor.
de Taluran. Richardus de Cereseaux junior. Johannes de Pyn. Rogerus Pridyas.
Rad. de Bello Prato, peregrinatus est cum Ottone de Bodrugan, cum licentia
regis prose and duobus valectis.
Isti praenominati habent 40. libr. terra and redditus per annum.

Alii multi Armigeri desunt, nomina eorum dilacerata, non possunt legi in
originali.

EDwardus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and
Dux Aquit. vicecomiti Cornub. salutem
Cum nuper tibi praeceperimus, quod omnes and singulos de balliua tua infra
libertates and extra, tam illos qui viginti libratas terrae and redditus per
annum habent, quam illos similiter qui plus habent, de quocunque teneant sine
delatione rogares, and specialiter requireres ex part nostra, fermiterque
iniungentes eisdem, quod essent ad nos Londini die dominica prox. post octauas
Sci. Iohannis Bapt. proximo futuras, cum equis and Armis, videlicet, quilibet
eorum prout decuerit statum suum, par ati transfretare cum corpore nostro,
parts transmarinas, ad Dei nostri and ipsorum honorem, vt speramus, and pro
saluatione and communi vtilitate regni nostri, tibi praecipimus, firmiter
iniungentes, quod mandato nostro praedicto diligenter and celeriter executo,
nos de nominibus omnium illorum de balliua tua quos sit rogaueris ad dictam
diem dominic. distinct and aperte, sub sigillo tuo certiores reddere non
omittas: Remittens nobis tunc hoc breue.

Test meipso apud Portesmouth, 24. die Maii, Anno regni nostri vicesimo
quinto.
Nomina eorum qui habent viginti libratas terrae, seu redditus vel amplius, in
Com. Cornubiae.
DOminus Oliuerus de Denham. Dominus Willi. de Boteraus Senior. Dominus Willi.
de Boteraus mayor. Dominus Willi. de Campo Arnulphi. Dominus Thomas de Kan.
Dominus Stepha. de Bello Prato. Dominus Rogerus de Carminou. Dominus Thomas de
Pridias. Dominus Hugo Peuerell. Dominus Johannes de Lambron. Dominus Rad.
Bloyhon. Dominus Johannes filius Willi. Dominus Osbertus le Sor. Dominus
Robertus Gifford. Dominus Richardus de Huwyse. Dominus Reg. de Beuille. Dominus
Richardus de Reskymer. Dominus Henricus de la Pomerey. Dominus Petrus de Fysac.
Dominus Roulandus de Quoykyn. Dominus Richardus de Greneuyle. Dominus Walterus
de Cornubia. Dominus Reginaldus de Botreaus. Thomas le Erchideakene. Serlo de
Lansladeron. Walterus de Trem. Steph. de Trewythen. Odo de la Roche. Willi. del
Estre. Rad. filius Oliueri de Arundell. Willi. de Bret. Mich. le Petit.
Johannes de Kellerion. Henricus de Kymyell. Johannes de Arundell. Rogerus le
Flemming. Richardus le Ceariseus, Johannes de Tynton. Rad. de Cheyndur.
Robertus le Brun. Stephanus de Trewynt. Robertus filius Willi. Thomas de
Waunford. Rogerus Cola. Rogerus de Meules. Johannes de Kylgat. Richardus de
Trenaga. Philip. de San. Wynnoko. Johannes de Thurlebere.
NOw to weaue on our former web. The ancient ma^^^ of Cornish building, was to
plant their houses Buildings
low, to lay the stones with mortar of lyme and sand, to make the walls
thick, their windows arched and little, and their lights inwards to the court,
to set hearths in the midst of the room, for chimneyes, which vented the
smoke at a lover in the top, to cover their planchings with earth, to frame
the rooms not to exceed two stories, and the roofes to rise in length above
proportion, and to be packed thick with timber, seeking therethrough only
strength and warmenesse; whereas now-adayes, they seat their dwellings high,
build their walls thin, lay them with earthen mortar, raise them to three or
four stoaries, mould their lights large, and outward, and their roofes square
and slight, coveting chiefly prospect and pleasure. As for Glass and Plaster
for private men's houses, they are of late years introduction:

The poor Cotager contenteth himself with Cob for his walls, and Thatch for
his covering: as for Brick and Lath walls, they can hardly brook the Cornish
weather: and the use thereof being put in trial by some, was found so
unprofitable, as it is not continued by any.

It rests, that after the Cornish Inhabitants real private estate, I speak
of their intercourse and traffike, and so step forth to their personal.

This intercourse is obtained by high ways and Intercourse.
Bridges: for high ways, the Romans did not extend theirs so far: but those
laid out of later times, are in the Eastern part of Cornwall, uneasy, by
reason either of their mire or stones, besides many vp-hils and downehils. The
Western are better trauaileable, as less subject to these discommodities:
generally, the statute 18. Eliz. for their amendment, is reasonably well
executed.

Bridges, the river Tamer has Polston, Gresham, Horse, Bridges.
and New Bridge. Lyner, that at Noddetor, Seton, and Loo, two bridges of the
same name. Foy river, Reprin, Lostwithiel, S. Nighton, or Niot, Fala river,
Grampord, Tregny. Loo river Helston. On the North coast, upon Camel, Wade,
Dilland and Helland. Upon Deuon, Trywartheuy, etc. for they are worth no
curious enquiry.

For maintenance of traffike by buying and selling, there are weekly markets
kept: In the Hundred of Traffike markets.
East, at Saltash, Launceston, and Milbrook. In West H. at Loo, and Liskerd. In
Stratton H. at the Town of the same name. In Lesnewith H. at Bottreaux Castle,
and Camelford. In Powder H. at Foy, Lostwithiel, Grampord, Tregny, and Truro.
In Trig H. at Bodmin. In Kerier Hun. at Helston, and Perin. And in Penwith
Hundred, at Pensants, and at S. Ies. Of these, Bodmyn and Launceston are the
greatest: this as placed in the broadest, that in the middle part of the
County.

Fayres there are many, some which here ensue.

Faires.
March 13 at Bodmyn, Helston S. Mishaels mount.

April 24. at Loo. 25. at S. Columbs, S. Probus.

May 1. at Launceston, Perin.

June 11. at Minhinet 24. at Lau^cesto^, pelint, probus, Colombs July, on S.
Margets day, at S. Stephens, S. Thomas transl. at Camelford.

On S. James day, at Golsinni, Saltash.

August 1. at S Germans.

On S. Laurence day, at S. Laurence.

On the Assumption of our Lady, at Lalant.

September, on S. Mathews day, at Liskerd, on S. Bartholmews, at Lostwithiel,
on the Nativity of our Lady, at Kellington, S. Marie week, and Marcasiow.

October, on S. Dionise day, at Treuenna in Tintagel.

November, on S Katherins day, at S. Thomas.

On S Leonards day, at Launceston and Tregny.

December, on S. Nicholas day, at Bodmyn.

And because traffike cannot be exercised without Waights and measures.
waights and measures, a word or two of them.

Touching wayghts, the statute 12. H. 7. which made a general ordinance
therein, did specially exempt those appertayning to the cunnage, in Deuon and
Cornwall, viz. that they should be privileged to continue their former usage.

In measures the Shire varieth, not only from others, but also in it self: for
they have a land measure, and a water-measure: the water-measure, of things
sold at the ships side (as salt and peason) by the Inhabitants, is sixteen
gallons the bushel; by strangers, between 18. and 24. The land-measure
differs in diverse places, from 18. to 24. gallons the bushel, being least in
the East parts, and increasing to the Westwards, where they measure Oats by
the hogshead.

The Justices of peace have oftentimes endeavored to reduce this variance to a
certainty of double Winchester: but though they raised the lower, they cannot
abate the higher to this proportion: and yet from the want of this reformation,
there ensue many inconveniences: for the Farmer that has the greatest bushel
at the market, makes a price for the lesser to follow with little, (or at
least) no rateable deduction. Besides, they sell at home to their neighbors,
the rest of the week, by the smaller measure, as was paid in the market for
the bigger.

There are also some Ingrossers, who buy Wheat of the husbandman, after 18,
gallons the bushel, and deliver it to the transporting Merchant, for the same
sum, at 16.

So does their Perch exceed that of other Countries, which amounts unto 18.
foot. And it is likewise observed by strangers, that the Cornish miles are
much longer then those about London, if at least the weariness of their bodies
(after so painful a journey) blemish not the conjecture of their minds. I
can impute this general enlargement of saleable things, to no cause sooner,
then the Cornish man's want of vent and money, who therethrough, to equal
others in quality of price, is driven to exceed them in quantity of measure.

Touching the personal estate of the Cornish Inhabitants, Personal estate.
Names.
to begin with their name in general, I learn by master Camden (who, as the
Arch-antiquarie Iustus Lipsius testifies of him, Britanniae nebulas claro
ingenij sole illustrauit) that Ptolomey calls them Damnonii, Strabo,
Ostidamnii, and Aretemidorus, Cossini.

Touching their particular denominations; where the Saxons have not intruded
their newer vsances, they partake in some sort with their kinsmen the Welsh:
for as the Welshmen catalogize ap Rice, ap Griffin, ap Owen, ap Tuder, ap
Lewellin, etc. until they end in the highest of the stock, whom their memory
can reach unto: So the Western Cornish, by a like, but more co^pendious manner,
entitle one another with his own and his fathers christen name, and conclude
with the place of his dwelling; as John, the son of Thomas, dwelling at
Pendaruis, is called John Thomas Pendaruis. Rich. his younger brother is named,
Richard Thomas Pendaruis, etc. Through which means, diverse Gent. and others
have changed their names, by remoouing their dwellings, as Trengoue to Nance,
Bomthon, to Carclew, two brethren of the Thomasses, the one to Carnsew, the
other to Rescrowe, and many other.

Most of them begin with Tree, Pol, or Pen, which signify a Town, a Top, and a
head: whence grew the common byword.

By Tree, Pol, and Pen,
You shall know the Cornishmen.
Neither do they want some signification, as Godolfin, alias Godolghan, a
white Eagle: Chiwarton, the green Castle on the hill: which Gentlemen give
such Arms; Reskimer, the great Dogs race, who bears a Wolf passant.
Carnsew, alias, Carndew, a black rock: his house Bokelly, which sounds the
lost Goat: and a Goat he bears for his coat: Carnimow, a little City:
Cosowarth, the high Grove, etc.

And as the Cornish names hold an affinity with the Welsh, so is their language
deduced from the same source, Language
and differs only in the dialect. But the Cornish is more easy to be
pronounced, and not so unpleasing in sound, with throat letters, as the Welsh.

A friend of mine, one master Thomas Williams, discoursed once with me, that
the Cornish tongue was derived from, or at least had some acquayntance with the
Greek: and besides diverse reasons which he produced to prove the same, he
vouched many words of one sense in both; as for example:

Greek. Cornish. English. Teino Tedua Draw Mamma Mamm Mother Episcopos Escoppe
Bishop Klyo Klowo Here Didaskein Dathisky To teach Kyon Kye Dog Kentron
Kentron Spur Methyo Methow Drink Scaphe Schapth Boat Ronchos Ronchie
Snorting, etc.

This language is stored with sufficient plenty to express the conceits of a
good wit, both in prose and rhyme: yet ca^ they no more give a Cornish word for
Tie, then the Greeks for Ineptus, the French for Stand, the English for
Emulus, or the Irish for Knave.

Oaths they have not past two or three natural, but are feign to borow of the
English: mary, this want is relieved with a flood of most bitter curses, and
spiteful nicknames.

They place the adjective after the substantive, like the Grecians and Latins,
as Father ours, March guiddu, horse white, etc.

In numbering they say, Wonnen 1, Deaw 2, Tree 3, Pidder 4, Pimp 5, Whey 6, Zith
7, Eath 8, Naw 9, Deag 10, Ednack 11, Dowthack 12, Tarnack 13, Puzwarthack 14,
Punthack 15, Wheytack 16, Zitack 17, Itack 18, Naunzack 19, Eygganz 20, Deaw
Eigganz 40, Cans 100., Mill 1000., Molla 10000.


Durdatha why, is Good morrow to you, Ternestatha, Good night, Fatlughan a why:
How do you: Da durdalatha why: Well I thank you. Betha why lawanneck: Be you
merry. Benetugana: Farewell. A sister, they call Whore: a whore, whorra: a
priest, coggaz: a partridge, grigear: a Mare, cazock. Relauta: by my troth.
Warra fay: by my faith. Molla tuenda laaz, ten thousand mischiefs in thy guts.
Mill vengeance warnathy, a thousand vengeances take thee. Pedu ioll, devils
head: Pedu brauze, great head: pedu mowzack, stinking head: and so in
infinitum. Which terms, notwithstanding though they witness their spite on the
one side, yet retain they as great a proof of their devotion on the other:
for the Lords Prayer, the Apostles Creed, and the ten Commandments, have
been used in Cornish beyond all remembrance. But the principal love and
knowledge of this language, lived in Doctor Kennall the Ciuilian, and with him
lies buried: for the English speech does still encroche upon it, and has
driven the same into the uttermost skirts of the shire. Most of the Inhabitants
can no word of Cornish; but very few are ignorant of the English: and yet some
so affect their own, as to a stranger they will not speak it: for if meeting
them by chance, you inquire the way or any such matter, your answer shall be,
Meea nauidua cowzasawzneck, I can speak no Saxonage. The English which they
speak, is good and pure, as receiving it from the best hands of their own
Gentry, and the Eastern Merchants: but they disgrace it, in part, with a broad
and rude accent, and eclipsing (somewhat like the Somersetshire men) specially
in pronouncing the names: as Thomas they call, Tummas and Tubby: Matthew,
Mathaw: Nicholas, Nichlaaz: Reignald, Reinol: David, Daaui: Mary, Maari:
Frauncis, Thwyting, is properly the cutting of little chippes from a stick.
Pilme, the dust which rises: Brusse, that which lies: which terms, as they
express our meaning more directly, so they want but another Spencer, to make
them passable.

The number of Cornish Inhabitants, though it cannot directly be summed, may
yet proportionably be Number.
gessed at by the musters taken of the able men (hereafter set down) which we
will value at a third part of the whole, in ensuing Bodins rate. De Rep.


But another question falls sometimes into scanning, namely, whether Cornwall
have heretofore been better stored with people, then it is now. Some hold the
affirmative, and vouch to prove it, the general decay of Inland towns, where
whole streets, besides particular houses pay tribute to Comdowne Castle, as
also the ruins yet resting in the wild Moors, which testify a former
inhabitance. Others incline again to the negative, alleging the reasons
heretofore touched, in the dear price of farms or bargains, by which mine
assent is rather swayed: for I suppose that those waste grounds were inhabited
and manured, when the Saxons and Danes continual invasions drove them to
abandon the sea coasts, save in such towns, as were able to muster, upon any
sudden occasion, a sufficient number for their own defense. The residue
retired into the heart of the land, where, upon a longer warning, they might
sooner assemble from all sides, to make head, and the enemy in so far a march
and retrait, should adventure a greater hazard to be distressed by the way.
Which policy the French were driven unto, in Edward the thirds time, upon the
Englishmens Frowncis: James, Iammez: Walter, Watty: Robert, Dobby: Rafe, Raw:
Clemence, Clemmowe, etc. holding herein a contrary course of extension to the
Italians abridgement, who term Frauncis, Cecco: Dominick, Beco: Lawrence,
Renzo: as also to the Turks, who name Constantinople, Stampoli: Adrianople;
Adrina: an Olifant, Fill: and the Sicilians, who curtayle Nicholas, to Cola.

Besides these; they have taken up certain peculiar phrases, which require a
special Dictionarie for their interpretation: of which kind are, It Is not
bezibd that is, fortuned to me: Thou have no road, aim, he will never scrip
escape it, he is nothing pridy handsome,
as also boobish, lubberly, dule, comfort lidden byword, shune, strange, show
threaten, skew, shun, hoase. forbear.


To reprove one of lazines, they will say, Do thou make Idle a coat? that
is, a coat for idleness? In coniecturing what number may effect a thing, they
add, or some: as two, or some: ten, or some: twenty, or some: idest,
thereabouts.

The other rude terms, wherewith Deuon and Cornish men are often twyted, may
plead in their defense, not only the prescription of antiquity, but also the
title of propriety, and the benefit of significancy: for most of them take
their source from the Saxon, our natural language, and continue in use amongst
the Dutch: as Nimme comes of Nimpt: Vang, of Fieng: the one importing a
taking by ones self: the other by delivery: both which we now confound. Ich to
Ick, Cund to Cundigen, Lading, to Geladen: eruing goods, to Erbnuss. So often
roades, and the Spaniards make use of at this day, in their Indies. Touching
the decayed Inland towns, they are counteruayled with a surplusage of increase
of those on the coast, and the desolate walls in the Mores, have begotten a
seuen-fold race of cotages near the sea side. And thus much of Cornwall
compared with it self: now, if you match it with other champion Shires,
methinks, I may gather the same to be better inhabited, within a like circuit
of miles, because the plenty of hills and valleys, afford a larger quantity of
ground thereunto. He that cannot conceive this, may read Polibius in his 9
book, where it is written, that for this reason, Lacedemon, being but forty
eight furlongs in compass, contains more dwellings then Megalopolis, which
extends unto fifty. My last proof is grounded on this, that where the most
part of the shire is severed into enclosures, you cannot easily make choice to
stand in any one of them, above a quarter of a mile distance from some dwelling
house.

After the names, language, and number thus perused, the Cornish peoples
disposition and quality of mind and body, as well ancient as present, and then
their degrees and recreations, succeed to be surueyed. The first Inhabitants,
or Aborigenes, as the Paynims held, resembled those who^ our stories affirm
Brute to have found here at his landing, huge of body, rough of living, and
savage of conditions, whom an old Poet desciphered in certain verses, which I
received of my particular kind friend, and generally well-deseruing Countreyman
M-Camden, now Clarentieulx, which he since has published.

-- Titanibus illa,
Sed paucis famulosa domus, quibus vda ferarum
Terga dabant vestes, cruor haustus, pocula trunci:
Antralares, dumeta thoros, caenacula rupes,
Praeda cibos, raptus venerem, spectacula caedes,
Imperium vires, animos furor, impetus arma,
Mortem pugna, sepulchrarubus, monstrisque gemebat
Monticolis tellus, sed eorum plurima tractus,
Pars erat Occidui, terror maiorque premebat,
Tefuror extremum Zephiri Cornubialimen.
Which sound thus in English.

This was the Titans haunt, but with No plenty did abound,
Whom beasts raw hides for clothing served; For drink, the bleeding wound;
Cups, hollow trees; their lodging, dens; Their beds, brakes; parlour, rocks;
Prey, for their food; rauine, for lust; Their games, life-reauing knocks,
Their Empire, force; their courage, tage; A headlong brunt, their arms;
Combat, their death; brambles, their grave. The earth groaned at the harms
Of these mount-harbour'd monsters: but The coast extending West,
Chief foyson had, and dire dismay, And sorest fury pressed
Thee, Cornwall, that with utmost bound Of Zephire art possessed.
But afterward, the Cornishmen, through the conversation offortaine Merchants
trading into their country for Tyn, by the testimony of Diodorus Siculus, grew
to a L. 5. cap. 8.
larger measure of ciuility, then others their fellow, but more remoted
Ilanders. From which ciuility, in the fruitful age of Canonizatio^, they
stepped a degree farther to holiness, and helped to stuff the church calendar
with diverse Saints, either made or borne Cornish. Such was Keby son to Solomon
prince of Cor: such Peran, who if my author Saints.
the Legend lyenot) after that (like another Johannes de temporibus) he had
lived two hundred years with perfect health, took his last rest in a Cornish
parish, which therethrough he endowed with his name. And such were Dubslane,
Machecu, and Manclunum, who (I speak upon Math. of Westminster. credit) forsook
Ireland, thrust themselves to sea, in a Boat made of three Ox skins and a
half, with seven days victual, and miraculously arrived in Cornwall.

Of Cornish men, whose industry in learned knowledges has recommended their
fame to their posterity, Learned men.
these few as yet are only come to my notice: John of Cornwall, a student at
Rome, and other places in Italy, 1170.
wrote of the Incarnation of Christ, against Peter Lumbard, and dedicated the
same to Pope Alexander the third, by whom he was highly favored.

Simon Thurnay, after he had out-gone all the Oxford scholars in profane
learning (says the commendably 1201.
paynefull Antiquarie, and my kind friend, Master Hooker) passed from thence to
Paris, and there so profited in the study of divinity, that he attained the
chiefest place amongst the profound Sorbonists. But it was a windy knowledge
that thus filled his sails of glory, which grew at last so to tempest his
wits, as he held Aristotle superior to Moses and Christ, and yet but equal
to himself. But this extreme surquedry, forfeyted his wits, so as at last
they could not serve him to know any letter in the book, or to remember ought
that he had done.

In King Henry the thirds time, lived Michael of Cornwall, admirable (as those
days gave) for his variety of Latin rimes, who maintained the reputation of
his Country, against Henry de Abrincis, the Kings Arch-Poet, but somewhat
angerly, as it seems by these verses against the said de Abrincis:

Est tibi gamba capri, crus Passeris, and latus Apri,
Os leports, catuli nasus, dens and gena muli,
Frons vetule, tauri caput, and color vndique Mauri
His argumentis, quibus est argutia mentis,
Quod non a Monstro differs, satis hic tibi monstro.
Walter of Exon, a Franciscane Friar of Carocus in 1292.
Cornwall, at the request of Baldwin of Exon (de-) formed the History of Guy
of War wick.

Godfrey, surnamed of Cornwall, was about that time a cunning Schoole-man, and
Divinity Reader in Paris.

William de Grenefild, from the Deanery of Chichester 1342.
stepped to the Chauncellorship of England, and Archbishopric of York, under
K. E. the first.

In Ed. the seconds days, one Geffrey of Cornwall, is remembered for a writer.

John Treuisa, a Cornishman, lived in R. the 2. reign, and translated diverse
books into English.

King Henry the fifth not unmindful of the ciuiller Arts amongst his Martial
exployts, founded an University at Caen in Normandy, and appointed Michael
Tregury of Cornwall, for his rare gifts in learning, to be Governor thereof.

In Henry the sixts time, John Skewish compiled certain abbridgements of
Chronicles, and the wars of Troy.

King Henry the 7. promoted John Arundel for his learning, to the sea of
Excester.

Neither is Thomas Trivet to be forgotten, as a writer, though he have graue^
his memory in a fairer letter, by building the costly bridge at Bridge-water,
of which sometimes he was Lord.

Within our remembrance Cornwall has bred or harbored Divines, graced with
the degree of Doctorship, Moreman, Tremayn, Nichols, and Rolls. Bachelors,
Medhope, Stowel, Moore, Denis. Of Preachers, the shire holds a number,
plentiful in regard of other shires, though not competent to the full
necessity of their own, all commendably laboring in their vocation, though
not endowed with an equal ability to discharge the same.

In the Civil law there lived of late Doctor Kennals, and Ciuilians.
now does Doctor Carew, one of the ancientest masters of the Chauncerie; in
which calling, after his younger years spent abroad to his benefit, he has
reposed himself. Bachelors there are, Carnsew, Kete, and Denis. Barristers at
the Common law, Chiuerton, Tremayne, Skawn, Common Lawyers.
Michel, Moyle, Courtnay, Tub, Treffry, Sayer. These testify the honesty of
their carriage by the mediocrity of their estate: and (if they will give me
leave to report a jest) do verify an old Gentleman's prophecy, who said that
there stood a man at Polston bridge (the first entrance into Cornwall, as you
pass toward Launceston, where the Assizes are holden) with a black bill in
his hand, ready to knock down all the great Lawyers, that should offer to
plant themselves in that County. In earnest, whether it be occasioned through
the countries poverty, or by reason of the far distance thereof from the
supremer Courts, or for that the multiplicity of petty ones near at hand,
appertaining to the Duchy, Stannary, and Franchises, do enable the attourneyes
and such like of small reading, to serve the peoples turn, and so curtall the
better studied Counselors profiting; once certain it is, that few men of
Law, have either in our time, or in that of our forefathers, grown here to
any supereminent height of learning, liuely-hood or authority.

Of like fortune, but less number, are the Phisicio^s; by how much the fewer,
by so much the greater witnesses Phisicions.
of the soyles healthfulnes. The most professors of that science in this
County, saving only one 10. Williams, can better vouch practice for their
warrant, then warrant for their practice. Amongst these, I reckon Raw Clyes a
black Smith by his occupation, and furnished with no more learning, then is
suitable to such a calling, who yet has ministered Phisike for many years, with
so often success and general applause, that not only the homebred multitude
beleeneth mightily in him, but eue^ persons of the better calling, resort to
him from remote parts of the realm, to make trial of his cunning, by the
hazard of their lives; and sundry, either upon just cause, or to cloak their
folly, report that they have reaped their errands end at his hands. But far
more commendable is M. Atwel, sometimes Parson of Caluerly in Deuon, and now of
S. Tue in Cornwall. For besides other parts of learning, with which he has
been seasoned, he is not unseen in the Theoricks of Phisike, and can out of
them readily and probably discourse, touching the nature and accidents of all
diseases. Besides, his judgment in vrines comes little behind the
skilfullest in that profession. Mary his practice is somewhat strange and
varying from all others: for though now and then he use blood-letting, and do
ordinarily minister Manus Christi, and such like cordials, of his own
compounding (a point fitting well with my humor, as enabling nature, who best
knows how to work) yet mostly for all diseases he prescribes milk, and very
often milk and apples, a course deeply subject to the exception of the best
esteemed Practitioners; and such notwithstanding, as whereby either the virtue
of the medicine, or the fortune of the Physician, or the credulity of the
Patient, has recovered sundry out of desperate and forlorn extremities.

This his reputation is of many years standing, and maintayneth it self
vnimpayred. But the same soareth to an higher pitch, by the help of another
wing, and that is, his liberality. On the poor he bestows his pains and
charges gratis: of the rich he takes moderately, but leaves the one half
behind, in gift amongst the household, if he be called abroad to visit any: The
rest together with the profits of his benefice (rather charitably accepted,
the^ strictly exacted from his Parishioners) he powers out with both hands in
pios vsus, and will hardly suffer a penny to sleep, but never to dwell with
him.

Few Towns there are in Cornwall, or any other shire between that and London,
which have not in some large measure tasted of his bounty. None comes in
kindness to see him, but departs gratifyed with somewhat, if his modesty will
accept it. Briefly, his sound affection in religion, is so waited on by
honesty of life, and pleasantness of conversation, that in Fabritius his
voluntary poverty, he is an equal partner of his honor, and possesses a
large interest in the love of his neighbors. My love to virtue, and not any
particular beholdingnes, has expressed this my testimony.

For persons employed in state affairs, and therethrough State men.
stepped to preferment, that I may not outstride late remembrance, Sir Richard
Edgecumb the elder, was Comptroller of the household, and privy Counselor to
King Henry the seventh, being sent by him also in diverse Ambassades, in one of
which to the Duke of Britain he deceased.

King Henry the eight made like use in this last kind, of John Tregonwel, who
graduated a Doctor, and dubbed a Knight, did his Prince good service, and lest
fair revenues to his posterity.

Sir Thomas Arundel, a younger brother of Lanhearn house, married the sister to
Queen Katherine Howard, and in Edward the 6. time was made a privy
Counselor: but cleaving to the Duke of Somerset, he lost his head with him.

Sir Henry Killigrew, after Ambassades and messages, and many other employments
of peace and war, in his Princes service, to the good of his Country, has
made choice of a retired estate, and reverently regarded by all sorts, places
his principal contentment in himself, which, to a life so well acted, can no
way be wanting.

Master George Carew, in his younger years gathered such fruit, as the
University, the Innes of Court, and forrayne travel could yield him: upon his
return, he was first called to the Bar; then supplied the place of
Secretary to the Lord Chancellor Hatton; and after his decease, performed
the like office to his two successors; by special recommendation from her
Majesty, who also gave him the Prothonotaryship of the Chauncery, and in anno,
1598. sent him Ambassador to the King of Poland, and other Nothern Potentates,
where, through unexpected accidents, he underwent extraordinary perils, but God
freed him from them, and he performed his duty in acceptable manner, and at
this present the common wealth uses his service, as a Master of the Chauncery.

Cornwall, no doubt, has affoorded a far larger proportion of well deserving
and employed members, to the good of their Prince and Country, albeit they
fall not within the compass of my knowledge, and it is likely that the
succeeding age will much increase the number, by means of her Highness bounty,
who to that end has established seed-plots of free Schools, with competent
Free schools.
pentions out of her own cofers, for the teachers at Saltash, Launceston, and
Perin, three market towns of the County.

In descending to martial men, Arthur claims the first mention, a Cornishman
by birth, a King of Britain Martial men.
by succession, and the second of the three Christian worthies by desert: whom
(if you so please) that Captain of Arms and Venery, Sir Tristram, shall
accompany. From them, I must make a great leap (which conuinceth me an unworthy
associat of the antiquary College) to Sir John Naphant, who (if I mistake not)
was by country a Cornish man, though by inhabitance a Calisian, where H. 7.
used his service in great trust; and Cardinal Wolsey owned him for his first
master. More assured I am, that Sir John Arundell of Trerne, upon a long fight
at sea, took prisoner one Duncane Camel, a hardy Scottish Pirate, and presented
him to K. H. the 8: for our Chronicles report it. Toward the end of that Kings
reign, Sir Will. Godolphin also demeaned himself very valiantly in a charge
which he bare beyond the seas, as appeared by the skarres he brought home, no
less to the beautifying of his fame, then the disfiguring of his face: Whose
Nephew, of the fame name and dignity, has so enriched himself with
sufficiency for matters of policy, by his long travel, and for martial
affairs, by his present valiant carriage in Ireland, that it is better known,
how far he outgoeth most others in both, then easily to be discerned for which
he deserves principal commendation himself. So did Sir Ric. Greinuile the
elder enterlace his home Magistracy, with martial employments abroad: whereof
the K. testified his good liking by his liberality. Which domestical example,
encouraged his son Roger the more hardily to hazard, and the more willingly
to resign his life, in the unfortunate Mary Rose. A disposition and success
equally fatal to that house: for his son again, the second Sir Ric. after
his travel and following the wars under the Emperor Maximilian, against the
great Turk, for which his name is recorded by sundry foreign writers, and his
undertaking to people Virginia and Ireland, made so glorious a conclusion in
her Majesty's ship the Revenge (of which he had charge, as Captain, and of the
whole fleet as Vice Admiral) that it seemed thereby, when he found none other
to compare withal in his life, he striued through a virtuous envy to exceed it
in his death. A victorious loss for the realm; and of which the Spaniard may
say with Pirrhus, that many such conquests would beget his utter overthrow.
Lastly, his son John took hold of every martial occasion that was ministered
him, until, in service against her Highness enemies, under the command of
Sir Walter Ralegh, the Ocean became his bed of honor. Neither may I without
wrong pass over Captain George Wray in silence, who (by a rare temperature of
virtues) breathed courage into his soldiers, purchased love amongst his
acquaintance, and bred dismay in his enemies. Or captain Hender, the
absolutest man of war for precise observing martial rules which his days
affoorded, besides his commendable sufficiency of head and hand for invention
and execution. I will end with master William Lower, late captain of Sir
Frauncis Veres company in Netherland, who has opened the war school unto a
great many Cornish young gentlemen, that under his conduct sought to conform
themselves to his pattern, every way accomplished with all the due parts of
honor.

For Mechanical sciences the old Veale of Bodmyn might Mechanical.
justly expostulate with my silence, if I should not spare him a room in this
Survey, while he so well deserves it. This man has been so beholden to
Mercuryes predominant strength in his natiuitle, that without a teacher he is
become very skillful in welneere all manner of handy-crafts: a Carpenter, a
Ioyner, a Milwright, a free-Mason, a Clockmaker, a Caruer, metal founder,
Architect, and quid non? yea a Surgeon, Physician, Alchumist, etc. So as that
which Gorgias of Leontium vaunted Cie. de Orat.
of the liberal sciences, he may profess of the mechanical, viz. to be
ignorant in none.

The Cornish minds thus qualified, are the better enabled to express the same
by the strong, active, and healthful constitution of their bodies; touching
each whereof a little in particular, though we shall have a fitter general
Bodies.
occasion to discourse thereof, where we handle their passetimes. For strength,
one John Bray (well known to me as my tenant) carried upon his back, at one
time, Strength
by the space welneere of a Butte length, six bushels of wheaten meal,
reckoning fifteen gallons to the bushel, and the Miller, a lubber of four and
twenty years age, upon the whole.

John Roman, a short clownish grub, would bear the whole carkase of an Ox,
and yet never tugged with him, like that so famous Milo, when he was a Calfe.

For actiuity, one Kiltor, committed to Launceston Gayle for the last Cornish
commotion, lying there Activity.
in the castle-greene upon his back, threw a stone of some pounds wayght, over
that Towers top, which leads into the park.

For health, 80. and 90. years age, is ordinary in every Health.
place, and in most persons, accompanied with an able use of the body and his
senses. One Polzew, lately living, reached unto 130. a kinsman of his, to 112.
one Beauchamp to 106. yea Brawne the beggar, a Cornishman by wandering (for I
cannot say, by inhabitance) though Irish by birth, out-scoreth a hundred
winters, by I wot not how many reuolutions. And in the parish where God has
seated my poor dwelling, I remember the decease of four, within 14. weeks
space, whose years added together, made up the sum of 340.

Now to the degrees of their several callings, wherein Degrees.
as I will poast over the Dukes to another place, so for Noblemen, I may
deliver in a word, that Cornwall Nobility.
at this present enjoys the residence of none at al. The occasion whereof
grows, partly, because their issue female have carried away the Inhabitance,
together with the Inheritance, to Gentlemen of the Eastern parts; and partly,
for that their issue male, little affecting so remote a corner, liked better to
transplant their possessions nearer to the heart of the Realm. Elder times
were not so barraine: for besides the Lord Tregoyes in Lords houses.
Will. Conquerours days, Bottreaux Castle vaunted his Baron of that title; both
now descended to the Earls of Huntingdon: the last deceased of which,
retayning the honor, departed with the land to my kind friend master John
Hender, a Gentleman for his good parts, employed by her Majesty amongst
others, in the peace government of the shire.

The Lord Bonuile his house was at Trelawne, alias, Trelawney, lately purchased
of her Highness, by Sir Jonathan Trelawny, a Knight well spoken, stayed in his
carriage, and of thrifty providence.

The Lord Bray dwelt at: the Lord Brook, at Kellington, where one of them has
his tomb: the Lord Marney at Colquite: and the Lord Denham, at Cardenham.

Boconnock also appertained to the Earls of Deuon, and was by Frauncis Earl
of Bedford, sold to Sir William Mohun, who derived his pedigree from the
ancient Barons of that name, and is also issued from one of those Earls of
Deuons sisters and heirs. This together with other fair possessions, now
rests in Sir Reignald Mohun his son, one that by his courteous, just, and
liberal course of life, maintayneth the reputation, and increases the love
always borne his ancestors.

The most Cornish Gentlemen can better vaunt of their pedigree, then their
liuelyhood: for that, they derive Cornish Gentlemen.
from great antiquity, (and I make question, whether any shire in England, of
but equal quantity, can muster a like number of fair coate-Armours) whereas
this declineth to the mean. One cause there is of both proceeding from the
want of those supplies, which service, law and merchandise, afford the more
inward Inhabitants of the Realm, as I have else where touched: yet this rule
is not so general, but that it admits his exceptions: for there are diverse,
whose patrimonies extend to a large proportion; and for the residue, the
cheapnes of their provisions, and their casualties of Tyn, and fines (which 2.
later ordinarily treble the certain reuennue of their rents) enable them with
their few scores, to equal the expenses of those Eastern dwellers, who reckon
by the hundreds: besides, they find means by a survey, to defray any
extraordinary charge of building, marriage, lawing, or such like. Yet I cannot
deny, but that some, in gaping for dead men's shoes, find their improuident
covetous humor punished with going barefoot.

This angle which so shuts them in, has wrought many interchangeable
matches with each others stock, and given beginning to the proverb, that all
Cornish gentlemen are cousins; which ends in an injurious consequence, that
the king has there no cousins. They keep liberal, but not costly builded or
furnished houses, give kind entertainment to strangers, make even at the
years end with the profits of their living, are reverenced and beloved of
their neighbors, live void of factions amongst themselves (at leastwise such
as break out into any dangerous excess) and delight not in bravery of
apparel: yet the women would be very loath to come behind the fashion, in
newfanglednes of the manner, if not in costlynes of the matter, which perhaps
might ouer-empty their husbands purses. They converse familiarly together, and
often visit one another. A Gentleman and his wife will ride to make merry with
his next neighbor; and after a day or twain, those two couples go to a
third: in which progress they increase like snowballs, till through their
burdensome weight they break again.

And here I thought requisite, to lay down the names of such Cornish
Gentlemen, as I find recorded to have come in with the Conqueror. Conquest
Gentlemen


Gentlemen descended from those, who came in with the Conqueror, and now
residing in Cornwall.
Arundell. Basset. Bluat, alias, Bluet. Beauchamp. Bray. Bellet. Beuill.
Barret. Courtenay. Chaumont, alias, Chamond. Denis. Greinuile. Karrow, alias,
Carew. Mowne, alias, Mohun. Malet. Miners. Pomeray. Rouse. Samtalbin, alias,
Semtabyn. Saulay, alias, Saul.


If the variety of Arms disclaim from any of these names, I will not stand
upon a stiff justification: and yet it is to be noted, that diverse Cornish
Gentlemen, borne younger brothers, and advanced by match, have left their own
coats, and honored those of their wives with the first quarter of their
shields. Which error their posterity likewise ensued, as also, that before
these later petty differences grew in vogue, the Arms of one stock were
greatly diuersified in the younger branches.

I had also made a more paynful, then perfect collection of most of the Cornish
Gentlemen's names and Arms: But because the publishing thereof might perhaps
go accompanied with diverse wrongs, to my much reverenced friends the Heralds,
by thrusting my sickle into their harvest; to a great many my Countrymen, whom
my want of information should be forced to pass over unmentioned; and to the
truth it self, where my report (relying upon other men's credits) might through
their error entitle me the publisher (though not the author) of falsehood: I
rather thought fit altogether to omit it, and to note only, that of diverse
Gentlemen there have been in Cornwall, either their names are worn out, or
their livings transferred by the females, into other families: as likewise,
sundry of those there now inhabiting, are lately denized Cornish, being
generally drawn thither (besides other more private respects) through, either
the desire of change, which the disease of discontent affects, or the love of
quiet in so remote a corner, or the supposall of commodities there arising, and
accruing, or the warrantize from ouerlooking and bearing, where little
difference in quality tends to an equality in estates.

From Gentility, we will descend to ciuility, which is or should be in the
townsmen. Those in Cornwall do no Townsmen.
more by nature, then others elsewhere by choice, conceive themselves an
estranged society from the vpland dwellers, and carry, I will not say a malice,
but an emulation against them, as if one member in a body could continue his
wel-being without a be holdingnes to the rest. Their chiefest trade consists
in uttering their petty marchandises, and Artificers labors at the weekly
markets. Very few among the^ make use of that opportunity, which the site upon
the sea proffereth unto many, for building of shipping, and traffiking in
gross: yet some of the Eastern towns piddle that way, and some others give
themselves to fishing voyages, both which (when need requires) furnish her
Majesty's navy with good store of very serviceable Mariners.

There are (if they be not slaundered) that hunt after a more easy then
commendable profit, with little hazard, and (I would I could not say) with
less conscience. Anno 32. H. 8. an act of Parliament was made for repayring,
amongst others, the Borough towns of Launceston, Liskerd, Lostwithiel, Bodmyn,
Truro, and Helston in Cornwall, but with what fruit to their good, I cannot
relate.

Within late years memory, the sea-cost Towns begin to proclaim their
bettering in wealth, by costly increase of buildings; but those of the Inland,
for the most part, vouch their ruined houses, and abandoned streets, as too
true an evidence, that they are admitted no partners in this amendment. If I
mistake not the cause, I may with charity enough wish them still the same
fortune: for as is elsewhere touched, I conceive their former large peopling,
to have bin an effect of the countries impouerishing, while the invasion of
foreign enemies drove the Seacoast Inhabitants to seek a more safe, then
commodious aboade in those Inland parts.

Strangers occasioned to travail through the shire, were wont, no less
sharply the^ truly, to inueigh against the bad drink, course lodging, and
slack attendance which they found in those houses that went for Innes: neither
did their horses better entertainme^t, prove them any welcomer ghests then
their masters: but in stead of remedy, they received in answer, that neither
such an outcorner was frequented with many way farers, nor by hanging out
signs, or forestalling at the Towns end, like the Italians, did they inuit
any; and to make great provision upon small hope of utterance, were to incur
a skorne-worthy loss, seeing Aspettare, and non venire (says the same
Italian) is one of the tree cose da morire.

Touching the Yeomanrie of Cornwall, I can say little, Yeomanry.
worth the observing, for any difference from that of other shires, and
therefore I will step down the next staire to husbandmen.

These in times not past the remembrance of some Husband men.
yetliuing, rubbed forth their estate in the poorest plight, their grounds lay
all in common, or only divided by stitch-meale: little bread-corne their
drink, water, or at best, but whey: for the richest Farmour in a parish brewed
not above twyce a year, and then, God wotte what liquour: their meat,
Whitfull, as they call it, namely, milk, sour milk, cheese, curds, butter,
and such like as came from the cow and ewe, who were tied by the one leg at
pasture: their apparel, course in matter, ill shapen in manner: their legs
and feet naked and bare, to which sundry old folk had so accustomed their
youth, that they could hardly abide to wear any shoes; complaining how it
kept them over hot. Their horses shod only before, and for all furniture a
pad and halter, on which the meaner country wenches of the western parts do
yet ride astride, as all other English folk used before R. the 2. wife brought
in the side saddle fashion of straw.

Suitable hereunto was their dwelling, and to that their implements of
household: walls of earth, low thatched roofes, few partitions, no planchings
or glass windows, and scarcely any chimnies, other then a hole in the wall to
let out the smoke: their bed, straw and a blanket: as for sheets, so much
linen cloth had not yet stepped over the narrow channel, between them and
Britain. To conclude, a mazer and a pan or two, comprised all their
substance: but now most of these fashions are universally banished, and the
Cornish husbandman conformeth himself with a better supplied civility to the
Eastern pattern, which has directed him a more thriuing form of husbandry;
and our halcion days of peace enabled him to apply the lesson: so as, his
fine once overcome, he can maintain himself and his family in a co^petent
decency to their calling, and finds money to bestow weekly at the markets,
for his provisions of necessity and pleasure: for his quarterlie rent serves
rather as a token of subjection to his Landlord, then any grievous exaction on
his tenement.

One point of their former roughness, some of the Western people do yet
still retain, and therethrough in some measure, verify that restimonie which
Matthew Westminster. gives of them, together with the Welsh, their ancient
countrymen: namely, how fostering a fresh memory of their expulsion long ago
by the English, they second the same with a bitter repining at their
fellowship: and this the worst sort express, in combining against, and working
them all the shrewd turns which with hope of impunitie they can devise:
howbeit, it shoots not to a like extremity in all places and persons, but
rather by little and little, wears out unto a more mild and conuersable
fashion. Amongst themselves they agree well, and company lovingly together: to
their gentlemen they carry a very dutiful regard, as enured in their
obeisance from their ancestors, and holding them as Roytelets, because they
know no greater. Only it might be wished, that diverse amongst them had less
spleen to attempt lawsuits, for petty supposed wrongs, or not so much
subtlety and stiffenesse to prosecute them: so should their purses be heavier,
and their consciences lighter: a reporter must auerre no falsehood, nor conceal
any truth.

We must also spare a room in this Survey, to the Poor.
poor, of whom few Shires can show more, or own fewer then Cornwall. Ireland
prescribes to be the nurserie, which sends over yearly, yea and daily whole
Ship-loades of these crooked slips, and the dishabited towns afford them
rooting: so upon the matter, the whole County makes a contribution, to pay
those Lords their rent. Many good Statutes have been enacted for redress of
these abuses, and upon the first publishing, heedfully and diligently put in
practice: but after the nine days wonder expired, the law is forgotten, the
care abandoned, and those vermin swarm again in every corner: yet those
peevish charitable cannot be ignorant, that herethrough, to the high offense of
God and good order, they maintain idleness, drunkenness, theft, lechery,
blasphemy, Atheisine, and in a word, all impiety: for a worse kind of people
then these vagabonds, the realm is not pestered withal: what they consume in a
day, will suffice to relieve an honest poor parishioner for a week, of whose
work you may also make some use: their staruing is not to be feared, for they
may be provided for at home, if they list: no alms therefore should be cast
away upon them, to the robbery of the needy impotent; but money least of all:
for in giving him saluour, you do him wrong, by changing his vocation, while
you metamorphize him from a beggar to a buyer. Lacks he meat, drink, or
apparel? (and nothing else he ought to be owner of) he must procure them of
the worst by free gift, and not make choice, for a just price, of the best.
Well, though the rogue laugh you to scorn at night, the alewife has reason
the next day to pray for you.

Surely we find by experience, that this so heinous an enormitie may be both
easily and quickly reformed: for let the Constables execute upon the rogues
that last most benificiall Act of Parliament, with due severity for one week,
and the terror thereof will free the parish for a month: use it a month, and
you are acquitted for the whole year. If the Constables persist in their
remissness, let the Justices lay the penalty upon them, and they will no longer
hoodwinke themselves at their neighbors faults. Let the neighbor be so
pinched by the purse, but once or twice, and he willbecome a great deal the
more sensible to season his charity with discretion for a long time after:

Upon the first statute, there was a house of correction erected at Bodmin, to
the great charge, but little benefit of the Country. Which experience
lessoneth them to illude this later, by appoynting certain cotagers houses in
every parish to serve, nomine tenus, for that purpose.

Lazer-houses, the devotion of certain Cornish Gentlemen's ancesters erected at
Minbinet by Liskerd, S. Thomas Lazerhouses
by Launceston, and S. Lawrence by Bodmyn^ of which, this last is well endowed
and governed. Concerning the other, I have little to say, unless I should
echo some of their complaints, that they are defrauded of their right. The
much eating of fish, especially newly taken, and therein principally of the
livers, is reckoned a great breed of those contagious humors, which turn into
Leprosy: but whence soever the cause proceeds, daily events minister often
pitiful spectacles to the Cornish men's eyes, of people visited with this
affliction; some being authors of their own calamity by the forementioned
diet, and some others succeeding therein to an haereditarius morbus of their
ancestors: whom we will leave to the poorest comfort in misery, a helpless
pity.

But let me lead you from these impleasing matters, to refresh yourselues with
taking view of the Cornish Recr eations.
men's recreations, which consist principally in feasts and pastimes.

Their feasts are commonly harvest dinners, Churchales, and the solemnizing of
their parish Churches dedication, Feasts.
which they term their Saints feast.

The harvest dinners are held by every wealthy Harvest dinners.
man, or as we term it, every good liver, between Michaelmas and Candlemas,
whereto he inuiteth his next neighbors and kindred, and though it bear only
the name of a dinner, yet the ghests take their supper also with them, and
consume a great part of the night after in Christmas rule: neither does the
good cheer wholly expire (though it somewhat decrease) but with the end of the
week.

For the Church-ale, two young men of the parish Churchale.
are yearly chosen by their last foregoers, to be Wardens, who dividing the
task, make collection among the parishioners, of whatsoever provision it
pleases them voluntarily to bestow. This they employ in brewing, baking, and
other acates, against Whitsontide; upon which Holidays, the neighbors meet at
the Church house, and there merrily feed on their own victuals, contributing
some petty portion to the stock, which by many smalls, grows to a meetly
greatness: for there is entertained a kind of emulation between these Wardens,
who by his graciousnes in gathering, and good husbandry in expe^ding, can best
advance the Churches profit. Besides, the neighbor parishes, at those times
lovingly visit one another, and this way frankely spend their money together.
The afternoones are consumed in such exercises, as old and young folk (having
leisure) do accustomably wear out the time withal.

When the feast is ended, the Wardens yield in their account to the
Parishioners, and such money as exceeds the disbursments, is laid up in
store, to defray any extraordinary charges arising in the parish, or imposed on
them for the good of the Country, or the Princes service. Neither of which
commonly gripe so much, but that somewhat still remains to cover the purses
bottom.

The Saints feast is kept upon the dedication day, by Saints feasts
every householder of the parish, within his own doors, each entertayning such
forrayne acquaintance, as will not fail when their like turn comes about,
to requite him with the like kindness.

Oflate times, many Ministers have by their ernest inuectiues, both condemned
these Saints feasts as superstitious, and suppressed the Church-ales, as
licencious: concerning which, let it breed none offense, for me to report a
conference that I had not long since, with a near friend, who (as I conceive)
looked heerinto with an Indifferent and vnpreiudicating eye. I do reverence
(said he) the calling and judgment of the Ministers, especially when most of
them concur in one opinion, and that the matter controuersed, holds some
affinity with their profession. Howbeit, I doubt, least in their exclayming or
declayming against Church-ales and Saints feasts, their ringleaders did only
regard the rind, and not perce into the pith, and that the rest were chiefly
swayed by their example: even as the vulgar, rather stouped to the wayght of
their authority, then became persuaded by the force of their reasons. And
first touching Church-ales, these be mine assertions, if not my proofs: Of
things induced by our forefathers, some were instituted to a good use, and
perverted to a bad: again, some were both naught in the invention, and so
continued in the practice. Now that Church-ales ought to be sorted in the
better rank of these twain, may be gathered from their causes and effects,
which I thus raffe up together: entertaining of Christian love, conforming of
men's behavior to a civil conversation, compounding of controversies,
appeasing of quarrels, raising a store, which might be converted, partly to
good and godly uses, as releeuing all sorts of poor people, repairing of
Churches, building of bridges, amending of high ways; and partly, for the
Princes service, by defraying at an instant, such rates and taxes as the
magistrate imposes for the Countries defense. Briefly, they tend to an
instructing of the mind by amiable conference, and an enabling of the body by
commendable exercises. But I fearing lest my friend would run himself out of
breath, in this volubilitie of praising, stepped athwart him with these
objections: That he must pardon my dissenting from his opinion, touching the
goodness of the institution: for taken at best, it could not be martialled
with the sacred matters, but rather with the civil, if not with the profane;
that the very title of ale was somewhat nasty, and the thing it self had been
corrupted with such a multitude of abuses, to wit, idleness, drunkenness,
lasciuiousnes, vain disports of minstrelsie, dancing, and disorderly
night-watchings, that the best curing was to cut it clean away. As for his
fore-remembred good causes and effects, I saw not, but that if the peoples
minds were guided by the true level of christian charity and duty, such
necessary and profitable contributions might still be continued gratis, and the
country eased of that charge to their purse and conscience, which ensues this
gourma^dise. His reply was, that if this ordinance could not reach unto that
sanctity which depends on the first table, yet it succeeded the same in the
next degree, as appertayning to the second. Mine exception against the title,
he mockingly matched with their scrupulous precisenes, who (forsooth) would not
say Christmas, nor Michaelmas, as other folk did; but Christ's tide, and
Michaels tide: who (quoth he) by like consequence must also bind themselves to
say, Toms tide, Lams tide, and Candles tide. But if the name of ale relish so
ill, whereas the licour it self is the English man's ancientest and wholesomest
drink, and serves many for meat and cloth too; he was contented I should
call it Church beer, or Church wine, or what else I listed: mary, for his part
he would loqui cum vulgo, though he studied sentire cum sapientibus. Where I
affirmed, that the people might by other means be trained with an equal
largess to semblable works of charity, he suspected lest I did not enter
into a through consideration of their nature and quality, which he had
observed to be this: that they would sooner depart with 12. pennyworth of ware,
then sixepence in coin, and this shilling they would willingly double, so they
might share but some pittance thereof again. Now in such indifferent matters,
to serve their humors, for working them to a good purpose, could breed no manner
of scandal. As for the argument of abuse, which I so largely dilated, that
should rather conclude a reformation of the fault, then an abrogation of the
fact.

For to prosecute your own Metaphore (quoth he) surely I hold him for a sorry
Surgeon, that cannot skill to salve a sore, but by taking away the lymme, and
little better then the Physician, who, to help the disease, will reaue the
life of his Patient from him. Abuses, doubtless, great and many have, by
success of time, crept hereinto, as into what other almost, divine, or civil,
do they not? and yet in these public meetings, they are so presented to every
man's sight, as shame somewhat restrayneth the excess, and they may much the
sooner be both espied and redressed. If you think I go about to defend
Churchales, with all their faults, you wrong your judgment, and your judgment
wrongeth me. I would rather (as a Burgess of this ale-parliament) enact
certain laws, by which such assemblies should be governed: namely, that the
drink should neither be too strong in taste, nor too often tasted: that the
ghests should be enterlarded, after the Persian custom, by ages, young and old,
distinguished by degrees of the better and meaner: and severed into sexes, the
men from the women: that the meats should be sawced with pleasant, but honest
talk: that their songs should be of their ancestors honorable actions: the
principal time of the morning, I would have hallowed to Gods service: the
after-noones applied to manlike actiuities: and yet I would not altogether
bar sober and open dancing, until it were first thoroughly banished from
marriages, Christmas revels, and (our Countries pattern) the court: all which
should be concluded, with a reasonable and seasonable portion of the night: and
so (said he) will I conclude this part of my speech, with adding only one
word more for my better justification: that in defending feasts, I maintain
neither Paradox, nor a conceit in nubibus, but a matter practiced amongst us
from our eldest ancestors, with profitable and well pleasing fruit, and not
only by our nation, but, both in former ages, by the best and strictest
disciplined common wealth of the Lacedaemonians, who had their ordinary
Sissitia, and now in our days, as well by the reformed, as Catholic Switzers,
who place therein a principal Arcanum imperij.

Now touching the Saints feasts, if you taynt them with suspect of
superstition, because they are held upon those Saints days, by whose names the
parish Churches are styled, I will ward that blow with the shield of Arch-Saint
Austines authority, who in his 8. book of Gods City, and 27. Chap. in the
like case, justifies a less allowable practice of the primitive Christians.
Summa, he closed his discourse with this protestation, that he appealed not
from, but to the honorably respected censure of the reverend Ministry,
desiring his speech might receive, not the allowance of a position, but the
license of a proposition: which my friends modest submission, I could not but
embrace my self, and recommend it over to your favorable acceptance.

My last note touching these feasts, tends to a commendation of the ghests,
who (though rude in their other fashions) may for their discreet judgment in
precedence, and preseance, read a lesson to our ciuilest gentry. Amongst them,
at such public meetings, not wealth but age is most regarded: so as (save in a
very notorious disproportion of estates) the younger rich reckons it a shame
sooner then a grace, to step or sit before the elder honest, and rather
expects his turn for the best room, by succession, then intrudeth thereto
by anticipation.

Pastimes to delight the mind, the Cornish men have Guary miracles, and three
men's songs: and for exercise of the body, Hunting, Hawking, Shooting,
Wrestling, Hurling, and such other games.

The Guary miracle, in English, a miracle-play, is a Guary miracle.
kind of Interlude, compiled in Cornish out of some scripture history, with
that grossenes, which accompanied the Romans vetus Comedia. For representing
it, they raise an earthen Amphitheatre, in some open field, having the Diameter
of his enclosed plain some 40. or 50. foot. The Country people flock from all
sides, many miles off, to hear and see it: for they have therein, devils and
devices, to delight as well the eye as the ear: the players conne not their
parts without book, but are prompted by one called the Ordinary, who follows
at their back with the book in his hand, and tells them softly what they
must pronounce aloud. Which manner once gave occasion to a pleasant conceyted
gentleman, of practicing a merry pranke: for he undertaking (perhaps of set
purpose) an Actors room, was accordingly lessoned (beforehand) by the
Ordinary, that he must say after him. His turn came: quoth the Ordinary, Go
forth man and show thy self. The gentleman steps out upon the stage, and like
a bad Clarke in scripture matters, cleaving more to the letter then the sense,
pronounced those words aloud. Oh (says the fellow softly in his ear) you
mar all the play. And with this his passion, the Actor makes the audience in
like sort acquainted. Hereon the promptor falls to flat railing and cursing in
the bitterest terms he could devise: which the Gentleman with a set gesture
and countenance still soberly related, until the Ordinary driven at last into
a mad rage, was feign to give over all. Which trousse though it brake off the
Interlude, yet defrauded not the beholders, but dismissed them with a great
deal more sport and laughter, then 20. such Guaries could have affoorded.

They have also Cornish three men's songs, cunningly Three men's songs. Shooting.
contrived for the ditty, and pleasantly for the note.

Amongst bodily pastimes, shooting carries the preeminence; to which in mine
younger years I carried such affection, as I induced Archery, persuading others
to the like liking, by this ensuing Prosopopeia:

My dear friends, I come to complain upon you, but to your selves: to blame
you, but for your good: to expostulate with you, but in the way of
reconciliation. Alas, what my desert can justify your abandoning my fellowship,
and hanging me thus up, to be smoke-starued over your chimnies? I am no
stranger unto you, but by birth, your Countrywoman: by dwelling your neighbor:
by education, your familiar: neither is my company shameful; for I haunt the
light and open fields: nor my conversation dangerous: nay, it shields you from
dangers, and those not the least, but of greatest consequence, the dangers of
war. And as in fight I give you protection, so in peace I supply you
pastime; and both in war and peace, to your lymmes I yield active
plyantnesse, and to your bodies healthful exercise: yea I provide you food
when you are hungry, and help digestion when you are full. Whence then
proceeds this unkind and unusual strangeness? Am I heavy for burden?
Forsooth, a few light sticks of wood. Am I combrous for carriage? I couch a
part of my self close under your girdle, and the other part serves for a
walking-staffe in your hand. Am I unhandsome in your sight? every piece of me
is comely, and the whole keeps an harmonicall proportion. Lastly, am I costly
to be provided? or hard to be maintained? No, cheapnesse is my purueyour,
easiness my preserver, neither do I make you blow away your charges with my
breath, or taynt your nose with my sent, nor defile your face and fingers with
my color, like that hellborne murderer, whom you accept before me. I appeal
then to your valiant Princes, Edwards, and Henry's, to the battayles of Cresey,
Poyters, Agincourt, and Floddon, to the regions of Scotland, France, Spain,
Italy, Cyprus, yea and Jury, to be vmpires of this controversy: all which (I
doubt not) will with their evidence plainly prove, that when mine adverse
party was yet scarcely borne, or lay in her swathling clouts, through me only
your ancestors defended their Country, vanquished their enemies, succored
their friends, enlarged their Dominions, advanced their religion, and made
their names fearful to the present age, and their fame everlasting to those
that ensue. Wherefore, my dear friends, seeing I have so substantially euicted
the right of my cause, conform your wills to reason, conform your reason by
practice, and convert your practice to the good of your selves and your
Country. If I be praiseworthy, esteem me: if necessary, admit me: if
profitable, employ me: so shall you revoke my death to life, and show your
selves no degenerate issue of such honorable Progenitors. And thus much for
Archery, whose tale if it be disordered, you must bear withal, for she is a
woman, and her mind is passionate.

And to give you some taste of the Cornish men's former sufficiency that way:
for long shooting, their shaft was a cloth yard, their pricks 24. score: for
strength, they would pierce any ordinary armor: and one master Robert Arundell
(whom I well knew) could shoot 12. score, with his right hand, with his left,
and from behind his head.

Lastly, for near and well aimed shooting, Buts made them perfect in the one,
and rouing in the other: for pricks, the first corrupter of Archery, through
too much preciseness, were then scarcely known, and little practiced. And in
particular, I have heard by credible report of those, who professed and
protested themselves to have been eyewitnesses, that one Robert Bone of Antony
shot at a little bird, sitting upon his cowes back, and killed it, the bird (I
mean) not the cow; which was either very cunning in the performance, or very
foolish in the attempt. The first of these somewhat resembled one Menelaus,
mentioned by Zosimus, lib. 2. who nocking three arrows, and shooting them all
at once, would strike three several persons, and might have deserved a double
stipend in the graund Signiors guard, where the one half of his Archers are
left handed, that they may not turn their tail to their Sultan while they
draw. The other may in some sort compare with that Auo, reported by Saxo
Gramaticus, for so good a markman, Lib. 6.
as with one arrow he claue the string of his adversaries bow, the second he
fixed between his fingers, and with the third struck his shaft which he was
nocking: or with that exploit of the fathers, piercing an apple on his sons
head, attributed by the same Saxo, to one Toko a Dane; and by the Switzers
histories, to Guillaum Lib. 10.
Tell, the chief occasioner, and part-author of their liberty.

Hurling takes his denomination from throwing of the ball, and is of two
sorts, in the East parts of Cornwall, Hurling.
to goales, and in the West, to the country.

For hurling to goales, there are 15. 20. or 30. players more or less, chosen
out on each side, who strip themselves Hurling to goales.
into their slightest apparel, and then join hands in rank one against
another. Out of these ranks, they match themselves by payres, one embracing
another, and so pass away: every of which couple, are specially to watch one
another during the play.

After this, they pitch two bushes in the ground, some eight or ten foot
asunder; and directly against them, ten or twelve score off, other twain in
like distance, which they term their Goales. One of these is appointed by
lots, to the one side, and the other to his adverse party. There is assigned
for their guard, a couple of their best stopping Hurlers: the residue draw into
the midst between both goales, where some indifferent person throws up a
ball, the which whosoever can catch, and carry through his adversaries goal,
has won the game. But therein consists one of Hercules his labors: for
he that is once possessed of the ball, has his contrary mate waiting at
inches, and assaying to lay hold upon him. The other thrusts him in the
breast, with his closed fist, to keep him off; which they call Butting, and
place in weldoing the same, no small point of manhood.

If he escape the first, another takes him in hand, and so a third, neither
is he left, until having met (as the Frenchman says) Chausseura son pied,
he either touch the ground with some part of his body, in wrestling, or cry,
Hold; which is the word of yielding. Then must he cast the ball (named Dealing)
to some one of his fellows, who catching the same in his hand, makes away
withal as before; and if his hap or agility be so good, as to shake off or
outrunne his counterwayters, at the goal, he finds one or two fresh men,
ready to receive and keep him off. It is therefore a very disaduantageable
match, or extraordinary accident, that leeseth many goales: howbeit, that side
carries away best reputation, which gives most falls in the hurling, keeps
the ball longest, and presses his contrary-neerest to their own goal.
Sometimes one chosen person on each party deals the ball.

The Hurlers are bound to the observation of many laws, as, that they must
hurl man to man, and not two set upon one man at once: that the Hurler against
the ball, must not but, nor hand-fast under girdle: that he who has the ball,
must but only in the others breast: that he must deal no Fore-ball, viz. he
may not throw it to any of his mates, standing nearer the goal, then himself.
Lastly, in dealing the ball, if any of the other part can catch it flying
between, or e're the other have it fast, he thereby wins the same to his
side, which straightway of defendant becomes assailant, as the other, of
assailant falls to be defendant. The least breach of these laws, the Hurlers
take for a just cause of going together by the ears, but with their fists
only; neither does any among them seek revenge for such wrongs or hurts, but
at the like play again. These hurling matches are mostly used at weddings,
where commonly the ghests undertake to encounter all comers.

The hurling to the Country, is more diffuse and confuse, as bound to few of
these orders: Some two or Hurling to the country.
more Gentlemen do commonly make this match, appointing that on such a
holyday, they will bring to such an indifferent place, two, three, or more
parishes of the East or South quarter, to hurl against so many other, of the
West or North. Their goales are either those Gentlemen's houses, or some towns
or villages, three or four miles asunder, of which either side makes choice
after the neernesse to their dwellings. When they meet, there is neither
comparing of numbers, nor matching of men; but a silver ball is cast up, and
that company, which can catch, and carry it by force, or slight, to their place
assigned, gains the ball and victory. Whosoever gets seizure of this ball,
finds himself generally pursued by the adverse party; neither will they
leave, till (without all respects) he be laid flat on Gods dear earth: which
fall once received, disableth him from any longer detayning the ball: he
therefore throws the same (with like hazard of intercepting, as in the other
hurling) to some one of his fellows, fardest before him, who makes away
withal in like manner. Such as see where the ball is played, give notice
thereof to their mates, crying, Ware East, Ware West, etc. as the same is
carried.

The Hurlers take their next way over hills, dales, hedges, ditches; yea, and
through bushes, briers, mires, plashes and rivers whatsoever; so as you shall
sometimes see 20. or 30. lie tugging together in the water, scra^bling and
scratching for the ball. A play (verily) both rude and rough, and yet such, as
is not destitute of policies, in some sort resembling the feats of war: for
you shall have companies laid out before, on the one side, to encounter them
that come with the ball, and of the other party to succor them, in manner of a
fore-ward. Again, other troops lie houering on the sides, like wings, to help
or stop their escape: and where the ball it self goes, it resembles the
joining of the two main battles: the slowest footed who come lagge, supply the
show of a rere-ward: yea, there are horsemen placed also on either party (as
it were in ambush) and ready to ride away with the ball, if they can catch it
at advantage. But they may not so steal the palm: for gallop any one of them
never so fast, yet he shall be surely met at some hedge corner, crosse-lane,
bridge, or deep water, which (by casting the Country) they know he must needs
touch at: and if his good fortune guard him not the better, he is like to pay
the price of his theft, with his own and his horses overthrow to the ground.
Sometimes, the whole company runs with the ball, seven or eight miles out of
the direct way, which they should keep. Sometimes a foote-man getting it by
stealth, the better to escape unespied, will carry the same quite backwards, and
so, at last, get to the goal by a windlace: which once known to be won, all
that side flock thither with great iolity: and if the same be a Gentleman's
house, they give him the ball for a Trophee, and the drinking out of his Beer
to boot.

The ball in this play may be compared to an infernal spirit: for whosoever
catches it, fares straightwayes like a mad man, struggling and fighting with
those that go about to hold him: and no sooner is the ball gone from, but he
resigneth this fury to the next receyuer, and himself becomes peaceable as
before. I cannot well resolve, whether I should more commend this game, for the
manhood and exercise, or condemn it for the boysterousnes and harms which it
begets: for as on the one side it makes their bodies strong, hard, and
nimble, and puts a courage into their hearts, to meet an enemy in the face:
so on the other part, it is accompanied with many dangers, some of which do
ever fall to the players share. For proof whereof, when the hurling is ended,
you shall see them retyring home, as from a pitched battle, with bloody
pates, bones broken, and out of joint, and such bruses as serve to shorte^
their days; yet al is good play, and never Attorney nor Crowner troubled for
the matter.

Wrestling is as full of manliness; more delightful, Wrestling.
and less dangerous: which pastime, either the Cornish men derived from
Corineus, their first pretended founder, or (at least) it ministered some stuff
to the farcing of that fable. But to let that pass, their continual exercise
in this play, has bred the^ so skillful an habit, as they presume, that
neither the ancient Greek Palestritae, nor the Turks so much delighted
Pelrianders, nor their, once countrymen, and still neighbors, the Bretons, can
bereau them of this Laurel: and matchless, certes, should they be, if their
cunning were answerable to their practice: for you shall hardly find an
assembly of boys, in Deuon or Cornwall, where the most untowardly amongst
them, will not as readily give you a muster of this exercise, as you are prone
to require it. For performing this play, the beholders cast themselves in a
ring, which they call, Making a place: into the empty middle space whereof, the
two champio^ wrastlers step forth, stripped into their dublets and hosen, and
untrussed, that they may so the better command the use of their lymmes, and
first shaking hands in token of friendship, they fall presently to the effects
of anger: for each strives how to take hold of other, with his best advantage,
and to bear his adverse party down: wherein, whosoever overthrows his mate
in such sort, as that either his back, or the one shoulder, and contrary heel
do touch the ground, is accounted to give the fall. If he be endangered, and
make a narrow escape, it is called a foil. This has also his laws, of taking
hold only above girdle, wearing a girdle to take hold by, playing three
pulles, for trial of the mastery, the fall-giuer to be exempted from playing
again with the taker, and bound to answer his successor, etc.

Many sleights and tricks appertain hereunto, in which, a skillful weak man
will soon get the ouerhand of one that is strong and ignorant. Such are the
Trip, fore-Trip, Inturne, the Faulx, forward and backward, the Mare, and diverse
other like.

Amongst Cornish wrastlers, now living, my friend John Goit may justly
challenge the first place, not by prerogative of his service in her Majesty's
guard; but through having answered all challenges in that pastime without
blemish. Neither is his commendation bounded within these limits, but his
clean made body and active strength, extend (with great agility) to whatsoever
other exercise, of the arm or leg: besides his ability (upon often trial)
to take charge at Sea, either as Master, or Captain. All which good parts he
graceth with a good fellowlike, kind, and respectfull carriage.

Silver prizes for this and other actiuities, were wont Games.
to be carried about by certain Circumferanei, or set up for Bidales: but time
or their abuse has now worn them out of date and use.

The last point of this first book, is to plot down the Cornish government,
which offreth a double consideration: Government.
the one, as an entire state of it self; the other, as a part of the Realm:
both which shall be severally handled.

Cornwall, as an entire state, has at diuerstimes enjoyed As an entire state.
sundry titles, of a Kingdom, Principality, Duchy, and Earldom, as may
appear by these few notes, with which I have stored my self out of our
Chronicles.

If there was a Brute King of Britain, by the same authority it is to be
proved, that there was likewise a Anno mundi 2850. Cornish Princes.
Corineus Duke of Cornwall, whose daughter Gwendolene, Brutes eldest son
Locrine took to wife, and by her had issue Madan, that succeeded his father in
the kingdom.

Next him, I find Henninus Duke, who married Gonorille, 3105.
one of King Leirs daughters and heirs, and on her begat Morgan: but whiles he
attempted with his other brother in law, to wrest the kingdom from their wives
father, by force of arms, before the course of nature should cast the same
upon them, Cordeilla, the third disherited sister, brought an army out of
France to the old man's succor, and in a pitched battle bereft Henninus of
his life.

Clotenus King of Cornwall, begat a son named Mulmutius Dunwallo, who, when
this Island had been long 3476.
distressed with the civil wars of petty Kings, reduced the same again into
one peaceable Monarchy.

Belinus, brother to that great terror of the Romans, Brennus, had for his
appaunage (as the French term it) 3574.
Loegria, Wales, and Cornwall.

Cassibelane, succeeding his brother Lud in the kingdom, 3908.
gave to his son Tennancius, the Duchy of Cornwall.

After this Island became a parcel of Julius Caesar's conquests, Anno Dom. 231.
the same rested it self, or was rather vexed a long time, under the government
of such rulers, as the Romans sent hither. But the Bretons turning, at last,
their long patience into a sudden fury, rose in arms, slew Alectus, the
Emperor Dioclesians deputy, and invested their leader Asclepiodotus Duke of
Cornwall, with the possession of the kingdom.

Conan Meridock, nephew to Octauius, whom the Emperor Constantine appointed
governor of this Island, 329.
was Duke of Cornwall.

At the Sinode of Arles in France, there was present 351.
one Corinius, son to Solomon Duke of Cornwall.

After the abouenamed Octauius his decease, Maximianus, 383.
a Roman, who married his daughter, succeeded him also in government: between
whom, and the foreremembred Conan, grew great wars; which concluding at last
in a peace, Maxim. passed with an army into France, conquered there Armorica
(naming it little Britain) and gave the same in fee to Conan; who being once
peaceably settled, wrote over unto Dionethus, or Dionotus Duke or King of
Cornwall, (as Matthew of West, terms him) to send him some Maidens, whom he
might couple in marriage with his people; whereon S. Vrsula and her companions
the 11000. virgins, were shipped, and miscarried, as their welknown history
reports.

Nicholas Gille, a French writer, delivers (upon the credit of our British
Historians) that about this time, Meroueus, a Paynim king of France, caused
his own son to be thrown into the fire and burned, for that he had slain
the king of Cornwall, as he returned from a feast.

He also makes mention of one Moigne, brother to Aurelius and Vter-pendragon,
Duke of Cornwall, and gouerner 433.
of the Realm, under the Emperor Honorius.

Caredoc Duke of Cornwall, was employed (says D. Kay) by Octauius, about
founding the Vniuerfitie of 443.
Cambridge.

And upon Igerna wife to Gorlois, Duke of Cornwall, 500.
Vter begat the worthy Arthur, and a daughter called Amy.

This Arthur discomfited in fight, one Childerick, a 526.
king of the Saxons, and afterward, upon certain covenants, suffered him
quietly to depart the Realm. But Childerick violating the word of a king,
bound with the solemnity of an oath, invaded estsoones the Western coasts,
harrowing the Country as he passed, until Cador, Earl of Cornwall, became Gods
Minister, to take vengeance of his perjury, by reauing off his life.

That Mark swayed the Cornish septer, you cannot make question, unless you
will, withal, shake the irrefragable authority of the round tables Romants.

Blederic Duke of Cornwall, associated with other Welsh kings, darrayned a
battle against Ethelferd, king of the 603.
Northumbers, and by the valiant forgoing of his life, got his partners the
victory.

Iuor, son to Alane king of little Britain, first wan 688.
from the Saxons, Cornwall, Deuon, and Somerset shires, by force of arms, and
then, taking to wife Ethelburg, cousin to Kentwin, king of Westsex, enjoyed the
same by composition.

Roderit, king of the Bretons in Wales and Cornwall, 720.
(under whom, Bletius was Prince of this last, and of Deuon) valiantly repulsed
Adelred, king of Westsex, what time he assailed him in Cornwall: yet in the
end, being ouer-matched in number, and tired with continual onsets, he was
driven to quit the same, and retire himself into Wales.

Polidor Virgill makes mention of one Reginaldus Comes 866.
Britannorum, in the time of king Etheldred.

Dungarth king of Corn, by mischance was drowned, 872.
Alpsius is recorded (about this time) for Duke of Deuon 900.
and Cornwall.

Orgerius Duke of Cornwall, had a daughter named Alfride, 959.
the fame of whose beauty, caused King Edgar to send Earl Athelwold, for
obtaining her at her fathers hands in marriage. But the Earl with the first
sight of this fair Lady, was so besotted in her love, that preferring the
accomplishment of his lust, before the duty of his allegiance, he returns
answer to the King, how the common report far exceeded her private worth, which
came much short of meriting a partnership in so great a Princes bed: and (not
long after) begged and obtained the Kings good wlll, to wed her himself. But
so brave a luster could not lie long concealed, without shining forth into
Edgars knowledge, who finding the truth of his Ambassadors falsehood, took
Athelwold at an advantage, slew him, and married her, being a widdowe, whom
he had wooed a maid.

Hitherunto, these titles of honor carry a kind of confusednes, and rather
betokened a successiue office, then an established dignity. The following ages
received a more distinct form, and left us a certeyner notice.

What time William the bastard subdued this Realm, 1067.
one Condor possessed the Earldom of Cornwall, and did homage for the same:
he had issue another Condor, whose daughter and heir Agnes, was married to
Reignald Earl of Bristowe, base son to King Henry the first.

This note I borrowed out of an industrious collection, which sets down all
the noble men's creations, Arms, and principal descents, in every Kings days
since the conquest: but master Camden, our Clarentieulx, names him Cadoc, and
says farther, that Robert Morton, brother to William Conqueror, by his mother
Herlot, was the first Earl of Norman blood, and that his son William
succeeded him; who taking part with Duke Robert, against Henry the first,
thereby got captivity, and lost his honor, with which that King invested the
forementioned Reignald. In this variance, it is great reason, that the balance
panche on his side, who has both authority to establish his assertion, and a
rarely approved knowledge, to warrant his authority. He dying issuelesse,
Richard the first gave this Earldom to his brother John.

John's son, Henry the third, honored therewith his brother Richard King of
the Romans, a Prince no 1257.
less plentifully flowing in wealth, then his brother was often driven to
extreme shifts, through needinesse: which made that barbarous age to poetrize,

Nummus ait pro me, nubit Cornubia Rome,
Money said, that for her sake,
Rome did Cornwall to wife take.
He had issue, Henry Earl of Cornwall, who deceased issuelesse: and Edmond,
whose daughter and heir Isabell (says mine author) was married to Moriee
Fitsharding Lord Barckleigh: but others affirm, that this Edmond dyed without
issue.

Edward the second, degenerating in his choice, created his mynion, Peter
Gaueston, a Gascoyne, Earl of this County, whose posterity ended in himself,
and himself by a violent death.

The last title of this Earldome, expired in John of Eltham, younger son to
that King Edward. After which, King Edward the third, by act of Parliament in
the 11. year of his reign, erected the same to a Duchy, the first in England,
and graced it with his son, the black Prince: for his heroical virtues did
rather bestow, then receive estimation from whatsoever dignity. Since which it
is successively incorporated in the Kings eldest son, and has been so
enjoyed, by Richard the second, Henry the fifth, Henry the sixth, Edward his
son, Edward the fifth, Edward son to Richard the third, Arthure, and Henry,
sons to Henry the seventh, and lastly, Edward the sixth: 10. Dukes in the
whole.

These Earls and Dukes have from the beginning, Royalties
been privileged with royal jurisdiction or Grown rights, namely, giving of
liberty to send Burgesses to the Parliaments, return of writs, custom, toll,
Mines, Treasure-trovee, wards, etc. and (to this end) appointed their special
officers, as Sheriff, Admiral, Receyuer, Hauener, Customer, Butler, Searcher,
Comptroller, Gaugeor, Excheator, Feodary, Auditor, Clarke of the market, etc.
besides the L. Warden, and those others beforeremembred, whose functions
appertain to the jurisdiction of the Stannary.

To the preservation of which royalties, our Parliaments have ever carried a
reverend regard. For by that Act, 17. Edw. 4. which enioyneth forrayne
Merchants to bestow such money as they receive for their wares, in English
commodities, or to pay the same unto Englishmen, the Kings part of all
forfeytures within Cornwall, is reserved to the Duke. So does that, 11. H. 7.
concerning the reformation of waights and measures, provide, that it shall not
be hurtful or prejudicial to the Prince, within the Duchy of Cornwall, nor to
any waights of the cunnage: and so does that 1. H. 8. touching Excheators,
exempt that officer in Cornwall. It should seem, that the first Earls bare a
heavy hand in command over their subjects: for both diverse ancient records (as
I have learned) make mention of tributes, imposed (almost) upon every thing of
profit; and it may farther be gathered, in that, as well towns, as particular
persons, were feign to procure Charters and graunts from them, for
corporations, faires, markets, taking or freeing from tolls, mines, fishing,
fowling, hawking, hunting, and what not? so as (upon the matter) the plight of
a Cornish Inhabitant and a French pezant did differ very little.

Which bondage, one not long ago sought in part to reestablish, under pretense
of reviving a rent decayed ever since 9. H. 2. and advancing her Majesty's
profit: and to this end procured Letters patents, that none should falt, dry,
or pack any fish in Deuon or Cornwall, without his license and warrant. A
matter that would, by consequence, have made him an absolute disposer of all
the Western shipping and traffike, and their sea and land dependants.

Few words, but folding up a multitude of inconveniences to her Maiestic, and
the whole Commonwealth.

Wherefore the Cornish Justices of the peace, became humble suitors to the
Lords of her Highness privy Council, for a necessary and speedy redress
herein: and through the never failing forwardness, and backing of Sir Walter
Ralegh, obtained a reuocation. Howbeit, this ill weed, rather cut off by the
ground, then plucked up by the root, once, yea twice or thrice grew forth
again, but yet, maugre the warmers and waterers, has by her Majesty's
gracious breath been ever parched up, and (as is hoped) will never shoot out
hereafter, at least it shall still find an united resistance, of most earnest
suit, and pregnant reasons, to beat, it down.

The Earls had four houses, builded Castle-wise Earls houses.
for their residence, viz. Trematon, Launceston, Restormel, and Liskerd. But
since the principality of Wales and this Duchy became united in one person, the
larger scope, and greater command of that, has robbed this of his Lords
presence, and by consequence, the strength of these Castles could not so guard
them, against the battery of time, and neglect, but that, from fair buildings,
they fell into foul reparations, and from foul reparations, are now sunk
into utter ruin,

King H. the 8. affecting his honor of Newelin, and respecting Annexed land.
Wallingford Castle.
the commodities, which Wallingford Castle might afford it, took this last by
act of Parl. from the Duchy, and in lieu thereof, annexed certain manors lying
in Corn. fallen to the Crown, through the Marquis of Excesters attainder: which
Qieene Marie afterward restored in tail to his son, the Earl of Deuon, and
upon his issueles decease received them again.

It were against duty to make question, whether in this exchange, the kings
meaning went with his pretense: and yet we find it an ordinary policy amongst
Princes, to send their successors, with a kind of libera, or honoraria
legatio, into the remoter quarters of their dominions, as if they would shun
occasions of iclousie, springing from an ouer-neere neighborhood.

Howsoever, the same king, not long after, passed away this Castle, unto
Christ's College in Oxford, who use it as a place of retrayt, when the
University is visited with any contagious sickness.

I have understood, that question is made amongst men of knowledge, what is
become of this Duchy. Some holding it altogether extinct, for want of the kings
issue male: some auerring, that it is suspended in (...) (as they say) pro
tempore: and some supposing, that it continues in full power, and that her
Majesty has only Custodiam Ducatus, as of Bishoprics, sede va(...)e? Fenes
Iudiceralis sit. Once, every Sheriff is summoned to enter his account in the
Duchy Exchequer, at Lostwithyel, and from thence, referred over to the
Exchequer above.

Cornwall considered as a part of the Realm, sorteth As a part of the Realm.
her government into two kinds, spiritual, and temporal.

Touching the spiritual: In ancient times this Shire Government Spiritual*
had his particular Bishop: and I find, how in the year, 905. Forinosus the
Pope sent a sharp letter to Edward the son of Alfride, reproouing him, for
suffering the West Saxons to be destitute of Bishops seven years together.
Whereon, by the advice of his Council, and Archbishop Pleymund, he ordained
seven Bishops in one day; amongst whom Herstane was consecrated to Cornwall,
and Eadwolfe to Crediton, which last had three towns in Cornwall, assigned
him, to wit, Pontium, Coelling, and Landwhitton, that thence he might yearly
visit the people, to root out (as mine author says) their errors: for
before, as much as in them lay, they withstood the truth, and obeyed not the
Apostolic decrees. Whereon I ground two collections: the first, that the light
of the Gospel took not his original shining into these parts, from the
Romish Bishop: the other, that the Cornish (like their cousins the Welsh) could
not be soon or easily induced to acknowledge his jurisdiction. The Bishops
see was formerly at S. Petrocks in Bodmyn; but by reason the Danes burned there
his Church and palace, the same removed to S. Germans. After that, 979.
Lumigius, from a Monk of Winchester, elected Abbot 1031.
of Tauistoke, and from that Abbey, advanced to the Bishopric of Creditune, by
his grace with Canutus King of the Angles, obtained an annexion of Cornwall
(lately fallen void) and so made one Dioces of that and Deuon, as it has ever
since continued. This Bishopric had diverse fair houses and large revenues in
Cornwall: but one Veyzy, Bishop of the dioces in King H. the 8. time,
coniecturing (as it is conceived) that the Cathedral Churches should not long
ouer-liue the suppressed Monasteries, made hauock of those livings beforehand,
some by long leasing, and some by flat selling, so as he left a poor remainder
to his successors.

It owes subjection to the Metropolitan of Canterbury, and has one only
Archdeaconry, which place is now supplied by master Thomas Sumaster, who
adorneth the Gentility of his birth, with the honesty of his life, and by both
sorts of feeding, approves himself a liberal and commendable pastor.

Certain Peculiars there are, some appertaining to Peculiars
the dignities of the Cathedral Church at Exon, to wit, S. Probus, and S.
Peran: and some to private persons, as Burien and Temple.

For religious houses, I read, that in the time of Paganism, Cunedag builded a
Temple in Cornwall to Apollo, Anno mundi 3172.
but where it stood I know not. Since it made room to Christianity, my (not
ouer-curious) enquiry has learned out these:

Pryories, at S. Germans, Bodmyn, Tywardreth.

Nunries, at S. Martine.

Fryeries, at Launceston, Truro, Bodmyn.

Colleges at Peryn, Crantock, Buryen.

Hospitals, at Helston.

Of parishes, the County has 161. as master Camden notes, and as others have,
about 180.

Doubtless, the Hierarchy of our English Church, if it were kept fast to his
first institution, might with his far better effects, close up their mouths,
who would thrust upon us their often varying discipline. But albeit neither our
time can well brook it, nor the succeeding would long hold it: yet it shall not
do much amiss, to look upon the original beauty thereof, if (at least) I be
able to trick the same truly out, and do not blemish it with my pensil.

At the planting of Christian religion, Monasteries and cathedral Churches
were likewise founded, which served for seedplots of the ministry, and sent
them abroad in yearly progresses, to labor the Lords vineyard. Afterward,
about the time of our last conquest, the country was sorted by a more orderly
manner into parishes, and every parish committed to a spiritual father, called
their Parson, who stepped into that room, not by election (as some imagine) but
mostly, by the nomination of him that either built the Church, or endowed the
same with some liuelyhood, or was L* of the soil where it stood. As for
Vicarages, those days knew few, for they grew up in more corrupt ages, by the
religious houses encrochme^ts. Besides this Incu^bent, every parish had
certain officers, as Church wardens, Sidemen, and 8. men, whose duty bound
them to see the buildings and ornaments appertaining to Gods service, decently
maintained, and good order there reuere^tly observed. And lest negligence,
ignorance, or partiality, might admit or foist in abuses, and corruption, an
Archdeacon was appointed to take account of their doings by an verily
visitatio^, and they there sworn duly to make it. He and they again had their
Ordinary, the Bishop, every 3. year to ouerlook their actions, and to examine,
allow, and admit the ministers, as they and the Bishop were se^blably subject
to the Metropolitanes survey every 7. year. For warning the Clergy, and
imparting their superiors directions, the Curats chose yearly their Deanes
rural. The Bishop, in his cathedral church was associated with certain
Prebe^daries, some resident, who served as his ghostly counsel in points of his
charge, and others not bound to ordinary reside^ce, who were called to
co^sultation, upon things of greater consequence: and for matters of principal
importance, the Archbishop had his prouincial Sinod, and the whole clergy their
national.

Now then, if every one thus entrused, would remember that he had a soul to
save or lose, by the well or ill discharging of so weighty a function, and did
accordingly from time to time bestow his requisite endeavor, what the least
fault could escape the espiall of so many eyes, or the righting amongst so many
hands? But I have thrust my sickle ouer-farre into another harvest: let my
mistaking be corrected, and in regard of my good meaning, pardoned.

The Temporal government of Cornwall, shoots out Temporal government.
Martial.
also into two branches, Martial, and Civil.

For martial affairs, master Camden notes out of Johannes Sarisburiensis,
that the Cornish men's valiancy purchased them such reputation amongst our
ancestors, as they (together with those of Deuon and Wiltshire) were wont to
be entrused, for the Subsidiary Cohort, or band of supply. An honor equal to
the Romans Triarii, and the shoot-anker of the battle. With which concurreth
the ancient, if not authentical testimony of Michael Cornubiensis, who had
good reason to know the same, being that Countryman, and more to report it:
his verses, for which I have also been beholding to M. Camden, are these: --
Rex Arcturus nos primos Cornubienses
Bellum facturus vocat; vt put a Caesaris enses
Nobis non alijs, reliquis, dat primitus ictum
Per quem pax lisque, nobis fit vtrumque relictum
Quid nos deterret, si firmiter in pede stemus,
Fraus ni nos superet, nihil est quod non superemus.


I will now set down the principal Commanders and Officers, touching these
martial causes, together with the forces of the shire.

Lord Lieutenant general, Sir Walter Ralegh. Deputy Lieutena^ts
Sir Frauncis Godolphin, or any 3. of them. Sir Nicholas Parker, or any 3. of
them. Sir Reignald Mohun, Peter Edgecumb, or any 3. of them. Bernard Greinuile,
or any 3. of them. Christopher Harris, or any 3. of them. Richard Carew, or any
3. of them.
Colonel general, Sir Nicholas Parker. Marshall, Bernard Greinuile.
Treasurer, Richard Carew. Master of the Ordinance, VVil. Treffry. Colonel of
the horse, John Arundell of Trerise. Sergeant mayor, Humfrey Parcks. Quarter
Master, William Carnsew. Provost Marshall, John Harris. Scowt Master, Otwell
Hill. Corporals of the field,
Osburne. Rusall. Rattenbury. Sled.
Ammunition Master, Leon. Blackdon. Trench Master, Cook. Regiments. Companies,
Number, Arm pikes, Muskets, Caliuers Sir Fra. Godol. 12. 1200. 470. 490. 240.
Sir Will. Beuil 6. 670 225. 215 130. Sir Rei. Mohun 6. 600. 200. 210. 190. Ber.
Greinuile 10. 1000. 370. 390. 240. Ri. Carew 5. 500. 170. 300 30. For Causam
Bay.
Antony Rouse 6. 760. 270. 320. 170. Chapter Treuanion 5. 500. 180. 190. 130. Will.
Treffry 4. 400. 140. 130. 130. For Foy.
Sir Nic. Parker 2. 200. 60. 80. 60. For Pendenis.

For S. Mawes. For the Mount.


Ha. Viuian 1. 100. 40. 40. 20. Ar. Harris 1. 100. 40. 40. 20. Summa. 58. 6030.
2165. 2535. 1330.




This may serve for a general estimat of the Cornish forces, which I have
gathered, partly out of our certificate made to the Lords 1599. partly by
information from the Sargeant mayor, and partly through mine own knowledge.
There are many more unarmed pikes, which I omit, as better fitting a supply
upon necessity, then to be exposed (for opposed) to an enemy. The number as
it stands, much exceeds the shires proportion, if the same be compared with
Deuon and other Counties: which grows, for that their neerenesse on all
quarters to the enemy, and their farnesse from timely succor by their friends,
have forced the Commanders, to call forth the uttermost number of able hands
to fight, and rather by persuasion then authority, procured them to arm
themselves beyond law and their ability. Which commendable endeavor shall not,
I hope ought not, I am sure, turn them to the prejudice of any unwonted charge
hereafter.

They are all provided of powder, bullet, and match in competent sort, and
order taken for furnishing of victuals, and mounting a third part of the shot
(at least) upon cause of service.

Light horses, the Lords in their directions, enjoin Light horses.
for orders sake, and the Lieuienants excuse it by insufficiency. Hitherto
neither has the commandment bin revoked, nor the omission controlled.

In the year 1588. when the Spanish floting Babel Munitie^ from the Queens
store.
pretended the conquest of our Island (which like Iosuahs army they compassed,
but unlike him could not with their blasting threats overthrow our walls) it
pleased her Majesty of: her provident and gracious care, to furnish Cornwall
with ordinance and munition, from her own store, as follows:

2. Sacres of cast Iron, well mounted upon carryages with wheels, shodde with
Iron, and furnished with Ladles, Spunges, and Rammers, with all other
necessaries. 2. Minions 2. Faulcons

Spare axeltrees, six. Spare paires of wheels shod with Iron, three. Shot of
Iron for the said pieces, of each sort, twenty. Canon corn powder for the said
ordinance, six hundred wayght. Fine corn powder, three thousand six hundred
weight. Lead, three thousand six hundred wayght. Match, three thousand six
hundred wayght.


All which, save the ordinance it self, partly by piecemeale employment, and
partly by ouerlong, or cuilkeeping, is now grown to naught, or naught.

After the sudden surprise of Pensants, Anno 1595. by Guard of seacoast.
direction from the Lords, order was taken that upon any alarm, the next
Captains should forth with put themselves with their companies, into their
assigned seacoast towns, whom the adjoining landforces were appointed to
second and third, as the opportunity of their dwellings affoorded best occasion.

The year following, by a new command, 4000. were allotted out, and provided
in a readiness to march for the aid of Deuon, if cause so required, as the Lord
Help for Deuon.
Lieutenant of that County had the same order, upon like necessity, to send an
equal number into Cornwall.

Lastly, anno 1599. when the Spanish fleet was again expected, the Cornish
forces volu^tarily assembled themselves, and made head, at the entrance,
middle, and West part of their south coast.

As for soldiers sent into other-places, Cornwall yields, upon every
occasion, a proportionable supply to the wants of Ireland; neither is acquitted
from performing the like service for France, if the employment be in Britain
or Normandy. Which often ventrings notwithstanding, upon the instance of
Captain Lower, and the follicitation of his friends, there passed over this
last year into Netherland, at one time 100. voluntaries Voluntaries.
and upwards, there to serve under Sir Frauncis Vere. And besides, they often
make out men of war against the Spaniards.

Forts and Castles there are; some, old and worn Forts.
out of date; and some in present use, with allowance of garrison.

Amongst the first sort, I reckon these, appertayning Old.
to the Duchy, as also Tintogel, and diverse round holds on the tops of hills;
some single, some double, and treble trenched, which are termed, Castellan
Denis, or Danis, as raised by the Danes, when they were destyned to become our
scourge.

Moreover, in this rank we may muster the earthen Bulwarks, cast up in diverse
places on the South coast, Bulwarks.
where any commodity of landing seems to inuit the enemy, which (I guess)
took their original from the statute 4. H. 8. and are ever sithence duly
repaired, as need requires, by order to the Captains of those limits.

Of the later sort, is a fort at Silley, called Garrisons. Silley.
reduced to a more defensible plight, by her Majesty's order, and governed by
the foreremembred Sir Frauncis Godolphin, who with his invention and purse,
bettered his plot and allowance, and therein has so tempered strength with
delight, and both with use, as it serves for asure hold, and a commodious
dwelling.

The rest are S. Michaels mount, Pendenis fort, and S. Mawes Castle, of which I
shall have occasion to speak more particularly in my second book.

Of Beacons, through the neernesse to the sea, and the Beacons.
advantage of the hilly situations, welneere every parish is charged with one,
which are watched, secundum vsum, but (so far as I can see) not greatly ad
propositum: for the Lords better digested instructions, have reduced the
Country, by other means, to a like ready, and much less confused way of
assembling, upon any cause of service.

For carrying of such aduertisements and letters, every thorow-fare weekly
appoynteth a foot-Poast, to give Poasts.
his hourly attendance, whose dispatch is welneere as speedy as the horses.

The last branch of my division, and so of this book, leads me to entreat of
Cornwals civil government, as Civil government.
it passes for a part of the Realm; and that may again be subdivided into
jurisdiction particular, and general. The particular jurisdiction is exercised
by Constables, Stewards of Courts Barons, and Leets, Franchises, Hundreds, and
Portreeues, and Majors; of boroughs and corporations of the Stannaries, we have
spoken already. The general, by the Clarke of the market, Coroners,
Viceadmiral, Sheriff, Justices of the peace, and Judges of assize.

Constables of the hundreds the shire has none, but Co^stables
this office for giving of warnings, and collection of rates, is supplied by
the deputy Baylifs, who perform it not with that discretion, trust, secrecy,
and speed, which were often requisite to the importance of the affairs. I have
known the Judges moved diverse times, for their opinion touching the erecting
of some, and found them of several resolutions, which gives little
encouragement to an innovation. Neither can the parish Constables well brook
the same, because it submits them to a subalterne command, more then of
custom; whereas now in their parishes they are absolute, the least whereof
has one, the middle sized 2. the bigger 3. or 4. I would not wish the blaze of
their authority blemished, if there were as much care used in choice of the
persons, as the credit of their place deserves. Wise direction without
diligent execution, proves fruitles. Now, as the former is derived from her
Majesty to the Lords, and from the Lords to the Justices; so this later lies
in the hands of the Constables. Watches and searches oftentimes carry weighty
consequence, and miscary in the managing: and it was seen in the last Cornish
rebellion, how the Constables command and example, drew many of the not worst
meaning people, into that extremest breach of duty.

Franchises, Cornwall has the Duchy, Rialton, Clifton, Franchises.
Minhinet, Pawton, Caruanton, Stoke Cliuisland, Medland, and Kellylond, which
have their Baylifs as the Hundreds, to Baylifs.
attend the public services.

Hundreds there are but 9. East, West, Trig, Lesnewith, Hu^dreds.
Stratton, Powder, Pider, Kerier, and Penwith, which contain tithings: by
these the shire is divided into limits, and all his rates proportioned as
follows:

Divisions.
East
East H. West H.
N.
Trig H. Lesnewith H. Stratton H.
S.
Powder H. Pider H.
W.
Kerier. Pe^with.



In all rates, the East and South limits bear 3. parts in 5. Proportions in
rates.
to the North and West. So in the Eastern, does East Hundred to that of West:
in the Southern, Powder to pider: and in the Western, Kerier to Penwith. In
the Northern, Trig bears 5. Lesnewith and Stratton 4. a piece. There is the
like proportion made of the parishes in the Eastern division, but with little
satisfaction of diverse: neither will it ever fare otherwise, and therefore
(this notwithstanding) I wish it followed in the residue.

The conuenientest and usual places of assembly for the Places of assembly.
whole County, is Bodmyn: for the East and North, Launceston: for the South and
West, Truro: for the East, Liskerd: for the North, Camelford: for the South, S.
Colombs: for the West, Helston.

For the Hundreds of East, Kellington: of West, Laureath* of Trig, Bodmyn: of
Lesnewith, Camelford: of Stratton, that town: of Powder, Grampond: of Pider,
S. Columbs: of Kerier, Helston: of Penwith, Pensants.

East H. has parishes 30. corporations 2.

West H. parishes 19. corporations 2.

Trig Lesnewith Stratton Powder Pider Kerier Penwith
Corporations are privileged with the administration of justice, within their
liberties, more or less, according Corporations.
to the purport of their Charter.

Such are Saltash, Launceston, Liskerd, Eastloo, Westloo, Bodmyn, Camelford,
Lostwithiel, Padstowe, Grampond, Truro, Helston, Perin.

The Majors and Recorders, in some of these, are Justices of the peace, for
their own limits, and welneere all of them have large exemptions and
jurisdictions. A garment (in diverse men's opinions) ouer-rich and wide, for many
of their wearish and ill-disposed bodies. They allege for themselves, that
speedy justice is administered in their towns, and that it saves great
expenses, incident to assize trials, which poor Artificers cannot undergo.
But the other answer, that these trials are often poasted on, with more haste
then good speed, while an ignorant fellow, of a sowter, becomes a magistrate,
and takes upon him peremptory judgment, in debts and controversies, great and
doubtful, Again, the neernesse of commencing their suits, draws on more
expenses, then the shortness of trials cutteth off, whereas longer respit would
make way to deliberation, and deliberation open the door to reason, which by
the fumes arising from cholers boiling heat, is much obscured. Thus does the
opportunity inure them to vexation; vexation begets charges, and charge
hatcheth poverty: which poverty, accompanied with idleness (for they cannot
follow law, and work) seeks not to relieve it self by industry, but by
subtilty, wherethrough they become altogether depraved in body, goods, and
mind. Add hereunto, that the Mayor exercising his office but during one
year, for the first half thereof is commonly to learn what he ought to do,
and in the other half, feeling his authority to wane, makes friends of that
Mammon, and serves others turns, to be requited with the like, borrowing from
justice, what he may lend to his purse, or accomplices: for as it has been well
said, He cannot long be good, that knows not why he is good. They conclude,
how from these imperfect associations, there spring pride amongst themselves,
disdain at their neighbors, and Monopolies against the Commonwealth.

This inuectiue is somewhat deeply steeped in gall, and must therefore be
interpred, not of all, but the worst. Surely, for mine own part, I am of
opinion, that how commodious soever this jurisdiction may prove amongst
themselves, it falls out sundry times very distastefull and injurious toward
strangers; and strangers they reckon all that are not Burgesses. Now, let such
a one be arrested within their corporatio^s, no sureties but townsmen can
find acceptance, be his behavior never so honest, his cause never so just,
his calling never so regardfull, and his ability never so sufficient; yet if he
have none acquaintance in the town, if the action brought, carry a show of
weight, if the bringer be a man of sway, in, or near the town, if any other
townsman of the higher sort bear him an old grudge, he must be contented to
fret the cold yrons with his legs, and his heart with grief: for what one,
amongst them, will procure an everlasting enemy at his door, by becoming
surety for a party, in who^ he possesses none, or little interest? The
ancients used to grace their Cities with several titles, as Numantia
bellicosa, Thebae superbae, Corinthus ornata, Athenae doctae, Jerusalem
sancta, Carthago emula, etc. and the present Italians do the like touching
theirs, as Roma santa, Venetia ricca, Florenza bella, Napoli gentile, Ferrara
civil, Bologna grassa, Rauenna antiqua, etc. In an imitation whereof, some of
the idle disposed Cornish men nicke their towns with by-words, as, The good
fellowship of Padstowe, Pride of Truro, Gallants of Foy, etc.

The Clarke of the markets office, has been heretofore so abused by his
deputies, to their private gain, Clarke of the market.
that the same is tainted with a kind of discredit, which notwithstanding,
being rightly and duly executed, would work a reformation of many disorders,
and a great good to the Commonwealth.

Four Coroners, chosen by the voices of the freeholders, do serve the shire,
who for the present are, Bligh, Coroners.
Tub, Trenance, and Bastard.

The Vice-admiralty is exercised by M. Charles Trenanion, Vice Admiral.
a Gentleman, through his virtue, as free from greediness, as through his
fair lively hood, far from needinesse: and by daily experience giving
proof, that a mind valewing his reputation at the due price, will easily
repute all dishonest gain much inferior thereunto, and that in conuersing
with the worst sort of people (which his office oftentimes enforces) he can no
more be disgraced, then the Sun beams by shining upon a dunghill will be
blemished.

I have here set down the names of those Commissioners Justices.
for the peace, who at this present make their ordinary reside^ce in Corn. as
they stand placed in the Commission, where the priority is mostly deferred to
antiquity.

Q. Fra. Godolphin M. 1. Q. Nic. Parker M. 2. Q. Iona. Trelawney M. 3. Q. Reg.
Mohun M. 4 Q. P. Petrus Edgeco^b 5. Q. Ric. Carew de Anth. 6 Q. Bern. Greinuile
7. Q. Antonius Rowse 8. Petrus Courtney 9. Q. Tho. Chiuerton 10. Q. Christ.
Harris 11. Io. Arund. de Trerise 12. Th. Arun. de Taluerne 13 Q. Nic. Prideaux
14. Q. Hannibal Viuian 15. Carolus Treuanion 16. Sessions.
Thomas S. Aubin 17. Q. Rob. Moyle 18. Q. Ed. Hancock. 19 Tristramus Arscot.
20. Thomas Lower 21. W. Treffry de Fowey 22. Johannes Henser 23. Q. Willi.
Wray. 24. Georgius Kekiwiche 25. Q. Arth. Harris 26. Io. Harris de Lansre. 27.
Q. Degor. Chamons 28. Johannes Trefusis 29. Otwel Hill. 30.
Their ordinary use was, to begin the quarter Sessions for the East half of
the Shire, on the Tuesdayes and VVednesdayes, at Bodmyn, and to adiourne the
same for the West half, to be ended at Truro the Friday and Saturday
following, leaving one days space for riding between. But about twenty years
sithence, the Eastern Justices making the greatest number, and in this
separation having farthest to ride, when they were disposed to attend both
places, either in regard of their ease, or upon scruple of conscience, or for
both together, called into question, whether this custom were as warrantable
by right, as it was pleadable by prescription; and whether it as much advanced
the administration of justice, as it eased the travel of the people. And
thereupon they began to appoint the entire Sessions at either place one after
another. This was sometimes performed, and sometimes broken, by the Western
Justices, so as several and contrary precepts of summons were directed to the
Sheriff, with the great uncertainty, ill example, and trouble of the Country.
It happened, that one newly associated, and not yet seasoned with either humor,
made this motion for a reconcilement, viz. that the Sessions should
enterchangeably one quarter begin at Bodmyn, and end at Truro: and the next
begin at Truro, and end at Bodmyn; and that no recognisance should be
discharged, or cause decided out of his own division. This proposition, as it
gave the Western Justices the greatest part of their will, so it salued a sore
which chiefly grieved the Eastern: for before, what was done in the beginning
at one place; was, or might be undone in the ending at the other: wherefore
all parties willingly condiscended hereunto, and it has ever sithence been
accordingly observed.

Another variance has sometimes fallen out between Cornwall and Deuon, about
the time of keeping their Sessions, For whereas the Statute 2. H. 5. enacteth,
that the Justices shall hold the same in the first week after S. Michael, the
Epiphanie, the clause of Euster, and the translation of S. Thomas (which,
worthily blotted out of the Calender, Test Newbrigensi, is ever the seventh of
July) and their oath binds them to a strickt observation hereof: the question
has grown, when those festival days fall upon a Monday, whether the
Sessions shall be proclaimed for that week, or the next, and the general
practice has gone with the former. But the Cornish Justices, waying, that
prescription is no Supersedeas for swearing, upon debating of the matter, have
resolved, and lately accustomed, in such cases, to put it over unto the week
ensuing: and these are their reasons: If the Sessions must be kept in the
first week after, it cannot admit an interpretation of the same week it self.
Again, the clause of Easter, mentioned in the one, should seem to make a
construction of like meaning in the rest. Besides, those, who suite themselves
to the other fashion, do yet swerve therefrom, if those feasts fall upon any
later day in the week then Monday; for then they defer it till the next: and
yet, seeing no day certain is directed for beginning the Sessions; if they
will constantly bind themselves to the former sense, when those days fall on
the Friday, they ought to call it for the morrow following. The Judges of the
circuits Oracle, to which the Commission of the peace refers the Justices
Quaeres, has resolved, that neither of these ways tends to any breach of
the law. Once sure it is, that the Terme-suiters may best speed their
business, by supporting the former: for the end of these Sessions delivers
them space enough to overtake the beginning of the Terms.

For the rest, equity bears more sway, then gravity, at the Cornish bench,
and in confusion they maintain equality: for though they speak more then one
at once, yet no one man's speech, or countenance, can carry a matter against the
truth. Neither do assertions, but proofs in hearings; nor vouchings, but
showing of law cases, in deciding, order the controversies: and as diversity
in opinions breeds no enmity, so ouer-ruling by most voices, is taken for no
disgrace.

One only Judge was wont, in three days at farthest, to dispatch the Assizes,
and gayle delivery, at Launceston, Judges.
the usual (though not indifferentest) place, where they are holden. But
malice and iniquity have so increased, through two contrary effects, wealth and
poverty, that now necessity exacteth the presence of both, and (not seldom) an
extent of time.

I have heard the Judges note, that besides their ordinary pains, they are
troubled with more extraordinary supplications in Cornwall, then in any other
shire: whereto they yet give no great encouragement, while the causes are on
the backside, poasted over to Gentlemen's hearing, and account seldom taken or
made, what has been done therein.

Verily, we must acknowledge, that ever since our remembrance, God has blessed
this Western circuit with special choice of upright and honest Judges;
amongst whom, this of our last is not the least: for they do so temper a quick
conceit with a stayed judgment, a strict severity in punishing, with a mild
mercy in remitting, and an awful gravity at the Bench, with a familiar
kindness in conversation, as they make proof, that contrary virtues may, by
the diverse ways of love and reverence, meet in one only point of honor.

The common Gayle of the shire for offenders, is Gayle.
kept at Launceston: for that statute, 33. H. 8. which amongst other shires,
gave the Cornish Justices leave to alter the same, by a Prouiso, took it away
again, in that this keepership is annexed to the Constableship of the Castle,
and that granted out in lease.

I will conclude with the highest jurisdiction, namely, the Parliament, to which
Cornwall, through the grace of his Earls, sends an equal, if not larger
number of Burgesses, to any other shire. The boroughs so privileged, more of
favor (as the case now stands with many of them) then merit, are these
following: Launceston, Downeuet, Liskerd, Lostwithiel, Truro, Bodmyn, Helston,
Saltash, Camelford, Eastloo, Westloo, Prury, Tregny, Kellington, Bossimy, S.
Iues, S. Germans, Meddishole, and S. Mawes: and because Quindec. are
ordinarily granted at Parliaments, together with the Subsidies, I will here
set down the ordinary rate of them.

Md. de 15. Cornub. in Paroch. subsequent. vt patet. p.
Hund. de Penwith.
Paroc. S. Iusti. 2li.. 11s.. 8d. S. Gorian. 8. 5. 2 S. Gorgian. 1. 15. 6 S.
Crowen. 2. 2. 2 S. Michaels. 2. 11. 3 S. Illogan. 4. 7. 10 S. Erly. 3. 11. 8 S.
Luduan. 2. 16. 6 Morueth. 0. 17. 6 S. Siluan. 2. 12. 5 S. Sancred. 1. 14. 0 S.
Ey. 3. 6. 8 S. Sennar. 2. 11. 1 S. Hillary. 2. 18. 8 Caniborn. 4. 2. 0 Laundut.
6. 16. 5 Vthno. 0. 12. 6 Germogh. 0. 10. 8 S. Synan. 3. 6. 0 S. Maddern. 4. 12.
0 S. Twynnock. 2. 5. 0 S. Felis. 2. 1. 2 Kedruth. 1. 12. 5 S. Winner. 3. 6. 0
S. Pawl. 6. 17. 0 Woluele. 3. 5. 0 Sum. 81. 8. 6.
Hund. de Kerier.
Wennape 2. 8. 0 S. Martyn. 0. 18. 8 S. Gluuiack 2. 2. 10 Constantyn. 3. 6. 4
S. Melor. 2. 4. 0 S. Briack. 2. 3. 0 S. Crade. 1. 4. 6 Wyneanton. 0. 14. 18 S.
Mawnan. 1. 8. 0 S. Stidian. 2. 19. 4 Arwothel. 1. 4. 9 S. Landy 1. 10. 4 S.
Mawgan. 1. 16. 0 S. Rumon. ma. 1. 2. 0 S. Antony. 0. 8. 0 Corentun. 0. 15. 0
Minster. 1. 4. 6 S. Budock. ma. 2. 9. 0 Burgus de Perm. 2. 0. 0 S. Melan. 2.
18. 4 S. Keyran. 6. 8. 0 S. Wynwolny. 0. 10. 4 S. Rumon parua. 0. 7. 2
Crewenne. 1. 0. 10 S. Sithne. 2. 0. 0 S. Ewynne. 0. 15. 4 Burg. de Helston. 4.
6. 8 Germock. 0. 10. 8 S. Wendron. 3. 12. 0 Sum. 52. 18. 5.
Hund. de Powder.
Tywardreth. 2. 15. 11 Argallas. 1. 14. 4 Burg. de Fowy. 2. 8. 4 Roche. 2. 8. 7
Kenwen. 2. 19. 0 Eglosros. 1. 16. 0 Moresk. 2. 0. 0 Manerium de pen. Kneth and
Restormel. 0. 10. 4 S. Awstle. 6. 14. 11 Mewan. 1. 12. 0 Elerky 3. 6. 0 S. Keby
1. 2. 1 Landreth. 0. 17. 8 Eglosmerther. 0. 18. 0 Lanuoreck. 1. 10. 0 Grogith.
0. 14. 4 Fowy extra. 1. 4. 8 S. Sampson. 1. 15. 0 S. Stephens. 3. 6. 3 Gerend.
2. 0. 0 Feock. 1. 10. 0 Burg. de Lostwi. 8. 13. 4 Caryhayes. 0. 11. 6 S. Denis.
1. 16. 6 Penkeuel. 0. 11. 8 S. Anthony. 0. 12. 2 Burg. de Mau. 0. 5. 6 S.
Goran. 1. 16. 0 Burg. de Grand. 0. 14. 6 Burg. de Truru. 12. 1. 10 S. Ermets.
1. 14. 0 Landege. 2. 7. 0 Lasullian. 1. 10. 6 S. Aleyn. 3. 4. 6 Laurocen. 0.
17. 0 Ladock. 2. 14. 0 Lanhorn. 1. 14. 8 S. Ewe. 1. 8. 3 Manerium de Towingto^
in P. S. Austle. 1. 19. 0 S. Creed. 2. 1. 0 S. Just. 1. 16. 0 Burg. de Tregony
1. 15. 3 S. Probus. 5. 6. 0 Calendry. 1. 0. 8
Hund. de Pider.
Lanhidrock. 0. 17. 8 S. Peran. 2. 6. 8 S. Caranto. 2. 13. 0 S. Vuel. 1. 10. 0
S. Agnes. 1. 6. 10 S. Petrock ma. 2. 4. 10 S. Columb ma. 5. 13. 0 S. Columb mi.
4. 11. 0 Burg. de Meddi. 0. 8. 0 Oldstowe. 1. 9. 0 Lanherne. 3. 0. 0 S. Wenne.
1. 18. 0 S. Ermets. 2. 2. 6 S. Euoder. 3. 0. 0 S. Petrock mi. 0. 6. 4 Laneuet.
1. 10. 0 S. Ede. 1. 12. 0 S. Bruck. 2. 7. 0 Newlyn. 3. 17. 4 Maruy 2. 1. 0
Withiel. 1. 6. 8 S. Colan. 1. 4. 6 Cuthbert. 2. 0. 0
Hund. de Trigge.
Teth. 2. 9. 6 Minuer. 1. 15. 0 P. Bodmyn ext. 1. 16. 0 Brue rode. 1. 19. 5
Bur. de Bodmyn. 20. 0. 0 Maben. 1. 10. 9 S. Eudelian. 1. 8. 0 Egloshail. 2. 3.
8 Bliston. 1. 17. 2 Temple. 0. 5. 0 S. Laud. 1. 6. 0 Ma. de Pennayn. 0. 4. 10
S. Tweir. 1. 16. 8 Hellond. 0. 19. 0
Hund. de Lesnewith.
Cleder. 1. 16. 8 S. Warburg. 1. 18. 4 S. Juliet. 0. 14. 8 Bur. de Tintagle. 0.
13. 2 Podistok. 4. 5. 2 Mihelstowe 0. 19. 0 Bu. de Camelforth. 0. 9. 0
Alternon. 1. 18. 6 David. 2. 6. 8 Treualga. 1. 0. 0 Bur. de Castle 0.7.0
Boterel. 0. 7. 0 Oterham 0. 19. 0 Lanteglos. 1. 10. 0 S. Genis. 1. 14. 2
Lesnewith. 1. 8. 0 Manner. de Tintagle. 1. 7. 0 Minster. 1. 4. 6 Treneglos 1. 6.
8 Athawyn. 1. 0. 0
Hund. de Stratton.
Kilkhamlond. 3. 4. 4 Iacobstow. 1. 16. 4 Poghwil. 0. 19. 0 Launcels. 1. 8. 0
Ouerwynchurch. 2. 0. 0 Whitston. 1. 13. 0 Bridgerule. 0. 12. 6 Moristow. 3. 6.
0 Boyton. 1. 9. 0 Stratton 2. 19. 6 Wyke. 1. 15. 0 Bur. de Kilkhamp. 1. 0. 2
Hund. de VVestwibilsher.
Niot. 2. 7. 0 Cardinham. 1. 18. 0 Morual. 1. 17. 0 S. Clear. 2. 1. 7. Tallan.
1. 12. 0 Lansalwys. 1. 9. 0 Vepe. 1. 9. 2 Manner. de Liskerd. 1. 13. 0 Dulo. 1.
18. 6 Warlegan. 1. 2. 0 Pleuiul. 2. 7. 0 Liskerd. 1. 12. 0 Lanteglos. 5. 0. 0
Burg. de Liskerd. 6. 14. 0 Reprina. 0. 8. 0 Wynnock. 2. 0. 0 Burg. de Loo. 1.
10. 0 Lanraythew. 1. 8. 6 Villade. 1. 13. 0 S. Martyn de Loo. 1. 10. 0
Brotheck. 0. 18. 0 Kayn. 0. 8. 4 Pynnock. 0. 19. 0
Hund. de Eastwibilshere.
Antony. 1. 11. 0 Lawlutton. 1. 3. 0 Southil. 0. 18. 0 Piderwyn. 2. 3. 0
Landilp. 0. 17. 6 Stoke. 2. 9. 0 Minhinet. 4. 6. 0 Egloskery. 2. 5. 0 S.
Germyns. 6. 10. 0 Bur. de Downuet. 2. 16. 8 Lasant. 1. 18. 0 S. John's. 1. 6. 10
S. Stephens of Lanceston. 4. 16. 0 Quedock. 1. 7. 0 Northil. 1. 12. 0 Manerium
de Tremeton. 2. 15. 4 Linkinhorne 2. 0. 0 Seuiock. 1. 4. 0 Calstock. 3. 6. 0 S.
Melan. 1. 6. 0 Rame. 1. 11. 0 S. Iue. 1. 19. 0 S. Dominick. 1. 4. 0 Lawanneck.
1. 10. 0 Laurake. 1. 19. 0 Burg. de Ash. 2. 0. 8 Pillaton. 0. 15. 4 Boskenna.
0. 9. 0 Mere. 0. 15. 0 Sum. tot. 15. and 10. in Cornub. 479. 0. 3.
Md. postea sequuntur deductiones and allocat. de eisdem sum. appunctuat. per
Edmund. Episc. Exon. and Thom. Bodulgat tunc un. milit. praed. Comin Anno 24.
H. 6. vt pt. p. particulariter.
Trigge.
Parochia de Menefride 1. 0. 0 Helland. 0. 15. 0. Burg. de Bodmyn. 6. 0. 0 S.
Tudy. 0. 9. 0 Tethe. 1. 10. 0 Aldehan. 0. 15. 0 Maben. 0. 15. 0 Egloshail. 1.
10. 0 Temple. 0. 3. 0 S. Bruer. 0. 15. 0 Sum. 13. 12. 0.
Hund. de Lesnowith.
Cleder. 0. 12. 0 Burg. de Botriscast. 0. 6. 0 Pondistoke. 2. 0. 0 Mynster. 0.
12. 0 Bu. de Camelforth. 0. 6. 0 S. Gennys. 0. 15. 0 S. David. 0. 10. 0 Oterham
0. 15. 0 Aduen. 0. 6. 0 Warburg. 0. 10. 0 Lesnowith. 0. 12. 0 Treueglos. 0. 18.
0 Alternon 0. 10. 0 Sum. 8. 12. 0.
Hund. de Stratton.
Morestowe. 1. 10. 0 Poughwel. 0. 12. 0 Lancels. 0. 10. 0 Boyton. 0. 10. 0
Kilkampton 1. 0. 0 Stratton. 1. 1. 0 Burgus de Kilkampton 0. 9. 0 Merwinchurch.
0. 15. 0 Whithton. 0. 15. 0 Iacobstow. 0. 10. 0 Sum. 7. 12. 0.
Hund. de East.
Calstok. 1. 10. 0 Lawanneck. 1. 1. 0 S. John's. 0. 15. 0 S. Iues. 1. 0. 0
Minhiner. 3. 0. 0 Manerium de Tremeton. 1. 5. 0 Burgus de Downeued 1. 0. 0 S.
Melan. 1. 0. 0 Rame. 0. 15. 0 Quethiock. 0. 12. 0 S. Domineck. 0. 10. 0
Pederwyn. 0. 8. 0 S. Germyns. 4. 10. 0 Antony 0. 15. 0 Lawhitton. 0. 15. 0 S.
Stephens. 2. 0. 0 Laurake. 0. 10. 0 Egloskery. 0. 15. 0 Sum. 22. 1. 0.
Hund. de West.
Burgus de Liskerd. 1. 0. 0 S. Clear. 0. 10. 0 Morual. 0. 10. 0 Talland. 0. 10.
0 Parish of Liskerd. 0. 18. 0 Lanteglos. 1. 10. 0 Lanrethow. 0. 10. 0 S. Vepe.
0. 10. 0 Manerium de Liskerd 0. 12. 0 S. Pynnock. 0. 10. 0 Nyot. 0. 10. 0 Sum.
7. 10. 0.
Hund. de Penwith.
Luduan. 0. 9. 0 Camborn. 1. 0. 0 S. Senan. 0. 13. 0 S. Gothian 0. 10. 0 S.
Just. 0. 10. 0 S. Veryn. 2. 0. 0 S. Wynner. 0. 10. 0 S. Sencrede. 0. 15. 0 S.
Felix. 0. 6. 0 S. Selenan 0. 10. 0 S. Michaels 0. 10. 0 S. Pawl. 1. 0. 0 S.
Thebut. 1. 0. 0 S. Gray. 0. 9. 0 Sum. 10. 2. 0.
Hund. de Kerier.
S. Wenep. 0. 10. 0 Mawnan. 0. 6. 0 Burg. de Helston. 1. 10. 0 Melan. 0. 10. 0
Arwothel. 0. 10. 0 Minster. 0. 6. 0 S. Constantyn. 0. 9. 0 Crade. 0. 10. 0
Wynampton. 0. 6. 0 Stedian. 0. 9. 0 Ewyn. 0. 10. 0 Sum. 5. 16. 0.
Hund. de Powder.
Argallas. 0. 10. 0 Keby. 0. 9. 0 Burgus de Truru. 10. 0. 0 Roche. 0. 18. 0
Moresk. 0. 10. 0 S. Goran. 0. 9. 0 S. Allen. 0. 5. 0 Illerky. 0. 10. 0 Lamorek.
0. 10. 0 S. Sampsons. 0. 10. 0 S. Gereus. 0. 10. 0 Burgus de Lostwithiel. 8. 0.
0 Lamhorn. 0. 6. 0 Tywardreth. 0. 10. 0 S. Stephens. 0. 10. 0 Eglosros. 0. 10.
0 Sum. 19. 17. 0.
Hund. de Pider.
Lanhidrok. 0. 11. 0 S. Pyran. 0. 15. 0 S. Newlyn. 1. 10. 0 S. Colan. 0. 10. 0
Lamhern. 0. 10. 0 S. Edy. 0. 12. 0 S. Enoder. 0. 15. 0 S. Petrock minor. 0. 6.
0 S. Petrock mayor. 0. 10. 0 S. Breock. 0. 15. 0 Withiel. 0. 5. 0 Carnenton. 0.
10. 0 Vwel. 0. 10. 0 Sum. tot. deductions. 15. and 10. 113. 1. 6.
THE SVRVEY OF CORNWALL.
The second Book.
IN this second book I will first report, what I have learned of Cornwall, and
Cornishmen in general, and from thence descend to the particular places and
persons, as their note-worthie site, or any memorable action, or accident, of
the former or later ages, shall offer occasion.

The highest which my search can reach unto, I borrow Cornishmen in general.
out of Strabo, who writes, that the Western Bretons gave aid unto the
Armorici of France, against Caesar, which he pretended for one of the causes,
why he invaded this Island.

Next I find, that about sixty years from the landing of Hengist, one
Nazaleod, a mighty King amongst the Anno Do. 509.
Bretons, joined battle with Certicus, Sovereign of the West Saxons, and
after long fight, with his own death accompanied the overthrow of his army.
Yet, the Bretons, thus abandoned by fortune, would not so forsake 519.
themselves, but with renewed courage, and forces, coped once again with
Certicus, and his son Kenrick, at Certicesford, though equally destitute of
success as before.

Gurmund, an arch-Pirate of the Norwegians, was called 590.
by the Saxons, out of his late conquered Ireland, to their aid, against
Careticus king of the Bretons; whom he overcame in battle, and enforced his
subjects to seek safeguard by flight, some in Wales, some in Cornwall, and some
in little Breteigne: since which time, they could never recover again their
ancient possession of the whole Island.

Howbeit, not long after, Iuor, son to Alane, king of 688.
the said little Breteigne, landed in the West parts, wanne from the Saxons,
Cornwall, Deuon, and Somerset shires, by force of arms, and then established
his conquest, by a peaceable composition with his adverse party.

Adelred, king of West-sex, invaded Deuon and Cornwall, whom Roderick, king of
the Bretons, and Blederick 720.
Prince of those provinces, encountered and discomfited: which notwithstanding,
process of time reaued from 750.
him, and added such strength to his enemies, that he was driven to abandon
Cornwall, and retire into Wales.

So, the Cornishmen quitting their liberty with their 809.
prince, stouped to the command of Egbert King of West-sex, and with their
territory (says William Malmsburie) enlarged his confines.

Athelstane handled them yet more extremely; for he drove them out of
Excester, where, till then, they bare equal 937.
sway with the Saxons, and left only the narrow angle on the West of Tamer
river, for their Inhabitance, Limits.
which has ever since been their fatal bound.

On their Reguli (as Vincentius delivers) he imposed Tribute.
an yearly tribute, of 20. li. in gold, 300. li. in silver, 25. oxen, and
hunting hounds and hawks, at discretion.

To these afflictions by home-neighbours of bondage, 997.
tribute, and banishing, was joined a fourth, of spoiling by forrayne enemies:
for Roger Houedon tells us, that the Danes landed in sundry places of
Cornwall, forrayed the Country, burned the Towns, and killed the people.

To whom succeeded in the like occupation, Godwin, 1068.
and Edmond magnus, King Harolds two sons, discomfiting the forces opposed
against them, harrowing Deuon and Cornwall, and then retiring with their prey
into Ireland.

After the conquest, when K. H. the first invaded 1113.
Griffin ap Conan Prince of Wales, he distributed his army into three
portions, one of which (wherein consisted the forces of the fourth part of
England and Cornwall) he committed to the leading of Gilbert Earl of Strigill.

In Henry the thirds time, by the testimony of Matthew 1227.
Paris, William Earl of Sarum, after long tossing at sea, with much ado,
about Christmas arrived in Cornwall: and so afterward, did Earl Richard, the
Kings brother, at two several times: the later of which, being destitute of
horses and treasure, he prayed therein aid of his loyals.

When Edward the third auerred his right to the 1339.
Crown of France, by the evidence of arms, the French for a counterplea,
made an unlawful entry into Deuon and Cornwall; but Hugh Courtney Earl of
Deuon, removed it with posse Comitatus, and recommitted them to the woodde^
prison that brought them thither. Yet would not the Scots take so much warning
by their success, as example by their precedent, if at least, Froissarts
ignorance of our English names, bred not his mistaking in the place.

By his relation also, Cornwals near neighbourhead gave opportunity of access,
both to the Earl Montford, when he appealed to that Kings aid, for recovering
his right in Britain (albeit I cannot bring home Cepsee the designed port of
his landing) and after his captivity, to the messengers of his heroical
Countess, employed in the like errand.

And from Cornwall, the Earl of Sarum, Will. de Mesuile and Philip de Courtney,
set to sea, with 40. ships, besides Barks, and 2000. men at arms, besides
Archers, in support of that quarrel.

Lastly, his authority enformeth me, that those soldiers of Cornwall, who
under their Captains John Apport and John Cornwall, had defended the Fort of
Bercherel in Britain, against the power of France, above a yeree space, in
the end, for want of due succors, upon an honorable composition surrendered
the same.

Queen Margaret, wife to H. 6. upon her arriual out of France, after the
loss of Barnet field, received great aid, 1471.
though to small purpose, from the Deuon and Cornish men, under the conduct of
Thomas, Earl of that shire.

And so much were those Western people addicted to that name, as they readily
followed Sir Edw. Courtney, 1485.
and his brother Peter, Bishop of Excesler, what time they assisted the Duke of
Buckingham, in his revolt against Richard the third.

Neither did his suppressour and successor, H. the 7. find them more loyal:
for the Cornish men repining at 1497. Rebellion
a Subsidy lately granted him by Act of Parliament, were induced to rebellion
by Thomas Flammock, a Gentleman, and Michael Joseph, a Blacksmith, with whom
they marched to Taunton, there murdering the Provost of perin, a Commissioner
for the said Subsidy, and from thence to Wells, where James Touchet, Lord
Audely, degenerated to their party, with which increase they passed by
Sarisbury to Winchester, and so into Kent. But by this time, Lords and Commons
were gathered in strength sufficient, to make head against them, and soon
after, black Heath saw the overthrow of their forces in battle, and Loudon,
the punishment of their seducers by justice.

In the same fatal year of reuolts, Perkin Warbeck, a counterfeit Prince,
landed in Cornwall, went to Bodmyn, assembled a train of rake-hels, assaulted
Excester, received the repulse, and in the end sped, as is known, and as he
deserved.

The last Cornish rebellion, was first occasioned by one Kilter, and other his
associats of a Western parish, 1549.
called, S. Keueren, who imbrued their wicked hands in the guiltles blood of
one M. Body, as he sat in Commission at Helston for matters of reformation in
religion: and the year following, it grew to a general revolt, under the
conduct of Arundel, Wydeslade; Resogan, and others, followed by 6000. with
which power they marched into Deuon, besieged and assaulted Excester, and gave
the L. Russell (employed with an army against them) more then one hot
encounter, which yet (as ever) quayled in their overthrow.

In my particular view, I will make easy iournies from place to place, as they
lie in my way, taking the Hundreds Particular description,
for my guydes, until I have accomplished this wearisome voyage.

My first entrance must be by the hundred of East, so East Hundred. Plymouth
haven.
named for his site, and therein, at Plymmouth haven. It borrows that name of
the river Plym, which rising in Deuon, and by the way baptizing Plymston,
Plymstock, etc. here emptieth it self into the sea. The haven parts Deuon
and Cornwall welneere every where, as Tumer river runs: I say welneere,
because some few interland places are excepted: a matter so sorted at the first
partition, either to satisfy the affection of some special persons, or to
appropriate the soil to the former Lords, or that (notwithstanding this
seuerance) there might still rest some cause of intercourse between the
Inhabitants of both Counties: as I have heard, a late great man ensued, and
expressed the like consideration, in division of his lands between two of his
sons.

Now though this haven thus bound both shires, yet does, the jurisdiction of
the water wholly appertain to the Duchy of Cornwall, and may therefore be
claymed as a part of that Country. Notwithstanding, I will forbear what I may,
to intrude upon my good friend M. Hookers limits, and reserve to him the
description of the farther shore.

The first promontory of this harbor on the West Rame head.
side, is Rame head, by his proportion, receiving, and by his possession,
giving, that name and arms to his owner, whose posterity conveyed it by
inter-marriages, from Durnford, to Edgecumb: on the top thereof rises a
little vaulted Chapel, which serves for a mark at sea.

From thence trending Penlee point, you discover Kings sand and Causam Bay, an
open road, yet sometimes Causam Bay.
affoording succor to the woorst sort of Seafarers, at not subject to
co^ptrolment of Plymmouth forts. The shore is peopled with some dwelling
houses, and many Cellers, dearly rented for a short usage, in fauing of
Pilcherd. At which time, there flocketh a great concourse of Sayners, and
others, depending upon their labor. I have heard the Inhabitants thereabouts
to report, that the Earl of Richmond (afterward Henry the seventh) while he
houered upon the coast, here by stealth refreshed himself; but being
advertised of straight watch, kept for his surprising at Plymmouth, he richly
rewarded his host, hyed spcedily a shipboord, and escaped happily to a better
fortune.

Here also of late years, part of the Cornish forces twice encamped
themselves, planted some Ordinance, and raised a weak kind of fortification,
therethrough to contest, if not repulse, the landing of the expected enemy:
and a strong watch is continually kept there, ever since one thousand, five
hundred, ninety seven: at which time, a Spaniard riding on the Bay, while most
of the able people gave their attendance at the County Assizes, sent some
closely into the village, in the dark of the night, who hanged up barrels of
matter fit to take fire, upon certain doors, which by a train should have
burned the houses. But one of the Inhabitants, espying these unwelcome ghests,
with the bounce of a Caliuer chaced them aboard, and removed the barrels,
before the traynes came to work their effect. The Inginer of this practice,
(as has since appeared by some examinations) was a Portugal, who sometimes
sailed with Sir John Borowghs, and boasted to have burned his Ship: for which
two honorable exploits, the King of Spain bestowed on him two hundred ducats.

In the mouth of the harbor, lies S. Nicholas Island, S. Nicholas Island.
in fashion, losengy, in quantity, about 3. acres, strongly fortifyed,
carefully guarded, and subject to the Co^maunder of Plymmouth fort.

When the Cornish rebels, during Edw. the 6^ reign, turmoyled the quiet of
those quarters, it yielded a safe protection to diverse dutyful subjects, who
there shrouded themselves.

From this Island, a range of rocks reaches over to the The bridge.
Southwest shore, discovered at the low water of Spring tides, and leaving
only a narrow entrance in the midst, called the Yate, for ships to pass
through, whereto they are directed by certain marks at land.

Upon this South shore somewhat within the Island, stands mount Edgecumb, a
house builded and named Mount Edgecub.
by Sir Ric. Edgecumb, father to the now possessioner and if comparisons were
as lawful in the making, as they prove odious in the matching, I would
presume to rank it, for health, pleasure, and commodities, with any subjects
house of his degree in England. It is seated against the North, on the
declining of a hill, in the midst of a Dear park, near a narrow entrance,
through which the salt water breaks up into the country, to shape the greatest
part of the haven. The house is builded square, with a round turret at each
end, garretted on the top, and the hall rising in the mids above the rest,
which yields a stately sound, as you enter the same. In Summer, the opened
casements admit a refreshing coolenes: in Winter, the two closed doors exclude
all offensive coldness: the parlour and dining chamber give you a large and
diuersified prospect of land and sea; to which vnder-ly S. Nicholas Island,
Plymmouth fort and the towns of Plymmouth, Stonehouse Milbrook, and Saltash.
It is supplied with a neuer-fayling spring of water, and the dwelling stored
with wood, timber, fruit, Dear, and Conies. The ground abundantly answers a
housekeepers necessities, for pasture, arable and meadow, and is replenished
with a kind of stone, serving both for building, lyme, and marle. On the sea
clifs grows great plenty of the best Ore-wood, to satisfy the owners want,
and accommodate his neighbors. A little below the house, in the Summer
euenings, Sayne-boates come and draw with their nets for fish; whither the
gentry of the house walking down, take the pleasure of the sight, and
sometimes at all adventures, buy the profit of the draughts. Both sides of the
forementioned narrow entrance, together with the passage between, (much
haunted as the high way to Plymmouth) the whole town of Stonehouse, and a
great circuit of the land adjoining, appertain to M. Edgecumbs inheritance:
these sides are fenced with blockhouses, and that next to Mount Edgecumb, was
wont to be planted with ordinance, which at coming and parting, with their
base voices greeted such ghest sas visited the house, neither has the
opportunity of the harbor wanted occasions to bring them, or the owners a
frank mind to inuit them. For proof whereof, the erst remembered Sir Ric. (a
gentleman in whom mildnes and stoutnes, diffide^ce and wisdom, deliberatenes
of undertaking, and sufficiency of effecting, made a more commendable, the^
blazing mixture of virtue) during Q. Ma. reign, entertained at one time, for
some good space, the Admirals of the English, Spanish, and Netherland fleets,
with many noble men besides. But not too much of this, least a partial
affection steal, at unawares, into my commendation, as one, by my mother,
descended from his loins, and by my birth, a member of the house.

Certain old ruins, yet remaining, confirm the neighbors report, that
near the waters side, there stood once a town, called Weststone house, until
the Weststone house.
French by fire and sword overthrew it.

In the year one thousand, five hundred, ninetienine, the Spaniards vaunts
caused the Cornish forces to advance there a kind of fortification, and to plot
the making of a Bridge on barges over that strait, for inhibiting the enemies
access by boats and Galleys, into the more inward parts of the haven. But it
may be doubted, whether the bridge would have proved as impossible, as the
Sconcefell out unnecessary.

Master Peter Edgecumbe (commonly called Peers) married Margaret the daughter
of Sir Andrew Lutterel, his father Sir Richard married the daughter of Tregian:
his father Sir Peers married the daughter, and heir of Stephan Durnford: and
his father Sir Richard, married the daughter of Tremayn. These names of Peers
and Richard, they have successively varied for six or seven descents. He
bears for his Arms, Gules on a Bend ermine, between two Cotises, Or. 3.
Bores heads coped, arg. armed as the three; Langued is the field.

A little inward from Mountedgecumb, lies a safe and commodious Road for
shipping, called Hamose, and compounded of the words Ose, and Ham, according to
Hamose.
the nature of the place. Here those vessels cast anchor, which are bound to
the Eastwards, as those do in Catwater, who would fare to the West; because
every wind that can serve them at Sea, will from thence carry them out: which
commodity other Roads do not so conveniently afford. It is reported, that in
times past, there was an ordinary passage over this water, to a place on Deuon
side, called Horsecoue, but long since discontinued.

At the higher end of a creek, passing up from hence, Milbrook lurketh between
two hills, a village of some Milbrook.
80. houses, and borrowing his name from a mill and little brook, running
therethrough. In my remembrance (which extends not to above 40 years) this
village took great increase of wealth and buildings, through the just and
industrious trade of fishing, and had welneere forty ships and barks at one
time belonging thereunto. But our late broils with Spain have set up a more
compendious, though not so honest way of gayning, and begin by little and
little, to reduce these plain dealers, to their former undeserved plight. Yet
do they prescribe, in a suburbiall market (as I may term it) to Plymmouth, for
their relief, by intercepting, if not forestalling, such corn and victuals,
as passing through their streights, cannot for want of time or weather, get over
Crymell passage, to the other: and surely they are not unworthy of favor: for
this town furnishes more able Mariners at every pressed for her Highness
service, then many others of far greater blaze.

It chanced about twenty years sithence, that one 2. children borne in 10.
weeks.
Richaurd, wife to Richard Adams of this town, was delivered of two male
children, the one ten weeks after the other, who lived until baptism, and the
later hitherto: Which might happen, in that the woman bearing twins, by some
blow, slide, or other extraordinary accident, brought forth the first before
his time, and the later in his due season. Now, that a child borne in the
seventh month may live, both Astrologers and Phisicions do affirm, but in
the 8. they deny it; and these Gellius li. Cap. 16. Schonerus.
are their reasons: The Astrologers hold, that the child in the mothers womb,
is successively governed every month, by the seven Planets, beginning at
Saturn: after which reckoning, he returning to his rule the 8. month, by his
dreery influe^ce, infortunateth any birth that shall then casually befall:
whereas his succeeder Jupiter, by a better disposition works a more
beneficial effect. The Phisicions deliver, that in the seventh month, the
Leuinus Lemnius occul. not. miraculis.
child, by course of nature, turns itself in the mothers belly; wherefore,
at that time, it is readier (as half loosed) to take issue by any outward
chance. Mary, in the eightth, when it begins to settle again, and as yet
retayneth some weakness of the former sturring, it requires a more forcible
occasion, and that induces a slaughtering violence. Or if these coniecturall
reasons suffice not to warrant a probability of the truth, Plynies authority,
in a stranger case, shall press them farther: for he Lib. 7. Cap. II.
writes, that a woman brought a bed of one child in the seventh month, in
the months following, was also delivered of twins.

A part of Mount-Edgecumb, and of this Milbrook, though severed from Deuon, by
the general bound, yet, upon some of the foreremembred considerations, have
been annexed thereunto.

Aside of Milbrook, lies the Peninsula of Inswork, on whose neckland stands
an ancient house of the Champernons, and descended by his daughters and heirs,
to Forteskew, Monck, and Treuilian, three Gentlemen of Deuon. The site is
naturally both pleasant and profitable; to which, the owner by his ingenious
experiments, daily adds an artificial surplusage.

Passing somewhat farther up, you meet with the foot of Lyner, where it wins
fellowship with Tamer, that, till then, and this, yet longer, retayning their
names, though their ouer-weake streams were long before confounded, by the
predominant salt water. A little within this mouth of Lyner, stands
East-Antony, the poor home of mine ancestors, with which in this manner they
were invested: Sir John Lerchedekne, Knight, and not priest, (for he was so
called of his family, and not by his calling, as in Froissard you shall note
the like, to be familiar amongst the nobility of Gascoigne) by Cecill, the
daughter and heir of Jordan of Haccumb, had issue 9. sons, Ralph, Waryne,
Richard, Otho, John, Robert, Martyn, Reignald, and Michael. Richard married
Ione, the daughter of John Bosowr, that bare him Thomas, in whom the heirs
male of this multiplied hope took an end. Warine, afterward knighted, took
to wife Elizabeth, one of the daughters and heirs to John Talbot de Castro
Ricardi, and on her begat three daughters and heirs, Alienor, wedded to Sir
Walter Lucy: Margery, to Sir Thomas Arundel of Taluerne: and Philip, to Sir
Hugh Courtney of Bauncton (which I take, is now named Boconnock.) From Lucy
descended the Lord Vaux, and others. Margery dyed childlesse, anno 1419. as is
testified by her toomb-stone in West-Antony Church, where she lies buried.
Sir Hugh Courtney was second son to Ed. Earl of Deuon, and had 2. wives: the
first, Maud, daughter of the L. Beaumond; to whose children, for want of issue
in the elder stock, that Earldom deuolued, and the later, our forereme^bred
Philip, who left her inheritance to her only daughter Ione: and she taking a
pattern from her fathers fortune, espoused likewise 2. husbands, viz. Sir
Nicholas Baron of Carew, and Sir Robert Vere, brother to John Earl of Oxford:
to Sir Nicholas, she bare Thomas, Nicholas, Hugh, Alexander, and William: to
Sir Robert, John, and became widow of both. And, as after the fathers decease,
good agreement between the mother and eldest son has commonly weak
continuance, because both being enfranchised to a sudden absolute jurisdiction,
neither of them can easily temper the same with a requisite moderation: so it
chanced, that she and hers fell at square, which discord (with an unnatural
extremity) brake forth into a blow, by him no less dearly, then undutifully
given his mother: for upon so just a cause, she disinherited him of all her
lands, being seventeen mannours, and bestowed them on her younger sons. This
I learned by the report of Sir Peter Carew, the elder of that name, and eldest
of our stock (a Gentleman, whose rare worth my pen is not able to shadow, much
less with his due lineaments to represent) at such time, as being a scholar
in Oxford, of fourteen years age, and three years standing, upon a wrong
conceived opinion touching my sufficiency, I was there called to dispute ex
tempore (impar congressus Achilli) with the matchles Sir Ph. Sidney, in
presence of the Earls, Leycester, Warwick, and diverse other great personages.
By the forementioned conueyance, she disposed of her said mannours as
follows: Haccumb, Ringmore, and Milton, she gave to Nicholas: Lyham,
Manedon, Combhall, and Southtawton, to Hugh: East-Antony, Shoggebroke, and
Landegy, to Alexander: Wicheband, Widebridge, Bokeland, and Bledeuagh, to
William: and lastly, Roseworthy, Bosewen, and Tregennow, to John: al which she
entailed to them, and the issue of their bodies, substituting, for want
thereof, the one to be heir to the other: and in witness hereof (says she in
her conueyance) to each of these deeds five times indented, I have set my
seal; and because my seal is to many unknown, have procured the seal of the
Mayor of the City of Exon, to be also adjoined.

Thomas her eldest son, repaired this loss, in part, by matching with one of
Carminowes daughters and heirs.

From Nicholas, is descended Carew of Haccumb, who by virtue of this entayle,
succeeded also to Hughs portion, as deceasing issuelesse. From William is come
Carew of Crocum in Somerset shire, and from John Vere, the now Earl of Oxford,
deriueth his pedigree. Alexander married Elizabeth the daughter of Hatch, and
begat John, who took to wife Thamesin, one of the daughters and heirs of
Holland: their son Sir Wymond, espoused Martha, the daughter of Edmund, and
sister to Sir Anthony Denny. Sir Wymond had Thomas, the husband of Elizabeth
Edgecumb, and they my self, linked in matrimony with Julian, daughter to John
Arundel of Trerice, and one of the heirs to her mother Catherine Cosewarth,
who has made me father of Richard, lately wedded to Briget, daughter of John
Chudleigh of Ashton in Deuon.

Touching our stock in general, and my family in particular, being once vainly
disposed (I would it had been but once) I made this idle observation.

CArew of ancient Carru was, And Carru is a plowe,
Romans the trade, Frenchmen the word, I do the name auowe.
The elder stock, and we a branch, At Phoebes governing,
From fire to son, do wax and wane, By thrift and lauishing,
The fire, not valuing at due price His wealth, it throws away:
The son, by service or by match, Repaireth this decay.
The smelling sense we sundry want, But want it without lack:
For it is no sense, to wish a weal, That brings a greater wrack.
Through natures mark, we own our babes, By tip of the upper lip;
Black-bearded all the race, save mine, Wrong did by mothership.
The Barons wife, Archdeacons heir, Unto her younger son
Save Antony, which down to me, By 4. descents has run.
All which, and all their wives, expressed A Turtles single love,
And never did tha'duentrous change, Of double wedding prove.
We are the fifth: to swerve herefrom, I will not though I could,
As for my wife, God may dispose, She shall not, though she would.
Our family transplants itself, To grow in other shires,
And Country rather makes then takes, As best behoof appears.
Children thrice three God has us lent, Two sons, and then a maid,
By order borne, of which, one third We in the grave have laid.
Our eldest daughter widow fell, Before our youngest borne:
So do hard haps unlooked come, So are our hopes forlorn.
Mine trebled have in either sex, Those which my parents got,
And yet but halfed them, which God My graundsire did allot:
Whose grace in Court, rarely obtaynd, To th'yongst of those eighteen,
Three Kings of England Godfathers, For Godmother, our Queen.
The Arms of our family, are Or. 3. Lions passant, sable: armed and Langued
Gules.

It exceeds good manners, to inuit your longer stay at our cold harbor; and
yet, for that diverse strangers have, either upon cause or kindness, pretended
to like well of a saltwater pond there made; and others, whose A saltwater pond.
dwelling affoordeth a semblable opportunity, may (perhaps) take some light
herefrom, to do the like: if they be so disposed, I will put my self to the
pain of particularly describing it and you may (notwithstanding) at your
pleasure, save the labor of perusing it; wherein I will by the way interlace
some notes, for the Imitaters better instruction.

There lies a creek of Ose, between two hills, which delivering a little
fresh rillet into the sea, receives for recompense, a large ouerflowing of the
salt water tides. This place is deepened to apond, by casting up part of the
Ose to the heads, part to the middle, and part to the sides: the upper head
stops out the fresh water, the lower keeps in the salt: the middle rayseth
an Island for the VVorkmens ease, the owners pleasure, and the fishes succor.
The Ose thus advanced, within short space, through the sun and wind,
changes his former softnes, to a firmer hardness. Round about the pond, there
is pitched a frith of three foot height, sloped inwards, to bar any Otter
from issuing, if he there adventure his natural theft, as it would foreclose
his entrance, but lose the pastime of his hunting, if the same declined
outward. In one of the corners next the sea, stands a flood-gate, to be
drawn up and let down through reigles in the side posts, whose mouth is
encompassed with a double frith, of two foot distance, each from other, and
their middle space filled up with small stones: this serves to let in the salt
water, and to keep in the fish, when the flood-gate is taken up: and therefore
you must not make the frith too close, nor the compass too little, lest they
too much stop the waters passage. It rises of equal height with the banks,
and they must outreach the highest full sea mark, by two foot at least: neither
ought your floodgates foot to stand even with the pondes bottom, lest
emptying the water, it wholly abandon the fish, but must leave about three foot
depth within. In the half circle enclosed between the floodgate and the
compass frith, there is dug a round pit, of three foot diameter, and four
foot depth, frithed on the sides, which is continually fed with the water
soaking from the said flood-gate, and serves to keep any fish alive, that you
have before taken, and so to save over often drawing. The flood-gate will hold
water best, if his sides be walled up with Cob. The pond may not carry one
continual depth; but contain some shallow places, to protect the smaller fish
from the greater, and for them all to play in, when the weather is hot. In the
higher bank there is also a flood-gate, to let in the fresh water, during
Summer season, which the fish then best affects; the rest of the year it is
carried away by a trench, for avoiding diverse discommodities.

Thus much for the making: now to the use. Such as have the means, may best
benefit themselves, by letting in the salt water every tide, which is easily
done, in making that place, where the water enters, lower then the banks and
frith, and so suffering the tide to take his course forth and back, without
stop or attendance: and in this case, you may place your flood-gate even with
the floor of your pond, and never take it up, but when you are disposed to
view all your store. But mine lies so high from the mouth of the haven, as I
am driven to detayne the last provision, until the coming springtyde have
taken two days increase; at which time, the floodgate is hoysed up, the old
water let out, and the new admitted. At full sea down goes the flood-gate
again, and there abides, until the next day minister the like ocasion: and
after this manner is opened and closed, for six days in the whole, continuing
from thenceforth other ten days vnmedled withal, to wit, 8. days of the
neap, and two of the spring. Neither does all this require ouer-lo^g, or busy
pains or atte^dance: for if the former water be let out (saving in extreme
cold weather) before any new come in, or stopped somewhat too late, it little
skilleth, so as on the last day you keep the advantage, which the flood, then
at highest, does give you.

And all these services about my pond, together with sundry other, are
performed by an old fellow whom I keep for alms, and not for his work. The
best means of preventing leakage, is to let three or four shouels full of
earth fall softly down, by the inner side of the flood-gate, which will quurt
up his chinkes.

In winter season, six foot depth of water, at least, is requisite.

Now touching the fish, this is the manner: When the Pilcherd Sayners cut the
most impaired pieces out of their nets, they are bought for a trifle, and serve
to make a less Said, of some 30. or 40. fathom length, and 2. in depth, for
this purpose, wherewith, between Midsummer and the end of August, when the
full sea falls in the after-noones, my people make draughtes on the shallow
places within harbor, and taking small fishes, cast them into the pond: they
are kept and brought thither alive, in a boat half full of water, which
enters through a little augre hole in the bottom, and so continues new. The
fish thus taken, are commonly Basse, Millet, Guilthead, Whiting, Smelts, Flouk,
Plaice, and Sole. The pond also breeds Crabs, Eeles, and Shrimps; and (in the
beginning) Oysters grew upon boughs of trees (an Indian miracle) which were
cast in thither, to serve as a houer for the fish. The Basse and Millet do also
spawn there, but whether they ouerliue their breeders ravening, to any big
growth, I am not certain. The pond will more over keep Shote, Peale, Trought,
and Sammon, in seasonable plight, but not in their wonted reddish grain. They
feed on salt vnmarchantable Pilcherd, small fish, called Brit, and Barn,
Tag-wormes, Lugges, little Crabs, and the livers of beasts: the rest devour
their meat, but the Millets content themselves with sucking it, and chawing of
the sedge. Every evening they come to a place certain in the pond, for
receiving their allowed pittance, and in Summer, approach very near, and in
the top of the water plainly discover themselves. They were first trained
hereunto, by throwing in their bayte at the ponds mouth, as they resorted
thither, to take pleasure of the new entering water, and are now become alike
tame, with those in the Sicilian river Elorus, for which, Leonicus voucheth the
testimony of Apollodorus. If they be absent, a knocking, like the chopping of
their Var. Hist. Lib. 3. Cap. 75. Lib. 9. Cap. 7.
meat, serves for a summons to call them, and confirms Plynies assertion,
that fishes do hear. In the hotest Summer weather, they swim with the ryme
of the water; and in the Winter, keep the depth. Lymy, or thick puddelly
water, kills them: they grow very fast, and fat, which also bettereth their
taste, and delivers them to the demaunders ready use, at all seasons,
seasonable.

They are taken generally, by a little Said net: specially the Eeles in
weelies: the Flowks, by groping in the sa^d, at the mouth of the pond, where
(about Lent) they bury themselves to spawn; and the Basse and Millet by angling.

The pleasure which I took at my friends pleasure herein, idly busied me thus
to express the same.

I Wayt not at the Lawyers gates,
Ne shoulder clymets down the stayres;
I vaunt not manhood by debates,
I envy not the misers fears:
But mean in state, and calm in sprite,
My fishfull pond is my delight.
Where equal distant Island viewes
His forced banks, and Otters cage:
Where salt and fresh the poole renues,
As Spring and drowth increase or swage:
Where boat presents his service pressed,
And well become the fishes nest:
There sucking Millet, swallowing Basse,
Side-walking Crab, wry-mouthed Flooke,
And slip-fist Eele, as euenings pass,
For safe bayt at due place do look:
Bold to approach, quick to espy,
Greedy to catch, ready to fly.
In heat the top, in cold the deep:
In spring the mouth, the mids in neap:
With changelesse change by shoales they keep,
Fat, fruitful, ready, but not cheap:
Thus mean in state, and calm in sprite,
My fishfull pond is my delight.
And again.
STench-louing Flies, their father heat,
On mother, moisture does beget,
Who feeling force of Sun too great,
Their course unto some water set,
There mean of calmy air to prove,
Twixt cool below and warmth above.
But careless of foresight in weal,
The evening deaw droplodes their wing,
So forced, down fallen, for flight to sail,
With buzzing moan their bane they sing,
Fluttering in wave, swimming in air,
That, weak to drown, and this, to bear.
While thus they can nor live nor dye,
Nor water-gieu'd, escape away,
The fish and swallows it epsy,
And both them challenge for their pray;
The fish as caught within their toil,
The Swallows as their kindly spoil.
The fish, like Swallows, mount on high,
The Swallows, fish-like diue in wave,
These, finlesse swim, those, winglesse fly,
One bent their diverse ventures have,
Fish in the dry, Swallows in wet,
By kind against kind their prey to get.
Their push a bubble up does rear,
The bubble drives the Fly to brinke:
So Fish in vain devour the air,
Swallows in vain the water drink,
While Fly escapes, this sport I take.
Where pond does The Ocean captive make.
I carried once a purpose, to build a little wooden A plot for a ba^queting
house.
banqueting house, on the Island in my pond, which because some other may
(perhaps) elsewhere put in execution, it will not do much amiss, to deliver you
the plot, as the same was devised for me, by that perfectly accomplished
gentleman, the late Sir Arthure Champernowne.

The Island is square, with four rounds at the corners, like Mount-Edgecumb.
This should first have been planched over and rayled about, with ballisters. In
the midst, there should have risen a boorded room, of the like fashion, but
lesser proportion, so to leave sufficient space between that and the rayles
for a walk round about: this square room should within side have been sieled
roundwise, and in three of the places where the round joined with the square,
as many windows should have been set; the fourth should have served for a
door. Of the 4. turrets, shut out by this round, one should have made a
kitchen, the second, a storehouse, to keep the fishing implements, the third,
a buttery, and the fourth a stayre, for ascending to the next loft: which next
loft should have risen on the flat roof of the lower, in a round form, but of
a lesser size again, so to leave a second Tarras, like the other: and as the
square room below was sieled round, so should this upper round room be sieled
square, to the end, that where the side walls and sieling joined, three
windows and a door might likewise find their places. The void spaces between
the round and square, he would have turned to Cupboardes and boxes, for
keeping other necessary vtensiles, toward these sishing feasts.

Ouer-against this pond, lies beggars Island, so called Beggars Island.
(as our neighbors relate) ever since my great grandsire espying 2. of that
idle occupation, at a hot combat on the shore, while he was rowing homewards
from Saltash, took them into his boat, and there set them on land, to try (as
in a lists) the uttermost of their quarrel: which place they could not quir,
until the low water should enfranchise them by wading and the respite, vent out
the aly e fume of their fury.

About 40. years ago, it chanced, that a boat ouerfraighted with people, in
rowing down the river from Saltash market, was by the extreme weather, sunk,
near to a place called Henpoint, and all the folk drowned, saving one only
woman, named Agnes, the wife of one Cornish, whom it pleased God so to protect
and direct, that in her first popping up again (which most living things
accustom) she espied the boat (after it had discharged his burtlien) risen
likewise, and floting by her, full of water, whereon she got hold, sat
astride upon one of his sides, and by the wind and tide, was vnusually, and
almost miraculously driven athwart the channel, to a place called Wilcoue,
where she no sooner stepped ashore, but the boat (as having done his enjoined
errand) presently recommitted itself to the storms disposition.

The woman thus freed from one peril at sea, adventured another of little
less consequence at land; for being not yet thoroughly restored to her sense,
she clymed up the cliffe in such a steep place, as the very consideration
thereof, does ever sithence half amaze the beholders. But that ground was
foreordained to her good: for not long after, her husband took the same, with
the rest of the tenement, in lease; and it now serves her for a dwelling, and
many others, by her charity, for a relief.

Her said husband, and their two only sons, at several times, by one kind
of misfortune, found their burial in the waves.

The Oysters dredged in this Lyner, find a welcomer acceptance, where the
taste, and not appetite, is Cater for the stomach, then those of the adjoining
Tamer, which grows (as I conjecture) because Lyners lesser stream leaves
them to be seasoned, with a more kindly and better relished saltnes.

The next parish upon this river, is called Sheuiock, sometimes the ancient
Dannyes inheritance and inhabitance: by Sheuiock.
whose daughter and heir, the same (together with other fair possessions)
descended to the Earls of Deuon. In the church there lie two Knights of that
name, and one of their ladies by her husbands side, having their pictures
embossed on their tombs in the side walls, and their Arms once painted round
about; but now by the malice, not of men, but of time, defaced. They are held
to be father and son, and that the son slain in our wars with France,
was from thence brought home to be here interred. There runs also a tale
amongst the parishioners, how one of these Dannyes ancestors undertook to
build the Church, and his wife the barn adjoining, and that, casting up their
accounts, upon finishing of their works, the barn was found to cost three
halfepence more then the Church: and so it might well fall out: for it is a
great barn and a little Church.

In this parish stands Crasthole, which by the high Crasthole
site, might more fitly be termed Open hill, a poor village, but a much
frequented thorow-fare, somewhat infamous, not upon any present desert, but
through an inueterate byword, viz. that it is peopled with 12. dwellings and
13. cuckolds: for as the dwellings are more then doubled, so (I hope) the
cuckolds are less then singled.

Howsoever, many wayfarers make themselves glee, by putting the Inhabitants in
mind of this privilege; who again, especially the women (like the
Campellians in the North, and the London Bargers) forslow not to baigne them
(unless they plead their heels the faster) with a worse perfume, then Iugurth
found fault with in the dungeon, where the Romans buried him alive, to attend
his languishing and miserable death.

Upon Sheuiock abbutteth S. Germans, the greatest S. Germans.
parish in Cornwall, if you join to the store of people, the quantity and
quality of the soil, wherethrough it affoordeth commodious dwellings to sundry
ancient Gentlemen, and wealthy Farmours* amongst which first sort, I may not
(without withdrawing my testimony due to venue) omit M. George Keckwitch of
Catch-French, a house so named (by likelihood) for some former memorable,
though now forgotten accident, whose continual, large, and inquisitiue
liberality to the poor, did in the late dear years, extraordinarily extend it
self to an inuiting emulation, but beyond the apprehensiue imitation of any
other in the shire. He has issue by Blanch the daughter of Sir Frauncis
Godolphin: his father George, married Buller: his graundsire their ancient
dwelling was in Essex, where this Gentleman enjoys fair possessions, and
bears for his arms, Ar. two Lions in bend passant Sa. cotised, G.

The Church town mustreth many inhabitants, and sundry ruins, but little
wealth, occasioned either through abandoning their fishing trade, as some
conceive, or by their being abandoned of the religious people, as the greater
sort imagine: for in former times, the Bishop of Cornwals See, was from S.
Petrocks in Bodmyn, removed hither; as from hence, when the Cornish Dioces
united with Deuon, it passed to Crediton: and lastly, from thence to Excester.
But this first loss received relief through a succeeding Priory, which at the
general suppression, changing his note with his coat, is now named Port Eliot,
and by the owners charity distributeth, pro virili, the alms accustomably
expected and expended at such places. Neither will it (I think) much displease
you to hear, how the gentleman's ancestour, of whom master Eliot bought it,
came by the same,

John Champernowne, son and heir apparent to Sir Philip of Deuon, in H. the
8. time; followed the Court, and through his pleasant conceits, of which much
might be spoken, wan some good grace with the King. Now when the golden shower
of the dissolved Abbey lands, rayned welnere into every gapers mouth, some 2.
or 3. gentlemen, the Kings servants, and master Champernownes acquaintance,
waited at a door where the King was no pass forth, with purpose to beg such a
matter at his hands: Our gentleman became inquisitiue to know their suit: they
made strange to impart it. Thi^ ^^hile, out comes the King: they kneel down,
so does master Champernowne: they prefer their petition; the King graunts it:
they render humble thanks, and so does M. Champernowne: afterward, he
requires his share; they deny it; he appeals to the King: the King avoweth
his equal meaning in the largess; whereon the overtaken companions were feign
to allot him this Priory for his partage.

The parish Church answers in bigness, the large proportion of the parish,
and the surplusage of the Priory; a great part of whose chauncell anno 1592.
fell suddenly down, upon a Friday, very shortly after public service was
ended, which heavenly favor, of so little respite, saved many persons lives;
with who^ immediately before, it had been stuffed: and the devout charges of
the well disposed parishioners quickly repaired this ruin.

At the towns end, Cuddenbeak, an ancie^r house of the Bishops, from a well
advanced Promontory; which entitled Cuddenbeak.
it Beak, takes a pleasant prospect of the river.

In this parish lies Bake, the mansion of the forereme^bred M. To. Moyle, who
married Anne daughter of M. Lock, as he did mistress Vaughan, a Gentlewoman
suppressing her rare learning, with a rarer modesty, and yet expressing the
same in her virtuous life and Christian decease. John father to Robert married
Agnes, daughter of Semtabyn: and his father (...) daughter of Forteskew, to
whom that dwelling first descended. He bears for his Arms G. a Moyle
passant, Ar. A part of this parish confineth on the maine sea, and offreth a
fair landing place, called Seaton, howbeit, by a handsome fence forbidding any
foes invasion: it is ouerlooked, upon the one side of Seaton.
the river (which there discharges his stream into the Ocean) by Keuerel, the
ancient house of the Langdons, Gent. in former times, of fair reuennues, whose
Arms are Ar. a Cheuron between 3. Bears heads erased Sa. The house perhaps,
borowing his name of Che^ereal, al French word, signifying a wild Goat (as
those high elifs afford them a commodious inhabitance) and on the other, by
Tregonnock, the dwelling of M. Tho, Smith, who in a quiet and honest
retirednes, finds that contentmet, which many ambitious heads far and wide
do vainly seek for: he married Tree(...) his father Robert

one of the daughters and heirs to Killigrew: and his son John, Priscilla
the daughter of M. Geo. Wadham. His Arms, B. a Soultier Ar. between 4.
Martlets O.

Leaving S. Germans, and passing through Laurake parish, in which M. Peter
Courtney has an high seated house, called Wotto^, you descend to Noddet or
bridge, where the river Lyner first mingleth his fresh stream with the brinish
waves touching whose name and quality, one delighted in the solitary solace of
his banks, and more affecting his own recreation, then hunting after any
others good liking, descanted thus:

WHo first gave Lyners name,
Or from what cause it came,
Hard it is for certain to express:
Experience yet directs,
By trial of effects,
Thereatto aim, and frame a guess,
Is It, that as she thee bear'th,
So thou do line the earth,
With purfeld streams of blew and white:
Or, at a line does guide,
So thou do level slide,
And throw'st into the sea thy mite?
Is It, that with twisted line,
The Angler does untwine
The fishes life, by giuing-breath.
Or, as the threshing lout,
Rusheth his Lyners out,
So Lyner on his course rushetht,
Or, as some puppy feat,
Lives a mastiue great,
And gets whelps of mongrell kind:
Lyner, the sea so lines,
And stream with wave combines,
Begetting waters freshly brin'de.
Item.
WHen Sun the earth least shadow spares,
And highest stalles in heaven his seat,
Then Lyners peeble bones he bares,
Who like a lamb, does lowly blear,
And faintly sliding every rock,
Plucks from his foamy fleece a lock.
Before, a river, now a rill,
Before, a fence, now searce a bound:
Children him ouer-leape at will,
Small beasts, his deepest bottom sound.
The heavens with brass enarch his head,
And earth, of iron makes his bed.
But when the milder-mooded sky,
His face in mourning weeds does wrap,
For absence of his clearest die,
And drops tears in his Centers lap,
Lyner gynnes Lyon-like to roar,
And scorns old banks should bound him more.
Then, second Sea, he rolls, and bear's,
Rocks in his womb, riekes on his back.
Downe-borne bridges, vptorne wear's,
Witness, and wayle, his force, their wrack.
Into men's houses fierce he breaks,
And on each stop, his rage he wreakes.
Shepherd adiew's his swymming flock,
The Hind his whelmed harvest hope,
The strongest rampire fear's his shocke,
Plains scarce oan serve to give him scope,
Nor hills a bar; whereso he stray'th,
Ensue, loss, terror, ruin, death.
In following the course of Lyner, you fall down by Master Bonds ancient
house of Earth, descended to his auncesters, from the daughter and heir of
that name, to that of Master Wiuels, newly and fayrely builded, on which
abbutteth Ma. Bullers Shillingham, not so much beholden to the owners
inhabitance, as to natures pleasant and commodious seating.

Bond married with Fountain, his father with Fits: his Arms are Ar. on a
Cheuron Sa. three Befants.

Next, we take view of Trematon Castle, as it does of the Haven, and Country
adjoining. It is, or rather was, Trematon.
one of the Dukes foremencioned four houses: for now all the inner buildings
are sunk into ruin: onelythere remain the Iuie-tapissed walls of the Keep,
and base Court, and a poor dwelling for the keeper of the Gayle, to which
prisoners are brought upon actions, from al places, appurtena^t to that large
Lordship, if they cannot by suretiship discharge themselves, from the Bailiefes
arrest.

I have received information, from one auerring eyewitnes, that about
fourscore years since, there was dug up in the Parish Chauncell, a Leaden
coffin, which being opened, showed the proportion of a very big man, but
when the hands went about to ascertaine themselves, as well as their eyes, the
body verified, that Omnis caro puluis. The party farther told me, how, a
writing graued in the Lead, expressed the same to be the burial of a Duke,
whose heir was married to the prince. But who it should be, I cannot devise,
albeit my best pleasing conjecture, lights upon Orgerius, because his
daughter was married to Edgar.

At the last Cornish commotion, S. Richard Greynuile the elder did, with his
Lady and followers, put themselves into this Castle, and there for a while
endured the Rebels siege, encamped in three places against it, who wanting
great Ordinance, could have wrought the besieged small scathe, had his friends,
or enemies, kept faith and promise: but some of those within; slipping by night
over the walls, with their bodies after their hearts, and those without,
mingling humble intreatings with rude menaces, he was hereby won, to issue
forth at a posterne gate for patley. The while, a part of thoserakehels, not
knowing what honesty, and far less, how much the word of a soldier
imported, stepped between him and home, laid hold on his aged vnweyldie body,
and threatened to leave it liuelesse, if the enclosed did not leave their
resistance. So prosecuting their first treachery against the prince, with
suitable actions toward his subjects, they seized on the Castle, and exercised
the uttermost of their barbarous cruelty (death excepted) on the surprised
prisoners. The seely Gentlewomen, without regard of sex or shame, were
stripped from their apparel to their very smockes, and some of their fingers
broken, to pluck away their rings, and Sir Richard himself made an exchange
from Trematon Castle, to that of Launceston, with the Gayle to boot.

This Castle vaunteth the Lord Warden his steward by Patent, Master Anthony
Rouse his Baylife by inheritance, and Richard Carew of Antony his keeper by
lease. Of the ancient officers, one yet retayneth the name, though not the
place, viz. M. Porter, to whose ancestor, when Vantor was L. thereof, one by a
deed before date, gave land, lying without the gate, by the title of Russell
Ianitori de Trematon, which he still enjoys. M. Porters Arms are Sa. Three
Belles Ar. a Canton Erm.

It stands in S. Stephens parish: the sheafe whereof, together with other
far reuennues, M. George Wadham enjoying in the right of his wife, the
daughter and heir to master Hechins, liberally bestows in continual
hospitality.

Master Hechins Arms, are Sa. a cross Fleurty, quarterly B. and G. between
4. Lions heads erased Sa. langued of the second. M. Wadhams, G. a Cheuron
between three Roses Ar.

The same parish also compriseth Saltash, in old writings, called Villa de
Esse; Esse his town: and such Gentlemen Saltash.
there have been of ancient descent and fair reuennues. The word Salt, is
added thereunto, because it stands on the sea, and to distinguish it from
other places of the same name. It is seated on the declyning of a steep hill,
consists of three streets, which every shower washes clean, compriseth
between 80. and 100. households, vnderlyeth the government of a Mayor and his
10. brethren, and possesses sundry large privileges over the whole haven, to
wit, an yearly rent of boats and barges appertayning to the harbor, ancorage
of strange shipping, crowning of dead persons, laying of arrests, and other
Admiral rights, besides electing of Burgesses for the Parliaments, benefit of
the passage, foreclosing all others, save themselves, from dredging of Oysters,
except between Candlemas and Easter, weckely markets, halfe-yeerely fayres,
etc.

The town is of late years well increased and adorned with buildings, and the
townsmen addict themselves to the honest trade of merchandise, which endoweth
them with a competent wealth. Some 7. or 8. ships belong thereunto.

It was not long since, that the neighbour-ministers successively bestowed
their pains in preaching there, on the market days, and the bordering
gentlemen yielded their presence. Sermon ended, the Preachers resorted to one
ordinary, and the Gentlemen to another. This affoorded commendable effects to
many works of love and charity: but, with the retorted blame, from one to
another, it is now wholly given over.

Here, that great Carrack, which Sir Frauncis Drake Carrack.
surprised, in her return from the East Indies, vnloded her frayght, and
through a negligent fyring met with an improper ending.

In this town also dwells one Grisling, deaf from a Grisling.
long time, who, besides his merry conceits, of counterseyting by signs (like
the Roman Pantamimi) any kind of occupation or exercise, has a strange
quality, to understand what you say, by marking the moving of your lips,
especially if you speak deliberately of any ordinary matter, so as (contrary
to the rules of nature, and yet without the help of art) he can see words as
they pass forth of your mouth: and of this I have caused him to give often
experiments.

And if Plyny now lived, I suppose he would afford A charitable dog.
a room, in his natural History, to a dog of this town, who (as I have
learned by the faithful report of master Thomas Parkins) used daily to fetch
meat at his house there, and to carry the same unto a blind mastiffe, that
lay in a brake without the town: yea, (that more is) he would upon Sundays
conduct him thither to dynner, and, the meal ended, guide him back to his
couch and covert again.

I had almost forgotten to tell you, that there is a well in this town, whose
water will never boil peason to a seasonable softnes.

At the foot of Saltash, there abbutteth upon the sea, a rock, called Ashtorre,
alias, Esses Torre, which is invested Ashtorre
with the jurisdiction of a manor, and claymeth the sultes of many Gentlemen,
as his freeholders in Knights service. Below this, there is a rock on each
side of the river, the one termed the Bull, the other the Hen; that The Bull
Henpoint
on Deuon, this on Cornwall side. The Hen stands a little distant from the
shore, which gives occasion to a Pack, how between it and the land, the
Queens greatest ship may sail; but it is meant of the farther distant.

Above Saltash, Cargreen, a fisher town, shows it Cargreen
self, but can hardly muster a mean plight of dwellings or dwellers: so may
their care be green, because their wealth is withered.

Near thereunto is Clifton, a neat seated house, appertayning to one of the
Arundels, descended by a Clifton.
younger brother, from those of Trerice: he married Hill, his father, Cole.

Neither has your eye searcely quitted that, when it receives Halton, the
pleasant and commodious dwelling of M. Anthony Rouse, both which benefits, he
employeth Halton.
to a kind and uninterrupted entertainment of such, as visit him upon his not
spare inuiting, or their own occasions, who (without the self guilt of an
ungrateful wrong) must witness, that his frankenesse confirms their welcome,
by whatsoever means, provision, the fuel of hospitality, can in the best
manner supply. His ancestors were Lords of little Modbury in Deuon, before the
descent of times grew to a distinguishment, by the date of writings: which
manor, together with other lands, through a lineall succession, fell to be
possessed by Raphe, Will. Raphe, John, Will. Raphe, and Raphe, whose daughter and
heir Elizabeth, bestowed the same, with her self, upon the family of the
Dimocks. Robert, second son to the last mentioned Raphe, save one, had issue
Will. who married Alice, the daughter and heir of Tho. of Edmerston. Will. had
another Will. and he had John, and John again had Will. This Will. had Roger, who
upon Julian, sister and coheire of John Hill of Fleet, begat John and Richard,
father to the Gentleman now living, and he matched with Elizabeth, daughter of
Thomas Southcott, and one of the heirs to her mother, the daughter of
Barnehouse: besides which, he succeeded to his uncle John's inheritance, who
deceased issuelesse: and being yet scarcely entered the limits of an healthful
old age, sees his pedigree extended into two farther descents. As for those
outreaching man's memory, I have seen them very sufficiently verified: his
Arms are, O. an Eagle displayed B. pruning her wing, armed and langued G.

Upon the top of a creek hereby, lies Crocadon, the Crocadon
mansion of M. Treuisa, a Gent. deriuing himself from the ancient and
weldeseruing Chronicler of that name: he bears G. a garb O.

A mile above Halton, stands Cuttayle, another Cuttayle.
house of M. Edgecumbs, so named (as we may conjecture) of the French
Courtaile, in English, short cut; because here, the salt water course is
straightned, by the incroching banks. The buildings are ancient, large, strong
and fair, and appurtenanced with the necessaries of wood, water, fishing,
parks, and mils, with the devotion of (in times past) a rich furnished
Chapel, and with the charity of almes-houses for certain poor people, whom
the owners used to relieve. It is reported, and credited thereabouts, how Sir
Ric. Edgecumb the elder, was driven to hide himself in those his thick woods,
which ouerlook the river, what time being suspected of favoring the Earl of
Richmonds party, against King R. the 3. he was hotely pursued, and narrowely
searched for. Which extremity taught him a sudden policy, to put a stone in his
cap, and tumble the same into the water, while these rangers were fast at his
heels, who looking down after the noise, and seeing his cap swimming thereon,
supposed that he had desperately drowned himself, gave over their farther
hunting, and left him liberty to shift away, and ship over into Britain: for
a grateful remembrance of which delivery, he afterward builded in the place
of his lurking, a Chapel, not yet utterly decayed.

And thus having coasted the Cornish side of Plymmouth Voyages to and from
Plymmouth.
haven, I hold it not amiss, to make report of such great voyages, as, by the
memory of our Chronicles, or our own view, from this harbor, took their
beginning or ending.

Here the never enough commended black Prince, 1355.
attended by the Earls of Warwick, Suffolk, Sarisbury, and Oxford, the Lord
Chandos and others, committed himself to the sea, with a navy of 300. bottoms,
for landing and maintayning his fathers right in France; and hither, after his
glorious battle at Poictiers, he returned, with the captive French King and
his nobles.

Here the Lady Katherine, daughter to the King of 1501.
Spain, and wife to our Prince Arthur, took land, at her first arrival in
England.

Here shipped himself, the Lord Darcy, sent by King 1509.
Henry the 8. with a lusty crew of soldiers, for that Ferdinands just
assistance, against the Infidels: but used by him as a stale, for the unjust
conquest of Christian Nauar.

Here, mostly, have the troops of adventurers, made their Rendez vous, for
attempting new discoueries or inhabitances: as, Tho. Stukeleigh, for Florida,
Sir Humfrey Gilbert for Newfound-land, Sir Rich. Greynuile for Virginea, Sir
Martyn Frebisher, and Master Dauies, for the North-west passage, Sir Walter
Raleigh for Guiana, etc.

Here, Count Mongomery made forth, with a more commendable meaning, then able
means, or welspeeding effect, for relieuing the hard besieged, and sore
distressed Rochellers.

Here, Sir Fra. Drake first extended the point of that liquid line, wherewith
(as an emulator of the Suns glory) he encompassed the world.

Here, Master Candish began to second him, with a like heroical spirit, and
fortunate success.

Here, Don Antonio, King of Portugal, the Earls of Cumberland, Essex, and
Notingham, the Lord Warden of the Stanneries, Sir John Norrice, Sir John
Hawkins (and who elsewhere, and not here?) have ever accustomed to cut sail,
in carrying defiance, against the imaginary new Monarch; and here to cast
anchor, upon their return with spoil and honor.

I omit the infinite swarm of single ships, and petty fleetes, daily here
manned out to the same effect.

And here, in eighty eight, the foreremembred Lord Admiral expected, and set
forth, against that heauenthreatning Armado, which, to be tainted with the
shamefuller disgrace, and to blaze our renoume with the brighter luster, termed
it self, Invincible. But I may not grow ouer-lasciuious in extolling.

King R. the 2. Anno 5. of his reign, by Act of Parliament, restrained all
passengers from shipping themselves in any other Ports the^ such as are there
set down: of which Plymmouth was one.

From Plymmouth haven, passing farther into the country, Hengsten down
presents his waste head and sides to our sight. This name it boroweth of
Hengst, which in Hengsten
the Saxon signifies a horse, and to such least dainty beasts it yields
fittest pasture. The country people have a by word, that,

Hengsten down, well ywrought,
Is worth London town, dear ybought.
Which grew from the store of Tynne, in former times, there dug up: but
that gainful plenty is now fallen to a scant-sauing scarcity. Those works
afford store of the formentioned Cornish Diamonds. The neighboring Inhabitants
observe also, that when the top of Hengsten is capped with a cloud, the same
boadeth a shower within short time after.

Roger Ho^^den reports, that about Anno 806. a fleet of Danes arrived in
West-wales, with whom the Welsh joined in insurrection against king Egbright,
but he gloriously discomfited them, at Hengistendune, which I take to be this
place (if at least West-wales may, by interpretation, pass for Cornwall)
because the other province, of that name, is more commonly divided into North
and South.

This down is edged by Carybullock, sometimes a park Carybullocke.
of the Dukes, but best brooking that name, now it has lost his quality,
through exchaunging Dear for Bullock.

A little aside from hence, lies Landwhitton, now Lawhitton, which (as I have
elsewhere noted) was exempted unto Edwulff Bishop of Creditune, from the
Lawhitto^
Cornish Diocese, to which yet, both for the temporaltie, and spirituality,
the same owes present subjection. Mary, into what new names Pontiu^ and
Coilleng there also mentioned, are now metamorphized, I must say amplio.

Those buildings commonly known by the name of Lauriston, and written
Lanceston, are by the Cornishmen, Lanceston
called Lesteeuan (Lez in Cornish signifies broad, and those are scatteringly
erected) and were anciently termed Lanstaphadon, by interpretation, S. Stephens
Church: they consist of two boroughs, Downeuet and Newport: that (perhaps so
called) of down yeeding, as having a steep hill this, of his newer erection.
With them join the parishes of S. Thomas and S. Stephens. The parish Church of
Launceston it self, fetches his title of dedication, from Mary Magdalen,
whose image is curiously hewed in a side of the wall, and the whole Church
fayrely builded.

The town was first founded (says M. Hooker) by Eadulphus, 900.
brother to Alpsius, Duke of Deuon and Cornwall, and by his being girded with a
wall, argues in times past to have carried some value.

A new increase of wealth, expresses it self in the Inhabitants late
repaired and enlarged buildings. They are governed by a Mayor, and his
scarlet-robde brethren, and reap benefit by their fayres and markets, and the
County Assizes. The Statute of 32. Henry 8. which took order touching
Sanctuaries, endowed this town with the privilege of one, but I find it not
turned to any use.

To the town there is adioynant in site, but sequestered in jurisdiction, an
ancient Castle, whose steep rocky-footed Keep, has his top environed with a
treble wall, and in regard thereof, men say, was called, Castle terrible. The
base court compriseth a decayed Chapel, a large hall, for holding the shire.
Assizes, the Constables dwelling house, and the common Gayle.

About 60 years past, there were found certain leather coins in the Castle
wall, whose fair stamp and strong substance, till then resisted the assault of
time, as they would now of covetousness.

A little without the town, were founded a Friery, and anno 1128. an Abbey,
furthered by Reignald Earl of Cornwall.

About 2. miles distant from Launceston, Penheale manor Penheale
coasteth the high way, claiming the right of ancient demain, and sometimes
appertaining to the Earls of Huntingdon, but purchased not long sithence by
the late M. George Greinuile, who descended from a younger brother of that
family, and through his learning and wisdom, advanced his credit to an
especial good regard in his Country. He married Julian, one of the 6.
daughters and heirs of William Viel: and Jane, the daughter to Sir John
Arundel of Trerne. Richard his father took to wife, one of Kelwayes heirs;
and Degory his graund-father, one of the inheritors to Tregarthen: which helps,
together with his own good husbandry, have endowed his son with an elder
brothers liuelyhood: he bears G. three Restes O.

In Lezant parish hereby, master Christopher Harris owneth a third part of
Trecarell (the project and onset of a sumptuous building) as coheire to the
last Gentleman Trecarel.
of that name, but admits no partner in the sweetly tempered mixture of
bounty and thrift, gravity and pleasantnes, kindness and stoutnes; which grace
all his actions. He bears Sa. three Croissants within aborder A.

Neither may we forget Master Coringtons house of Newton, old to him by
succession, yet new, in respect of his own antiquity: diverse his ancestors
have reaped Newton.
the praise and reputation of a stayed carriage, howbeit one of them, through
his rash, but merry prankes, is to this day principally remembered, by the name
of the mad Corington. I have heard him deliver an observation, that, in eight
liniall descents, no one borne heir of his house ever succeeded to the land:
he bears A. a Saultier Sa.

Trebigh, a privileged franchise, is by his Lord, Master Trebigh.
William Wray, converted to a general welcomer of his friends and neighbors.
He married the daughter of Sir William Courtney: his father the coheire of
Killigrew. He bears Sa. a Fesse between three battelaxes A.

Poole, for his low and moist seat, is not unaptly named, Poole.
houseth Sir Jonathan Trelawny, far beneath his worth and calling: he married
Sir Henry Killigrews daughter: his father, the coheire of Reskimer: his
graundfather Lamellyns Inheritrix.

Poole stands in Mynhinet parish, where Sir Jonathan has a large privileged
Ma^nour of the same name: the Benefice is given by Excester College in Oxford,
none but the fellows admittable, wherethrough it has sccessiuely been
graced, with three well borne, well learned, and well-beloved Incumbents; Doctor
Tremayne, Master Billet, and Master Denis. Out of Sir Ionathans house is also
descended Master Edward Trelawny, a Gentleman qualified with many good parts.
Their arms are A. a Cheuron, S. between three Oke-leaues Vert.

Sundry other Gent. rest beholden to this hundred, for their dwellings, who,
in an enuiable mediocritie of fortune, do happily possess themselves, and
communicate their sufficient means to the service of their prince, the good of
their neighbors, and the bettering of their own estate: of which sort are, M.
Becket, who bears S. a Fesse, between three Boares heads coped, six Crosses
crosselet Fichee. O. M. Tregodecke, who bears A. a Cheuron between three
Buckles S. M. Spur. G. on a Cheuron. O. a rose of the first, and 2. mullets
pearnd S. M. Bligh B. a Griffon legreant O. armed G. between 3. Croissants A.
M. Lower B. a Cheuron engrayled O. between three Roses A. M. Treuisa G. a garb
O. M. Chiuerton A. a Castle S. standing on a hill V. Manaton. A on a Bend S.
three mullets of the field, and some others.

Stratton Hundred.
STratton Hundred extends the breadth of Cornwall, to the North, as that of
East begins it on the South, and therefore it shall next succeed. His
circuit is slender, but his fruitfulness great, and the Inhabitants industry
commendable, who reap a large benefit from their orchyards and gardens, but
specially from their Garlic (the Countreymans Triacle) which they vent, not
only into Cornwall, but many other shires besides.

Stratton, the only market town of this Hundred, gave the same his name, and
(if I mistake not) takes it Stratton.
from Strota, a street: other memorable matter to report thereof, I find not
any.

Upon one side of the town, lies master Chamonds house and place of Launcels,
so called, for that it was sometimes a Cell, appertaining to the Abbot of
Hartlond. Launcels


This Gentleman's father, late deceased, received at Gods hands, an
extraordinary favor, of long life.

He served in the office of a Justice of peace, almost 60. years.

He knew above 50. several Judges of the western cercuit.

He was uncle, and great uncle to at least 300. wherein yet, his uncle and
neighbor, master Greynuile, parson of Kilkhampton, did exceed him.

He married one of the daughters and heirs of Treuenuer, and by her saw five
sons, and two daughters, the youngest out-stepping 40. years.

Sir John Chamond his father, a man learned in the common laws, was knighted
at the Sepulcher, and by dame Jane, widdowe to Sir John Arundell of Trerice,
and daughter to Sir Thomas Greynuile, had an elder son called Thomas, whose
two daughters, and heirs, by Arscot; carried part of the lands, to Tripcony,
and Treuanion, with whom they matched.

Master Chamond bears A. a Cheuron between 3. flowers de Luce: G.

In Launcels parish, also, stands Norton, the house of Norton.
M. Tristram Arscot, a Ge^t. who by his travailing abroad in his younger years,
has the better enabled himself, to discharge his calling at home. He took to
wife Eulalia, the widow of the wise, and virtuous M. Edmond Tremayne, and
daughter of Sir John Sentleger, whose stately house of Anery, in Deuon, he
purchased, and thither has lately removed his residence; he bears party per
Cheuron B. et E. in chief two stagges heads cabased O.

Upon the North-sea, thereby, bordereth Stow, so Stow.
singly called, Rer eminentiam, as a place of great and good mark and scope,
and the ancient dwelling of the Greynuiles famous family, from whence are
issued diverse male branches, and whither the females have brought in a very
populous kindred. Master Bernard Greinuile, son and heir to Sir Richard, is
the present owner, and in a kind magnanimity, treads the honorable steps of
his ancestors.

Tonacumb, late the house of Master John Kempthorne, Tonacu^b.
alias, Lea, who married Katherine, the daughter of Sir Peers Courtney, is, by
his issuelesse decease, descended to his brothers son: he bears A. three
Pineapple trees V.

Returning to the Westwards, we meet with Bude, Bude.
an open sandy Bay, in whose mouth rises a little hill, by every sea-floud
made an Island, and thereon, a decayed Chapel: it spares road only to such
small shipping, as bring their tide with them, and leaves them dry, when the
ebb has carried away the Saltwater.

Upon one side hereof, Master Arundel of Trerice possesses a pleasant-seated
house, and demaines, called Efford, alias, Ebbingford, and that not improperly,
because Efford.
every low water, there affords passage to the other shore: but now it may
take a new name, for his better plight: for this Gentleman has, to his great
charges, builded a Salt Water Mill, athwart this Bay, whose causey serves, as
a very convenient bridge, to save the way-farers former trouble, let, and
danger. It is received by tradition, that his belsire, Sir John Arundel, was
forewarned, by I wot not what Calker, how he should be slain on the sands.
For avoiding which encounter, he always shunned Efford, and dwelt at Trerice,
another of his houses. But, as the proverb says, Fata viam inuenient, and as
experience teaches men's curiosity, Fato viam sternit. It happened, that what
time the Earl of Oxford surprised S. Michaels mount by policy, and kept the
same by strong hand, this Sir John Arundel was Sheriff of Cornwall,
wherethrough, upon duty of his office, and commandment from the Prince, he
marched thither, with posse Comitatus, to besiege it, and there, in a skirmish
on the sands, which divide the mount from the contine^t, he fulfilled the
effect of the prophecy, with the loss of his life, and in the said mounts
Chapel lies buried.

So Cambises lighted on Ecbatana in Egypt, and Alexander Epirot, on Acheros in
Italy, to bring them to their end. So Philip of Macedon, and Atis the son of
Croesus, found a chariot in a swords hilt, and an Iron poynted weapon at the
hunting of a Bore, to delude their preuentiue weariness. So Amilcar supped in
Siracusa, and the Prince of Wales ware a Crown through Cheapside, in another
sort and sense then they imagined, or desired. And so Pope Gerebert, and our
King H. the 4. travailed no farther, for meeting their fatal Jerusalem, S.
Mary Wike. Perambulation of Kent in Sandwich. Brita^nia. Thomasin Bonauenture.
then the one to a Chapel in Rome, the other to a chamber in Westminster.

S. Marie Wike stands in a fruitful soil, skirted with a moore, course for
pasture, and combrous for travelers. Wic, by master Lambert, signifies a
town: by master Camden, Stationem, vel Sinum, vbi excercitus agit. This
village was the birthplace of Thomasine Bonauenture, I know not, whether by
desce^t, or event, so called: for whiles in her girlish age she kept sheep on
the foreremembred moore, it chanced, that a London merchant passing by, saw
her, heeded her, liked her, begged her of her poor parents, and carried her to
his home. In process of time, her mistres was summoned by death to appear in
the other world, and her good thewes, no less then her seemly personage,
so much contented her master, that he advanced her from a servant, to a wife,
and left her a wealthy widow. Her second marriage befell with one Henry Gall:
her third and last, with Sir John Perciual, Lord Mayor of London, whom she also
ouerliued. And to show, that virtue as well bare a part in the desert, as
fortune in the means of her preferment, she employed the whole residue of her
life and last widdowhood, to works no less bountiful, then charitable:
namely, repayring of high ways, building of bridges, endowing of maidens,
relieuing of prisoners, feeding and apparelling the poor, etc. Amongst the
rest, at this S. Mary Wike, she founded a Chauntery and free-schoole, together
with fair lodgings, for the Schoolemasters, scholars, and officers, and added
twenty pound of yearly reuennue, for supporting the incident charges: wherein
as the bent of her desire was holy, so God blessed the same with all wished
success: for diverse the best Gent. sons of Deuon and Cornwall were there
virtuously trained up, in both kinds of divine and humane learning, under one
Cholwel, an honest and religious teacher, which caused the neighbors so much
the rather, and the more to rewe, that a petty smacke only of Popery, opened a
gap to the oppression of the whole, by the statute made in Edw. the 6. reign,
touching the suppression of Chaunteries.

Such strange accide^ts of extraordinary aduanceme^ts, are verified by the
ample testimony of many histories, and, amongst the rest, we read in
Machiauell (how beit controuled by the often reproved Iouius) that Castruccio
Caestracani climed from a baser birth, to a far higher estate. For being
begotten in Lucca, by unknown parents, and cast out, in his swaddling clouts,
to the wide world, he was taken up by a widdowe, placed by her with a Clergy
man her brother, given by him to a Gent, called Francesco Guinigi, and by
Guinigi left tutor to his only son. From which step, his courage and
wisdom raised him by degrees, to the sovereignty of Lucca, the Senatorship of
Rome, the special favor of the Emperor, and a near hope (only by death
prevented) of subduing Florence.

Lesnewith Hundred.
LEsnewith Hundred takes his name of a parish therein (as Stratton does of a
town) memorable for nothing else. It may be derived, either from Les, which in
Cornish signifies broad, and newith, which is new, as a new breadth, because
it enlarges his limits farther into Cornwall on both sides, whereas Stratton
is straightned on the one by Deuon: or from Les and gwith, which imports
broad Ashen trees, g, for Euphonias sake being turned into n.

The first place which here offreth it self to sight, is Bottreaux Castle,
seated on a bad harbor of the North Bottreaux Castle
sea, and suburbed with a poor market town, yet entitling the owner in times
past, with the style of a Baron, from who, by match it descended to the L.
Hungerford, and rests in the Earl of Huntingdon. The diuersified rooms of a
prison, in the Castle, for both sexes, better preserved by the Inhabitants
memory, then discerneable by their own endurance, show the same, heretofore
to have exercised some large jurisdiction.

Not far from thence, Tintogel, more famous for his antiquity, then
regardable for his present estate, abbutteth Tintogel.
likewise on the sea; yet the ruins argue it, to have been once, no unworthy
dwelling for the Cornish princes. The cyment wherewith the stones were laid,
resists the fretting fury of the weather, better then themselves. Half the
buildings were raised on the continent, and the other half on an Island,
continued together (within men's remembrance) by a drawebridge, but now
divorced, by the downefalne steep Cliffes, on the farther side, which, though
it shut out the sea from his wonted recourse, has yet more strengthened the
late Island: for, in passing thither, you must first descend with a dangerous
declyning, and then make a worse ascent, by a path, as every where narrow, so
in many places, through his sticklenesse occasioning, and through his
steepness threatening, the ruin of your life, with the failing of your foot.
At the top, two, or three terrifying steps, give you entrance to the hill,
which supplieth pasture for sheep, and conyes: Upon the same, I saw, a decayed
Chapel, a fair spring of water, a Cave, reaching once, by my guides report,
some far way under ground, and (which you will perhaps suspect of untruth) an
Hermites grave, hewn out in the rock, and serving each bodies proportion for
a burial. But, if that in Wales carry an equal verity, the miracle will
soon reap credit: for this is so sloped inwards at both ends, that any tall
stature shall find room by a little bending, as the short in the bottom by
extending.

The fardest point of this hill, is called Black head, Blackhead.
well known to the coasting Mariners. The high cliffs are by sea inaccessible
round abouts, saving in one only place, toward the East, where they proffer an
uneasy landing place for boats, which being fenced with a garretted wall,
admits entrance through a gate, sometimes of iron, as the name yet
continuing, expresses, and is within presently commanded by a hardly clymed
hill. Under the Island runs a cave, through which you may row at full sea, but
not without a kind of horror, at the vncouthnesse of the place. M. Camden
delivers us these verses out of an old Poet, touching Tintogel.

Est locus Abrini sinuoso littore ponti,
Rupe situs media, refluus quem circuit aestus.
Fulminat hic late, turrite vertice Castrum,
Nomine Tindagium, veteres dixere Corini.
Which import in English:

There is a place within the winding shore of Seuerne sea,
On mids of rock, about whose foot, The tides turne-keeping play:
A towry-topped Castle here, wide blazeth over all,
Which Corineus ancient brood, Tindagel Castle call.
It is not laid up amongst the least vaunts of this Castle, that our victorious
Arthur was here begotten by the valiant Vter Pendragon, upon the fair Igerna,
and that without taynt of bastardy, says Merlyn, because her husband dyed some
hours before.

Of later times, Tintogel has kept long silence in our stories, until H. the
3. reign, at which time (by Mat. Paris report) his brother, Earl Ri. grew
into obloquy for privy receiving there, and abbetting, his nephew David,
against the King. After which, being turned from a Palace to a prison, it
restrained one John Northamptons liberty, who 8. R. 2.
for abusing the same, in his unruly Maioralty of London, was condemned hither,
as a perpetual Penitenciary. A fee of ancienty belonging to this Castle, was
cancelled as unnecessary, by the late L. Treasurer Burleigh.

One collecting the wonders of Cornwall, rimed touching this, as follows:

TIntogel in his ruins vauntes, Sometimes the seat of Kings,
And place which worthy Arthur bred, Whose praise the Breton sings.
A bridge these buildings joined, whom now The fallen clifs divorce,
Yet strengthened so, the more it scorns Foes vain attempting force.
There, cave above, entry admits, But thorowfare denies;
Where that beneath allows both, In safe, but ghastly wise.
A Spring there wets his head, his foot A gate of Iron gardes:
There measure due to each ones length, The Hermits grave awards.
IN the mids of the wild moors of this Hundred, far from any dwelling or
river, there lies a great standing water, called Dosmery poole, about a mile
or better in Dosmery poole.
compass, fed by no perceived spring, neither having any auoydance, until (of
late) certain Tynners brought an Audit therefrom. The country people held
many strange conceits of this poole; as, that it did ebb and flow, that it had
a whirle-poole in the midst thereof, and, that a faggot once thrown thereinto,
was taken up at Foy haven, 6. miles distant. Wherefore, to try what truth
rested in these reports, some Gent. dwelling not far off, caused a boat and
nets to be carried thither over land. Fish they caught none, save a few Eeles
upon hooks: the poole proved no where past a fathom and half deep, and for
a great way very shallow. Touching the opinion of ebbing and stowing, it should
seem to be grounded, partly upon the increase, which the rain floods brought
thereinto from the bordering hills (which perhaps gave also the name; for Doz,
is, come, and maur, great) and the decrease, occasioned by the next drowth, and
partly, for that the winds do drive the waves to and fro, upon those sandy
banks: and thus the miracle of Dosmery poole deceased. Of this other wonder
he said.

Dosmery poole amid the moors, On top stands of a hill,
More then a mile about, no streams It empt, nor any fill.
Camelford, a market and Fair (but not fair) town, Camelford.
fetches his deriuatio^ from the river Camel, which runs through it, and
that, from the Cornish word Came, in English, crooked, as Came, from the often
winding stream. The same is incorporated with a Maioralty, and names Burgesses
to the Parliament, yet steppeth little before the meanest sort of Boroughs, for
store of Inhabitants, or the Inhabitants store.

Upon the river of Camel, near to Camelford, was that last dismal battle
strooken between the noble king 525.
Arthur, and his treacherous nephew Mordred, wherein the one took his death,
and the other his deaths wound. For testimony whereof, the old folk
thereabouts will show you a stone, bearing Arthurs name, though now depraved to
Atry.

Master Camden lets us understand, that this town is sometimes termed
Gaffelford: wherethrough we may mark it for the lists of a great fight
between the Bretons and Devonshire men, which Houeden assigns 812.
to have been darrayned at Gauelford, and perhaps the same, which the said
Master Camden voucheth out of Marianus Scotus, and describes by these verses
of an elder Poet: 820.


-- Naturam Cambelafontis,
Mutatam stupet esse sui, transcendit inundans
Sanguineus torrens ripas, and ducit in aequor
Corpora caesorum, plures natare videres,
Et petere auxilium, quos vndis vita reliquit.
The river Camel wonders, that His fountains nature shows
So strange a change, the bloody stream Vpswelling ouerflowes
His both side banks, and to the sea The slaughtered bodies bears:
Full many swim, and sue for aid, While wave their life outweares.
In our forefathers days, when devotion as much exceeded knowledge, as
knowledge now comes short of devotion, there were many bowssening places, for
curing of mad men, and amongst the rest, one at Alternunne in this Hundred,
called S. Nuns poole, which Saints Altar (it may be) by pars pro toto, gave
name to the S. Nu^nes poole.
Church: and because the manner of this bowssening is not so unpleasing to
hear, as it was uneasy to feel, I will (if you please) deliver you the
practice, as I received it from the beholders.

The water running from S. Nuns well, fell into a square and close walled
plot, which might be filled at what depth they lifted. Upon this wall was the
frantic person set to stand, his back toward the poole, and from thence
with a sudden blow in the breast, tumbled headlong into the pond: where a strong
fellow, provided for the nonce, took him, and tossed him up and down,
along and athwart the water, until the patient, by forgoing his strength,
had somewhat forgot his fury. Then was he conveyed to the Church, and certain
Masses sung over him; upon which handling, if his right wits returned, S. Nun
had the thanks: but if there appeared small amendment, he was bowssened again,
and again, while there remained in him any hope of life, for recovery.

It may be, this device took original from that master Schimpfund Ernst.
of Bedlem, who (the fable says) used to cure his patients of that impatience,
by keeping them bound in pooles, up to the middle, and so more or less, after
the fit of their fury.

Trigge Hundred.
THe name of Trig, in Cornish, signifies an Inhabitant; howbeit, this Hundred
cannot vaunt any ouer-large scope, or extaordinarie plenty of dwellings: his
chief town is Bodmyn; in Cornish, Bos venna, commonly termed Bodman, which
(by illusion, if not Etimology) a man might, not unaptly, turn into Badham:
for of all the towns in Cornwall, I hold none more healthfully seated, then
Saltash, or more contagiously, then this. It consists wholly (in a manner) of
one street, leading East and West, welneere the space of an Eastern mile, whose
South side is hidden from the Sun, by an high hill, so nearly coasting it in
most places, as neither can light have entrance to their stairs, nor open air
to their other rooms. Their back houses, of more necessary, then cleanly
service, as kitchins, stables, etc. are clymed up unto by steps, and their
filth by every great shower, washed down through their houses into the streets.

The other side is also ouerlooked by a great hill, though somewhat farther
distant: and for a Corollarium, their conduit water runs through the
Churchyard, the ordinary place of burial, for town and parish. It breeds
therefore little cause of marvel, that every general infection is here first
admitted, and last excluded: yet the many decayed houses, prove the town to
have been once very populous; and, in that respect, it may still retain the
precedence, as supported by a weekly market, the greatest of Cornwall, the
quarter Sessions for the East division, and half yearly faires. The
jurisdiction thereof is administered by a Mayor and his brethren, and upon
warrant of their Charter, they claim authority, to take acknowledgement of
statute bonds.

In former times, the Bishop of Cornwall (as I have elsewhere related) held his
See at S. Petroe's, in this town, until the Danish pirates, firing their
Palace, forced 981.
them to remove the same, with their residence, unto S. Germans. They were
succeeded by a Priory, and Friery; which later, served a while as a house of
correction, for the shire, but with greater charge, then benefit, or
continuance.

For other accidents, I find, that Perkyn Warbecke, after 11. H. 7. Warbeck.
his landing in the West parts of Cornwall, made this town the Rendez vous of
his assembling forces, for atchieuing his, alike deserving, and speeding
enterprise against King Henry the seventh.

Hither, also, in the last commotion, flocked the Rebels, 3. Ed. 6.
from all quarters of the shire, pitching their camp at the towns end; and
here they imprisoned such Gentlemen, as they had plucked out of their holds,
and houses, until the fortune of war gave verdit with the right of justice,
for their well deserved evil speeding.

Sir Anthony Kingston, then Prouost-marshall of the Sir Anthony Kingston.
Kings army, has left his name more memorable, then commendable amongst the
townsemen, for causing their Mayor to erect a gallows before his own door,
upon which, (after having feasted Sir Anthony) himself was hanged.

In like sort (say they) he trussed up a millers man, thereby, for that he
presented himself in the others stead, saying he could never do his master
better service.

But men's tongues, readily inclined to the worst reports, have left out a part
of the truth, in this tale, that the rest might carry the better grace. For
Sir Anthony did nothing herein, as a Judge, by discretion, but as an officer,
by direction; and besides, he gave the Mayor sufficient watchwordes of timely
warning, and large space of respite (more then which, in regard of his own
peril, he could not afford) to shift for safety, if an vneschewable destiny,
had not haltered him to that advancement. As for the millers man, he equalled
his master, in their common offense of rebellion, and therefore it deserved the
praise of mercy, to spare one of the two, and not the blame of cruelty, to
hang one for another.

I should perhaps have forgotten the free school here, maintained by her
Majesty's liberality, were I not Free school.
put in mind thereof, through afore-halsening of this rebellion, by an action
of the scholars, which I will report from some of their own mouths. About a
year before this stir was raised, the scholars, who accustomably divide
themselves, for better exploiting their pastimes, Childre^s forehalsening of
war.
grew therethrough into two factions; the one whereof, they called the old
religion; the other, the new. This once begun, was prosecuted amongst the^ in
all exercises, and, now and then, handled with some egernesse and roughnes,
each party knowing, and still keeping the same companions, and Captain. At
last one of the boys, converted the spill of an old candlestick to a gunne,
charged it with powder and a stone, and (through mischance, or ungraciousness)
therewith killed a calfe: whereupon, the owner complained, the master whipped,
and the division ended.

By such tokens, sometimes wonderful, sometimes ridiculous, does God at his
pleasure, foreshewe future accidents: as in the Planets, before the battle at
Thrasimenus, Li. L. 22.
between Hannibal and the Romans, by the fighting together of the Sun and
Moon. In birds, Val. Max.
what time Brute brought forth the remnant of his army at Philippi, against
Caesar and Anthony, by the furious biekering between two Eagles. In men,
against the destruction of Jerusalem, by the encountering of Chariots Josephus.
and armies in the air. And before Alexanders battle Plutarch, in Alexandr.
with Darius; first, by a casual skirmish of the camp-straglers, under two
Captains, borrowing the names of those Princes: and then by Alexanders
voluntary setting those Captains to a single combat. Yea (to bring these
examples nearer home) the like has happened both before and sithence, amongst
boys in other places.

When Caesar was departed from Rome, to try the title Dion Cassius.
of the worlds Empire with Pompey, the town boys (without any man's command)
parted in twain; the one side calling themselves Pompeyans, the other
Caesarians; and then darrayning a kind of battle (but without Arms) the
Caesarians got the ouerhand.

A like prank under the like assumed names, and with Idem.
like success and boding, they played, when Octauius and Anthony were, with
like means, to decide the like Sovereignty.

And to the same purpose, Procopius affirms, that the De bello Gothico L.
primo.
Samnite boys, when they drove their cattle to feeding, after their usual
manner of pastime, chose out amongst themselves, two of the best actiuity and
seemelinesse; the one, they named Bellisarius, General for Justinian the
Emperor in Italy, the other Vitiges king of the Goths, against whom he
wanted. In the buckling of these counterfeite Commanders, it fell out, that
Vitiges had the worst, whom the adverse party with a jesting and craking
manner, hanged up at the next tree, in earnest, but yet with no intent to kill
him.

This while it happens, that a Woolfe is descryed* away run the boys: fast
abides the imaginary Felon, and so fast, that for want of timely rescouse, the
breath poasted out of his body, and left the same a liuelesse carkase. The
which notifyed to the Samnites, quitted the striplings (or slipstrings) of
their punishment, but increased the dismay of the elder people.

A like accident befell sithence, by testimony of the ceremonious Texera, as a
presage of Jews the Prince of Condyes death, 1509. Four days before which,
at Xaintes, the youth of all sorts, from 9. to 22. years age, assembled, and
(of their own accord) chose two Commanders, one they entitled the Prince of
Condy, the other Mounsieur, who then lay in the field against him. For three
days space, they violently assaulted each other, with stones, clubs, and other
weapons, until at last it grew to Pistoles: by one of which, the imaginary
Prince received a quelling wound in his head, about 10. a clock in the morning:
the very hour (faith this Portugal confessor) that the Prince himself, by a
like shot was slaughtered.

The same author voucheth a semblable chance, somewhat before the siege of
Rochell 1572. where, some of the boys banded themselves, as for the Mayor, and
others for the King; who after 6. days skirmishing, at last made a
composition, and departed: even as that siege endured six months, and finally
brake up in a peace.

So does Mercurius Gallobelgicus give us to wit, that in the year 1594. a
Turkish Beglerbey of Greece, either seeking by a fore-coniecture, to be
ascertained himself, or desirdus to nusle the younger sort in martial
exployts, led out of Alba Regalis, about 600. Turkish boys, aged between 11.
and 14. years, and severed them into two troops, terming the one, The
Christian, the other, The Turkish batalion. Those, he directed to call upon
Jesus, these, upon Hala: both parts he enjoined to bicker coragiously, and
egged them onward with the enticeme^t of rewards. The token is given, the
forces encounter, the fight is hot. In the end, the Turks betake themselves to
their heels, and Jesus party carries away the victory, But such occurrents do
not always either foregoe, or foresignifie; for sometimes they fall out idle,
and sometimes not at all. How beit, Nicetaes Chaniates takes it very unkindly,
that God would not spare some watchword out of his prescie^ce, to the
Constantinopolitanes, what time Baldryn Earl of Flaunders and others, first
assisted, and then conquered their City.

Touching Veall the Merecurialist, I have spoken in my former book.

The youthlyer sort of Bodmyn townsmen use sometimes to sport themselves, by
playing the box with strangers, whom they summon to Halgauer. The name
Halgauer.
signifies the Goats moore, and such a place it is, lying a little without the
town, and very full of quauemires. When these mates meet with any raw
seruingman, or other young master, who may serve and deserve to make pastime,
they cause him to be solemnly arrested, for his appearance before the Mayor of
Halgauer, where he is charged with wearing one spur, or going untrussed, or
wanting a girdle, or some such like felony: and after he has been arraygned
and tried, with all requisite circumstances, judgment is given in
formatterines, and executed in some one ungracious pranke or other, more to the
skorne, then hurt of the party condemned.

Hence is sprung the proverb, when we see one stouenly appareled, to say, He
shall be presented in Halguer Court.

But now and then, they extend this merriment with the largest, to the
prejudice of ouer-credulous people, persuading them to fight with a Dragon
lurking in Halgauer, or to see some strange matter there which concludes at
least, with a trayning them into the mire.

Within short space after the great same dispersed, touching the rare effects
of Warwickshire wels, some idle envious head raised a brute, that there rested
no less virtue (forsooth) for healing all diseases, in a plentiful spring,
near unto Bodmyn, called Scarlets well: which report grew so far, and so
fast, that folk ran Scarlets well.
slocking thither in huge numbers, from all quarters. But the neighbor
Justices, finding the abuse, and looking into the consequence, forbad the
resort, lequestred the spring, and suppressed the miracle. How beit, the water
should seem to be healthful, if not helpful: for it retains this
extraordinary quality, that the same is waightier, then the ordinary of his
kind, and will continue the best part of a year, without alteration of sent
or taste; only you shall see it represent many colors, like the Raine-bowe,
which (in my conceit) argues a running through some mineral vein, and tho^^
withal a possessing of some virtue.

Aside from this town, toward the North sea, extends a fruitful vein of
land, comprizing certain parishes, which serves better then any other place
in Cornwall for Winter feeding; and suitably enricheth the Farmours.
Herethrough, sundry Gentlemen have there planted their seats, as, in S. Kew,
master Carnsew, at Bokelly* in S. Endelion, master Roscarrock, at his house of
the same denomination: besides, master Penkeuel, Nichols, Barret, Flammack,
Caud, and diverse more.

Carnsew, rightly Carndeaw, purporteth in Cornish, a blackrock: and such a one
the heir owneth, which gave name to his ancient possessed manor, as the
manor to his ancestors. His house Bokelly may be derived from Both, in
Cornish, a Goat, and kelly, which is lost; and the Goat he gives for his
Arms. This Ge^t, father married the daughter of Fits in Deuon, and left
behind him three sons, Richard, Matthew and William, with two daughters:
those, brought up in learning and experience abroad: these, in virtue and
modesty at home: the fruits whereof, they taste and express, in a no less
praiseworthy, then rare-continuing concord, having (not through any
constrayning necessity, or constraintiue vow) but on a voluntary choice, made
their elder brothers ma^sion a College of single living, and kind
entertaining. Amongst who^, I may not omit the youngest brother, whose well
qualified and sweet pleasing sufficiency draws him out from this cloister,
to converse with, and assist his friends, and to whose sounder judgment, I owe
the thankful acknowledgement of many corrected flippings in these my notes. The
arms of this family are thus blasoned, S. a Goat passant. A. attired and
trepped O.

Roccarrock, in Cornish, means a flower, and a rock, in English. Roses are
his arms, and the North rocky clifs, which bound his demaines, perhaps added
the rest. The heir has issue by the daughter of Treuanion. His father married
the sole Inheritrix to Pentire, whose dwelling, Pentuan, is seated on the South
sea, so as he might make use of either climate for his residence. The family is
populous, but of them two brothers, High, for his civil carriage, and kind
hospitality, and Nicholas for his industrious delight in matters of history and
antiquity, do merit a commending remembrance. They bear A. a Cheuron between
2. Roses, G. and a sea tench^ nayante proper.

The little parish called Temple, skirteth this Hundred, Temple.
on the waste side thereof: a place, exempted from the Bishops jurisdiction, as
once appertayning to the Templers, but not so from disorder, forit common
report communicate with truth, many a bad marriage bargain is there yearly
slubbred up.

Hundred of West.
WIth Trig Hundred on the South side, confineth that of West, but takes his
name from the relation which it bears to that of East: the circuit thereof is
not so large, as fruitful.

In entering the same, we will first pitch at the Loo^s, two several
Corporations, distinguished by the addition Loo, East (...) West.
of East and West, abbutting upon a nauigable creek, and joined by a fair
bridge of many arches. They took that name from a fresh river, which there
pays his tribute to the sea: and the river (as I conjecture) from his low
passage, between steep coasting his for Loo, and low, after the Cornish
pronunciation, do little differ.

East-Loo voucheth less antiquity, as lately incorporated, but vanteth greater
wealth, as more co^modiously seated: yet the foundation of their houses is
grounded on the sand, supporting (naythelesse) those poor buildings, with a
sufficient stablenesse. Their profit chiefly accrueth from their weekly
markets, and industrious fishing, with boats of a middle size, able to brook,
but not cross the seas: howbeit, they are not altogether destitute of bigger
shipping: amongst which, one has successively retained the name of the George
of Loo, ever since the first so called, did a great while fithence, in a
furious fight, take;. French men of war.

The town toward the sea, is fenced with a garretted wall, against any sudden
attempt of the enemy.

West-Loo mustereth an endowment with the like means, but in a meaner degree,
and has of late years somewhat relieved his former poverty.

Almost directly over against the barred haven of Loo, extends S. Georges
Island, about half a mile in compass, and plentifully stored with Conies. When
S. Georges Island.
the season of the year yields opportunity, a great abundance of sundry
sea-fowle breed upon the strond, where they lay, and hatch their eggs, without
care of building any nests: at which time, repairing thither, you shall see
your head shadowed with a cloud of old ones, through their diuersified cries,
witnessing their general dislike of your disturbance, and your feets pestered
with a large number of young ones; some formerly, some newly, and some not yet
disclosed; at which time (through the leave and kindness of Master May, the
owner) you may make and take your choice. This Gent. Arms, are G. a Cheuron
vary between three Crowns.

The middle market town of this Hundred, is Liskerd, Les, in Cornish, is
broad, and ker, is gone. Now, if Liskerd.
I should say, that it is so called, because the wideness of this Hundred,
here contracteth the traffike of the Inhabitants, you might well think I
iested, neither dare I auow it in earnest. But whencesoeuer you derive the
name, hard it is, in regard of the antiquity, to deduce the town and Castle
from their first original: and yet I will not join hands with them who term
it Legio, as founded by the Romans, unless they can approve the same by a
Roman faith.

Of later times, the Castle served the Earl of Cornwall for one of his houses;
but now, that later is worm-eaten out of date and use. Coynages, Fayres, and
markets, (as vital spirits in a decayed body) keep the inner parts of the
town alive, while the ruyned skirtes accuse the injury of time, and the
neglect of industry.

S. Clear parish, coasting Liskerd, brooketh his name by a more percing, then
profitable air, which in those open wastes, scowreth away thrist, as well as
sickness. Thither I rode, to take view of an antiquity, called, The other
half stone; which I found to be thus? There are The other half stone,
two moore stones, pitched in the ground, very near together, the one of a
more broad then thick squarenesse, about 8. foot in height, resembling the
ordinary spill of a Cross, and somewhat curiously howed with chaper work. The
other comes shore of his fellows length, by the better half, but, welneere,
doubleth it in breadth, and thickenesse, and is likewise handsomely carved.
They both, are mortised in the top, leaving a little edge at the oneside, as to
accommodate the placing of somewhat else thereupon. In this latter, are graued
certain letters, which I caused to be taken out, and have here inserted, for
abler capacities, then mine own, to interpret.



Why this should be termed, The other half stone, I cannot resolve with my
self; and you much less Howbeit, I haltingly aim, it may proceed from one
of these respects; either, because it is the half of a monument, whose other
part rests elsewhere: or, for that it means, after the Dutch phtase, and
then own measure, a stone and half. For, in Dutch, Ander halb, (another
half) imports, One and a half, as Sesqui alter does in Latin. It should
seem to be a bound stone: for some of the neighbors observed to me, that the
same limiteth just the half way, between Excester and the lands end, and is
distant full fifty miles from either.

Not far hence, in an open plain, are to be seen certain stones, somewhat
squared; and fastened about ^ foot deep in the ground, of which, some six or
eight stand upright in proportionable distance* they are termed, The hurlers.
And alike strange observation, takes The hurlers.
place here, as at Stonehenge, to wit, that are doubled numbering, never eueneth
with the first. But far stranger is the country peoples report, that once they
were men, and for their hurling upon the Sabbath, so metamorphosed. The like
whereof, I remember to have read, touching some in Germany (as I take it) who
for a semblable profanation, with dau^ing, through the Priests accursing,
continued it on a whole year together.

Almost adjoining hereunto, is a heap of rocks, which press one of a less
size, fashioned like a cheese, and therethrough termed Wringcheese. Cheesewring.


I know not well, whether I may refer to the parish of S. Neot in this
Hundred, that which Mat* West reports S. Neot.
of K. Alfred, namely, how coming into Cornwall on hunting* he turned aside,
for doing his devotion, into a Church where S. Guorijr and S. Neot made their
abode (quare, whether he mean not their burials) or rather so resolve, because
Asser so delivers it, and there found his orisons seconded with a happy effect.

Next, I will relate you another of the Cornish natural wonders, viz. S. Kaynes
well* but lest you make a wonder S. Kaynes well.
first at the Saint, before you take notice of the well* you must understand,
that this was not Kayne the manqueller, but one of a gentler spirit and milder
sex* to wit, a woman. He who caused the spring to be pictured, added this rhyme
for an exposition.

In name, in shape, in quality,
This well is very quaint;
The name, to let of Kayne befell,
No ouer-holy Saint.
The shape, 4. trees of diverse kind,
Witby, Oak, Elm and Ash,
Make with their roots an arched roof,
Whose floor this spring does wash.
The quality, that man or wife,
Whose chance, or choice attaines,
First of this sacred stream to drink,
There thy the mastry gains.
In this Hundred, the rubble of certain mines, and ruins of a fining house,
convince, Burchard Craneigh, the Fining house.
Duchmans vain endeavor, in seeking of silver owter howbeit, he afterward
lighted on a thriftier vain, of practicing phisike at London, where he grew
famous, by the name of Doctor Bureot.

Killigarth, being interpreted in English, signifies, Killigarth.
He has lost his griping, or reaching; and by his present fortune, (in some
sort) justifies that name* for the same has lately forgone Sir William
Beuill, whom it embraced as owner and Inhabitant, by his sudden death* and is
passed into the possession of the fair Lady his widow, by her husbands
conueyance.

It yields a large view of the South coast, and was it self, in Sir
Williams life time, much visited, through his frank inuiting^. The mention of
this Knight, calls to my remembrance, a sometimes uncouth servant of his,
whose monstrous conditions, John Size
partly resembled that Polyphemus, described by Hom^^ and Virgil, and lively
imitated by Ariosto, in his Orco: or rather, that Egyptian Polyphagus, in whom
(by Suetonius report) the Emperor Nero took such pleasure. This fellow was
taken up by Sir William, under a hedge, in the deepest of Winter, welneere
starued with cold, and hunger: he was of staturemeane, of constitution lean,
of face freckled, of composition, well proportioned, of diet, naturally, spare,
and cleanely enough; yet, at his masters bidding, he would devour nettles,
thistles, the pith of Artichokes, raw, and living birds, and fishes, with their
scales, and feathers, burning coals and candles, and whatsoever else, howsoever
unsavory, if it might be swallowed: neither this a little, but in such
quantity, as it often bred a second wonder, how his belly should contain so
much: yet could no man, at any time, discover him doing of that, which
necessity of nature requires. Moreover* he would take a hot iron out of the
fire, with his bare hand; never changed his apparel, but by constraint, and
used to lie in straw, with his head down, and his heeled upwards. Spare he
was of speech, and, in stead of half his words, used this term Size, as I
will Size him; for strike him, he is a good Size, for man, etc. Ouer-sleeping,
or some other accident, made him to lose a day, in his account of the week, so
as he would not believe, but that Sunday was Saturday, Saturday Friday, etc. To
Sir William he bare such faithfulness, that he would follow his horse, like a
spanyell, without regard of way or weariness, wait at his chamber door, the
night time, suffering none to come near him, and perform whatsoever he
commanded, were it never so vndawfull, or dangerous. On a time, his master,
expecting strangers, sent him, with a panier, to his (...) at the sea side, to
fetch some fish. In his way, he passed by a river, whereinto the tide then
flowed, and certain fishermen were drawing their nets: which after John Size
had a while beheld, he casts to have a share amongst them, for his master. So
into the water he leaps, and there, for the space of a flight shoot, wadeth and
walloweth (for swim he could not) sometimes up, and sometimes down,
carrying his panier still before him, to his own extreme hazard of drowning,
and the beholders great pitying, until at last, all wet, and wearied, out he
scrambleth, and home he hieth, with a bitter complaint to his master, of his
ill fortune, that he could not catch some fish, as well as the rest, where so
much was going. In this sort he continued for (...) years, until (upon I wot
not what ve^^^^, or unkindness) away he gets, and abroad he rogues: which
remitter brought him in the end, to his foredeferred, and not avoided destiny:
for as under a hedge he was formd pyning so under a hedge he found his
miserable death, through penury.

Sir Williams father married the daughter of Militon: his graundfather, the
daughter and heir of Bear, whose liuelyhood repaired what the elder brothers
daughters had impaired. The Beuils Armesart A* a Bull passant G. armed and
tripped O.

In the same parish where Killigarth is seated, Master Murth inheriteth a house
and demaynes. He married Murth.
Treffry: his father, Tregose. One of their ancestors, within the memory of
a next neighbor to the house: called Prake, (burdened with 110. years age)
entertained a British miller, as that people, for such idle occupations, prove
more handie, then our own. But this fellows service befell commodious in the
worst sense. For when; not long after his acceptance, wars grow between us
and France, hestealeth over into his country, returns privily back again,
with a French crew, surprizeth suddenly his master, and his ghosts, at a
Chrisemas supper, carries them speedily unto Lahueghey, and for coth the Gent.
to redeem his enlargement, with the sale of a great part of his revenues.

A little to the Westwards from Killigarth, the poor harbor and village of
Polpera coucheth between 2. Polpera.
steep hills, where plenty of fish is vented to the fish driuers, whom we call
Iowters.

The warmth of this Hundred, siding the South, has entierd many Gent. here to
make choice of their dwellings, as M. Buller, now Sheriff at Tregarrick,
sometimes the Widestades inheritance, until the fathers rebellion for feited
it to the Prince; and the Princes largess rewarded therewith his subjects.

Wides lades some led a walking life with his harp, to Gentlemen's houses,
wherethrough, and by his other active qualities, he was entitled, Sir
Tristram; neither wanted he (as some say) a bele I sound, the more aprly to
resemble his pattern.

Master Buller married the daughter of one Williams, a Counselor at law in
Deuon: his father, a younger branch of the ancient stock, planted in Somerset
shire, took to wise the widdowe of Courtney, and daughter and heir to
Trethurffe; by whose dower, and his own endeavor, he purchased and left to his
son, fair possessions, but not vnencumbred with titles, which drove this
Gentleman to salve them all by new compositions with the pretenders: and for
compassing the same, to get an extraordinary experience in husbandry. His
ancestors bare S. on a plain Cross A. quarter pierced 4. Eagles of the field.

At S. Winowe in habiteth M. Thomas Lower, commendable through his double
provision, against the wars, as having both furnished himself with great
ordinance, for private defense of the County, and thrust forth his sons to be
trained in martial knowledge and exercises, for the public service of the
Country.

His wife was one of Reskimers daughters and heirs: his mother, the daughter
of Treffry: his house descended to his auncestour, by match with Vpton. He
bears B. a Cheuron engrayled O. between three Roses A.

Laureast, is the inheritance of M. John Harris, a Gent. employing his sound
judgment, and other praiseworthy parts, to the service of his Prince and
country, and the good of his friends and himself. His wife was daughter and
heir to Heart: his mother sister to M. Chr. Harris, which (by his uncles yet
want of issue) intitleth him with a fair expectancy. He bears S. 3.
Croissants within a border A.

Treworgy is owed by M. Kendul, and endowed with a pleasant and profitable
fishing and command of the river, which flitteth under his house. He married
with Buller: his mother was daughter to Moyle of Bake, and bears A. a Cheuron
between 3. Dolphins S.

Master Glyn of Glynfoord, manifests, by this compounded name, the antiquity
of his descent, and the ordinary passage there, over Foy river* The store of
Sammons which it affoordeth, caused his ancestors to take the Sammon spears
for their Arms: for he bears A. a Cheuron; between three Sammon spears S.

Sundry more Gentlemen this little Hundred possesses and possessioneth, as
Code, who bears A. a Cheuron, G. between three Crows. May, G* a Cheuron
vary between three Crowns. Athym, A. a Maunche Maltaile S. within a border of
the first, charged with, Cinquefoyles, as the second Grilles etc. But want of
information, and lothnes to wax tedious, makes me fardle up these, and omit
the rest.

It is hemmed in on the West, by the East side of Foy haven, at whole mouth
stands Hall, in Cornish, a Hall.
moore, and (perhaps) such it was before better manurance reduced it to the
present fruitfulness. The same descended to Sir Reignald Mohun, from his
ancestors, by their match with the daughter and heir of Fits-Williams; and
(amongst other commodities) is appurtenanced with a walk, which if I could as
plainly show you* as my self have oftentimes delightingly seen it, you might,
and would auow* the same to be a place of diuersified pleasings: I will
therefore do my best, to trace you a shadow thereof* by which you shall (in
part) give a guess at the substance.

It is cut out in the side of a sleep hill, whose foot the salt water
washes, euenly leuelled, to serve for bowling, floored with sand, for soaking
up the rain, closed with two short hedges; and banked with sweet senting
flowers: It wideneth to a sufficient breadth, for the match of five or six in
front, and extends, to not much less, then half a London mile: neither does
it lead wearisomely forthright, but yields varied, and yet, not ouer-busie
turnings, as the grounds opportunity affoordeth; which advantage increases the
prospect, and is converted on the foreside, into platformes, for the planting
of Ordinance, and the walkers sitting; and on the back part, into Summer
houses, for their more private retrait and recreation.

In passing along, your eyes shall be called away from guiding your feet, to
descry by their fardest kenning, the vast Ocean, sparkled with ships, that
continually this way trade, forth and back, to most quarters of the world.
Nearer home, they take view of all sized cocks, barges, and fisherboates,
houering on the coast. Again, contracting your sight to a narrower scope, it
lights on the fair and commodious haven, where the tide daily presents his
double service, of flowing and ebbing, to carry and recarry whatsoever the
Inhabitants shall be pleased to charge him withal, and his creekes (like a
young wanton lover) fold about the land, with many embracing arms.

This walk is guarded upon the one side, by Portruan; on the other, by
Bodyneck, two fishing villages: behind, the rising hill bears off the cold
Northren blasts: before, the town of Foy subiecteh his whole length and
breadth to your ouerlooking: and directly under you, ride the home and foreign
shipping; both of these, in so near a distance, that without troubling the
passer, or borrowing Stentors voice, you may from thence, not only call to, but
confere with any in the said town or shipping.

Mounsieur la Noue notes, that in the great hall of justice, at Paris, there
is no room left, for any more images of the French Kings: which some
prophetically interpreted, to signify a dissolution of that line, if not of
the monarchy. But this halsening, the present flourishing estate of that
kingdom, utterly conuinceth of falsehood. A far truer foretoken, touching the
Earl of Deuons progeny, I have seen, at this place of Hall, to wit, a kind of
Faggot, whose age and painting, approves the The Faggot.
credited tradition, that it was carefully preserved by those noble men: but
whether upon that prescience, or no, there mine author fails me. This faggot,
being all one piece of wood, and that naturally grown, is wrapped about the
middle part with a bond, and parted, at the ends, into four sticks, one of
which, is, again subdivided into other twain. And in semblable manner the last
Earls inheritance accrued unto 4. Cornish Gent. Mohun, Trelawny, Arundell of
Taluerne, and Trethurffe: and Trethurffes portion, Courtney of Ladocke, and
Viuian, do enjoy, as descended from his two daughters and heirs.

Sir Reig. Mohun is widdower of two wives; the one, daughter to Sir Henry
Killigrew, the other, to Sergeant Heal: his father, Sir William, married,
first, the daughter of Horsey, and one of the heirs, by the common law, to Sir
John her late brother; and next, the widdowe of Trelawny, who, ouerliuinghim,
enjoys this Hall, as part of her ioynture; a Lady, gracing her dignity, with
her virtue, and no less expressing, then professing religion. Reignald, father
to Sir William, wedded the daughter of Sir William Treuanion. The arms of the
Mohuns are O. 2 Cross engrayled Sa.

Powder Hundred.
SOme impute the force of Powder unto this, that the same is converted, at an
instant, from his earthy substance, to a fiery, and from the fire, into air;
every of which changes, requires a greater enlargement, one then other:
wherefore it finding a bar, over, under, and on the back and sides, by the
pieces strong imprisonment, by consequence breaks forth with a sudden
violence, at the mouth, where the way is least stopped, and drives before it,
the unsettled obstacle of the bullet, imparting thereunto a portion of his fury.
To which (through want of a probable Etymon) I may, in part, resemble the
hundred of Powder, not only for the names sake, but also because this parcel of
the Cornish earth extends it self wider, and compriseth more parishes, then
any other Hundred of the shire, as stretching East and West, from Foy to
Falmouth: and South and North, welnere from one sea to the other.

In describing the same, we must begin where we left, Foy haue^ and town
to wit, at Foy haven, in Cornish, Foath. It receives this name of the river,
and bestows the same on the town. His entrance is guarded with Block-houses,
and that on the towns side, as also the town it self, fortified and fenced
with ordinance. The comme^dation of which iudustry, is principally due to the
providence and direction of M. Will. Treffry, a Gent that has vowed his rare
gifts of learning, wisdom, and courage, to the good of his country, and made
proof thereof in many occurre^ts, and to whose judicious correctio^s, these my
notes have bin not a little beholden. His fair and ancient house, Castle-Wise
builded, and sufficiently flanked, ouerlooketh the town and haven with a
pleasant prospect, and yet is not excluded from the healthful air, and use of
the country, which occasioned his ancestors (though endowed elsewhere, with
large reuennues, of their own and their wives inheritance) for many discents,
to make here their ordinary residence, as is witnessed by their to ombestones,
which I have seen in the church. One of them, about 145. years sithence,
valiantly defended this his dwelling* against the French, what time they had
surprised the rest of the town.

He married one of Tremaynes heirs: his father, the heir of Tresithny: his
graundfather, the daughter of Killigrew: and bears S. a Cheuron between
three Hawthornes A.

But I will return to the town. During the warlike reigns of our two valiant
Edwards, the first and third, the Foyens addicted themselves to back their
Princes quarrel, by coping with the enemy at sea, and made return of many
prizes: which purchases having advanced them to a good estate of wealth, the
same was (when the quieter conditioned times gave means) heedfully and
diligently employed, and bettered, by the more civil trade of merchandise; and
in both these vocations they so fortunately prospered, that it is reported, 60.
tall ships did, at one time, belong to the harbor, and that they assisted the
siege of Callais, with 47. sail. Heereon, a full purse begetting a stout
stomach, our Foyens took heart at grass, and chauncing about that time (I
speak upon the credit of tradition) to sail near Rye, and Winchelsea, they
stiffly refused to veil their bonets at the summons of those towns; which
contempt (by the better enabled Sea-farers, reckoned intolerable) caused the
Ripiers to make out with might and main against them; howbeit, with a more
hardy onset, then happy issue: for the Foy men gave them so rough entertaynment
at their welcome, that they were glad to forsake patch, without bidding
farewell: the merit of which exploit, afterward entitled them Gallants of Foy:
and (it may be) they sought to eternize this memorable fact, after the Greek
and Roman manner, by inuesting the town of Golant with that name:
notwithstanding, quaere, whether a causeless ambition in the postetitie,
turned not rather Golant into Gallant, for their greater glory. Once, the
townsmen vaunt, that for teskuing certain ships of Rye from the Normans in
Henry the thirds time, they bear the arms, and enjoy part of the privileges
appertaining to the Cinqueports, whereof there is some memory in their
Chauncell window, with the name of Fisart Bagga, their principal Commander in
that service. Moreover, the prowess of one Nicholas, son to a widow, near
Foy, is deskanted upon, in an old three man's songs, namely, how he fought
bravely at sea, with John Dory (a Genowey, as I conjecture) set forth by John
the French king, and (after much bloodshed on both sides) took, and slew him,
in revenge of the great rauine, and cruelty, which he had forecommitted, upon
the English men's goods and bodies. Yet their so often good success, sometimes
tasted the sauce of crosser speeding; for Tho. Walsingham tells us, that Sir
Hugh Calueley, and Sir Th. Percy, deputed to guard the sea, by R. the 2. Anno
1379. chanced there to meet a Cornish barge, belonging to Foy harbor, which
having worn out his victuals, and time, limited for the like service, was then
sailing homewards, neither would be entreated by those knights, to join
company with them: howbeit they bought this refusal very dear. For no
sooner was the English fleet past out of sight, but that a Flemmish man of
war lighted upon them, and (after a long, and strong resistance) ouermastred
them as well, at last in force, as they did at first in number, took the
Barge, sunk it, and slaughtered all the Sailors, one only boy excepted, who in
the heat of the bickering, seeing which way the game would go, secretly stole
aboard the Flemming, and closely hid himself amongst the ballast. Over a
while, this Pirate ^ast Anchor in an English harbor, where the boy, hearing his
Countrimens voice, that were come aboard, rises from his new burial,
bewrays the fact, and so wrought means, for their punishment, and his own
delivery.

Not long after, our Foy gallants, unable to bear a low sail, in their fresh
gale of fortune, began to skum the Seas, with their often piracies, (auowing
themselves upon the Earl of Warwick, whose ragged staff is yet to be seen,
pourtrayed in many places of their Church Steeple, and in diverse private
houses) as also to violate their duty at land, by insolent disobedience, to
the Princes Officers, cutting off (amongst other pranckes) a Pursiuants ears:
whereat king Edward the fourth conceived such indignation, as he sent
Commissioners unto Lostwithiel, (a town there by) who, under pretense of using
their service, in sea affairs, trained thither the greatest number of the
Burgesses; and no sooner come, then laid hold on, and in hold, their goods were
confiscated, one Harrington executed, the chain of their haven removed to
Dartmouth, and their wonted iolity transformed into a sudden misery: from which
they striued a long time, in vain, to relieve themselves: but now of late
years do more and more aspire to a great amendment of their former defects,
though not to an equal height of their first abundance.

Where I may not pass in silence, the commendable deserts of Master Rashleigh
the elder, descended from a younger brother of an ancient house in Deuon; for
his industrious judgment and aduenturing, in trade of merchandise, first
opened a light and way, to the townesmens new thriuing, and left his son
large wealth, and possessions; who (together with a daily bettering his estate)
conuerteth the same to hospitality, and other actions fitting a Gent. well
affected to his God, Prince, and Country. He married the daughter of Bonithon;
his father, of Lanyne, and bears S. a plain Cross between 2. Croissants A.

Anno 28. H. 6. there was an Act of Parliament made, to restrain the abuses of
sea-officers, in wrong exactions at Foy, and some other havens.

The Lord of Pomier, a Norman, encouraged by the civil wars, wherewith our
Realm was then distressed, 1457.
furnished a navy within the river of Said, and with the same in the night,
burned a part of Foy, and other houses confyning: but upon approach of the
countries forces, raised the next day by the Sheriff, he made speed away to his
ships, and with his ships to his home.

In a high way near this town, there lies a big and A graued stone
long moore stone, containing the remainder of certain ingraued letters,
purporting some memorable antiquity, as it should seem, but past ability of
reading.

Not many years sithence, a Gentleman, dwelling not far off, was persuaded,
by some information, or imagination, that treasure lay hidden under this stone:
wherefore, in a fair Moone-shine night, thither with certain good fellows
he hyeth to dig it up: a working they fall, their labor shortneth, their hope
increases, a pot of Gold is the least of their expectation. But see the
chance. In midst of their toyling, the sky gathers clouds, the Moone-light
is ouer-cast with darkness, down falls a mighty shower, up rises a
blustering tempest, the thunder cracketh, the lightning flasheth: in
conclusion, our money-seekers washed, in stead of laden; or laden with water,
in stead of yellow earth, and more afraid, then hurt, are forced to abandon
their enterprise, and seek shelter of the next house they could get into.
Whether this proceeded from a natural accident, or a working of the devil, I
will not undertake to define. It may be, God gives him such power over those,
who begin a matter, upon covetousness to gain by extraordinary means, and
prosecute it with a wrong, in entering and breaking another man's land, with out
his leave, and direct the end thereof, to the princes defrauding, whose
prerogative challenges these casualties.

A little beyond Foy, the land opens a large sandy Bay, for the Sea to
ouer-flow, which, and the village adjoining, Trewardreth Bay.
are therethrough aptly termed Trewardreth, in English, The Sandy town. Elder
times, of more devotion then knowledge, here founded a religious house, which,
in King Henry the eights reign, underwent the common downfall.

I have received credible information, that some three years sithence,
certain hedgers dividing a closse on the sea side hereabouts, chanced, in
their digging, upon a great chest of stone, artificially joined, whose cover,
they (ouer-greedy for booty) rudely brake, and therewithal a great earthen pot
enclosed, which was gilded and graued with letters, defaced by this
misaduenture, and full of a black earth, the ashes (doubtless) as that, the vrna
of some famous personage.

Upon a side of this bay, one M. Peter Beuill first began M. P. Beuils pond.
the experiment of making a saltwater pond, induced thereunto, by observing,
that the high Summer tides brought with them young Basses and Millets, whom at
their ebbing, they left behind in little pits of the even ground, where they
would live for many weeks without any reuisitation of the sea: who, as he
bettered this natural pattern, so did I his artificial; but yet with a
thankful acknowledgement, by whom I have profited.

Lostwithiel should seem to fetch his original from Lostwithiel.
the Cornish Loswithiall, which in English, sounds a Lions tail: for as the
Earl of this province gave the Lion in arms, and the Lions principal
strength (men say) consists in his tail; so this town claymeth the
precedence, as his Lords chiefest residence, and the place which he entrusted
with his Exchequer, and where his wayghtier affairs were managed. Maioralty,
markets, faires, and nomination of Burgesses for the Parliament, it has common
with the most: Coynage of Tynne, only with three others; but the gayle for the
whole Stannary, and keeping of the County Courts, it self alone. Yet all this
can hardly raise it to a tolerable condition of wealth and inhabitance.
Wherefore I will detayne you no longer, then until I have showed you a solemn
custom in times past here yearly observed, and only of late days
discontinued, which was thus:

Upon little Easter Sunday, the Freeholders of the town and manor, by
themselves or their deputies, did there assemble: amongst whom, one (as it fell
to his lot by turn) bravely apparelled, gallantly mounted, with a Crown on
his head, a scepter in his hand, a sword borne before him, and dutifully
attended by all the rest also on horseback, rode through the principal street
to the Church: there the Curate in his best beseene, solemnly received him at
the Churchyard style, and conducted him to hear divine service: after which,
he repaired with the same pomp, to a house foreprouided for that purpose, made
a feast to his attendants, kept the tables end himself, and was served with
kneeling, assay, and all other rites due to the estate of a Prince: with which
dinner, the ceremony ended, and every man returned home again. The pedigree of
this usage is derived from so many descents of ages, that the cause and author
outreach remembrance: howbeit, these circumstances offer a conjecture, that it
should betoken the royalties appertaining to the honor of Cornwall.

M. Will. Kendals hospitality, while he lived, and here kept house, deserves a
special remembrance, because, for store of resort and franknes of
entertainment, it exceeded all others of his sort.

This town anno 11. H. 7. was by act of Parliament assigned, to keep the
public waights and measures, ordained for the County.

Lostwithiel subiecteth it self to the command of Restormel Castle, alias,
Lestormel, sometimes the Dukes Restormel.
principal house. It is seated in a park, upon the plain neck of a hill,
backed to the Westwards, with another, somewhat higher, and falling every other
way, to end in a valley, watered by the fishfull river of Foy. His base court
is rather to be coniectured, then discerned, by the remnant of some few
ruins; amongst which, an oven of 14. foot largenes, through his exceeding
proportion, proves the like hospitality of those days. The inner court
grounded upon an entrenched rock, was formed round, had his utter wall thick,
strong, and garretted: his flat roof covered with lead, and his large windows
taking their light inwards. It consisted of two stories, besides the vaults,
and admitted entrance and issue, by one only gate, fenced with a Portcouliz.
Water was conveyed thither, by a conduit, from the higher ground adjoining.
Certes, it may move compassion, that a Palace, so healthful for air, so
delightful for prospect, so necessary for commodities, so fair (in regard of
those days) for building, and so strong for defense, should in time of secure
peace, and under the protection of his natural Princes, be wronged with those
spoylings, then which, it could endure no greater, at the hands of any forrayne
and deadly enemy: for the Park is disparked, the timber rooted up, the conduit
pipes taken away, the roof made sale of, the planchings rotten, the walls
fallen down, and the hewed stones of the windows, dournes, and clauels, pluct
out to serve private buildings: only there remains an utter defacement, to
complain upon this unregarded distress. It now appertains by lease, to
Master Samuel, who married Halse: his father (a wise and pleasant conceited
Gent.) matched with Tremayue.

After we have quitted Restormel, Roche becomes our next place of soiourne,
though hardly inuiting, Roche.
with promise of any better entertainment, then the name carries written in
his forehead, to wit, a huge, high and steep rock, seated in a plain, girded
on either side, with (as it were) two substitutes, and meritorious (no doubt)
for the Hermit, who dwelt on the top thereof, were it but in regard of such an
uneasy climing to his cell and Chapel, a part of whose natural walls is
wrought out of the rock it self.

Near the foot of Roche, there lies a rock, Ieuell The tide welspring
with the ground above, and hollow downwards, with a winding depth, which
contains water, reported by some of the neighbors, to ebb and flow as the
sea. Of these, as another Cornish wonder.

You neighbour-scorners, holy-prowd, Go people Roche's cell,
Far from the world, near to the heavens, There, Hermits, may you dwell.
Is It true that Spring in rock hereby, Does tide-wise ebb and flow?
Or have we foolas with liars met? Fame says it: be it so.
From hence ascending easily the space of a mile, you shall have won the top
of the Cornish Archbeacon Hainborough, which (as little to great) may for
prospect Haynborough.
compare with Rama in Palestina, Henius in Medica, Collalto in Italy, and
Sceafel in the I Will of Man: for if the weathers darkness bound not your
eyesight, within his ordynarie extent, you shall thence plainly discern, to
the Eastwards, a great part of Deuon, to the West, very near the lands end, to
the North and South, the Ocean, and sundry Islands scattered therein,
wherethrough it passes also for a wonder.

Haynboroughs wide prospect, at once, Both feeds, and gluts your eye,
With Cornwals whole extent, as it In length and breadth does lie.
At Ladocke, in this Hundred, dwells master Peter Courtney, who doubly
fetches his pedigree, from that honorable stock, and embraces the
contentment of a quiet private life, before the public charge in his Country,
due to his calling, and to which long sithence, he has been called. His father
married (as I have showed) the daughter and coheire of Trethurffe, himself
Reskimers, his son the daughter of Saintabyn: he bears O. three Torteaux,
and a File with as many Lambeaux, B.

Leo After, in the delightful, and approved description of his Country,
tells us of a blind guide, who would readily and safely conduct stranger
trauailers, over the huge Deserts, with which that region abounds, and that
the means he used, was, in certain distances, to smell at the sand, which
gave him perfect notice of the places.

Likewise, Jews Guicciardin, in his book of Netherland, makes report of one
Martyn Catelyn, borne at Weruicke in Flaunders, who falling blind before he
attained two years age, grew, notwithstanding, by his own industry, without
any teacher, to such a perfection in Timber handy-craft, as he could, not only
turn, and make Virginals, Organes, Vyolons, and such like Instruments, with
great facility, order, and proportion, but also tune, and handsomely play upon
them, and besides, devised many serviceable tools for his science.

These examples I thrust out before me, to make way, for a not much less
strange relation touching one Edward Bone, sometimes servant to the said
master Edward Bone.
Courtney: which fellow (as by the assertion of diverse credible persons, I have
been informed) deaf from his cradle, and consequently dumb, would yet be
one of the first, to learn, and express to his master, any news that was
sturring in the Country: especially, if there went speech of a Sermon, within
some miles distance, he would repair to the place, with the foonest, and
setting himself directly against the Preacher, look him steadfastly in the
face, while his Sermon lasted: to which religious zeal, his honest life was
also answerable. For, as he shunned all lewd parts himself, so, if he espied
any in his fellow servants, (which he could and would quickly do) his master
should straightwayes know it, and not rest free from importuning, until,
either the fellow had put away his fault, or their master his fellow. And to
make his mind known, in this, and all other matters, he used very
effectual signs, being able therethrough, to receive, and perform any
enjoined errand. Besides, he was assisted with so firm a memory, that he
would not only know any party, whom he had once seen, for ever after, but
also make him known to any other, by some special observation, and
difference. Upon a brother of his, God laid the like infirmity, but did not
recompense it with the like raritie.

Somewhat near the place of his birth? there dwelt another, so affected, or
rather defected, whose name was Kempe: which two, when they chanced to meet,
would use such kind imbracements, such strange, often, and earnest rokenings,
and such hearty laughters, and other passionate gestures, that their want of a
tongue, seemed rather an hinderance to others conceiving them, then to their
conceiving one another.

Gwarnack, in this Hundred, was the Beuils ancient Gwarnack.
seat, whose two daughters and heirs, married Arundel of Trerice, and
Greinnile.

Wolueden, alias, Golden, fell unto Tregian, by match Wolueden
with the Inheritrix thereof. Tregean signifies the Giants town: their son
married in Lanherne house, their Graund-child with the L. Stourtons daughter:
he bears Erm. on a chief S. three Marilers O.

It standethin Probus Parish, whose high, and fair Probas Steeple.
Church tower, of hewed Moore stone, was builded within compass of our
remembrance, by the well disposed Inhabitants: and here also dwells one
Williams, Williams
a wealthy, and charitable Farmer, Graund-father to fixtie persons, how
living, and able, lately to ride twelve miles in a morning, for being witness
to the christening of a child, to whom he was great great Graund-father.

From hence, drawing toward the Southsea, we will touch at the late Park of
Lanhadron, because there grows an Oak, bearing his leaves speckled with
Lanbadron park.
white, as does another, called Painters Oak, in the Hundred of East: but
whether the former partake any supernatural property, to foretoken the
owners-soone ensuing death, when his leaves are al of one color (as I have
heard some report) let those affirm, who better know it: certain it is, that
diverse ancient families in England are admonished by such predictions.

Grampond, if it took that name from any great Bridge, has now Nomen sine re:
for the Bridge there is Grampond.
supported with only a few arches, and the Corporation but half replenished
with Inhabitants, who may better vaunt of their towns antiquity, then the
town of their ability.

Of Pentuan I have spoken before. For the present, it harbors master Dart,
who as diverse other Gentlemen, Pentuan.
well descended, and accommodated in Deuon, do yet rather make choice of a
pleasing and retired equality in the little Cornish Angle. He matched with
Roscarrocke.

Penwarne, in the same Parish of Meuagesy, Alias S. Penwarn
Meuie, and Isy (two nothing ambitious Saints, in resting satisfied with the
partage of so petty a limit) is vefled in master Otwell Hill, as heir to his
mother, the daughter and heir to Cosowarth, to whom it likewise accrued, by
matching with the daughter and heir of that name: a seat, through his
fruitfulness, and other appurtenances, supplying the owner large means of
hospitality, and by him so employed, who reckons to receive most good, when
he does it. He deriueth himself from a populous, and well regarded family in
Lancashire, and matried the daughter of Denham: and bears G. a Cheuron,
between three Garbes Ermine.

Art he adjoining Saint Tue, dwells master Richard Tremayn, descended from a
younger brother of Colocumb house, in Deuon, who being learned in the laws, is
yet to learn, or atleast to practice, how he may make other profit there by
then by hoarding up teasure of gratitude, in the mindful breasts of poor and
rich, on whom he, gratis, bestows the fruits of his pains and knowledge.
He married Coffyn, he bears G. three Arms in circle joined at the Tronkes
O. with hands proper.

Dudman, a well known foreland to most Sailors, Dudma^.
here shouldreth out the Ocean, to shape the same a large bosom between it
self, and Rame head, which are wel-neere twenty miles in distance. Amongst
sundry proverbs, allotting an impossible time of performance, the Cornishmen
have this one, When Rame-head and Dudman meet. Whose possession, yet, though
not themselves, met in Sir Peers Edgecumb, as inioying that, in right of his
wife, and this, by descent from his Father.

Bodrugan, a large demaines adjoining thereunto Bodruga^.
(which I will not derive from Sir Bors du Ganis, though the neighbors so say)
was the dwelling of Sir Henry Trenowith, a man of great liuely-hood, who
changed his name with the house, and lost house and holding, through attainder
for rebellion, against king Henry the seventh. The king bestowed it, by an
intailed gift, upon Sir Richard Edgecumb.

Next, lies the foreremembred Carybayes (Kery haz in Cornish, signifies to
bear his seed, or as some other define it, delighting in seed) descended to
M. Charles Treuanion, the present possessioner, by a long rank of ancestors,
from Arundels daughter and-heire: his father married the daughter of Morgan,
and sister to the first Lord Hunsdons wife, which brought him an honorable
ally. Three of this Gentleman's elder brethren, Edward, John, and Hugh, forewent
him in successioned their fathers inheritance, and passed to the better world
in a single life: himself by matching the daughter and heir of Witchalse,
whose mother was coheire to Marwood, has raised issue unto them, and
continues the hope of posterity. Sir William Treuanions his Graundfire, took
to wife the said Sir Richard Edgecumbs daughter. The Treuanions Arms are A. a
Fesse B. charged with three Escalops O. between two Cheurons G.

Roseland, is a circuit, containing certain Parishes hereabouts, and
benefiting the owners with Roseland.
his fruitfulness, so that though the original of his name came (perhaps) as
master Camden notes, from his former thickets, yet his present estate better
resembles a flowrie effect.

By this time we approach the limits of Falmouth Haven, upon one of whose
Creekes, stands the market and incorporate town of Tregny, not specially
memorable (in my knowledge) for any extraordinary worth, Tregny.
or accident.

Of better regard is Truro, alias, Truru, or Trisow, as the principal town of
the Haven, privileged with a Truro.
Mayraltie, and benefited with the general Western Sessions, Coynages,
Markets, Faires, etc. The shape of the town, and Etymon of the name, may be
learned out of this Cornish prophetical rhyme.

Truru, Triueth cu, Ombdina gives try ru,
Which is to say, Truro consists of three streets, and it shall in time be
said, Here Truro stood. A like mischief of a mystery, they observe, that in
taking T. from the town, there testeth ru, ru, which in English sounds, Woe,
Woe: but whatsoever shall become thereof hereafter, for the present, I hold it
to have got the start in wealth of anyother Gornish town, and to come behind
none in buildings, Lanceston only excepted, where there is more use, and
profit of fair lodgings, through the County Assizes. I wish that they would
likewise deserve praise, for getting, and employing their riches, in some
industrious trade, to the good of their Country, as the Harbors opportunity
inviteth them.

Descending from Truro to the Havens mouth, by Gentlemen's houses.
water, you are ouer-looked, by sundry Gentlemen's commodious feats, as Fen
ten golian, in English, the Ha^ts well, lately appertaining to master Carmynow
by interpretation often loving, and now to master Holcomb, who married the
daughter of master Peter Courtncy.

Master Sayers house, Ardeuora, inhabited by master Thomas Peyton, a Gentleman
for his age and virtues, deserving a regardfull estimation, Master Befcawnes,
Master Sayers: but amongst all, upon that side of the river, Taluerne, for
pleasant prospect, Taluerne
large scope and other hous-keeping commodities, challenges the preeminence:
it was given to a younger brother of Lanhearne, for some six or seven descents
past, and has bred Gent, of good worth and calling: amongst whom, I may not
forget the late hind, and valiant Sir John Arundell, who matched with
Godolphin, nor John his virtuous, and hopeful succeeding son, who married
with Carew; though this remembrance renew that sorrow, which once I partly
expressed in the ensuing Epitaph.

Seek not, blind eyes, the liking with the dead,
It Is earth you see: our Arundel is gone,
To join with Christ, as member to his head,
And skernes, and pities, this our bootlesse moan.
Yet pardon us, sweet soul, man's nature bears,
We, to thy loss, should sacrifice our tears.
Thou time have changed to eternity,
But timelesse was that time, in our regard,
Since ^^ught thou leau'st us, save the memory
Of thy dear worth, so soon not to be spared.
Soft be the grine, vnrathy resting bones.
Short be the date, that us again atones.
Upon the East side of the Havens entrance, Saint Maryes, alias, S. Mawes
Castle, witly his Point-blanke S. Mawes Castle.
Ordinance, comptrolleth any shipping, that deserve a denial of admission or
passage, and is commanded by master Viuian, a Gentleman, who through his worth
deserves, and with due care and judgment discharges, the Martial and civil
governments committed to his trust: he bears party per fesse. Ar. and
Vnsase 6. in chief, a Lion rampant G.

We will close up this Hundred, after our usual manner, with the Gentlemen of
mark, but not orderly marked. Such are Tanner, who married the daughter of
Rosicarrock: who bears A. on a chief S. three Morions heads O. Pomeroy, a
branch of Bery Pomeroy in Deuon: he bears O. a Lion rampa^t G. who matched
with Tanner, and whose daughter and heir apparent, has taken to husband the
young Penkeuil, who bears A. two Cheurons, and in chief a Lion passant G.

Polwheele, whose name in deduced from his dwelling and his dwelling may be
interpreted* The mity work, linked in wedlock with the coheire of Trin^^^^^e,
in English, The town of the borough. His mother was Lower of Trelask. Palwheel
bears S. a Saultier engraysed Erm.

Hearle, lineally desoended from sundry Knights, who wedded Treuanion: and his
son Trestry

He bears A. a Pesse G. between 3. Sheldrakes proper.

Sawle, who espoused Rashleigh: and his father, Kindall, etc. and bears A. a
Cheuron between 3. Fauleons heads erased S.

Pider. Hundred.
I Must now, for a while, bid the South sea late well, until a new opportunity
call me to end the other part of Falmouth haven, and take the Hundred of Pider
in task* which confineth with Powder in situation, as it resembles the same
in denomination.

Pider in Cornish is 4. in English, and this is the fourth Hundred of Cornwall,
if you begin your reckoning from the Wester part at Pen with, which (signifying
a head) does seem so to requirele.

In entering this Hundred, Padstowe first presents it Padstow
self, a town and haven of suitable quality, for both (though bad) are the
best, that the North Cornish coast possesses. The Borough gave name to the
harbor, and borrowed it of Petrock and Stowe, contracting the same into
Padstowe. It has lately purehased a corporation, and reapeth greatest thrift,
by traffiking with Ireland, for which it commodiously lies.

The harbor is barred with ba^ks of sand, made (through uniting their weak
forces) sufficiently strong, to resist the Oceans threatening billows, which
(divorced from their parent) find their rage subdued by the others lowly
submission.

M. Nicholas Prideaux, from his new and stately house, thereby, takes a full
and large prospect of the town, haven, and country adjoining to all which,
his wisdom is a stay, his authority a direction. He married one of Viels
coheires: and though endowed with fair reuennues in Deuon ^aketh Cornwall
beholde^ to his residence. He bears A. a Cheuron S. in chief a fyle with
three Lambeaux G.

The salt water leaving Padstowe, flows up into the country, that it may
embrace the river Camel, and having performed this natural courtesy, ebbeth
away again, to yield him the ^^^er passage, by which means they, both
undergo Wade bridge, the longest, strongest, and fayresh that the Shine can
muster. It took Wade bridge.
his name of a foorde adjoining, which affoordeth a way, not so safe, as
compendious, when the tide is out.

Wade bridge delivers you into a waste ground, where 9. long and great
stones, called The sisters, stand in a rank together, and seem to have been
so pitched, 9. sisters.
for continuing the memory of somewhat whose notice is yet envied us by time.

Near to Belowdy, commonly, and not improperly, termed Beelowzy, the too of a
hill is environed with deep treble trenches, which leave a large plain space
in the midst: they call it Castellan Danis, of which my former Castellan Danis,
book makes mention, and it seems (in timespast) to have bin a matter of
moment, the rather, for that a great cawfey (now covered with grass) does lead
unto it.

Saint Colombs is a big parish, and a mean market S. Colo^bs
town, subject to the Lordship and patronage of the Lanhearn Arundels, who for
many descents; lie there interred, as the inscriptions on their grave stones
do testify.

Their name is derived from Hirundelle, in French, a Swallow, and out of
France, at the conquest they came, and six Swallows they give in Arms. The
Country people entitle them, The great Arundels: and greatest stroke, for love,
living, and respect, in the Country heretofore they bare.

Their said house of Lanhearne, stands in the next parish, called Mawgan:
Ladu is Cornish for a bank, and Lanherne
on a bank the same is seated, what hearne may mean, ignorance bids me keep
silence. It is appurtenanced with a large scope of land, which (while the
owners there lived) was employed to frank hospitality; yet the same wanted
wood, in lieu whereof, they burned heath, and generally, it is more regardable
for profit, then commendable for pleasure. The Gent. now living, married Anne
the daughter of Henry Gern^^gham: his father (a man of a goodly presence and
kind magnanimity) married the daughter of the Earl of Darby, and widow to the
L. Stourton. He bears S. 6. Swallows in pile A.

Little Colan has less worth the observation, unless you will detide, or
pity their simplicity, who sought at our Lady Nants well there, to foreknowe
what fortune Nants well.
should betide them, which was in this manner:

Upon Palm Sunday, these idle-headed seekers resorted thither, with a palm
cross in one hand, and an offering in the other: the offering fell to the
Priests share, the Cross they threw into the well; which if it swamme, the
party should outliue that year; if it sunk, a short ensuing death was boded:
and perhaps, not altogether untruly, while a foolish conceyt of this halsening
might the sooner help it onwards. A contrary practice to the goddess Iunoes
lake in Laconia: for there, if the wheate^ Leonicus Var. Hist. Lib. 1. Cap. 30.
cakes, cast in upon her festival day, were by the water received, it
betokened good luck; if rejected, evil. The like is written by Pausanias, of
Inus in Greece, and by others touching the offerings thrown into the fomace of
mount Etoa in Sicill.

From hence, by the double duty of consanguinitie and affinity, I am called to
stop at Colowarth, which inhabitance Cosowarth.
altered the Inhabitants from their former French name Escudifer, in English,
Iron shield, to his own, as they prove by old evidence, not needing in the
Norman Kings new birth; to be distinguished with the Raigners number.

Cosowarth, in Cornish, imports The high grove: and well stored with trees it
has been, neither is yet altogether destitute.

John the heir of that house, having by the daughter of Williams, issue only
one daughter Katherine, suffered part of his lands to descend unto the children
of her first husband, Alen Hill: another part he intayled in her second
marriage, with Arundel of Trerice, to their issue. The house of Cosowarth, and
the ancient in heritance there adjoining, he gave to the heirs male of his
stock, by which conueyance, his uncle John succeeded, who married the daughter
of Sir Will. Lock, King H. the 8. merchant, and by him knighted, for that with
equal courage, and hazard; he took down the Popes Bull, set up at Antwerp
against his Sovereign. He had issue Thomas, Edward, Michael, John, and Robert.
Thomas married the daughter of Samtubyn, on whom he begat John and Dorothy: John
the elder and Robert, never tasted the sweet and sour of bridale fruit.

Michael took to wife Sidenhams daughter of Dul^^^rton in Somersetshire, and
is father only of issue female.

He addicteth himself to an Ecclesiastical life, and therein joining Poetry
with Divinity, endeavors to imitate the holy Prophet David, whose Psalms, of
his translation into English meeter* receive the general applause, beyond a
great many other wel-deseruing undertakers of the same task.

John the youngest; succeeding in this inheritance, upon just cause, good
conscience, and grateful kindness, renewed the intayle which his father
Thomas had cut off, and in a single restate, and the universal love of all
that conuersed with him, made a short period of his long hoped life: whose
decease I bewailed in these times.

HE that at sea and land amidst his foes*
By courage guided, sought, and escaped his death*
Lo, here, amongst his friends* whom liking chose,
And nature lent, has up resigned his breath*
Vnripened fruit in grouth* precious in hope*
Rare in effect, had fortune given scope*
Our eyes with tears perform thine obsequy,
And hearts with sighs, since hands could yield none aid,
Our tongues with praise preserve thy memory,
And thing his with grieft, since we behind are staid.
Coswarth farewell, death which us parts atwaine,
E're long, in life, shall us conioyne again.
His sister married Kendall.

Edward his uncle, and heir, by virtue of these entayles, married the daughter
of Arundel of Trerice, and from a civil Courtiers life in his younger years,
reposeth his elder age, on the good husbandry of the country, having raised
posterity sufficient, for transplanting the name into many other quarters. He
bears A. on a Cheuron between three wings B. five Bezants.

Against you have passed toward the West somewhat more then a mile, Trerice,
anciently, Treres, oftreth you the view of his costly and commodious Trerice.
buildings. What Tro is, you know already, res signifies a rushing of fieeting
away, and upon the declyning of a hill the house is seated.

In Edward the 3. reign, Ralphe Arundel matched with the heir of this land
and name: since which time, his issue has there continued, and increased their
liuelyhood, by sundry like Inheritours, as S. John, Jew, Durant, Thurlebear,
etc.

Precisely to rip up the whole pedigree, were more tedious, then behoouefull:
and therefore I will only (as by the way) touch some few points, which may
serve (in part) to show what place and regard they have borne in the Common
wealth.

There was an Indenture made, between Hugh 7. H. 5.
Courtney, Earl of Deuon, Leiutenant to the King, for a sea voyage, in defense
of the Realm: and Sir John Arundel of Trerice, for accompanying him therein.

He was Sheriff of Cornwall. 8. H. 5.


John Earl of Huntingdon, under his seal of Arms, 5. H. 6.
made Sir John Arundel of Trerice, Seneshall of his household, as well in peace,
as in war, gave him ten pound fee, and allowed him entertaynment in his
house, for one Gentleman, three Yeoman, one boy, and six horses.

The same Earl, stiling himself Lieutenant general to John Duke of Bedford,
Constable and Admiral of 8. H. 6.
England, wrote to the said Sir John Arundel, then Vice Admiral of Cornwall,
for the release of a ship, which he had arrested by virtue of his office.

The Queen, by her letter, advertised John Arundel 3. H. 7.

12. Oct.


of Trerice Esquire, that she was brought in childbed of a Prince.

The King wrote to Sir John Arundel of Trerice, that he should give his
attendance at Canterbury, about the 11. H. 8.
entertaynment of the Emperor, whose landing was then and there expected.

John Arundel of Trerice Esquire, took prisoner, Duncane Campbell, a Scot, in
a fight at sea, as our Chronicle 14. H. 8.
mentions, concerning which, I though it not amiss, to insert a letter sent
him from Tho. Duke of Norfolk (to whom he then belonged) that you may see the
style of those days.

By the Duke of Norf.
RIght well-beloved, in our hearty wise we commend us unto you, letting you with
that by your servant this bearer we have received your letters, dated at Truru
the 5. day of this month of, April, by which we perceive the goodly, valiant,
and ieopardous enterprise, it has pleased God of late to send you, by the
taking of Duncane Camel and other Scots on the sea of which enterprise we have
made relation unto the Kings Highness, who is not a little joyous and glad to
hear of the same, and has required us instantly in his name, to give you
thanks for your said valiant courage, and bold enterprise in the premises; and
by these our letters for the same your so doing, we do not only, thank you
in our most effectual wise but also promise you that during our life we will
be glad to advance you to any preferment we can. And over this, you shall
understand our said Sovereign Lords pleasure is that you shall come and
repair to his Highness, with diligence in your own person* bringing with you
the said Captive, and the Master of the Scottish ship; at which time, you shall
not only be sure of his especial thanks by mouth and to know his further
pleasure therein, but also of us to further any your reasonable pursuits unto
his Highness, or any other, during our life to the best of our power,
accordingly*

Written at Lambeth, the 11. day of April aforesaid.
Superscribed: To our right well-beloved servant, John Arundell of Trerice.


The King wrote to Sir John Ar. of Trerice touching (...)
his discharge from the Admiralty of the fleet lately committed unto him, and
that he should deliver the ship which he sailed in, to Sir Nic. Points.

The same year the King wrote to him again, that he should attend him in his
wars against the French king, with his servants tenants, and others, within
his rooms and offices, especially horsemen.

Other letters from the King there are, whose date is not expressed, neither
can I by any means hunt it out.

One, to his servant John Arundel of Trerice Esquire, willing him, not to
repair with his men, and to wait in the rereward of his army, as he had
commanded him, but to keep them in a readiness for some other service.

Another to Sir. John Arundel of Trerice praying and desiring him to the Court,
the Quindene of Saint Hillarie next, wheresoever the King shall then be within
the Realm.

There are also letters, directed to Sir John Arundell of Trerice, from the
Kings Counsel, by some of which it appears, that he was Vice admiral of
the Kings Ed. 6.
ships, in the West seas, and by others, that he had the goods and lands of
certain Rebels, given him, for his good service against them.

The Queen wrote to Sir John Arundell of Trerice, 1. Mar.
praying and requiring him, that he, with his friends and neighbors should
see the Prince of Spain most honorably entertained, if he fortuned to land in
Cornwall.

She wrote to him (being then Sheriff of Cornwall) (...).
touching the election of the Knights of the shire, and the Burgesses for the
Parliament.

She likewise wrote to him, that (notwithstanding 2. and 3. P. and M.
the instructions to the Justices) he should muster, and furnish his servants,
tenants, and others, under his rule and offices, with his friends, for the
defense, and quieting of the Country, withstanding of enemies, and any other
employment, as also to certify, what force of horse and foot he could arm.

These few notes I have culled out of many others. Sir. John Arundell, last
mentioned, by his first wife, the coheire of Beuill, had issue Roger, who died
in his fathers life time, and Katherine, married to Prideaux: Roger by his wife
Trendenham left behind him a son, called John. Sir John's second wife, was
daughter to Erisy, and widow to Gourlyn, who bare him John, his succeeder in
Tretice, and much other fair revenues, whose due commendation, because
another might better deliver then my self, who touch him as nearly, as
Tacitus did Agricola) I will therefore bound the same within his desert, and
only say this, which all, who knew him, shall testify with me: that, of his
enemies, he would take no wrong, nor on them any revenge; and being once
reconciled, embraced them, without scruple or remnant of gall. Over his kindred,
he held a wary and charie care, which bountifully was expressed, when
occasion so required, reputing himself, not only principal of the family,
but a general father to them all. Private respects ever, with him, gave place
to the common good: as for frank, well ordered, and continual hospitality,
he outwent all show of competence: spare, but discreet of speech, better
conceiving, then delivering: equally stout, and kind, not upon lightness of
humor, but soundness of judgment, inclined to commiseration, ready to
relieve. Briefly, so accomplished in virtue, that those, who for many years
together waited in nearest place about him, and, by his example, learned to
hate untruth, have often deeply protested, how no curious observation of
theirs, could ever descrie in him, any one notorious vice. By his first
foreremembred wife, he had 4. daughters married, to Carew, Summaster,
Cosowarth, and Denham: by his later, the daughter of Sir Robert Denis, 2.
sons, and 2. daughters: the elder, even from his young years; began where
his father left, and with so temperate a course, treads just in his
footesteps, that he inheriteth, as well his love, as his living. The younger
brother follows the Netherland wars, with so wel-liked a carriage, that he
outgoeth his age, and time of service, in preferment. Their mother equalleth
her husbands former children, and generally all his kindred, in kind usage, with
her own, and is by them all, again, so acknowledged and respected.

Of Saint Peran, we have spoken before, which too well brooketh his surname,
in Sabulo: for the light-sand, Peran in Zabulo.
carried up by the North wind, from the sea shore, daily continues his
covering, and marring the land adioynant, so as the distress of this deluge,
drove the Inhabitants to remove their Church: howbeit, when it meets with
any crossing brook, the same (by a secret antipathy) restrains, and barreth
his farther incroching that way.

In Withiell Parish of this Hundred, one Gidly, not many years sithence,
dug down a little hillocke, or Borough, call^. Borsneeuas, in English,
Cheapfull, Borsneeuas.
there with to thicken his lother ground. In the bottom of which he found
three white stones, triangle-wise (as pillars) supporting another flat one,
some two foot and a half square, and in the midst between them, and under
it; an earthen Pot, half full of a black, flymie, and ill-sauouring
substance, which (doubtless) was once the ashes of so he notable person, there
committed to that manner of burial.

Saint Agnes, one of the high hills, which I specially recited S. Agnes
in my former book, by his entrails (like ^rome^heus) feeds the Tynners
pecking, or picking bills, with a long live diprofit, albeit, their scarce Eagle
eyes sometimes mistake the shadow for the substance, and so offer up degenerate
tears, as a late sacrifice to repentance. The neighbors have observed, that
of two Lakes, here adjoining to this hill, and so each to other the one will
foster fish; and the other none at all.

Neither may I omit new Kaye, a place in the New Kay
North coast of this Hundred, so called, because in former times, the
neighbors attempted, to supply the defect of nature, by Art, in making there
a Kay, for the Rode of shipping, which conceyt they still retain, though want
of means in themselves, or the place, have left the effect in Nubibus: and
only lent them the benefit of Lestercockes and fisher-boates.

I cannot finish this Hundred, with the relation of many more Gentlemen, either
through want of them, or in my self Tirenance added to his own liuelyhood,
the possessions of Littleton, to whom, as sisters son, and general heir,
he succeeded: he married Kendall, and his son Roscarrocke: he bears A. A
Fesse, between three Swords S.

There dwells also Master Tredeniak, who matched with the daughter of Viuian,
and his father, of Marow, who bears O. on a bend S. three Buckes heads
cabased A. As also Langherne B. a Cheuron between 3. Escalops O. Burlace, A.
on a bend S. two hands tearing in sunder a horse-shooe of the field; and others.

Kerier Hundred.
KEry in Cornish, signifies bearing: and yet you must bear with me, if I
forbear to derive Kerier herefrom, until I see some reason for my warrant:
wherefore leaving that, I will weaue on my former web of Falmouth haven; and
first, a word or two touching the same in general, ere I descend to the yet
vndescribed West side in particular.

The river Fala, falling here, into the seas wide-gaping mouth, has endowed it
with that name.

In the very entrance of the harbor lies a rock, rather disgracing, then
endamaging the same: for with the cbbe it is discovered, and at the flood,
marked by a pole purposely fixed thereupon. For the rest, such as compare
Plymmouth and Falmouth together, observe, that Plymmouth creekes are mostly
coasted with plain shoares; Falmouth, with steep: which makes that, the more
delightful for prospect, this, the more safe for riding. Again, they say that
Falmouth lies farther out in the trade way, and so offreth a sooner opportunity
to wind-driuen shipping, then Plymmouth, but that Plymmouth has a better
outlet, from his Catwater, for sailors bound to the Westwards, and from
Hamoase, for those that would fare to the East, then Falmouth. Likewise as
Plymmouth vaunteth richer and fairer towns, and greater plenty of fish then
Falmouth: so Falmouth braggeth, that a hundred sail may Anchor within his
circuit, and no one of them see the others top, which Plymmouth cannot equal.
Howsoever they agree for competence among themselves, the worst of them, by
most men's judgments, has the precedence (Milford only excepted) of all other
Havens in England. And thus much of the whole. Now to the parts.

On the West side, at the very coming in, there rises a hill, called
Pendenis, where king Henry the eight, Pendenis fort.
when he took order for fortifying the Sea coasts, caused a Castle to be
builded, with allowance of a petty Garrison, and some small store of
Ordinance. Another, somewhat like thereto in plot, but different in sight, was
then erected in the other side, at Saint Mawes, of which I have spoken
heretofore. S. Mawes Castle.


Saint Mawes lies lower, and better to annoy shipping: but Pendenis stands
higher, and stronger to defend it self. It should seem, the fortifier made
his advantage of the commodity, affoorded by the ground, and shot rather at a
safe preserving the Harbor, from sudden attempts of little Fleetes, and the
mastering of Pirates, then to withstand any great Navy, or maigne invasion.

But her Majesty casting an equal eye to both, or rather a sharper sight to
this later, as quickened through the enemies diverse pretenses against these
places (whereof Falmouth, by miracle, not providence, escaped one) raised a new
fort with a Garrison, upon the Hawe at Plymmouth, and at her great charges,
with some litte help of the Country, added an increase of fortification, and
soldiers to Pendenis. Howbeit, his greatest strength consists in Sir
Nicholas Parker, the Governor, who demeaning himself, no less kindly, and
frankly toward his neighbors, for the present, then he did resolutely, and
valiantly, against the enemy when he followed the wars; therethrough
commands, not only their bodies, by his authority, but also their hearts,
by his love, to live and die in his assistance, for their common preservation;
and her Highness service: he bears B. Frettie, and A. a Fesse O.

After the declining hill has delivered you down from this Castle, Arwenacke
entertaineth you, with a Arwenacke.
pleasing view: for the same stands so far within the Havens mouth, that it
is protected from the sea storms, and yet so near thereunto, as it yields a
ready passage out. Besides, the Cliffe, on which the house abbutteth, is steep
enough to shoulder off the waves, and the ground about it, plain and large
enough for use and recreation.

It is owed by Master John Killigrew, who married the daughter of Monck, and
heir to her mother and was son to Sir John Killigrew, who matched with
Woluerstone: the stock is ancient, and diverse of the branches (as I have
elsewhere remembered) grown to great advancement, in calling and liuely-hood,
by their greater desert: their Arms are A. an Eagle with two heads displayed
within a bordure Bezanty S.

Somewhat above Arwenacke, Trefuses point divides the harbor, and yields a
several Ankering Trefuses.
place on each side there of, the one called Carrack rode, the other, kings
rode.

This Promontory is possessed and inhabited by a Gentleman of that name, who
suitably to his name, gives three Fusils for his coat, in this sort: A. a
Cheuron between three Fusils S. He married the coheire of Gaurigan, and M. Will.
Godolphin late younger brother to Sir Frauncis, her other sister.

Upon the left hand from hence, at the top of a creek, Perin town has taken
up his seat, rather passable, then Peryn.
noteable, for wealth, buildings, and Inhabitants: in all which, though nearer
the havens thouth, it gives Truro the preeminence: the like whereof I observe,
touching diverse other towns, of the same situation, in Deuon, as Salcomb, and
kings bridge, Dartmouth, and Totnes, Tops^^ain, and Excester: amongst which,
those that stand highest up in the Country, afford therethrough, a fitter
opportunity of access, from all quarters, and so a speedyer and larger vent of
their commodities.

In Perin was Glasney College, founded by Walter Brounscomb, and benefited by
John Graundson, Bishops 1256. 1327.
of Excester, which See possesses fair reuennues thereabouts.

Upon another crecke on the same side, Carclew has Carclew.
(after the Cornish manner) welneere metamorphosed the name of Master Bonithon,
his owner, into his own. He married the daughter of Vinian, his father of
Killigrew, his graundfather of Erisy, and bears A. a Cheuron between 3.
Flowers deluce. S.

With any memorable act or accident, concerning this haven, I cannot acquaint
you, before my perting therefrom, save only, that Philip, Archduke of
Austriche, during his voyage from Netherland toward Spain (his wives
kingdom) was weather-driuen into Weymouth, and, with a kind constraint,
received a more royal, then welcome entertainment, at the hands of King Henry
the 7. from which he could not free himself, but by redeeming his liberty,
with De la Pooles captivity. This accomplished, he made ehoyce to take ship
again at Falmouth, that so by the shortest eut, he might leave least power in
fortune, to thwart him any second encumbrance.

Hailford, so called, of the fordable river Haill, if elsewhere Helford.
placed, would carry the reputation of a good harbor; but as it now stands.
Falmouths ouer-neere neighborhood, lesseneth his use, and darkeneth his
reputation, as quitting it only to the worst sort of Seafarers, I mean
Pirates, whose guilty breasts, with an eye in their backs, look warily how they
may go out, ere they will adventure to enter; and this at vnfortifyed
Hailford, cannot be controlled: in which regard, it not improperly brooketh his
more common term of Helford, and the nickname of Stealfoord.

His shores afford commodious seats, to the dwellings of Reskimer, who married
S. Abin, and bears B. 3. bars A. in chief, a Wolf passant of the first:
and Tregose, who matched with Kendal: his son with Erisy, and bears B. two
bars Gemewes in chief a Lion passant O. armed and langued G.

And if your ears be not already cloyed with relation of wonders, I will let
you understand, how I was once carried to see one hereabouts. It is (forsooth)
a great rock, lying upon the ground, his top deepned to a hollownesse, not much
unlike in fashion, but far exceeding in proportion, the long half of an egg.
This (they say) holds water, which ebbeth and flows as the sea, and,
indeed, when I came thither, the tide was half out, and the pit half empty.
By it there stands a Chapel, and to it there belonged a cover, so as the same
seemed, in former times, to carry some regard. But I have heard credible persons
so discredit this wonder, that I dare not offer it you, as probable, much
less thrust it upon you, as approved. The name thereof is, Hanterdauis, which
(turning d to t) signifies half a tongue. Hanterdauis.


More certain, though less wonderful, and yet, for the strangeness, well
worth the viewing, is Mainamber: Mainamber.
Main, is a rock, amber, as some say, signifies Ambrose. And a great rock
the same is, advanced upon some others of a meaner size, with so equal a
counterpeyze, that the push of a finger, will sensibly move it too and fro: but
farther to remove it, the united forces of many shoulders are ouer-weake.
Wherefore the Cornish wonder-gatherer, thus deservbeth the same.

BE thou thy mother natures work, Or proof of Giants might:
Worthless and ragged though thou show, Yet art thou worth the sight.
This hugy rock, one fingers force Apparently will move;
But to remove it, many strengths Shall all like feeble prove.
Helston, in Cornish, Hellaz, in English, the green hall, Hellox.
is a well seated and peopled town, privileged, secundum vsum, with the rest,
and one of the 4. Coynage places.

Under it runs the river Lo, whose passage into Lo poole.
the sea, is thwarted by a sandy bank, which forces the same to quurt back a
great way, and so to make a poole of some miles in compass. It breeds a
peculiar kind of bastard Trought, in bigness and goodness exceeding such as
live in the fresh water, but coming short of those that frequent the salt.

The foreremembred bank serves as a bridge, to deliver wayfarers, with a
compendious passage, to the other side; howbeit, sometimes with more haste then
good speed: for now and then, it is so pressed on the inside, with the
increasing rivers weight, and a portion of the utter sand, so washed down by
the waves; that at a sudden, out breaks the upper part of the poole, and away
goes a great deal of the sand, water, and fish: which instant, if it take any
passenger tardy, shrewdly endangereth him, to flit for company: and some have
so miscarried.

To this poole adioyneth M. Penrose his house, whose kind entertainment has
given me, and many others experience of these matters. He married the daughter
of Rashleigh: he bears A. 3. Bendes S. charged with 9. restes of the field.

Those 2. rivers of Haill and Lo, rising not far asunder, do enclose
between them, as they run into the sea, a neck of land, particularized with
the name of Meneag: Meneag,
and in regard of his fruitfulness, not unworthy of a seuerance.

Within this circuit, lie Trelawarren M. Viuians house, and Erisy, seated in 2.
parishes, and descended, by a long rank of ancestors, to the Gent. of that
name, now in ward. His father married Carew: his graundsire, one of Militons
coheires, who ouerliuing her husband, ended the course of her long and well
commended widdowhood, in becoming Lady to Sir Nicholas Parker, The E^zies
bear S. a Cheuron, between 3. Griffons Sergreant O.

Clowance (derived from Cloow, which signifies, to hear) is the possession
and dwelling of M. Saintabin, whose very name (besides the conquest roll)
deduceth his first ancestors out of France. His graundfather married
Greinuile: his father, one of Whittingtons coheires: which later couple, in a
long and peaceable date of years, exercised a kind, liberal, and never
discontinued hospitality. Himself took to wife the daughter of Mallet, and
with ripe knowledge and sound judgment, discharges the place which he bears
in his Country. He bears O. on a cross G. five Bezaunts.

Pengueraz, in Cornish imports a head to help; from which, some deduce the
Etymon of Pengersick, a fair house, in an unfruitful soil, sometimes the
inhabitance of M. Militon, Captain of the Mount, and husband to Godolphin,
whose son being lost in his travail beyond the seas, enriched 6. distafs
with his inheritance. They were bestowed in marriage (but by me not orderly
marshalled) as follows: 1. to Erisy, and Sir Nicholas Parker. 2. to Laniue,
3. to Trefuses, and Treg^deck, 4. to Trenwith, Arundel, and Hearle, 5. to
Bonithon. 6. to Abbot.

Not far from thence, rises Godolghan ball, or hill, at whose foot stands
a house of the same name, and so intitling his owner, though lately declined
(with a milder accent) to Godolphin: in Cornish, it signifies, a white Eagle:
and such arms they carry in this sort: G. an Eagle displayed with two heads,
between three Flowers de luce A.

This hill has, for diverse descents, supplied those Gent. bountiful minds,
with large means accruing from their Tynne-works, and is now possessed by Sir
Frauncis Godolphin Knight, whose zeal in religion, uprightness in Justice,
providence in government, and plentiful housekeeping, have won him a very
great and reverent reputation in his Country: and these virtues, together with
his services to her Majesty, are so sufficiently known to those of highest
place, as my testimony can add little light thereunto: but by his labors and
inventions in Tynne matters, not only the whole Country has felt a general
benefit, so as the several owners have thereby gotten very great profit out of
such refuse works, as they before had given over for unprofitable; but her
Majesty has also received increase of her customs by the same, at least to
the value of 10. thousand pound. Moreover, in those works which are of his own
particular inheritance, he continually keeps at work, three hundred persons
or thereabouts, and the yearly benefit, that out of those his works accrueth to
her Majesty, amounts, communibus annis, to one thousand pound at the least,
and sometimes to much more. A matter very remorceable, and perchance not to be
matched again by any of his sort and condition in the whole Realm. He
succeeded to the inheritance of his uncle Sir William Godolphin, who, as has
been said before, demeaned himself very valiantly in a charge which he bare
at Boloigne, toward the latter end of the reign of King Henry the 8. and is
like to leave the same to another Sir William his son, who gives hope, not
only of the sustaining, but increasing of the reputation of his family. He
matched with Killigrew, his father with Bonythou, his Graund-father with Glynne.

Diverse other Gentlemen there dwell in this Hundred, as Lanyne, the husband of
Kekewitch, his father married Militon, and bears S. a Castle, A. standing in
waves B. over the same a Faulcon houering with bells O. Pernwarne, that matched
with the coheire of Tencreek, who bears S. a Cheuron between three Flowers
de luce A. Lagherne, who took to wife the daughter of Nants, and bears B. a
Cheuron between three Escalops, O. Nansperyan coupled in matrimony, with and
his two daughters and heirs apparent, with Prideaux, and Matthew: who bears
A. three Losenges S.

Penwith Hundred.
MY last labor, for closing, up this wearisome Survey, is bounded, as Cornwall
it self, and so the West part of England, with Penwith Hundred. The name, in
English signifies, the head of Ashen trees, belike, for some such eminent
mark, while the Country was better stored of Timber. The Danes sailing about
997.
Penwith Steort (says Houeden) made foul havoc, in Deuon and Cornwall.

Upon the North sea, lies Nants, which imports a valley, and houseth a Gent.
who therethrough, has worn out his former name, of Trengoue, in English, the
Smithes town, and assumed this: he married Sir John Arundels daughter of
Trerice: and bears A. a cross haumed S. During summer season, the Seals
haunt a Cave, in the Cliffe thereby, and you shall see great store of them,
apparently show themselves, and approach very near the shore, at the sound of
any loud music, or other such noise.

Beyond Nants, M. Basses possesses Tehiddy, who married Godolphin, his father
Caffyn: he bears O. three Piles in point G. a Canton Er. with a difference.

And so, leaving these private Inhabitances, and keeping still the North coast,
we arrive at the town, and port of S. Ies: both of mean plight, yet, with
their best means, S. Ies.
(and often, to good and necessary purpose) succouring distressed shipping.
Order has been taken, and attempts made, for bettering the Road, with a Peer,
but either want, or slacknesse, or impossibility, hitherto withhold the
effect: the whiles, plenty of fish is here taken, and sold very cheap.

As you row to the Westwards from hence, the sea flows into a large Cave,
farther up, then any man durst A Cave.
yet adventure to discover, and the Cliffes thereabouts muster long strakes of
a glittering hiew, which import a show of Copper: and Copper mines are found,
and wrought in the grounds adjoining.

M. Camden observes, that near hereunto, stood the watch-towre, mentioned by
Orosius, and oppositely placed to such another in Galitia.

Stepping over to the South sea, (for the distaunce is in comparison, but a
step) S. Michaels mount looks so alost, as it brooketh no concurrent, for the
highest S. Michaels mount
place. Ptolomey terms it Ocrinum, the Cornish men, Cara Cowz in Clowze, that
is, The hoare rock in the wood. The same is sundred from the main land, by a
sandy plain, of a flight shoot in breadth, passable, at the ebb, on foot;
with boat, on the flood. Your artiuall on the farther side, is entertained by
an open green, of some largeness, which finishing where the hill begins,
leaves you to the conduction of a winding and craggy path; and that at the top,
delivers you into a little plain, occupied, for the greatest part, by a fort
of the old making. It compriseth lodgings for the Captain and his garrison,
and a Chapel for devotion. This latter, builded by Will. Earl of Morton, to
whom William the Conqueror his uncle, gave much lands in those quarters, and
greatly haunted, while folk endured their merits, by far travailing. They
have a tie pit, not so much satisfying use, as relieuing necessity. A little
without the Castle, there is a bad seat in a craggy place, called S. Michaels
Chair, somewhat dangerous for access, and therefore holy for the adventure.

Until Richard the firsts reign, the mount seems to have served only for
religion, and (during his imprisonment) to have been first fortified by Henry
de la Pomeray, who surprised it, and expulsed the Monks: howbeit soon after,
when he became ascertained of his Sovereigns enlargement, the very fear of
ensuing harm wrought in him a present effect of the uttermost that any harm
could bring, namely, his death: whereon, the old cell and new fort, was
surrendered to the Archbishop of Canterbury, in the Kingsbehalfe. Thus Houeden
reports. But the descendents from this Pomeroy, alias, Pomeroy, make a
somewhat different relation of this accident: for they affirm, that a Sergeant
at arms of the Kings, came to their auncestour, at his Castle of Bery Pomeroy,
in Deuon, received kind entertaynment for certain days together, and at his
departure, was gratified with a liberal reward: in counter-change whereof, he
then, and no sooner, revealing his long concealed errand, flatly arresteth his
hoaste, to make his immediate appearance before the King, for answering a
capital crime. Which unexpected and il-carryed message, the Gent. took in
such despite, as with his daggen he stabbed the messenger to the heart: and
then well knowing in so suparlatiue an offense, all hope of pardon foreclosed,
he abandons his home, gets to a sister of his abiding in this mount, bequetheth
a large portion of his land to the religious people there, for redeeming his
soul: and lastly, causes himself to be let blood unto death, for leaving the
remainder to his heir: from which time forward, this place continued rather a
school of Mars, then the Temple of peace. For shortly after the discomfiture
of H. the 6. party, by Ed. the 4. at Barnet field, John Earl of Oxford, who
had made 11. E. 4.
one, and one of the principal on the weaker side, arrived here by shipping,
disguised himself, with some of his followers, in Pilgrims habits,
therethrough got entrance, mastred the garrison, and seyzed the place. Which,
thus politikely won, he as valiantly kept, and kept a long time defended
against the Kings power, until reasonable conditions swayed him to a surrender.

A like surprise, but of later date, I read in Popeliniere, touching the like
named and seated mount, in Normandy. 2. Vol. Lib. 31.


During the last Cornish commotion, diverse Gent. with their wives and families,
fled to the protection of this place, where the Rebels besieged them, first
wynning the plain at the hills foot, by assault, when the water was out, and
then, the even ground on the top, by carrying up great trusses of hay before
them, to blench the defendants sight, and dead their shot. After which, they
could make but slender resistance: for no sooner should any one within, peep
out his head, over those inflanked walls, but he became an open mark to a whole
shower of arrows. This disadvantage, together with the women's dismay, and
decrease of victuals, forced a surrender to those Rakehels mercy, who, nothing
guilty of that effeminate virtue, spoiled their goods, imprisoned their bodies,
and were rather by Gods gracious providence, then any want of will, purpose, or
attempt, restrained from murdering the principal persons.

Here also, was the Lady Katherine Gordon (an unfit 13. H. 7.
yoke fellow for that counterfeit Prince, Perkin Warbeck) taken by the L.
Daubney, and conveyed to the King. Of this, as the last wonder.

Who knows not Mighels mount and chair,
The Pilgrims holy vaunt:
Both land, and Island, twice a day,
Both fort, and port of haunt.
Under the mount extends a bay, for lesser vessels to lie at: and between it
and the Western shore, there is an indifferent good road for shipping, saving
upon some winds, called the Mou^ts bay: where, by Froiss arts report, Mounts
bay.
Sir Robert Knolles landed, what time his return out of France, was by K. Ed.
the 3. commanded, and for his valiant exployts there, achieved, very
graciously welcomed.

Ouer-against the Mount, fronteth a town, of petty fortune, pertinently named
Marcaiew, of Marhas diow, Marcaiew.
in English, the Thursdaies market; for then it uses this traffike. At the
beginning of K. H. the 8. reign, it felt the Frenchmens fiery indignation, who
landed there with 30. sail. But the smoke of those poor houses, calling in
the country to the refcusse, made the place over hot for the enemies any
longer abode.

Mousehole, in Cornish, is named Borternis, and in Latin, Mousehole.
Portus Insulae, both importing one sense, to wit, the Hand haven, and so
called, through a little Island placed before it.

M. Holinshed tells us, that near heereunto, not many years sithence,
certain Tynners, as they were working, found Speareheads, Battel-axes, and
swords of Copper, wrapped in lynnen clouts, and little impaired through their
long lying.

Pensans, by interpretation, The Saints head, is a market Pensants.
town, not so regardable for his substance, as memorable for his late accident
of the Spaniards firing, which fell out in this manner*

The three and twentieth of July; 1595 soon after the Sun was raised, and had
chased a fogge, which before kept the sea out of sight, 4. Galleys of the enemy
presented themselves upon the coast, ouer-against Mousehole, and there in a
fair Bay, landed about two hundred men, pikes and shot, who forthwith sent
their forlorn hope, consisting of their basest people, unto the stragled
houses of the country, about half a mile compass or more, by whom were
burned, not only the houses they went by, but also the Parish Church of Paul,
the force of the fire being such, as it utterly ruined all the great stony
pillars thereof: others of them in that time, burned that fisher town
Mowsehole, the rest Mousehole.
marched as a guard for defense of these firers. The Inhabitants being feared
with the Spaniards landing and burning, fled from their dwellings, and very
meanly weaponed, met with Sir Francis Godolphin on a green, on the West side
of Pensance, who that forenoone coming from his house, for pacifying some
controversies in those Western parts, and from the hills espying the fires in
that town, Church, and houses, hastened thither: Who forthwith sent to all
the Captains of those parts, for their speedy repair with their companies,
and also sent by Poast to Sir Francis Drake, and Sir John Hawkins (then at
Plymmouth with a fleet bound for the Indies) advertisement of the arrival of
these four Galleys, and of their burnings, aduising them to look to
themselves, if there were any greater fleet of the enemies at Sea, and to send
West with all haste, what succors by sea or land they could spare. Then Sir
Francis Godalphin advised that weak assembly, to retire into Pensance, and to
prepare it for defense, until the coming of the Country forces that he had
sent for. But they finding themselves in number something above a hundred,
wherein were about thirty or forty shot, though scarce one third of them were
serviceable, insisted to march against the enemies, to repel them from farther
spoils of their houses.

But while they were marching toward them, the Spaniards returned aboard their
Gallyes, and presently removed them farther into the Bay, where they anchored
again, before and near a lesser fisher town, called Newlyn.

There again with all speed they landed, and imbattelled in the slope of a
hill, about four hundred pikes and shot, sending about two ranks of
soldiers, three in a rank, up to the top of the hill, to discover what forces
or ambushes of the Country might lie in view: who espying none but those that
were returned with Sir Frauncis Godolphin, from their forementioned fruitless
march, gave notice thereof to their imbattelled company. Whereupon they
forthwith marched toward Penzance.

Upon their moving, Sir Frauncis Godolphin moved also, to enter Penzance
before them: and as soon as that weak number were entered into the open green
being of three quarters of a mile length, the Gallyes ceased not to plye them
all that way with their ordinance from their prowes, as busily as they could.
Of which shot, though none were hurt, but only a Constable unhorsed without
any harm, saving the show on his doublet of the bullets sliding by his back,
yet many in fearful manner, some fell flat to the ground, and others ran
away.

Sir Frauncis sent after those that were entered Penzance before him, that they
should make their stand at the market place, himself staying hindmost, to
observe the enemies order, and which way they would make their approach. Which
done, he found at the said market place but only two resolute shot, who stood
at his command, and some ten or twelve others that followed him, most of them
his own servants; the rest, surprised with fear, fled, whom, neither with his
persuasions, nor threatening with his rapier drawn, he could recall.

Finding himself thus abandoned, and the enemies entered the town in three
parts, he was then forced to depart, the enemies beginning their fire some
houses behind him. The town thus fired, as also the forementioned little
fisher town Newlyn, they returned again to their Galleys.

By this time, toward the evening, the Cornish forces increased in number, and
amended in heart, encamped themselves on the green, near to the town of
Markesew and S. Michaels Mount, for defense thereof, and there spent out the
night. The next day the enemy made show to land again on the West side of the
bay; but seeing the people, though few in number, yet resolute to resist, they
desisted from their enterprise: and besides, finding themselves annoyed by the
shooting of bullets and arrows into their Galleys where they road at anchor,
they were forced to remove them farther off.

Soon after, viz. on the 25. of July in the morning, came thither Sir Nic.
Clifford, Sir H. Power, and certain other Captains, who were sent by the
Generals from Plym mouth to the camp: As some of her Majesty's ships were also
sent, who being come as far as the Lizard head, and those Captains to the
camp, matters there go on in provident and orderly sort, a plot is laid for
intercepting the enemy by ambush, if he thrust on shore again, whereto
necessity must soon have pressed him, for renewing his consumed store of fresh
water: but within one hour after the arrival of these Captains, the wind,
which was until then strong at Southeast, with mist and rain, to have
impeached the Galleys return, suddenly changed into the Northwest, with very
fair and clear weather, as if God had a purpose to preserve these his rods
for a longer time. The wind no sooner came good, but away pack the Galleys
with all the haste they could.

Thus have you a summary report of the Spaniards glorious enterprise, and the
Cornish men's infamous cowardice, which (were there any cause) I could qualify
by many reasons, as, the suddenness of the attempt, the narrowness of the
country, the opennesse of the town, the advantage of the Galleys ordinance on
a people unprepared against such accidents, through our long continued peace,
and at that very time, for the most part, either in their Tynne-workes, or at
sea, who e're the next day made resistance, even with a handful, and entered a
vowed resolution, to revenge their loss at the next encounter, if the enemy
had landed again.

So might I likewise say, that all these circumstances meeting in any other
quarter of the Realm, would hardly have produced much better effects. But I
will not seek to thrust my Countrymen into any other folks company, for
shifting them out of sight.

Verily such sudden surprises work more indignity then damage, and more
damage then disgrace, and have so been ever construed. Moscho, a head City
in a populous dominion, was burned by the roguing Tartars, anno Domini 1572.
The Capitol, a head fortress, Liu. lib. 3
in a populous City, was taken by slaves and outlawes, anno vrbis, 292. and
yet, who therefore exalts the Tartars valiancy, above the Moschouite, or the
Romans slaves and outlawes, above their masters? Besides, such nap-taking
assaults, spoylings, and firings, have in our forefathers days, between us
and France, been very common; and yet, who is so witless, as to twite either
of both, for the same?

But least hold can the author, and actor of this Tragedy take, to build any
vaunt hereon: for oftentimes small troops of ours, against far greater forces
of theirs, yea (sometimes) after forewarning, and preparance, have won,
possessed, ransacked, synged, captiued, and carried away the towns, wealth,
and Inhabitants, not only of their Indies, but of Portugal and Spain it
self. Which Nombre de dios, S. Domingo, Cartagena, the lower town of the
Groigne, Penecha, the suburbs of Lisbone, and Cales will testify, beyond all
exception. But our Countrymen leaving reason and example, excuse themselves by
destiny. In fatis they say (and not in fatuis) it was, that the Cornish people
should undergo this misfortune: for an ancient prophecy, in their own
language, has long run amongst the^, how there should land upon the rock of
Merlin, those that would burn Paul's Church, Pensants, and Newlyn. And indeed,
so is the rock called, where the enemy first stepped on shore. The prophesy is
this:

E^^ra ^^yre^ wa^ meant Merlyn
Ara Les^^y Pawle Pensanz ha Newlyn.
Not far from the lands end, there is a little village, called Trebegean, in
English, The town of the Giants Trebegea^
grave: near whereunto, and within memory (as I have been informed) certain
workmen searching for Tynne, discovered a long square vault, which contained
the bones of an excessive big carkas, and verified this Etimology of the name.

At Saint Buriens, a parish of great circuit, and like benefit S. Burie^s
to the Incumbent, King Athelstane accomplished his vow, in founding a
College of Priests, what time he had conquered the Sillane Islands.

Chiwarton signifies a house on the green lay, and a Castle on a green hill
is given by the Gent. of that name, who, in a quiet single life, makes no
farther use of his knowledge gotten in the laws, during his younger age, or
that experience, wherewith a long course of years has sithence enriched him,
then may tend, sine lucro, to the advancement of public justice, or, sine
strepitu, to the aduisement of his private acquaintance. He bears A. a
Castle S. Standing on a hill. V.

Sundry other Gentlemen people that remote quarter, as Lauelis, etc. touching
whom I must plead, non sum informatus.

Diogenes, after he had tired his Scholars with a long Lecture, finding at last
the void paper, Be glad, my friends (quoth he) we are come to harbor. With
the like comfort, in an unlike resemblance, I will refresh you, who have
vouchsafed to travail in the rugged and wearysome path of mine ill-pleasing
style, that now your iourny ends with the land; to whose Promontory (by Pomp.
Mela, called Bolerium: by Diodorus, Velerium: by Volaterane, Helenium: by the
Cornish, Pedn an laaz: and by the English, The lands end) because Lands end.
we are arrived, I will here sit me down and rest.

Deo gloria: mihi gratia. 1602. April. 23.
Corrections.
FOlio 9. a. lin. 13. read Lanine. Fol. 10. lin. 28. read Sic. Fol. 15. a. l.
5. ere. Fol. 16. a. l. 27. certainly. Fol. 17. b. l. 28 Gentleman. ibid. l. 30.
appeal. fol. 18. b. l. 12. expected. fol. 19. a. l. 10. canding. fol. 20. b.
l. 28. may. fol. 21. a. l. 17. an. fol. 23. a. l. 17. Kerier. fol. 25. a. l.
16. dieting. ibid. b. l. 1. affect. fol. 32. a. l. 8. Dories. fol. 33. a. l. 4.
celler. ibid. b. l. 11. foreclosing. fol. 53. b. l. 22. of which. fol. 55. a.
l. 6. Bonithon. and l. 20. Carminow. ibid. b. l. 2. Tedna. ibid. l. 22. guiddn.
fol. 56. a. l. 8. Pedn. fol. 61. b. l. 28. Trerice. fol. 66. b. l. 11. leave
out, of straw. fol. 67. b. l. 15. silver. fol. 68. a. l. 17. breeder. ibid. l.
26. unpleasing. fol. 75. a. l. 32. from him. ibid. b. l. 22. Peluianders. fol.
76. a. l. 19. fore-hip. ibid. b. l. 2. Circumforanei. fol. 77. a. l. 2.
appannage. fol. 80. a. l. 29. Newelm. fol. 82. b. l. 1. entrusted. ibid. l. 16.
entrusted. fol. 84. b. l. 22. ventings. fol. 87. a. l. 25. interpreted. fol.
88. a. l. 18. Hender. fol. 98. a. l. 7. interlaced. fol. 100. b. l. 22. third.
and l. 23. as. fol. 106. b. l. 4. net becomes. fol. 110. a. l. 24. Saultier.
ibid. b. l. 21. Lineth. fol. 111. a. l. 7. eye. fol. 112. a. l. 28. fair. fol.
116. b. l. 19. Trerice. fol. 117. b. l. 10. pierced. and l. 11. segreant. and
l. 30. strata. fol. 118. a. l. 14. Treuenner. fol. 122. b. l. 18. Cambala. fol.
127. b. l. 3. tripped.

The Table of the first Book.
THe Survey of Cornwall contains a description general, in the first book,
reporting her Accidents. Elements. Inhabitants.
THe Survey of Cornwall contains a description Special, in the 2. book,
containing matters Topographical, Historical.


Accidents, wherein are delivered the name and shape. Fol. 1. Climat. 2. The
quantity, length and breadth. ibid. Borders. ibid. Commodities of the
situation. 3. Discommodities. 4. Temperature. 5.
Elements.
Earth above, form, quality. 5. Things of life, growing and feeling. Earth
under, Mynerals. 6. Precious, Diamonds, Pearl, and Agats. 7. Water fresh,
springs, rivers, ponds. 26. Therein the fish. 28. The taking. 30. Sea, things
liuelesse: living, fish, foul.
Things of life, growing.
Mats. 18. Herbs. 19. Corn, dressing. ibid. kinds. 20.
Trees for fruit. ibid. Fuel, timber. 21.
Things of life, feeling.
Worms. 21. Beasts, Venery. 22. meat. 23. use. 24.
Birds. ibid.
Minerals.
Stones for walling, windows, covering, pauing, lyme. 6. Metals* Tynne: 7.
Copper. 6. Silver and Gold. 7.
Tynne-works.
Kinds, finding. 8. Color, bigness. 10. Working, expressing the persons:
Adventurers. ibid. Captain. ibid. Laborers. ibid.
Manner, tools. ibid. Loose earth, rocks. 11. Conueyance by water, engines,
Addits. ibid.
Tynne-dressing.
Breaking, stamping, drying, crazing, washing. ibid. Blowing. 12.
Jurisdiction.
Charter. 16. Officers supreme: L. Warden, Vice-warden. 17. Ioterior: Stewards,
Gaylour. 18. Iuries: great, petty. ibid. Witnesses. ibid.
Orders.
Sharing. 12. Places: Wastrel, Several. 13. Bounds, doales, measure. ibid.
Coynage in time, 13. Post, 14. and their places. ibid. times. ibid. Officers.
ibid.


Price by free sale, Preemption. 17. Usury in Tynne: black, white. 15.
Sea: things liuelesse.
Briny, Salt-mils, Islands, havens. 26. Sand, Orewoods, Shells and Nuts,
Shipping. 27.
Sea: things living.
Fish, partaker of the fresh. 28. Therein the fashion, shelly, flat, round. 30.
Within haven. 29. Their taking, general and particular. 30. Upon the coast.
31. Saving and venting. 33. Foul: eatable, not eatable. 35.
Inhabitants: estate real.
Private: grounds, houses. 36. Intercourse: bridges, high ways. 53. Traffike:
markets, fayres. ibid. Wayghts and measures. 54.
Inhabitants: estate personal.
Names. 54. Language. 55. Number. 57. Disposition ancient. ibid. Disposition
later, of minds, holiness. 58. Sciences: Divines. ibid. Ciuilians. 59.
Phisicians. 60. Statemen, Martial, Free schools. 61. Mechanical. 62.
Disposition later, of bodies: strength: ibid. Actiuity, health. 63. Degrees:
Nobility and Gentlemen. ibid. Townsmen. 65. Husbandmen. 66. Poor. 67.

Recreations.
Feasts: Saints, 69. Harvest, Church-ale. 68. Pastimes of the mind: songs, 72.
Guaries. 71. Pastimes of the body: shooting, 72. Hurling to goales, 73. Hurling
to country, 74. Wrestling, 75. Games. 76. Government, as an entire State:
Governors, ibid. Royalties. 79.
Government, as a part of the Realm, Spiritual: Archbishop, Bishop,
Archdeacon, 82. Peculiars. 81. Government, as a part of the Realm, Temporal:
Martial Commanders, 83. Martial Forces, ibid.
Orders, Forts, 84. Beacons, Poasts. 85. Civil Magistrates: Judges, 89.
Justices, 88. Vice Admiral, Coroners, Clarke of the market. 87. Corporations,
86. Parliaments. 90. Civil Ministers: Constables, Baylifs, 85. Gaylour. 90.
Limits: Hundreds, Franchises, parishes. 86. Proportions: places to meet,
rates. ibid.



The end of the first Table.

The Table of the second Book.
COrnwall in general. 96. East Hundred. 98 Topographicall.
Plymmouth haven. 98. Rame head. ibid. Causam bay. ibid. S. Nicholas Island. 99.
The bridge. ibid. Mount-Edgecumb. ibid. West Stonehouse. 100. Hamose. ibid.
Milbrook. 101. Insworke. ibid. Antony. 102. Lyner river. ibid. Saltwater pond.
104. Banqueting house. 107. Beggars Island. ibid. Sheuiock. 108. Chrasthole.
ibid. S. Germans. ibid. Cuddenbeake. 109. Seaton. 110. Wotton. ibid. Trematon
Castle. 111. Saltash. 112. Ash torre. 113. Henpoynt. ibid. Cargreene. ibid.
Hengsten. 115. Carybullock. ibid. Lawhitton. ibid. Lanceston. 116.
Historical.
Edgecumb. 99. Richaurd Adams strange childbirth. 103. Carew. ibid.
Lerchdeacon. 102 Agnes Cornish, her strange escape from drowning. 107. Danney.
108. S. Germans Priory. ibid. Kekewitch. 109. S. Germans chauncel. ibid.
Moyle. ibid. Smith. 110. Langdon ibid. Fleets from Plymmouth haven. 114. Carack
burned. 113. Trematon besieged. ibid. Bond. 111. Greinuile. ibid. Porter. 112.
Wadham. ibid. Grisling understanding speech by sight. 113. A charitable dog.
ibid. Arundel. ibid. Rouse. ibid. Treuice. 114. Harris. 116. Corington. 117.
Wrey. ibid. Trelawny. ibid.
Stratton Hundred. 117. Topographicall.
Straton town. 117. Bude. 118. S. Mary Wike. 119.
Historical.
Chamond. 118. Arscot. ibid. Rempthorne. ibid. Thomasin Bonauenture. 119
Lesnewith Hundred. 120. Topographicall.
Bottreaux Castle. ibid. Tintogel. ibid. Dosmery poole. 122. Camelford. ibid.
Historical.
John Northampton 121. Earl Richard of Cornwall. ibid. King Arthur ibid.
Bousening. 123.
Trigge Hundred. ibid. Topographicall.
Bodmyn. 123. Scarlets well. 126. Temple. 127.
Historical.
Perkin Warbeck. 124. Childrens forehalsening. ibid. Sir Anthony Kingston.
ibid. Halgauer Court. 126. Carnsew. 127. Roscarrock. ibid.
West Hundred. 127. Topographicall.
East and West Loo. ibid. S. Georges Island. 128. Liskerd. ibid. S. Neot. 129.
S. Kaines well. ibid. Polpera. 131. Fining house. 130. Hall walk. 132.
Historical.
Beuill. 130. John Size, a strange eater. ibid. Murth. 131. Wideslade. ibid.
Lower. 132. Kendall. ibid. Glyn. ibid. Mohun. ibid. Earl of Deuons faggot. 133.

Powder Hundred. 134. Topographicall.
Foy haven and town. 134. Trewardreth. 136. Lostwithiel. 137. Restormel
Castle. ibid. Roche. 138. The tide well spring. ibid. Hainborough. ibid. S.
Probus. 140. Lanhadron. ibid. Grampond. ibid. Dudman. 141. Roseland. ibid.
Tregny. ibid. Truro. ibid. S. Mawes Castle. 142.
Historical.
Treffry. 134. Nicholas of Foy. 135. Treasure non troue. 136. A grave found.
137. Gallants of Foy. 135. Rashleigh. 136. Bone, deaf and dumb. 139. Hill.
140. Tremaine. ibid. Bodrugan. 141. Treuanion. ibid. Lostwithiel custom. 137.
Pider Hundred. 143. Topographicall.
Padstowe. 143. Wade bridge. ibid. Nine sisters. ibid. Castellan Denis. ibid.
S. Colombs. 144. Peran in Sabulo. 148. Bors neeuas. ibid. S. Agnes Hill. ibid.
New kay. ibid.
Historical.
Prideaux. 143. Cosowarth. 144. Trerice. 145. Trenance. 148. Tredenick. 149.
Nants well halsening. 144.
Kerier Hundred. 149.
Topographicall.
Falmouth. 149. Pendenis. ibid. Perin. 150. Hailford haven. 150.
Ha(...)erd(...)s. 151. Mainamber. ibid. Helston. 152. Lo poole* ibid. Meneag.
ibid.
Historical.
Trefuses. 150. Parker. ibid. Killigrew. ibid. Carclew. 151. Penrose. 152.
Erify. ibid. Saintabyn. ibid. Militon. ibid. Godolphin. 153.


Penwith Hundred. Topographicall.
S. Ies. 154. The Cave. ibid. S. Michaels mount. ibid. Mounts bay. 156.
Pensants. ibid. Trebegean. 159. S. Buriens. ibid. Lands end. ibid.
Historical.
Nants. 154. Pomeray. 154. Vere. 155. Pensants burning. 156. Chiuerton. 159.

FINIS.

