AN EXAMINATION Of those things wherein the Author of the late Appeal holds
the Doctrines of the Pelagians and Arminians, to be the Doctrines of the Church
of England.

Written by GEORGE CARLETON Dr. of Divinity, and Bishop of Chichester.

JOHN 10.2.4.5. He that enters in by the door is the Shepherd of the Sheep
-- -- and the Sheep follow him; for they know his voice, and a stranger they
will not follow, but will flee from him, for they know not the voice of
Strangers.

LONDON, Printed for William Turner. 1626.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, CHARLES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF
GREAT Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign,
SVch Princes as are raised by God for some great and good service, are many
times incubred with great troubles, that they may be tried. Of this your Mtie
has had experience. For besides the great perils out of which God has
delivered you, and brought you home in safety to the joy of all your faithful
subjects: two other great dangers have assailed your kingdom of late, the
Plague and the Pelagian heresy, the one destroying bodies, the other souls.
This latter has been creeping in corners heretofore, but of late has come in
more public show, then ever before, and dedicated to your Mtie, in a book
entitled An Appeal to Caesar, wherein the Author has with confidence
delivered the doctrines of the Pelagians and Arminians for the doctrines of the
Church of England. By this our dangers grow great and come near us. When the
Church is in danger, to who^ may we fly unto for help next under God, but
only to your Mtie, whom God has set a nursing father of his Church here. Of
necessity these things must be brought to your Maties knowledge, whose godly
care is, that this Church which has thus long prospered and flourished, by the
blessing of the Almighty, and the favor of godly and gracious princes, may not
loose that honor under so good and gracious a king, which it has held under
your noble predecessors. I will not say, defend me gladio, but defend the truth
and faith, whereof God has made you the Defender, and God, who only is able,
will not fail to defend you. I end with that prophetical promise, which I
beseech the God of heaven to make good to your Mtie. No weapons that are made
against thee shall prosper, Esa 54.17.
and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall
condemn: this is the heritage of the Lords servants, and their righteousness
is of me, says the Lord.

Your Mties most humble servant and Chaplain, GEO. CICESTRIENSIS.

THE CONTENTS. (...) Or Recapitulation of the chief passages in this Book.
CHAPTER. 1. AN Introduction to the whole work ensuing. Page 1. CHAP. 2. An
Introduction for the better understanding of the Controversy following. Page
4. CHAP. 3. An Examination of the respective pretended decree of
Predestination. Page 7. CHAP. 4. A prevention of such answers as may be made
against that which has been delivered in the former Chapter. Page 31. CHAP.
5. Of perseverance in Grace, and falling away from Grace. Page 40. CHAP. 6.
That perseverance to the end is a gift of God, given to true believers, flowing
from Gods purpose and Predestination. Page 43. CHAP. 7. Saint Augustines
dostrine in the matter of the perseverance of the Saints of God. Page 50. CHAP.
8. The dostrine of Saint Ambrose, and others of the Ancients touching
perseverance. page 59. CHAP. 9. An examination of the Arminians definition of
Grace. page 65. CHAP. 10.11.12. and 13. A view of some particular escapes in
the Appeal. page 70. and seqq.
AN ANSWER TO THE Author of the Appeal.
CHAPTER. 1.
THE Author of the Appeal has troubled the Church of England with strange
Doctrines in two things especially: First, in the Doctrine of Predestination he
attempteth to bring in a decree Respective, which he takes for granted to be
the Doctrine of our Church: But this will never be granted by us, nor proved
by him. Secondly, he takes it likewise for granted, that the Doctrine of our
Church is, that a man may fall away from grace totally and finally: If his
meaning be that such as are called and justified according to Gods purpose may
so fall away, this was never a Doctrine of the Church of England. If his
meaning be that others may fall away, which are not called and justified
according to Gods purpose, then has he troubled the Church with an idle
Discourse to no purpose: For in this he has no Adversary. For it is necessary
in the beginning to agree upon the state of the question. St. Augustine sets
it in these terms: They that are called and justified according to Gods
purpose, cannot fall away. Now against this question proposed in these terms,
the Author of the Appeal disputes: For page 37. scorning and rejecting this
Doctrine, he writes against his informers as he calls them, thus. It is
your own Doctrine, God has appointed them to grace and glory, God according
to his purpose has called and justified them, therefore it is certain that
they must and shall be saved infallibly.

In the matter of Predestination I have ever bin fearful to meddle; it is one
of the greatest and deepest of Gods Mysteries: We are with reverence to wonder,
and with Faith and Humility to follow that which God in his Scriptures has
revealed in this point, and there to stay. But it has been the unbridled
humor of some to be still prying into Gods secrets, and to run rashly and
irreuerently into these Mysteries. These things were never so irreuerently
handled by any, as they have been of late by the Arminians. The Author of the
Appeal, does complain of some who (...) do conclude upon Gods secrets. I
would to God, he had been as careful to avoid that fault in himself,
Tostat. in Genes. cap. 19.
as he was to reprove it in others: Tostatus Abulensis has a remarkable
speech. In nulla materia periculosius erratur quam in hac de praedestinatione:
Eligerem enim magis contra totius fidei veritatem perverse sentire, and in hac
non errare, quam in omnibus recte iudicanao in hac sola deuiare. The speech is
strange, but he intended to show, that error is more dangerous in this
point, then in all other: His reason is, Quia ex nulla speculatiua cognitione
tantu^ finis noster statuitur, and operationes diriguntur: And again:
Scientiae de praedestinatione specialiori modo, quam omnes aliae, a Deo est; ex
hac enim perditio vel saluatio nostra exordium sumit: Therefore his advise is,
that men should be very sparing in the handling of such a Mystery: which
advise I am also desirous to follow: yet here I am drawn into it against my
will. For when such men as seem to have little reverence to so high a Mystery,
run rashly and boldly into it, and as it may seem without great praemeditation
of the matter, which they should have thought on, conceiving things contrary to
that, which we have received from the Scripture, I may not be silent: For that
were, as much as in me is, to betray the Truth. Yet my care shall be to say no
more herein, then I shall be drawn necessarily to speak for the Truth; and
to remove that which has been erroneously presumed by others: For then is a
man bound to maintain the Truth, when it is oppugned.

It troubled me not a little, I confess, that I am to deal with a Minister
of the Church of England; one that has been mine ancient Acquaintance, of
whom I had greater and better hopes: But in Gods Cause all respects of
Friendship and Acquaintance, yea if it were of blood and kindred, must give
place to the Truth. Leuy said to his Father and to his Mother, I have not
seen him, neither knew he his Brethren, nor knew his Children: For they
observed thy Word, and kept thy Commandment: Deuteronomy. 33.9. And this is the way
to do him good: For I am not out of hope of reclaiming of him, seeing he has
promised, that if the evidence be clear against him, or if he be convicted
per testes idoneos to have erred, he will recall it. The Scriptures, the ancient
Fathers, and the Doctrine of the Church of England are testes idonei. I shall
deal freely and plainly. For the ordering of the whole: First after a brief
Introduction set down for the better understanding of the controversy, I will
examine his extrauagant opinions concerning the respective decree of
Predestination, and after of falling away from Grace. Last of all, some
particulers in his Book.

This I do not undertake upon any confidence that I conceive in my self. I
know many in our Church more worthy and able then my self, and I thank God
for them: But as heretofore I have had experience of Gods mercy, and found
that the love of the truth has in other things enabled me to defend the Truth,
and helped me to know the Truth, so I rest upon the same help: I seek Gods
Truth, which will not fail them that seek and love it. And if any man of
greater confidence in his wit and learning, will enter upon the Defense of the
Appeal (for I have heard the whisperings) I shall be willing to spend the
rest of mine old days in this, for they cannot be spent in a better service.

CHAP. 2. An Introduction for the better understanding of the Controversy
following.
THE Church England was reformed by the help of our learned and Reverend
Bishops, in the days of King Edward the sixth, and in the beginning of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth. They who then gave that form of reformation to our
Church, held consent in Doctrine with Peter Martyr, and Martin Bucer, being by
authority appointed Readers in the two Universities; and with other then
living, whom they judged to be of best learning and soundness in the reformed
Churches. And of the Ancients especially with St. Augustine. And were careful
to hold this Unity amongst themselves, and with the reformed Churches. For that
these worthy Bishops who were in the first reformation, had this respect unto
P. Martyr, and M. Bucer, it is apparent, both because the Doctrine of our
Church does not differ from the Doctrine that these taught, and because that
worthy Archbishop Cranmer caused our Leiturgy to be Translated into Latin, and
craved the consent and judgment of M. Bucer, who gave a full consent thereto,
as it appears in his works Inter opera Anglicana. And P. Martyr being
likewise requested, writes in His epistles touching that matter, his judgment
and consent of the government and discipline of our Church.

This uniformity of Doctrine was held in our Church without disturbance, as
long as those worthy Bishops lived, who were employed in the reformation.

For albeit the Puritans disquieted our Church about their conceived
Discipline, yet they never moved any quarrel against the Doctrine of our
Church, which is well to be observed. For if they had embraced any Doctrine
which the Church of England denied, they would assuredly have quarrelled about
that as well, as they did about the Discipline. But it was then the open
confession both of the Bishops and of the Puritanes, that both parts embraced a
mutual consent in Doctrine, only the difference was in matter of
inconformity: Then hitherto there was no Puritan Doctrine known.

The first disturbers of this uniformity in doctrine were Barret and Baro in
Cambridge, and after them Thomson. Barret and Baro began this breach in the
time of that most reverend Prelate Archbishop Whitgift.

Notwithstanding that these had attempted to disturb the Doctrine of our
Church, yet was the uniformity of Doctrine still maintained.

For when our Church was disquieted by Barret and Baro, the Bishops that then
were in our Church, examined the new Doctrine of these men, and utterly
disliked and rejected it: And in the point of Predestination confirmed that
which they understood to be the Doctrine of the Church of England against
Barret and Baro, who oppugned that doctrine.

This was fully declared by both the Archbishops, Whitgift of Canterbury, and
Hutton of York, with the other Bishops and learned men of both Provinces, who
repressed Barret and Baro, refuted their doctrine, and justified the contrary,
as appears by that Book, which both the Archbishops then compiled.

The same Doctrine which the Bishops then maintained, was at diverse times
after approved, as in the Conference at Hampton Court, as will be hereafter
confirmed. And again it was confirmed in Ireland, in the Articles of Religion,
in the time of our late Sovereign, Articulo 38.

The Author of the Appeal pleads against the Articles of Lambeth, and
justifies the Doctrine of Barret, Baro and Thomson, auerring the same to be
the Doctrine of the Church of England.

This he does not by naming of those men, whose names he knew would bring no
honor to this cause: but by laying down and justifying their doctrines, and
suggesting that they who maintained the doctrines contained in the Articles of
Lambeth, are Caluinists and Puritans: So that those Reverend Archbishops,
Whitgift and Hutton, with the Bishops of our Church, who then lived, are in his
judgment to be rejected as Puritans.

The question is whether of these two positions we must now receive for the
doctrines of our Church: that which Barret, Baro and Thomson would have brought
in, which doctrines were then refuted and rejected by our Church: Or that
Doctrine which the Bishops of our Church maintained against these men, which
Doctrine has been since upon diverse occasions approved? If there were no
more to be said, I dare put it to the Issue before any indifferent Judges.

CHAP. 3. An examination of the respective pretended decree of Predestination.
THe Author of the Appeal, undertaking to maintain the Doctrine of the Church
of England, refuteth that which hitherto has been taken for the Doctrine of
our Church; and maintains the doctrine of the Pelagians, striving to make
that to be understood the Doctrine of our Church. A bold attempt, whether he
does it through ignorance, or open malice to trouble the Church with these
doctrines, which have troubled so many Churches: that himself knows best.
But that this he does, it is apparent, by that which he has written, and will
be made more apparent by that which must now be said in the necessary defense
of the truth, and of the doctrines of our Church.

The poisoned doctrines of the Pelagians were never well known before Saint
Augustine discovered that danger. The sum is to pull down the power of God,
and to set up the power of Man. This they attempted to do by defacing the grace
of God. And because that could not be done, without controlling the Doctrine of
Predestination, this they have likewise attempted. Predestination is fashioned
into a new mould by these men, who have made it not to depend upon God, but
upon Man: That God himself and his high and holy purpose and will must depend
upon somewhat in man, must expect man's Free will and merits. by this means
they saw that grace might easily be defaced. So that the Question is, whether
that the fountain of grace be in God, or in Man: For they take it from Gods
good will and purpose, and place it in man's merits. This is the wisdom of the
Pelagians: which the Author of the Appeal seems to embrace, and, as well as
he can, persuades others to do so: For first he laboreth to corrupt the
doctrine of Predestination, and then to deface the doctrine of Grace: First
against the doctrine of Predestination he has brought nothing, but the old
and worn objections of the Pelagians: Finding no other he was glad to take
them, that he might seem to say somewhat against Predestination. Which
objections albeit Saint Augustine and others of the ancient Fathers have
answered, and refuted long ago; yet that thing moves not this man: somewhat
must be said to deceive the simple, that will be deceived. First I will examine
one sentence of his Book, by which we may understand his meaning in the point
of Predestination: The sentence is this. Page 58. speaking of the 17 Article,
he says.

In all which passage there is not one word, syllable, or apex touching your
absolute, necessary, determined, irrespectiue, irresistible (in other places he
adds Fatal necessitating) Decree of God, to call, save and glorify Saint
Peter, for instance, infallibly, without any consideration had or regard to his
Faith, Obedience, Repentance; and to condemn Judas as necessarily without any
respect had at all to his sin: This (says he) is the private fancy of some
particular men.

The Author of the Appeal does often charge some men with a Doctrine, which no
man did ever maintain. For I say, he is not able to prove, that any have
maintained the Doctrine of predestination, in those terms which he
proposes. Indeed Pelagius and his Followers, and amongst them this Author,
have made these objections against the Doctrine of Predestination: We use not
th^se terms we reject them, we need them not, we find them not in
Scripture, we have enough in Gods Word to maintain this Doctrine. Touching
that which he says of Judas, that some should teach, that by the decree of
God, Judas should be condemned, without any respect to his sin; I suppose it
will be hard for him to find any that teaches so in those terms. Calvin I
suppose is the man he means: But Calvin in many places says the contrary,
and confesses that wicked men are damned justly for their sins: that Gods
mercy appears in them that are saved, and his justice in other. He says
indeed of the reprobate: Principium ruinae and damnationis esse in eo, quod
sunt a Deo derelicti: which this Author will also confess, because he can say
nothing against it.

But to open this point a little further. It must be confessed that whilst
some have strayed too far on the left hand, touching the respective decree,
that God for respects in men has predestined them: Others in zeal to
correct this error, have gone somewhat too far on the right hand; teaching
that Predestination is a separation between men and men, as they were found
even in the Mass of mankind vncorrupt, before the Creation, and the fall of
Man. It is true that this Counsel of God, was before the Creation and Fall.
But here we seek upon what ground first presupposed, this counsel of God
proceeded. Saint Augustine was clear in this, that Gods purpose of
Predestination presupposed the fall of Mankind, and the corrupt mass of
mankind in sin. And verily this opinion has such firm grounds of
Scripture, that (so far as I can judge) are unanswerable: For the Apostle
teaches that Predestination and Election are in Christ. Ephesians. 1.4. As he has
chosen us in Christ, before the foundations of the World: and v. 5. Who has
predestinate us to be adopted through Jesus Christ in himself: And verse 11.
In whom we were chosen when we were Predestinate. Now if Predestination be in
Christ, it must be acknowledged that this counsel of God had respect to the
corrupt mass of mankind: For the benefit that we have in Christ appeared not
in the state of innocence. Some have answered that the Angels had that benefit
of their standing in Christ. To this I say, granting that the Angels had that
blessing from Christ: yet this is a thing without doubting, and beyond all
contradiction, that the doctrine of Predestination, as the Apostle teaches it,
is not for Angels, but only for men; not for men in the state of innocence, but
for sinful men. In declaring the purpose of Predestination the Lord says, I
will have mercy on whom I will have mercy: Then the counsel of Predestination,
is the counsel whereby God shows mercy where he will: But mercy does
presuppose misery, and a sinful estate in man: Again the purpose of God is
conducted to his end by such means as God has set, and the Apostle has
opened: that is, by Predestination, Vocation and Justification to
glorification, that is to the intended end. But vocation and justification
cannot be understood of angels, but of men: and not of men with out sin in the
estate of innocence, but of sinful men. For sinners are called to repentance:
and sinners they must be that are justified from their sins. None are called to
repentance and justified from sin, but sinners. And it is also certain that
none are thus called and justified, but only they that are predestined:
Therefore Predestination does not look upon the mass of mankind vncorrupt and
innocent, but upon the mass corrupted. These things are set in such evidences
of the Scriptures, that for my part I know not what can be said to impeach
them. Upon these grounds we must confess, that both Predestination and
reprobation do respect that sinful and corrupted mass of mankind.

But between Predestination and reprobation, amongst many other, this is one
difference, that all men for sin have deserved reprobation, but no man could
deserve mercy to be delivered by predestination: Romans 3.23. For there is no
difference, for all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God. Then in
the sinful estate of corruption all are found once a like, and all deprived of
the glory of God. And what is this to be deprived of the glory of God, but to
deserve reprobation? So he says, Romans 11.30. God has shut up all in
Unbelief: So that all that are received to mercy by Predestination, Vocation,
Justification, are taken out of the corrupted state of mankind, the rest are
left in their sins. These we call men reprobate, that are left in their
sins; and in the end justly condemned for sin. But why some are left in their
sins, other delivered from their sins by Predestination, Vocation,
Justification, of this no cause can be given but the will of God.

But says our Author in that Article there is neither word syllable, or apex
to prove, etc. Yes sir, there is somewhat, For in that Article Predestination
is said to be The everlasting and constant purpose of God. It is said in the
Article, that They that are predestined, are called according to Gods
purpose: This is enough to prove all which they intend, and to overthrow your
new Doctrine, that men are called in consideration of their Faith, Obedience
and Repentance. The Article says moreover, That they are justified freely. If
freely, then without consideration of any thing foreseen in man. Thus whilst
in curiosity you were seeking your apices, you stumbled and are fallen into a
dangerous pit, out of which God deliver you. I will do the best service I can
to make you see these dangers.

Your common Objection against them, that teach predestination to depend only
upon Gods will, is this. You say, They bring in a decree absolute, necessary,
irrespectiue, irresistible, determined, fatal, necessitating. These Objections
you borrowed from the Arminians, they had them from the Pelagians. But you say
that You have read nothing of the Arminians. It seems that you are an
excellent Scholar, that can learn your lesson so perfectly without
instructors. If they who use these Objections take them from the Pelagians,
then you see that the Doctrine which the Pelagians oppugned, is the same which
you oppugn.

St. Augustine had much controversy with the Pelagians. Pelagius taught that
Grace is given to men in respect of their merits. St. Augustine refuses this
error of Pelagius, for which he was condemned for an Heretic in three Synodes.
Gratia Dei datur secundum merita nostra. This was the position which the
Pelagians maintained, and which St. Augustine refuted. St. Augustine refers
the matter, to Gods will and purpose only. But this Pelagius denied, and said,
that grace depends not upon Gods will only: He denied not the will of God,
but said that Gods will had respect to merits foreseen. In this sense he
says, Gratia Dei datur secundum merita nostra. And in this sense the purpose
of God was held by the Pelagians to be respective, as respecting somewhat
foreseen in men predestined. Pelagius himself said it respected merits:
others said, that it respects faith foreseen: others devised the respect of
works foreseen, which is all one with Pelagius his merits foreseen. The
Arminians have added the respect of humility foreseen.

Hence arise two opinions about Predestination. The one the Doctrine of the
Church taught by St. Augustine, and Prosper, by St. Hierom, St. Ambrose, St.
Gregory, St. Bernard, and the rest that herein followed St. Augustine: The
other is the opinion of the Pelagians who oppugned this Doctrine.

If the question be proposed, why God receives one to mercy and not an other?
why this man, and not that? to this question all the Orthodoxe that have taught
in the Church after St. Augustine answer, that of this taking one to mercy,
and leaving an other, no reason can be given but only the will of God. The
Pelagians and Arminians say, that Gods will herein is directed by somewhat
foreseen in men Predestined. Now that Predestination depends only upon
Gods will without respect to any thing foreseen in men, is as I said, the
received Doctrine of St. Augustine, and of the Church following: For before St.
Augustine, this thing came not in question, as himself in many places
confesses. The same is the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches. And this has
hitherto been received the Doctrine of the Church of England. I will add also,
the same is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, as Bellarmine delivers it.
Bellar. lib. 2. de great. and lib. arb. cap. 16.
For he concludes thus, Restat igitur vt huius discretionis causa sit voluntas
Dei, quae vnum liberat quia ei placet, alterum non liberat quia non placet.
Wherein he follows the Doctrine of St. Augustine and the rest.

Of these two opinions, the Author of the Appeal has made choice of that
which Pelagius held against the Church, and maintayneth it by the arguments
which the Pelagians have used. For thus they objected against the Doctrine of
St. Augustine, that he brought in a decree, absolute, irrespectiue,
irresistible, determined, fatal, necessitating, and these be our Authors
Objections.

It must be confessed it is a wrong to lay to men's charge Doctrines in other
terms then themselves do teach. These terms are not used by them, whom this
man charge: We do not deal so with the Papists, or any other: For my part I
mislike these terms: But if by this word decree there be nothing intended,
but the purpose of Gods election, I will not wrangle for words: Only I think
that we may speak most warrantably in the words of the Scripture: For the
holy Scripture has furnished us with words sufficient. We find it there
called the will of God, and (...) the purpose of God, and (...) the Good
Pleasure of God. These words suffice to sober minds to express this Doctrine.

Then he charge us to teach that this decree is absolute. Because the
Pelagians and their Followers infer an absolute decree, they should declare
what they mean by this word absolute. If this be the meaning of the word, that
Gods purpose of Predestination depends upon the only will of God, and not
upon any thing foreseen in men Predestined, which God respected in
Predestinating: then I affirm that this is the ancient and Catholic Doctrine
of the Church, and the contrary is the Doctrine of the Pelagians. If this
Author would speak for the Pelagians against the received Doctrine of the
Church, then must he declare unto us what thing did move the will of God. And
by this means he will teach us a thing which no man ever could speak to, to
know the cause of Gods will. Dicat qui potest. I think he knows as little
in this matter as other men. And yet he is bound to instruct us in this
Mystery. For he that says, the will of God depends upon something, is
bound to show what that thing is upon which the will of God depends: But if
it be independing and respecting nothing but it self, why then is it not
absolute? And why then does he with the Pelagians cast this against Gods
purpose of Predestination, that it is absolute?

The next accusation is that this decree is necessary: Can any man give us a
reason, why the purpose of God should not be necessary? Our Author writes thus,
Page 10. The will of God is the necessity of things, say your Masters out of
Saint Augustine misunderstood: He that charge others with misunderstanding,
should declare the true understanding, that they that misunderstand, may be
informed. He does not this, but we must all be supposed to misunderstand this
thing in the understanding whereof he will not help us.

There must be some cause of the necessity of those things that are necessary:
What cause can this be? It must either be the will of God, or some other thing.
The ancient Writers of the Church make it the will of God. If you can find any
other cause, you must declare it. The will of God may truly be said to be the
necessity of things, because it is the prime, high and necessary cause of
things. If you grant not this, then you must point out unto us some superior
cause: which because you cannot do, you must be contented with us to confess,
that the will of God is not only necessary, but the necessity of things.

Bradwardin; that worthy Archbishop of Canterbury, cites out of Anselme, Brad.
lib. 1. cap. 10.
his Ancient in the same See, diverse things to this purpose: Anselm. 1. cur
homo Deus: Si vis omnium quae fecit and passus est seire necessitatem, scito
omnia ex necessitate fuisse, quia ipse voluit. And again, Omnis necessitas aut
impossibilitas Dei subiacet voluntati: illius autem voluntas nulli subditur
necessitati, aut impossibilitati. Nihil enim est necessarium aut impossible,
nisi quia ipse ita voluit. And in this respect S. Augustine speaking of this
powerful will of God, whereby he does what he will and suffers even evil
things, that he may turn the^ unto good, Enchir. cap. 96.
says, Nisi hoc credamus, periclitatur ipsum confessionis nostrae initium;
quia in Deum patrem omnipotentem credere confitemur: Neque enim ob aliud
veraciter omnipotens diceretur, nisi quia quicquid vult potest, nec voluntate
cuiuspiam creaturae voluntatis omnipotentis impeditur effectus. And again,
Voluntas Dei omnium quae sunt ipsa est causa. De Genes. contra Man. lib. 1. c.
2.
Si enim habet causam voluntas Dei, est aliquid quod antecedit voluntatem Dei,
quod nefas est credere. Upon these grounds the ancients conclude, that the will
of God is necessary, that it is the cause of all necessity in things, and
therefore may well be said to be the necessity of things.

But why is this cast upon us as an error, that we teach that the purpose of
Gods predestination is necessary. Will this man say that it is not necessary,
but co^tingent? one of the two he must say. If necessary, then is he idle that
obiecteth this against predestination. If contingent, then he runs blindfold
into an high blasphemy, pronouncing the purpose of God to be co^tingent. It may
be amongst the late Arminians, who never care what they speak or write, some
may be found to utter such absurd blasphemies. But these men we leave to their
own humors, which forsake understanding, godliness and piety. The next
accusation of this Author and the Pelagians is, Lib. 1 contra Pelag and Calest.
cap. 6.
that this decree is irrespectiue. S. Augustine as before I related, affirms
in diverse places, that Pelagius taught that the grace of God is given in
respect of merits. In this respect Pelagius and his followers held the decree
respective, as this man does. He must tell us what Gods purpose respected, and
he must give us a reason why he was so bold, as to make this a doctrine of the
Church of England, which was first invented, and always afterward maintained
by the Pelagians against the Church.

The next accusation is, that the purpose of Predestination is irresistible.
This objection is much used by the Arminians taken from the Pelagians. This was
first devised to set forth the glorious power of Freewill. If the question be
moved, whether Freewill may resist grace? it is apparent naturally in the
unregenerate, it may resist, it does daily resist: according to that Act. 7 51.
You have always resisted the holy Ghost. But if the question be moved of them
that are called according to Gods purpose, whether they resist the grace of
their calling (in which the Apostle teaches that there is the exceeding
greatness of Gods power: and what is that but Gods omnipotent power? Ephesians. 1.18.
The eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that you may know what the
riches of the glory of his inheritance of the Saints, and what is the exceeding
greatness of his power to usward, who believe according to the working of his
mighty power. Now we believe by the power of his calling, therefore this
exceeding greatness of his power is in his calling: For the first grace that is
wrought in us is faith, which is wroght according to this power of his
calling.) If therefore the question be of them that are thus called according to
his purpose, and according to this great power; then, removing the humor of
contention, the truth will easily appear. For this power of God does so order
the will of man, that the will of man cannot but be willing to receive this
grace, when it is thus ordered, framed and wrought upon; for the power of
working is in grace: grace works, conuerteth nature and heals it: nature is
wrought upon, converted, and healed. So the question is whether nature in this
case does resist the omnipotent power of God? Lib. de corrept. and gratiae ca.
14.
S. Augustine says, Deo volenti salvum facere hominem, nullum hominis resistit
arbitrium. But then says our Author, it must follow that the will of God is
irresistible.

I demand from whence he had this objection to dart against Gods
Predestination? it is apparent that it comes out of the same quiver out of
which he had all the rest. I must entreat him to observe this objection more
exactly: and by this he may find against whom he disputes: for the blessed
Apostle lays down these things in order: First the doctrine, which this
Author oppugneth; secondly, this man's objection against that doctrine: and
lastly, the answer to this objection. To. 9.18. etc. The doctrine in this
Apostolical conclusion: Therefore he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and
whom he will, he hardens. The objection in these words: Then thou will say
unto me, why does he yet complain, who has resisted his will? The answer in
these words: Nay, but o man who art thou that reply against God? shall the
thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Our Author
must consider against whom he makes this objection, when he accuses Gods
purpose of predestination to be a decree irresistible: For the Apostle has met
with this objection: Who has resisted his will? Lib. de Praedest. Sanct. cap. 6.
The Apostle says not that me^ may resist this will of God, but he says that
this manner of obiecting is replying against God. S. Augustine observed thus
much. Voluntati eius quis resistit? Numquid responsum est ab Apostolo; o homo
falsum est quod dixisti? non; sed responsum est o homo quis tu es, qui
responsas Deo? And that which the blessed Apostle has taught in this one
objection we may by good ground and warrant from the Apostle judge accordingly
in all the rest of these accusations and objections, which are here brought
against the doctrine of Predestination, that all these objections are nothing
else but replying against God. How could such a desperate conceit come into the
heart of one that professes the Gospel in our Church? What this Author may
think hereof I know not: but verily I should tremble, if I were found in such
a case, in plain terms, opposite to the Apostle; obiecting that which the
Apostle has so severely repressed.

An other accusation against Predestination is, that it is determined. I think
the man did not use much premeditation in these things, but took them upon the
credit of some that he trusted. For that the purpose of God should be
determined, did ever any man doubt? The very word propositum, the purpose of
God does prove a determination. And he may read that neither Herod, nor
Pontius Pilate, nor the Gentiles, nor the Jews, in showing their greatest
malice against Christ and his Apostles, and in exercising their greatest
cruelty, Act. 4.28.
could go no further, nor do no other thing, then whatsoever the hand and
Counsel of God had determined before to be done: This was never doubted, no
not amongst the Pelagians, that the Counsel and purpose of God is determined.
Only the question is what does Determine Gods purpose? whether his own will
or man's Freewill? If this man's purpose be to give this to man's free will, then
he comes home to the Pelagians. If he confess this determinating power to be
in Gods will; then to what end does he object this, as a thing absurd, that the
decree is determined?

The last accusation is, that they who hold the Doctrine of Predestination
bring in Fatal necessity. As he uses this objection, so the Pelagians used
it, and urged it against St. Augustine. St. Augustine complains of such
accusers of his Doctrine: Lib. de done perseu. Cap. 12.
Pelagiani nobis obijciunt, quod fato tribuamus Dei gratiam: Ipsi potius Dei
gratiam fato in parvulis tribuunt, qui dicunt fatum esse, vbi meritum non est.
And in an other place: Nec sub nomine gratiae fatum asserimus. Ad Bonif. lib. ^
cap. 5.
-- Si autem quibusdam omnipotentis Dei voluntatem placet fati nomine
nuncup^ri, profanas quidem verborum nouitates euitamus, sed de verbis
concendere nolumus.

This Author takes his pleasure to use the same Objections against
Predestination, which the Pelagians used. But the indignity is, that whilst he
is thus wrangling against our Church with the Pelagians, he must be supposed
(forsooth!) to maintain the Doctrines of our Church; as if our Church had need
of such maintayners. Who did accuse the Doctrine of our Church? For now he has
done with the Gagger, he is turned to others who charge not the Doctrine of our
Church. The Doctrine of our Church has been, and will be maintained by other
men and means: We need no Pelagians to help us herein. This man has more
dishonored our Church; and slandred our Doctrines, then ever did any member of
our Church: This is plain dealing without malice. For if he were not plainly
told of his errors, how could he see them and redress them? as our hope is he
will. But to proceed, St. Augustine sporteth himself with the folly of such,
as charge him to induce fatal necessity under the name of grace. Potest enim
hinc similiter stultus fati assertorem Apostolum putare vel dicere. Ibid.
Quum enim propterea nobis calumniantur, dicentes nos gratiae nomine fatum
asserere, quia non secundum merita nostra dari dicimus gratiam Dei: proculdubio
confitentur quod ipsi secundum merita nostra gratiam dari dicant. And verily
we can say no less to this man, then Augustine said to the Pelagians, that in
making these objections, he does secretly confess that the grace of God is
given according to our merits. For there was never any that used these
objections against Predestination, but held withal that conclusion, that the
grace of God is given in respect of merits, and therefore this man sticks not
at this, but comes home roundly to the same conclusion: as presently it shall
appear.

Aduers. calumniat. August. c. 1
Prosper found himself troubled with the same accusations, in that other part,
of dereliction. Obijciunt (says he) quod ex praedestinatione Dei, velut
fatali necessitate homines in peceata compulsi cogantur ad mortem. Prosper
shortly returns this. Quisquis ex predestinatione Dei velut fatali
necessitate homines in peccata compulsos cogi dicit in mortem, non est
Catholicus.

That Doctrine of the respective decree, which the Author of the Appeal
nourishes as a Viper in his bosom, does indeed respect that conclusion of
Pelagius; that Grace is given according to merits. For if grace be given
according to some respects or virtues found or foreseen in men predestined,
then it must follow as Pelagius taught, that Grace is given according to
merits: for in the end they will close: For this respective decree respects
somewhat in the predestined: What is that, but some virtue? and what is that
but some merit? Thus he has brought his respective decree to a fair issue,
to join hands with Pelagius. Perhaps he may seek an evasion, that by a
respective decree he means not the decree of Predestination, but of
Reprobation, which is in respect of sin. I could wish that he had been so
advised, as to have reserved this refuge for himself: But he speaks of the
decree of Predestination, scornfully calling it our New Doctrine, and sometimes
our decree, sometimes the Private fancy of some particular men.

But himself puts this matter out of doubt, in those words of his before
cited, on the 17. Article. There is not (says he) any word, syllable or apex
touching your absolute, necessary, determined, irresistible, irrespectiue
decree of God, to call, save and glorify St. Peter, for instance, without any
consideration had or regard to his Faith, Obedience and Repentance, and to
condemn Judas as necessarily, without any respect had to his sin: This,
(says he) is the private fancy of some particular men.

Now are we come to the instance of St. Peter: For to all other things I have
spoken. In this instance he has somewhat roundly opened himself: This takes
away that refuge, which he might have reserved, to say, that by his respective
decree, he might have meant reprobation: That men that are forsaken are justly
thrown into condemnation in respect of their sins.

For to speak somewhat to this particular. If that be granted which we have
proved before by evident Scriptures, that both Predestination and Reprobation
respect the corrupt mass of mankind: This I say being granted: It follows
that Gods justice did find a just cause to condemn all men, because all have
sinned and are deprived of the glory of God: But God in his mercy receives
some to favor: Of this we can find no other cause but the mere and only
Will of God: God in his justice condemns other; of this beside the Will of God
we find a cause, to be the sin of those men that are condemned. Here rises
a question, whether there be an absolute decree of Reprobation? If we
understand an absolute decree to be such as depends upon the only will of
God, without respect to any other thing; then I confess I cannot understand
any such absolute decree in this: For those things are here understood
absolute, which depend upon no other cause, but only the will of God. Now here
besides the will of God, we find sin to be a just cause to condemn, and to
reprobate. For this ground we take with Saint Augustine that Predestination
and Reprobation do respect sin. And if besides the will of God, sin also be
a just cause of condemnation, then, I understand not how any decree herein can
be absolute. But if it should be further questioned whether dereliction of some
in their sin be absolute? so far as my knowledge reaches, I must yield that
this may be called absolute; because in this there is no other cause but only
the will of God: For seeing that all men are once found sinners, there may be a
cause given why all men may justly deserve condemnation: The cause is apparent,
that is, sin; but why any man should be saved no cause appears, but only
the will of God, and his mercy to them whom he is well pleased to deliver from
sin. Upon these grounds St. Augustine says, Obdurationis meritum inuenio,
misericordiae meritum non inuenio. But some object thus: If sin be the cause
of condemnation and reprobation, then must all men be condemned and reprobate;
for all have sinned. Whereby they would infer, that sin is no cause of
condemnation and reprobation, but only the will of God: but I deny the
consequence; for the true consequence should be this. If sin be the cause of
condemnation and reprobation, then no man can find any cause in himself, why
he should not be condemned and reprobate. For I suppose that the greatest
Saints that ever lived, could find no cause in themselves why they might not
be condemned and reprobate: I say in themselves: for if they look out of
themselves upon Christ, then they find an high and only cause, the will of God
in Christ, in whom he has fully revealed his will and mercy to save sinners.
For Christ was sent to save them that were lost, and to call sinners to
repentance.

Some may happily say, that these questions and quirkes might be forborne, and
not spoken of at all. I answer, I am of the same mind: But when the enemies
of the Truth, Pelagians and Arminians are ever busy in stirring these
questions, these busy heads impose a necessity upon them that love the Truth
to maintain it, and by plain writing to walk safely and plainly even
through the midst of Maeandrian crookes and windings of the Adversaries. The
Church (says Tertullian) has a rule, and this rule has no question, but such
as Heresies bring in.

Thus we see there may be a cause of condemnation besides the only will of
God, but concurring with Gods will; but of salvation no cause can be given but
the only will of God. Yet our Author here undertakes to find a cause besides
the only will of God, though concurring with Gods will: This he does in the
instance of St. Peter: For he says that There is neither word, apex, nor
syllable to prove that God did call, save, and glorify St. Peter without any
consideration had or regard to his faith, obedience and repentance.

The better to understand this, we must clear some things which he has
confounded. They that deal not plainly confound many things of purpose, which
must be distinguished that the matter may be cleared. He says that Saint
Peter was not called, saved and glorified without consideration, or regard of
his Faith, Obedience and Repentance. This proposition in Truth contains three
propositions in it: And neither can he conclude three propositions at once,
neither can any man answer to three at once. Therefore we must distinctly
separate these three propositions, that his confusion may appear, and that a
clear answer may be framed unto the point in question.

Of these three propositions, the first is, St. Peter was not called without
respect to his Faith, Obedience, and Repentance. The second is, Saint Peter was
not saved without respect to his Faith, Obedience and Repentance. The third is,
Saint Peter was not glorified without respect to his Faith, Obedience, and
Repentance. These three things are not all of one kind. The two latter
propositions we grant; the reason is, because salvation and glorification are
in the nature of a reward. Now the Scripture witnesses, that God will reward
every man according to his Works: And therefore Saint Peter's faith, obedience
and repentance shall-bee rewarded with salvation, and glorification: And
salvation and glory may be said to respect these goods works that went before.

But the first of these propositions is, that Saint Peter was not called
without respect to his faith, obedience and repentance. Here we close with him.
I must charge with Pelagianisme in that very point of this Heresy, for which
Pelagius was condemned for an Heretic in the Synod of Palestina, as St.
Augustine often relates. In which Synod the Doctrines of Pelagius were
condemned, as they were also in many other Synodes: Concilio Carthag. 7.
Concilio Meleuitano: Concilio Arausica: And also condemned by the decrees of
the Popes that then were, and the Emperors.

He says that St. Peter was not called without respect and consideration had
to his faith, obedience and repentance: In denying this proposition he
affirms the contradictory: That St. Peter was called in consideration and
respect of his faith, obedience, and repentance. This is the same which the
Church has condemned in Pelagius. For Pelagius taught no otherwise but thus,
Gratia Dei datur secundum merita nostra: In respect or consideration of our
merits. This man teaches that St. Peter was called in consideration or respect
of his faith, obedience and repentance. This is evidently Secundum merita, as
Pelagius understood merita. For those things which Pelagius and the Ancient
Fathers, who wrote in his time, called merita, were no other then these which
this man calls faith, obedience, and repentance; Pelagius knew no greater
merits then these. If St. Peter was called in consideration and respect of
these things, then was that grace of his calling given in consideration and
respect of these things, and so Gratia datur secundum merita: Secundum merita,
whether we Translate, according to merits, or in respect and consideration of
merits, all is one. I stand not upon any curiosity of Words, there is no
difference in the matter. It follows necessarily, that this man teaches that
Doctrine, for which Pelagius was condemned for an Heretic: let him shift this
as he can.

Here the Author of the Appeal may consider what wrong he has done to the
Church of England; in obtruding, for Doctrines of our Church, the old rotten
Heresies of Pelagius. And let him also consider who does now (...) trouble and
betray the Church of England. We teach with the Scriptures, and with the most
Orthodoxe Ancient Church, that St. Peter was predestined and called unto
faith, obedience, and repentance. This man runs with the Arminians into the
depth of Pelagius his poisoned Doctrine. And was it not likely that he should
run this way, who being a private man without authority, takes upon him to
impose Doctrines to our Church, to change those that are received, and in place
thereof to revive the Pelagian errors, to bear men in hand that these are the
Doctrines of our Church; to scorn men that have been reverenced for their
Learning, and will be reverenced in the ages following; such as Archbishop
Whitgift, Archbishop Hutton, Doctor Rainolds, Doctor Whittakers, and the other
Bishops and Learned men, that joined with them, whom this man accounts
sometimes Caluinists and Puritanes, sometimes that They were reputed learned,
as if himself had that in Truth, which they did but seem to have: Who being a
Priest of the Church of England, accuses Bishops, his superiors, to be
Puritanes; as all must be to him, who yield not to his foolish and erroneous
Doctrines: who in commendation of his own style calls it an Exasperating
style: Who in this exasperating humor cares not, and professes that he
cares not, what any think that please not this his humor: Who with such
height of disdain sleighteth the diligence and industry of his brethren
gathered at the Synod at Dort. Yet they who were employed in that service,
were authorized by his Majesty's Commission, directed by his Instructions, and
when they returned rendering to his Majesty an account of their employment, were
most graciously approved of by his Majesty, only they cannot get the
approbation of this Gentleman. It were good for him to consider these
exasperating humors; they proceed from Pride: Here is neither Humility nor
Charity to be found, and therefore not the Spirit of God. And what good can he
do in Gods Church, that comes in Pride, and a spirit exasperating without
charity and humility? Sir, I write not this in choler, nor in malice to your
person: but I have told you plainly the censures of those men, with whom I
have spoken in this matter; both of the higher sort in the Church, who are your
Fathers; and of inferior rank, who are your Brethren. I omit the censure of
the Layty. I speak of them that are able to judge of your spirit. And because
they have observed these things in you, I thought the best service I could do
you, was plainly to let you know these things that you may amend them.

It were good and necessary for you to understand how you have bin fetched over
by those cosening companions the Arminians, who have plunged you in with
themselves in the depthes of Pelagius. Their end in devising that respective
decree is, that Predestination should not be ruled by Gods will, and eternal
purpose, but by man's free will. And this is the end which you must embrace,
unless God turn your heart, and warn you to avoid these dangerous and
pernicious doctrines, wherein you draw the yoke with Pelagius. God make you to
see your error, and to make some satisfaction to the Church of England, whom
you have so much wronged.

We say in this, as Saint Augustine said in the like. Promisit Deus, quae ipse
facturus erat, non quod homines facturi erant, De praedest. sanct. cap. 10.
quum Abrahae promiserat in semine eius fidem gentium: quia etsi faciunt
homines bona, ipse tamen facit vt faciant, quae praecepit. Alioquin vt Dei
promissa compleantur, non in Deised in hominum est potestate. That which Saint
Augustine says here of the promise of God, is in like manner true in the
purpose of Gods Predestination. For God does predestinate that which he
himself will do, not that which men would do. For albeit men according to
Gods purpose are called, do believe, are justified, walk in obedience and
repentance, and other good works, yet it is God that works that which he
predestinateth, and works according to his own exceeding great power faith
in men, charity, and hope, and makes them walk in obedience: otherwise, that
Predestination should have his effect, it should not be in Gods power, but in
man's power. Now if it be Gods calling that gave to Saint Peter faith, obedience
and repentance, how then does this man say that Saint Peter was called in
consideration and respect of his faith, obedience and repentance? This is true
that God gives these graces: Now he says, that Saint Peter was called in
respect of these graces: what can follow but this, that God gives these
graces to Saint Peter, in respect of these graces. Which were to run giddy in a
circle.

CHAP. 4. A prevention of such answers, as may be made against this that has
been said.
SOme happily may object, that this is not so plain Pelagianisme: For Pelagius
taught that there was somewhat in Nature, that did cause God to confer grace,
but this man seems to say, that God gives grace not in respect of nature,
but in respect of grace: For faith, obedience and repentance are graces: and if
in these respects God give grace, then it is grace that draws grace, and not
nature.

This objection, as it may proceed from the Pelagians; is of no validity: For
Saint Augustine does witness that Pelagius himself did confess grace in
words, but in truth denied it. I will not think that this man does so collude
in this word Grace: But because he follows the same course which the
Pelagians held, whether wittingly, or as I rather think, unwittingly: We may
not suffer the grace of God, whether wittingly, or unwittingly to be defaced.
The Pelagians when they speak of faith, and charity, and such like graces,
give but smooth words to color their meaning, and to deceive the simple: Some
of them do more plainly open themselves. John Scotus who was the greatest
Pelagian that lived in his time (for it was he that brought in the doctrine of
Meritum ex congruo, which some of the most learned Papists, amongst who^ we may
account Franciscus Victoria, do confess to be the true doctrine of Pelagius.
Victoria speaking of that doctrine, De merito ex congruo; says plainly, Haec
erat bona pars erroris Pelagianorum, R^^ect. 1. de potest.
si ego quicquam intelligo. Scotus then teaches that faith, charity and
repentance may be had ex puris naturalibus. Concerning faith he says: Zib. 3.
did. 23* Quest. 1.
Fide acquisita ex puris naturalibus potest homo assentiri omnibus reuelatis a
Deo. And a little after. Hoc igitur tenendum est tanquam certum, quod
reuelatorum in Scripturis est nobis acquisita fides generata ex auditu and
actionibus nostris, qua eis firmiter adhaeremus. And speaking of faith infused,
he says. De fide infusa quomodo sit ponenda in nobis, hoc non est ita certum
an fit, vel quomodo sit ponenda in nobis. After the same manner he speaks of
charity. Lib. 3. Distinct. 27. Quaest. 1. and did. 28. Now seeing these be
their positions, it is not much material what words they give; when speaking
of grace, they intend to give all to nature in the end. The subtle Doctor saw
that they who bring in the respective decree, affirming that God in conferring
of grace respects somewhat in man, must needs yield that the thing respected
in man, must be nature, nothing but nature. And therefore Scotus, being a
Famous Pelagian, grants that roundly, because he perceived that the
respective decree cannot stand without this ground.

But others are or seem to be offended at such gross proceedings, and
therefore they would temper this mortar, and daube it up thus: That it is not
Nature but Grace that God respects. Thus they would in words mollify the
horror of the other opinion, and yet they retain the same absurdities. The
Author of the Appeal is running on with these; but God knows which way he
is going, for he himself knows not. He says, God called Saint Peter in
respect of his Faith, Obedience, and Repentance, and then he thinks, that
he has well said, in laying this respect not upon nature, but upon grace,
as he thinks: But he does not understand the absurdity that this draws
after it. For if God called Saint Peter in respect of his Faith, Obedience, and
Repentance; then were Saint Peter's Faith, Obedience and Repentance some cause
why he was called; and therefore before his calling. But in true Divinity
Saint Peter's Faith, Obedience and Repentance, are the effects of his calling,
not the cause; and come after the calling, but go not before it. It may well
be said that God justified him in respect of his calling, and God called him
in respect of Predestination, and God predestined him, Secundum propositum,
in respect of his purpose: For so Saint Augustine reasons, that for the grace
of Predestination, we have the grace of Gods calling, that is grace for grace:
And for the grace of his Calling, we have the grace of Justification, that is,
grace for grace. But the Ancients that reasoned thus, always observed that the
Consequent grace might be given for and in respect of the Precedent grace: but
that the Precedent grace might be given for or in respect of a Subsequent
grace, there was never Orthodoxe Writer that taught so: Yet the Pelagians and
after them the Arminians, seeming willing to avoid the danger of that Rock,
at which so many have made Shipwreck, that grace is given for some respects in
nature, to avoid this absurdity, they labor to mollify the matter, but run
still upon the same danger: They change the manner of speaking, and say that a
Precedent grace is given in respect of subsequent grace, as this man says,
When he holds, that the grace of calling is given in respect of Faith and
Obedience, which are subsequent graces.

But this is nothing else, but for the love to hold with Pelagius, to say
something; Wherein they forsake Understanding, Reason, Divinity, and
Philosophy, and speak Non sense. For that I call Nonsense, that is against
Divinity, Philosophy and Common reason, as this is, which makes a subsequent
grace to be the cause of a Precedent grace; to set the effect before the
cause. And because in this manner of speech, there is nothing to satisfy the
understanding of a Divine or a Philosopher, it is apparent, that this was
devised for none other end, but only to dazzle the ignorant with Words without
Understanding: But a matter of this nature will not be carried with empty
Words.

And in so high a point of Divinity, to speak without express Scriptures, is
a sign that they presume too much, either upon their own wit, or upon other
men's weakness. Their end is, that if thus much might be obtained, that God
gives the precedent grace for or in respect of the consequent, they might with
more ease afterward fall into the plain terms of Pelagius. For howsoever
they may palliate the matter with strange Words not understood, yet the Truth
is, as Scotus confesses, that if Gods grace be given in respect of any thing
in man, that can be nothing but nature. For in man, before he be called, there
is nothing but nature.

And therefore the plain Doctrine of Scotus, that a man may merit grace Ex
puris naturalibus, stands more probable in reason, then this opinion which
deuiseth a subsequent grace to be the cause of a precedent grace: For as this
is against Divinity, so the reason of the Natural man refuses it.

The graces of God are ordered, and they that would disorder them, trouble the
whole frame of our salvation. For God has set the order: From Gods purpose
proceeds Predestination, from Predestination Calling, from Calling Faith and
Justification, from Justification Obedience and all fruitful works. The
first grace that we apprehend is Calling: And therefore before we are called,
there is nothing in us but nature. If then God respect any thing in man, in
respect whereof he calls him, that can be nothing but nature and free will.

This the Pelagians taught plainly; but some following the Pelagians are
ashamed to utter themselves so plainly: They strive to handle the matter more
finely, but whilst they seek finenesse, they have lost their wits. Surely
they have forsaken reason and understanding. Now it is not possible that from
nature and freewill any grace should rise: because the Lord says, John 3.6.
That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that which is borne of the
spirit is spirit. Here be two principles set, one in Nature, the other in
Grace: The principle of grace and all good motions is the Spirit: the highest
principle of nature and natural motions is the Flesh: Therefore no grace of
the spirit can proceed from the flesh; but nature and free will is nothing but
flesh.

Again, the order, wherein the Blessed Apostle sets down these things, the
purpose of God, predestination, calling, justification, glorification, does
prove that a precedent grace may be some cause to draw after it a subsequent
grace; but for a subsequent grace to be any manner of cause to draw a
precedent, this is impossible. The blessed Apostle says: All things fall out
for the best to them that love God, to them that are called according to his
purpose.

Before I come to that which I intend, I would here first remove a scruple,
which the Pelagians stumble at, in those words of the Apostle: To them that
love God: From these words they infer, that God respects them that love
him; But the Apostle expounds himself in the words following: To them that
are called according to his purpose: For these are they who love God; who
understand that Gods love prevented them and called them according to his
purpose. He that has the knowledge of this love of God, must needs love God
again: but this love begins by Gods preventing love, as St. John says:
Herein is love, not that we loved God, 1 John 4.10.
but that he loved us, and sent his son to be a reconciliation for our sins.
There be some that begin to love, but fall away and continue not to the end. Of
these Saint Bede, in his Expositions collected out of Saint Augustine, Bed. in
Romans 8.
expounds this place thus. Apostolus cum dixisset: scimus quoniam
diligentibus deum omnia cooperantur in bonum, sciens non nullos diligere Deum,
and in eo bono vsque in finem non permanere; mox addidit; his qui secundum
propositum vocati sunt: Hi enim, in eo quod diligunt Deum, permanent vsque in
finem. Thus much to remove this scruple, that no occasion be left to the
Pelagians. Now to proceed. The Apostle says, All things fall out to the best,
to them that are called according to Gods purpose: Then Gods calling is
according to his purpose. If any man should say, that Gods purpose were
according to his calling; should he not inuert the Words of the Apostle, and
falsify his Doctrine? Then his calling is according to his purpose; but his
purpose may not be said to be according to his calling: because the calling
depends upon his purpose, but not the purpose upon the calling. The purpose
is a cause of the calling, but not the calling a cause of the purpose. Now if
we proceed from Vocation to Justification, we shall understand the same. For
as Vocation depends upon Gods purpose of Predestination, so does our
Justification depend upon Vocation; and as this was to pervert the Apostles
words, and to falsify his doctrine, as before I said, to say that Gods purpose
was according to his calling: So if a man should say, as this Author says,
that Gods calling is according to faith, obedience and repentance; this man
should in like sort pervert the Apostle his words, and falsify his doctrine.
For justification, faith, obedience and repentance, depend upon Gods calling,
but his calling depends not upon them: they are given according to his
calling; but his calling is not according to them: And therefore they are given
for and in considetation of his calling; but that Gods calling should be for
and in consideration, or regard of these things, which Gods calling draws
with it, and after it; is a thing absurd not only in the judgments of
Orthodoxe Writers, but even in the judgment of Pelagius himself, and of
Scotus, and of the most learned of that side; who thought it more probable and
agreeing more with reason to say that the grace of God is given according to
merits, then to devise this strange fancy, that a subsequent grace should be
the cause of a precedent grace. This I say is not a private fancy of some
particular men, but such a thing as was never uttered by any sober or learned
writer. And because heresy goes not without absurdities, it may be called
either the Arminian heresy, or the Arminian absurdity. For besides Arminians,
no man writes thus.

I may not omit to observe in the last place, that our Authors words cross the
words of the 17. Article; which he professes to maintain. For the article
speaking of Predestination says. They which be endued with such an excellent
benefit of God, be called according to Gods purpose, by his spirit working in
due season, they thorough grace obey their calling, they are justified freely,
they be made the sons of God by adoption, they be made like the image of his
only begotten son Jesus Christ, they walk religiously in good works, and
at length by Gods mercy they attain to everlasting felicity.

These words of the Article contain the true Apostolical doctrine: For the
calling of God is here said to be according to Gods purpose; and justification,
obedience, walking religiously in good works, these things are declared in the
Article to follow the calling as effects thereof.

But this man, the new maintainer of the articles and of the doctrines of our
Church, peruerteth this Apostolical doctrine contained in the article. For he
says, that the calling is according to faith, obedience and repentance:
contrary to that which is contained in the article. The article makes faith,
obedience, and repentance, to be the effects of calling, and to follow it, and
proves consequently that the calling is not according to these effects, or in
consideration and regard of these effects, but that these effects are according
to the calling, and in consideration and regard of the calling: By this man's
doctrine, the calling depends upon faith, obedience and repentance: by the
doctrine contained in the article, these things depend upon the calling.

Thus has he clean perverted and crossed the doctrine contained in the
article, and yet this man is thought fit to expound the Articles, and to
declare the Doctrines of our Church. Thus much concerning his errors touching
the matter of Predestination.

CHAP. 5. Of perseverance in Grace, and falling away from Grace.
THe question as Saint Augustine proposes it, is of perseverance of the Saints
in grace: As this man and the Pelagians propose it, of falling away from grace,
or of the Apostasy of the Saints. The question is the same though diversely
proposed: so that if we prove the perseverance of Saints to the end, then is
that doctrine overthrown, that brings in the Apostasy of Saints.

If this question be moved thus: Whether a man may fall away from grace: The
proposition, by reason of the ambiguous acception and use of this word grace,
may be both true and false. For this is true; a man may fall from grace both
totally and finally. And this likewise true, a man cannot fall from grace
neither totally nor finally. They who have a purpose to deceive take the
generality of terms; and in vniuersalibus latet dolits. Therefore before any
true proof can be made in any disputation, the word that is ambiguous must be
declared distinctly. In the Scriptures, and in those Writers that ground
themselves upon the Scriptures, there is observed a double acceptance and use
of this word grace. I am not ignorant that many distinctions are used of this
word, and that Bellarmine confounds himself, and his reader with the
multitude of distinctions of this word; but distinctions were invented to
clear the point in question, and not to confound things. I rest therefore for
our present purpose upon one distinction, which is plain and grounded in the
Scriptures, and this it is. Grace is taken diversely according to diverse
Fountaynes from which it flows: For albeit all grace proceeds from God, yet
it proceeds diverse ways from him; one way is, by the way of his eternal
purpose: Thus proceeds the grace of Predestination, and the grace of Gods
calling according to his purpose, and the grace of justification according to
his calling, and consequently, according to his purpose. This grace is primary,
constant and unchangeable: This is a free gift proceeding from the purpose of
God, and is wrought in us by Gods calling. Romans 11.29.
Of this the Apostle speaks. The gifts and calling of God are without
repentance. This is one way by which grace proceeds from God: Another way it
proceeds from God, and comes to us by the way of Preaching. Matthew 13.
This way diverse graces come in diverse measures, as hte Lord has taught in the
Parable of the Sower. The Sower sowed the same Seed; but some fell by the Way
side, and the Fowls came and devoured it up; by this are they described, who
hear the word of the Kingdom and understand it not: Then comes the wicked
one and catches away that which was sown in their hearts. Other seed fell
upon stony ground, where it had not much earth; and forthwith it sprang up,
because it had not deepness of earth, and when the Sun was up it was
scorched, and because it had not root, it withered away. By this are they
signified, who hear the word and anon with joy receive it: Yet he has no
root in himself, but dureth but for a time; for when tribulation or
persecution arises because of the word, by and by he is offended. Thirdly,
some fell amongst Thorns, and the Thorns sprang up and choked it. By this he
is noted, that hears the word, and the care of this world and the
deceitfulness of riches choke the Word, and he becomes unfruitful. Last
is he that received seed into good ground, he that hears the Word and
Understands it, which also bears fruit, and brings forth some an
hundredth, some sixty, some thirty.

I have stayed the longer upon the full recital of this Parable, because it
proves fully that which I intend to draw out of it. First, it is evident
hereby, that by the Preaching of the Word diverse graces are given. And the
very Preaching of the Word freely to some Nations, is a great grace. In this
respect it is called Verbum gratiae, Acts 20.23. This grace, though so great,
yet may be lost: For many Nations have had it, that have lost it: Let them that
have it make much of it whilst they have it: For who knows how soon it may
be taken away? And this is one way to loose it, to suffer the Doctrines of our
Church to be corrupted. It is the Spirit of God that sets up Preaching, and
directs Preachers to one place, and not to another: As we read, Acts 16.6, 7,
9. This then is one great grace to have the Word of God Preached to a people;
but when it is Preached some understand it not: others receive a greater
measure of grace, when they receive the word with joy. Yet this dureth not in
some, but is lost both totally and finally: Others are choked with the
deceitfulness of the World, and these fall away also: Others are fruitful
and bring forth plentifully. All receive the seed in some measure; and
thereby receive grace in some measure: but three sorts loose it altogether, the
fourth only receives it fruitfully. Then all these that receive some grace
and loose it again, are said, and truly said, to fall away from grace. These
graces that are thus lost are true graces: And men may proceed far in the
practice of these graces, some farther then other, and yet may loose them. Then
they that speak in general words, that a man may fall away from grace, speak
at random. The question is Whether they that are according to Gods purpose
Predestined, called and justified, may loose these graces of their
Predestination, Calling, and Justification. This the Orthodoxe Church has
always denied. The Arminians who admit no other Predestination but
conditional, affirm it; and none but Pelagians and Arminians. The Arminians
hold that men may be often predestined, often elected; and in the end may
loose all. They labor to prove that all grace may be utterly lost, that the
power of free will may be received, which then may show her power more fully,
when there is no grace.

CHAP. 6. That perseverance to the end is a gift of God given to true
believers, flowing from Gods purpose and predestination.
FIrst I will produce reasons to prove, that perseverance in grace to the end
is a gift of God given to true believers; and then answer his Objections. To
prove this, the Scripture is evident to such as read it with a single heart
and unblemished eyes. First of all, those words of the Apostle prove it. We
know that all things work together for the best to them that love God, even to
them that are called according to his purpose. For those whom he knew before,
he Predestined to be made like to the Image of his Son, that he might be
the first borne amongst many brethren. Moreover whom he Predestined, them
also he called, and whom he called, them also he justified, and whom he
justified, them also he glorified. The purpose of God is the Spring and
Fountain from which all these graces are derived: The end is glorification:
From the beginning to the end are Predestination, Calling and Justification.
The chain is so linked together, that it cannot be separated. He that God
purposed to Predestinate, must needs be Predestined; he that is
Predestined must needs be called; he that is so called must be justified;
he that is so justified must be glorified: But no man can come to glory
without the grace of perseverance to the end: Therefore where God gives these
graces, such a calling, such a justification, he gives with all perseverance,
without which no man can come to this end.

The same is proved from the words of St. John. Whosoever is borne of God
sins not, 1 John 3.9.
for his seed abides in him, and he cannot sin because he is borne of God.
When St. John says, that a man, once regenerate by the Spirit of God, sins
not, and cannot sin: We may not understand this of sins of infirmity: For
of such St. John himself says: If we say we have no sins, 1 John 1.8.
we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us, if we confess our sins
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. How then do these two agree
together? First, we are all sinners and we must confess our sins: Secondly,
a regenerate man sins not, yea cannot sin. These contentions of the
Arminian faction, has taught us to reconcile these places. For a man that is
borne of God may sin; that is, fall into the sins of infirmity; but yet he
can not sin, that is, he cannot fall back into the service and dominion of
sin totally and finally. The thing which I especially observe out of these
words is, that there is somewhat which is here called the Seed of God
abiding in him that is once borne of God: And this declares a regeneration
which proceeds from the purpose of God, and from that powerful calling which
is according to his purpose. What this seed is, let any man declare: This is
certain, all is not gone, all is not cut off by intercision; here is a Seed
of God abiding: Call it what you will, all is one to our purpose: For whether
this Seed of God be Faith, or the Word of God, or the Grace of Gods calling
according to his purpose, or the Spirit, or any of these, or all these: It
proves our purpose, that all is not gone, all is not fallen away: If all be
not fallen away, then this man in whom it abides can not fall totally. If Faith
be the Seed, the Word of God sows it, the calling of God rayseth it, and
makes it fruitful, 1 Peter 2.3.
the Spirit of God quickneth it: To this purpose St. Peter says: Being borne
again, not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God
which lives and abides for ever: The Word of God is said to live and abide
for ever, because of the effect which it works, as some learned Interpreters
have observed: For here he speaks of the new birth, as Saint John did, of the
incorruptible seed (as Saint John called it) the seed of God abiding, of the
word of God whereby the grace of regeneration is given, which lives and
abides for ever. This agrees with that which St. John said of the same new
birth.

Saint Peter confirms this further in those words: Blessed be God the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Peter 1.3.
which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again to a lively
hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance
immortal, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you,
which are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. It is hard to
devise more express words to deliver this Doctrine of perseverance, then Saint
Peter uses here: For he speaks of them that are regenerate according to the
purpose of God, when he says, According to his abundant mercy he has
begotten us again; he says, to a lively hope, and inheritance; the
inheritance is said to be reserved for us in Heaven, and we are kept by the
Power of God through faith unto it. If we be kept for it by Gods power through
faith, and it be kept for us; then he that denies perseverance unto the end,
must break this power of God by which we are preserved to the end: For what is
this power of God that keeps us through faith to the end, but the grace of
perseverance to the end?

The same Doctrine of perseverance, or of our preservation by Gods power to the
end, is confirmed unto us from the nature of Faith and of Charity. Of Faith the
Lord says: John 5.24.
He that hears my Word and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death to life.
The Lord speaks of Faith, but this faith is not an Historical faith, nor a
Temporary faith; for these do fade and have not this promise which this faith
has of which the Lord speaks: Then what faith can this be, but such a
justifying faith that proceeds from the Calling of God according to his
purpose? The Lord says, that He who thus believes has everlasting Life: If
he has everlasting Life, then what Arminian or Pelagian can take this from
him, that Christ says he has? Some may answer, that when it is said, he
has it, it may be understood, he shall have it. I stand not much upon that,
for whether the Lord, that gives everlasting life, say he has it, or he
shall have, it is not much differing: But yet I cannot but observe the Lords
speech, who knew best how to speak. When he says He has it, his meaning is,
that everlasting life shall be as firmly and truly given to him, as if he
had it already in possession, which yet he holds but in hope.

Now which of all the Pelagians dare say, that perhaps he may have it, and
perhaps he may loose it, or that he may fall totally or finally from it, when
the Lord says he has it? He could have said, he shall have it, but why
does he say He has it, but only to teach us that true believers have such a
grace here, which can not be lost? The Lord says also of the man that has
this grace, that He shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death
to Life. What is that, is passed? but to make this Doctrine sure, that there is
such a grace given here which cannot be lost. Let the Pelagians wrangle as
they will about loss of grace: this may be sufficient for us to rest in the
plain and evident words of our Lord and Master Christ Jesus. Thus we see that
a true and lively faith carries with it undoubtedly the grace of perseverance
unto the end.

The same may be confirmed from Charity. I mean such charity whereby such a
faith works, as was last described. Of charity the Apostle has these words.
Charity never fails; though prophecy fail, and tongues shall cease, and
knowledge shall vanish away.

If any man shall here say, that this is spoken in respect of other graces that
in this life we have use of, and go no farther. I answer, I admit that to be
so: but here the Apostle says, Charity never fails. It is true, he numbreth
up some graces that do fail. I grant that in the life to come we shall not
have use of these graces that fail. The Apostle observes a difference here
between graces and graces: some for the use of this life only, others for
this life and for that to come. Of these that are both for this life, and for
that to come, he names charity which fails never. If charity never fail,
no not in the life to come; then it must follow that it never fails in this
life: because if it should fail in this life, then it must needs fail in the
life to come. For no man shall have the glorious comfort of charity in that
life, who loses altogether the gracious comfort of it in this life. Charity
never fails; therefore it abides for ever: therefore there are graces
wherein true believers persevere to the end. Hereupon some Schoolmen say that
perseverance is a grace, not really differing from charity: It is true that
charity waxes cold, and the charity of many may fail, and the faith of many
may fail: but the purpose of God cannot fail: and those graces that proceed
from Gods purpose never fail them to whom they are so given.

But because these controversies were not known in the Church, before the time
of S. Augustine, and by him more diligently handled then by any other. For the
ancient Fathers that lived before him, could not speak to these things which
are brought in by Pelagius after they were dead, and therefore could not come
to their knowledge: and indeed spoke somewhat securely as fearing no harm and
not knowing that their words should after their death be perverted by the
Pelagians, which made S. Augustine say, Vobis Pelagianis nondum natis securius
loquebantur Patres Because, I say, before him none could, and after none did so
exactly handle these things, as if he had been raised up* and reserved by God
to do this service to the Church, (as no doubt he was.) I purpose here to ser
down S. Augustines doctrines in this particular, not by way of citing some
sentences, but by a continued tract. I may sometimes upon occasions intermingle
some things, but that shall be in a parenthesis. The whole body of this that
follows is S. Augustines. Which I do the more willingly, because I am well
assured, that the learned Bishops who were in the reformation of our Church, in
the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, did so much honor S. Augustine,
that in the collecting of the Articles and Homilyes, and other things in that
reformation, they had an especial respect unto S. Augustines doctrines.

CHAP. 7. Saint Augustine his doctrine in the matter of perseverance of the
Saints.
Lib. de pradest. Sanctor
FIrst this is true, that God by especial graces has made a difference
between Saints and other men. This is evident by those words. Quis te
discernit? quid habes quod non accepisti? 1. Cor. 4.7.
Who separateth thee? what have thou that thou have not received? This
separation or distinction is not made by natural gifts. For no man can say
that one man is made to differ from another by natural gifts, which are
common to all men: it remains then that this difference is made by especial
graces.

(It is incredible to hear the folly and pride of the Arminians Greuincouius,
one of them, was not afraid to answer these words of the Apostle, quis te
discernit? with these words of his own cracked brain, ego meipsum discerno.
But let S. Augustine proceed.)

This separation whereby one man is made to differ from another, is the
s^parating of some men, and taking them out of the mass of perdition, wherein
others are left. That man is discerned or separated from the condition of other
that is by mercy taken out; which is done by Gods praedestination, calling,
justification. Wherein we s^e and confess the miserable estate of all men, by
that sin which Adam has brought upon all his seed, that is, upon all men.
We see and must confess the mercy of God, in taking some to mercy, and leaving
other: they that are thus taken to mercy are said to be separated or to differ
from other men.

Then this grace of perseuering to the end, is the gift of God in Christ. Lib.
de dono persevere.
Whether any have this grace, as long as he is living here, to us it is
uncertain, as to us it is uncertain who are praedestinated. A man that
believes and lives a godly life, albeit he live but one day, or less, has
this gift rather then one of many years, who but a little before his death
shall depart from the soundness of faith. Now that this grace is given to men,
it is evident by diverse Scriptures. Phil. 1.29.
To you it is given for Christ, that not only you should believe in him, but
also suffer for his sake. The one of these things, belongs to the beginning
of faith, to believe: the other pertains to the end, to suffer. Yet both is
the gift of God, because both are said to be given. Now can any man give a
reason, why perseverance in grace to the end should not be given in Christ, to
that man to whom it is given to suffer for Christ? or to sp^ake more expressly,
to whom it is given to dye for Christ? And if this be given to them that dye
for Christ, who can say that the same grace of p^rseuerance is not given to
such as by sickness, or any other means dye in Christ. It is a more difficult
thing to suffer death for Christ, yet both that which is more difficult, or
less difficult is given by him, to whom it is easy to give both.

Those things that are contained in the promises which God has made to us for
the nourishing and increase of our faith, we may, we must lay hold on: but God
has promised to give us this grace of perseverance unto the end. The Prophet
Jeremy says: Ier. 32.40*
I will put my fear in their hearts, and they shall not depart from me. What
other thing is this, which God promises here, but that this fear shall be
such and so great, which God will give into our hearts, that we may
perseueringly adhere unto God? Now that which God has promised unto us, for
that have we good warrant to pray. And therefore this grace of perseverance, is
such a grace, as believers continually do pray for.

(Saint Augustine has observed out of that Exposition of the Lords prayer made
by S. Cyprian, that almost in every petition we pray for perseverance.)

1. Petition. Hallowed be thy name. We say (says S. Cyprian) hallowed be thy
name. Not that we ask of God, that it may be hallowed by prayers: but because
we desire of him, that his name may be hallowed in nobis, in our selves. But
how is God sanctified by man, whom God himself does sanctify? Yet because he
has said, Be you holy because I am holy; this we ask, this we desire, that
we, who are sanctified in baptism, may persevere in that which we have begun
to be.

2. Petition, Aduentat regnumtuum. Do we here ask any other thing, then that
his kingdom may come to us, which we doubt not shall come to all the Saints?
Then they that are Saints, what other thing do they ask here, but that they
may persevere in that sanctity which is given to them? For otherwise the
kingdom of God shall not come to them, which assuredly comes to none other,
but only to them which persevere unto the end.

3. Petition. Fiat voluntas tua in terra sicut etc. The Saints who do the will
of God, saying, thy will be done, pray that it may be done, when it is already
done in them. Why then do they yet pray that it may be done, but only that
they may persevere in that which they have begun to be?

4. Petition. Give us this day our daily bread. S. Cyprian shows how
perseverance is here also prayed for. We desire (says he) that this bread may
be daily given us, least that we, who are in Christ, and daily receive the
Eucharist, as the food of our souls, may be separated from the body of Christ,
if by any grievous crime, or being excommunicate, we be forbidden to come to
receive this heavenly bread. These things (says S. Augustine) show plainly,
that the Saints by prayer ask perseverance of the Lord, when in this intention
they say, give us this day our daily bread, least they be separate from the
body of Christ, they pray that they may persist in sanctity.

6. Petition. Lead us not into temptation.

When the Saints pray, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
What other thing do they pray for, but that they may persist in holiness? For
if this gift of God be granted us (which no man can deny to be Gods gift,
seeing we are commanded to pray to God for it) this being granted to be the
gift of God, that we be not lead into temptation, it follows, that the Saints
praying for, and receiving this gift, must needs hold perseverance in grace
unto the end: for no man cease to persevere, unless he be drawn away by
temptation. If therefore this which he prays for be granted, that he be not
lead into temptation, then surely by Gods grace he persisteth in that
sanctification which by Gods grace he received. Thus far Saint Augustine out
of Saint Cyprian. And now Saint Augustine in his own course. But in
perseverance it is not as in other graces. We call him chaste, whom we know to
be chaste, whether he persevere, or not persevere in chastity: and the like we
say of other graces of God, that may be had or may be lost. We say he has it,
as long as he has it: but if he loose it, we say then he had it. But in
perseverance it is otherwise: For no man can be said to have had perseverance,
but he that perseuereth to the end: Therefore this is such a grace which many
may have, but he that has it, can never loose it. This grace may be obtained,
but when it is once obtained, it cannot be lost through contumacy. Let any man,
Dicat mihi quisquis auder.
that dare, tell me whether God cannot give that which he commands us to
ask of him? God commands us to ask, that we be not lead into temptation:
then whosoever is heard of God in asking this grace, is preserved from the
temptation of contumacy, by which he might loose perseverance in grace; for he
that is not lead into temptation, departs not from God.

After the fall of Adam, God would have it to pertain only to his grace, that
man should come to him, and likewise to pertain to the same grace, that man
should not depart from him: This grace he has put in him, in whom we have
our inheritance being praedestinated according to his purpose that works all
things. And therefore as he works that we come to him, so he works that
we depart not from him: wherefore it is said in the Psalms. Psalm. 80.17
Let thine hand be upon the man of thy right hand, and upon the son of man,
whom thou have made so strong for thine own self, that we depart not from
thee. Who is this man? Iste non est primus Adam in quo discessimus ab eo, sed
Adam nouissimus, super quem fit manus eius, vt non discedamus ab eo, says
Augustine. For Christus totus, all Christ with his members is for the Church,
which is his body and his fullness. Therefore when the hand of God is upon him,
that we depart not from God, v^rily the work of God comes to us. For this is
the hand of God, forasmuch as by the work of God and his power, it is wrought
so that we are permanent with Christ in God: not as Adam departing from God.
This is the hand of God, not ours, that we depart not from him. This, I say,
is the hand of him that said, I will give my fear in their hearts, that they
depart not from me. But we see that some depart; why does one depart and not
another? why is perseverance to the end given to some, and not to others? To
this what can we say, but that the ways of the Lord are past finding out. Why
is one received to mercy and not another, can any man give a reason but only
Gods will? He has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens. So he gives the grace of perseverance to whom he will, and
denies it from whom he will. Yet in this the faithful must rest, that he
that has the gift of perseverance, is in the number of the praedestinated,
the other is not. 1. Ioh. 2.19.
For Saint John says of such as depart. They went out from us, but they were
not of us; for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us. Quid
est, quaeso, non erant ex nobis? What is the meaning of this, they were not of
us? were not both they that departed, and they that continued, created of God?
both borne of Adam? both called? both renewed in the fountain of regeneration?
All this is true, but yet according to another separation they were not of us.
What is that separation? Gods book is open, we must not turn our eyes from
it: the Scripture cries loud, let us hear it: before the beginning of the
world they had not their part in him; they were not praedestinated according to
his purpose, which works all things. For if thus had they been, then they
should have been of us, and should without doubt have continued with us.

Saint Augustine in his book de correptione et gratia, has diverse things to
this purpose, which because they conclude for perseverance in grace to the end,
I think it not unfit that the reader be made acquainted with his reasons, the
rather to satisfy the Author of the Appeal, that this is no new Puritan
doctrine, as it pleases him to call it. And that he may more fully understand
that this which we teach, is not the private fancy of some particular men, but
the public doctrine of the Church.

Lib. de correp. et gratia
Upon thos^ words; Rogaui pro te Petre ne deficiat fides tua: Saint Augustine
says: What did Christ pray for here, but for his perseverance unto the end?
And again. When he prayed that Saint Peter's faith should not f^ile: what
other thing did he pray for, but that he might have a most free, Liber^ima^,
fortissimam, enuictiss man, perseuerantissimam in fide voluncatem.
a most strong, a most inuict, a most perseuering will in faith to the end? (S.
Augustine knew well that Peter sinned in denying his Master, and yet he did
not doubt to say, that Christ prayed for him, and was heard for S. Peter's
perseverance unto the end. Then it is not every sin that breaks the course
of perseverance, but a falling back into the dominion and service of sin.)
Act. 13. Act. 13.48.
As many as were ordained to everlasting life, believed Who can be ordained to
everlasting life, but by the grace of perseverance? Whosoever are delivered
from damnation by the goodness of Gods grace, there is no doubt but by Gods
providence the Gospel shall be preached to them, and they shall hear and
believe and persevere unto the end in faith that works through love. si
quando exorbitant.
And these if they sometimes go wrong, yet by reproves they amend, and
return again into the way which they left. Their faith which works through
love, surely either fails not at all, or if there be some defect, it is
repaired in them before the end of their life. And that intercurrent iniquity
which breaks in, is blotted; and perseverance is reputed unto the end, vsque
in finem perseuerantia deputatur.

But they who persevere not, but fall away from the Christian faith, and from a
godly conversation, surely these men are not to be accounted in this number,
no not then, when they lived well: they are not separated from that mass of
perdition by Gods praedestination, not called according to his purpose; but
called amongst them of whom it is said, multi vocati, but not of them of whom
it is said, pauci electi. And who will deny that these are elect, when they
believe, and are baptized, and live godly? They may be said to be elect, sed a
nescientibus, by such as know not what they shall be; not by him who knows
that these had not perseverance. For some be called of us the sons of God for
temporary graces which they have received: but unto God they are not such.

Touching those Saints that are praedestinated to the kingdom of God, such an
helping grace is given to them, that perseverance is bestowed upon them, not
only that without it they cannot, Ioh. 15.16
but that with it they cannot but persevere. For he said not only, Without me
ye can do nothing: but he said also; you have not chosen me; but I have chosen
you, and ordained you that you go, and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit
remain. In these words the Lord declares, that he gave them not only
righteousness, but also perseverance therein. For seeing that Christ ordained
them to go and bring forth fruit, and that their fruit should remain, quis
audet dicere, who dare say that peradventure it might not remain? For, the
gifts and calling of God are without repentance: but then vnd^rstand that
calling which they have who are called according to his purpose. These receive
such freedom by this grace, that albeit so long as they live here, they fight
against the concupiscences of sins, and some creep in upon them, for which
they p^ay daily forgive us our trespasses: yet they do not wilfully serve that
sin that is to death, of which S. John says, There is a sin to death, I say
not for it thou should pray. Of thi^ sin, because it is not expressly
declared, many and diverse things may be thought: but I say that this sin to
death, is a falling away even to death, from that faith which works by
charity. Now albeit the Apostle says of all regenerate men living orderly:
Romans 14.4.
Who art thou, that condemnest another man's servant? he stands or falls to
his Lord: yet presently his words following respect the praedestinated. For he
says, He shall be established, for God is able to make him stand: then
assuredly be gives perseverance, that is able to establish them that stand,
that they may stand most perseueringly, or to restore them that fall. For it is
the Lord that raises up the bruised, Psalm. 146. And therefore, he that
rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord. Hence it is that in this place of
misery, where the life of man is a temptation upon earth, virtue is perfected
in infirmity. What virtue? but that he that glories may glory in the Lord. And
for this cause the Lord would not have his Saints to glory in their strength,
no not in their perseverance in good: but to glory in him, which does not only
give them such an help as he gave to the first man, without which they could
not persevere if they would; but in them also he works this that they shall
will. Therefore is both the possibility, and will of perseuering given to them
from the bounty of divine grace. Thus has S. Augustine at full declared
himself in this particular.

CHAP. 8.
I Was willing to let S. Augustine be heard the longer in that cause, wherein
he was most exercised against the Pelagians. The same doctrine as being the
public received doctrine of the Church, has been likewise taught by others.
In Ephesians. 1.
S. Ambrose says, quos deus vocare dicitur, perseuerant in fide, hij sunt quos
elegit ante mundi constitutionem. He makes p^rseuerance a grace that depends
upon Gods calling: he means, as himself expounds it, that calling which
is according to Gods purpose. And he says again in the same place, hoc
placuit deo, cuius consilium retractari non potest. Exhort. ad virgin. 2 Timothy
4, 7, 8.
This he proves also from those words of the Apostle: I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; from henceforth is
laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous
Judge shall give at that day: and not to me only, but to all them also that
love his appearing. Then without perseverance no man can expect glory. And this
grace is given not only to Saint Paul, and such excellent Saints as he was,
but unto all that love the Lords appearing. Prosper. lib. de vocat. gentium. 1.
1 Cor. 1.8.
The same thing is taught by the Author of the book de vocatione gentium, who
cites that place: Who shall confirm you to the end that you may be
blameless in the day of the Lord. And those words; Who shall separate us from
the love of Christ? Romans 8.35.
shall tribuation, or anguish etc. Charitas dei, says he, qua eos diligit,
quos inseparabiles facit, id est, vsque in finem perseuerantes: nam quid aliud
est perseuerare, quam tentatione non vinci? Greg. in 1 Reg. cap. 14. lib. 4.
The same is taught by Saint Gregory Qui non praedestinati sunt, says he,
sieve audiant doctorum verba, sieve non audiant, vocari in dei habitaculum
nequeunt. And again he says: Ab eo qui defecit, venire spiritus dicitur, ire
ad eum qui perseveraturus est: quia alios in tempore deserit, alios assumit,
nec tamen deserit. -- in reliquum dirigitur spiritus, qui a gratia quam
percipit, nunquam discedit. -- quid est ergo qu^d dicitur a die illa, et in
reliquum? nisi quia spiritus gratia sic recipitur, vt in ea electi vsque in
finem perseuerare doceantur? And our venerable Bede, Beda in Romans 8.
upon those words, scimus queniam diligentibus deum omnia cooperantur in bonum,
says thus. Sciens nonnullos diligere deum et in eo bono vsque in finem non
perseuerare, mox addit, his qui serundum propositum vocati sunt: he enim in eo
quod diligunt deum, permanent vsque, in finem: et quid ad tempus inde deuiant,
reuertuntur, et vsque in finem per durant, quod in bono esse coeperaent. Saint
Bernard holds the same course. Bern. de modo been wuendi. sermon. 20.
Salus perseuerantibus promittitur praemium perseuerantibus datur. Non est
bonus, qui bonum facit, sed qui incessabiliter facit. And in another place,
Lib. de pass. dom. cap. 14.
O sol iustitiae, benign Jesus Christ, lucens in tua virtute, reddens temet
ipsum in praemium sempiternum omnibus qui perseuerauerunt in agone certaminis.
Hunc splendorem nemo potest adipisci, nisi qui perseuerauerit vsque in finem.
Abulensis follows the same doctrine for he says speaking of outward calling
by preaching, and of that conversion which stands in external profession.
Tostat. in Mat. 22. q. 6 9.
Dicuntur vocati quicunque per praedicationem conuersi sunt ad fidem, et tamen
non sunt omnes electi, quia non perueniunt omnes ad vitam aeternam. Nam licet
quibusdam det deus gratiam conuersionis, non dat eis gratiam perseuerandi in
fide, vel operibus fidei, et ita pereunt. Eligere autem est dare gratiam istam
perseuerandi et perueniendi. He says; many obtain diverse graces by hearing
the word preached, amongst whom they that are elect receive the grace of
perseuering to the end, but they that are not elect, though they may attain to
many graces, yet they may and do fall away, because this grace of perseuering
to the end is proper and peculiar to the elect.

From the Schoolmen we are to look for no soundness in this point. For it
is a hard thing for them to speak of grace who have it not: Many of them
speak of grace like mere natural men. They wanted neither wit nor learning,
but many of them wanted grace to speak of grace, as the Jesuits for the most
part do at this day. Therefore I pass them over, and come to the time of
Reformation. In which time, if I should produce the sentences of them that have
been most learned and labourious in the reformed Churches, it would be a long
work, and happily give no great satisfaction to the Author of the Appeal, and
others whom I desire to satisfy. For how can he receive satisfaction from the
judgment of late men, that seems to scorn their very names? As for Calvin,
his name and doctrines are made odious, but why, I know not. If he has
written somethings amiss, as who writing so much, has not slipped in many
things? yet a charitable construction would help in many things: And admit he
has some things which cannot be excused; yet, if we consider the ancient
Fathers, how often they have slipped and erred, we might be more moderate in
censuring of others. In the Fathers we take that which they have done well, and
the rest we pardon for that which they have done well. And why may we not do
so with others? And what greater pleasure can a man procure to the enemies of
the truth, then to speak evil and odiously of those men, whose service God
has used, and made them excellent instruments to make the truth known unto
us? Some take it for a sign of such as are looking toward Popery, when they
offer such a service to the Papists, as to speak evil of them, that have
been the greatest enemies to Popery, the greatest propagators of the truth:
but I censure none. Then leaving other Churches, we come home to our own
Church.

We have enough in the articles of Faith and Religion, to confirm the same
truth, which hitherto we have proved. The Author of the Appeal has gone
wrong in two points: First, in the respective decree; which either he has
devised, or taken from the Arminians. Against this, we have heretofore showed
that the 17. Article has set forth the doctrine of Praedestination in a sound
and wholesome manner: that Gods calling follows the purpose of God, and
depends upon it: that faith, obedience, and repentance follow the calling of
God, and depend upon it: but the calling of God does not follow faith,
obedience, and repentance, nor depends upon them. So did the 17. Article
teach against the new devise of this man. This I have observed before.

The second thing wherein this man wandreth, is denying of perseverance, and
scorning it as a Puritan doctrine. I must here again recite the 17. Article:
And I would entreat any man, that has his eyes set right in his head, to read
and consider the words, the order and soundness of them: and th^n let him
judge whether perseverance unto the end be not soundly and roundly set down,
and auerred in the Article. The words are:

Predestination to life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby before the
foundation of the world, he has constantly decreed by his counsel secret to
us, to deliver from curse and damnation those whom he has chosen in Christ
out of mankind, to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation: wherefore
they which be endued with such an excellent benefit of God, be called
according to Gods purpose by his spirit working in ane season. They through
grace obey the calling, they be justified freely, they be made the sons of
God by adoption, they be made like to the image of his only begotten son
Jesus Christ, they walk religiously in good works, and at length by Gods
mercy attain everlasting felicity. Thus far the words of the Article.

Can any man in any words declare perseverance more fully or plainly from the
beginning by the means to the end, then here is done? For what is
perseverance, but as S. Peter says, a preservation or keeping of the Saints by
the power of God to salvation? And how can it be better proved, then to draw it
from the purpose of God, by predestination, by Gods calling, by justification,
by the work of Gods spirit, by adoption, by being fashioned like to the image
of Christ, by walking religiously in good works, and by this means to come to
life everlasting? This is done in the Article: And this is the true doctrine of
perseverance. They who are called according to Gods purpose, and justified and
sanctifi^d, made the sons of God by adoption, walk religiously in good
works and so at last attain to everlasting life, are they who have received
the grace of perseverance to the end: thus does that Article set forth this
doctrine. But our Author says, before they come to this end, they sin: And
what then? Gods calling is powerful indeed, according to his purpose: But it
was not the purpose of God in calling us, to make us Angels, or to set us in
such an estate wherein we should never sin any more; but to teach us humility
he suffers us to strive with sin, and teaches us to fight against sin.
And if in this battle we take a blow, yet he sustaineth our weakness, and
will have us to glory in nothing that is in our selves, but in our infirmities.
And still in his mercy preserves us from falling back from the faith, and
keeps us from presumptuous sins, and from that sin that is unto death.

This perseverance you will say, is with great weakness. It is true, we
cannot glory in our perfections, which are none. The Pelagians and Arminians,
who glory in themselves, in the power of their wills, cannot taste this
doctrine. But we glory in God, that through many and manifold imperfections
and infirmities of ours brings us by this grace unto the end. This work to
bring us through many infirmities to an happy end, is the work of God, which
no power in the world can defeat.

CHAP. 9. An examination of the Arminians definition of grace.
FOr the better understanding of these men that plead against the grace of
God, We must observe that one especial ground of their error is in this, that
they conceive and understand amiss of grace. They take it for another thing
then the Scriptures have declared, and the Church of God from the Scriptures
have taken it to be. And therefore when they define grace, they say it is a
moral persuasion. Arminius himself says, it is lenis suasio: they admit no
power of God here.

And are not these a strange kind of men, that will make unto themselves their
own grounds, and not take their grounds from the Scriptures? If this ground,
which they so blindly beg were true, then were it indeed easy for them to
prove many of their conclusions: that alike or general grace is offered unto
all: that quantum ad Deum pertinet, for so much as is in God, one man receives
as much grace as an other: that the difference is in man's free will, in
accepting or rejecting of grace: that grace may soon be gotten, and soon
lost altogether. But who gave these men authority to make a definition contrary
to that which the holy Scriptures have delivered. These men acknowledge no
other power in the Gospel preached, but only the power of the Minister that
preaches. The Preacher has not power to give faith and repentance, to infuse
grace, but only uses moral persuasions to the people: but together with the
labor of the Preacher the spirit of God works: 1 Cor. 3.9.
And therefore we are called (...) helpers with God in that great work. And
because the spirit of God works with power in opening men's hearts, humbling
them, leading them to an acknowledgement and confession of their sins,
converting their souls, drawing them out of the power of darkness, out of the
power of Satan and sin; which work cannot be done by a gentle persuasion
only, it cannot be done but by the power of God: therefore the Apostle
declaring that grace, which comes to belieuers by the preaching of the
Gospel, Romans 1.16.
calls it the power of God to salvation. And again, 1 Cor. 1.18.
The preaching of the cross is to them that perish foolishness, but unto us
that are saved, it is the power of God. And the Apostle speaking of faith,
which is the first and one of the greatest graces which we receive, 1 Cor. 2.3.
says, your faith stands not in the wisdom of man, but in the power of
God. If our faith which is the first, and the chiefest grace whereby we stand,
be in the power of God, not in the wisdom of man, then it is no moral
persuasion: For moral persuasion reaches no further then man's wisdom. But
this is most perspicuously taught in the Epistle to the Ephesians; Ephesians. 1.18.
where the Apostle says, I cease not to give thanks unto God, making mention
of you in my prayers, -- that the eyes of your understanding may be enlightened,
that you may know what the hope of his calling, and what the riches of his
glorious inheritance is in his Saints; 1^.
and what is the exceeding greatness of his power toward us which believe,
according to the working of his mighty power. Then when we are drawn unto
faith, when we believe, this is done by the power of God, by the exceeding
greatness of his power, by the mighty working of his power. And therefore they
that say, that grace is only a moral persuasion, and quantum ad deum, that
salvation is alike prepared for all: and that the reason why one receives
grace, another receives it not, is only in man's free will: These men and
their vain and weak fancies are clean overthrown, because grace is found to
be in the power of God. For, if quantum ad deum, as they say, it were prepared
alike to all, why then does the Apostle say, that preaching is foolishness to
them that perish, but the power of God to us that are saved? If it be
foolishness unto some, and the power of God to salvation to others, then
verily it is not alike unto all. God is able to make his powerful grace
appear unto them, to whom it is foolishness, but he will not.

Here we may find many things to admire, and to wonder at, and to cry out
with the Apostle, O the depth! But still we find that the power of God is in
his calling, and declared in our faith, which stands not in man's wisdom,
but in the power of God. This does sufficiently prove, that the grace of God
is not as these men affirm, without and against all grounds of Scripture, a
moral persuasion: For it is the power of God, the exceeding greatness, and
the mighty working of his power.

They that would understand this controversy, between the Church of God, and
th^se ungrateful and ungracious men, that oppugn the grace of God, may best
understand it, if they seek out with care and diligence the definition of
grace. It is of the greatest importance to know, and being known, will lead a
man (as by a thread) unto the particulars of this question. We find plainly,
that the love of God, and the power of God is in it: And we may be sure, that
they who deny the power of God to be in grace, can never come to the true
knowledge of it. It is true, that if that definition were once granted, that
grace is nothing but a moral persuasion, then would all those strange
conclusions follow of which I spoke before, and others more mad then they; that
the purpose of Praedestination is a thing uncertain, and of no power: that
Gods purpose of Praedestination must be ruled by man, and not by God.

It is much to be wondered at, that such men should be found in the Church,
professing Christianity, that with such boldness take such a definition as
granted, and with such ignorance draw those conclusions from it.

Let us but stop this principle, and we stop their mouths. For if grace be
the power of God to salvation, if Faith and grace stand not in man's wisdom,
but in the power of God; if we be drawn to believe by the exceeding
greatness of Gods power, by the mighty working of his power; then it
follows, that the grace whereby we are called, whereby we believe, and
repent, and are justified, and in the end saved, is the power of God. It was
his good will and purpose to praedestinate us, but it is his power to execute
that good purpose, to draw sinful men out of the power of darkness, into
the kingdom of light, to work in our hearts a love of obedience by his holy
Spirit. To work this, far surpassed the power al of creatures, and therefore
it is done by the power of God. Upon this ground thus laid, the course of
Arminians is stopped. If they tell us that grace is a gentle persuasion, and
goes no further; We answer, that in grace there is the power of God. If they
tell us that grace may be utterly lost, we say it proceeds from the purpose
of God, and is given to us from the power of God. His purpose is immutable, his
power who can resist? They must ouerreach the purpose of God, and overcome the
power of God, before they can undo this great work, which God with such
wisdom purposes, and with such power performs. If it were in the wisdom
of man to devise it, or in the power of man to perform it, then might it be
soon undone: but this work is Gods, and all men must give God the glory, who
only has undertaken this work, and only is able to bring it to an end. When
God has once manifested his will, it is strange that the pride and ignorance
of man should devise ways to bring that into questions and doubts which God
in his Scriptures has evidently set down. But there must be heresies that
they which are approved may be known. 1 Cor. 11.19.

Now I think this long contention may be brought to a short end: If any of
the Pelagians or Arminians, or if all of them be able to prove, that the grace
of God, by which we are called, and justified, and saved, is nothing but a
gentle or moral persuasion, then the Pelagians have overcome us: But if this
grace be wrought in us by the power of God, then has the truth overcome the
Pelagians and Arminians. Now I come to take a view of some particular escapes
in his book.

CHAP. 10.
PAge 17. speaking of Saint Peter's fall, he says, Christ prayed for Saint
Peter that he might not fall: and Christ was ever heard in that he prayed for:
And a little after. If he fell he must needs fall either totally or finally;
for cedo sertium? And again, avoid it if you can, you come up and home to our
Gagger, that Saint Peter's faith did not fail, and so subscribe to Bellarmine.
Petro dominus impetrauit vt non posset cadere, quod ad fidem attinet. Thus
writes the Author.

FIrst this is granted that Saint Peter fell into a great sin; but every fall
into sin proves not a failing in faith. Christ prayed that his faith should
not fail, and he was heard in that he prayed for: therefore this is true
that his faith failed not. If any Papist speak or write this truth consonant
to the Scripture, I take not that for Popery. This Author says, that Christ
prayed that Saint Peter might not fall, and Christ was ever heard in that he
prayed for; his conclusion should be that Saint Peter did not fall: Which
because he sees to be false; he would interpret it, that he fell not
finally, though he fell totally. But the ought to have interpreted the words
of the Scripture, and not to make words of his own, and interpret them. He
does strangely confound the thing whereof he speaks. Where he says, Christ
prayed for Saint Peter that he might not fail: these be his own words, they
are without warrant, against the evidence of the story: For Saint Peter did
fall into a great sin: But Christ knowing that he should fall, and giving
him warning thereof, prayed that though he fell, yet his faith should not
fail. He is entangled with an idle and unnecessary confusion, as though the
failing of Saint Peter's faith, and his falling into sin, were one and the
same thing. Distinguish these things that are confounded, and then it is
clear, that Saint Peter did fall into sin, and yet his faith failed not.

But says he, he fell either totally or finally: for, cedo tertium. The
ancient Fathers writing of the sins of the Saints, give to him his tertium,
which he requires. For when they speak of the falls of the Saints, they use
to note them by this word, Lapsus: which though we in English ordinarily call
a fall: Yet it is a tertium in respect of a total and final fall; and so
saves such a fall from being either total or final: So whether we call
Lapsus, a fall or a slipping, we stand not upon words: the thing we seek is
whether every sin in the regenerate cutteth off faith, as Master Thomson
devised, and this man seconds him. This they affirm, and we deny: The just
man sins often, but who did ever say, that he loses his faith as often as
he sins? For in the just and regenerate man, there are two men dwelling
together, the old and the new man: and sin that is still dwelling is sometimes
working.

This is manifested in diverse places of the Scripture, as namely Romans 7. In
which Chapter, whatsoever some say to the contrary, the Apostle speaks in the
person of a regenerate man. Saint Paul confesses that sin dwells in him;
that the good which he would do, that he does not, but the evil which he
would not do, that he does: that he delights in the Law of God after the
inward man: (which words are sufficient to prove against the Pelagians,
Arminians, and Papists, that he speaks in the person of a regenerate man;
for an unregenerate man cannot truly utter those words.) And yet he
confesses, that he sees an other Law in his members, bringing him to the
captivity of the law of sin. Then it must be confessed that sin may dwell there
where faith dwells.

This doctrine is contained in the Articles of faith and religion. Article 9.
in these words. Although there is no condemnation to them that believe and are
Baptized, yet the Apostle does confess that concupiscence and lust has of it
self the nature of sin. In the same Article it is said, that this
concupiscence deserves Gods wrath and damnation. So that we must admit that
sin and faith may dwell together until we come to an Angelical state. And
therefore sin in a regenerate man does not make a cutting off of faith,
according to the new devised cut.

Yet in this is our Author resolute, that Saint Peter fell totally. I answer
that cannot be in the regenerate, where there is repugnance, and reluctation.
As long as the war is maintained, the flesh striving against the spirit, and
the spirit against the flesh. so long the fall is not total, neither can it
be, when the spirit is still striving, and disallowing and recovering the hold
again. And if this war be maintained, there must needs be the Spirit. For
the flesh does not strive against the flesh, and where the Spirit is there is
faith. And therefore as the Spirit is not totally lost in the regenerate,
though many times it may be and is grieved so faith is not totally lost in
them, though they may fall into diverse sins, by which sins the Spirit is
grieved.

Saint Hilary compares the book of Psalms to a bundell of keys to open the
locks (that is) the difficult places of the Psalms and of other Scriptures.
If the right key be taken and rightly applied, it will open the lock. The
Author of the Appeal has set a lock here, that is a difficulty, where there
was none indeed. I will try if I can ^ight of the right keys out of the
Psalms to open this lock, that is, to dissolve this difficulty which he
makes here of a total fall from grace.

Psalm 19. verses 12, 13. Who can understand his faults? cleanse me from my
secret sins; and keep thy servant also from presumptuous sins, and let
them not reign over me: so shall I be upright, and made clean from the
great transgression. He prays to be cleansed from other sins, but to be
preserved from presumptuous sins; that they have not the dominion over him:
Whereby we may collect, that the Saints are freed, and still pray to be freed
from presumptuous sins, such as reign in the wicked: but for other sins,
altogether they are not free.

Psalm 25. verse 5. Unto thee, O Lord, I lift up my soul, my God I trust in
thee. Here he professes his faith: And yet verse 11. he says: For thy
names sake O Lord he merciful to mine iniquity, for it is great: then in him
there was a true faith, and great iniquity dwelling together. It follows,
that not only sin, but sometimes great sins may be in a godly man; but
such as are not joined with presumption, but with true and sincere repentance.

Psalm 37. verse 24. Though he fall, he shall not be cast down; for the
Lord holds him up with his hand. In this Scripture there is another instance
given of that which this Author called for, when he said, cedo tertium: For
the Prophet says: Though he fall, he shall not be cast down. To fall and
yet not to be cast down, is a tertium in respect of a total and final fall.
For he that falls so, as yet he is not cast down, falls, and yet neither
totally nor finally: the reason is given which is beyond all answering: For the
Lord puts his hand under him to stay him.

Psalm 38. verses 3, 4. There is nothing sound in my flesh, because of thine
anger, neither is there rest in my bones, because of my sin: for mine
iniquities are gone over my head, and as a weighty burden too heavy for me.
And yet, verse 15. he says: On thee O Lord do I wait; thou will hear me my
Lord my God. He feels the heavy burden of his sins, he does not conceal
the multitude of them, they are so many that they are gone over his head, he
confesses, he complains, he cries to God. What then? where so great and
so many sins were felt (as a tender conscience must needs feel them) shall
we say that this man lost all grace? No. If he had not been much troubled with
his sins, he would not thus have spoken of them; if he had not had grace,
he would not thus confess them and call to God for mercy.

Psalm 40 verse 12. My sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am not
able to look up, they are me in number then the hairs of head. Yet verse 17.
Though I be poor and needy, the Lord thinks of me. Thou art my helper and
my deliverer my God. Here we find great and many sins, and yet a great and
a precious faith.

It were too long to rehearse all of this kind. This may suffice to prove
that grace in the regenerate, is not totally lost by sins; unless they be
presumptuous sins which reign: But from these reigning sins, they that are
borne of God are preserved: according to that of S. John, He that is borne of
God sins not: He that stands upon the top of the stayres, may fall and
slipp down a step or two, and yet not fall to the bottom. There is danger I
grant it. And if we stood by our own power and strength, as the Pelagians and
Arminians would have it, then might we fall away altogether. But in a
regenerate man, there is power and weakness: the power is Gods, the weakness
is his own. When he falls, this is his weakness: but God by his power does
so order that weakness and those falls, that he will have his great power
manifested in this great weakness. Therefore the Apostle had this answer. My
grace is sufficient for thee, for my power is made perfect through weakness:
Wherefore the blessed Apostle makes this use. Very gladly therefore will I
rejoice rather in mine infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in me.

I say further, that sin is so far from cutting off faith totally in the
regenerate, that it is rather ordained, by the infinite mercy of God, (which is
rather to be adored, and wondered at, then disputed) it is, I say, ordained for
the better exercise of faith and repentance* For if by falling into sin,
faith were totally lost in the regenerate, then a man so falling could never
rise again unto repentance. For he that has lost grace totally, has nothing
left in him but flesh, and his own nature and free will. Which of it self can
never raise a man to repentance, though the Pelagians and Arminians strive for
this, and would have all grace lost, that they might infer, that nature and
free will may raise up a man to repentance: but this is the poison of their
heresy. Saint Peter fell into sin, and rose again by repentance, because
his faith remained, and failed not, which drew him to repentance. But Judas
fell, and never rose again, because he never had true faith.

Now, why do men strive for this, or what do they aim at? When they would
have faith utterly lost, against the Apostle, who teaches that the gifts and
graces of God are without repentance; what have they gotten that thus strive,
or what would they have? forsooth they would make Praedestination hang upon
uncertainties, upon man's will; that a man may predestinate himself when he
will, as often as he will: For they have no better ends then these.

Page 18. Speaking of Bellarmines words, Petro dominus impetrauit, vt ^on
posset eadere, quod ^d fidem attinet: He adds these words: Just your Puritan
doctrine for final perseverance.

This is the first time that ever I heard of a Puritan doctrine in points
dogmaticall, and I have lived longer in the Church then he has done. I
thought that Puritanes were only such as were factious against the Bishops in
the point of pretended Discipline: and so I am sure it has been understood
hitherto in our Church. A Puritan doctrine is a strange thing, because it has
been confessed on both sides, that Protestants and Puritanes have held the
same doctrines without variance. The discipline varied in England, Scotland,
Geneua, and other where: Yet the doctrine has been hitherto held the same,
according to the Harmony of the several Confessions of these Churches. Not
one doctrine of the Church of England, another of the Church of Scotland, and
so of others.

What is your end in this, but to make divisions where there were none? and
that a rent may be made in the Church? forsooth! that place may be given to
the Pelagian and Arminian doctrines: And then all that are against these must
be called Puritan doctrines. It is true, that Arminian doctrines will make a
division, where none was before. And our Author of contentions by virtue of
that doctrine, has given a desperate attempt to do the like in our Church.

And that final perseverance should be that Puritan doctrine, is a thing no
less strange. The Pelagians would have so called it in Saint Augustines time,
if they had had that word then, or any thing that might give disgrace to the
doctrine of perseverance. For Saint Augustine maintained the doctrine of final
perseverance against the Pelagians. And does not this man in rejecting that
doctrine, profess himself to stand for the Pelagians against Saint Augustine,
and the Orthodox Church? And yet himself confesses final perseverance; he
had the less reason to call it a Puritan doctrine.

But he is so various in his sayings, as professing to be at liberty, not to
declare his own mind, but to relate what others say, that it seems hard to
hold him steadfast to any thing. But in this particular he must confess, that
though a regenerate and justified man fall into sin, yet there is something
that abides and continues in him to raise him up again to repentance. As the
carnal part abides, so the spiritual part abides, so long as the spirit
strives against the flesh. Math. 24.13.
Our Lord says, He that perseuereth to the end shall be saved. S. John
says, He that is borne of God sins not, for the seed of God abides in
him. Of this I have spoken of before.

Briefly, touching final perseverance, I would know how any man can truly lay
to his heart that article of our faith: I believe life everlasting; but that
withal he must believe final perseverance: for he that belieueth that he
shall receive everlasting life, must also believe that he shall persevere to
the end, without which grace no man shall attain to life everlasting.

When the Pelagians and Arminians would say somewhat to infringe the doctrine
of Praedestination, they show all their spite against final perseverance,
that all grace may be lost. And what will follow then? If all grace be lost,
then surely the grace of Praedestination is lost, and the grace of calling is
lost; and then must men go to seek a new Praedestination, and a new calling:
and thus of the greatest mysteries of our salvation they make fables.

I think that the Author of the Appeal is but a young Scholar in the
Arminian School, and did not well foresee these consequences, but from the
grounds that he has laid, these things must follow: the grace of
Praedestination, and the grace of Gods calling must be lost. For I appeal to
his Logic, does not he that says all grace is lost totally, conclude that
the grace of Praedestination and calling is lost? if so, then is not this man
bound to tell us how GOD proceeds to a new predestination, and to a new
calling? These be things which the Arminians listen after. How glad would they
be to hear that the Church of England should begin to follow them in this
course of multiplying predestinations and elections? This is that which they
have long aimed at: And here our learned Author has well bestirred himself to
do them this service. Against these foolish and fabulous fancies, the Apostle
has laid this bar. Ephesians. 1, 4.11.
We are chosen and predestinate in Christ before the beginning of the world,
according to the purpose of him, that works all things according to the
counsel of his own will. This counsel, by which he has wrought these
things, Esa. 46.10.
is constant and unchangeable. Against this truth the gates of hell shall never
prevail, Heb. 6.17.
though the Arminians come with all their tro^pes to maintain the passages of
hell gates.

When the ancient Fathers and other godly men speak of predestination, they
teach that it is a grace which God gives, and God preserves in us, and by
which also he preserves us to himself. For we cannot keep and preserve our
selves to the end, no more then a silly flock of sheep can keep, preserve,
and defend themselves from the Wolves: this is the shepherd his care. So our
great shepherd can and does keep and preserve us to the end: this is his
work, not ours. But this grace is given to them that are called according to
his purpose, and are justified, and believe in him that is able to bring his
promise to his end.

The great mysteries of our salvation are in danger by these poisoned doctrines
of Arminians to be shaken. If this age should give liberty to these
beginnings, it is to be feared that in place of Communio sanctorum, in another
age may creep in Apostasia sanctorum.

Page 25. and 26. he speaks variously of falling away from grace and loosing
of faith, as if he had not yet determined what to hold. He relates a speech of
his Gagger thus. You meant that faith might be lost both totally and finally in
regard of God, who made no such absolute and irrespectiue Decree. If he should
be challenged for this speech, he will answer, as his use is, that he relates
only, but does not determine dogmatically: but in this place he is put from
that answer. For he cannot relate this as the opinion of the Gagger, whom we
may number amongst those Papists, that deny the respective Decree: for that
they deny it, Bellarmine witnesses, as before I have related. Then this must
be his own speech and collection; Faith may be lost totally and finally, in
regard of God that made no such absolute Decree, and irrespectiue. His reason
stands thus, If God made no absolute and irrespectiue Decree, then may faith
be lost totally and finally. But this is his opinion, that God made no such
absolute and irrespectiue Decree, therefore it follows that in respect of the
Decree of God, faith may be lost totally and finally. This would prove fine
Divinity, if he would stand to it; he writes so, as if his greatest care were
only to seek the approbation of Pelagius; for these things will never get the
approbation of any sound Divine in the Church of England. But it is well, that
before faith can be totally and finally lost, he must first prove that Gods
Decree is respective: This he never labored to prove, and he never heard any
man deliver it but Arminians.

CHAP. 11.
SPEAKING of falling away, he lays all upon the doctrine of the Homilies. He
says. In the second part of the Homily of falling from God, we are sent to a
conclusion more adoppositum, not only of total lapse for a time, but also of
final separation, and for ever. Which also is according to the doctrine
expressed in the Articles. For he that says a man may fall away, and may
recover; implies withal that some may fall away and not recover.

This belike he takes for a solid kind of proof, if he do but in his
imagination think it implies so much: When he urges a point, he brings no
reasons but a conceit of implications: When he is urged, he does but relate
other men's opinions, but what himself thinks, that he keeps close. This
close-keeping of his opinion, which he so much professes, is very suspicious;
there is something in it, that he is loath should be known: yet he hides it
not so closely* but it may be found out. He pleads that a man may fall from
grace totally and finally: A man may fall away from grace and become no child
of God. All this may be truly said, and then who has any thing to say to him,
that says nothing but that which any other man may avouch? Forsooth, aliquid
latet; If he should say plainly, that they that are called, and justified
according to Gods purpose, do fall away totally and finally: then he sees
that he should contradict the doctrine of the ancient Fathers, and of our
Church: but holding himself in these general terms, that men may fall away
from faith and grace, he understood that this might be maintained. We must
therefore open this matter plainly. This is soon done, by calling to
remembrance, what has been said of the respective Decree, or irrespectiue. He
holds the Decree of predestination to be respective, that is to respect
something in men. If this be so, then it makes no matter, whether faith and
grace be utterly lost: For all may be repaired again. But repaired in regard
and consideration of that which men do, and not upon that which God has done.
But if the Decree respect nothing in man, then the case is altered. We have
before declared the doctrine of the orthodoxe Church, that the purpose of God,
which he calls the Decree, respects nothing but Gods will: and therefore
they that are called and justified according to Gods purpose, do believe and
obey, repent and walk in good works, and at last obtain the end, everlasting
life. These graces that proceed from Gods calling according to his purpose,
cannot be utterly lost, because these gifts and this calling are without
repentance. They may be troubled and shaken, but totally lost they cannot be.
This man takes these things otherwise, that they may be totally lost. To be
short, we must bring him to this stand: either plainly to confess, that the
graces that are given according to Gods calling and purpose may be totally
lost: or else to confess that his writings are idle, and trouble our Church to
no purpose: because if he speak of graces which proceed not from Gods purpose
and calling (as many graces do, and in which graces men may make fair and
far proceedings, of which graces the Homilies speak) in this point he has
no adversary, that I know. If he will acknowledge plainly that the graces which
proceed from Gods calling and purpose may be lost, then should not I trouble
him in this point. Provided withal, that he give over his respective Decree,
which is the ground and root of all this trouble, wherewith he has troubled
himself and others.

Now we come to examine that which he brings out of the Homilies, concerning
falling from God. The first Homily says, that sometimes men go from God, for
lack of faith, sometimes by neglecting his commandments: to be short, all
they that may not abide Gods word, but following the persuasions and
stubbornness of their own hearts, go backward and not forward. And whereas
God has showed to all them that truly believe his Gospel, his face of mercy
in Jesus Christ, which does so lighten their hearts, that ( if they believe it
as they ought to do) (this Parenthesis the Author has left out, which might
some way direct the meaning of the Homily) they be transformed to his image,
be made partakers of heavenly light, and of his spirit, be fashioned to him in
all goodness requisite to Gods children: so if they after do neglect the same,
if they be unthankful etc: he will take away from them his kingdom, his
holy word, etc. These words that follow the Parenthesis depend upon those
words contained in it, which our Author has left out. It is true that if
these men behold this grace and believe as they ought to do, that then they
are so enlightened, etc. But this is joined with that condition expressed in the
Parenthesis: if that condition fail, then these other things following, are
not well urged from those words. And what is all this, but if we forsake him,
he will forsake us, as the Scripture teaches. 2 Chronicles. 15.2.

It is evident that the Homily speaks of profane and wicked men, that go
from God, because they never care for coming unto God: of which profane men,
there are (God knows) too many in our Land; whereof the Homily complains.
The Homily speaks partly of such, and partly of hypocrites. This is evident
from the words of the Homily, which are these. For God that promised his mercy
to them that be truly penitent, has not promised to the presumptuous sinner,
either that he shall have a long life, or that he shall have true repentance at
the last end. Does not the Homily speak plainly of wicked, profane, and
presumptuous sinners? What is this to them that are called according to Gods
purpose, and walk with fear and obedience in the works of their calling?

To the same purpose is that which he has brought out of the second Homily;
Wherein, by his leave, he has undertaken more then he has proved, or can
prove out of the words of the Homily: For he says, that in that Homily is
concluded not only a total lapse for a time, but also a final separation for
ever. This conclusion is not prooved out of the words of the Homily: And if
they were, they help him not: For that Homily is to be expounded by the words
of the former Homily, which speaks in express words of presumptuous sinners:
that such may fall away altogether, who did every deny?

And because he urges so much the words of the Homilies in this point, I would
know of him a reason, why in that Homily which is against Worshipping of
Images, he denies that the Homilies contain the public dogmaticall
resolutions of our Church? Why does he play fast and loose? Why does he urge
this in one place, which he flatly denies in an other place? Let him give a
reason.

But the 16. Article teaches the same, says he: the words of the Article are
these. After we have received the holy Ghost, we may depart from grace given,
and fall into sin: and by the grace of God we may rise again, and amend our
life's: The Article speaks religiously and truly. For it is true, and must be
confessed that after grace given, we may fall into sin. The Article
attributes all power of rising again to the grace of God: This we embrace.
What has this man against this? truly, no reason, but a pretty fancy of his
own. For, says he, he that says a man may fall away, and may recover,
implies withal, that some may fall away and no recover. Which kind of speech
is a plain confession, that he has nothing for himself in the words of the
Article.

And yet in this weak manner he cannot proceed, unless he take this
liberty to himself, to change and control the words of the Article. For the
Article speaks of departing from grace given, he makes it speak of falling
away. The Article says, the grant of repentance is not to be denied to such
as fall into sin after baptism; and that we may depart from grace given and
fall into sin, and by the grace of God may rise again. He will confess, I
suppose, that there is no man who lives long after his baptism, but may fall
into sin: and that is a kind of departing from grace given, From these words
he concludes, against all Logic, that a man so falling into sin falls
away: this is far from the words and meaning of the Article, and shows
that his purpose is not to satisfy men of judgment, but by perverting and
intorting of words to a strange, that is, to his own private sense, to deceive
the simple.

But Page: 27. he would prove from Saint Augustine and Prosper, that a regenerate
and justified man may fall away. Our learned Author did never intend in writing
this to satisfy the learned and judicious, but to deceive and undermine the
weaker sort of men. Would any man that had his right wits, alleadg Saint
Augustine and Prosper in this particular, wherein they have so fully, and
soundly declared themselves to the contrary against the Pelagians? But some
what must be said, and some show must be made. Herein our Author may see the
wretchedness of his cause, and how little hope he has to hold it up, when he
is driven to seek help at them, who utterly overthrow his cause. Saint
Augustines words by him cited (though they are not there where he cites them)
are these. Si autem regenitus and iustificatus in malam vitam sua voluntate
relabitur, iste non potest dicere, non accepi: quia acceptam gratiam Dei suo in
malum libero arbitrio amisit. And again: Credendum est quosdam de filijs
perditionis non accepto dono perseverandi vsque in finem, in fide quae per
dilectionem operatur, incipere vivere, and aliquandiu just and fideliter
vivere. That which he cites out of Prosper is this: Ex regenitis in Christo
Jesus, quosdam relicta fide, and pijs moribus Apostatare a Deo, and impiam vitam
in sua aversione finire, multis, quod dolendum est, probatur exemplis.

If that Saint Augustine himself had not made a full answer to these and such
like things, as may be cited from him, this Author might with some probability
have brought these places. But if you will urge Saint Augustins words, you must
give him leave to expound his own words. Saint Augustine says, that just men
and regenerate; nay, he proceeds farther, that the Children of God; yea, and
more then that, that the Elect may fall away: It is true that Saint Augustine
says all this. But if a man should cite these things from him, and so leave
them, as this learned Author does; he should do great wrong to Saint
Augustine. For he expounds himself, that these men whom he calls just,
regenerate, the sons of God, and elect, which do fall away, are so esteemed
of us, but that they are not such in the knowledge of God. They are said to be
such: sed a nescientibus quid futuri sunt. S. Augustine speaks of them that
are so called of us, but are not such indeed. Lib: de corrept: and gratia.
cap: 7.
Quis neget eos electos cum credunt and baptizantur, and secundum Deum vivunt?
plane dicuntur electi, sed a nescientibus quid futur^ sunt, non ab illo qui ^os
novit non habere perseverantiam, quae ad beatam vitam perducit electos, scitque
illos ita stare, vt praesciret esse casuros. ibid: cap: 9.
To the same purpose he says again. Sunt quidam qui filij Dei propter
susceptam vel temporaliter gratiam dicuntur a nobis, nec tamen sunt Deo. Now
take this declaration of his meaning from himself, and then we grant that a
justified man, regenerate, the son of God, and Elect, may fall away: because
these though by us according to the judgment of charity, may be esteemed such,
yet with God they are not: For they only stand and hold out to the end, that
are known to God to be such, whom he has called according to his purpose: of
which sort none fall away. To Prosper I answer the same: For Prosper does
follow Saint Augustine (...), and swarveth not from him, his words are as Saint
Augustines are, and he understood them as S. Augustine expounded himself.

But he has here also somewhat out of S. Augustine touching perseverance.
Sancti de suo perseverantiae proemio certi sunt, de ipsa tamen perseverantiae
reperiuntur incerti. If we grant this, what will he infer? Saint Augustine
teaches that God to humble us, and to make us to seek him with zeal, does
hide some things from our knowledge, as our final perseverance, and our
predestination: but this is for our good to remove pride and presumption from
us: If we our selves did either predestinate our selves; or give the grace of
final perseverance to our selves, then might this objection be made; for then
would things be in uncertainties: but we give all the glory to God, who knows
us better then we know our selves, and we leave this to him, which only is
able to bring his own work to an end. And yet if we search a little more
exactly into the meaning of S. Augustins words, it will appear that S.
Augustine speaks not simply against the certainty of perseverance, but in some
respect.

To be certain of our perseverance, may be two ways understood: either to be
certain that we shall never fall into sin, so to trouble the course of our
perseverance. Of this S. Augustine speaking says truly, we are uncertain of
our perseverance: or else to be certain of our perseverance, may be understood
to be certain of our faith, whereby we persevere; that our faith shall never
utterly fail. Of this every man cannot be sure: But he that has a true faith,
believes that his sins are forgiven, that he is the child of God: this man
walks in love and obedience, without which his faith is vain, believes to
receive in the end everlasting life. And therefore S. Augustine says; Sancti de
suo perseverantiae praemio certi sunt. How can a man be sure of the reward of
persevera^ce, unless he be sure of his perseverance? Everlasting life is the
reward of his perseverance, and of this reward he is sure. It must needs follow
that in some sort, he is sure of his perseverance. What sort is that? Verily
his faith persevereth, as Christ said to S. Peter, though he fell into a great
sin, and therefore did not persevere without sinning, yet he had prayed that
his faith did not fail: and so he did persevere in the faith. And S. John
says, that he that is borne of God, cannot sin, because the seed of God
abides in him. Then he that has the seed of God abiding in him, does
persevere according to that grace which abides in him. Many men speak of
grace and faith, but verily none can speak truly thereof, but they that have
these things in them. S. Augustine says, no man can understand the truth, Lib.
de oper. Monach. cap. 13.
but he that lives a godly life. In cognitione cavendus est error, in action
nequitia: Errat autem quisquis putat veritatem se posse cognoscere, dum adhuc
nequiter vivat.

Now where S. Augustine says, that Saints or true believers are sure of the
reward of perseverance, but not of perseverance it self: if we should
understand this, as our Author seems to take it; S. Augustine has wrapped
himself in a contradiction. For if a man should thus reason against these
words: Every true believer is sure of the reward of perseverance: but every
true believer is sure that unless he persevere, he cannot be sure of the
reward of perseverance: therefore every true believer is sure of his
perseverance. This, I say, cannot be denied by any that grants with S.
Augustine, that true believers are sure of the reward of perseverance: For it
follows, that he is as well assured by faith of his perseverance. And upon
this ground it is inferred, because he is sure of the reward of perseverance.

CHAP. 12.
PAGE 28. He makes a great show of all the learned men of the Church of
England that composed the Articles; that confirmed them; that justified them at
Hampton Court. He says, that these were the most learned men of our Church:
Who denies that? or who called their learning into question? But what do
these here? And why are they troubled? All these, says he, are such as do
assent to antiquity. There is no doubt but these learned men did assent to
learned Antiquity. But where is this Antiquity, or what is it? Parturiunt
montes. Truly we have not hitherto had one word from Antiquity, but only
those places of S. Augustine and Prosper, which are answered and found to be
nothing to the purpose. This is a strange kind of proceeding, to raise so
great an expectation, and in the end, all to turn into smoke. We expect to
hear, whereunto all these learned men have assented: here is nothing but words
in the clouds. You have made a glorious syllogism. The mayor is, that these
men were the most learned men in our Church: it is granted: The minor you say
you will make good; but that is not yet done: you have said nothing to prove
it; you would prove it first out of the 16. Article; but you go from the words
of the Article, and show us what in your conceit it implies. This will never
be taken for proof* That which you undertake to prove, is a total and final
fall; whereof you have not as yet offered a proof, either out of the Articles
or Homilies.

Page 30. he says, The doctrine of the 16. Article was challenged for unsound
in the conference at Hampton Court, by those that were petitioners against the
doctrine and discipline established: and being so challenged before his
Majesty, was then and there defended, maintained, avowed, averred for true,
ancient, justifiable, good and catholic, against that absolute,
irrespectiue, necessitating, fatal Decree of your new predestination.

A man would think that such a man as this, relating things done, should
speak truly, especially of such an Act, which every man that list may know.
It is more strange that he should report it so, as not to say one word true:
For it is not true that it was challenged for unsound: it is not true that it
was then and there defended, maintained, avowed, averred for true: For there
could be no use of this defending, avowing, averring, where, on both sides, it
was confessed to be true, and where the Article was not challenged for unsound.
The plain truth is, Doctor Rainolds repeated the Article, and professed, that
the meaning of the Article was sound: besides Doctor Rainolds, no man spoke to
that particular. How then could our Author say, it was challenged for unsound?
Does he that says the meaning of the Article is sound, challenge it for
unsound? The liberty is great that this man gives to himself, to think that
such things would currantly pass, whether his words contain reason or none.
Doctor Rainolds only desired that it might be explained by these words added
to the end of the Article thus: after we have received the holy Ghost, we may
depart from grace: to these words of the Article he desired this might be
added, yet neither totally nor finally: Against this, no man spoke then: but
for it, that worthy and learned Deane of Paul's then, after Bishop of Norwich,
Doctor Overall did speak so much as directly confirmed that which Doctor
Rainolds had moved; For Page 42. of that Conference, he professed that it was a
Doctrine which himself had taught; That whosoever, though before justified,
did commit any grievous sin, as adultery, murder, treason, or the like, did
become ipso facto subject to Gods wrath, and guilty of damnation. Adding
hereunto, that those which were called and justified according to the purpose
of Gods election, howsoever they might and did fall into grievous sins, and
therefore into the present state of wrath and damnation, yet did never fall
either totally from all graces of God, to be utterly destitute of all the parts
of seed thereof, nor finally from justification. Now when Doctor Overall did in
the sum agree with Doctor Rainolds; where then was the challenging of the
Article for unsound on the one side, and where was that defending, avowing,
averring, on the other side?

Our Author would prove his assertion out of the Conference at Hampton Court;
but out of that conference the contrary is proved. He says, that a justified
man may fall away totally and finally; but D. Overall in that Conference
affirms the contrary, neither totally, nor finally: he should have used some
more probability. He seems to be much destitute of reason, when he uses
reasons, which being at the first examined, prove directly against him. He must
therefore observe, that this doctrine of total and final falling away, which
he pretends to be the doctrine of our Church, was a doctrine refuted at
Hampton Court, by D. Overall, and before that time was never received here: For
D Overall would never have refuted a doctrine received in this Church. Then let
him seek out when his doctrines began to be the Doctrines of our Church.

Page 35. and 36. he says; Let this be acknowledged the doctrine of our
Church, that Children duly baptized, are put into the estate of grace, and
salvation: but many children so baptized, when they come to age, by a wicked
life do fall away from God, and from the estate of grace and salvation wherein
he had set them. -- if you grant not this, you must hold that all men that are
baptized are saved.

If our Author had been pleased, to have observed the judgment of the
Ancients, he would not be thus troubled with novelties. This one poor
objection seems to trouble the man. Saint Augustine might easily have
satisfied him: For he observes a great difference between them that are
regenerate and justified only sacramento tenus, and those that are regenerate
and justified according to the purpose of Gods election. Abraham received the
sacrament of Circumcision, as a seal of the righteousness of faith. The
sacrament is good to them to whom it is a seal of the righteousness of faith,
but it is not a seal in all that receive the Sacrament: For many receive the
sign, which have not the thing.

Then to proceed: Ismael was circumcised, and so was Isaak: but Ismael was
borne according to the flesh, and Isaak according to the spirit. Now he was
not justified, but only sacramento tenus, that was borne according to the
flesh: but he that was borne according to the spirit, was justified truly.
Saint Augustine says, Cum essent omnibus communia sacramenta, non communis erat
omnibus gratia. August: in Psalm. 77.
And again. Omnibus in nomine patris, and filij, and spiritus sancti
baptizatis, commune est lavacrum regenerationis, sed ipsa gratia cuius ipsa
sunt sacramenta, qua membra corporis Christi cum suo capite regenerata sunt,
non communis est omnibus.

Israel was called to be a people of God, yet all that were so called, were not
so in truth: So all that receive Baptism are called the Children of God,
regenerate, justified: for to us they must be taken for such in charity, until
they show themselves other. But the Author affirms, that this is not left to
men's charity ( as you, says he, do inform the world) because we are taught
in the service Book of our Church, earnestly to believe; that Christ has
favorably received these infants that are baptized, that he has embraced them
with the arms of his mercy, that he has given unto them the blessing of
everlasting life: And out of that belief and persuasion, we are to give
thanks faithfully and devoutly for it. All this we receive and make no doubt
of: but when we have said all, we must come to this, that all this is nothing
but the charity of the Church: and what more can you make of it? For where he
urges this, that Children baptized are put in the state of salvation, and this
must be believed. I make no doubt of it, but because he seems to have a
strange understanding of it, and urges it as if forsooth it could not be
answered: I ask him this question, whether we must believe it as an Article of
faith, or ex judicio charitatis? this judgment of charity he utterly rejects.
Then he must hold that we believe it as an Article of faith: but this is not
contained in any Article of faith, it is not expressed in any Scripture. And
the things which a man is bound to believe for his salvation, to speak
properly, he must believe for himself only, not for another man. And
therefore this thing which he urges, that we must believe for other men,
cannot be called properly faith and believing: for no man believes for
another: this proves evidently that this believing, whereof our Communion
bo^ke speaks, is nothing else, but to believe it ex judicio charitatis: and
can no further be stretched. Concerning this judgment of charity, we do not
inform the world any otherwise, then Saint Augustine informed the Church long
since against the Pelagians. The Pelagians urged these things as you do, that
they that were baptized were regenerate, and justified. Saint Augustine
answers they are so, for ought that we know, and until they themselves show
themselves to the contrary. Then so long as we have no cause to the contrary,
we judge them in charity to be such as we desire they should be: did we devise
this? or did we first inform the world of this? it has been of old received
thus in the Church. We do but say that which the ancient Fathers have said
before us: and you follow that which your Fathers the Pelagians have taught
before you. But here is great difference; we following the ancient Fathers,
follow the Church* and you following the Pelagians, follow the Enemies of the
Church.

But here he cites in the margent, page 36. that all Antiquity taught thus. I
pray you what did Antiquity teach? That young children baptized are delivered
from original sin: We teach the same, and we doubt not, if they dye before
they come to the practice of actual sins, they shall be saved.

But this is not so to be understood, that no children unbaptized can be saved:
For in this point the ancient godly Fathers have delivered their judgments,
grounded upon fair evidences of Scripture. And because this is a thing wherein
some may require satisfaction, the Reader will not think the time lost, if I
somewhat enlarge this point. Baptism is required as necessary to salvation, so
that the contempt thereof brings damnation; but not the want of it. For where
a true faith is, and a sincere desire of Baptism, though a man should by some
inevitable means miss of washing by water, yet the Ancients make no doubt of
the salvation of such a man. This is the judgment of S. Cyprian, S. Augustine,
S. Ambrose, and S. Bernard. Hugo de sancto Victore lived at the same time with
S. Bernard. Hugo was troubled with the noveltie of a hot-spirited man, who
taught this assertion; That since the time that it was first said by Christ;
Unless a man be borne of water and the holy Ghost, he shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven, since that, no man might by any means be saved, without
the actual receiving of the visible Sacrament, yea though a man should desire
the same with true faith, and contrition of heart, being only prevented by
death, that he could not obtain that which he desired, yet should this man be
damned without remedy. Hugo having notice of this assertion, wrote to S.
Bernard, concealing the name of the Author of that opinion, only declaring his
assertion; and craved the judgment of S. Bernard in that point. To this S.
Bernard answers. The sum of his answer is this: Bern: epist. 77.
First he takes exception against the time so precisely set by the Author of
this assertion. For he sets the time to begin presently upon the speech of
those words which Christ spoke in secret to Nicodemus, in the night when he
came to him. S. Bernard shows that the beginning of so great a matter was not
advisedly set by this new Author, he therefore would have the beginning to be
after the promulgation of the Gospel by the Apostles. For the old Sacraments
were in force so long, until it was openly and publicly known that they
were abrogated; How long after, penes deum est, non meum definire, says S.
Bernard. Then the old Sacraments did stand in force, until they were
abrogated, that is, publicly by the Apostles interdicted. And therefore as
Baptism is now a remedy against original sin, so was Circumcision of old.
Now if any that are come to years and understanding, after the publication of
the remedy of Baptism, shall refuse to be baptized, this man adds another
sin to original sin, and so through his own pride, he bears the double
cause of a most just damnation, if he should in that case chance to dye. Yet if
before his death he repent, and desire and ask to be baptized, and dye before
he can obtain his desire, so that a right faith, a godly hope and sincere
charity be not wanting; so God be merciful unto me, says S. Bernard, as in
this case I cannot despair of this man's salvation for the want of water only;
Neither can I believe that this man's faith is void, his hope confounded, his
charity failed, if that not the contempt, but only the impossibility of
having the Sacrament hinder him from being washed with water. And I much
marvel, says he, Si novus iste novarum inventor assertionum, and assertor
inventorum; if this new inventer of new assertions, and assertor of things
invented, can find a reason in this thing which was hid from the Fathers,
Ambrose and Augustine; or can find any authority before the authority of
these. For if he know it not, both these judged as we do herein; let him read
S. Ambrose his book of the death of Valentinian, if he has not read it, or if
he has read it, let him recall it well to memory; if he recall it, let him not
dissemble; and there he shall find that S. Ambrose confidently presumed of the
salvation of that man who dyed without Baptism, and did undoubtedly attribute
that to his mind, which was wanting thorough impossibility of performance.
Let him also read the fourth book of S. Augustine of one only Baptism against
the Donatistes, and he will either acknowledge himself to be imprudently
deceived, or prove himself impudently obstinare. For S. Augustine says, that
sometimes suffering is in stead of Baptism, as appears in the thief upon
the Cross, to whom though unbaptized, Christ said, to day thou shall be with
me in Paradise: From which place S. Cyprian took an Argument to prove the
same point: And S. Augustine adds; Considering this thing again and again, I
find ( says he) that not only suffering for the name of Christ may supply
the want of Baptism, but faith also and the conversion of the heart, if
happily the straitness of time will not suffer a man to celebrate the mystery
of Baptism. And afterward; How much (says he) even without the visible
Sacrament of Baptism, that avayleth which the Apostle says: With the heart
man believes to righteousness, and with the mouth man confesses to
salvation, it is declared in that Thief. But then is this fulfilled invisibly,
when as not contempt of Religion, but necessity excludes the mystery of
Baptism. S. Bernard having declared thus much out of S. Augustine, proceeds
thus. I confess, says he, that S. Augustine retracteth that instance which he
put of the Thief, and thought it not so fit to prove this sentence, because it
was uncertain whether that Thief was baptized or no: but the sentence it
self and assertion he confidently maintained, and diverse ways confirmed;
neither shall you find that he did ever retract the opinion, if I be not
deceived, says Bernard: And further he says, that S. Augustine in another
place when he had spoken of some, whom the Scripture restifyeth to be
sanctified invisibly, but not visibly; He makes this inference: hence it is
collected, that invisible sanctification has been had, and has profited
without the visible Sacraments, which are changed according to the diversity
of times, so that others were then, others are now. And a little after;
notwithstanding* says S. Augustine, the visible Sacrament is by no means to be
contemned; for he that contemns it, cannot be invisibly sanctified. Whereby
he prooveth plainly that a faithful man, and one converted to the LORD, is not
deprived of the fruit of Baptism, if he cannot hau^ Baptism, but if he
contemn to be baptized. From these two pillars (I mean S. Ambrose and S.
Augustine, says S. Bernard) I can hardly be drawn to believe otherwise. I
confess my self either to err, or to be wise with these. I my self also
believing, says he, that a man may be saved sola fide, by faith only, having
a true desire to receive the Sacrament, though either death anticipate his holy
desire, or some other invincible force hinder it: And consider when our Savior
says; He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mark. 16.16.
whether it be not with great wariness and vigilance repeated again, But he
that will not believe shall be damned? He says not, he that is not baptized
shall be damned; but only, he that believes not, shall be damned; implying
hereby, that sometimes faith alone suffices to salvation, and without it
nothing. Wherefore albeit we grant, that Martyrdom may be in stead of
Baptism, yet we must understand that it is not punishment that makes this,
but faith it self, for without it what is Martyrdom but plain punishment?
Now it is against all reason to think, that faith which is reputed for
Baptism, where Baptism is wanting, and which does make Martyrdom acceptable
to God, should be sufficient by it self to save a man when either Baptism
cannot be had, or Martyrdom is not required. S. Bernard upon these, and such
like reasons concludes, that a man may be saved by faith without Baptism,
where there is a true desire, and no contempt of Baptism. And that Infants
which die without Baptism are consequently saved, by the faith of their
faithful Parents. Thus far S. Bernard.

Cyprian: de coena Domini.
Saint Cyprian, (cited here by Saint Augustine and by Saint Bernard out of Saint
Augustine) upon this point has these words; speaking of the thief upon the
cross: Latr^cinium damnationem meruerat and supplicium, sed cor contritum
poenam mutavit in martyrium, and sanguinem in baptismum. And this is all that
antiquity teaches, or our Church requires: that baptism is not simply
necessary, so as without it damnation must follow of necessity; and that
children baptized are delivered from original sin. But this man goes
further. Many that are baptized (says he) may after their baptism live a
graceles life: then they loose grace; or else we must say that all that are
baptized are saved. I answer, we need not say so. We say, that, if they fall
into a sinful and wicked life after baptism, they loose the privilege of
their baptism, and the good that they might have had by it, so long as they
remain such: And this is sufficient to answer him. But what is this to the
grace of predestination, which he would oppugn by these quirkes, drawn only
from the charity of the Church and baptism? which charity we also hold. Then
to proceed, of these who have received the sacrament of regeneration, and are
judged by us to be regenerate and justified, many may proceed and make a great
progress in the Church, to be enlightened, to taste of the heavenly gift, Heb.
6.
to be made partakers of the holy Ghost (that is of many graces of the holy
Ghost) to taste of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to
come: and yet they may fall away totally and finally. But they that are
regenerate, justified and called according to Gods purpose, (ask not me who
these are, it is enough that they are known to God) they may fall into diverse
temptations and sins, which bring men under Gods wrath; but these never fall
away either totally or finally. This was expressed by D. Overall in the
Conference at Hampton Court. By this distinction of men regenerate, and
justified sacramento tenus only, and such as are so indeed according to Gods
purpose and calling, he might easily and fairly have satisfied himself in all
these objections, which he draws out of the book of Homilies, and out of our
Service book. For first he has not proved, that a justified man may fall away
totally and finally; neither does that follow from any words by him produced:
And if it were proved in direct terms, how easy is the answer, that it is
then meant of such as are regenerate and justified sacramento tenus, and no
further: For that such fall away it was never doubted in the Church, as S.
Augustine shows. And therefore when he says, that children duly baptized,
are put into the estate of grace and salvation; I grant they are so to us, we
must esteem them so, Lib de bapt: contra Donatistas. 5 ca. 24.
judicio charitatis. Saint Augustine says, Omnes, qui in Christo baptizantur,
Christum induunt: but then he resolves. Induunt Christum homines aliquando
vsque nd sacrameti perceptionom, aliquando vsque ad vitae sanctificationem:
atque illud primum and bonis and malis potest esse commune, hoc autem alterum
propnium est bonorum and piorum. By which grounds we may understand how the
ancient fathers resolved of them that fell quite away from grace. And we may
learn to rest in their resolution: Were it not better for this Author, with
the Ancients to seek out the truth, and means to defend the truth, then with
the Arminians to rake up the Pelagian dunghils for old objections, that are
already answered long ago by the ancient Fathers?

CHAP. 13.
PAGE 37. he says, I see no reason wherefore I might not be as confident in
maintaing falling away from grace, as you and your Divines are upon weaker
grounds in defending the contrary.

If confidence will make your cause good, then there is no doubt of it; you
have enough. You know that he was confident that asked Michaiah this question:
When departed the spirit of God from me to speak in thee?

This Author has thought it good, as a thing becoming him, not only to
imitate the confidence of the false Prophet, but to answer in those very
words of his, Page: 8. Yet for all this confidence, he should find much more
comfort in imitating the humility of the true Prophets, then the pride and
confidence of the false Prophets. This humor appears further in comparing
himself with their Divines. What they are whom he describes in these words
(your Divines) I know not. If he mean such as have maintained this cause
against M. Thomson and such: I am well assured that all the Pelagian and
Arminian schools, have not afforded such learned Divines as they were. But is
not this a raising of a faction between Divines and Divines in our Church, and
over all the reformed Churches in Christendom? If his meaning be to note all
Divines which hold against the Arminians in this particular; he will find the
greatest Divines in Christendom in opposition against him; where his
confidence will do him as little good, as it did Zedekiah. But whether have
the weaker grounds, our factious Author may find in good time, and upon better
advise. For though he may be confident, coming, as he takes, to the first
onset, as if his grounds had never been shaken before; yet the truth is,
these grounds have been long ago and often examined. Pelagius being
confident upon these grounds, was thrust out of the Church. The Arminians of
late resuming the same grounds were driven out of the Netherlandes. After all
this he comes on with a fresh supply: but he must look for no other
success, then the same cause has found at other times. For the same God
lives, which has heretofore raised up the spirits of his servants to
maintain the truth against the Pelagians, and will raise up others to stand
for the same truth, whenever it is oppugned.

Page: 40. he says, If it be an error of Arminius, which was the positive
doctrine of Lutherans, and Luther, before Arminius was borne; why is Arminius
entitled to that which is none of his, but Martin Luthers?

In these words he seems to say that these late opinions of the Lutherans in
Germany, were the doctrines of Martin Luther himself. Wherein he is much
mistaken. For these opinions were brought in by another: the thing is well
known. They increased much in Germany after Martin Luthers time; and in many
things disagree from his doctrine: they were seditiously amplified by Johannes
Iacobus Andreas, who was a man of a furious and turbulent spirit, and called
himself the Pope of the Lutherans, which Martin Luther himself never did. Why
Arminius should be entitled to this, I know no other reason, but the common
course that has entitled Heretics to those heresies, which either they have
invented, or maintained and increased. It may be, he aff^cted that title; sure
it is that he increased the heresy, and spread it where it was not before.
This is no strange thing in the world, that factious men spreading strange
opinions, should get titles of that sect which they maintain: For if our
Author should proceed far in this course, which he has so unadvisedly begun,
he might happily purchase to himself a title likewise; though thereby he would
get no glory.

Page 42. he says; Surely those very points (of predestination, free will,
final perseverance) being scholasticall speculations merely, and as far from
state business, as theory is from practice, are not of themselves, aptae natae
to breed dangers.

These words contain two things: First that the doctrines of predestination,
free will, and final perseverance are merely scholasticall speculations: But
why any doctrine contained in the holy Scripture should be called a mere
scholasticall speculation, is a thing I conceive not. He must give a reason
that calls it so. Mere scholasticall speculations may well enough be spared
without any loss or hinderance to our salvation: But will he say that these
doctrines of Scripture may so well be spared without any loss or hinderance to
our salvation? It would be an hard task for Pelagius himself to prove that.
Another thing in these words is, that these speculations as he calls them,
are not to be feared to breed danger. The Church is quiet, and without danger,
until some new doctrines be broached, and contentions raised about the truth:
and then the hearts of many are disclosed, and dangers grow. These things that
this Author has moved in our Church, are more apt to breed dangers, then any
thing that has been moved since the time of Barret, Baro, and Thomson. A
desperate man may set an house on fire, and say there is no danger; yet the
danger is not the less, but the madness of the man is the more, that cries
out there is no danger. The ignorance of Gods word, and truth therein
contained, is able not only to breed danger, but to cause destructions of
Churches and states. Hos. 4.6.
The Prophet complains that the people of the Jews were destroyed, and led
into captivity for want of knowledge. Then, the want of knowledge of God, and
of the holy doctrines of Gods word, is a thing apta nata to throw states and
Kingdoms into destruction: And the true knowledge thereof is a thing apta nata
to keep states and people from destruction.

Page 42. he says, These classical proiects, consistoriall practices,
conventuall designs, and prophetical speculations of the zealous brethren in
this land (meaning Holland) do (...) aim at anarchy and popular confusion;
dangerous indeed to Prince and people.

He speaks here of the Ministers of the Low-countryes, between whom and us in
the matter of doctrine there has been a care of mutual consent sought, and
by his late Majesty graciously entertained; and for the public good the
desire thereof may be continued, though this man should be offended. For though
the Church of England be the best Reformed Church, yet is it not the only
Reformed Church. And it might seem no good providence in us, to stand so by
our selves, as to reject and disdain the consent of other Churches, though
they do not agree with us in the discipline. It is observed by Eusebius, that
Polycrates and Irenaeus did both reprone Victor, because for matters of
ceremonies he was too much offended with other Churches, which otherwise agreed
with him in doctrine. Irenaeus does admonish him, that the ancient Bishops of
Rome before Victor, did keep unity and consent with the Eastern Bishops,
though in ceremonies there was difference between them. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24.
Omnes isticum in observantia variarent, inter semetipsos et nobiscu^ semper
pacifici fuerunt. He says there also that the dissonance in ceremonies, did
not break the consonance in faith. And why may not we do the like to keep
the unity of faith with those Churches, which do not agree with us in
ceremonies; if we seek the peace of the Churches, yt profess the same
doctrine?

Touching the point of their discipline, I can witness that they are weary of
it, and would gladly be freed if they could. When we were to yield our consent
to the Belgicke confession at Dort, I made open protestation in the Synod,
that whereas in that confession there was inserted a strange conceit of the
parity of Ministers to be instituted by Christ; I declared our dissent utterly
in that point. I showed that by Christ a parity was never instituted in the
Church: that he ordained 12 Apostles, and also 70 Disciples; that the
authority of the 12, was above the other: that the Church preserved this order
left by our Savior. And therefore when the extraordinary authority of the
Apostles ceased, yet their ordinary authority continued in Bishops, who
succeeded them; who were by the Apostles themselves left in the government of
the Church to ordain Ministers, and to see that they, who were so ordained,
should preach no other doctrine. That in an inferior degree the Ministers that
were governed by Bishops succeeded the 70. Disciples: That this order has
been maintained in the Church from the time of the Apostles. And herein I
appealed to the judgment of Antiquity, and to the judgment of any learned man
now living, and craved herein to be satisfied, if any man of learning could
speak to the contrary: My Lord of Salisbury is my witness, and so are all the
rest of our company, who spoke also in the same cause: To this there was no
answer made by any. Whereupon we conceived that they yielded to the truth of
the protestation. And somewhat I can say of mine own knowledge: For I had
conference with diverse of the best learned in that Synod; I told them that the
cause of all their troubles was this, that they had not Bishops amongst them,
who by their authority might repress turbulent spirits that broached
novelties. Every man had liberty to speak or write what he list; and as long
as there were no Ecclesiastical men in authority to repress and censure such
contentious spirits, their Church would never be without trouble. Their answer
was, that they did much honor and reverence the good order and discipline of
the Church of England; and with all their hearts would be glad to have it
established amongst them, but that could not be hoped for in their state. Their
hope was, that seeing they could not do what they desired; God would be
merciful to them, if they did what they could. This was their answer; which I
think is enough to excuse them; that they do not openly aim at anarchy and
popular confusion. The truth is, they groan under that burden, and would be
eased, if they could. This is well known to the rest of my Associates there.

Page 58. speaking of the 17. Article, he says: there is not one word,
syllable, or apex touching your absolute, necessary, determined, irresistible,
irrespectiue Decree of God to call save and glorify S. Peter, for instance,
without any consideration had or regard to his faith, obedience, and
repentance, and to condemn Judas as necessarily without any respect had at all
to his sin: this is a private fancy of some particular men.

Of this I have spoken at large before. I have declared that these accusations,
which he has here made against the doctrine of predestination, were the
accusations of the Pelagians against Saint Augustines doctrine. Only here I
will answer to a particular surmise, that may happily fall into the thought of
the Reader, or of the Author of the Appeal himself. He says here, that
these things are not contained in the 17. Article: and so after his manner of
shifting, he may say, that he delivers not here his own opinion, but only
says that these things are not contained in the Article. To remove this
answer, he must remember, that in diverse places through his book, he
delivers the same with confidence, not only as his own opinion, but as the
doctrine of our Church, as page 30. He says (though not truly as has been
proved before) That the 16. Article was challenged as unsound; but was there
defended, maintained, avowed, auerred, for true, by the greatest Bishops and
learnedest of our Divines, against that absolute, irrespectiue, necessitating,
and fatal decree of your new predestination. In which words he plainly
delivers his own opinion, and, as he takes it, the doctrine of our Church.
Thus much I say here to take him from that starting hole, which he might think
of, to say that in this, as in some other things, he delivered not his own
opinion: his opinion is plain, that he lays these accusations against
predestination, as the Pelagians did.

Page 71. he says. That Deodate Minister and professor of the Church of
Geneua, professed to him his opinion in some points contrary to the conclusions
of Dort.

All the English Divines which were there do verily believe this to be untrue,
because they hold Deodate for an honest man. And to put this matter out of
doubt, Deodate himself has written to a learned and reverend Bishop of our
Church, protesting that he never spoke any such thing as the Author of the
Appeal imposes upon him, touching the conclusions of that Synod. He, that
durst deal so with Deodate, must needs loose credit in other things.

Page 72. he says At the conference of Hampton Court, the Bishop of London
Doctor Bancrofte called the doctrine of praedestination a desperate doctrine
without any reproof or taxation.

I answer, as the Bishop of London did then understand it a desperate doctrine,
so do I call it. The Bishop of London had reason, for speaking against a common
abuse of that doctrine: Our Author has no reason to speak against the
doctrine it self. The Bishops words were these (which he omitteth to wrong the
Bishop) Many in these times neglecting holiness of life, presume too much of
persisting in grace, laying all their religion upon praedestination: If I shall
be saved, I shall be saved: which he terms a desperate doctrine: and who
will deny this as the Bishop delivers it? It was not the Bishops meaning to
call the doctrine of praedestination, a desperate doctrine, as Saint Paul
preaches it, or as the 17. Article delivers it. The Article affirms, that
the godly consideration of praedestination, and our election in Christ is full
of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such as
feel in themselves the working of the spirit of Christ, mortifying the works
of the flesh -- as well because it does greatly establish and confirm their
faith of eternal salvation to be enjoyed by Christ, as because it does
fervently kindle their love toward God.

If the Author had been but indifferently affected to the doctrine of
Praedestination, and to the Article that proves such comfort to be contained
in it, and received by it; He would have said somewhat of this comfort, which
the godly receive from this doctrine: But he is pleased to find nothing in
Praedestination but a desperate doctrine. The Article says also; that for
curious and carnal men lacking the spirit of God, to have continually before
their eyes the sentence of Gods Praedestination, is a most dangerous downfall.
The Bishop spoke of these last words.

Our learned Author, the determiner of the doctrines of the Church of England,
allows that the doctrine Praedestination should be called a desperate
doctrine. (He cannot say here, that he only relates the Bishops words, for
therein he has wronged the Bishop, that he relates not his words rightly.)
But the doctrine of our Church in that Article says, that it is full of sweet,
pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to godly persons. He has handsomely
maintained the doctrine of our Church, saying, that the doctrine of
Praedestination is a desperate doctrine, without any mention of the abuse of
it; which before him, no Divine of the Church of England ever uttered.

Page 73. He says, It is your own doctrine, God has appointed them to grace
and glory, God according to his purpose has called and justified them;
therefore it is certain, that they must and shall be saved infallibly: Thus
writes the Author of the Appeal against his accusers.

I know not these men against whom he writes, but he does much honor them,
in saying that this is their doctrine. Sir, is not this your doctrine also? I
am sure it is the Apostles doctrine: Quos insitificauit, glorificauit. Saint
Augustine draws out of these words that doctrine which this man condemns.
Lib. de Fradest. sanct. cap. 17.
Electi sunt de mundo ea vocatione, quae Deus id quod praedestinauit, implevit:
Quos enim praedestinavit, ipsos and vocauit, illa scilicet vocatione secundum
propositam: Non ergo alios sed quos praedestinauit, ipsos and vocauit: nec
alios sed quos ita vocauit, ipsos and iustificauit: nec alios sed quos
praedestinauit, vocauit, iustificauit, ipsos and glorificauit. He says in the
same place, Haec est immobilis veritas praedestinationis and gratiae. Then
according to these grounds (which Saint Augustine calls the immovable truth
of Praedestination, and grace) they whom God according to his purpose has
called, and justified, must and shall be saved infallibly. Sir, do you puff
at this doctrine? Durum est contra stimulos calcitrate. The words are short and
plain; Quos iustificauit, glorificauit: They must and shall be glorified,
because the word of God must and shall be true. These things are not, as this
man in scorn calls them Scholasticall speculations, they are the Grounds of
our salvation.

The chief and corner stone, elect and precious, is unto some a rock of
offense: Men may dash themselves against this rock, but they cannot shake it,
they cannot hurt or remove it. Again, these short words, Quos iustificauit,
glorificauit: does utterly shake in pieces that new doctrine of his, where he
labors, but in vain, to prove, that a man so justified may fall away
totally and finally: Quos iustificauit, glorificauit. If they who are justified
according to Gods purpose shall infallibly be glorified; then can they never
fall away totally, or finally. Yes, says he, they may fall away totally,
though not finally. It seems that this man makes some account of this
conceit; for he has spoken of it at other times, that a man may fall away
totally, but not finally. If he, or any man, could prove by evident Scripture,
that a man that is predestined, called, and justified, according to Gods
purpose, may fall away totally; then will I yield that he may fall away
finally. It is a weak conceit to think that he shall stand finally, that
falls away totally. For if all grace be gone, totally lost, then must the man
come to another predestination* another calling, another justification,
(...)cation another adoption. But then must (...) man set up another School of
Diuinit(...) by that knowledge of Divinity, (...) received amongst us, and
hitherto preserved, these things cannot stand.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 2. lin. 5. for page 37. read page 73. Page 85. lin. 11. for may be lost,
read may not be lost.


