THREE SERMONS: THE FORMER DISCOVERING A DOUBLE and false Heart, upon the 1.
King. 21.9. and 10.

THE SECOND CALLED, THE BLESSEDNESS OF the Righteous, upon Psalm. 37. verse 37.

THE THIRD, THE COURT of Guard, or Watch of Angels: 1. Sam. 17.37.

Nathaniel Cannon, Preacher of Gods Word at Hurley in Berkeshire.

LONDON, Printed by T.C. and B.A. for William Welby, and are to be sold in
Paul's Church yard, at the Sign of the Swan. 1616.

TO THE THRICE HONORED PEER, MY LORDS Grace, the Duke of Lennox, Earl of
Richmont, Lord High Steward of his Majesty's Household, Knight of the most
noble and illustrious Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
IF it may become a Servant, to make tender of his duty unto his Lord and
Master, then may your Grace vouchsafe to patronage this poor present,
notwithstanding, it comes thus meanly apparelled. My offering is but little,
and less then ever was offered to so great a personage: yet let it not perish,
but find such acceptance, as may give testimony of your most heroical
disposition.

When first I had leave to call you Lord, it was in my heart to do something:
but never had the heart till now, and now too soon, for I may truly
acknowledge to your Grace, that this hoc aliquid nihil est, this is a very
something nothing, that is produced.

And yet great Lord, I do not, nor I dare not, speak meanly of my calling:
but my gifts, with joy, with confidence, and I hope with conscience, I may
join with our Apostles saying, that I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ,
Romans 1.16.
because it is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes: so
that in this respect, although the Lord has made you great, yet if you were
greater, and the greatest upon the face of the earth, yet know it is the word
of God, of that glorious God, who is the Creator, and the Kings and Princes,
Dukes and Nobles are but his creatures as other men: vos estis domini terrae:
indeed you are the Lords of the earth, Psalm. 82.1.
and yet your selves are but (Terra domini) even the earth of the Lords, as
other men.

O therefore let a servant speak, if you would double and trebble Honors upon
your head, let the Word of God be the lantern unto your feet, and the light
unto your paths, Psalm. 119.
you shall see the way that leads unto life everlasting: verbum est via, the
Word is the way: haec via ducit ad vrbem, this way leads unto the haven: yea
unto the heaven prepared for those that love, that hear, that reverence and
obey this word of God, there shall you change your Dukedom for a Kingdom* for
he crowns his children. Revel. 5.10.


If then the eminent Lords would raise their houses, let them raise up their
hearts, and set them upon righteousness, for them, says God, that honor me,
I will honor them, but they that neglect, or despise the Lord, shall down to
the ground.

Be pleased therefore most Honorable Lord, 1. Sam. 2.30
in respect of him whose word it is, to look upon this small Exposition,
although in respect both of my weakness and unworthiness that do present,
it may fall to the ground. Plutarch. in vita Artax.


Be unto me in this kind a Princely Artaxerxes, he received a handful of
running water from a poor laborer, be as gracious noble Lord, in receiving
this from me a poor Scholar, whilst I according to my beu^den duty, pray to
my God for your increase of honor and happiness, internal, external, eternal,
and so rest,

Your Graces Chaplain in all dutiful observance, Nathanael Cannon.

A DOUBLE HEART.
1. KING. 21.9.10. And she wrote in the letters, saying, Proclaim a fast, and
set Naboah among the people, and set two wicked men before him to bear
witness against him, saying: Thou did blaspheme God and the King, and then
stone him to death.


EZechiels Vision is full of demonstration Ezech. 8.8
, and in a lively manner does present unto us the course, or rather curse of
sin: it shows us the gradation of it, as if it grew up by the rule of
multiplication, from bad to worse, from much to more, from one mischief to
another, until the full measure of wickedness and abomination it self be
made up. Go (says God unto the Prophet in that place) and dig into the wall,
and thou shall find a door, which door break open, and thou shall see all
manner of abominations: and when thou have scene those, says God, go a little
farther, and then thou shall see more, and the further thou go the more
abominations thou shall find.

My Text seems to have the like revelation, for by that time the walls of the
Scripture are broken down, and the door of it opened, we shall see such
degrees of sin, and such a progression in wickedness, that the truth of that
Scripture will appear unto us, which Esaias speaks of, as concerning the nature
of wickedness, which is, to draw sin upon sin, and iniquity upon
iniquity, as it were with cart ropes Esaias 5.8.
.

This course is here taken by a cursed woman, for so God pronounces Iezabel to
be, who having with her husband Ahab, set their eyes upon that, which was not
their own and longing after Naboaths Vineyard which was near adjoining unto
their Palace, they propose it unto him, that they might obtain it for a
price, or else that they might excha^ge with him for some other: but his answer
is Negative: God forbid (says he) that I should sell my fathers inheritance.

This refusal in unpleasing to Ahab, as if it had been a great offense in
Naboath to keep his own.

In this coffeehouse, Iezabel takes her time, and of a resolution to
accomplish her wicked purpose, incenseth Ahab after this manner. Art thou a
King, says she, and rulest Israel. As who should say, Dares he deny thee his
vineyard.

Thus are there always wicked instruments to provoke and work ungodly
offices, especially where wicked women become counselors, whose malice is no
less then is noted unto us when it maintaind, that there is no head to the
head of a Serpent, Eccles. 35.
nor no malice to the malice of a wicked woman.

The consequence of this Text is an instance, so it is very probable, that Ahab
would have given this over after a little more grumbling. But Iezabel scorns
such a repulse, she will have his Vineyard and his blood, and for that purpose
she arraignes him, condemns him, and executes him all at once, as appears in
this Text.

Thus having broken down a little of the wall to make way unto it, that so we
may see the occasion from whence all this proceeds, we will now adresse
ourselves unto the door, and look in thereat, that so we may enter into this
Scripture, and take into our consideration such seuerals, as in a course of
division, this Text will naturally afford unto us, The division of the Text
into three parts. 1. Naboaths death. 2. The means of his death. 3. The
coloring of his death.


1. His death is decreed aforehand, stone him to death, says Iezabel, she will
have it according to the desperate rule: Sic volo, sic iubeo stet pro ratione
voluntas.

2. The means of his death, by subornation of false witness, Set two wicked
men before him, says she, and let them accuse him of blasphemy against God
and the King: answerable to that Popish proposition as Heathenish as the
former, inra periurasecretum prodere noli.

3. The pretended color for the lamenting of his death, Proclaim a fast, as if
she did commiserate the man's case, and as if he had been justly condemned, and
that she for his better preparation to his death would have this fast
proclaimed: partly to have it conceived, that she and others were sorrowful
for his death, but chiefly, that by means of such an Assembly, and so holy any
action as fasting was, she would have it appear, that she did it to no other
end, but only to bring Naboath to a feeling of his fault, as if he had
deserved death, and she great commendations for this charity and compassion
toward him in providing thus religiously (as she would have it thought) for
his peaceable departure. Thus the Camelion cast her color, and this miste must
arise to make many fall into error, she having concluded, that it was enough to
make this show: Et satis est potuisse videri.

Thus we have taken the Scripture asunder, let us desire God to join with us
in the enlargement of the whole. And for as much as the last part of this
division, are the first words of this Text, I will therefore begin with them,
and so take them in their course as they lie in order.

Proclaim a fast.
Simulata sanctitas est duplex iniquitas, says Austin, Augustine in Psalm. 36.
a dissembled holiness is double ungodliness.

It had been wickedness to shed innocent blood, and falsely to condemn, and
cruelly murder the harmless and guiltless man, but thus to trick it up, and
color it under pretense of pity, doubles the impiety.

But here is matter of great amazement coming forth to meet us. For first of
all, it is a trembling business, no question, to the wicked themselves to shed
blood: for it quakes nature, and excludes grace, and cries for vengeance, and
proves always so discouerable, that as we see by daily experience, God
suffers neither time, nor place, nor greatness to cover the blood that is so
barbarously shed: would not all these stay the hand, or stagger the heart, it
is more then a miracle unto us,

Secondly, it is no less to be wondered at, that the nature of sin should
grow to be so desperate, as to make choice of the most sanctified actions, for
their colorable protections.

For example: What action can there be more leading unto true sanctification,
then our mortification? What leads more unto mortification, then religiously
and sincerely from the bottom of the heart, to hold a religious fast unto the
Lord.

Behold, it is here but a vizard to produce a most monstrous and prodigious
act, Hear, O Heavens, and hearken, O Earth, and marvel, O ye sons of men,
at this impudency! O, who should dare to profane such divine actions as these
are, but only those, who are incurable, and so utterly incorrigible, as that
they care not, though they act the Devils own part.

Judas kisseth Christ Luke 22.48
: but hides his treason; and so Iezabel, proclaims a Fast, but hides the knife
from Naboaths, that must give him his death.

The Panther, Plin. not. hist. lib. 8.
as ( Pliny reports carries with him a sweet sent, but an ugly force,
therefore he hides his talents, until he have the pray within danger. In like
manner Iezabel will suck the blood of Naboath, and yet she hides this venom
under a fast proclaim a fast, says she: from whence we may draw this
observation.


There are no perquisities of lasting and certain tenure, but only those
which a crew from virtue: notwithstanding, so quick is our apprehension in the
point of profit, and our wills so absolute in the doing of evil, that though
shame run by us like a lacky, and confusion prove the close and full point of
our deriuations, yet will the wicked proceed, and verily persuade themselves,
there can be no quare impedit, either to hinder or cut off them, or their
designs.

But it were a necessary question to demand of them, why they disguise
themselves? Aristot. Quaedam videntur and non sunt.
why they are like Aristotle's videnturs, who affirms that there are many
things seems to be that, which they are not.

The answer will aford it self, for by their shadows, mists and colors,
that they cast, they do deceive the people, whereas if they came in the proper
resemblance of their deformed courses, they would be more then monstrous in
the eyes of the people; and therefore our Savior speaks of these pretenses,
when he shows, that there are some that have put on sheep clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening Wolves, Sin ashamed of it self.
where we may see the hatefulness of sin, that it dares not be seen in his
own likeness, but must assume another shape for it, the which let me now
endeavor to prove from the Scriptures, as formerly I proposed it in the
doctrine, namely, that every sin will shelter it self under some pretense.

The Scribes and Pharisees, who were party coluored in all their actions, and
clouen-footed in all their treadings, did many foul and fearful things under
pretenses: but amongst all others, how ill did they use poor widows. Christ
says, That they devoured widows houses Ma. 23.14
. How did they devour the^, eue^ under the pretense of long prayers.

It was a fearful thing to offer violence unto them above al others: for God
commands us to help them, to comfort them, and to be a father to their
fatherles: and the Apostle shows, that this is as the evidence of our religion
Iam. 1.27.
: pure religion and undefiled before God, is to visit the fatherles and
widows, so that to do them wrong were hateful: but to oppress them, or to
draw blood from the^ under pretense of some prayers most damnable, for so
Christ affirms; therefore, says he, your damnation is greater, because of
your monstrous hypocrisy.

John 12.6.
Judas also puts on his cloak to his covetousness, as appears in the Gospel,
This ointment, says he, would have been sold, and the money given to the
poor, O what a fair pretense is this, who will or can dislike that man, which
shall speak for the poor: but God knew his heart, that it was not upright. He
care for the poor? No such matter: let them starve, sink or swim, it was
all one to him. This he said, says the Text, not that he cared for the poor,
but that he was a thief, and carried the bag; and therefore was loath, that
such a morsel should go from his own mouth.

Mat. 2.8.
Herod also seems wonderful forward in the sending away of the wisemen to
Bethelem, to seek out the Babe Christ, and when you have found him, bring me
word, says he, that I also may come and worship him. Would Herod, worship
Christ? No such matter: but if he could come at him, he would murder him, for
he is afraid of his crown, as al Tirants are. Balam Number. 23.1
pretends the glory of God, when he goes about his magical spells, and yet
comes the Lord, and calls for altars, Build me here, says he, seven Alters if
so be it may please the Lord to answer me. He works in sorcery, and yet
pretends great piety, just after the manner of that, which the Apostle speaks
of in the Epistle of Titus 1.16.
Titus; They profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, being
abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate.

Thus from the Scriptures have we proved this doctrine, and further might
confirm it from 1. Sa. 15.8.
Saul, who under the pretense of sacrifice reserueth Agage, and the rest of the
booty. Further from Ammon, 2. Sa. 13.6.
David's son, who pretends sickness, to ravish his Sister Tamar: from Ioab, who
under pretense of courtesy stabs Amasa to the heart 2. Sa. 20.9
.

From the Scriptures come unto our own times, what is there that we will allow
to be sin; have we not a cloak and a veil for every transgression. Does not
the covetous person shroud himself, under pretense of providing for his
family 1. Tim. 5.
. Does not the drunkard couch under good fellowship and love, does not murder
go now for manhood: is not lying and excusing answered and defended with good
intents, and what sin shall there be named, that will not be defended, Alas
my brethren, our defenses and intimations reseruations, and mental
conclusions, distinctions and euasions will not suffice us.

Amongst others, if we shall look upon the example of Vzza, ^ 2. Sam. 6.6 Good
intents will not excuse.
it is notable to this purpose, to put us from the good intents, when the Ark
was in danger of falling, by the stumbling of the oxen, he put forth his hand
out of a good intent, out of his love unto the Lord; yet in regardd there was a
commandment to the contrary, the Lord was angry with him, and strikes him
dead: the which with all other allegations to this purpose, as the Apostle
means in the 3. Romans 3.8.
to the Romans, that we must not do evil, that good may come thereof.

This therefore might raise admiration, but that we can collect the reasons,
why sinners will lodge themselves under these pretenses, and imaginary euasions.

Reasons.
1. They will do all their evil actions under good pretenses in the imitation
of their Master the Devil, whom they serve: Satan never comes to tempt like a
devil, but to that end that he may blind or deceive; he will transform
himself into an Angel of Light 2. Cor. 11.
: and he is so cunning in the delusions that he offers, that, as our Savior
says, if it were possible, he would deceive the very Elect Matthew. 24.
.

This lesson has he taught his instruments, always to pretend some good in
the wickedest actions that can be enterprised: and amongst other maxims and
principles of Satan, how foul so ever the fact is, yet you must not confess
it, but either justify the act under some good pretense, or else so extenuate
it, as it were, not worthy the reproouing. This shuffling our first parents
kept Genes. 3. It is one of the Devils principles never to acknowledge a fault.
: Adam says God, have thou eaten of the fruit: The woman, he says, that
thou gave me she gave me, and I did eat. Mark, it was no sin of his, but
the woman's: yea, he will lay the imputation upon God, as if he had been in the
fault for giving the woman; The woman that thou gave me. Then to the woman;
Why have thou done this: The Serpent, says she, beguiled me, and I did eat.
Thus they post their sins one from another. This trick Satan has taught
all his: for the thief in his deeds of darkness uses the night, that none
may see him: but if he be brought to light. Why then, what would you have me
do? I am in wants, and I was ashamed to beg, and I could not work; and
therefore I did this for necessities sake.

The Fornicator or Adulterer being made manifest, does he take it to heart, in
that he broke the commandment? No verily: but when his finne is urged, his
excuse is ready; Why, it is but a trick of youth, and I am not the first; and
if all our sins were written in our foreheads, others might be ashamed to
show their faces, as well as I; and therefore says he, Let him that has done
no sin cast the first stone.

The Curser and common blasphemer, that rips up the wounds of Christ, and
swears, ex tempore, at every word is he to blame, when his sin is called in
question, and he told, that the plague of God is upon that house, where
aswearer is, and lies between the wainscot and the wall Zach. 5.4.
. Does this either move him, or reform him, no not at all but he will defend
it: why did you provoke me, then (says he) it is your sin to urge me (says
he) and not mine.

Reason 2.
Iesabel and her disciples will have pretenses, to give some kind of
satisfaction, as it were, to the common people, especially, if it concern a
public action, for so Iezabel carries this. Naboath is set in the midst of
the people, and a fast is proclaimed, and every thing carried in that pitiful
manner, as if none had been more moved with compassion then Iezabel, yet
because he was a blasphemer, he must needs die, but in the manner of his death,
she would show all the favor that could be, A Similitude
like unto some thieves, who when they have stripped a man out of all he has,
would feign be accounted merciful thieves, in that they do not murder those
whom they have robbed, or in that they do not bind them so cruelly, as some
others have done. Thus that bloody Emperor would be accounted pitiful, Nero.
in that he let his schoolmaster die an easy death, whereas it was monstrous
cruelty in him to do him to death at al, especially upon no better ground, but
because he whipped him when he was his Scholar. But let us gather toward the
harvest of our doctrine, and that is such profitable uses, as may be derived
from this point, which shows us, that every sin will shelter it self under
some pretense.

Uses.
1. This shows what a fearful sin covetousness is, the which this action
of Iezabels will demonstrate unto us, for her walk was large enough, one would
have thought she had but a whole Kingdom, and yet that was not compass
enough: but she lackt a herb-Garden, for so the Text says. Covetousness like
the dropsy.
This sin has a great dropsy belly; and though it be never so full already,
yet it must have more, and nothing will satisfy it. A pitiful case, that a
whole kingdom should not afford a King a Herbe-garden, but he must take it
from another man. This is, as I said before a fearful sin: for this Judas,
will betray Christ Matthew. 26.
: this is the root of all evil 1. Tim. 6.
: for this, many a man ventureth his soul. But what shall it profit a man,
because they talk of profit, to get the whole world, and lose his soul Mark.
8.36.
. Take heed of this sin, if you would have gain, get godliness, for that is
great gain, if a man be contented with that he has; which if Ahab and Iezabel
had been, they had been innocent of this great offense. Therefore whenever we
are tempted unto this sin and money or gifts offered unto us. Let us say, as
Peter says unto Simon Magus, Acts 8.20.
Thy money perish with thee, and this is our first use.

2. This doctrine serves to make us acquainted with a certain generation, whom
Christ calls hypocrites, or generation of Vipers Ma. 23.33
. You shall know them by my text: for they will speak one thing, but act
another; they will proclaim a fast, but execute murder; they say, and do not,
says Christ: An Hipocrite compared unto a Iugler.
these are spiritual iuglers, who can show tricks, but it is all to deceive
the people. So indeed the hypocrite with all his pass and repasse, does but
deceive his own soul: but be not deceived, faith the Apostle, God is not
Gal. 6.7.
mocked; we may blind the world, and we may for a time get our own wills, and
serve our own turns, but this will turn to our destruction at last. Let us
therefore detest hypocrisy, because God does detest the hypocrite: He that
speaks the truth from the heart, shall enter into the Tabernacle Psalm. 15.
. Then they that dissemble, and wroke wickedness under fair pretenses shall
not: Away then with our colorable protestations and forged actions, we many
times speak fair unto the face, when we wish the destruction and confusion of
them, whom we thus salute. If this be not a fearful sin, what will we account
to be sin. This is so common, that it stumbles many a man now adays in his
choice of friends: for the upright men, the Lord help the while, as David
says, Psalm. 12.1.
are gone and perished from the face of the earth; and therefore it is not
amiss for men well to consider, whom they trust, with whom they converse. Yea
it is not much digressiue from the text, to bid them take head after whom they
eat or drink, for diets now adays are not altogether so wholesome, as they
have been heretofore, neither were hypocrites so dangerous, for they were wont
to hurt but their own souls, and now their hypocrisy in many things tends to
the destruction of others: let as many then as love the Lord hate this sin:
For God endures not a heart, and a heart: but the true Israelites are his
children, and the men in whom are found no guile, are only the ingredients
into his kingdom.

3 This point teaches us Christian circumspection even in divine matters:
there are those that profess God, and yet serve the devil, there are those
that come in sheep clothing, thing, but inwardly are ravening An hypocrite
like a Camelion.
but inwardly are ravening Wolves, and these men are so expert, and with the
Camelion, seem of any color, that if it were possible, they would deceive the
very elect Matthew. 24
. Try the spirits therefore, says Saint John, and believe not every spirit,
but see first whether they be of God or not 1. John 4.1.
. The Apostle shows them unto us, as it were out of a table 2. Tim. 3.5.
: when he says, that they have only a form of godliness, or a show thereof,
and these are hedgcreepers, for so the Apostle accounts them, when he says,
that they creep into houses, and lead captive simple women. Of these also the
Apostle speaks in the 1. of Timothy 1. Tim. 4.2
, that teach doctrines of devils, and speak lies, says he, through
hypocrisy: let us therefore shut our eyes from these Basilisks, and our ears
from these Sirens, lest we be circumuented.

4. It serves for an excellent rule unto all our actions, namely, that we
proportion them according to Gods word, which is not colorable, but
warantable, plain, and without evasion, if we proceed after this manner, then
we may say as Gamaliel does Act. 5.39.
: If it be of God, says he, it shall stand, otherwise it will fall to the
ground. Let every man remember this, that means to have his actions prosper.

5. It serves for an admonition unto great persons, and as it is said of old,
Remember Lots wife Genesis 19.26
: so say I, Remember Iezabel: no question she did not think, that God would
have revenged this hypocrisy so deeply. And again, there is no doubt but
she did apprehend her own greatness, as who should say, if it should be
known, yet who dares speak of it, or if they speak, yet what can they do.
Here we may see how they escape for all their greatness. God first discouers it,
to show, that though they have blinded the world, yet they cannot blind him.
Secondly, he reuengeth it soundly, ten for one, not one of Ahabs house shall
escape, and for the woman, author and actor of Naboaths death, she made the
dogs such a feast, that they never licked such blood before 2. Kings 9.36.
, and this is all the account that God makes of the greatest, when they forsake
him. O consider this you tall and lofty Cedars, I say, remember that there is
a God.

Thus have we helped to pull of this vizard of sin, which Iezabel has here
put upon a shameful murder, thinking it sufficient to have a shadow, and to
pretend something, that may be colorable, although the ensuing action be
never so abominable, answerable to that devilish proposition of Machiauel, who
says, Machiauel cap. 18. De principe.
that it is enough for a great man to seem devout, and to make show of that,
which he is not, a devilish document and a proposition of more practice, then
piety throughout all the world: let us therefore proceed with that which
follows in this text.

Naboaths death: Set two wicked men before him, and let them accuse him.

If the eye be single, says Christ, the whole body will be single Mat. 6.22.
: which shows, that the sight is the chief among the senses, as the heart is
among the members, the which being well affected, a consequence, yea, a very
confluence of goodness ensues to the whole body. But here Iezabel has cast her
eye upon an unlawful object, and a secret conueyance is made by a covetous
heart to entitle her unto another man's vineyard. The Logicians say truly, that
(color est obiectum visus) but this does not satisfy Iezabel: for to see this
vineyard, but her eye has taught her heart to covet, her heart has imploid
her head for devise, and her head has thought upon the use of a tongue, a
false, slanderous and cursed tongue which shall accuse this innocent man: truly
has Saint James spoken of an evil speaking tongue, when he says, that it is
a world of wickedness, and full of deadly poisom James 3.8
: deadly indeed, for the false tongue is here Naboaths death.

This sin of slander, and false accusing, is the devils own sin: for he is
called the accuser of the Brethren, he that accuses day and night Revel.
12.10.
. So then by this account the false accuser or slanderer is a very devil.

This sin comprehends many other, which Erasmus notes very wittily, Erasmus
com. de lingua.
Damihi mendacem and ego ostendam tibi furem: If thou will show me a liar,
says he, I will show thee a thief; and no doubt but these will beget
manyothers. Now as it draws on many other sins, so it exceeds many other sins,
Luther. loc. com. ling.
ter homicida calumniator and vno ictu tres occidit: the slanderer, or false
accuser, says he, kills three at one blow the party to whom, the party of
whom, and himself. The Thief sendes but one to the devil, for he hurts but
his his own soul; the adulterer sends two to the devil, unless he repent,
both their souls are in danger: but the false accuser sends three to the
devil, this is the sin that Iesabel resolves upon for the dispatch of
Naboath,

Here then it will be time for us to gather toward some point of doctrine for
our present instruction.

Naboath is innocent, and yet must die; not secretly, but by a public
sentence of Law, by means of evidence given against him, which charge him,
but falsely, for blaspheming God and the King.



It is no easy matter to bring the godly inquestion, if truth might take
place: for they keep a narrow watch over their ways, careful what they
speak, of whom, to whom, as careful what they do, and for the most part ask
counsel of God, as concerning their actions; and this they do not formidme
poenae, but virtutis amore, not for fear of punishment, which were servile,
but for the love they bear unto God which is filial: notwithstanding this
Christian circumspection, yet they are many times in Nabeaths case, that is,
falsely accused, for want of matter, it shall be made and devised, as Iezabel
here directs, set two wicked men before him, etc.

The Prophet Jeremy is in this case, Ier. 18.18
for they that hated him amongst the Jews did long lie in wait to have some
matter against him, but the Lord did so keep him, as that they could not
justly accuse him: What then, will they let him alone? No verily, they will
take a course with him. Come, say they, let us devise some matter against
Jeremy, let us smite him with our tongues: this is the course that they will
take with him; they will first devise some matter, then they will smite him with
the tongue, where we may note what a wicked tongue is, even a sharp rasor, or a
two edged sword, to cut assunder the very life or good name of an innocent.

The like course is taken with Christ, the Scribes and Pharisees resolve to
persecute and crucify Christ, Judas betraies him, the Soldiers and officers
carry him, the people cry against him, Crucify him, Crucify him, his blood
be upon us and our posterity. Pilate sits upon him, and yet for all this, he
is constrained to say, though he loved not Christ: I find says Pilate, no
evil in him, what has he done, that you would have him condemned. Yet this
does not stay their fury: but at length two false accusers are set before him,
and two wicked slanderers stand up against him: but till then, Pilate
acquitteth him, saying, I find no fault in this man, touching those things
that you accuse him. Luk 23.14


Poor innocent Joseph groans under the like burden, for he is accused even for
righteousness sake, and his incontinent Mistrisse missing of her purpose, in
that he will not consent to abuse his Masters bed, she then deuiseth against
him, and accuses him, that he attempted her chastity, and would have lien
with her Genesis 39.14
: for which he suffers imprisonment, until the Lord looked upon him, and
restored him to a double honor, making him head and ruler over all Egypt.

The like trick has that saucy servant Ziba, against his Master Mephiboseth
2. Sa. 16.3.
, possessing David with matter against him that he never thought as if
Mephiboseth should have labored to aspire the Kingdom.

These are the coiners and plotters of mischief, these men are never out of
matter, for they are turned devils, and can fit any man that shall offend them,
they have their articles and bills of indictment as readily framed as can be,
and for their witnesses, they have sure cards, such as make haste to kiss the
book, lest they should forget some of that forged vilanie, which must be
broched for the dispatch of the innocent.

Thus the first part of slander is acted, Slander or false accusing has diverse
acceptions.
or rather devised: for indeed first of all, it is taken up, or entertained in
the mind, where it is first thought upon or forged, as was this against
Naboath.

Secondly, the tongues of others must divulge and publish it, as these two
wicked men that are his accusers here do, and so like a leprosy it runs up
and down, by means whereof, a fresh spring arises, and with a new edition,
it comes forth in print as it were, and by that time a great many slanderers
are begotten; who relate it as confidently, as if it were true indeed. Thus
this slander that at the first was invented, or vented by gross, is afterward
sold by retaile, and they walk up and down with it, as it were, so many
pedlers, and whersoeuer they come, they open the pack, and show what wares the
devil has furnished them withal.

Thirdly, a slander is committed, by giving ear unto a false report, although
though thou do not devise it, as Iezabel does, nor publish it, as the two
false witnesses here do, yet if thou receive it, and approve of it, if thou
give ear unto it and believe it, thou art a slaunderer, which is intimated
unto us, when it is made a mark of Gods child in thee Psalm 15.
: not to receive an evil report against his neighbor. This reaches far,
and fasteneth upon many in these our days, and with the Athenians Act. 17.21
: we still ask news, and if any thing come out against any man, especially
against him or them, that we do not love, then we first believe it, and
secondly, set upon it as furiously, as if we were very Fensers, and would play
such a prize, that every body should think we were not our selves.

Thus we play at Tennis, with the good names of other men, but upon great
disadvantage: for in this tennis court, we have extraordinary hazards. We
hazard our judgments, in receiving rash reports. Secondly, we hazard our
discretion in believing them; and thirdly, we hazard our religion in
publishing them, and railing upon them, whom we thus set upon: for Iam. 1.26
as Saint James says, if a man seem to be religious, and refraines not his
tongue, that man's religion is all in vain: notwithstanding all this, yet this
unruly member will fly about, and dart at Gods dearest children, very few of
them shall be free from the venom of it.

In this course the wicked will be agents, The righteous may be revenged on
them that accuse them falsely.
and the most righteous must be true patients, and yet the righteous know, how
to be revenged when they will, and that is by following the counsel of God,
namely, when they curse, the godly must bless, and when their enemies and
accusers are hungry, let the godly feed them, if thirsty, let them give them
drink, and in so doing, they shall heap coals of fire on their heads To.
12.20
: let them commit and commend their causes unto the Lord, for vengeance is his,
and he will repay it Deu. 21.19
: and let this suffice for the doctrine, which was derived from the second part
of this division, which was the means used to bring Naboath to his death,
namely, false witness: now let us see what applications will issue from hence
unto us.

Uses.
Our first ingredience will afford us a Caution, take heed of this little
member, it may hurt many ways, but it stabs to the very heart, when it is used
in this kind to slander, or accuse the innocent: take heed thou that deuisest:
take heed thou that reportest, and take heed thou that beleeuest any thing
against the innocent, there are many reasons why thou should hearken to this
caution.

First, because God follows that man with a sword to destroy him, and to cut
him off, which he threatens in the Psa. Psalm. 101.
He that privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I destroy.

Secondly, every one that commits sin, is of the devil 1. John. 3.
: but this is the devils own sin. Now if thou would not be accounted a
devil, be not guilty of this sin.

Thirdly, if thou be spiritual, thou will restore a man with the spirit of
meekenes that is fallen, as the Apostle Gal. 6.1.
exhorts: knowing that we our selves also may fall. But one the contrary, we
rather delight in these passages, then labor to cover them: but if it were a
cursed thing in Cham Genes. 9.14
to discover his fathers nakedness, it must needs be a wretched thing to
enlarge, amplify, and make an addition to our brethrens infirmities, but a
cursed thing to devise matter, that shall hurt their innocent souls; therefore
from the rule of charity this sin would be forborne, because charity never
thinks, much less does evil to the brethren.

Fourthly, a reason for this caveat might be drawn from the rule of equity,
which bids us do unto others, even as we our selves would be dealt withal: but
we would grieve and vex to hear, that men should accuse and rail upon us,
we would be loath to have our life or credit lie upon the accusation of a
false tongue: then proportion things unto others, Do as thou would be done by.
as thou would receive fac alijs fieri quod cupis ipse tibi, if thou
would that men should not make the worst construction of thee: be not
thou like unto a cupping glass, A Slaunderer like a cupping glass, which
only draws ill matter.
which only draws that humor that is evil and corrupt; so does the slanderer
only apply his tongue to false accusation and evil speaking.

The second use is to show, the excellent and sound condition of an upright
life; if any man will do them hurt, he must do it by lies and falsehood, for
the righteous are circumspect, and the blessing of God is so upon them, that
they do not lie open to dangers and imputations as other men do, and yet no
men so often in question, and so subject to false aspersions as they, but for
the most part it is devised and enlarged against them: it shows that the
blessing of God is as a shield to cover them, and yet for all this, Satan has
fiery darts, and maleuolent courses against them.

3. This will teach us to charge a watch over all our members, but especially
our tongues: O Lord, says David, set a watch before the door of my lips,
that I offend not with my tongue Psa. 141.1
. May a man be a murderer with his tongue, O then watch that member, forbear
to hear evil, forbear to speak evil: si deest auditor, deest and de
tractor, Hierom.
if the hearer would forbear, the slaunderer would cease: for the sin of
slander gets a kind of nutriment from a willing hearer, and yet both are so
dangerous, that as Bernard observes, Bernard.
dum aurem inficit, animam interficit: so bad a season must needs have a cursed
harvest: let us therefore bridle our affections, and let grace overcome nature
in this evil, and this shall suffice to show the cursed disposition of the
wicked, who do so hate the godly, and are so bent in their own purposes, that
though they have no just cause to accuse the righteous of, yet they will
invent, and with Iezabel, set wicked men before them to accuse and condemn the
innocent.

4. This serves to pacify and to appease the working, that these prouocations
and accusations would work in us, if God did not stay us: surely these
slanders and false reports and dangerous attempts against us, may with other
afflictions be fitly compared unto physic, Affliction like physic.
the which we take from the physician to make us well, and so with the blessing
of God it does, yet at the first it makes us very sick, until such time as it
has purged the stomach, and cleansed it. so verily, our afflictions make us
sick to the death, and bring us very low at the first, until it has cleansed
our hearts of all vindictiue humors, of all earthly humors of all superfluous
matter, then we shall find health even saving health, and be so restored,
that we will not fear those, that can but kill the body, but only fear him,
that can kill body and soul, and cast them both into ouerlasting hell fire
Mat. 10.
. And herewithall let us conclude this point.

Now in the last place we shall be brought to behold the woeful tragedy of
poor Naboath, Stone him to death, says she, that is the Terminus ad ad quem,
of all this business he must die, and thereby he shall know, what it is to
cross such a woman as Iezabel was of her will.

Here sin begins to troop and march forward one after another very fairly,
and as if they had learned a hellish discipline, they keep rank in such an
orderly manner, that you may tell them, and easily discern how one has
begotten another, let us therefore calculate how this begun, and to what pass
it is now come.

First, Covetousness, as a mother sin, conceived, and in this conception or
breeding fell to long, and that so eagerly, that the very delay of obtaining,
brought forth hatred in so deadly a manner, that nothing but the death of the
obstacle Naboath can serve the turn, this cursed daughter, I mean hatred, the
daughter of covetousness has sat in counsel, and has concluded, that if
Naboath were done to death, then all were hers, but this will require help, the
help of such bloodsuccours, as must draw from Naboath both life and breath,
and blood, and vineyard and all.

Thus one sin waits upon another, and one begets another, Vno dato absurdo
mill sequuntur.
and you may tell them how they proceed in a hellish order.

First, here is hypocrisy: Proclaim a fast.

Secondly, Slander: let two accuse him.

Thirdly, Murder: Stone him to death.

This progress of sin will produce this doctrine very naturally from this
latter part.

degrees from one sin to another. As Romulus made slaughter of his brother
Rhemus, to that end, that he might settle the Kingdom in his own person,
August. de cinttat. Dei lib. 15. cap. 5.
as Saint Austin reports: so verily, this woman butcher, or butcherly woman
will not give over, until she bath her self in blood, even in the blood of her
adjoining neighbor, that she may settle his vineyard into her own possession:
how she has begun we have heard, like a mother in show. Proclaim a Fast: as
if a father would have at the death of a child a solemn funeral, together
with a sermon of the same nature, to preach mortality unto the living: thus
with a show of natural affection she appears in the 1. scane, in the 2. she
has her deponents, who with grave aspect before the judges of the land, call
God to witness, by virtue of an oath that Naboath was a blasphemer, and in the
3. she strikes him down even with a deadly blow, Stone him to death: this is
the perambulation of the wicked, they proceed from worse to worse, from one
sin to another.

This Esaias 5.18
Esaias notes in the fifth Chapter of his Prophecy, when he says, that the
ungodly do draw sins together, as it were with cartropes: let us note the
phrase the Prophet uses, they draw sins, it is a phrase to express the
greatest strength of any creature, the horse in his greatest strength and force
is said to draw, and it intimates in mankind the putting on of forces, as if
we should say, they use their wits, words, works, and all their endeavors to
this purpose, and they pull them as it were with cart-ropes, where the Prophet
gives to understand, that besides their own strength, they use all other
means and adiunctes heereunto, that so the full measure of sin may be made up.

Saint James shows the same gradation, every man is tempted, James 1.14
says he, when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence. Then 2. when this
lust has conceived, it brings forth sin: And then 3. this sin must have
a time to work, and at length to finish. And then fourthly when that is
finished, it brings forth death.

This we see both in the falls of them, who were given over to wickedness,
and also in the failings of those, whom God did raise and restore again.

Caine first of all did secretly murmr at his brother Abel, Examples of both
sorts.
but afterward he bore deadly hatred unto him. Thirdly, he murdered him with
the jaw bone of an Ass. Fourthly, being convicted as it were before God, in a
question that might have led him to repentance, he answeth as wickedly as
before he had done, Genes. ^.
Am I my brothers keeper. The like we find in Indas his first sin noted unto
us, was covetousness, he grumbles at the poor woman's liberality, when she
powered that precious unguent upon Christ, John 12.5.6.
this would have bin sold, and given to the poor: his meaning was for his own
private purse for the text says, He carried the bag:

After this not having repented, he falls into a higher degree of
covetousness, for now for thirty pieces he will sell and betray his own
Master Mat. 26.
. After that, he proceeds unto the worst of all, and that was to despair of
the mercies of God. Augustine.
O nomen sub quo nemini desperandum est, notwithstanding this strong anchor of
salvation to all believers Heb. 6.19.
: yet he proceeds to his own execution, he went and hanged himself: thus
wickedness does multiply and huddle upon the heads of them, who have not called
upon God for true repentance.

This we may further see in those, whom God has forgiven and restored.

First, our first parents, how did they multiply even at the first: Euah looks
upon the fruit. Secondly, she holds a conference with Satan. Thirdly, she
tastes of it though it were forbidden. Fourthly, she gives her husband, to make
him as guilty as her felfe. Fifthly, she excuses her fact, and extenuateth it,
when God questions her Genes. 3.
.

The like we find in David, that man of God, who 2. Sam. 1.
first having seen the nakedness of Bethsheba, sends for her, then he
commits folly with her, then upon her proouing with child sends for Vriah
her husband, and at his coming, uses all means to make him lie with his
wife, that so he might have shadowed his wickedness, and to that end
labors to make him drunk: but when this would not take place, then he
proceeds to blood; and for this purpose, writes unto Ioah the Captain of the
Host, that he might be placed in the forefront of the battle, that so he
might be smitten and die, the which was effected, and so innocent Vriah
murdered.

The like gradation we find in Peter, who at the first out of a fainting fear
is afraid to confess his Master, but very peremptorily denies, that ever he
knew him, afterward being thereunto pressed, he grows deeply offended, and
at last he swears and curses, he never knew the man, all which will show us,
how far we shall go in a course of wickedness, if God do not stay us.

Sin will begin to possess that man, that does not resist it, and break it
of in time, for it enters in three ways, as one of the learned observes.

1. Blandiendo, first, 3. Degrees in a course of sin.
it smiles upon us like the strumpet, Prou. 7.

2. Delectando, Secondly, it takes away our hearts, as Absalom would steal
away the hearts of the people: 2. Samuel.

3. Regnando, Thirdly, it takes possession like the strong man Luke 11.
: then whose are we until a stronger come, and cast him out: thus the wicked
they decline sin per omnes casus.

Innominatino per superbiam, in genitiuoper luxuriam, in datiuo per Symoniam,
in accusatiuo per detractationem, in vocat^to per adulationem, in ablatiuoper
rapinam, and yet for all these, Iezabel and her crew are certainly persuaded,
that they can sin, and not be seen.

1. Reasons for the progress of sin.
Sin grows in the heart, as the child does in the womb: for as the infant
has his increasings, even by degrees, until he come to see the light, and be
borne into the world, according as Job has it: Job 10.10.11.
Thou have powered me out as milk, and turned me into curds like cheese, thou
have clothed me with skin and flesh, thou have joined me together with
bones and sinews. So is it with the ungodly man, his beginnings were but evil
imaginations, which he never resisted, then afterward out of the abundance of
his heart his mouth spoke, either falsely, furiously, or fainedly, which he
never repented, and then at length he becomes all these, and acts any part of
wickedness whatsoever.

Romans 1.28
, that as they have not regarded to know God, so the Lord has given them up to
their own hearts lusts to work all manner of wickedness: and this comes first
of all by the little or no account that we make of sin, Bernard. Tract. de de
gradibus hum.
at first: this, as that father notes upon the point of excusing or
extenuating sin, when sin is found out, and the question is, who has, done
it? the sinner answers, Nonfaeci, if that will not serve the turn but that
it be proved, then it is turned, Si faeci non male faeci, if the evil be proved,
then it is translated, si male faeci, non multum male, if the quality and
quantity be proved, then it has a fourth evasion, si multum male, non male
intention: if good or evil intents be by divinity confuted, then our last
refuge is, aliena tamenfaeci perswasione, and thus we spin out iniquity and
give it suck from such a breast of mainetenance and excuse, as if it were very
lawful to do evil.

Let us therefore descend unto the life of this doctrine and that is to show
our uses and applications.

Uses.
1. All these proofs, reasons, examples and illustrations do echo forth
unto us this first use, Principijs obsta: look to the beginning of evil, kill
sin in the neast, before it brings forth, for it has a cursed offspring,
thou must set a watch over thy mouth, as David says, Psalm. 39.
thou must make a covenant with thine eyes Job. ^1.
: thou must examine thine heart Psalm. 4.
: if it be a proud heart at the first, it will after spawne forth into a false
heart, if become a false heart, it will not be long, before it be a cruel
heart: if it grow to be a cruel heart, a little time will make it a hard heart,
if it be hardened, then surely the next degree must needs be a reprobate sense,
the very judgment, that God suffers the most ungodly to fall into: O then stay
the beginnings of wickedness, and follow the divine counsel of thy Christ,
who wishes thee to look unto thy members, and if thine eye offend thee, to
pluck it out, if thy hand offend thee, to cut it off, that is, cut or take away
that sin, that grows by means of thine eye or thy hand, and do it in
time, least with the leprosy it run further and further.

Amongst the many diseases, or maladies that happen unto man's body, there is
one that they call by the name of Gangren, The Gangren.
which does affect altogether the joints, and the present remedy thereof is
immediately to cut off that first joint, which is first affected, or else it
presently takes another, and so from that unto a third, unless it be thus
ordered by decision: this is the nature of sin, which unless it be cut off
in the motion, proceeds unto the action, from the action unto delectation,
Aristot. log. Habitus est difficulter mobilis a subiecto.
from delectation unto assuefaction or custom, from that unto a habit never
to be removed, a dangerous leprosy, both for infection and dispersion,
unless there be a timely prevention.

Let this be considered in all our temptations unto sin, Thetheefe.
if it be unto stealth, we begin with a pin, then a point, then a shilling,
then a pound, at length any thing: O let the young thief take heed of an old
judgment, unless he repent and leave that sin.

It may be they have escaped many times and that emboldens them, but he that
leads them will never leave them, until they are left unto the law both of
God and man, unless they stay these beginnings by true touch of conscience.

The adulterer does not presently fall upon the bed to commit wickedness, The
adulterer.
but first his eye sends a message to his heart, his heart gives consent unto
the action, and then the time and place, purpose is concluded, whereas if the
eye went single the whole body would have been single and that first restraint,
would cut off the cursed consequents that always do proceed from that sin.

The liar, The lier. Mendacium, perniciosum, officiosum, ioco sum.
who kills his own soul and vents falsehoods of al sorts, sometimes to destroy
a Brother, as these false witnesses did against Naboath, sometimes out of their
pretended charity to save anger, or prevent displeasure, sometimes out of the
old wives Calender, tell strange and merry lies, fables of great antiquity
and no less iniquity, all these lies had their beginning, which should have
been suppressed at the first, but for want thereof makes the ingredient so
perfect, that a man cannot believe one word, that comes out of his mouth, and
if it happen that such a man speak truth which is but sildome, yet it is not
believed, and it is just upon a liar speaking truth, but sildome never to be
believed. O then season thy mouth at first with truth, for thy God is a God of
truth, and in that thou have not prevented this sin in time, Mendaci ne
credas, ne iurantiquidem.
thou have lost thy birthright for the liars cannot call God their Father, for
they have a father by themselves, even the devil, who is the father of lies
John 8.44.
; stay therefore these beginnings, lest the latter end prove fearful unto
thee: for thou can not shake of these things when thou will; and therefore
do it when thou may: Consuetudo est altera natura.
take heed of a custom in evil, for a Blackemoore shall sooner change his
hue, or a Leopard his spots, then they shall ever do good, that have been
accustomed unto evil. Ier. 13.23


So then let us conclude this use, cure the disease in time, before it grow
incurable, whether it be pride, envy, slander, disobedience, deceit,
oppression, revenge, profaneness, adulteries, falsehoods, murmurings,
treacherous practices, or the like: cleanse thy heart in time, lest thou become
incorrigible and inconuertible, which must needs be damnable in the latter end.

Use 2.
This serves to display the devils hatred unto mankind, who does not only
seek like a Lion, whom to devour, but also is always tempting us to devour
1. Peter 5.
one another, as here Iezabel has nothing to ease her stomach withal, but
blood and revenge: thus we devour one another, as if man, who is created after
the Image of God, were of no more account, but presently upon our private
discontentments and grudges, to butcher them up, as if we were Canibals, even
to feed upon our brethren and to drink up their blood, as it were in boules.

Hence it is, that if any man stand in our way, or in our light, we conclude
him presently, and either by potion, or some other sinister practice, we
pronounce him dead, so little account do we make of that blood, which is so
precious in the eyes of God: thus we fall one upon another, upon a
displeasure, as Caine does upon Abel Genes. 4.8.
, and ease our stomachs and have our desires, forgetting that blood must have
blood, and that it cries for vengeance against us: this is the Devils malice
against us, who stirs up after this manner. Will thou endure and pocket up
these wrongs, will thou be accounted base minded, and wilt not maintain thy
reputation? this is rhetorique, and the rule is, that the lie deserves the
stabbe: that it is honorable and the trial of an Heroical spirit to enter
into single combat, and their honor is their life, and these Maxims makes
them like fierce Tigers one against another, so cruel are we grown, so
dangerous the times, as that Ieremies caution may well be our observation for
our latter times, Ier. 9.4.
Take you heed every one of his neighbor, and trust you not in any Brother
for they will utterly supplant and destroy one another.

Thus vindicta, vindicta, is our common place among the common people, yea,
nobler breasts have been set on fire with revenge, as if the blood and death of
innocents would not as well cry for vengeance against them, as against other
men: but he that looks into the book of God finds, that the greater the
offender is in this kind, the greater the punishment has bin, not one of Ahabs
house shall be left to make water against the wall, and as for Iezabel her
self, the very dogs shall lick their lips after her blood, and be glutted
with it; let this therefore, but especially the fear of the Lord temper our
passions, and so guide our understandings, that we give not place unto the
devil, Ephesians. 4.
in these so deadly and damnable enterprises.

Use 3.
This serves for our animaduersion, as concerning the condition of them that
thus proceed in the degrees of finne, surely their judgment sleeps not, but
increases as their sins are enlarged, Hell is said to be enlarged with these
augmentators, for they are upon the skore, and it runs upon the reckoning,
until the Lord come to render unto every man according to his works, the
merciful Advocate Jesus Christ the righteous pleads the causes of all
penitent sinners 1. John 2.1
: but these men in their hearts that cannot repent, heap unto themselves wrath
against the day of wrath, and declaration of the vengeance and judgment of
God, who, as the Apostle says, will render it unto them To. 2.5.6.
. This is a fearful condition: for if every sin in his own nature deserve
death, and that is the wages of it 1 Romans 6.23.
: how then shall these men answer the many thousand sins that have been
committed by them without feeling.

The Apostle shows, that the destruction of such men sleeps not: 1. Pet.
2.2.3.
The Lord will awaken unto them, and suddenly come with the account: they have
been long inthe action, but their destruction shall sweep them away in a
moment, and their confusion must be of longer continuance: for as they have
been continual transgressors, so must they be continually tormented with
flames unquenchable, with horror unspeakable, lo thus they stand, or rather
fall, who do not think our God is just to recompense their wickedness.

When they are ripe, or rather rotten in their sins, then comes the dreadful
harvest, they shall be served as God threatens the Amorites; Genesis 15.14
When they have filled up the measure of their sins, then shall they be
rooted out, says the Lord.

This is the same which was declared unto Amos in a Vision, Amos 8.1.^
where he saw a basket of Summer fruit, whereby is meant ripeness, or the
time that the fruit should be gathered; Now says the Lord, the end is come, I
will pass by this people no more.

Let this be considered, O ye men of earth, the God of heaven will not be
mocked, and therefore be not you deceived, whatsoever sins are newly committed,
do not think the old sins are forgotten, unless thou be a new man, then
thy sins of old shall not be imputed unto thee Psalm. 32.1.
: otherwise it will go hard against us, unless that garment of righteousness
cover us, the Lord will write bitter things against us, and make us to possess
the iniquities of our youth. Job 14.26


Christians ought to be Graduates in godliness.
as the other do in wickedness: let them be the Lords Graduates, and
proceed in that famous University of Sion, even in the Church of God: of this
proceeding, the Propher David speaks in the Psalms; Psalm. 84.7.
The righteous grow from strength to strength, until they appear before God
in Sion, there they are to be presented, and there it is, that they shall be
eternized: let them therefore begin with godliness, and end with golinesse, and
they shall not loose their labor, for it has the promises both of this life,
and the life to come 1. Tim. 4.8
proceed therefore, O you Saints and servants of the Lord, you fear the Lord,
they that do so, need to fear nothing else: keep your inheritance, it is
far beyond Naboaths Vineyard, Iezabel shall not hurt you, the gates of hell
shall not prevail against you, the Kingdom of heaven is prepared for you, and
for all those, that love the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the
Father, and the most blessed Spirit, one eternal, immortal, invisible and God
only wise, be praise and dominion with all glorious ascription, now and for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

