O the most excellent / most redoubted and most christian king: King Edward
the fourth Johan kay his humble poet lawreate / and most lowly servant:
knelyng unto the ground says salute. It is not out of your knowleche and herty
pity most prudente Prince: how that thies forty years passed: the turks
hane vexed the christian parties and hane prevailed / and had of the christian men
the ouerhande: in so much that now late agaynest al right, and reason were
possessours in Italye / in the domynyon and ground of the most constant king
Ferrand of Arragon king of Naples: in preiudyce and horrible terror to the
court apostolyque and to al crystendome. For by that the great Turk late named
Mahumete proposed and ordained great might and strenghte to undo and subuerte
the holy cytee of Rome, and put Italye to his subiectyon / and after lightly
to overcome and oppress the resydue of crystendome. But Ihesu christ our
redemptour would not his christian people to be put into longer pain / or to more
trybulacion: he has retrayte and withdrawn his rod: as a kind father to his
dear children content with great menasses and lytil punycyon. Certes the
sins of the christian people: as I think: and lytil regard to our saueour
Ihesu: meued and caused the ryghtwys god: to warn us to have him beter in
mind by the flagel of this great and mighty enemy. But after repentence and
prayers of our holy father the pope: Cardynalles: Christian princes: and all
christian people: and with so great pardones of the court of seyntes petre and
paul: through the grace of the blessed Ihesu: this great turk in his most
pride / and his most hope has made be sodeyn death amend of his live: and is
the cruel generacyon of the turks for evermore / with gods grace deiecte /
and cast out of Italye And all the turks among them self in great Werres.
Which thing is token to all christian princes here after to recover the parties
christian. Certain yt is most gracyous prince: that he few days before his death
laid siege to the noble cytee of Rhodes: which is the key and yate of all
crystendome. But there he was put to his worse and to shame. And be cause that I
have seen and red in Italye of the oppressyng and captyuyce by the said Turk
of the worshipful cytee sometime of Constantinople: and also not many years
passed of the unfortunate loss of the streng cytee of Nygrepount. For the
Cardynale greek of Mycene made and wrode in latyne the lamentable captyuyte of
Constantinople to the pope: and Balthazar perusyn wrote in the langayge Italyon
of Nygrepount to the lord of Vrbyn: for to meue the christian people to prayers
and prouycion. I have thought more beter labor and more commendable purpos if
I in the reverence of Ihesu christ / and in the worship of your good grace
should put with dylygence out of latin in english / and to the understanding of
your people the dylectable newesse and tithynges of the glorious victory of
the Rhodyans agaynest the turks. whereof they redyng shall have Joy and
consolacyon and shall alwey deuoutely know by daily miracles and gods works
the inestimable power and certente of our christian faith. And in so much more
to your hyensse I make a yefte of my labor: that your good grace abondeth
with all virtues: also much as in a most christian king longs to be: And also I
am of this opinion that all the common well and common good comes through god and
the kings to their peoples. wherefore what so ever fruit or pleasur your people
shall in this my studies find they shall yield glory to god and grace and than
kings to your hyenes. The which god almighty keep ever and prosper with all
your noble desires

^Yth that I have aplyed me to declare and publysshe to all christian people the
siege of the noble and inuyncyble cytee of Rhodes: First I purpose to tell and
opene the causes that meued the cruel tyrant Mahumete great Turk and
insacyable enemy to our christian faith / that he with so great might and so
great streynght vexed the Rhodyans: how be it / that before this time the
rhodyans and the Turks often have had werrys: Nevertheless this cruel Turk
after the subduyng and oppressyng of the miserable and dolorous cytee of
Constantynople has begone and ordained agayns the cytee of Rhodes greter
werrys theme ever did his predecessors. For the entente and purpos of the
said great Turk was / to persecute and outerly undo the christian faith.
Therefore after the space of.xxiiii. years whenne that he had conquered many
empyres / kyngdommes / and lordshyppes was wroth to see the little cytee of
Rhodes standing so nygh his kyngdommes and lordshyppes: not subject / nor
contrybutarye to him: Therefore four diverse tymys with ships and men of werre
assauted the castelles and places of the Isle of Rhodes / where both by land
and by water thorough gods grace he was venquysshed and overthrow and of his
oste many slain with the Rhodyans / many drown^d and many put to flight and
to shame: Therefore after he saw the noble hertys of the knights and people of
Rhodes that nether by fyghtyng / nether by power he might attain the cytee:
thought and ymagyned by subtylyte and cauteles to have his entente thereof. And
so often times after that he had great part of Greece to his obeysaunce temptyd
to make peace and amyte with the Rhodyans: so that they would knowledge him as
their souuerayn: and yearly yolde him a little trybute / which condytyon the
Rhodyans alleweye withseyed and dyffyed. And when he saw that in no wise he
could get nor attain trybute of rhodes in that manner: offerred them yet
peace: upon this condytyon. That the embassedoures of the knights of seynte
Johan of Jerusalem: that is to say of Rhodes should come to his court and
present to him certain royal yeftes: the which he thought to resceyue under
the title of trybute: and so by wyles intended to make the said cytee of
Rhodes trybutarye to him. but he could not speed his false purpos. For the noble
and victoryous Prince and renomed lord The lord master of Rhodes and his
pendent counseyl: refused of their ennemy peace nor would be of amyte with him
that was a persecutor of crystes / ^yth and crystes relygyon: And so day and
night the most nobelest knights of the said Relygyon: according to their
order helped and defended our faith and the said cytee of Rhodes. For thees
causes now said the furyous enemy conceived agayns the cytee of Rhodes
inestymable hate read and wrath: and ymagyned / if he might: outerly to
dystroye the said Rhodes. And to this crnel purpose he was also meued by
conseyl and persuasyons of the traitors of crystes faith: the which had in
knowledge all the places and secrets of Rhodes. Among the which falls
traitors and renegates was one especyal of the cytee of Rhodee: called Antony
Melagolo: a man unkind to god and to man. He was noble of birth and evil of
condycyons and living / the which by fore times thorough evil guydyng and
onthryftenesse had brought him self to pouerte. This man thought and ymagyned
by his false and subtyl wit a mean to tray and put in destruction his owen
country. And therefore he dylygentely and pryuely espied in the cytee of Rhodes
all the places defensybles and indefensybles / and pourtrayed and peynted them
in a papire and bore the said pourtraytoure and papir to the cytee of
Constantynople / and anon after he showed hit to the gretest cappetayn of the
Turk / and gave him great confort / that he should but in his mind and dispose
him seefe to the destructyon and captyute of Rhodes. And so deed an other falls
renegate called Dymetryus Sopheano / the which after the captyuyte and
destructyon of the cytee of Nygrepont renayed and forsouke the faith of christ
and went to the Turk. This Dymentryus by fore times had dwelled in Rhodes /
and had been embassedeur from the Turk to the Rhodyans: under a faynte and
color to desire peace. and so after the space of.iii. years which were spended
and occupied in the conseylyng of these works and that it had been showed: that
they might come to their entente. the foresaid capeteyne was well pleased. To
the which also many other renegates had given by diverse menes counseyl and
comfort But among them all the foresaid Antony: said and affermed That a great
part of the walls of the cytee of Rhodes was old and in decay. and that
there were but few men of dyffence in the cytee. and also they lakked
vytaylles. and that they could not have in time of need help of christian
kings. For they were to far from them. And all this was graunded and for
certain affermed by Dymetryus and his felawes renega^es. And so with their
falls comfort / it was thought necessary to the party of the Turk / to
ordeyne their engynes and instruments: for the siege of Rhodes. In what time
that thees things were thought and counseyled in Constantynople among the
turk and his counseyle / The vyctoryous Prince and lord: The lord master of
Rhodes called Master Peter Daubusson: a man of high prudence and of the noble
blood and house of France / had knowledge of the conspyracye and falls
ymagynacyon the which was wrought agaynest the cytee of Rhodes. And so by the
grace of almighty god in the space of three years next following made great
reparacyons and renewed the old walls of the forsayde cytee of Rhodes: where
as need was. And also made pollitike and great prouysyons: that is to say / of
wine / whete and other vytaylles necessaryes. And wrote epysteles and lettres
unto all contreyes / lands and prouynces of christian relygion for the knights
of his order / commandyng them to come keep and defend the noble cytee of
Rhodes. And so by the will of god almighty: Rhodes in all haste was fortefyed /
with vytaylles / ships: and men of werre. But the traitor Antony then
being in the cytee of Constantinople and not having knowledge of this great
prouycyon of Rhodes. comforted and exhorted the great Basse / that ye to say:
the great capetayne under the Turk. that he should in all haste ordeyne him
to the siege of Rhodes. Whereupon the said Bassie aduertysed the great Turk of
the enformacyons of the said Antony and other renegates. Wherefore among the
knights and men of werre of the turkys party was calleed a great parliament and
conseyle. where many diverse opynyons were taken. For sum of them said. That
hit was impossyble to get Rhodes so lyghtely as Antony had said. For the cite
was so strong and the knights were so noble that they would rather lose their
lives in fyghtyng fo: crystes law: and for the welfar of krystendom then ever
to see in their life Rhodes in subiectyon of the Turk. Some of the turks sayde^
That Rhodes lightly should be had. and that since the time that Antony came to
Constantinople which were but.iii years: the lord Master of Rhodes couth not
pourueye for so many dyffautes of the cytee: like as the renegate Antony
Melagolo had told and given him to understand. Therefore hit was finally and in
all haste concluded in the foresaid parliament and counseyle. That both by
land: and by see they should make them ready for to goo to the siege of the said
cytee of Rhodes. And forthermore were there called many connyng men in making
of instrumens of werre / that is to say Bombardes / gowns / culuerynes /
serpentines and such other Among the which was one called George / renegate^^
man of subtyl wit that dwelled in Counstantinople and there had wife and
children. and for his subtle wit and great connyng in making of such
instruments of werre: had of the Turk great rewards / which George.xx.
years before passed had been in Rhodes / the which Cytee then was not so
strong as now. And whenne the Turk commanded / that the cytee of Rhodes should
be pourtrayd and peynted on a table and showed unto him. Among all other
this George brought the best patron drawn and pourtrayed. and so by him and by
other the Turk took for the last conclusyon to send and lay siege to Rhodes.
Consydering that with instruments of werre al manner of walls may be thrawen
down / And also consyderyng his great power and might: by the which he had
conquered and gotten.ii. Empyres.xii. kyngdommes and many other lands and
places. He also consideryd the great goods and profettes the which he might
have of Rhodes / for asmoche as he knew the great comodytees and strenght of
the same cytee of Rhodes / both by land and by see. And forthermore ymagyned
/ if he had Rhodes that he might or deyne werres agaynest many other lands /
both eest and west. Also this Turk knew right well: that the said Rhodes was
an Isle of great name and of good aye^: and that Rhodes in old time was of
great amyte and chierte with the Romans And also he thought. if he might
have the foresaid cytee of Rhodes: he should lyghtely put under his subiectyon al
other countries about: and so in conclusyon he should conquer and subdue all the lands from the sea called Egeum unto the sea called Yoneum. that is to say
from the est part of the world to the west part. Notwithstanding sum of his
capptaynes counseyled him that he should not lay siege to Rhodes. and that was
token of his evil adventure. Nevertheless by his commandment / his men of
werre came toward Rhodes / both by land and by see. And they that went by
see: sailed on til time they arrived to a country called Lycya. And (...) days
after that they were arrived there with their naueye came also theder the other
great oste by land: And so they met each other in the foresaid country of
Lycya which is but xxii. miles from Rhodes. Also they carried with them by see
great instrumens of werre. that is to say Bumbardes. gowns / serpentynes with
many other instrumens of werre. for they were so great and so many that they
coud not bring them fro Counstantinople: but saylyng with ships and gale^e^:
And of the said naueye and company was Basse: that is to say capetayn in
english a Greek which was of the noble ho^s called Palliogolus: the which
when he should take shippyng asked after Antony Melagolo. and hit was told him
that four days before he was myscheuously slain in Counstantinople Therefore he
took with him Dymetryus renegate felawe to the said Antony. and anon after
their departing fro Constantinople by see: the turk send as said y^ his other
cost by land that went far about by the countries of Asya for fere lest
christian men should know their entente. The Turk also closed and stopped all
manner of passayges of his landys. save the secret weyes that his oste went.
Nevertheless the lord Master of Rhodes by his great wit and dylygence had
knowledge of all this array. For the Turk had messyngers that were not all
true: for some of thayme told thayre masters conseyle. But when the oste that
went by land came to Lycye the Rhodyans had great marvel what they were.
and the turks made a commyn sclandyr to dysceyue the Rhodians and saydyn that
their lord the great Turk was deed / and they were send thedyr to keep the
country of Lycye from harm of enemies. But the lord Master of Rhodes had
knowledge of al thees wyles and falsede of the Turk. And therefore he with great
dylygence made strong with men of werre and vytaylles all the holds / both
castelles and forslettes within the Isle of Rhodes. That is to say / Longon /
The Castylle of Saint Petre / Feracle / Lynde / Monoleto. And all the people
of the Isle of Rhodes wythdrewe to the strong holds with their goods and
catelles. And the barle that was ripe lightly they gederyd hit up and took
hit with thaym And be cause that whete and other manner of corns were not all
ripe they plukkyd thaym up fro the ground as they were and brought thayme to
the towns and holds. And whenne they were in doing of these werkys with great
haste and furye the wache that was on the top of the hylle beside seynte
stephen showed a token and a knowleche: that in the west from Counstantinople
was on the sea saylyng a great nombre of ships. And then the most part of
the people of rhodes went unto the hye places and saw them. And anon the
same ships went toward a town called Physoom. which is in the countreye
called Lycye upon the sea side.xxii. miles from Rhodes: and there they landed
and received the men of werre that, came theder by land by the country of
asya as I have said before. And then they turned theyme in the sea toward
Rhodes. and so in a short time they werre at the banks of the Isle of Rhodes.
And the nombre of the ships that came to the banks of Rhodes was a honderd.
And th^s was in the year of our lord a thousand four honderd and fo^^ schore
the.x. kalendre of the month of June. And anon with great dylygence they
voyded their ships of the men of werre and of their ordonnances. And the men
of werre made their parkes and their tents strongly upon the hylle of seint
Stephen before said. And afterward they putted their ordonnance on the sea
bank under the hylle of Seynte Stephen wherefore the Rhodyans saw all them
that were on the hill But they might not see their ordonnances and instrumens
of werre which were on the sea bank under the hylle: be cause of the hyenesse
of the hylle. And so anon the ships went and came again from the banks
of Rhodes to Physoom. bryngyng with theyme at every time their men of wrere
toward Rhodes. And in the mean while sum of the turks on horsebake and on
foot the most hardyest ran to the walls of Rhodes with great menassing and
crakyng. And the Rhodyans with great manhood went agaynest theyme / and put
theyme to flyghte and slew many of theyme. And in the next day following the
turks made again an other assaute whiles the Rhodyans were at dinner. but also
they were put to flyghte and some of theyme to death. But there was one of the
knights of Rhodes the which auentured him self to far and was slain of
the turks. and then they took his heed and put yt on a spear and ran
with great mirth and Joy to their company and oste. And the body was
brought to Rhodes with the rayemente. The turks anon after set three
bombardes of great vyolence in the chyrcheyarde and gardens of Seynte Antony:
which was but a lytill space from Rhodes. And with thees bombardes they
studied and thought to thrawe down the hye toure and strong place of Rhodes
called / the toure of Seynte Nycolas: and covered their bombardes with great
logges and trees and bourdes of great defense. But whenne the Rhodyans had
spyed it they alsoo ordained three great bombardes agaynes the oste of the
turks: which casted throe the right side of their oste great and mighty
stones: which did theyme great harm. And in the morning following George the
great gonner / of the which we have said before: came suddenly as amasid man
to the dyche of Rhodes toward the palace of the Lord master / and saluted and
greted the Rhodyans frendely and mekely cried and prayed / that he might come
in to the city / and so he was resceyued. And be cause that he had the
rayement and leuerey of the Turk / sum smote at him. But many dyffended him
and brought him unto the Lord master of Rhodes. This George was a personable
man and welbesene: of great eloquence / and of great malice / a duche man
borne. And anon he was asked: which was the cause of his coming theder. He
answerde. For the faith and relygyon of Ihesu christ / and for the welfare and
worship of all crystendom. And be cause that he forsook the false believe of the
Turk: therefore he was received with great joy. and also his purpos was
gretely preysed if he would abide stedfastely in hit as he said. Anon after yt
was asked him. what oste the Turk had send agaynest Rhodes / and what nombre
of fyghtyng men: and what ordenance of instrumens of werre. George with
boldenes and with wit: and as it seemed with throth answered to the questyons
and said / that the turk had the nombre of an honderd thousand fyghtyng men /
and xvi. great bombardes euerychon of.xxii. foot of lenght / of the which the
lest casted stones every stone of.ix. spannes in compass about. But within
Rhodes were many opynyons and diverse sentences of the coming of the said George
from the Turk to christian folk. For sum said: that he came as a spy. and
that before this time he with great malice had done many things agaynest god.
and specially had forsaken crystes law. and that for certain he werked now
for to betraye Rhodes. The most part said: that he was a great master in
making of instruments of werre. and that he was a defensyble man in what
someuer place he was in: and that he came to Rhodes as a penytent man that had
forsaken his faith and his maker / and that such a wise man as he was: would
not come to Rhodes allon to dysceyue such a prudent man: as the lord master
was: and such a great felyshyp of knights of Rhodes. And so was thought for
the beter: that George should abide in Rhodes. But anon few days after /
sum that loved the christian faith in the oste of the Turk shotre arowes with
lettres into Rhodes: which lettres were fond and warned the Rhodyans: to be
ware of the treson of George. Therefore the lord master comman ded anon. that
george should be kept with.vi. might men which should take hid on him / But
nevertheless he herd and had at all owres georgys conseyle to such prouycyons
that belongs to engynes and instruments of werre / After this the turks
with great might of bombardes and other instruments of werre labored day and
night to put down and ouerthrawe a place which was a quater of a mile
within the sea by the weste bank of Rhodes: which maked with her walls and
wings a plesaunt haven to ships and galeyes. and is called the tour of Saint
Nycholas / and it was made in the old time and after the old and bygge makmg
of walls. The said tour was set so nygh the city of Rhodes be cause that
no person by land nor ly water should come to Rhodes without their license.
And also the mouth of the haven and that place was so streyte / that nether
galeye nether ship might enter / but only one ot ones. and above this port
was the foresaid saint Nycolas toure / the which was made of the Rhodyans
within thye honderd years. And the turks thought: that if they had this tour
in their subiectyon: that they should lyghtely overcome Rhodes / considering
the great commodyte of the haven and of the self place of the tour. And
therefore they casted agaynes the tour three honderd great stones of bombardes
and brake the toure stoutely and put hit in a great danger to be ouerthrawen /
and in much less space then ever the Rhodyans thought that hit should have been possible. But nevertheless the nether old and auncyon wall stood
stedfastely. for hit was made in old time of a bygge matere and substance. And
anon the lord master alleway prouydent and besye came to the tour with a
barg^e full of men / and made reparacyons with stones and trees / as in such a
time the case required / and put^e in the ^^ur many fyghtyng men and the
manlyest of his oste / the which should be the strenghte and the keeping of
that place in the toure that was so beten in the side toward the west: that
there was left no manner of reparacyon: but with hands and nombre of strong
men. After that thees prouycyon had been made in the forsayde tour: they
ordained men of werre under the walls of the cytee and under the wall upon
the bank of the sea: the which was from the castle of Seynte Peter unto a
certain place called Mandrache. and there were men on horsebake and on foot /
that should let the turks to come to land in that cost: and there abowte
the sea is at every tide flow and ebb: wherefore were there thrust done pypes
and tonnes and tabelles full of nails: so that the turks what someuer ebbyng
befell should not pass over And forthermore was made another great prouycyon:
in that part of the cite where the lord master stood in clean harness. for
in that part were ordained bombardes and other great instruments castyng great
stones for to break the galeyes of the turks. and also under the tour that the
Lord master kept were lytill ships filled with gonne powder and brymme
stone and other such things: the which when the galeyes of the turks came
ner^ should be put in fire to the destructyon of the galeyes of the turks.
And whenne thees things were so ordained: all the Rhodyans with manhood abode
from day to day / and from our to our: that the turks should give them
assaute / and in the morning neyt following the turks came with fifty galeyes
from the hylle of Saint Stephen aforsayd toward the cytee and they thought
shortly to come a land / and there they made a great cry and a great noise
with trompes and taberettys and other such instruments be cause that they
should make afered our folk of them for their great noise But anon after
whenne the turks with their galeyes came nere the toure aforesaid: the
bombardes and other instruments of werre which were there ordained. brake
with great might the arayes of the turks and put them offe fro the cost with
their great myscheffe. And in this deed the Lord Master of Rhodes him self
came out of the walls of the said toure with his company: for to fight
hand for hand with the turks. and there were ouerthrawen and put to dech.vii
honderd turks and many were wounded and many drowned / as sum sayden that
came to Rhodes from the turks. After thye the Lord master clean armed and
rydyng upon a mighty horse came again to Rhodes with his feleshyp: as an
Emperor vyctoryous / and came to the church: where was the ymayge of our
lady: called our Lady on the hylle of Felerene: which place is full of
miracles. and there he kneled down and yolde thankynges and leuynges (...) God
and our lady of his vyctorye. and afterward came to his pallays and howshold
for to refresshe his company And so whenne the turks saw / that they could
not overcome the forsayde toure: they purposed to break the walls of the cytee
with great bombardes and gonnes in diverse places of the same cytee / and that /
be cause that the puyssance and might of the Rhodyans should be dyuyded / and
that they should not be all in one place: as they had been late in the defense of
the foresaid toure of Seynte Nycolas. and also they deed yt for more lyghtely to
overcome the strenghte of the foresaid coure Therefore in the night next
following the turks with great noise brought great bombardes and gonnes toward
the walls of Rhodes in that side of the cytee where as the Iues (...) keeping
wache and defense by the commandment of the lord may sier. and before the said
walls they putted.viii. great instruments: which casted great stones in the
cite. and had made ronde abowte bollewerkes to the instruments, because that
the Rhodyans should not hurt them. Another great instrument they putted at
foot of a hylle toward the weste: above the which hylle stood the galowes of
the Justice of Rhodes: and from that place they casted great stones in rhodes /
in that part of the cytee where the wind mylnes were / and brake them all to
p^ec^s. Whenne the Lord master saw the purpos and the wyles of his enemies
which had then made much more strenghte and might then ever they had done by
fore: he or deyned in Rhodes processyons generalles with great deuccyon of him
and all his people of Rhodes. and after that they had made their prayers to
god and to our lady in whoes quarrel they faught: the Lord master anon
commanded to put down the houses and habytacyons of the Iues that were with
in the cytee by the walls: called the Iure of Rhodes. Also were there made
wythinne the cytee of Rhodes great and mighty dyches: for the saving of the
body of the cytee / if the turks gate the first walls. and therefore they
made day and might great works / as walls of tymbre and many other things
defensybles / to the which labor every creature in rhodes of all manner of
aage both men and women of all manner states putted and aplyed them self and
their goods with great will and great devotion for Ihesus sake. And in thees
while / the bombardes and great gonnes of the turks casted down and destryed
the walls of the cytee of Rhodes / with so great might and strenghte and with
so great wonder: that all they that were in Rhodes / strangers and other old
and young of all the countries of crystendom said / that they herd never
strokes of bombardes so great and so horrible as thylk were. The false traitor
George said also. that hit was Impossible after his thynkyng to find in all
the world such instruments of werre / that were so great and horrible of
noise as they were / for they of a town called Reed which is an honderd
miles from Rhodes toward the eest herd the great brute and the great noise as
they said afterward. And also for to show and declare the meruoylous
gretenesse of the said bombardes and gonnes: the great pyles and posts strong
and mighty that were stykked in the gronde behind at taylle of the forsayde
great bombardes gave such great and mighty shaking that the howses of Rhodes
other whiles shaked in such a wise like if hit had been a yerth quake. But
they of Rhodes alleway besy and prouydent stopped with trees the great ruin of
their walls / and made also many dyches wythinne the cytee. The turks vexed
also the Rhodyans with many other and diverse instruments of werre. for they
ordained rond above the foresaid Cytee of Rhodes certain instruments of werre
the which ben called Slings or Engynes / And the turks with such
instruments of werre casted in to the eyere a pype full of great stones the
which foll upon the houses of Rhodes and putted them in a wrecched ruin with
great murdre of them that were within for that time: and forthermore they
put in a great thought and sorrow all the hole cytee of Rhodes. for no
person was sure in house with out he were in a kaue. But nevertheless the
prudente and wise Lord Master and his noble conseyle fond a remedy as hit
follows. For anon he commanded: that all manner of women and all folk of
young aage and old aage not able for to fight should be put by the walls of
the town in a void place. for the guyse of the cytees is / to have next the
walls such a void place. and there were made mighty schaffoldes the which
were not so hye as the walls of the cytee. for be cause that the turks should
not aspye hit. for in such void place they casted no stones: but into the
mids of the cite. The young men able to fight kept them self and eshewed
the castyng of the stones in the day light. and in the night they hyded them
in streng places and kaues / so that by the miracles of god and prayers of
christian people few men or bestes of the cite were hurted. The turks not
understanding how god pourneyed and kept the Rhodyans harmeles / ordained two
great slings in a hye place toward the weste: from the which they might seen
all the cite of Rhodes. and fro thens they casted great stones in the mids of
the cytee. In thees mean whiles whenne thees things were so ordained: the
great basse of the turk saw and consyderyd / that the dylygence of the Lord
master noyed much to his power and to his counseyles. Therefore he dysposed by
mean whiles to put to death the foresaid Lord master of Rhodes. And ordained
two turks / of the which one of theyme should goo and yield him self to the
Rhodyans for to live in crystes faith and tell the Rhodyans / that another of
the turks which was his folawe should also come to Rhodes and forsake the false believe of the Turk. But the basse / that is to say the cappetayne of the
turks had ordained / that the same felaw should bring poison into Rhodes: with
which the Lord Master should be put to death: and be cause that thees two
turks should adventure them self to poison the Lord Master: the basse had
promised them many great rewards. But he that came to Rhodes before his felawe
as we have said was in his talkyng and in his purpos: and in all his desyng
in Rhodes fond inconstante and varyante. wherefore anon the Rhodyans had
demyng and plain opinion: that he was come for to work some trayson. And so
after dylygence and s^ray^e examynacyon: he confessed the trayson and his
boldenes and therefore was he put to death as a traytre: The day neyce
following his felawe no thing knowing of this: came toward Rhodes / but the
christian men stroke sore upon him wherefore he fled and turned again to the
turks / and so the basse was begyled of his trayson. In thees whiles the
turks werred agayns one side of the cite called the ward of the Italyans. and
in a derk night they came so nygh that they putted gonnes and great bombardes
upon the banks of the dyches: and made great strenghte with trees rond abowte
that they should not be broken with no manner shottes of the Rhodyans. But anon
after they were spyed and seen. wherefore there was a conseyle made in Rhodes:
where fyfty lykkely young men and very lovers of our lord Ihesu christ
promised them self there to deye in that quarrel: or to destroy in that same
night the said great bombardes and gonnes with all their array. And so a
knight of the order of Saint Johan was capeteyne to the said fyfty lykkely young
men. and they came pryuely by the bothome of the dyche with certain ladders
which they brought with them to the banks where as the bombardes and gonnes
were: and made such a fray that the turks fled away fro the bombardes:
and.x. of them were slain. and also they destreyed all that ordonnaunce and
casted in the dyche. And this done the foresaid fyfty young men with their
capeteyne came again in to the cite of Rhodes as men vyctoryous. Wherefore the
Lord Master of Rhodes gave unto them many worshypfull yeftes be cause of
their virtuous manhood: and for to give courayge and exhortacyon to all
other. And they were resceyued in Rhodes with great glory and Joy and also
they had great thankynges of all the people of Rhodes. Therefore few days
after that this was done: the turks for despyte and great annoye of the
foresaid things which were done unto theyme made anon ready a great
ordonnaunce and came again unto the tour of saint nycolas for to have it. and
anon with their bombardes boldly they casted down the bollewerkes and
forslettes. And as fast as they casted them down the Rhodyans repaired them
again. The turks also made a long b^igge of the length of a quater of a mile.
the which recched from the bank there as the turks lay: unto the bank of
saint Nicolas toure. and was so large: that.vi. men on horseback might ride a
front. and was made with voyded pypes and with bordes strongly nailed upon
them. and purposed to being the same brigge by craft into the water. and they
fested and knytted strongely to the said brigge great and myghts ropes which
had in the other end strong ancures: which ancur^s they fasted with a boat to
the nether bank of the tour / so that the brigge with the drawyng of the cord
and flotyng should have recched to the said bank. Anon afoer that the
Rhedians had knowleche of thees works. a shipman well expert in swimming:
went by night and noted the cords fro the ancre and knytted them unto a
stone of the bank: so that lyghtely whenne the turks drew the cord: they
knew well that they were begyled of the Rhedyans. The lord mayscer of Rhodes
understanding this nobe act: rewarded the foresaid shypman worshipfully and
right largely. And so whenne the turks saw and knew the great frawde which
was done to them of the Rhodyans: thought and ordained that they would bring
the foresaid brygge theder with great strenghte. and nombre of botes being full
of rowers which and toure: great stones of bombardes and of gonnes and wyld
fire and arowes of bows and balestres. And so all the night from twelfe the
clock unto. x. in the day they faught all by derke: but as the fire of the
bombardes and the flammes of the wyldfyre gave light. And so after that the
turks were put out: with their great damage and harm. and that the men of
Rhodes had the vyctorye: a man might have seen three days following ded men of
the turkys party: casted and lvyng in the bank of the sea toward Rhodes.
which were fond arrayed with gold and silver and precious clothyng and part
of their array was seen flotyng in the sea. which geyre and array was taken
up by the christian men with great profit and wynnyng. And in also much more
was this vyctorye in gladness to the Rhodyans: because that there were slain
many noble turks: and in especial a ^^syn of the great turk. the death of the
which was a great sorrow to the great turk and to all his people. and his
body was fond on the bank spolyed of the Rhodyans. And anon after this great
fyghtyng: sum turks yield them to the christian people of Rhodes: and said
for troth that there were slain of the turks three thousand and fyfe honderd:
and that the basse by the space of three days: for sorrow and thought spoke
with no man of his company nor with none other. And anon auysed the great
turk of this great myschyfe that was befalle to them. And in so much more was
wroth / that with so great death of his people and myscheuous harms / he had
no thing profyted agaynest Rhodes: nether agaynes the forsayde tour: but with
hye damage and shame was put offe / as not able with all that feleshyp and
might to overcome the cite of Rhodes / as he had pourposed. And so after that
the turks saw: that they could not win the toure by strenghte and might:
anon they turned their fantasye and studied with all their virtue and
might to assaute the cytee. and in especyal they made great assaut agaynest
the walls that were kept by the Iues: and also agaynes the walls that the
nacyon of Italye kept and defended. and shortly the turks made great
damages and hurtes all abowte the walls of the cytee with their great gonnes
and bombardes: in so much that they thought to come by wyles and subtle
means nygh to the walls of the cite And so they made certain dyches in diverse
places of the fyldes: and covered them with grene bows / and afterward they
pritted earth and turns upon the same: and mined fast and prynely. for they
pourposed to come / to fight hand for hand with the Rhodyans. Also they
ordeygned certain logges which they coueryd with grene bows be cause that
they should not be known: and fro thens they shot to the walls of Rhodes
great bombardes / gomies and serpentynes in such a wise: that no man durst
look out of the walls of the cytee to their fylde and to their works. And in
this while the turks filled a certain place of the dyche of the city with
trees and stones and such other things: so that the dyche was made equal and
playnnyssed unto the heyght of the broken wall: so that lyghtely they might
come for to feyghte hand for hand with the Rhodyans. Then the Lord Master
of Rhodes consyderyng and seeing openly the great hardynesse of the turks: and
also the great danger that the cytee of Rhodes stead in / he as a noble Prince
loving and defendyng his said cytee and lordshyppe and his people: with great
dysygence called all his famous knights and governors of his werree: and
then he declared and showed to theyme with prudence and eloquence the great
dangers / in the which by the furye and open boldness of the turks /
Rhodes the most christian cytee stood in. Few days by fore the siege of Rhodes
/ was come from the royame of France to Rhodes the mighty and exellente
knight named Antony Daubusson: which was brother to the Lord Master of
Rhodes. This Antony Daubusson was Lord in France of a place which is called
Montelyon / a man of great wysedom and counseyle / strong and hardy in werres
and bataylles. He departed from the royaume of France with a companyr of
clenly and lykkely men: which were able to fight under what sum ever baner
that belonged to king or Emperor. And his entente and purpos was: to vysyte
deuoutely the blessed and holy sepulcher of cure saueour Ihesu christ in
Jerusalem. But whenne he understood and perceived: that the great Turk should
come and lay siege to Rhodes: he pourposed to help and defend the cytee of
rhodes with Iuborte of his life and all his company. for he thought: that in
no manner place: nor in no manner wise he might spend his blood better: and
more for the welfare of his soul: then there: where he should fight for the
precious name of our Lord Ihesu christ: and for the ryghtfull quarrel of all
christian faith: and to keep from captyuyte of the turks the noble cytee of
Rhodes. and be cause that his holiness and his herty love which he had to
the faith of Ihesu christ: and also that his great manhood was well known to
all the knights of Rhodes: the Lord Master his brother and all the counseyle
of Rhodes. elected and chosed him capetayn and governor of all the men of
werre. And so manly and wisely he ordeygned and dysposed him to all such
things that should noe to the pourpes of the turks and that should help and
strengh Rhodes for the worship / health and perpetuell glory of all
crystendom: And anon after this he had a great often in which were many
gentle knights / Baylyffes / pryours / Mayseres and (...) of the order of
Seynte Johan. Of the which the most man lie men were borne in England and in
France / and in other countries of the weste. There were also merchauntes and
men of diverse occupacyons of the self Rhodes / and of many places of Grede:
the which in wysedom and prudence of many worldly things had knowledge and
experrence. All thees to geder / with one word / with one heart / and with one
feythe / pourposed and swear to defend and keep the cytee of Rhodes: or else
to dye gladdely and kyndely for him that dyed for us all. And so anon after
a man of Greece / wise and expert in sieges counseyled the lord master and the
Rhodyans to make and ordeygne an engyne called Trebuke like a slynge / which
was great / hye and mighty and casted great and many stones into the host of
the turks. and so by this means the turks were in great fere and Iuber^e.
for their loggyses and tents were broken and smyten to ground: with much and
great damage and hurt to their gonnes / bombardes / serpentynes and all
their ordonnances of werre: so that in few days they resceyued thees hurtes
and dammayges without nombre. We have said before: how the turks fulfilled a
part of the dyche by the walls with stones. And be cause that the Rhodyans
could ^ot void hit openly: they made a mine under the ground: by the which
pryuely they bare the stones in the cytee. But the turks anon perceived: that
the heyght and the hepe of the stones was made less / and that they could not
crepe up by that weye: but if they hasted theyme: and so they did. But
before the rhodyans with great business fond a remedy to the defawtes of the
walls: the which the turks by that side of the cytee had cast down to the
ground. For they withinne the walls not far from the dyche made a front of
a wall with stakes and earth in the mids and with buskes thrusted strongly
to geder and tempered it with water like as they make a mudwalle: and upon this
wall they putted gonnes / culuerynes / wildfyre and barelles full of pyche and
sulfur and great hepes of stones and such things: that should let the turks
to clymbe up: so that hit was a pleasur to see their besynes agaynes the
beginning of the turks assaute And for to have in this work counseyle: was
theder brought the forsayde George traitor. but he showed no cunnyng in the
defense of the cytee as he had promised / and as the rhodyans trusted. For
the false and wikked man was cleasyd to see so great ruin in the pryncypall
walls of Rhodes: and hoped that lyghtely the turk should euercome yt.
Nevertheless for to cover his mind and malice counseyled the Rhodyans to set
a bombarde: which should cast from thens to the host of the turks for to
break their bombardes. but he wyste well that thereof they should heue great
hurt: wh^d^^ ^t had been a token and covenant between the turk and him: or of
his owen auyse did hit: thynkyng that the turks should in so much more casie
toward that part for to veeke the Rhodyans shot. But so as he counseyled
was done. and anon great harms and damages came of hit. for the turks
dressed all their shot thede: ward and gave greter hurie to the broken wall.
And in this while were short arowes into Rhodes with lettres: which blamed
George that he did not his deuer for the turk in Rhodes: in also much / as he
gave not theyme certain tokenes of the iuyne and condycyon of the cytee. But
they knew not how george was kept for suspecte within Rhodes: as a man gylte
of trayson And whenne hit was told and showed to George. He answered boldly
and with shrewed langayge: wherefore the Rhodyans had him in suspecyon and was
put in prison And anon by wise men was examyned and fond varyable in his
answers: wherefore with tokyns suffycyent was put^e to tormente: where he
confessed: how that the Turk had send him theder to betraye Rhodes if he
might / as he had betrayed many other places in Greece. which confession he
affermed after also without tourmente. And said: how the Turk had bid him:
if Rhodes might not then be gotten: to abide nevertheless in Rhodes all the
siege time: and longer to espy all the condycyons and manners of their defenses
and that afterward he should tell yt to the Turk for to pur^e^e strenger
siege: and more to the pourpos of victory. For the turks entenc^on: was
finally / to have the cite of Rhodes. Wherefore George had of him great yeftes
and rewards. But anon after George was dampened to death: and in the syghte of
all the people of Rhodes for his trayson / and myscheuous counseyles was
hanged. and anon after every man of Rhodes returned again to keep their
place with great gladdenes that George the false traitor of crystys faith and
he that had studied to put to death so many noble and worshypfull knights:
and to defowle and rauessche so many good and honest women and holy vyrgyns /
had at last fond a nynde according to his traysons and myscheuous dedys.
Anon after this the basse that is to say the great Capetayne of the Turk
caused other lettres to be casted in the cytee of Rhodes: in which lettres he
conforted and warned the bourgeyses of the said cytee and other merchauntes of
crystendomme which were wythinne the cytee: that they should find the means
for to yield theyme and delyuere to him the Cytee and they should have their
lands and their goods save and their bodies free and harmelees. for he would
but only dystroye the knights and men of we^^e being within Rhodes: and if
they did otherwise / he menassed to put them all equally to death. and by
thees means and cauteles he ymagyned and thought to put dyuccyon among
the people of Rhodes. but he could not speed his ful^ purpes: for he fond
theyme Just and true to God and to the order of Rhodes. And so whenne he
saw and consyderid that this failed him: he yet by wylenesse send a man in
the night time to the dyches of Rhodes: in that side of the cytee where stood
a church of our Lady called Eleme^erra. This man was a Greek and late had
forsaken crystys faith and went to the Turk. And so this greek called and
said to them that wached there: that the greie capeteyn of the turk would
send an embasseteur to the Lord Master: if the Rhodyans would let him goo
and come sure. They answered and said to this man: that they were well content
that the great capeteyne of the Turk should send his embasserour unto the
dyche and bollewerke of that side of the cytee: and that there should be a
noble man / the which should give an answer for the Lord master: and so the
day next following the Embassetoure of the forsayde Capetayne came theder: And
said: how that he had great marvel: that such a little cytee would
withstand and resyste agaynest the great might and puyssaunce of the
dredefull Turk: which had conquered.ii. Emperys and so many Kyngdommes.
Therefore he exhorted them / to have pity of iheyme self: and not to be the
cause. that the cytee of Rhodes should be taken by the assaute of the turks
and by strong hand. for then the turks should put to myscheffe and to
vyolence / both men and women being in the cytee of Rhodes: and forthermore he
said that if they of Rhodes would desire and take of the turks peace the^
should have hit / with the possessyon of the self Rhodes / and with all
their goods: or else they should be putted utterly to destructyon with all
manner cruelte: and so he menashed to be / in short time to come: and therefore
he bade them answer: wheder they would peace or werre. Then anon answered
the noble and prudente knight that there was for the Lord Master: and said.
how that the Rhodyans had great meruaylle: that the turks with so great
naueye / and with so strong armee: agaynes the honor of all manly werryers
should eyhorte their enemies to peace. And said that the Rhodyans understood
and knew right well the feynte and falls color of them: for they wyste well:
that they did hit be cause that they should preue their hertes. Therefore he
said that nether by yeftes nether by menasshes they would do shame to
crystendom: and / that wythinne the cite of Rhodes was a common acorde among the
greeks and latynes and all the people of Rhodes / which would rather dye for
crystes faith: then to be of amyte and of the law of Mahumete. And if it so
were / that the turks would break up their siege and turn again to their
countreye: and after send embassetoures to Rhodes for peace: the Rhodyans
should thereof by conseyl give them an answer. but sith that they were so
mighty in arms: they bade them use and do that they came fore: and that
thorough the grace of Ihesu they should know / that they had not to do nor to
fight with men of Asea their country couherdes and vnherty as women. but they
should know well and perceive / that they should feghte and be in hand with
strong manly and christian people of Rhodes. After the which answer / the
turks with lo chiere and half shamely contenaunce departed from theyme and
turned again to their ^sie and to their capeteyne. And so the more that the
rhodyans wythstode the turks with might and wysedom: the more waxed the
turks furyous agaynes Rhodes. And anon after this with great bombardes /
gonnes / engynes and all other such instruments of werre: they vexed and
grieved the Rhodyans. and purposed to preue: if the dedys of the Rhodyans should
accord with their great words. Therefore like wise as they had done a great
and horrible assaute agaynest the toure of Seynte Nycolas.xxxvii. days passed
or deyned and dressed all their bombardes and gonnes of werre all their
ordonnance and their might agaynest the pryncypal strenghte and most neweste
walls of the cite of Rhodes: how be hit that they were / large / new and
fortefyed with mighty toures and bollewerkes: nevertheless with castyng of three
thousand and fyfe honderd great bombardes stonee: they were horrybly bruised and
thrawen down. And many worshipful places and howses of the Rhodyans by that
side with the hurt and the ruin of that new wall were myscheuously broken
and des^ryed all to pieces. The which miserable case and horrible ruin fered
many of the Rhodyans her (...) and putted theyme to more thought and sorrow
then ever they were sythen the coming of the turks theder. But the Lord
Master as a steadfast Prince trustyng in Ihesu christ and in his sweet mother
marye and in Seynte Johan Baptyste conforted all the people: so that nether
the knights / nether the pryours nether the baylyffes of the order / nether
merchaunts / nether people in Rhodes were afered: but gladly as the case ste^^
were ready and content to fight hand for hand with the turks at broken walls
and plain place. And so the turks by two or three evenings following came to
the dyches with their taberettys and made songs of myrthe: hopyng that within
short days they should get rhodes. And the Rhodyans from the other side of the
broken wall answered thayme as merely again with trompettes and claryons. but
the Lord Master knowing by his prudence / that anon with great might and
furye the turks would come theder to assaute the cytee: he fortefyed the walls
with knights of his order and most manlyest werryers: and he him self by the
broken wall was full of besynes / to teache / warn and comfort all the people
abowte him: and was ready and at all owres abode to give socout to the
knights and werry ere on the walls. and so was all his people from the highest
degree unto the loest dysposed. In this while the turks made theyme ready in
their often for to come and give assaute And made a commyn cry: that the great
Turk gave them all the goods that were in Rhodes: and that they should took
all the young children in Rhodes and cause them to ^enaye their faith: and they
that were above.x. years unto.xx. should have their throtes kette: and all that
were above that aage if they were taken alive should be perfed through the
fondemente and through the head with a long stake. wherefore they bare with
theyme to the assaut.viii. thousand stakes: and that the Turk all only was
content to be vyctoryous and lord possessour of Rhodes. (...) all the turks
came toward Rhodes. but before that they gave assaute after their falls believe
called to their help Mahumete and washed them all naked in rennyng water: in
a kene of purgacyon of their sins: and after they arrayed them euerychon
after his qualyte of werre: and brought sakkes with them to put in the
goods of Rhodes: and tied at their gyrdess ropes to bind their prysonners.
For they hoped in their God Mahumete: that they without fail should have
vyctorye of Rhodes. The day before that the great assaut and bataylle was: they
casted and shot agaynes the walls great stones of.viii. the gretest
bombardes that they had and casted down the reparacyons and defenses / which
the Rhodyans had made in the broken walls: so that they stroke and slew the
waches that were on the walls: in the night following. for they sessed never
thorowyng throe all that day and the night and all there morning of the day
following: in the which the great assaute was made: so that there might no body
surely stand upon the walls ner might stop the great ruin of the walls.
for in a short space were casted three honderd great stones. After that the
turks had fynysshed their shot of bombardes: the fyfte kalendre of the
^oneth of Auguste abowte.viii. the clokke in the morning they came to geder
with great multitude and nombre: and anon they passed over the dyche. which
was then fulfilled with the ruin of the broken walls of the cytee: and so
anon they clymed lyghtely upon the walls and more lyghtely / then the Rhodyans
co^de in their side with ladders and steyres Anon after that thees turks were
upon the walls they slew all the christian men that there were in defense / and
setted up there their standerdes and baneres: before that the Rhodyans might
clymbe up with ladders to the walls. but anon the Rhodyans were there ready at
their hands: and was given of one part and other a great and horrible cry.
for all the part of Rhodes cried on Ihesu christ: and the turks cryden
Mahumete And so the Rhodyans feghtyng manly and hertely resysted and withstode
the great preesse of the turks. There was the worshipful Lord / the Lord of
Montelyon capeteyn of the men of werre of Rhodes: and brother to the lord
master. And there were with him many manly knights of the order of Rhodes: and
many other men of the cytee: of the which in that assaute and ba^aylle* sum
were slain and many wonded. There were in that side of the assaute four great
ladders in diverse places for to goo up and down to the walls: of the whihe
one was towaard the Iues street. and by that ladder and place the turks came
down into the cytee. But anon the lord Master commanded: that yt should be
kytte and pulde down And he him self in an other place by: wor^e upon the
walls with his company: and there they faught agaynes the enemies of crystes
faith / as manly as ever did the remaynes for their empire. And slew many
turks: and finally beted them offe. But the Lord master had five wounds Of
the which one was Iuberte of his life: but throe the grace of God and help of
leeckes and surgeons he was helped. And he for his great manhood and noble
heart to God and to his order / through all Rhodes was called the very father
and defensour of the cytee and of the faith of Ihesu christ. And what great
glory and lawde he and his company with all the feghtyng men of Rhodes that
same day deserved: the noble and manly act showed hit. for upon the broken
walls of Rhodes. and in the places that we have said were.ii. thousand and
five honderd turks in clean harness: and behind them following by and by /
as after was said and known: was the nombre of.xl. thousand turks. They that
had gotten the walls fawght for to thruste down and cast offe the walls the
christian feghtyng men: which manly resysted their furye. and so the feghtyng
endured by the space of two owres that hit was in dowte / who should have the
victory. for other whiles a man should have demed that the Rhodyans should houe
had the vyctorye. and anon the fortune changed so that no man should have
thought the contrary but that the turks should have had the vyctorye of the
Rhodyans and their entente of the cytee. for fortune was so meruayllously
instable. But after the space of two owres through the grace and ^^tee of
almighty god and through the virtue and manhood of the worshypful and
tryumphaunt the lord master of Rhodes and of his people the turks were
putted utterly to the worse. They were smyten down and beten out offe the
walls with so great might and manly feghting of the Rhodyans which so
stedfastely came upon them: that the turks with great fere and hastynes
turned their bakkes and fled in so great nombre that in fleyng one hurted
and wounded the other. But one of the fairest / and manlyest dedys / and worthy
to be had in mind: that the christian people did in that assaute agaynest the
turks was: whenne a great nombre of the turks were upon the walls in the
ward where the Iues had the keeping: and there the said turks stoutely feghted
for to thraw^ down of the walls the cryston feghtyng people for to have entree
to the cite. But the christian people with great manhood and furour: threw down
of the walls to the cytee three honderd of theyme: and more / which were
slain: some with the horrible falls beside the walls. for the hienes of the
walls was of.xx. foot so that the Rhodyans clymmed up with ladders: and
often might not for the shot of the engynes of the turks come upon the
walls: but by a certain token of the ryngyng of a lytyl belle at the wache
place of the walls / sum were bruised and afterward slain with the Rhodyans
wepons: so that all the street called the Iu^e by the walls was full of their
blood and caren: and theder afterward came all the people of Rhodes to see and
to wondre the myscheue of the turks. Also after that the turks so
myscheuously and shamefully were put offe of their assaut and fled to
their host: the Lord Montelyon brother to the worshipful Lord Master
pursued theyme into their tents and loggyses: where they slew many of them
and spolyed theyme of their Iuelles and harness of werre / and of their
baners and standards: the which they brought with theyme to Rhodes / cryyng
merely and making great Joy: and entered again into Rhodes through the broken
walls / for a perpetual memory. In that assaute for certain were slain
three thousand and five honderd turks. For their carens and bodies were fond
and seen and nombred by the Rhodyans: of the which bodies and carens some were
fond within the cytee / some upon the walls and many in the dyches / and by
the sea side. And be cause that all Rhodes stanke of their carens both within
and without: they putted them all on a hepe out of the town: where they or
deyned great fire: with the which anon they were burnt and consumed to
ashes. But they that afterward yolde them to the faith of Ihesu christ and
forsook their falls believe because of certain miracles that folowen: sarde for
troth / that sith the turks came to lay siege to Rhodes there were of them
slain.ix. thousand: and.xv thousand sore wounded and grievously hurt. And this
they knew in so much / as the great Basse of the turks made after this great
assaute comptes and rekenynges of al his men of werre. and so the Basse with
all his oste was full of ^^owe and confused. But alweye God almighty for to
de^^^ere finally Rhodes his christian cytee: and for to put the turks in greter
confusyon: showed suddenly in this assaute. his love and his sweet grace to his
christian people. For by the commandment of the lord Master: a baner of Ihesu
criste Another of our Lady and another of saint Ichan baptiste patron of the
order of Rhodes: were set up on the walls whenne the bataylle was on both
sides most sharpest. And anon after the turks saw properly in the myddest of
the clean and bright eyer / a cross all of shynyng gold: and also saw a
bright vyrgyne: which had in her hand agaynes the oste of the turks a spear
and a shylde: and in that sight also apired a man clothed in pouer and vile
array: which was accompanied with great nombre of fair and welbesene men in
arms: as if they would have comen down to the help of Rhodes. By the cross
of gold we may Justly understand. our saueour Ihesu christ. And by the
vyrgyne we may understand / our lady the blessed marie. And by the man
pouerly clothed we may understand the holy seynte Johan baptyste Patron and
auowre of the order of Rhodes: which was acompanyed with seyntes and angeles
of God for to help the Rhodyans. The which goddely and heavenly syghte putted
plainly the turks in so great wonder and fere: that in no manner after that
vysyon: they were hardy to look toward the cytee of Rhodes. But anon after
they took counseyl among theyme to leave their entente and turn again to
their countreye / so that through the grace and miracles of almighty god and
through the prudence and dylygence of the lord master and faith and manhood of
the knights of Rhodes: and obeyssaunce of all the people: Rhodes was and is
preserved and kept fro the turks captyuyte. Thees miracles in so much more
are in confirmacyon and devotion to our christian faith be cause that the first
knowleche of theyme came by the vysyon and fight of the turks enemies to
our christian faith. For afterward many of theyme forsook their falls believe:
and were crystened withinne the cytee of Rhodes: where as they openly and
constantely to all the men of Rhodes / with one accord and with a good
courayge made faith and knowleche of the goddely and heavenly vysyon which they
had seen And for certain every wise man may know: that without Gods hand so
few christian men might not have resysted and withstanded so great nombre of
turks: and in especyall when that they were upon the walls. for then they
thought to have merely and with lytill pain the victory of the cytee of
rhodes. But who let them then to come down fro the walls to the cytee:
before that the Rhodyans clymed with ladders to feght with them and drive them
fro the walls: Certainly hit was none other but god. Who was he / that blinded
their wit / so that anon after the first assaute / they ordained not an
other agaynes our christian men: which by the first assaute had been pyteously
hurt and wonded and were all weary of fyghting. Hit was non other but god. Who
was cause of the death of so many of them in the space of two owres in the
great and last assaute: but god and his angels that were seen in the bright
eyer. Who was he shortly that put from the vyctorie of Rhodes so lytil a cite
in comparyson of others: as constantinople and nygrepount and many more strong
and mighty: the Turk strong and full of pride. Well may every man know that it
was more gods act then mannys. Wherefore we all christian men mekely and with
herty devotion / owe to yield graces and louynges to almighty God: which had
preserved rhodes the keye of all crystendom from the foul and vnrightful
subiectyon of the turks: which has been for their evil purpes smyten and
kytted in pie^s as bestes and finally were putted fro their entente. But for
to come to the conclusyon of the departing of the turks. Anon after that they
were put to flight: they went bakward a large mile: and there they made new
tents / to abide there: while they charged their ships and galeyes with all
their ordonnances of were. And in this while they charged in little galeyes /
day by day and our by our their men that were sore hurt and wounded with
all their arraye: and brought them again to the country of Lycya: where they
had resceyued them whenne they came toward the siege of Rhodes: and there they
abode till they were hole / and might turn again to Turkea their countreye.
That same Lycya was to them a great commodyte and to all their entente. for
from thens to Rhodes was but a narowe see / called the sea Lycyon. And not
far from the bank of the said Lycya: was a great and old town called
Physcum: where first they abode the nauey that came from Constantinople: and
now also were there with their wounds dylegentely refresshed. And sco an^ne
after this: yt was concladed among the turks: that all the often should depart
from Rhodes. Therefore they made a great wast and destryed all manner gardens and
vynes and al other things the which they supposed that might do ease to the
Rhodyans. Also they brende many houses and spolyed fyldes of their catelles:
and charged their ships with great nombre of the bestes of the Isle of Rhodes
/ which might not before the siege be brought into the cytee not into the
holds of the Isle. and in the mean while that the turks made them ready to
return to their countreye / were spyed and seen from Rhodes two great ships
in the sea saylyng from the weste toward Rhodes: and anon the Rhodyans had
demyng that they were ships of crystendome and of their friends. And as they
supposed / yt was. for they were send theder by the most christian king and
most devour Prince Ferrand of aragonne king of naples to help and socour the
Rhodyans agaynes the turks. for the ships were charged with the most
manlyest men of werre of his kingdom and of all stuff necessary for them.
Thees two mighty and strong ships entered friendly toward the port of Rhodes
about one the clokke after mydday in the behold^nge and syghte of the
Rhodyans: which therefore made great Joy and myrthe: and yolded great graces
and louynges to almighty God. But whenne they should enter into the h^uen the
turks shot great soones of bombardes to theyme: so that one of theyme was
sore hurt in the maste. and the the other eschwed and escaped the shot without
hurt. and so they casted their anturs and abode the tide that they might
enter into the haven: but toward the night the sea waxed so rough / that they
durst no longer abide there at the ancure. Therefore the ship that had not
ben hurt took the broad see. and thoder ship be cause that her most was in a
great danger: doutyng to sail: abode the tide with all paryll and Iuberie.
But throe the grace of god almighty at that tide entered surely into the haven
of Rhodes. the next day following the other ship which had taken the
broad see returned again to enter into the port: but a mile and a half fro the
port the wind failed her and might seyle no further: wherefore the turks
send theder twenty galeyes of their naueye arrayed and armed for to fight and
overcome the shypp and bring her to the turks: but the christian men of nails
and of Secylle that were in the shypp bare them: and quyted so manly: that
nether for the shot of the galeyes nor for the might of so many men that
there were agaynest so few: they never made token of fere / but resysted so
manly and virtuously / that in the space of three owres that the bataylle dured
they slew four times greter nombre of turks then they were them self so
that they had the better hand and were vyctoryous. and in that fyghtyng was
slain the schief capeteyne of the said galeyes. and with this harm and shame
returned the galeyes to their party: and the ship of the christian men the
day following with full sail and standerdes of victory and tryumphe entered
into the port of Rhodes. Thyes two ships brought to Rhodes merry tythynges. for
they brought the (...) lettres which were red and declared openly be fore all
them of Rhodes that would give audyence thereto. In the which lettres our holy
father the pope comforted and desired of the lord master and of all the
christian people that was within Rhodes. that for the love of Ihesu christ they
wholde with all their heart and manhood withstand the furye of the turks: and
that in of host they should have socours from Italye both by see and by land
in so great nombre and strenght / that they should be lightely delivered of the
trauayles and peynes: which ^othe day and night the turks with all besynes
ymagyned and wrought agaynes them. for the host of the christian people should
come so mighty: that with the grate and help of God they should be able to give
bataylle to all the puyssance of the turks and hane the becer of hit. wherefore
the Rhodyans all with one voice thanked God and magnefyed with great
praysynges our holy father the (...) Sy^te the fourth: the which tythynges
went anon to the often of the Turks and fered them fore wherefore they the
sooner departed from Rhodes: where they had been at the siege three months save a
day. and turned again to the country of Lycya and arrived to the great town
Physcum: where they tarried and refresshed them nerehand.xl. days: and
aftreward turned to their country / with their great shame / their hurt and
great myschefe. Deo gracias.


