TENTATIONS. Their Nature, Danger, Cure,


By RICHARD CAPEL. Sometimes Fellow of Magdalen College in Oxford.

To which is added a Brief Dispute, as touching Restitution in the Case of
Usury.

1 COR. 10. 13. There has no Tentation taken you, but such as is common to
man: But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you
are able: but will with the Tentation, also make away to escape, that ye may
be able to bear it. LONDON, Printed by R. B. 1633.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR WILLIAM GUISE Knight; Grace and Peace from JESUS.
CHRIST.
SIR,
THose that 1 Samuel 2. 30.
honor God, God will honor, and so will godly men: God will; for he uses not
to be behind with any, neither will he with you: You have done God much honor
in setting up such Lights in our Country; Ministers who both Mat. 5. 19. Prius
actionem posuit mox Doctrinam. Chrysostom. Hem. 72. ad Pop. Antioch.
Do and Teach: They (as Christ has it) shall be called great in the Kingdom
of heaven; and so shall you. And so will godly men honor you, both Ministers
and Others: Ministers, because you have built us of our coat some Synagogues:
Others (who had it not been for you, might have sat in the Luke 1. 79.
Shadow of Darkness and Death) for that they now see best by their present
mercy, what was their former, and what would have been their future Misery.
To save one soul fom death is noted in the 1 Timothy 31. Iam. 5. 20.
Word to be an honorable piece of service: How great is your Honor and
comfort then? to whom God has given an Heart and means to set up sundry Mat.
5. 14.
Lights of it for the Saving of many souls, in many Parishes. Now as God and
GODS People will honor you for providing that which is Isa. 55. 2.
Bread John 6. 55.
indeed: So you must conceive that Satan will not Luke 10. 18*
fall down from Heaven like lightning thus without some stir; You do pluck
down his Kingdom, and he will pluck at you, and you must, and (I hope) do
provide for his assaults. As for your Safety, your Luke 10* 20.
Name being written in Heaven (out of Satan's Job 1. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
walk) you stand 2 Timothy 2. 19.
sure; The Job. 10. 29.
Father holds, and the verse. 28.
Son holds, and none shall pluck you out of their hands: But as touching your
inward Quiet, by GODS Luke. 22. 31.
Leave, Satan will take his time to winnow you (not as Chafe) but as Wheat:
Expect it, he will do what he can (and he can do something) to interrupt your
Peace: He has Iam. 2. 19.
no Peace himself, and so he cannot abide (as far as he can do withal)
that any should have any: He durst and did set upon, and vex the Lord himself
with the smoke of an Matthew. 4. 9.
heavy Tentation: And will he not, Dare he not, let drive at us? Verily, when
we come to have those Luke 16. 11.
true Riches about us, and to be in some spiritual strength, (which usually is
in our later and more Heb. 5. 14.
experienced age) it is usual that GOD should, and he often does suffer Satan;
What? to beat us? No! But yet to 2 Cor. 12. 7.
buffet us, as he did Saint Paul. Wherefore, after some great things done to
GODS honor, and Satan's undoing, we are then chiefest of all, to look for the
hour of Tentation, and to take the best care we can, both for our Safety and
Peace: This is to fight, not so much Ephesians. 6. 12.
with men, nor with 1 Cor* 15* 32.
beasts, after the manner of men, as with Ephesians. 6. 12.
Principalities and Powers: His Arrows are Ephesians. ^. 10.
fiery, and have sorrow enough in them, to make the Heart of a Christian man to
Prove. 1^. 25.
stoop: We are therefore, all of us, by all means to furnish our selves with
such 2 Cor. 10. 5.
Arms as may fit us in our several occasions. And now to help the weaker sort
of Christians, I have here done somewhat that way, which (what ever it be) I
do here make bold to publish it under your Name and Countenance: To whom I
wish, as Saint John did to Gaius (the Romans 16. 23.
Host of the Church in his Time:) 3 Ioh. 2.
That above all things you may prosper, and be in health, even as your soul
prospers,

Yours in our Lord Christ Jesus. RICHARD CAPEL.

To the Christian Reader.
AFter the Angels left their own standing, they envied ours, and out of envy
became both by office and practice Tempters, that they might draw man from that
happy Communion with God, unto that cursed condition with themselves. And
success in this trade; has made them both skillful, and diligent especially
now, their time being but short. And if neither the first or second Adam could
be free from their Impudent Assaults; Who then may look for exemption? the best
must most of all look to be set upon, as having most of Christ in them, whom
Satan hates most, and as hoping by dis-heartning of them, to foil others, as
great trees fall not alone; no Age or rank of Christians can be free:
Beginners he labors to discourage; those that have made some progress, he
raises storms against; those that are more perfect, he labors to undermine,
by spiritual pride, and above all other times he is most busy, when we are
weakest, then he doubles and multiplies his forces, when he looks either to
have all, or lose all. His course is either to tempt to sin, or for sin: To
sin, by presenting some seeming good, to draw us from the true good, to seek
some excellency besides God in the creature, and to this end, he labors in
the first place to shake our faith in the Word, thus he dealt with Adam, and
thus he deals with all his posterity. And besides immediate suggestions, he
comes unto us, by our dearest friends, as unto Christ, by Peter: so many
tempters, so many devils in that ill office, though neither they, or we, are
often aware of it; the nearest friend of al, our own flesh, is the most dangerous
traitor, and therefore most dangerous, because most near, more near to us,
than the Devil himself, with which, if he had no intelligence, all his plots
would come to nothing; this holding correspondence with him, lays us open to
all the danger; it is this inward bosom enemy that does us most mischief.
When Phocas (like another Zimry) had killed his Master, Cedren.
Mauricius the Emperor, he labored, like Cain, to secure himself, with
building high walls, after which, he heard a voice telling him, that though he
built his walls never so high, yet sin, within the walls, would undermine al:
It is true of every particular man, that if there were no Tempter without, he
would be a Tempter to himself; it is this lust within us that has brought an
ill report upon the creature: This is that which makes blessings to be snares
unto us; all the corruption which is in the world, is by lust, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
which lies in our bosom, and as an Achitophel, or Judas, by familiarity
betrayeth us; yea, oftentimes in our best affections, and actions, Nature will
mingle with our Zeal, and privy pride will creep in* and taint our best
performances, with some corrupt aim: Hence it is, that our life is a continual
combat. A Christian, so soon as Newborn, is borne a soldier, and so
continues until his crown be put upon him, in the mean time, our comfort
is, that ere long, we shall be out of the reach of all tentation, Romans 16. 20.
the God of peace will tread down Satan under our feet. A carnal man's life is
nothing but a strengthening and feeding of his enemy, a fighting for that,
which fights against his soul. Since Satan has cast this seed of the
Serpent into our souls, there is no sin so prodigious, but some seed of it
lurketh in our nature; It should humble us, to hear what sins are forbidden by
Moses, which if the Holy Ghost had not mentioned, we might have been ashamed
to hear of, they are so dishonorable to our nature, the very hearing of the
monstrous outrages committed by men, given up of God, as it yields matter of
thanks to God for preservation of us, so of humility, to see our common nature
so abused, and abased by sin and Satan: Nay, so catching is our Nature of
sin, that the mention of it, in stead of stirring hatred of it, often kindles
Fancy to a liking of it: the discovery of divellish policies and stratagems of
wit, though in some respects to good purpose, yet has no better effect in
some, than to fashion their wits to the like false practices; and the
innocence of many arises not from love of that which is good, but from not
knowing of that which is evil.

And in nothing the sinfulness of sin appears more than in this, that it
hinders all it can, the knowledge of it self, and if it once be known, it
studieth extenuation, and translation, upon others; sin and shifting came into
the world together, in Saint James his time, it seems there were some that
were not afraid to father their temptations to sin, upon him that hates it
most, (God himself) whereas God is only said to try, not to tempt. Our
Adversaries are not far from imputing this to God, who maintain Concupiscence,
the mother of all abominations, to be a condition of Nature, as first created,
only kept in, by the bridle of original righteousness, that from hence, they
might the better maintain those proud opinions of perfect fulfilling the Law,
and meriting thereby. This moved Saint James to set down the true descent and
pedigree of sin; we our selves are both the Tempters, and the Tempted, as
Tempted, we might deserve some pity, if as Tempters we deserve not blame, in
us there is both fire and matter for fire to take hold on, Satan needs but to
blow, and often times not that neither, for many, if Concupiscence stir not
up them, they will stir up to Concupiscence. So long as the soul keeps
close to God, and his truth, it is safe, so long as our way lies above, we are
free from the Snares below, all the danger first rises, from letting our
hearts loose from God by infidelity, for then presently our heart is drawn away
by some seeming good, whereby we seek a severed excellency, and contentment
out of God, in whom it is only to be had. After we have once forsaken God, God
forsakes us* leaving us, in some degree, to our selves, the worst guides that
can be; and thereupon, Satan joins forces with us, setting upon us as a
friend, under our own colors; he cannot but miscarry that has a Pirate for
his guide. This God suffers, to make us better known to our selves, for by
this means corruption, that lay hid before, is drawn out, and the
deceitfulness of sin the better known, and so we are put upon the daily
practice of repentance and mortification, and driven to fly under the wings of
Jesus Christ. Were it not for temptations, we should be concealed from our
selves, our graces, as unexercised, would not be so bright, the power of God
should not appear; so in our weakness, we would not be so pitiful and tender
toward others, nor so je^lous over our own hearts, nor so skillful of Satan's
method and enterprises, we should not see such a necessity of standing always
upon our guard; but though, by the overruling power of God, they have this
good issue, yet that which is ill of it self, is not to be ventured on, for
the good that comes by accident. The chief thing wherein one Christian
differs from another, is watchfulness, which though it require most labor,
yet it brings most safety, and the best is no farther safe, than watchful,
and not only against sins, but tentations, which are the seeds of sin, and
occasions which let in tentations, the best, by rash adventures, upon
occasions, have been led into temptations, and by temptation, into the sin it
self: whence sin and temptation come both under the same name, to show us that
we can be no farther secure from sin, than we be careful to shun
temptations. And in this, every one should labor so well to understand
themselves, as to know what they find a temptation to them, that may be a
temptation to one, which is not to another; Abraham might look upon the smoke
of Sodom, though Lot might not, because that sight would work more upon Lots
heart, than Abraham's. In these cases, a wise Christian better knows what to
do with himself, than any can prescribe him. And because God has our hearts
in his hand, and can either suspend or give way to temptations, it should move
us especially to take heed of those sins, whereby grieving the good Spirit of
God, we give him cause to leave us to our own spirits, but that he may rather
stir up contrary gracious lustings in us, as a contrary principle. There is
nothing of greater force, to make us out of godly jealousy to fear always:
Thus daily working out our salvation, that God may delight to go along with
us, and be our Shield, and not to leave us naked in the hands of Satan, but
second his first Grace with a further degree, as temptations shall increase; it
is he that either removes occasions, or shuts our hearts against them, and
gives strength to prevail over them, which gracious providence you cannot be
too thankful for; it is a great mercy, when temptations are not above the
supply of strength against them. This care only takes up the heart of those,
who having the life of Christ begun in them, and his Nature stamped upon them,
have felt how sweet communion and acquaintance with God in Christ, and how
comfortable the daily walking with God, is: these are wary of any thing that
may draw away their hearts from God, and hinder their peace. And therefore they
hate temptations to sin, as sin it self, and sin, as hell it self, and hell
most of all, as being a state of eternal separation from all comfortable
fellowship with God. A man that is a stranger from the life of God, cannot
resist tentation to sin, as it is sin, because he never knew the beauty of
holiness, but from the beauty of a civil life he may resist tentations to such
sins as may weaken respect, and from love of his own quiet, may abstain from
those sins that will affright conscience. And the cause why civil men feel
less disturbance from temptations, is, because they are wholly under the power
of temptation, til God awaken their heart. What danger they see not, they fear
not, the strong man holds his possession in them, and is too wise, by rowzing
them out of their sleep to give them occasion of thoughts of escape. None more
under the danger of tentation, than they that discern it not, they are Satan's
stales, taken by him, at his pleasure, whom Satan uses to draw others into the
same snare; therefore Satan troubles not them, nor himself about them, but a
true Christian, fears a temptation in every thing, his chief care is, that in
what condition soever he be, it proves not a temtation to him: Afflictions,
indeed, are more ordinarily called temptations, than prosperity, because Satan
by them, breeds an impression of sorrow and fear, which affections have an
especial working upon us, in the course of our lives, making us often to for
sake God, and desert his cause; yet snares are laid in every thing we deal
with which none can avoid, Domine, quis vadet l^^ueos isto ^^nultos (...)
videat istos, and (...) vid^ iistos, nis^ (...) illuminaveris ^^mine (...) ipse
enim pater ten^^^^rum (...) queo^ sous abscondit.
out those that see them, none see, but those whose eyes God opens, and God
uses the ministry of his servants for this end, to open the eyes of men, to
discover the net, and then (as the Wiseman says) in vain is the net spread
before the sight of any bird.

This moved this godly Minister, (my Christian friend) to take pains in this
useful argument, Soliloq. cap. 16.
as appears in this Treatise, Which goes under Augustines name, Tome 9.
which is written by him in a clear, quick, and familiar style; and for the
matter and manner of handling, solid, judicious, and scholler-like; and which
may commend it the more, it is written by one, that besides faithfulness, and
fruitfulness in his ministry, has been a good proficient in the school of
temptation himself, and therefore the fitter, as a skillful Watchman, to give
warning and aim to others; for there be spiritual exercises of Ministers,
more for others, than for themselves. If by this, he shall attain, in some
measure, what he intended, God shall have the glory, thou the benefit, and he
the encouragement, to make public some other Labors.

Farewell in the Lord. R. SIBBS.

Faults escaped.
PAge 40. line 20. for, sin this, read, this sin. p. 123. l. 7. for, who
can say. r. who can say? p. 183. l. 23. for, stake, r. slake. p. 212. l. 9.
for, blame, r. flame. p. 225. l. 5. after again, put in, who can say. p. 380.
l. 22. for, manner. r. Manor. p. 416. l. 18. for, we keep, r. keep we. p. 549.
l. 23. for, alienated, r. alienum. p. 203. l. 17. for, freed once, r. freedom.
p. 58. l. 24. for, will, r. would. p. 65. l. 8. after not, put in, only. In the
Epistle to the Reader, for desert. r. desert. p. 18. l. 20. r. armand. p. 387.
l. 18. for, thoughts r. faults. p. 239. l. 21. r. sinful affections. p. 240.
l. 18. for, both, r. back. p. 238. l. 20. for, grave, r. grown. p. 190. l. 17.
for, we, r. he. p. 191. l. 10. for, the sure, r. sure the. p. 136. l. 15. for,
does God, r. God does. p. 137. l. last, for, from, r. for. p. 108. l. 21. put
out, and. p. 75. l. 23. for, reproved, r. approved. p. 61. l. 18. after
certain, put in, of all sins. p. 138. l. 10. for, suffer, r. choose. p. 290.
l. 18. put out, Art. p. 342. l. 19. after man, put in, may. 362. l. 7. in the
margent, after, they drank, put in, they married. p. 84. l. 9 r. liking. p.
376. l. 8. r. convenient. p. 384. l. 3. put out the point at heard. p. 337. l.
7. put out, to. p. 377. l. 25. the point at not, put at will. p. ibid. l. 22.
first of Timothy 5. 11. put in the margent. the first 227. must be 225.

THE TABLE.
A
ADams first sin from himself. Page (...) How sin came first into the
Angels. (...) Adam deprived himself of righteousness. (...) We must keep all
our Armor about us. (...) An Angel without God, serves not. (...) Afflictions
no proof that God loves us not. (...) Atheism how tempted to it, and how
cured of (...) Satan neither is, nor can be an Atheist. (...) Adultery a great
sin, how prevented, and how cured, (...)
B
TEntations of Blasphemy, what, and how cured 270 Blasphemy against the holy
Ghost. (...) Baptism properly no vow. ^88 Beastiality: Tentations that way,
and their (...) 3^6 The Body, a great occasion of uncleanness. (...) Helps
against such as have hurt their Bodies by the sins. (...)
C
COnscience simply is not our Judge. 309 Sins the worse or less, for that
they trouble the Conscience, how and why. 370
D
DEceits of sin. 22 Men do wrong the Devil. 39. 40. We must not lay our
faults on the Devil. 44 Dispute not with sin and Satan. 96 Desertion in it
self no sin. 137 Discontent is caused by sin, not by crosses. 337 Despair
in lusts of uncleanness, prevented. 419
F
FVlnesse of sin, what, and when 75 Fly not in tentations. 97 Faith our weapon
in Tentations. 100 Fight and conquer. 104 Friends to be chosen to help us in
tentations. 188 After Falls, rise again. 212 Fear, a means to prevent hurting
ones self.
G
GOd to be our God, we must hold in Tentations. 131
H
Sin against the Holy Ghost, not in the old Testament. 40 Sin against the
Holy Ghost, a part of Original sin. 41 Sinners in Hell do not demerit. 146
I
Enclosure, a great sin. 27, 28 Infirmities, what, and how known. 118
K
KIndred must take heed one of another in the lusts of uncleanness. 40^
L
Lust unconsented, forbidden in each Commandment. 17 Long-suffering, a great
means to help in Tentations. 166 Love of God keeps us from relapsing. 226
M
FIrst Motions to sin, are great sins. 12 Abuse of Mercies brings Tentations.
81 Tentations of Murder, and their cure. 322 Self- Murder discovered, and
the cure of it. 324 ^^ch as have the gift ought not to Marry. 375 Marriages are
to be provided for children in due time. 375 Marriage not appointed to make men
rich, but chaste. 383 Rules how to Marry, and how to order our selves in the
married estate. 386
N
Sins against Nature. 53 Law of Nature, no part of original sin. 55 How men
become inclinable to sins against Nature. 63
O
Original sin, is properly a sin. 11 Original sin for bidden by the
Law. 14 Original sin, is virtually every sin. 38 Original sin equal in
all men. 41 Old Christians most tempted. 51 Occasions of sin to be avoided.
83 The help of Others in tentations. 183 Avoiding Occasions of sin, a sign
of grace. 205 Old people must see they avoid lusts of youth. 400 No Ordinary
conquest against sin, without putting away the occasions. 411 Opinion
prevails too much in judging of sins. 350
P
THe Pharisees held all inward motions to be no sins. 20 Spiritual Pride
makes work for tentations. 79 Pride the master sin in all. 88 Prayer brings
more than we believe, how. 108 Tentations of Perjury what, and how cured. 281
When Prayer for others come too late. 365
R
NO true Reasons to be found for any sin. 47 Reprobate-sense in such as are
not Reprobates. Many Reprobates never committed some sins of are probate
sense. 71, 72 Reasons will not serve in Tentations. 106 Resisting, a great
help in Tentations. 109 Relapses dangerous, yet curable. 214 To Repent of
sin, is as great a work of grace, as not to sin. 298 Relapses not usual
after Repentance in the lusts of uncleanness. 426
S
SAtan did and does properly sin. 5 Sin not the cause of the first sin. 7
A single apprehension of Sin, is not sin. 15 Satan must have leave ere he can
hurt us. 33 Satan has no natural affection in him. 53 Every man Subject to
every sin. 60 Security makes way for Tentations. 80 Death of Sin, what, and
how. 111 Sin punished with sin. Sin the punishment, is not ever greater
than the sin punished. 147 Strength from God helps us in Tentations. 161 A man
after repentance may fall into the same gross Sin again. 215 Not to Sin
is better than to repent. 219 Sin is not to be made worse than it is. 2^5
Satan hurts most when he comes with holy ends. Sodomy, the tentation of it, and
the Cure. 358
T
Satan's Tentations. 30 Tentations coming from our selves. 38 Mix Tentations.
43 The definition of Tentation. 46 The best that be, often Tempted. 48 Uses to
be made of the Tentation. 86 Rules, after the Tentation is over. 201 Evil
Thoughts, how far subdued. 208 We are subject to the same tentation again.
245 Theft a sore Tentation, the cure of it. 318 How to know when the lust is
killed, or Satan do only cease to Tempt. 416
V
ALL Vices properly sins. 11 Vnnatur all sins. 50 Vows broken prove great
Tentations. 289 Uprightness of obedience, and of repentance. 300 Unbelief in
Christ a great Tentation. 302 Lusts of Uncleanness, their tentation and cure.
345 Religious men and women must beware one of another in the lust of
Uncleanness. 407 Heed must be taken of our own servants that they infect him
not in the lust of Uncleanness. 410 Lust of Uncleanness dangerous. 345
W
SAtan himself cannot force the Will of man. 31 Will, not taken for the Deed
in sins. 93 Watching, a great help in tentations. 158 Wisdom, a great help
in tentations. 164 The Word, a chief weapon in tentation. 168 Women stand
freer from perjury than men. 282 Widows estates, and their danger. 399
Y
Yielding hurts, not helps in Tentations. 157 How to avoid the lust of Lust.
399
The end of the Table.
TENTATIONS. Their Nature. Danger. Cure.

JAMES 1. 14. But every man is tempted when he is drawn aside of his own
lust, and entised.
IT appears that we all came out of Adams loins, in that we smell of his
disease, to father our sins on the Lord: a common thing it is, and not so
common as wicked for a man to say that he is tempted of God, and so to make
God at least a co-authour of our sins, which S. James finding to be up and
down in his time, cleares God, Diaboli hoc opus est ut faciat ^^ultos potius
and corpus, and D^um, and proximum, quam corruptum animum accusare, ne
scili^cet, inventa peccandi cousa a malorum radice liberentur.
and lays the fault on man, where the root of all tentation is. He would have
man to learn, that he carries the cause of all tentations within his own
bosom; which the Apostle finds out to be our Lust: This Lust does work our
tentation by degrees.

1 By drawing the mind of man aside from thinking on God and goodness, Chrysostom.
in 1 Cor. 6. Hom. 17.
raising up sudden thoughts in us, of that which is not good without any
consultation, giving a man no time to dispute the matter with himself, or with
his God.

2 By enticing and baiting the heart of man, as men do for fishes; working on
the will to bend toward such or such object represented by Lust, as in
appearance good and pleasant; and here though we do repel such thoughts as
draw, and withdraw, and such wishes as entice and allure, even as fast as they
come to our consideration: yet S. James tells us here, that they are the first
fruits and effects of our concupiscence. By Lust is meant our natural and
original corruption; the conclusion is, That all our tentations are long of
our original sin: I deny not but Satan tempts, and so does the World; but yet
neither Satan nor the World can now hurt us, if all be well within; they tempt,
but it is by working on our own concupiscence, should they find nothing in us,
we needed not to care thus much for their tentations. Christ indeed was
tempted, and had no Lust in him, and did not Satan lose his labor? And all
because nothing was found in him: fire burns not where is no matter for it to
work upon; no mere man is tempted and drawn aside, but he may thank his own
concupiscence.

The greatest quaere is of Adam in Paradise, and of the Angels in heaven. The
maine answer is, that James speaks of Man as he is now, not as he was then.
The greatest matter then is, how sin came into Adam, which must be from the
liberty of his will, he was tempted from without, and so was Eve, but no
motion of Lust within could draw him to his first sin, for then there must
needs have been in him a sin before his first sin, and then the first sin
could not have been his first sin; he was of such a condition, that he might
fall if he would, and he did fall, but not without any tentation simply, though
without any from himself, for he was tempted by the Devil. Lust in Satan was
the occasion of Adams fall, Roff: art. 39.
but the cause was his own will; Contra.
his first sin was from Satan's sin, Luth. Sandf.
(sin, De Dese: l. 3. Sect. 96.
I say,) for it is a weak conceit for any learned man to write that the divill
has no sin, because the Law was not given to him* which proves that in form
he is not such a sinner as man is, but a sinner he was and is, being and doing
that which was contrary to the will and Law of God, laid upon him in his
Creation. The holy Page is for it, in the very terms, Io. 8. 44. He was a
murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, therefore a sinner:
He is a Lier and the father of lies; therefore a sinner, and 1 John 3. 8, The
Devil sins from the beginning. His Lusts then that were in him, did draw
him to work upon Eves and Adams free will to draw them aside. The Devil was
an Angel, and then he had no Lust within him to draw him; no object without,
being in heaven, where was nothing but all perfection: A Deep it is then to
conceive, how sin came first into the Angels. That one great Angel (now
Beelzebub) did first fall, and then drew after him the rest, is like enough; but
yet the question remains, how the first sin came into that Angel since there
was no defect within nor none without: I must first say that sin is a
privation, an Obliquity, no effect but a defect, and therefore we are not to
trouble our selves to enquire after any proper and efficient cause; God cannot
be a deficient cause, be cause there can be no defect in him, and therefore
the defect must be in the Angel, and we must rest in the will of the Angel
who without motion from with in, or any tentation from without, fell from his
estate, abode not in the truth as Iudes Phrase is, Jude v. 6.
left his habitation voluntarily and maliciously, left it because he would
leave it. The first sin or Lust was a sin then, whose cause was (such cause
as a sin could have) not sin, for then the first sin could not be the
first sin, if there were a sin the cause of that sin; and again, we are
where we were; and are left to inquire the cause of that sin, to which if we
say, sin, to have bin the cause of that, Vid. Scot. Collat. 5.
then we may ask after the cause of that sin again and so in infinitum.
Here then we must stop and say, that Eves sin and Adams sin came not from any
Lust within, but from an act of their own free will, drawn out by the
tentation of the devil, and of the devils first sin, no internal Lust, no
external tempter at all, was the cause, for there was neither, but we must say
that of that sin, sin was not the cause, but the will of the Angel created
good, but mutable and free; no good I confess can be the univocall cause of
any sin but an equivocal cause; and accidental cause of sin good may be, for
the will of the Angels good in it self was the cause, not by working neither,
but by not working. Adam then (to come to him) turning himself of himself
from God: Censur. Remonst: in ca. 7. Becan.
God then took away his assisting and actual grace, Sum. part. 2. c. 9. q. 6.
concl. 6. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 24, art. 10.
and then Adam did put away from him his original righteousness, put out his
own eyes and so came in Original sin, viz. this Lust, Bradward.
that ever after tempts all mere men that are tempted, Sum. contr.
by drawing them aside from good, Pelag. l. 2. c. 9.
and enti^ing them to evil. They dream then, who say that God took away
original righteousness from Adam, and that he by an act of his will did not
thrust it away: It Is safest to say that he deprived himself, fell off from
God, else we come to near to make God some kind of author of his sin. Thus
came in this Lust, the fuel of all sinful tentations whatsoever; What cause
have we then to look about us, since our righteousness within, in the
regenerate is very weak, and exceeding imperfect, our lusts strong, a world of
sins lurking up and down in our souls. For did the Angels in heaven whose
innate holiness and righteousness was most perfect, in whom there was a
concurrence of all grace in all perfection, did they fall? and did Adam in whom
there was no spice of sin? oh then, how stands it us upon to implore the
continual assistance of the actual grace of God, and incessantly to call in
for the Phil. 1. 19.
supply of the spirit of Jesus Christ, else we fall and sin most miserably; we
have strange lusts within (the devils soldiers) warring against our souls, 1
Pet. 2. 11.
and Satan ever blowing at the divine Candle of the spirit of God, Romans 7. 23.
he never gives over by a circle and round of tentations to power cold water
on our faith; (...).
Look we ever upward then for the daily aid of Gods assisting grace, Non
friglde repugnat.
that he would ever blow the bellows to keep this holy fire in; Pro. 20. 27*
for we see by Adam and the Angels, that it is not the perfect habit of
internal grace, no, nor the absence of external tentations neither, that can
keep a man from sin, Zu^res Opuse. 8. l. 3. c. 4. ^^m. 1.
it is only the actual work of the right hand of the most high must do the
deed; else if Adam having no lust fell, we having little else but lust must
needs be drawn aside and enticed: Say day and night, Lord lead me not into
tentation. Habits of grace are like the fire of a Smith, Ward.
be they never so pure and perfect, Great. Discrim.
they burn not in us no longer than they be blown: if God withhold or
withdraw his assisting hand, Lust draws us aside presently and down we fall.

CHAP. 2. Of drawing aside
QVestion is made, whether this first drawing of lust be sin, I say it is; for
if lust be sin, then the effect of it must needs be sin. Evil may come out of
good by accident, but out of sin comes nothing but sin: Lust is sin and
cause of sin, and of nothing but sin. Let it go for a weak opinion of the
Jesuits, Sum. part 2. tract. 2. cap. 9. q. 3. and 8.
who tell us of vicious things that are no sin: for Becanus (no babe) does
confess, that God does hate this concupisence with a true hatred, but
(forsooth) not redounding on the person in whom this lust is, Psalm. 45. ^
as though that were not sin; and all that sin, which God hates, God can hate
nothing but what is against his nature and will, and whatever is against his
nature and will is sin. Original sin is properly sin, and to make it a sin
it is enough that it is voluntary in the will of Adam so Voluntate Adae. In
sent. Lib. 2. Did. 41. 4. 2. q. 1. in Resoint,
Bonaventure; Besides, as soon as ever we come to have the power to do it, we
do all give a full and a free consent to that sin and the motions of it, which
after-consent makes the sin in the guilt of it the more ours: we then have no
excuse left but to cry peccavi, and to fetch all from the sin (as David did) in
which we were conceived, Psalm. 51. 5.
In original sin lies a tacit consent (eminently) to all sin.

2 James makes this drawing aside to be a fruit of sin, 2. to be a sin, 3. to
be a cause of sin; therefore these drawings aside are sins.

3. They be sins whether we like them or mislike them, Aliquid dicitur
voluntarium quia estab aliquo potente prohibere, non tamen prohibente, hic
primus motus dicitur esse voluntarius. Bonav. l. 2. D. 41. Dub. 3.
because they are against the Law of God. For that which is urged that there is
no consent: I think there is some consent: as the offers of the understanding
are quick, so the Acts of the will are quick and sudden. I rather say that
there is some sudden inchoate imperfect consent given to all motions that
arise: Semper in tentatione carnis est aliquis consensus. Durand. li. 2. Did.
21. q. 1. Number. 11.
that an actual sin should be without all consent I cannot conceive; Paul did
sin against his Judgment I confess; for so he means when he says, he did
that he would not: but to speak in proper terms, he neither did, no, nor
could sin, either without or against all motion, or any inclination of his
will: Paul did sin this sin with his will, for else he would not do it, it
was an act of his will, and it is impossible to coact and force the will of
man; though the consent makes it not properly a sin, but rather our sin to be
imputed to us, yet I think there is no motion, Scot. l 3. Di^ 34. Sect. Ad.
arg. Absolute nullus vitiose agit, nisi ex deliberatione -- Intelligere enim
propter quod agit est deliberare, quasi imperceptibiliter deliberat propter
promtitudinem in Syllogizando practice.
no first thought that rises out of our Lust, but as the thought is, so the
consent is sudden, short, quick, and almost insensible: a consent such as it
is then, ever goes with our desires, and motions; but say that they were
unconsented to, yet being against the Law of God, sins they are, and for sins
they must go. For if concupiscence it self, and Original lust be sin,
because it is against the Law of God, then all the operations of it must also
be of the same kind. By the way then they are deceived, who would feign say,
Moulin. Anat. Armin. ca. 8. Wotton on Ioh. page 146. Can. relict. part. 4.
that original sin is not forbidden by the Law; Directly indeed and immediately
it is not; but forbidden it is, because it is condemned by Gods Laws. That
which James here calls Lust, Paul Romans 7. 8. names it sin, sin taking occasion
by that Commandment.
Now the Law does curse none but such as break it: Original sinners the law
does curse, and (if not in CHRIST,) God will damn; therefore they do against
the Law, and the Law then is given to them. Directly the Law forbids actions of
sin, Praeelectio videtur esse maxim propria virtutis: and Iudicare mores
magis, quam Actiones, Arist. Eth. l. 2. c. 2.
by consequence the Law forbids the habits of sin: But to return, the Law of
God is so pure and perfect, that it does bind the most sudden thoughts that
arise, for thoughts being acts of a man, the whole man being bound, those must
needs stand bound; there sin begins, and our thoughts are not free; thoughts of
sin arising out of our Lusts are sinful thoughts: Consent or not consent,
does not make an act to be simply a sin or not a sin: Sin is not defined to be
a thing done with or against our assent, but against Gods Law, and Gods Law
does bind our very first and original thoughts. A mere and single
apprehension or cogitation of a sin suggested by another, is not straight a
sin, for this was or I know might have been in Christ; and Adam before his
fall might dutifully have thought of the thing forbidden him without sin, but
the difference is, that in him they could not have risen, as they do in us on
such a sudden, the sudden moving of the thinking power, proves that they come
from an evil fume and are not right: besides in Adam there must have bin a
perfect meditation of the naughtiness of them, and lastly a true affection of
perfect hatred of them, where as in the natural man now, there is no hatred at
all; in the most regenerate the hatred that is, is but in part; it comes in
nature ever, in time most an end after the motion: or if with it, yet that is
not sufficient, in Adam it would have been antecedent to the thought of his
mind.

These drawings aside, (moving the powers of our souls out of the right
place,) dislike we them as much as we can, they are sins forbidden in all the
Commandments of God; for look in what Commandment the finished sin is
forbidden, in the same Commandment is the first motion of that sin forbidden
also. Neither in my mind do they distinguish the Commandments aright, who
reserve these kind of sins to the last Commandment. The Lust St. James speaks
of, is forbidden, in all the ten Commandments; but these unconsented motions
(as many call them) are the drawings aside of this lust, and therefore forbidden
in every Commandment as Lust is. All desires to a sin are forbidden, where
the sin it self is forbidden, the only argument for that opinion worth the
while is out of Romans 7. 7. I had not known Lust (says Paul,) except the Law
had said thou shall not Lust; that by Lust Paul here means, The affirmative of
the tenth Commandment is such a contentation with our own estate, as not to
desire ought of our neighbors; no not for our money without his free consent:
to love our neighbor for degree fully as ones self, vid. Sum. of Divin.
published by Mr. Downam. lib. 1. c. 14.
a Lust forbidden in one single Commandment cannot be proved: but as the Law,
that is the whole body and context of the Law, says, thou shall not Lust, that
is, thou shall not sin, sin and Lust being synonimaes: the word Lust is as
broad in extent as the word sin. The reason by which many think to carry it,
is in my opinion very weak; Paul (say they) did know when he was a Pharisie,
that Lusts consented unto were sins; for the Philosophers and heathens as blind
as they were, saw so much, But here Paul speaks of such a Lusting which Paul
had not known, had he not known the Law, Hic (id est precepto 20.) non
prohibetur Ancilla pro usu concubinae and usu voluntatis, quia sic prohibetur
prohibitione qua prohibetur concupiscentia carnis, sed quantum ad servilem
actum, and usum utilitatis, Azmand De Bello visu tract. 2. cap. 128. vid.
Bonav. in 3. Sent. 14. Dub. 1.
and therefore Paul takes the Law to forbid Lust without consent. Grant all
this, and much is not made of it. That Paul did not know those first motions
(before his conversion) to be sin is a truth, and that by the Law too, such
Lusts are forbidden is as true. Does it follow then, that by the Law forbidding
such Lusts, must be meant the tenth or one distinct Commandment? Why may not
the sense run thus, that Paul did not know that in any of the Commandments
such Lusts were forbidden at all; but now being made a Convert, his eyes were
so opened, that he now saw such lusts to be forbidden in every Commandment;
as the first rising to Idolatry in the first Commandment, and sic in caeteris.

But now to answer all; I say that it is disputable, whether the Philosophers
and Heathens did confess Lusts consented unto, to be sin: if of all Lusts that
Gods Law does forbid, I flatly deny; many went with them for virtues, as to
Lust after the hurt of an enemy, Inimicos ulcisci potius quam illis
reconciliari honestum censetur, Arist.
is commended by the wisest and purest of the heathens; and so in a world of
Instances, as a man may see, in Aristotle, Plato, Seneca, and the rest. If of
any Lusts and desires that go no further than a mere inward consent of the
mind and will; Rhet-lib. 1. cap. 9.
Philosophers do rather deny such motions and affections to be vices, except
they swel and rage, putting still a difference betwixt passions and vices. But
for Paul's case, it is not the like, he was no moral Philosopher but a
Pharisie, and I affirm it, that Paul did hold that in ward motions consented
unto ever so much were no sins at all. It Is too late to say that nature
morallized and generally enlightened, is able to find out such consented Lusts
to be sins, for Paul was otherwise doctrinated, Homo saepe non potest
apprehendere ver itatem quia illa sequitur quibus est assuetus educa ti enim in
scriptis quae inter ipsos magni fiunt. Sic ut prae a more illarum opinionum
quibus quispiam innutritus est, ab illis dimoveri nequeat. Rabbi Maimon: More
Nevochim. part. 1* ca. 31.
his judgment was carried another way; it being the constant Tenet of the
School of the Pharisees to hold, that the Law of God did only forbid the
outward action, without having to do at all with any inward motion and
affections whatsoever. This he learned at the feet of Gamaliel: He was a Zelot
among the Pharisees; and this was a Case among the Pharisees, received and
believed by them all: that the inward desires stood free and no way obligated
by the Law of the Decalogue, give a man, what assent and consent to them in the
motions thereof he would. Act. 22. 3.
This to have bin the general and constant opinion of the Pharisees is made so
plain by Doctor Raynolds out of the fifth of Matthew, Phil. 3. 56.
that there is no denying of it; Confer. c. 8.
and therefore it was Paul's religion to hold, Dia 4.
that deeds and acts only where sins and not affections: And so we conclude,
that Paul had not known any inward Lust whatsoever (albeit consented unto with
a free consent, and liked of with a full delight) to have bin sin, had not the
Law said, thou shall not Lust; and so for all this place of Paul, our assertion
stands good, that in every commandment where the act of sin is forbidden,
there the motion of the same sin is forbidden; aye the first motion, this
drawing aside spoken of by the Apostle S. James.

CHAP. 3. Of the enticing of Lust.
AFter Lust has drawn us aside from God, (...).
it does entice us and woo us; the word signifies baiting us, as men do bait
for fishes, coozening sometimes the eye, sometimes the of the silly fish, so
does sin use us puts on guises and maskes, making the sin to appear in an
other color than it is. Thus our own Lust does nibble at us with some delight,
proposes it to us under terms of pleasure, profit, honor; alluring us with
the seeming sweetness, that to our sancies and senses do appear to be in
several sins, and all to bring us to accept of the motion to finish sin, and to
finish it, is to act it indeed; so means S. James. Lust I know does work by
force, but nothing so much as by enticing. Man is a creature guided by his
will, and where will is, there constraint and violence prevails little, we
love not to be forced, and therefore our Lust does go most an end the other
way to work, Inest peccatum cum delectatis: regnat si consenseris, August. in
Psalm. 50.
to bring us on to sin by licorish courses, sawcing us with a proposal of some
seeming sweetness to be found in the doing of sin, for then is sin like to
break out into act, when it has gained consent within; and enticing is the
likeliest way to woo us to consent and assent to sin the sin in question;
sin uses not to come against the hair, but when we are caught with the
spiced pleasures of sin, then we go a maine down the stream, and we give
too free consent and allowance to sin, when we are besotted with the deceits
of sin. It Is very often that we read in the Word of the deceitsulnesse of
sin: and I do desire all Christians to beware, lest that their own hearts,
that is their own lusts do not go beyond them with cunning, and get within
them by some enticing slight. For Lust is such an enticing harlot, as will
undo the party enveagled for ever, and leave him nothing but shame and misery,
loocheth him from his right master, and makes him a slave of slaves, even to
delight in his slavery; robs a man of his liberty, honesty, comfort, salvation
and all. Go to GOD then, that he would be pleased to stand betwixt us and
this Coozener, that our concupisence having great advantage, in that it is
within us, may not cheat us with golden mountains, and leave us in the suds
at last. I mean not to enter into the description of the particular veins
that sin has to entice us; Books are full of admirable matter about the
deceitfulness of sin; showing, how the heart first deceives us with colors,
and when we are once a doting after sin, then we join and deceive our hearts;
Iam. 1. 26
using fallacious and specious Sophismes, to make our selves think that to be
lawful to day, which we our selves held to be unlawful but yesterday. Lie
therefore day and night at God for wisdom to prevent the stratagems of sin;
by nature our imaginations are vain, our hearts are foolish, and willing to be
deceived by sin, little suspecting to find a Serpent and a Snake in the grass
of sin. Lust would allure us to pleasure it in the tents of Meshecke, Genesis 9.
27.
God will persuade and allure his to dwell in the tents of Sem: Only I must
commend to the honest Christian, the two maine treacheries of Lust to go
beyond us. 1. Lust sits upon our upper part; and by probable reasons to see to,
strives to win our judgments, and in case a man look not well to the matter;
Lust will so bleare his understanding with mysts, that he shall think he has
reason to be mad, and that there is great sense in sinning* Man being a
reasonable creature is apt to be carried by reason; and if lust can once bring
us over with pretended reasons, why then the will is glad of the motion, the
affections wait on the will, as on their Queen and Mistress, and the sin is like
to be finished and bring forth death. Against this we are to set the Word, and
since sin can show no reason out of the Word; say my reason is corrupt and I am
only for the Word. 2. Lust works on our inferior parts, and slatters our
affections with pausible persuasions; and a man is soon taken by fair offers
to satisfy his affections: they be quick and sudden, and it is hard to hold
them in; and when the fume of sin has wound it self into the affections, it
quickly creeps up into the very judgment and eats out all faculty of
discerning, and then good goes for evil, and evil for good. Wat^h we over our
selves both ways before hand, in making head at the very first against these
entisings of lust, lest both our reason and affections go after sin; a world of
difficulties will come in, when we are not only to bring in our affections,
but our judgment too: That Fort lost is not had again with a song; remember
that we have not a novice in hand, but are to deal with an old man which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, so Paul* Most dangerous of all is
the deceit of lust, when it seems to carry with it our reason: because then it
is next to an impossible thing, to keep out of the snare and clutches of sin;
an instance or two, and then an end. Why is it past the power of our Divines
with their pens and tongues to cry down usury? the cause is, because most men
do think that they have reason to make the most of their money, and as yet
they will see no reason against it; there is an unanimous consent I think
amongst all the Divines; that to enclose is an oppressio of an high degree, and
yet many of our Gentry enclose more and more every day, and that they do it
with an high hand is too plain, else they would not have us in derision as they
have; and dare proclaim that they will enclose, say all the Preachers in the
world the contrary. A proud word, and well might they, if GOD did not say the
contrary, Pro. 13. 23 12 11. 28. 19.
as he does; the best is, God is not mocked: for we see that the posterity of
the great inclosers, would be right glad with all their hearts to feed a poor
beast in some common and cannot. Thus the Lord does laugh at their calamity,
Pro. 26. 31
and mock when their fear comes: but why are men so set in that sin?
Because they think that they have reason to enclose. Thus when Lust has
enticed and bewitched our reason: wise men grow to desperate resolutions; all I
say, is in a word. He that keeps from sin because reason is against it,
Audaciam existimo de bono divini precepti disputare, nec quia bonum est,
auscultare debemus, sed quia deus praec epit, Ter^^l de poenit.
and not because the Word of GOD is against it; that man obeyes reason and not
GOD.

CHAP. 4. Of our being tempted by our lust.
GOD I know is often said to tempt us, Aug. Tract. 13. in Joan. Evang. Deus
neminem tentat secundum eam teutationem quae decipit. Deus neminem tentat
formaliter loquendo, tentatione ad peccandum. Caiet. in Jacob. 1. vid Twisse
Vindic:
but never to sin; we speak not of his tempting us for our trial, but of our
tempting our selves: His tentation meant often for our good we abuse, and take
occasion thence to sin, and so we turn it in the event to be our own. As for
our tempting our selves it is a reflect act, we are the tempters, we are the
tempted: it is not hard for a man to make himself a worse sinner than he is.
Great. l. 2.
And is not Satan said to tempt us? Criminat.
he is; 3. Digress. 2. cap. 5.
he is the Grand tempter; he brought sin into mankind first, and he is still
by tentations keeping of it in, and increasing of it: sometimes, though
seldom, Satan tempts us and we join not with him: sometimes, and but seldom,
neither we tempt our selves, and Satan does not join with us; but most times
our tentations are mixed, he and we concur and make one act of tempting; the
sin finished is his and ours too.

SECT. I.
Of Satan's Tentations.
SAtan at first sinned without a Tempter; for he had no lust in him to draw
him or entice him: having sinned without a tentation, and without any remedy,
he sets upon man, and by his beguiling, he wrought upon that power he had in
his will and man was overcome. As the case stands with us, Satan could not hurt
us, were it not for our lust.

He did set upon Christ, Ioh 14. 30.
but found no matter in him, he had no power over him not simply, Pis^: and
Ma^don: in lo^cum.
because in Christ there was no sin, but because he was also so supported by
the eternal Spirit, that Satan had not to do with him. Heb. 9. 14*
Eve had no sin: yet his tentations went beyond her, and her first listening to
him and his Siren song, was a sin in her; his first tempting her to the first
sin could not possible presuppose a former sin in her to work with and
upon. It Is only the power of God, not of our will, that does keep us from the
fiery darts of the Devil: how far Satan can go I cannot set down; only I
say that he cannot go so far, as to force the will of man by plain violence:
will were no will, if it could be compulsed or constrained by any. It is held
to be the privilege of God alone, immediately to inflow into the work upon
that noble part, the soul of man; much less is any created power able
directly to turn and wind the will of man; Tile^. De malis Angelis. Th. 31,
32 and de Pro. 24. Bonav. lib. 2. Did. 8. part. 2. per. totum.
it is beyond the sphere of Satan, and quite out of his element to reach so
far: but to trouble the spirits pote^tly, to raise the humors, to proceed by
presenting matter immediately to the fantasy of man, is within his reach;
that the devil can do, and therefore (having leave) he is able to put those
acts into a man, and to work with power in the children of disobedience.

In the phrase of the Scripture it is said: He put it into the heart of Judas
to betray his Lord and Master: He filled the heart of Ananias to lie to the
holy Ghost. Act. 5. 3.
The best is Satan has no kind of command over, nor power in us to force us,
and therefore the care of a Christian is to resist him, and not to fear him:
he is a coward and trembles all over; fly not but stand, and he will fly: for
Satan must have a double leave ere he can say or do any thing unto us.

1. He must have leave of God, as we see in Job; he was feign to come morning
after morning to have his Commission renewed: 1 Kin. 22. 22.
GOD must bid him go and do, or else we need not care (thus much) for all his
power; hold in with God, Calvin. Instit. l. 1. c. 14* Sect. 17.
and then let Satan do his worst: he does of himself wish us all evil, but
for the effect how far he shall go; it is in the hands of God, not of
Satan; according as we read, Luke 22. 31. Satan has desired to have you to
winnow you, as a challenger desires to have one of the other side to combat
with, so did Goliath. So we see Satan must desire leave of God to harm us; our
prayer then is, that God would not lead us into temptation: what a matter of
comfort is this? that our case is in the hands of Christ, who is our head.

2. So he must have leave of us; Diabolum potentem ad homines sibi subdendos
and in captivitate retinendos non virtus ejus facit, sed humana peccata.
I mean we must give way to his Tentation, else his Tentation will be
frustrate, so Acts 5. 3. Why has Satan filled thy heart? he does there
expostulate the matter with Ananias, not with Satan; Mat. 12. 29*
and asks him what he meant to give Satan occasion to fill his heart with such
wickedness, August. in Psalm. 71.
we must then thank our selves if the Devil snare us: he had a consent from
our first Parents, he did woo them to it, and he must win us to yield,
else the sin is his, not ours: I am persuaded that many men do discourage
themselves over and above, by reason of the too much fear they have of Satan;
I would we would fear God more and Satan less, and then the devil and we
should be less accquainted; we yield often out of a base fear: fear of
yielding occasions us to yield, when it is too much. Many dispute it, how to
find out the point of difference; betwixt tentations that are ours, and such as
are wholly diabolical; I think he does best who does study how to resist
them, rather than to difference them. That there is a difference I know; but
where the indivisible point of the difference does stand, I know not: some tell
us that a man may find them out by their suddenness, and because they are
independent and not consequent of any former occasion: but to say that our lust
does not push out as sudden or as independent motions and suggestions is hard.
Besides for a man to determine the difference betwixt the independency and
suddenness of Satan's tentations, and our corrupt flying motions, I conceive to
be a work to hard for most men. And for the other note commonly produced, that
they be unnatural and terrible it satisfies not: in that original sin
works unnaturally, and violently, and terribly, deny it who can, and where
the act of our sin ends, and Satan's begins, who can tell? What needs all this
if we reject them, whether they come from him or us: in the matter of
justification wherein lies our salvation and our peace; they are not imputed to
us, Romans 5. 1.
no more being ours than we accept and assent unto. In a natural corrupt
motion: Paul says, R^m. 7. 20.
When I do that I would not, All c^^e used.
it is no more I that do it: therefore no more is imputed by God, than is
seen and allowed by us; we shall do well then not to perplex our selves with
needless queries which be Satan's, and which be ours: since that we all find
that the act of our own mind, the motion of our fancy, the wishes of our own
will in those things we have no reason to suspect Satan has any thing to do;
I say, we find them to go and come, to be in and our very suddenly, and
without any coherence at all; and the rage of our Lust is terrible and violent
of it self, and therefore pass that; and be sure come the tentation which way
it will, we do reject it and then we are safe, it is not set on our score:
if it come from Satan it is no sin of of ours at all: if from our lust, sin
it is materially, but not formally, for the guilt is done away, in that we do
not allow it but abhor it, as some are of opinion.

SECT. II.
Of Tentations which come from our selves.
I Confess it is but now and then, that Satan if he may be suffered does not
join issue with us when we do deceive and tempt our selves: but yet the
thing I urge is, that there is no sin that is committed, but might be
committed if Satan were dead and buried. Could one kill the Devil? Yet you
cannot name the sin, that Original lust would not draw and entice a man
unto. It is agreed on, that Original sin is (virtually) every sin; neither
would God have forbidden all sins to man, if man's nature had not in it
seminally sins of all sorts and sizes, and so much we have from Christ's own
mouth, Mat. 15. 19.
Out of the heart proceeds evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, etc. That, is
all evil thoughts, what sin worse than murder and adultery? and may we not
think that the holy Ghost says not murder but murders, not adultery but
adulteries? to show that all sorts, and so the worst sorts of murders came out
of the heart of man, yea, self murders and all. Neither stands our heart,
that is, our lust, free from highest impieties against God; and therefore those
blasphemies, that is, all sorts, kinds, and degrees of blaspheming are said to
proceed out of the heart; Satan need not put them in, there they are, though
he draw them not out thence, they will spout out of themselves; so that though
the devil did not owe men a spite, yet the lust of man may mar all, and
will make some sin all manner of sins whatsoever. I think the devil has
great wrong done him, when men to excuse themselves derive their sins from him;
when perhaps, Satan has not to do in the provoking them to sin those things.
He is not truly acquainted with the depth of Original sin, nor soundly
humbled, who thinks he had never done those faults, except the devil had
tempted him; for a man has in him all sins that be, (at least potentially:)
Indeed we read not of any mention made in the old Testament of the sin
against the holy Ghost not that original sin had not this sin hid in it then,
but I think there was not the occasion then of finishing and acting this sin;
for sin this supposes greater light, as touching CHRIST JESUS in the Gospel,
than was set a foot under the Old Testament, and therefore I say that in lust
then it was, but it was not drawn forth. How can it come into the heart now,
if it were not there from the very first? Is there a new Original sin? or a
new kind and species added unto it? was not the heart of man only evil and
prone to all evil ever since the fall? Peccatum non infunditur de novo, sed
elicitur and educitur de potentia peccati Originalis.
Out of the heart says Christ proceeds blasphemies: What? some, or all, if
not all; which are excepted? and why those rather than these? if all, as truth
is: then blasphemies against the holy Ghost, comes out of the motions of man's
heart; all this is to show that there is no new sin which has not ever bin
radically in our lust and nature, else we are more in Adam than ever all men
have bin; but all have equally sinned in Adam, and therefore Original lust is
equal in all; Romans 5. 12.
perhaps by our default we do ad new strength to Original sin in us, Aquin.
1. 2. q. 82. a. 4.
but for the kinds of it, Scot. 4. Sentent. D. 14. q. 1.
Original sin is equal in all, and there is no sin but lust had it in ever;
and my conclusion is, that a man does carry fire in his bosom, which has
enough in it to kindle any sin, though the devil should stand by and say
nothing. We all read that the heart of man is deceitful above all things, Ier.
17. 9.
yea, above the devil, why? Because Satan does not so know the thoughts of our
hearts as we our selves do: as also for that Satan cannot come within us to
deceive us, except (as I have said) our hearts do give some way unto him; how
true is that then, that every one is tempted when he is drawn aside, and
enticed by his own Concupiscence.

SECT. III.
Of mixed Tentations wherein Satan joins with us, and we with him.
THE next are such Tentations, wherein either Satan begins to us, and we
pledge him, or we begin to him and he joins with us; when we by discontent,
or other inward motion, as by offering our selves to some outward occasion,
expose our selves; then we do light a candle to the devil, then we begin: but
when Satan does make the offer, by moving the fancy with thoughts within, or
by proposing some object without, and we entertain him, then he does begin to
us: these ways are ordinary, and it is but rare that the devil will not
interpose. He dogs us up and down, and waits upon his opportunities, by sin
to devour us; and now because we sin few sins where Satan has not a hand, and
Satan seldom sets upon us indeed, but more or less we hearken unto him:
therefore understand, all that follow to-bee meant of those Tentations where
lust and Satan join hands, the chief hand is from our selves, the principal
lies in our own lust; without us Satan could not have his desire; but we may
and do finish many sins without Satan: the cause of those sins is in us,
whereof the occasion is from him, and so we find that people of God in the
confession of sins (we have in the word) do never so much as touch upon the
devil, as knowing that to be but a bare excuse. Indeed Eve who had not then
her heart wrought upon, put off all upon the Serpent, but the Saints charg all
on themselves. David was by very importunity of the devil won to number the
people; 2 Chro. 21. 1.
the Text says, Satan provoked him: but yet we see when he comes, to
confess, not a word of Satan* but al is his own, I have sinned greatly, I have
done very foolishly, Lord forgive the iniquity of thy servant. When the Saints
were to speak of the sins of others, it is often found, that for their
encouragement they make Satan an agent: he is not then left out: as Christ
rebuking Peter, Mat. 16. 23
get thee behind me Satan, because Christ saw, Satan was too hard for Peter,
and wrought him to it: and so Paul, lest Satan tempt you for your incontinency.
But when men are on their own sins, all is laid on their own con-nate lust,
nothing said of Satan: he persuades us we yield, the amends is in our own
hands. Now the better briefly to unfold the nature of these tentations, I mean
to deliver my self in these short Questions.

1. What a Tentation is.

A tentation is the moving of a man to some sin, either by or without the
senses with a reason to enforce it: it is when lust and Satan do suggest,
persuade and instigate a man to the committing of some sin, with some show of
reason. Every thing is as it is received, that is, a reason which is so taken,
else sin can have no true reason for it: who can imagine that there is any
reason in it, for a man to do that which in its nature and desert casts away
his soul and body for ever: but yet the tentation would never take, except
man, a reasonable creature were brought over by some reason in appearance.

Paul calls sinners absurd and unreasonable men: 2 These. 3. 2
neither can they give a reason for any sin they commit, but because our
apprehension is corrupt, and the ^^culty of discerning is lost, Exodus 1. 10
therefore Satan may with ease put fallacies upon us: The new King said, Come,
let us deal wisely.
and under a color of dealing wisely, lead us into a fools paradise. Our
only way is then to believe, Yet every oppressor is a soole, Pro. 28. 1^*
that there can be no reason given for sin; and that it is nothing but very
skill in our great adversary to let in his poison. Isa. 1. 16.
Come and let us reason with GOD, and not with the devil: and then we shall
soon epsy the folly, that is in reasoning with lust and Satan. Sometimes we
are tempted to sin, and when we once yield then we are tempted for sin to do
this, or that, because we have thus sinned: when a man is once in a sin, then
we are apt to fall into tentation of discouragement or worse: that now it is
impossible to get out, I might have kept my self when I was well, but now
there is no hope it is in vain now to strive, and so the tentation is made a
snare, or else to find some end by some other wicked course and fearful
enterprise, to break out of sin by some other sin, and this indeed is all the
reason that is for sinning.

Who are subject to be tempted.

No man free, our Apostle says, [Every man is tempted being drawn aside, and
entised by his own lust.] The best men are often tempted, and that when they
are at the best: Satan was neither ashamed nor afraid to set on the LORD JESUS
himself; his malice is mighty toward the godly, and if he can but get one of
them down, he is made, he has enough by the end to weaken the hearts of
weaker Christians, to discredit the Gospel; and the best men are apt to be
lifted up and carried away with some pangs of spiritual pride, and then they
are in a foul way for one tentation or other, there is as Satan thinks
something to be had thence. Thieves rob not outhouses where there is nothing
but dung or straw, the godly have in them the riches of the spirit, gold and
silver, and that makes the devil to carry an evil eye to them, and he is ever
sick to ruin such a Christian; and God who sits Moderator in all our
tentations, orders all according to his holy wisdom; if he suffer such to be
tempted, it is for their good, to let them blood to purge their choler, to fit
them for himself. Pirates set not on an empty Vessel, but on Merchants laden
as deep as they can swim. Do not dream that any perfection shall privilege
thee from being tempted: thou that art a spiritual man, consider with thy
self lest thou be also tempted, and so tempted as overcome; that must be the
Apostles meaning, No man can say when he is tempted that he shall not be
overcome, Gal. 6. 1.
in and by the tentation: He then is wisest that does keep off tentations all
he can; and that way goes S. Paul's exhortation: He that thinks that he is
so good that he ought not to be tempted, or so strong, that he need not
fear to be tempted, has need of a tentation, that by experience in himself
he may prove what he ought to have found in the word, that of our selves we
have no strength, that our goodness is not our own. 2 Cor. 3. 5.
Watch and pray says Christ, Ioh. 15. 5.
lest yea fall into tentation. Non ait sine me de^iClius potestis facers: sed
ait, sine me nihil potestis facere. Council. Milevit. cap. 5.
Lead me not, must every Christian say, into tentation; of our selves and of
others, we must not Judge rashly, as though either we or they were not good,
because frequently and greevously tempted; every man whilst he has lust in
him and devils about him, must be in his armor, have all in a readiness, ere
he be a day elder; a storm may come: Ship-men when in a calm, or at an haven,
use to look to their tacklings, make all sure against a tempest: no grace, no
place can exempt any living wight: we must take our turns and it is our best
to be arming and preparing; what ever is past, all is not past, a thousand to
one the fits will come again. He went away from Christ but for a season, Luke
4. 13.
and after a season he came to him, and will to us: the elder we grow because
we have most faith, the more (usually) and the stronger are our tentations;
when we are seasoned we hear of those tentations which we had no acquaintance
with when we were green; 1 Cor. 10. 13.
we shall not have more, but we shall have as much as we can bear, we must
be put to it to the very back, and after some greater matter done, either for
us or by us: it is common for to hear of Satan, as in 2 Chronicles. c. 18.
Iehosophat, he fell; so did 2 Chronicles. c. 16.
Asa after God had done great things for them; and when Peter made that Mat.
16. 16.
noble confession, Mat. 16. 22, 23.
Satan begins to be both bold and busy with him presently. Make a stand then;
as we may and must fly from the outward occasions yet from our lusts within,
Ephesians. 6. 4.
or our spiritual enemy without; we neither may, nor can fly, except we fly
to heaven.

How Tentations to unnatural sins, may be said to come from our own lusts.

A man is to expect if he live out his days, to be urged to all sins: to
the breach of every branch of every one of the ten Commandments, he is like to
run through them all, more or less; and for his faith, Lust and Satan cannot
abide faith, and we must arm our selves for all assaults that way, we shall
be put to it, in respect of every Article of our Creed: Satan and our own
lust will try, whether they can bring us, to question all the Articles
concerning God, concerning Christ, or concerning the Church. All sins are in a
sense against nature, as nature was and should be: these are so called because
they are against natures law, as nature is. Vid. Aquin. in Romans 1.
But for sin against nature, it is not so easy to see how our own lust may
be said to move, and to entice us to them: I may say, that all our tentations
if they may be let run, will become unnatural, they will end there in
something, which is unnatural touching God; as Atheism and Blasphemy; or
touching men, as others or our our selves, Romans 1. 26.
as unnatural killings, self murders, pollutions against nature, passions of
dishonor and the like: Satan has no natural affection in him, nor lust (as
lust) has none neither: Satan has no naturality in him, for he lost all in
his fall: the law of nature was not given to him, he was not to hold order and
terms of civillity and humanity amongst men, and therefore there was not use
of any such law to be given to him. All we can say of him, is, that Satan is
kept under, held in awe by God, restrained by fear within, and ordered by Gods
providence without; it is awe, not natural law that keeps Satan within
bounds. Man has indeed in him naturalnesse, but lust which is our Original
sin, has no natural affection in it: some sins then are called unnatural,
because they are against the law of nature in us, which law of nature is no
part of Original sin; for in it self it is good and the very unwritten law of
God, which law of nature as it is now in us, does neither see nor greeve at all
sins, but only at some greater sins, which sins are therefore called
unnatural. In every man there are two things; Vid. Sclater on Romans p. 170, 171.
the law of nature is one, Ames Theolog* l. 2. c. 2* Sect. 15.
Original sin the other; for the law of nature some say it is a relic of the
old Image left in Adam, This law of Nature tho it be good in it self, yet in
us it is no part of our Regeneration, nor of our New man.
I think not: for then man in Adam lost not all the Image of God, then in man
by nature there is some piece of goodness, but the frame of man's heart is
only evil. Vid. Twisse Vindie. ^ lib. 3. errat 8. Sect. 11.
There is none that does good, no not one, we are all together become filthy.
Then it would follow that man brings with him of his own into the world, Vid.
Scla. o^ Romans 1. v. 31
the seeds of virtue, Genesis 6. 5.
some roots of goodness, Ps. 14, 1. 3.
which is Pelagianisme, Contr. Collator: c. 27. Sclat. of Tithes page 171, 172,
173, 174.
and condemned by the Church of God. The seeds of virtue are not (says
Prosper) in the soul of man, Morton Appeal l. 5 c. 17. Sect. 2. Sclat. of
Tithes p. 171, 172, 173, 174.
because they are utterly lost in the first sin of Adam, neither can we come
by them, except GOD who first gave them, restore them again; Field Appendix
part 2. Sc. 6. p. 54*
I think rather to say, that in things useful to hold in the wild lusts that
be in man, Vid. Harris Sermon. on the Covenant. pa. 15.
GOD presently after all was lost by the fall, (all and every piece of the
Image of God) I say to maintain discipline amongst men, GOD planted in the
heart of all mankind, an inward law, checking many sins against God, but more
against men; and accordingly GOD has made a fuller and greater revelatio^ to
nature in the things of the second Table, than in the first: and what else is
meant by the phrase, where speaking of the power of nature, to see into the
book of the creature, it is said, God showed it unto them, viz. by the law and
light of nature which God has given to all men, as men; they showed it not to
themselves, God is said to show it unto them. Now then to come home to ou^
point Sins against nature are such, as are against the law of nature: lust has
in it all sins; and when it is so great and breaks out so grossly that
nature cries shame of it, why then we call that sin an unnatural lust a sin
against nature; which sins have their root in Original sin, and would show
themselves and appear were there no devil, albeit herhaps not in that manner
and measure: as we see some men who cannot be said to be haled to it by the
devil, but only by their own wicked lusts, who when their lusts are in, care
no more for wife, children, friends, brother, father, than they do for a dog;
are moved no more with the tears of their own bowels, than with the whinening
of a pigge. Let lust alone, and without any help from Satan, it will make a man
give over to be a man: shake off all humanity, go beyond all shame, all sense,
put off all natural affection, deliver a man up to obdurate heart, not
discerning betwixt good and evil, either in moral or natural respects, Romans
1. 17.
as Paul shows; how some men put off all manhood, Deu. 23. 18
become dogs, The price of a Dog, id est of a Buggerer. Iun. and Deodare in Loc.
yea worse than dogs; for dog with dog uses not to commit filthiness,
and some women shakes off all woman-hood also: (...) Phocil.
for there is no who with lust, for were it not for the watching providence of
God over us, and the restraining power of God with us, and the law of nature in
us; men would fling out into all kind of wickedness, there would be no being,
no living amongst men; we would all be such fools as to think with our
hearts, and say with our mouths there is no God. Original sin, has all
Atheism in it: there will be nothing but murder amongst us: Psa. 14. 1.
Husband would kill the wife; and wife the husband, father son, son the
father; brother, brother, Caine, Abel, our houses and towns, would be full of
parracides, and fratricides, and men would do execution on themselves as
common as might be: oh the bottomless depth of Original sin! Our own lust is
a fearful murderer, it comes immediately from Satan at the first, and he is
a murderer from the beginning. Ioh. 8. 44.
Men would be Wolves, Homo homini Lupus.
Bears, Tigers, Devils, one to another: neither would any shame keep men and
women from monstrous adulteries, most infamous uncleanenesse, Incests, Rapes,
Beastiality, what not? Look we what is in any man, that is by nature in the
heart and lust of every man, were it not for God restraining, and natures law
curbing: should our Original sin be drawn forth and let out, we should all
do as Caine did, as Absalom did, as Ammon did, as the Sodomites did; for what
sin soever is forbidden in the Word, and has bin ever practiced in the world,
that sin every man carries in his bosom: 2 King. 8 13.
there is no man but is of himself a dead dog; for why should God forbid
that in the word to all, if the nature of all were not subject to it?
Bestiality (the foulest sin) is forbidden to thee as well as to any other; Lev.
18 23
therefore it is in thy corrupt nature, The moral law was indeed given
immediately to Moses: but Moses stood as a common father, and was then and
there every man representative.
as well as in the nature of any other: Besides we are cut all out of the same
cloth, we are al alike in the guilt of Adams sin, one man has not sinned
more in Adam than another, and therefore our Original sin being the penalty of
Adams sin, must needs be one and the same in all; where the cause is just the
same, Maiemonid in more Nevochim, part 2. c. 33.
there the effect must needs be the same, Original sin then by nature is no
more, no worse, in one than in another; it differs not so much as Magis and
minus: In some what by reason of the tempter of the body, education, occasion,
tentations, influences of Gods providence, and chiefly by reason of the liberty
of man's will, (man having his will at some command to sin,) I say by reason of
that and other things, lust is drawn forth more in one than in another, and
more to one sin than another, and that breaks out in the life of one, which
does not in another: but as the plot of all diseases lies in the humors of the
body, so for certain in the lust of the soul: there is in all a kind of
pronesse, a very aptitude to the worst of sins. I know that the power of man
is finite, and no way able to run upon diverse horrible impieties in all
extremity at once, chiefly since many sins in the act do cross one another,
(though all concur in the Root as in a Common Center) but yet now one then
another: there is no sin under heaven, but man is subject unto, by turns
chiefly; should the LORD give Satan leave to blow the fire, and to bait our
lust, man would presently show himself in his colors, and sin many divelish
sins: That which is said is true, that there is no sin, so bad, so base, so
unnatural, but man's nature is, if no enclinable to it, yet capable of it: If
the sin be but so, Adrian the Emperor canonized Antinous his Catamite for a
God Spartian. in Adrcano Julian: in Caesaribus.
so, an ordinary crime, that then our nature is inclinable to it: but if most
unnatural and most abhorrent from the principles of nature, yet we are
capable of it in some degrees: Lust is of it self past shame and past sense;
Tertu. Apol. c. 13. The like did Alexander for his boy Ephestion. Justin hist.
l. 12.
I may add that though at first sin against nature sit not with us, taste not
of our nature by reason of that law and light that is in us; yet after a little
space, when lust has overcome the law of nature, Alii morbosi vel ex
consuetudine quem-ad modum pilorum evulsiones, and ungnium esus, praeterea vero
Carbonum and terrae. Adhaec autem libidin^sorum concubitus cum ma^ibus: aliis
enim quidem natura, aliis vero ex consuetudine contingunt utii qui assueti
fuerint a pueris.
a man is as sick after sins against nature, as he was after common sins and
worse, for the greater and fowler a sin is, the more headlong is our lust after
it, we being by Original sin, most eager after those transgressions which are
worst: an ordinary stomach is most (of it self) earnest after usual diet
that is wholesome; but we see a custom brings children to eat coals, and an
humor in the stomach, makes young women eat leather to choose, and what more
usual, than for breeding women to lust after such things which would make the
stomach of another to rise: Arist. Eth. l. 7. c. 5.
so I may say, that as long as our lust is kept in, and held down, it is for
ordinary faults, while the law of nature can rule it against the force and
cunning of Original sin, such unnatural, passions seem to find some
Antipathy in us; but when by custom, occasion, or tentation, lust shows it
self and the light of nature can do little, why then man is not only capable
of unnatural sins, but inclinable to them, and more impudent and impotent that
way than after other sins. As we see Ammon is sick after his own Sister, an
unnatural crime, and hungers more after her than ordinary; and Caine had
rather kill his own brother than any man else in the world had there bin any.
Many are more mad after He lusts, Genesis 19. 8. 9.
who care not for She lusts: as in Sodom we see Lots daughters were not worth
the looking after, they must know the men; they went after strange flesh says
Jude, strange in their Sex and kind, so Paul says Romans 1. 26. that women
(more shamefast and modest by nature than men) did not care for the natural
use which they had lawfully, V. 7. Non solum jure sed natura fiet.
but changed it into that which is against nature; thus we see delights against
nature are (when Original lust is let out) more looked after than natural;
Quod dicit mutaverunt naturalem usum ad habentes illum spectat Chrysostom. in loc.
our corrupt affections are not more capable of, but more inclinable at last to
unnatural sins, which they did stare at at the first: as long as the law of
nature does fight it out against Original sin and can carry it, 1 Cor. 6. 1.
we love not to hear these sins named, but when nature in the Law of it is
suppressed and our lust rules all, Romans 1. 29
no sin in such request as some unnatural sin or other, Non dicit quoniam,
a maverunt aut de^ideraunt sed exarserunt Chrysostom. in loc.
these passions of fedity and dishonor do then burn, as it is in Saint Paul's
English: We read much of Ganimedes, and the jest went of Nero and his Sporus;
that it had been well for the world, Sueton in Neron. c. 29.
if Domitius Neros father had had no other wife: In a word, a man whose
Original sin is kept in order, does but hunger after sins of ordinary
quality: but when nature is out of office and lust does all, men will then long
after unnatural lusts: Passions work more strongly the wrong way, and the
stream is most swift, when it is not in the right channel. And in the other
passion of blood, how men do put off all natural affection we see it; for men
are more cruel (when they take) to their own children, their own parents,
than to any enemies, aye the fire of a man's unnatural sins are not satisfied,
but with a man's own blood; and many think to lay this devil by killing
themselves, who have not a thought of murdering any body else. Oh that men
could once come within sight of the depth of their own lust! Man would then
learn not to be so bold with occasions of sin against nature; what if at
first nature does even spit at them? yet if once they fire and take, they work
strongly and come with a greater swing of delights than natural sins do,
and therefore I would we could learn as to be humble for our Original sin;
so to thank GOD for keeping us and ours, that those unnatural courses have
not bin, and broken forth in our persons or houses to our shame and scandal,
as have bin done in houses and families of better than our selves: And to pray
that God would keep us, as from all other, so from taking after unnatural
passions. What if we have grace? yet since these sins are not sins against
the holy Ghost, it is possible for good people to be infected with them: as long
as we have Original sin, we want but occasion, and a tentation, and Gods
permission, and then we fall; since Original sin is the same it was, and was at
first the same it is now: there be perhaps new actual sins, because never
drawn out into practice before, Bonav^l. 2. D. 33. a. 2. q. ^. et. 2.
but no new Original sin, Original sin is but one, and it is the self same
in kind and degree, in all persons and at all times: It may and does in some
bear new fruits; but it never had, nor has, nor shall have new roots: it
ever had in it the roots of all sins, and it can never have but the roots of
all. We must ever stand bound to the goodness of our God, who has so kept us
hitherto that we have not broken forth into more and into worse sins than we
have. There is no abomination so prodigious, but our Original sin would
quickly water at it; it is his mere favor alone, who has kept us and our
families from occasions of such sins, or such occasions from us. Bless God
then, that Caine has not killed Abel in our houses: that Ammon has not
defloured our Tamar, that our Absalom, has not been the death of his brother
Ammon; (...), that our brother Absalom has not sought our lives also; that
Reuben has not gone up to his fathers Couch. What are we? what are our fathers
houses, that we have been preserved in our houses from such scandalous sins?
are we better? are we so good as these fathers were? Should God sit still, and
the law of nature stand still and look on, and let our Original sin, our lust
within show it self? the next would be sin upon sin; against Scripture,
against Nature, no Bonds, no Bounds, would hold us worse and worse still; with
greatest violence we should long after the greatest sins, and the end would be
a reprobate sense, from the which good Lord deliver us.

The Sum is, that the cause why we feel not such pronenesse to the sin
against nature is, not because Original lust is not as prone in it self (if
not more prone) to those sins as to others, but because there is by God for
necessary causes a law of nature superadded to Original sin in all mankind,
holding us off from such unnatural passions, which law of nature does suffer
when such sins are committed, Aq^in. in Romans 1. Lect. 8. Dicuntur passiones,
secundum quod proprie passio dicitur, ex eo quod aliud trahi^ur extra ordinem
suae naturae, puta cum aqua cale^it, aut cum homo infirmatur.
and therefore the Apostle fitly calls them Passions; as water suffers when it
is made hot, and therefore as long as the law of nature is not suppressed, a man
is not patient about such lusts: But when our lust has gotten the better of
natures law, then to what sins are such men more eager, than to those?
Therefore such lusts are by the Apostle styled, the lusts of their To. 1. 24.
own hearts. We said with St. Paul that God does deliver men into a reprobate
sense, and then they fall into such lusts. Here a doubt may arise, whether such
sins are done only by those who are Reprobates, since one would think, that
this Reprobate sense were only in Reprobates, and therefore so named.

This is I confess out of my way, yet because I would not stumble any man's
conscience, I am bold to speak a word to the point, and the thing I affirm is,
that unnatural sins are done sometimes by such as are no Reprobates: and I
think there are many reprobates, who nein all their lives committed and acted
these sins. It is a fearful estate to be cast by God into a reprobate sense;
and the danger is so much, that he is not himself, who dares to venture on
such rocks because some only escape. There is no sin (except the sin against
the holy Ghost) but an elect person may commit, all sins else may stand with
the grace of Election, but this reprobate sense, is not that sin against the
holy Ghost what ever it be; what ever a man may repent of may stand with our
estate in Christ. Now to say that this is a condition which admits not of
repentance is hard, neither can it be proved, and 1 Cor. 6. Instance is given
in one of the worst of all unnatural sins, and yet the Apostle says, Such
were some of you, and they were Elect, repented, and are now in heaven: GOD
forbid then, that we should be so s^uer to the conscience of man, as to think
that all those Romans 1. and all others like to those who are in Gods Justice for
a time given up to a reprobate mind, are past all hope of reconciliation and
salvation. There is a sacrifice for those sins, Heb. 10. 26.
some have gotten out of that estate and others may. It is then called a
Reprobate mind; not because it is the mind of none but Reprobates; but
because such have in regard of their present condition, Sclat in Romans 1. 28.
Aquin. in Romans Lect. 8 Dicitur Reprobus sensus, quo aliquis reprobandum
judicium habet de agendis, secundum illud, 2 Timothy 3.
a mind (as one says) rejected, disallowed, abhorred of God; yet not a mind
past all hope of cure and recovery, or if you will a mind as another speaks
worthy of reprobation, making choice of matters reprobated: We have a phrase
in St. Paul, That Christ is in you, Homines mente corrupti, reprobi circa
fidem, Cajetan. in Loc.
except you be reprobates: but such are in such an estate, that except they
get Christ into them, it is all one with them as with Reprobates; 2 Cor. 5. 13.
5.
they are (as it were) for the pre^ent in the state of reprobation for any
goodness that is in them, but Reprobates they are not, and as Beza notes, the
scope and dispute of the Apostle will not bear this sense, since hence he
proves that no man can be justified by the law of nature, because it is in all
men to break the law of nature, and that the Apostle proves by this, that all
men, except GOD stay them, all run on to a reprobate mind, by a reprobate
mind then he will have meant a mind, going against the dictates of conscience,
and the principles of Nature, out of which estate it pleases GOD to call some
to grace: God does call in some that are cast far behind hand by their sins;
and therefore we must not say that there is such a point of sinning, that no
man does ever come back from it again, for no man goes so far but he might
have done worse and gone farther; and therefore when and where can one fix the
measure to rest, that a man going so far can never come to good again? There
is a fulness I know of sinning which some must come unto, ere the Judgment
can come on them; but that all who fill up sin or sins to the height are
Reprobates, or that none are reprobates, but such as make up the extremity of
sinning I deny: for the conscience must have some where to rest, and to pitch a
degree of sinning, that he that comes not to that degree may repent, and
return: he that comes to that degree of sinning and may not return, would
trouble the wit of the acutest Disputer in all the world.

Neither does indeed the Greek word properly carry the sense of one cast away,
but of one reproved; not as contrary to the word Elect, but as contrary to the
word reproved: so Paul uses it, 1 Corin. 9. 27. Lest I my self be a
Reprobate, that is, reproved; for Paul knew full well by confession of all
Papists, that he neither was nor could be a Reprobate, Vid. Rittez. in
Salvian. page 10.
and the learned Borgius expounds (...) the Reprobates mind to be a mind,
that no man has cause to glory in, but rather to be much ashamed of, which is
indeed the right and full sense of the Greek word. Artic. 36. Contra. L^ther
Roffensis therefore is in an uncomfortable error; who writes, that when a man
is hardened as Pharaoh was, or given up to a Reprobate sense, as those of whom
Saint Paul speaks, were; that God does cast them off for ever without ever
tendering to them the offer of his grace again: that God does forsake some such
is true, but that he does forsake all such (which is his assertion) is false.
And sundry learned amongst the Papists have a dream; that when a man comes to
such a number, and such a measure of sins, then God is bound in Justice, not
only not to give him (though that were too much) but to deny him favor and
grace ever after, and so (says Abulensis) it is all one as though such a man
were already actually in hell. Quast. 12. in Exodus 4. Cajetan. jentac. 8, q. 1.
This unsound and unsafe opinion is also confessed to be held by great Divines
amongst them, as by Tapper in art. De lib. Arbit. Medin. l. 3. de recta in deum
fide c. By Dried. de Captiv. cap. 3. vid.
To cast all into a brief; I say that God is not bound to give place of
repentance unto dispisers and breakers of his covenant. 2. He may in Justice
absolutely deny it them, Valcut. To. 2. Dis. 8. q. 3. punct. 4.
and many times does: as to Caine, Genesis 4. 11. to Esau, Heb. 11. 17. to Corah
and his accomplices, Number. 16. 27. to Ananas and Zaphira, 2. 2. q. 2. art 5. ad 1.
Acts 5. 5. and infinite others, (...) says Aquinas, God (if he will) may do
it, for no sin, but for to punish Original sin only. 3. God does give place
and time, and the grace of repentance to most indurate sinners, and to such as
for the just guerdon of some former sins have bin given up to a reprobate
mind, and albeit such be far spent, yet they are not past cure, the disease
does admit of a remedy, the sin is not the sin against the holy Ghost, it is
pardonable by a kind of violent work of the Law and Gospel, by a strong and
compacted force of the Spirit of God, such hurts are sometimes cured, and such
sins are healed; and therefore to avoid the blow of Satan's tentations that
we are in a reprobate mind and therefore past all remedy: Let us say, Ezekiel. 10.
2.
yet there is hope in Israel concerning this sin; repent we and return and
God will show us mercy. For though God may leave such a man utterly in his
sins, yet that he must and will give men up, when their sins are come to such
or such a pass: is a Doctrine fit for none to teach but Papists, whose
religion was and is, as Luther once noted, a Slaughterhouse of the conscience
of man.

Quest. On Gal.
What be the remedies against tentation.

They are either General, or else Particular, for some certain cases, as for
the General, there are Rules to be observed; some before, some in, others
after the tentation.

General Rules and Remedies for prevention before.

All I cannot, neither would I if I could, the chief are:

1. Beware of spiritual pride, the disease of such as have something to be
proud of: for when men grow into a big conceit of themselves, then there needs
a tentation to prick the bladder. Swelling in the body is a dangerous
Symptom, it is no less ominous to the soul: for if once we come to please our
selves with our well doing, the heart presently swells up into a puff of
spiritual pride, which is the greatest enemy to the free grace of God, that
is; which spiritual pride is usually cured with a spiritual fall. See in the
stories of the Saints in the blessed Bible, and we shall find that their pride
of spirit has ever likely had a fall; it was for the pride of wit that those
Romans 1. were given over to passions of dishonor: V. 21. 22.
walk humbly with thy GOD and fear nothing. What was in Adam, Genesis 3. 5.
is rife in us still; ye shall be as gods was his disease and it is ours ever
after.

2. The next thing we must see to is, Mar. 14. 38.
Security, and here the precept is, Watch: When men think there is least
danger, then the danger is greatest; sin and Satan are ever watching their
oportunities, which is, when we watch not: and is it not fit sin and Satan
should be let loose upon us, to fear us out of our security, and chiefly such
lusts as fire the conscience. A man in a swoone must we know be rubbed and
chafed, and some staring lusts which will trouble the spirits of a man and
chafe his very soul, are a fit of burning fever to cure this spiritual
Lethargy. Security will rust us, undo us, and eat out all that good is out
of us, and if the word will not do it, nor a cross will not work it; then
comes a sharp tentation to see what that will do, and if any thing will first
awake, and then humble the drowsy and sleepy heart of a man, it is some vexing
sin or other.

3. We must not abuse any mercy what ever it be, for that bringes in a
tentation: he that will not use lawful things lawfully, it is just with God
that he should, and ten to one he shall fall into the unlawful act of the
thing abused. Be it Wife, or Name, or Goods, or any mercy, if we abuse it and
do not use it aright: the next is to be set upon with some act of sin in the
matter it self. What ever we enjoy, if we enjoy it not holily and
thankefully, we shall be sore tempted about it, in one sinful vein or other.

4. Look not disdainefully on any sin in another, be the sin what it will,
be the sinner who he will, our nature stands not free from the same, we are
subject to that very malady and to punish us for looking upon the false and
faults of others with scorns; first or last we are like to be tempted to and
with the same offense, that we may learn to know our selves, and to be more
merciful to others, Gal. 6. 1.
against another time. A common thing for a man out of passion, not compassion,
to let fly at another sins to day, and to fall, or be ready to fall into the
self same sin to morrow. We find that we are solicited to a sin, that we
never yet from our youth felt any motion too till now; to let us see, that we
bear about us not only the roots of those sins which our complexion has
inclined us unto, but also of those sins we never thought of, nor dreamed
of, that so we may learn to consider others in their corruptions with
meekness to day, since it may be our case to take their turn to morrow.

5. Keep off from us, and our selves off from all occasions of any sin, to
rush into harms way, is to tempt our selves, and to tempt Satan to tempt us.
He that will dare to run into the mouth of any sin, he does conceit that he
is free from that sin, and the next news he hears is, to hear of that
very sin, that he may know by experience what a creature man is;keep and does
not he who ventures on occasions of sin, take himself free from the danger of
that sin? whereas the very deed is, that the man who does dare to venture on
the occasion of sin, shows that there was in the heart an implicit likening
of that sin, though he neither think it nor feel it, but rather dream the
contrary; for when the occasion is once afoot, then presently comes in mighty
provocations to that sin, and then the hidden corruption opens and manifests it
self: it is our wisdom as we would shun sin to avoid all occasions of all
sins whatsoever: For if we will not keep our selves from the occasion, God
will not keep us from the sin; and if God do not keep us, we cannot be kept,
we cannot, we will not choose but fall.

6. Keep all our armor about us, and put sin and Satan out of hope: the devil
is wiser, than usually to tempt where he has no hope to speed. Judah went
about an honest business: Genesis 28.
yet because he took not his armor with him in the morning, he fell ere
night: we must carry our Antidotes about us, because we walk in places that
are infectious; and chiefly we must see to our matters in sins we are given
unto, if to pride, then go not where fashions are, without a commission and
weapon; if we be apt to quarrel, go without a sword, and when we have not
our weapon about us, we shall not be so tempted to brawle; if to the lust of
unelcannesse, come not near the doors of her house, and that will keep our
hearts free, having our hearts still an end full of serious meditation of the
presence of God Almighty; since our nature is so apt to be tempted by our lust,
and we are so soon afoot after every sin, that like children we had rather be
in the dirt than in the clean: have we not cause to look after these
directions, and such as these are, that we may not be lead into tentation; that
our lust may not draw us aside from God, and entise unto evil.

2. Rules for the remedy in the Tentation.

To him that would know what he is best to do, when the tentation is come or
coming, we prescribe him to follow this order.

1. To make a right use of it.

2. To get by good means out of it.

For the use to be made of the Tentation, do thus. 1. Know that the tentation
is suffered to come upon us by God for our humbling, whether it be to commit a
sin, or, to despair for some sin committed, when it is to some fault, as in
this case most times it is, which is against our minds and to the trouble of
our souls: God he knows that if any thing under heaven will humble us, this
will do it; what else will so gaul and cut the heart of a Christian man? what
else will so set us a praying, a whining, a watching, a fasting? this he see,
will even vile a man in his own eyes, and make him base to himself: this will
season and fit us for Gods building, and the use we are to make of it, is; to
see our selves what we are, and to look up to Christ Jesus: God sees and we
must see: that we cannot well come to heaven without such a purge and
therefore we must join with God, make his end, our end: he does it to break
us and humble us, and we must humble our selves: humbly our selves says St.
James, Iam. 4. 10.
and God will exalt us; it is to humble us and do us good, Deu. 8. 16.
when? In the latter end says the Text: this is not done in a day; and
therefore we must wait Gods time: It is a plaster and it must lie on some
time, if God mean us any good, the tentation shall not over straight, but
hover and hang about us some long time, some good space. GOD does drive out one
nail with another, Pride with a tentation of Lust, but this is not done in an
hour, if it be somewhat long a doing, yet it is worth our while. Let us stay
and wait upon God from whom comes our humiliation: the cause of a tentation
is pride, the use of the tentation is to take away our pride: there is great
dispute which is, and which is the way to find out our master-sin, but when
all is done, pride is the master-sin in all. We all hold of Adam in Capite,
pride was the first and and great sin in Adam, and so it is in all his see, we
had our lust from him; He his from the Angels; the sin of sins in the Angels
was pride; 1 Timothy 3. 6.
it gave them their fall; August. in Psa. 58. Caput Omnium peccatorum superbia.
so it was in Adam, it gave him his fall, and so it is in us. There is we say
in trees a master-roote, Aug. tract. 25. in Joan. Evang.
and that root in Original sin is no other than pride; indeed there is in
most some other particular stream and vain, which carries, one, one way,
another, another; arising from Complexion, Education, Condition and other
causes and occasions, which often varies as the temper of our bodies, and the
order of our estate does change; and this year it is one sin, seven year henc
(as every seven year there is a sensible change in the humor of the body) it
is another, when poor it is one, when rich it is another sin; but that sin of
all sins which goes through all the race of man kind is pride, the universal
and general Captain, Sin, in all the world: Unbelief may have that name and
be well called our master-sin, in respect of our Justification, instrumentally
taken, because it hinders our union with Christ: but the chief sin, which is
our greatest moral vice, and carries the greatest strain and power with it in
respect of sanctification, is this same sin of Pride, and spiritual pride is
the pride of all prides, all other sins do a kind of homage to pride, as to
their king and Lord. De Civit.
Austine has it, that the Romans did forbear many vices that carried shame
with them, Dei. lib. 5. cap. 12.
and did many commendable acts, Lib. 4. in Julian. c, 3.
and all to serve their sin of of vainglory: and Val. Mar. l. 4. 26. Lev. l.
26
Scipio by name and Alexan. vid Plut. in Alex.
others, did abstain from that which their nature would have been right
willing to have enjoyed, and all to keep their name, and to maintain their
credit, and outward reputation amongst men: so that all other sins do as it
were veil to this, and therefore God may be said to resist all other sins,
but this sin he resists afar off; Ps. 138. 6.
he cannot abide the sight of it, and so we say that God does use to give us
up for some time, in some measure, to some base tentations, he lets out some
vile corruptions and why? but all to take down this sin of pride; it is say we
all little enough to humble us: affliction without the true sight and sound
feeling of some of our corruptions will not do it: a man is then humble, when
he is humbled before his Original sin, and amonst all the bitter fruits of
that cursed lust, pride is chief, and does play the Rex amongst the rest:
other sins that we (speaking from feeling) do call our master-sin or sins,
our predominant lusts are but made use of by God to humble us, and to eat out
this dangerous sin of pride; and therefore it cleares it self, my thinks to
say, that this sin of pride is in every man his cheifest sin, since other
beloved sins are let to have their swing in men, all to master, this Master of
sins, our pride. The use then that we are to put our tentations unto when they
come, is: to humble our hearts, to abase us, to pluck away the feathers of our
pride.

2. The next use we are to make of our tentation, is; that we see a mercy in
it whatsoever it be, if we feel nothing but what is common to man, and others
have had and have the like, we must learn to bear it with a kind of
impatient patience; why should not we bear what others bear, what are we?
is our nature better than others? here must be a kind of content, else it is
like it will be worse yet, else as yet, we are neither truly nor sufficiently
humble: Phil. 2. 3.
it must teach us to think better of others, Vere existimemus aliquid occultum
esse posse in alio quo no bis superior sit.
than of our selves; and we must learn to render thanks to God, considering
what our deserts are, Aug. 83. Quaest. q. 71
and what our nature is; that we are no worse, that we are broken out no more.

3. The last use is, that we must consider a providence in it, in that we are
kept from sinning, by being tempted for sin, God does suffer us to fall into
the thoughts and affections, that so we might not fall into the outward deed
and action of sin: better have a motion in the will, than the will and the
deed too; the will is taken for the deed in good things, but not in sin, for
that Gods accepting and rewarding our good deeds, comes out of his grace and
favor; it is a matter of mercy and draws out of the merits of Christ, and
therefore God may, and does many times take the hearty will and desire for the
deed: but in sin it is not so, for there the punishment is according to the
desert, and merit of the sin, it is more or less, as the desert of the sin is
more or less; now there is more guilt in the act and will too, than is in the
will alone: evil works really deserve punishment, and the punishment is never
more than the guilt that is in the sin, and therefore the will is not so bad as
the deed: There be more degrees of malice and evilnesse in the act, than in the
purpose alone, and therefore of the two, it is better to have it in the
affection within, than in the act without, too chiefly when the thoughts be
such as we cannot abide, do not allow, but abhor; we fall soonest into the
outward act of that sin, which thrusts in upon us on a sudden whereof we felt
not the drawing tentation first within: had David bin haunted with pestilent
and violent suggestions and motions to adultery and murder, he had then felt
those corruptions to have been strong in his flesh; his care then would have
been, to have been earnest with God by prayer, to be pardoned, healed and
preserved; and so he had found such strength, that he would not, nor should
not have done those faults: what if we find that we do loath such lusts when
they begin to fire? yet we must not stay there as though it were impossible
that we should ever fall into the sins themselves: David would have taken it
in as much scorn as another, had one spoken before to him as touching adultery
and murder; our disliking the inward motion, is not through enough, except it
bring us on our knees and beg of God, that it proceed no further, Tentari and
in Tentationem non inferri non est malum imo etiam bonum est, hoc enim est
probari.
and so we see by accident, it is a mercy to be held under some such profitable
tentations, and we must make this mercy of it: that the tentation drive us to
God, to keep us from finishing the sin it self: Aug. l. 2. de bono persev: c.
6. Non nobis exped it esse sine tentationibus, necro gemus Deum ut non
tentemur, sed ut non inducamur in tentationem. Aug in Psa. 73.
our tentation must be a means of our prevention, we must take it as a
warning piece to arm us against falling into the foul fault it self.

The second maine branch, is, how we should get the tentation off, and draw our
selves out of the snare, and here we are to show what we must not do, and
then what we must do.

1. We must not dispute with sin nor Satan: Satan when they came to arguing;
was too hard for our first parents in their innocence, when they had wit at
will, and their reason, at command, and now that we are as we are, we loose
all if once we begin to enter into disputation with such an old Sophister and
crafty fox as Satan is; and our own lust is the greatest, both deceiver and
distembler in the world. Greeneham.
He (as one says) shootes with Satan in his own Bow, who thinks by disputing
and reasoning to put off Satan, our reason is corrupt, and on his side, and it
will betray us into his hands.

2. We must not fly away from Satan, a runaway never makes a good conclusion
of his tentations from Idolatry: 1 Cor. 6. 8. 10. 14.
and from Adultery and Fornication we must fly: 1 Timothy 6. 11. Fly these
things.
such sins are best conquered by flying, 2 Timothy 2. 22.
and we are to hold our selves from all occasions of all sins whatsoever, Fly
also youthful lusts.
when and where we may do it without offending of God; Libidinem fugiendo
superare.
but from the devil it is neither possible nor lawful to fly from him; Vid.
Aug. De honestate mulierum*
not possible because the devils are exceeding many, Ephesians. 6. 13.
and they are spirits and there can be no flying from them; Iam. 4. 7.
nor lawful, because we are bid to resist him, 1 Pet. 5. 9.
and therefore forbid to fly from him, and then again, because it is a kind
of service done to Satan, a yielding to him some kind of worship, When Satan
sees his threatenings to be feared, then he terrifies more and more, such as
are terrified already Luth. on Gal.
since that it is to fear him; and we are commanded to fear GOD, and not the
devil. A fear there is granted, so as to send us to God, and to the use of
Gods means: but such a fear as to make us run, (a fainting fear) is
unlawful and dangerous; and after a sort a serving of Satan the deadly enemy
of the Lord Jehovah.

Make the case thus, a man is on just occasion alone, by himself, aye in the
dark too, and has reason so to be: now sin and Satan let fly at him with
their fiery bloody darts; here we must not run, not avoid the place, it is
a kind of serving Satan, and a yielding to the devil, God is angry with it,
and it is often the way to great danger; what if by this shifting the room, we
find ease for the present, yet it is but his skill, like a lightening before
death, it leads us securely into the hands of the same or some other
tentation? what must we do? Ephesians. 6. 14.
Even stand it out, hold there, as we have a calling to be there, what if we
quake? better quake, than serve Satan, better tremble every vein than sin,
better dye in the place, than fly from the place, because it is a flying from
Satan, and he that in this sense flies from Satan for fear, seems to
distrust Gods providence on him, for that particular.

Thus far for what we must not do; now next is, what we must do, and here we
have many things, the heads are these.

1. The first thing is believing; Ephesians. 6. 16.
get faith (says Paul and then we shall quench all the fiery darts of the
Devil. Our faith will do wonders if we apply the victory, that Christ has
made over Satan for us; what if we be Cowards, In Christo tu tentaberis -- Si
in illo nos tenati sumus, in illo nos Diabolum superamus, Aug. in. Psa. 60.
Christus Diabolum vicit and pro te vicit, and tibi vicit, and in te vicit. Aug.
in Psa. 49.
yet Christ did not play the Coward; His victory Mat. 4. was ours, and for us:
He stood in our place, played our prize, beat Satan to our hands: His glorious
triumph over Satan, is a kind of satisfaction for all our yielding so much,
aye, too too much to the devil: what if Satan beat me may a Christian, say,
yet I pass not; since my Christ in my stead, for my part has beaten Satan all
to pieces: In him my head, I have long since beaten satan hand to hand, he is
then to me in him (my Captain) a very vanquished enemy: thus faith makes his
victory as touching the price of it ours, as though we our selves had in our
own proper persons, conquered Satan, and beat the Devil. The next thing that
we must do by our faith, is, to take Christ Jesus, and set him against the
Tempter, why? Because there is scarce any tentation wherein Satan is not: the
devil has put some of you in prison: Get thee behind me Satan; Rev. 2. 10.
the devil is usually in it then: Mat. 16. 23.
We are then by faith to set Christ against Satan: we are not of our selves so
weak in the hands of Satan, as Satan in the hands of Christ; turn him then
over to CHRIST, and let Christ alone with him; faith will be satisfied with
none else, nothing but Christ; and faith is said to be our victory, which
neither hope nor charity are said to be, 1 Ioh. 5. 4.
because it does make Christ ours, who is our victory over sin and Satan both.
Faith is not content with the presence and assistance of an Angel neither,
except the Lord Jesus be there himself: Exo. 33. 2.
for God did promise to send an Angel with his people, and to drive out the
Canaanite and the rest of that Crew, ver. 3.
but he himself would not go: the people of GOD were no way content with an
Angel, they took no comfort in this; V 4.
this was says the Text, Deus iratus dioere videtur tu and populus tuus, --
alioquin dixisset Tu and populus meus. Aug. Quest. 149. Super Exodus Tom. 4.
evil tidings, they mourned and put on blacks, like a loving wife; she must
have her husband; what do you tell her of sending a trusty servant along with
her, nothing will content her but her husband. So when our faith is set on
work, it makes us but sick to tell us of an Angel, except we may have Christ
Jesus also, him or none; and therefore we are not safe except we do and can
by faith lay fast hold on Christ Jesus, and set up him and his power against
the gates of hell and powers of darkness. Say an Angel bring strength with
him yet an Angel brings no merits, nor that authority with him. Faith must
have one to side it with us against Satan, who has absolute command over
Satan, and merits to make amends and payment to God for all our sins, (that
way) now these concur in none but Christ, and so we find that no substitute,
no not an Angel will serve, but Christ must be ours by faith and by a living
faith we must take him, and make him our Buckler and sword against the Devil
and his Angels: If Christ do but say the word, the Devil himself is said,
his tentations dye. To him then who is our refuge and our strength, no creature
is to be our refuge, because none can be our strength, Psa. 46. 1.
but if we rest on them, say, on the Angels themselves, Vid. Aug. in Loc.
they will prove our weakness; but Christ Jesus the Lord our righteousness,
he will be sure to be our strength. Say I of my self, am as weak as water,
but in Christ, Phi. 4. 13
made mine by faith, I am strong, Lu. 10. 18
can do all things, can, and shall, and will beat down Satan himself; like
lightening from heaven, and tread down the devil under my feet: To. 16. 20.
but when? Mat. 23. 37.
Shortly, Aug. in Psa. 62.
Through whom? Through the God of peace, so says St. Paul. Let the devil and
his angels be unto us as a Kite; yet as long as we may succor our selves
under the wings of the Lord Jesus Christ, we are safe, we are sure. The last
remedy that we have by faith, is, to learn us to rely on that promise, that
if we fight we shall conquer. The promise is, that if we resist Satan steadfast
in the faith, he will fly. Iam. 4. 7.
Believe then that we shall overcome; and we shall overcome: we are more than
Conquerers, as the Greek is: We do overcome; other fighters fight first,
Romans 8. 37 (...).
and then conquer; but we through faith in Christ are said to overcome before
we fight, and so we are more than Conquerors; this is to be more than a
Conqueror, to be sure of the victory before one fight. Believe, and prosper;
do, but by faith say it shall be so, and it shall be so. 2 Chro. 20 20.
A man shall not presently conquer: a man he is to fight with, though he does
believe that he shall conquer him, because there is no promise made by GOD that
he shall, there is no covenant past betwixt God and us to that end. But now
GOD has said the word, we have him fast in a Bond; that if we fight against
Satan we shall conquer Satan, resist him and he shall fly; war against sin,
and sin shall dye: I speak not of presumption, but faith, when a man has
grounds for it, uses GODS means in Gods sight. Have we not a command to
pray? Lead us not into tentation: If a command, then it is attended with a
promise; that he that prays not to be lead, shall not be lead into the
tentation; we are bound then to believe, that following Gods ways, we shall
not be lead into tentation: John. ^. 4.
Faith is our victory, and nothing but faith, because it is not hope, but faith
which apprehends and applies the promise. We see then that Saint Paul speaks
to great purpose, when he calls upon the Ephesians above all things, Ephesians. 6. 16.
to get faith and the use of faith, to quench not some, but all the fiery darts
of Satan: reason can do nothing; as it is natural, it is in vain, and does no
good; the tentation is a spiritual thing, reason, a natural weapon: now a
natural thing, can have neither strok nor force against a spiritual, and
therefore reason is a false weapon; and as our reason is carnal, it is a
secret friend to Satan, takes part with him against us, The weapons of our
warfare are not carnal, but mighty, how? Through God.
good stuff for a man to think to conquer the devil, with a wisdom which
the Apostle says is divelish: How divelish? Because it has the devil for its
damme; 2 Cor. 10. 4.
we must not then consult with flesh and blood; Iam. 3. 15.
down with reason, away with our own wit, let faith do all, else faith will
do nothing; faith never works so well, as when it works alone: And is it no
more, but believe the promise, and is Satan gone? No, no more: and must we
have all we believe? all and more too. All, for it is with us according to our
faith, as Christ said to the believing woman of Canaan; a believer shall have
what he will. Mat. 15. 28.
More than, we believe, because we shall have beyond our faith; above what we
are able to ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 20.
and that abundantly too. How so? must we not have a promise and faith for all?
I answer and say, we have more than we have faith for, in the particulars; a
world of matters there be that come to our hand, that we did not know of nor
think of in the particular; yet nothing but what we have faith for, one way
or other, if not in the particular, yet in the general, viz. we believe that
we shall conquer all the tentations we see, and all others we neither see nor
feel, such as we do know and those we does Since we have this in us, that if
we did know them we would ask them and do, do our diligenc to know them.
not know of, wherein a kind of implicit faith is sufficient, thus and then
we ask nothing, but what we have faith for, one way or other. In the
general, we ask in the general, and we have many things whereof we have no
faith for in the particulars. Up then and be doing, work it out by having and
using our faith; Satan flies at the sight of faith, there is such an Antipathy
betwixt Satan and the faith of a Christian, that faith no sooner comes in
place, but Satan is gone: Other graces have their use, and place to resist the
impulsions of the devil; some one, some another, Ephesians. 6. 16.
but faith as Paul shows, does quench all; I say, all the fiery darts of the
devil, because it does take in Christ Jesus with all his merits, Value, Virtue
and Power. And thus much for the first means to get out of tentations which is
by Believing.

2. The second is by Resisting. 1 Pet. 5. 9.
Resist says Peter, Iam. 4 7.
how resist? Resist the devil and he will flee ^ not only run, but fly.
Steadfastly, how steadfastly? In the faith, and what then? why then Satan will
fly. The Apostle shows us in another phrase: Ephesians. 6. 14.
Stand, says he, and then Satan he falls. It is not here says Chrysostom,
as it fares with wrastlers; for there except we cast down our adversity, we
conquer not: here we conquer Satan, if he cast not us down, we are then (in
acceptance) as though we did cast him down: alas Satan is quelled, and as it
were cast down and killed already; he is too far in hell ever to come out
again; Satan can look for no crown, he is in perdition, his aim is to cast
us down into the same destruction he himself is in; Iud. 1. 6.
so that if we do resist and but keep our Stand, this is our conquest: we
must not look for a greater victory than is to be had in this world. That
which troubles some with discomfort, is, because no sooner do they begin to
resist, but it is rather worse with them, than it was before, these consider
not that it will be thus: for if we will let sin and Satan alone, they will let
us alone, sleep in sin, and spare not, we may have quiet enough, and come by
degrees to be past feeling: but resist we sin and Satan, and the devil will
play his part, to hold his hold: he is a strong man, and will not out except
he be forced; now possession by force, we know is with some stir, struggle;
sin will, and must, when we labor to cast the old man off: (it will) because
it is now a dying; and all dying things, that dye by pieces, as sin does reluct
and struggle, and stir for life (it must,) because else a godly man would not
so well discern the going out of sin: the Candle blazeth most, and stinketh
worst when it burns in the Socket; and so it fares with sin, when it is
toward it is last.

There is a double death of sin: one in respect of the guilt of sin, which
then is killed when we have our pardon, this is in Justification; and when we
begin to get our pardon, the Conscience is more out of quiet, greater stirs
being there, than when we sat still and did nothing that way: But when the
pardon is had once, then the conscience is alive, sin is dead, and our hearts
are at quiet; being justified by faith, we have peace with God. The other
death of sin, is in respect of the power of sin, and this is in our
sanctification, and this we mean chiefest here: when a godly man sets about
it to kill up and dry up this running disease; the plucking out of the weapon,
the removing of the guilt of sin, is done on a sudden; but the healing of the
wound, the mending of the languor, is done gradualy, now a little, and then a
little: and when a man is come to abhor his lusts; then he has given his sin
it is deaths wound as touching the power of it, and so on; now some, and then
some, sin does dye more and more. Now when a man can once come to resist
sin, he is dead to sin both ways; to the guilt of it, and to the power of
it: for had he not the pardon of it, he could not resist it: had he not some
power against it, he could not resist it: Now look how much power we get to
resist it, so much power sin loses. And now because sin will not give ground,
and lose the Field, without fighting and some opposition; hence it is, that
when we begin to resist, sin and Satan make (to feel to) the greater head,
Romans 6. 2.
and we take our case to be the worse, Delectationes carnales nobis illicite
multa suggerent, quibus non consentimus sed tamen non consentiendo contendimus,
Aug. in Psa. 64.
we cannot sleep in a quiet skin here, except we will sit down here by
Satan's fire, for if we once go about to get off from him, he will not lose
us so, but some stir he will make; but we must live by faith, and know that
Satan is going, and sin is a dying. When the devil went of out of the man's
body, he tare him and pulled him miserably; he would not take his far-well, but
he should feel it: so when we do by prayer conjure and charm him out of our
souls he will make all the hurly burly he can, So. Isa. 26* 16. Prayer is in
the Hebr^. called (...) Id est a Charm.
when he is going out; but be of good heart, our faith does assure us, that
there is never a prayer we make, nor act of resisting that we do use, but
gives Satan a knock, and sin a mortifying blow: when ones hands do ache for
cold, yet when we come first to the fire, the fingers ends ache worse; which
makes children cry when they first come to the fire; the cause is, because the
heat does draw out the cold, to the utmost parts and ends of every finger: like
to this it is that our sins do make us ache worse; when first we bring our
selves to the enlightening and healing ordinances of God, our sins then are
drawn out more, therefore they vex more; we do stir them more, and
therefore they stink worse; we see them more then, and are troubled at the
sight of them I confess. But yet, so as a man is at the sight of many huge
enemies, whom yet he knows that through the help of his Captain, by
fighting, he shall beat and conquer: by resisting and fighting what ever we
see and feel at first, we do and shall conquer sin and the lusts thereof,
and save our selves from the tentation of the devil. Some questions may here
come in by the way.

Quest. 1. When lust is sufficiently resisted.

Ans. Some kind of faint resisting may be made by general and common graces;
and some again, against some sins by the law of nature; but for the resisting
that proves effectual and is against all sin, as sin is against the written
Word and Law of God, it is done by faith and saving grace, and by the Spirit of
GOD giving lust such a wound, that let Satan lick it all he can, it never
recovers nor comes to it self again. Should we take the word (sufficiently)
in a legal sense; then while we breath we neither do, nor can resist sin, but
it may be, and it ought to be, more and better resisted still: but if we take
it in an Evangelicall sense, so as to be sure that our sin is dead at the
heart, (as some trees be that yet carry boughs) that we may be sure that we
are in Christ: here I say, that a man has sufficiently resisted sin and Satan,
when he does not allow the sin, when he does no way consent to the tentation.
Some express it by a distinction, and say, that if a man do not allow
infirmities, and do not live in the practice of gross sins, then all is
well and there is comfort enough to be had, to stay our thoughts against the
day of refreshing: as a little will stay the stomach for a time; so will an
assurance that we have broken the heart of sin, bind in our hearts from
despair. The answer which is made has this sense in it: that if we allow not
infirmities. 2. If we do not practice gross sins, then there is sufficient
resisting as touching the maine: That there is a difference betwixt
infirmities, and presumpuous sins is not to be denied; Psa. 19. 31.
it is expressly in the holy scripture. Praesumptuosus peccat, non aestimando
nimis misericordiam Dei: sed contemnendo justitiam ejus. Aquin. 22. q. 21. a. 2
ad. 2.
Papists say that the man who does a mortal sin, is not in the state of grace:
But for venials a man may commit (in their Divinity) who can tell how many of
them, and yet be in Christ for all that: I hope there is no such meaning in any
of our Divines as to tie up men's consciences, to hang on such a distinction of
sins, since it is beyond the wit of man, to set down a distinct point betwixt
mortal and venial sins; now when it is an impossible matter punctually to set
down to the understanding of man; which is, and which is not a venial sin;
they must pardon me from giving the least way to such Divinity, as must needs
leave the conscience of man in a maze and Labyrinth. I find that the nature of
infirmities does so depend upon circumstances, that, that is an infirmity in
one man, which is a gross sin in another; and some men plead for themselves,
that the things they do are but infirmities: He that will sin, and when he
has done will say (not to comfort his soul against Satan) but to flatter
himself in his sin that it is but an infirmity, for ought I know, he may go
to hell for his infirmities: Besides, if that be good, that a man who is in
grace may do infirmities, but not practice gross sins; Then I would I could
see a man that would undertake to find us out some Rule out of the word; by
which a sinner may find by his sin, when he is in Christ, and when out of
Christ; at what degrees of sinning, where lies the Mathematical point and
stop, that a man may say, thus far I may go and yet be in grace, but if I
step a step farther, then I am none of Christ's. We all know that sins have
their latitude: and for a man to hang his conscience on such a distinction, as
has no rule to define where the difference lies, is not safe Divinity. The
conscience on the rack will not be laid, and said with forms and quiddities;
the best and nearest way to quiet the heart of man, is to say that be the sin
a sin of infirmity when we strive and strive; but yield at last; or, of
precipitancy, when we be taken in haste, as he was, who said in his haste, all
men are liars; or, a mere gross sin in the matter: aye, say it be a
presumptuous sin, yet if we allow it not, it hinders not, but we are in
Christ: though we do with reluctancie, act and commit it; and I say that we
do resist it, if we do not allow it: For let us not go about to deny, that
a godly man during his being, a godly man, may commit gross and presumptuous
sins; and for infirmities, if we allow them and like them, that we know to be
sins, then we do not resist them; and such a man, who allows himself in
one, is guilty of all, and is none of Christ's as yet: be the sin what it
will, James makes no distinction, and where the law distinguishes not, Scot.
l. 4. D. 22. Qua^tum ad aeternam, etc.
there we must not distinguish. I speak not of doing a sin, but allowing; for
a man may do it, 2. Factus est omnium reus, etc.
and yet allow it not: as in Paul, that which I would not, Sic Martyr loc. com:
part 2. c. 14. Sect. 7.
that I do, and he that allows not sin, does resist it, therefore a man
may resist it, and yet do it, 3. Dispositive, nam ut ais, etc.
all the difference that I know is this.

1. That a man may live after his conversion all his days, Vid. Rog: Treat. 6.
c. 5.
and yet never fall into a gross sin: by gross I mean presumptuous sins,
Greg. mor^lw l. 21. c. 9.
so Psalm. 19. David says; not cleanse, but keep back thy servant from
presumptuous sins: we may then be kept from them; I speak not that all are,
but some be, and therefore in it self all might be.

2. For lesser sins, secret faults, we cannot live without them, they are of
daily and almost hourly incursion, but yet we must be cleansed from them, as
David speaks: daily get your pardon; and there is a pardon of course for them,
and they do not usually distract and plunge the conscience, but yet we must
not see them, and allow them; if we do, our case is to be pitied we are none
of Christ's as yet.

3. Great staring sins, a man cannot usually and commonly practice them, but
he shall allow them. So Ps. 19. 13. Keep back thy servant from presumptuous
sins, let them not have dominion over me: Implying, that except we be kept
back from them, they will have dominion over us: it follows, then shall I be
upright. So that the man, in whom presumptuous sin or sins have no dominion,
he is an upright man. To practice a sin is one thing, to live in the practice
is another: how far a man being and remaining in grace, may go in the
committing of great sins, is past my skill to determine: The case of Solomon
and others, proves that a man may go far; tentations may hang long, if a
day, a week, if a week, a year, if a year, many years; and how many? Who
can say, a man lives in a sin when he loves it, though he do not practice it
at all; as he is a Drunkard, who is never ^^unke, if he love drink; and he
Covetous, who loves money, though he have not a penny in his purse. So, say a
man never act the sin, yet if he love it, if he do not hate it, he lives in
it. As in the Body, a man is said to have his health, albeit he has usual
infirmities which make no let, but that he eat, drink, sleep, work; but if
a man have great diseases, which take away his stomach and strength, then we
say he is sickly, and in danger. In the soul, usual scapes and ordinary
infirmities, we cannot live without, yet they do not interrupt our peace nor
destroy the strength of our souls; we pray, read, hear, nevertheless. But
great sins do distract, and disturb, do weaken, and threaten the worst;
and as it is hard I confess, for a man to practice them, but he will be a
lover and an allower of them, a consenter to them, yet when at the worst; I say
(...) godly man does not make a trade of them, his heart is not on them, his
mind is another way all the while: thus then we must resist lesser lusts, by
dissenting and striving to weaken them, to lessen them; but do we our best, we
cannot possibly be free from them: and for greater sins, a godly man may be
kept from them, live and dye without them. But yet we must grant, that a man
may be good in the heart, and yet for a time (and how long who can say?) be
drawn to practice them too, albeit not to allow them. It is enough for either
sort to assure a man that he is a resister of the^; if he pray, or sigh, or
groan against them: for the reign of sin, is when we love them: now he that
strives, loves not sin, it being not possible for the heart of man, to be
against that which it loves; sufficient resistance is made, in point of
justification; when a man does disalow them in his judgment, and hates them
with his heart, though he cannot shake off the practice of them. It is not
easy to put off ones old companions: but in the point of Sanctification, there
is not sufficient resistance made, so as to have our peace of sanctification,
till we be able so to resist: that for greater sins, grosser, and more
presumptuous faults, we do not practice them at all, and for lesser, that we
do daily weaken them, lessen them, when our Judgment does carry a command
over our wills, our wills over our affections, our affections, over our actions.

Quest. 2 What order are we to observe in making our Resistance.

Ans. Order is of great use, to Resist, is to fight, and the enemies we are to
fight with, are many and mighty, and therefore as in Battles, so here: Array
and Order, is all in all; the Particulars are these.

1. We must set against and resist the motion that comes from us; and the
suggestion that comes from Satan at the very first, ere they meet and come
together, if we can possibly, be it never so unlikely and so absurd, yet we
must tremble at it in respect of our own weakness, so as to pray against
them, at the very first sight of the tentation: the affection is suffered to
come to humble us, that so we may walk in fear, use the means, and not fall
into the action. Do not say it is unlikely I shall never do it, this is the
way to grow secure, and then farewell. Sometimes we are set upon with
tentations, likely, that is, such as our particular nature is most given unto:
for we are many times soonest overtaken with those tentations that our humor
does itch after, and anon again, we are urged to those lusts we never had
much mind unto, that that so we may be taken secure, and ere we are aware, and
then we are gone: Since then our enemy never sleeps; we must watch, and wake,
and be in a readiness, to oberre all the motions of our devouring adversary:
if we resist at first coming, the work is half down, we shall find Satan a
coward; if we resist not, we shall feel him as a Lion: we must trust
neither our selves nor Satan with any tentation: We see the tempter changes
hands, a man so prodigal, that he wastes all, when young, when old, quite
another way: his life is in his riches; aye, one way to day, to morrow, the
wind sits in a quite contrary point, and therefore we must be provided for
all assaies, while the tentation is green and young: and what if we can make
no great matter of it as yet, to our thinking? We must hold out still, for all
that, play the man still: God means to make a sound cure, and it may be, he
will suffer us to be held to it somewhat with the longest; the venom and
poison must out from the very bottom, we must have patience, what? Patience
at motions to sin: yes, such a patience as this is, to thank God it is no
worse, and to be content to wait the Lords leisure, days, months, years,
and thanke-yee too, if we may have it at last, impatient at the lust; but yet a
patient and long suffering mind, that we be not tired out. Begin as soon as
the tentation begins to peep, be at it to day, to morrow, every day, and
after a time, the fits will and shall break away. Some Agues a^^^ured by
striving and resisting: All tentatiions I am sure are. He that will drive away
his sorry Partner by wrestling, must do it at the beginning before the Ague be
settled in the blood and spirits, and in like sort it is soonest done, to drive
away this devil by striving and resisting, to do it at the first, while it is
young, and not strong, ere it get into an habit, and creep into the bones, and
which is more inward into the marrow; I mean ere it can get any great hand
over the spirit of our mind, the bosom and bottom of our souls.

2. We must begin where Satan begins, Ephesians. 4. 23.
and go on as he goes on: The spirit of a thing is the quintessence of it.
Marbury thus, the spirit that is the imagination of our mind.
we are to observe his motions; if he begin with a lesser sin, we must not
despise small things, a little leake drownes all in time, and the prick of a
pin, lets out all the wind (...) bladder, Rep. p. 20.
and therefore we must make up against Satan, even then, when he comes with
the smallest sins; and if he turn to greater and fouler faults, we must of
all, be very careful to keep off the pikes of more damnable errors and
sins: They make foul holes in the consciences; and as thieves do, such
g^shes let in other sins, 2 Pet.. 2. 1
greater and greater still; when it first comes, it appears great, do but
yield to it once or twice and then we begin to think it to be, not so great a
matter: the ordinary and common tentation, that Satan uses to make the
foundation of, and to give entry to all the rest, is to bear us down in it
that we are not the children of God, and that we are not in Gods books; give
him but this, and then we do in a manner yield him all the rest; for if once
we conclude, that God is not our father in Christ, then Satan has us where he
would, and he may lead us into despair, or presumption which he pleases,
and therefore what ever we do, we must hold our own, and keep in this
persuasion, to dye for it, that we are the children God. Say we have ever so
many afflictions, desertions, corruptions; yet that ought not to shake us out
of our assurance, for David had as many afflictions as any of us, and more: and
for desertions, we find him all over the Psalms, making heavy complaints
that way: He that runs, may read all over that Book, many a doleful song, and
for corruptions, and such corruptions too, as use to pay us home: sins, great
sins, I mean committed after his calling and conversion: he laid hands on
another man's wife, he defiled her, her husband loving David, as his own soul,
and then fell upon an horrid plot of murder: he did art it with hellish skill,
and shed the blood of sundry, that he might be the death of one: and did he
not number the people against all reason, and stood it out too, say all the
Captains what they could? And this was the last Act that David did before he
took his bed.
And yet I hope David added not this sin to all the rest, to wit, to question
it; whether God were his God or not. I have (says he) done foolishly, 2 Samuel
24.
I have sinned and that greatly; ^ Kin. 1. ^.
Lord forgive, what? 2 Samuel 24. 10.
The infirmity: No, the iniquity; of whom? Of thy Servant. He holds this fast,
that for all his sins, his great sins, yet he was Gods servant still; let go
this, and though our sins were but a few or but ordinary, yet Satan will sink
us, with one tentation or other: but now keep we our ground in this point,
never deny the conclusion that God is our God: and say our corruptions were
more, were worse than they are, well may Satan shake his chain at us, but we
stand on a rock, and the floods of his tentations cannot come, so much as at
our feet: For we know that our sins are but the sins of a creature, his
mercies are the mercies of an infinite Creator, without either bank or
bottom: keep we the maine chance, that he is our father, and then, well may
our sins humble us, but Satan with all his setting on, shall never be able to
discourage us: we know that Christ died for sinners, and for the chief of
sinners: no man was ever kept out of heaven for his confessed badnesse, 1 Timothy
1. 5
but many are for their supposed goodness: In a word, this only point, that
he is our father, kept up in our consciences, will make us fit, and able to
dash, and blow off, all the powers of darkness, and push away all the darts of
the devil; therefore since it is his method to lay all upon this point, hold
this fast, and we hold all fast: If the Enemy assault one way, and the
Garrison defend another way, the Town is lost, the Enemy will carry the
strongest piece. We must not be taken up about other matters, and lie open
here; here Satan will try his skill, and do his utmost to bring us out of
conceit with God, and to make us think that God has no love unto us, no care
of us, and then we are gone. Live and dye then with this in thy heart, and
mouth; He is my God, and I am his servant, and so we shall be able to lay all
the devils in hell. Say, God has confirmed his love to me so much, so often,
that now I hope I shall never call that matter into question again: And next
for afflictions, we must frame a new Bible, ere we can with any color find
any thing out of Gods afflicting us, to prove that he does not love us; of the
two, abundance, and plenty, and outward peace, would yield matter to say, that
God does not care for us; and yet it would be long, ere a Christian will come
to a Minister, and say, I have such a deal of wealth, of health, and so many
friends, and so much friendship, that I fear me I am not in the right: but
when afflictions comes and storms arise, then we come and make a pitious
moan: sure God is not my father, I am not his child, and grow we do into hard
conceits concerning God, and heavy thought as touching our selves: now all this
comes out of our fancy who do so highly prize the things of this life, that
sure if God did love us we should not be in such and such wants. Heb 12. 6.
A very foolery, the Text is clear: he correcth every son, whom he receives;
let the word be heard, speak, and then we may conclude the contrary, and say
thus, does God afflict me, and he does withal make me to make a right use of
his afflictions, (say but of one) and by this I am sure, that he is mine, and I
am his: for affliction is a part of the curse in its own nature, and God does
never chang the nature of it, and turn it to a mercy but only to those he
loves, it should, it would hurt me, I find it did me, does me good, and
therefore I am a son of his love: And lastly for desertion, that is, but a mist
before our eyes. Desertion is in it self no sin: for Christ was without sense,
aye, he was so deep in it, that when he dyed, he said, why have thou forsaken
me? A total, a final desertion, ours is not partial: Ps. 22. 1.
the best have had and have; GOD turns away his face, David himself is
troubled: The just does live by faith, Ps. 30. 7.
and not by feeling: Heb. 10. 38
and in that very Psalm, where he complains that his spirit was overwhelmed
within him, and that his very heart within him was desolate: I say in that
selfsame Psalm, David says; Thou art my God: I pass not whether this
Desertion be for sin or from sin, a chastisement of sin, or an effect of
sin, all comes to one for our dispute; Psa. 143. 4. 10.
it has, is, and may be, the case of a right godly man. Look up then, and if
from want of sight and feeling we do say, Why have thou forsaken me? yet then
let us by faith withal say, Psa. 22. 1.
my God, my God, and we are safe. Since then this is the order Satan uses to
follow us in his tentations, to make us to distrust our being in Christ; and
our standing in grace, we must make that our method too, and rather suffer to
dye at Gods feet, than to suffer our assurance to be taken away from us: Lose
this and lose all our comfort, hold this and all is ours, let Satan say, and
do his worst. I confess it is a heavy hand, when a man is put to it, to walk
without his feeling. David was a man for natural and spiritual cheerfulness
both, above men, yet he had his heart full: and say his case were ours, that
for very sorrow of heart, arising from the absence of the light of his
countenance, Ps. 119. 83
we be like a bottle in the smoke, we do shrim away to nothing, become a very
Sceleton, a bag of bones, an Anatomy of a man, Ps. 22* 17.
yet then our faith must show it self, and we must hold up our heads above
water: no great thanks to swim, when God does hold us up by the chin, with
comfortable feeling: But he is a man of faith that can then say, God is my God,
my King, when he sees nothing but the promise; Ioh. 20. 29.
Oh, Blessed is the man, who believes and sees not: for want of sense their
song once was; 1 Ps. 69. 3. 119. 82.
mine 1. eyes fails, my 2. flesh fails, my heart fail, 2 Ps. 73. 28.
my 2. knees fail, my all fails; but my faith which never fails; 3. Ps. 109
well then, though a man's marrow be consumed like the drought in Summer, Ps.
32. 4.
say, Ps. 31. 10.
not only ones flesh be pined, which after sickness will come again; but
ones very bones be consumed, which when once dried they say, never come to
themselves again, aye, and ones juice (whithin the bones) do wast away, Romans
4. 18.
yet there we must hope against hope, and set faith against sense; when we
cannot see one shine in the face of God, yet we may fetch support out of the
promise: Gods countenance does change and turn away, but the promise is ever
the same, and al in all is in the promise; we are Romans 9. 8
childern, of what? of the promise; Gal. 3. 29.
heirs, of what? of the promise: sight and sense, looks only on the face of
God, Heb. 11. 1.
but our faith looks only on the promise; and it is the Evidence of things
not seen, it gives a being to that which in existence is not, and thus living
by faith, a Christian on all occasions may say, God is mine, and so mine, as
though he were nones but mine, he is all mine; and what we speak out of
feeling, a tentation may make us unspeake it again; but what we say by faith
once, we say it ever, and all the tentations Satan can devise, cannot make us
unsay it again. Mat. 5. 4.
I mourn, Blessed (not shall be) but are those that mourn, why? They shall be
(not are) comforted. He then is a blessed man, who mournes though he be
without present comfort.

3. We must keep this order, Medieus quando aegritudine, etc. Aug. in tract.
28. in Evang.
as to begin with the right end, and the right end, is then to find out what
the sin is, that is chastise or punised, Joan.
when the tentation to a lust is a punishment for some other sin: it is all in
vain, and mere lost labor for a man to think, to get off the sin, which is
the punishment, when we let the sin punished alone: hence it is that we do
find many a good man strive and strive, even his very heart out to master a
lust, and are where they were or rather worse, and why? But because that vexing
sin, is a correction for some other sin, which we over-see and say nothing
unto, and thus men run upon flats of discomfort, as though they were none of
Gods, and all because they cannot conquer a sin; which is not, because they are
not Gods, nor for want of faith neither, but for want of art and method. The
effect cannot be taken away until such time the cause be removed: now we
must know, that one sin is the cause of another, two ways:

1. First, by effecting and producing by a very efficiency another sin, as
Covetousness is a very Caust working oppression, Usury, rapine, buying and
selling for days and enclosure, now I confess it is hard to be convinced;
that that which is an effect of a former sin, is a sin till we be convinced;
that the sin which is the cause, is a sin, as he that knows not what
covetousness is, or is not convinced, that covetousness is a sin cannot be
cured of Usury, Enclosure, hoarding up of Corn, etc. and therefore the sin
which is the cause, must be pardoned and healed first. So pride of life is the
cause why men do follow fashions; to follow that which was a fashion is no
sin, but to be in that which is the fashion, whilst it is called the fashion
is a sin, else there is no such sin, as following of fashions, which Zeph. 18.
Isa. 15. Vid. Calv. in Zeph. 1. 8
Scripture, and Vid. Leges Sumptuarias. Compta and ornata ista co njugum vita
nihil differt a Tragaedorum in Scena versantium ornatu, Sic. Arist. O^con. l.
1. c. 4. Cas. Thesau. De con. l. 1. c. 4.
Nature, have condemed for a sin. I say, this sin comes out of pride, as out of
a working cause; and it is not possible for a man to be mended in one, except
he dig out the other: So Passion springs out of pride of heart, as out of his
very next cause, and so does Envy too: many are troubled with their Passions
and disquieted with Envy, and make a great marvel of it, that they cannot get
the victory all this while, I will tell you the reason; they pray against
passion, but not against the cause, not against pride; they stop at the
stream, but choke not up the spring, they lop the boughs, and it grows
thicker after, and pluck not up the root. Therefore if we mean to cast out of
our heart and life such a sin, as is an effect of a former sin, we must
first begin with the causing sin; or else he does wash a stone, and Satan will
hold him where he was, do what he can; and what a weary hand is this, for a
man to pray, to read, to hear, to fast against a sin, and yet to make
nothing of it.

2. By meriting, Aug. contra Julian. l. 5. c. 4. Field. l. 3. c. 24.
which School Divines call demeriting; and deserving to be cast into some sin
by God, as a just Judge for some other offense, and this as it comes from God,
is a Good of justice: think not that we mean it, as though God did infuse,
Nec haec quae pa^^ris mala, etc.
or put into a man, the matter or form of the punishing sin; Aug. in Psa. 102.
it needs not, there is matter enough in our hearts already: God cannot breath
sin in the mind or breast of any man, but by letting lust out, and setting
Satan loose upon us, we are punished and corrected by one sin for another. Some
say, it ought not to be said, that God does punish sin with sin, why? (then say
they,) that sin which is the punishment does deserve more punishment, and so it
does: What (say they) and does that deserve another? no, for albeit God may and
does punish sin with sin, it follows not, that the second sin (must) be
punished with another sin, but with some other punishment it must: and what if
in some cases, sins in a row be punished with sins; yet there is no processus
in Infinitum, because as the Schools have agreed, when once it comes to hell,
there is no demerit: Damnati blasphemant Deum and in hoc peccant.
sins on earth merit further punishment, but sins in hell do not, because
there is satisfaction given, Aquin. 2. 2. q. 13. 4. 2.
and so full a point put to the Justice of God. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 13. 4. 2. 11
and supplem. 9. 98. a. 6.
Besides, the damned are in actual possession of their last punishment, and
therefore there is in them no demerit of more or further torment: God in
justice then does and may punish one sin with another here, some say with a
greater; that is not always so: for he punishes Idolatry with Fornication,
yet Fornication must not be held to be a greater sin than Idolatry; De
ratione poenae, etc.
it is sufficient, that the sin which is made the punishment, Aquin. 2. 2. q.
94. a. 3. ad. 4. 3. m.
be a more vexing sin, bringing more shame, and more inward or outward
distress, that so the sinner may be made the more detestable to himself or
others: the greatest sins do not always vex; they should I know, but they do
not. To come to our point: We say that sin does cause sin, by way of desert,
when GOD does by Permission, Desertion, and Tradition, give a man up to some
sin, Can. Loc. l. 2 c. 4. p. 24.
of shame or inward biting sorrow, Edit, Colo^.
to judge him for some other sin: bare permission it is not; for so we sin all
sins we commit, I hope we cannot sin any sin, except he suffer, and his power
do permit: yet we find, that Pharaoh had his heart hardened worse for manner
and measure, than other common sinners had; Romans 1 24
but all sinners are sinners by permission, Aug. con. Julian. l. 5. c. 3.
therefore there was a delivering up, For this same purpose have I raised thee
up that I might show my power in thee.
an act of justice and power in hardening the heart of Pharaoh, and so it is,
when God does plague one sin with another: the thing I educe is this, Romans 9.
17.
that it is impossible with all our whining to get off the sin merited, except
we first deal with the sin meriting: we cannot affront the justice and power
of God, when he does inflict and lay it on for some other fault: it is out of
our element to take it off, till first we have removed and done away the guilt
and power of the former sin: when sin does work and produce another sin by its
own force, then it comes from the power of sin: when sin does demerit, to have
another sin made a punishment of it, that comes out of the guilt of sin and
justice of God, therefore we must make our peace for the sin which is is the
cause, and subdue that ere we can possibly make any hand with the other sin,
which is the punishment. That then we may clear our selves of some
tentations, we must look and see what brought it, if we try and try and can
make nothing of it, then we may see it is for some other sin; which sin we
must find out and then cast out that corruption, and the work is done: we
find some what to the purpose in Jonas, a good old Prophet; he fled away from
God, was found out, thrown into the Sea, swallowed by a Whale, and God in his
goodness did deliver him, and yet after he fell into the like sin again: no
doubt he did ask God forgiveness in the Whale for his first sin, yet he
after fell into the same way again, and did chafe, because Ninive was not
destroyed: now see here the root of sin was not moared up; he did at first
fly out of pride, because he would not be thought to preach the destruction
of so famous a place, he thought none would be well pleased with such a
message, and therefore do it whose would for Jonas. This fact he was sorry
for, but saw not the cause of all, to be pride; and therefore after, when he
saw that Ninive was not destroyed, what a chafe was he in? and was not this
horrible pride too? that so many must be destroyed, rather than Jonas should
be thought to miss in denouncing a judgment which should not come: had he
found out the Canker at the first and killed it, he had not fallen this second
fall. It Is certain, that as in diseases in the body, if one disease be caused
by another, that is more in the spirits and humors of a man: the disease
causing must be done away, ere the disease caused can be remitted, it may be
eased for a time, but it will return again, as long as the sick matter is
there to feed it: and therefore wise Physicians strike always at the root; so
must we, and when Satan is upon us with some vexing lust, and we cannot with
all our power put it off: Let us say, sure it is for some other sin, that
must be killed, ere this will be cured, and so we must cast out the
mother-lust: we must not say that we cannot find what it is, what the sin is
for which we are vexed, with these or those afflictions; for the Word and the
Spirit will show it, if we ask it at the hands of God, the Lord will point it
out unto us: so David, Psalm. 139. 24. See (says he) if there be any wicked way
in me, and lead me into the way everlasting. See if there be any wicked way
in me, see it, and show it unto me; it being the office of the Spirit, Ioh.
16. 9
to convince a man of his sins, it follows that the Spirit (if we secke it in
sincerity with a desire to be healed) will find out our sins for us, and
show them unto us; and when by the line of the Word and Spirit, we have found
out that Nest, we are to turn our grief upon those lusts rather than upon the
present tentation: the matter is, that when we are thus haunted and dogged
with such tentations as are corrections, say, it is rather for some sins,
either:

1. Past, So some when married are tempted, but not brought to adultery, because
when single, they were unclean one way or other, and thought to mend all by
marying without repentance; and so when once married, they grow secure, and lay
all on the Physic, 2 Chro. 15. 11.
and not on God; as Asa did in another case: and then when they feel that
sin urges, and Satan tempts; as much, and perhaps, more after, than
before, because the sin is worse; men faint and sing many a heavy song, and
hang up their sword, and say, as good not at all, as never the better: Now here
the right and ready way to heal all, is to repent truly and thoroughly of former
uncleanness and lusts, and then the Coasts will clear, first do that, and
then marry; bring not old sins to the marriage bed, and when the knot is knit,
tentations as many, as strong, perhaps more, perhaps greater may come, but they
shall not overcome; and therefore they must not say better, not marry at all if
it be so; I say he that has the gift let him not marry: Mat. 19. 11
but he who has not the gift, 1 Cor. 7. 7.
as all have not, C. Quid proposuisti. 32. qu. 7.
he were best marry, or he must, and will do worse: Resolve the case thus;
Ambros. in 16. Luc. Necessitas illius crimen tuum.
such a man if he marry not, use what helps, natural, moral, spiritual, 1
Cor. 7. 37
he can, yet he burns still, and the more he opposes, the more strong his
affections grow; a man married cannot say, that he shall not be tempted, to
defile the bed; but this I say, that using all GODS means, and calling in for
Gods blessing on the ordinance, he shall not fall, his soul will heal. Now in
case one find that for all his care, his lusts grow exorbitant and violent;
look back and humble, for what are past before, this is to pluck us by the
ears for what we were before we were married, make all that well, compound with
God for old matters, and then ease and peace will come.

2. Present, As say a worldly man to be told and convinced of his sin, and yet
will not mend; as we see a man may see a sin to be a sin, and yet go on in
it: witness that young Gentleman, who went away like one well beaten, when it
came to selling all. Now many times in such a case, God will have such an one
to be tempted by Satan, Mat. 19. 22.
as his Instrument, with strong passions to adultery, which usually of all sins
he could never abide, Deus utitur Satana, etc.
and this goes to the heart of him: He whines and wrings his hands, Vasq. 1. d
96 c. 10. 11. 64.
tears his hair, Ibid. D. 99. c. 4. n. 22. and. c. 3. n. 9. Can Loc. l. 2. c.
4. ad Arg. 7.
is weary of himself, knows not what to do, and is even angry with God,
because he cannot find ease, and is often upon the point to despair: here I
say it will not off, the tentation will not away till it has done its cure;
till, I mean, we find out, that all that is for our covetousness, by which
sin we vex and anger God; and therefore he does order Satan to follow us with
wave upon wave, in that sin of uncleanness which God sees will vex us: He
would not have us sit and rest quiet in that sin of earthlinesse, the worst
of the two, and for that it is, that we are terrified with those or some other
passions of shame and dishonor.

3. To come (so we are tempted) to some sins, we thought our hearts till now
had no mind unto: now in this case we must know, that it is a mercy, and so to
be taken, to let us see and feel that by tentation, when we might justly be
suffered to fall into the action it self, that we may know, that it was neither
in our worth nor in our strength, but only in the preventing grace of God,
that we have stood clear all this while, and that it must be, by the same
supporting grace of God, that we must stand firm for the time to come.

Look what is past, present, forward, backward, every way to see what it is
for, that we may remove the cause for which we are thus tempted, and then the
tentation will away, even of it self, when that is once cured: of all we must
beware of Satan's Sophistry, when he would needs persuade us to ease our
selves of the vexation by yielding once or twice, or so, to the sin in hand,
and then no more; now this is quite against Reason and Experience; against
Reason, for in all moral acts, whether virtuous and vicious (chiefly vicious,
because our nature is so strong that way) this is certain; when we once commit
it, it does leave a wonderful pronenesse to do it again: When then Satan
says, do it once, and then no more; no Satan, must we say, should I commit it
once, I should be more earnest to commit it the second time than ever I was the
first. Against Experience, for we do find, that when we once sin a sin, the
power of grace and faith does decay, we have not that heart to pray against it,
and so we are ready to turn that way again; as, put fuel to the fire it
burns the more, so does he, who thinks to satisfy the motion to a sin, by
sinning the sin, the only way to satisfy a lust, is not to satisfy it.

3. The third General Rule is, to make use of the Ordinances, to put off the
tentation, and they are chiefly two.

1. Prayer: Mark. 14 68.
Watch and Pray; Watching is but a preparation to, and a fortification of
Prayer: Prayer is a turning of our selves to God, and so a turning of us from
the tentation; some turn to some other sin, as to think of the world when
they are tempted to some unpleasing Passions: some to that which is lawful in
it self, and here they find some kind of respite, but the cure is not done
except we do by prayer come to God, and call unto him, for favor and succor.
A man is never overcome in and by the tentation, as long as one can pray
against it; the tentation prevails not till it please, Ego Adolescens
petieram, etc.
it pleases not as long as we can pray in earnest against it* Some for form
do pray, Conf. lib. 8. c. 7.
as (Augustine says) once he did against the lust, but would not for any
thing part with the profit or pleasure of them as yet, this is to say, Romans 7.
25
rather than to pray a prayer* delight in prayer and in the Lord, and then the
tentation does not delight; we cannot promise that you shall pray away the
suggestion, but the consent and delight you shall: But you will say, I pray,
and yet I find some delight in the sin: what of that? This is the delight of
the flesh, which Paul instancing in himself, dates call it a serving the law
of sin with his flesh; but the matter is, whether we do take delight in that
delight, which way the delight of our inward man is carried, as long as we
find that our delighting in the lust, does grive and trouble us more, than the
lust it self does. Our case is good, Tentationi carnis nunquam, etc.
and our prayer is of force, and what if for all that, Durand. l. 2. D. 21. q.
11. 4.
sin be there, yet it reigns not there? and what if worse haunted than when
I set my self against it then before? Rogers Trea. 4. c. 16 Rule. 4.
It is common to be worse sick when we first take our Physic; we think of
the sin and the circumstances of it most, when in our prayers we set our
selves to aggravate it; and out of that Satan picks matter to delight us with,
and when we oppose the lust, the lust then does most oppose, us and Satan will
come upon us then with his greatest impressions, to see if now he can allure
us with some fleshly delight, then he calls upon us to give over prayer, that
sure our prayer is naught, that we are naught, that God has no mind to us,
that sin has dominion in us, since it stirs and pricks most, even then when
at prayer: but we must believe that since, we ask according to his will, Ioh.
5. 14, 15.
he hears us, we know that we have the petitions we desire of him, Perk.
Cas. Cons. l. a. c. 7
what ever we feel, say our prayers prove an occasion to ripen a disease,
when it must ripen ere it will cure; all is to drive us out of all self
confidence and then the malady will heal. Go then on in praying with
perseverance, all manner of prayer, and the end will be, that if we do not
give over to pray, Satan must, and will give over to tempt. The three maine
matters I could wish Christians to sue for in their prayers are, 1. Strength to
conquer satan when he sets upon us, with main force, and plain violence, and
seidge; I know he cannot compel us, for then the sin were his, not ours;
but yet forall that he can and does with a strong hand drive and make us to
consent, and brings us to yield, Bonav. l. 2. D. 11. a. 1. q. 1. ad arg. and.
D. 25. q. 4.
and in that sense we cannot of our selves stand in his hands, when he comes
against us with his power: no standing against him and his tentation, except we
be underlaid by the power of God; he will wrest a consent from us, and work us
to a delight, do we what we can (for we can do nothing of our selves,) it
is out of our hands to be able to gain say him, when he comes with his
authority, and frights us with his power, we must then pray in the power of
God, and when we see Satan come roaring like a Lion, cry out and say, help,
help, though it be as much as ever we can do to speak. If a woman cry she
is faultlesse, Vid Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 1. c. 17. 18.
simply faultlesse; we are, if we cry as soon as the Satanical impulsion does
appear, but in the tentations of the flesh which are sins in themselves, there
some secret consent goes with them as far as they move and go; a woman may,
but the will of a man cannot be ravished, because it cannot possibly be
forced, Satan must by his strength and terrifying draw a consent from us, else
we are free and the sin cannot be done, and that he will do, except we do
bespeake by prayer the power of God: But now since that we have by reason of
Gods promise the power of God at command, it is in our selves, if we want his
strength in our souls, it is, because we will not do so much as ask for it:
Phi. 2. 13.
if we find that he has given the Will, he will give the Deed, Romans 7. 18.
though not ever answerable to our will; as we see in Paul, to will, is present
with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find not; that is not
answerable to my desire, simply then he does not deny us all performance, nor
such as shall be accepted to our comfort, pray then for strength and Satan
will prove but weak, either God will weaken him, or else he will further
strengthen us.

2. The next thing we must pray for, is Wisdom, that we may not be ignorant
of his wiles, which if we be, he will coozen and cheat us: Satan comes not
ever as a Lion, but rather most an end, like a Serpent, a Fox, with all his art
and skill that he may circumvent us, and bring his ends together, by reason of
our simplicity and folly: we must up, to the only wise God by prayer, that he
would enrich us, with the wisdom that comes from above: if any man says
James want: Iam. 3. 17.
What? Wisdom, Let him ask of God: Iam. 1. 5.
but he will not give me, yes, he gives to all: and what if our wants that way
be great? why, he gives liberally: and say we have bin great sinners, are as
unworthy as they that are most, if follows; (he upbraideth no man) he will
not hit us in the teeth with old matters: all want wisdom, but he that is
sensible of his want, let him ask and he shall have wit enough, to prevent
the Stratagems of the devil: the Lord God is too wise for Satan; he will make
children of us, if we set to him hand to hand, our wit to his will come to
nothing: look how a crafty pate, may coozen a child of all that he has for an
apple, or so; In like manner, Satan with a toy, will deceive us of our souls,
and beguile us of our peace; there is then neither wit nor grace in it, for a
man to venture on him without prayer to God, for the spirit of wisdom, and in
particular, with a special strain of spiritual understanding to be able to
wind out of the policies of the devil. What with his natural wit, Age, Time,
Experience; Satan is full of depths and profundities, we cannot hold our own,
if we have no better skill to plead with him than our own; Prayer will make
us wise to salvation, and help us to that understanding in the Mysteries of
his iniquity, 2 Timothy 3. 15
that we shall soon find him out, and save our selves.

3. The third thing we are to ask for, is Long-suffering; for when Satan
cannot have his will by Violence, by Craft, then he will see what he can do by
Continuance and mere Importunity: I cannot express my self better, than in
the words of Martin Luther: On Gal.
when the devil (says he) cannot by force overcome those that he tempts;
then seeks he to overcome them by long continuance, for he knows that we
be earthen vessels which cannot long endure, and hold out many knockes and
violent strokes; therefore with long-continuance of tentations, he overcommeth
many and therefore long-suffering is needful to wait for the end of those
tentations, Psa. 30. 18
which the devil raises up against us. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
So he, how long we shall be put to it to wait, I know not; the best is, if
we dye while we are waiting we go to heaven, for such are happy and blessed;
but usually and commonly, God gives us an issue here, first or last: we must
then pray that it may be, and wait with patience till it shall be, which
will be, and shall be in Gods time: he never comes too soon, nor never
stays too long: We say, Lord how long; but GOD says, in the appointed time;
therefore wait and pray: and in some cases where single prayer will not do,
as in some, it will not, there help it with a fast. Mat. 17. 21.


2. The next Weapon, is the word, Ephesians. 6. 17.
Read, Heard, Meditated; Paul calls it, the sword of the Spirit; a fit
instrument for a man to enter into the Combat with: for Satan being a Spirit,
our weapons must not be carnal, 2 Cor. 10. 4
but spiritual, and the Word of GOD is the sword of the Spirit, Gladius
dicitur sermo divinus, etc Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 8.
which being had and used, kills up all the lusts of the flesh, and he that
kills sin, does in a sort kill the devil. A man that is to ride where Thieves
way lay him, will be sure to have his sword: We are to pass up and down
where we shall light upon the devil, and sinful occasions at every turn; he
is still at the hedge corner as we travel, he is at home, he is at Church,
he misseth not a Sermon, he is the god of this world, under the great GOD of
Heaven and Earth as he shall give way, and there is no place privileged from
him; 2 Cor. 4. 4
we cannot take Sanctuary any where under Heaven, and therefore we must ever
have the sword of the Spirit about us, in all readiness; we must not only
have it, Heb. 4. 1^.
but we must have the heart to draw it, and the skill to use it, we must be
able to fence with this weapon of proof, and then the devil will be gone, this
two-edged sword will make him run. We find that Christ, Mat. 4. being at it
with the devil, did not make use of his authority or power, to command or to
force him away, Ideo Jesus omnes has tentationes, etc. Cajetan. in Mat. 4. and
Ia^ic^. in L^c.
but to sanctify the use of this weapon to us, stops his mouth with (thus it
is written, Satan does vow and swear our death, therefore it stands us upon to
look to our heads, and we must not think with a few big words of our own to
make this mighty and crafty foe to fly the field, it must be done by the word
of God which is mighty through God; 2 Cor. 10. 4
Satan comes with his Bible too, as we see Mat. 4. but he does corrupt and
falsify the Text; the word used aright sets him going, it has to back it, the
Almighty power of God, and Satan cannot stand before this breath of the Lords
nostrils: we deceive o^r selves, if we think that Reason is of any force, that
Inconveniences will hold against Satan; to say, shame will follow, danger will
come, I shall but create trouble to my self; should I kill, or whore, or
steal, Satan will come within us, for all these; he will set such a gloss on
the matter, that we shall think we have greater reason to sin the sin,
than we can show to the contrary: Reason was never appointed or sanctified to
this use: dispute but with Satan and he will so befoole us, that we shall
think we cannot live, no, nor scarce go to heaven neither, except we sin some
sins for a time, or so. Beware then of going that way to work, we have a
better course, that is, to run to the Word; the Word will do it, (it is
written) will pack him away: but what if he come again and again with the
selfsame tentation, as Satan both may and does, why, the same places of the
word will do the deed again; Satan is not afraid of big looks and words;
circles and holy water are but toys to him, but it is the word of GOD which
makes him avoid: Christ we see, did not pray; he could have prayed, I hope,
none the like; but only the word is his defense, being thus to grapple and
enter into duel with the devil; I speak not, that prayer is not of great
use, I have set down my mind of that already, but that with our prayer must be
joined; the word; and the word will do it, and of these two, if both by
strictnes of time cannot be used, be we sure to make use of the Word of God:
the words and experience of Luther, On Gal.
are just to our purpose, when (says he) the motions of the flesh do rage;
the only remedy is to take to us the sword of the Spirit, that is, the word of
salvation, and to fight against them, which if we do, let us not doubt but we
shall obtain the victory, although so long as the battle endures, we feel
quite the contrary: but set the Word out of sight and there is no help nor
counsel remaining; of this that (I say) I my self have good experience; I
have suffered many great passions, and the same also very great and vehement,
but so soon as I said hold of any place of Scripture, and staid my self upon
it, as upon my chief Anchor-hold, strait-wayes my tentation did vanish away,
which without the word it had been impossible for me to endure any little
space, and much less to overcome them. Thus Luther; A brave speech, and
fitting the Author of it: Learn of him, to have our Bible at command, and
Satan dares not stay. I speak not, as though we were to turn the Text of
Scripture into a charm, as though to repeat a place by rote, and in a
heartlesse manner, would prove a bug-beare to Satan. VVier. de praestig.
Demon. l. 5. c. 4
No, no, Satan has gotten much amongst the superstitious and ignorant by that
conceit; Phi. 2. 16.
but the Word must be held out by faith: it was not so much Scanderbegs sword
as his arm that held it, which gave him such victories; it is the hand of
faith, and of the spirit by which the word of God is held out, which does the
deed; wherefore we see what reason we have, since we have such an adversary,
who is (though not simply every where) yet in every place where we be, he is,
or some of his Angels are: great reason I say there is, Heb. 4. 13, 14.
that we should be expert in the word of righteousness, to have places at our
fingers ends ready to draw out as occasions shall require, that we may have a
fit and a pat place to meet with the several impulsions of the flesh, and
objections of the devil: there is neither sin or tentation, neither inward
corruption nor outward motion, but the word has a sovereign remedy for it, to
be fitted in a peculiar sort to the nature of the disease; Omnis morbus animae
habet in scripturis medicamentum suum, Aug. in Psa. 36.
it is not for nothing, that we are commanded to search the Scriptures, and as
Chrysostom often notes, as men do in Mines for gold, and the rather, because
here is all gold and no dross; Ioh. 5. 39
and as there is an art in mining for gold; De verb. Isaiae, vidi Dominum. Hom.
3.
so there is an holy skill to find out golden places fit for our present
purpose: and thus a godly wise Christian, say he be often in the fire, yet he
is like the burning bush, never consumed; and why? because one place or other
of the word comes in to his succor; the particulars that we are to follow are
three.

1. We must have ready the precept, and statute of God forbidding the sin to
which we are solicited, as say, it be to Sabbath breaking, then say, it is
written, thou shall keep holy the Sabbath day; or to murder ones self or
some other, say, it is written, thou shall not kill; or to uncleanness, urge
the place, avoid Satan, it is written, thou shall not commit adultery, and so,
thou shall not steal, and the like, in the special branches of every
Commandment.

2. We must have at hand, the promise too, that in case we consent and obey
not, and refuse the devils offer, we shall have comfort here, and heaven
hereafter. The devil will come with his hands full of glorious proffers, but
we must out of the Word, set against him the fair and certain, and goodly
promises of the Word, as there is no sin but we shall find one promise or
other made in plain terms to us, if we resist it; resist the devil and GOD
will draw near to you: he offers the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them; God offers the kingdom of heaven and the glory of it.

3. The threatening, that if we yield, we enda^ger al, that we do subject our
selves to the curse of God; say we do believe the Commandment, yet except we
do believe the threatening, and do set the commination against the tentation,
we are not like, nor sure to hold; here Eve lost her self; in whose loss we
all lose our selves; the commandment she did hold, that she was not to eat
of the for bidden fruit; but now for the threatening, that in the day she did
eat thereof she should dye the death, there she came short and so yielded:
that she was quick and strict in the precept, it is plain by the words of the
Text; Genesis 2. 17.
for whereas it is in the charge of the Lord, of the tree of knowledge, of good
and evil, Thou shall not eat of it; Eve having occasion to urge this divine
prohibition, does not only say, that God said, Ye shall not eat of it, but to
show her pious mind to the mandat of the Lord, she says more and adds, Genesis
3. 3.
ye shall not touch it; which words we find not in the letter of that law,
but when it came to the commination, Parae. in Genesis 3. 3.
ye shall dye the death: Satan was too hard for her, and put her off from that,
and so she fell; perhaps she halted in adding to the Lords words, for JEHOVAH
had forbid them to eat it, but he did no where forbid them to touch it, yet
this shows, that therein she was strict, and more strict than the words will
bear; but for the theatning, where God said, ye shall dye, she falters, and
has it thus, least ye dye: and for certain, when we do not keep to the
threatening, we shall not hold our selves to the commandment: it goes with us
as it did with our first fathers, a want of holding the threatening fast did
cast them down; and if we be short there, and do not oppose the threatening,
we cannot stand: as soon as ever Satan is at us to yield to our lust, say no,
it is forbidden by God: let it be to Adultery; answer, it is written, thou
shall not commit adultery; Heb. 13. 4.
then add to the prohibition the commination, Adulterers and Fornicators God
will judge. I must not, I am forbidden, I dare not yield, if I do, I shall dye
the death, I shall damn, and so Satan has his answer.

The last general Rule we propose, is to ask help of other men, and the
directions which come in here to be set down are these. 1. Never to let any
man know what the matter is, if by any means we can have comfort from GOD,
acquaint no man with it; if we can get him to do the cure in ordinary matters,
see what the use of ordinary prayer will do; in cases extraordinary, stretch
our strength to the most, that our prayers may be strong and long, let us wing
them with faith, and with a fast, that they must up to the bosom of the
father; to say, I have prayed and can find no ease, and therefore I will make
use of a friend is well enough; but I have prayed, fasted, and waited too, as
long as ever. I can, and yet it will not come, then we must, but til then till
we have tried the utmost, I could wish men to secret their tentations from the
world: God will not take himself to be well used, for us to go to others, when
we may have it for the coming at his hands, with comfort and encouragement. A
father loves not a child should run to neighbors for physic, when he may have
it of him; besides, it is sweetest, when we have it immediately from the hands
of God our father: when a child is sick, the same cordial or sweet meat sent
by a servant, is not so accepted when father or mother brings it and gives it
with their own hands; we see many must have mother give it, else they will not
take it: so it is with us, it cannot but be best welcome, when God does give us
our comforts with his own hands, and tell us good tidings of peace and mercy
with his own mouth; and then again, we do not conceive, how it will wound out
hearts, that we have let any man know our state and case, when we are to come
to our selves again; if so be then we find and conceive that all might have
been well, and the cure done betwixt God and our selves, without the knowledge
of any man, the trouble that way many times, wounds more than ever the
tentation did, and some have even wished them dead and fairly buried, to whom
in times of their heaviness they have broken their minds, and therefore the
counsel I give is, first, to try all means, to use all patience, to watch, to
pray, to fast, to wait, and if God at any time will come in with comfort, let
him do all, and have all the praise, we hiding our grifes from all the world,
in great inward sorrows we are too apt to open our selves more than needs,
therefore this counsel is in season. 2. See whether we can cure our selves (as
thus) what would I say to, or think of another, should he come to me with my
sore complaint, the same, say we to our selves, and see what that will do. 3.
When all will not do, and we find that GOD does look straying yet; and we
can hold no longer, then we must know, that GOD does call us to vent and open
our grief to some one or other; now the grief must be opened, God does call
us to a free discovery of our selves to another, and without we do break
open the matter, the end is not like to be good. So James, Confess your sins
one to another, and pray one for another, Chapter 5. 16.
and there shall be an healing; and in this case, without this mutual and
reciprocal confession, there shall not be an healing; I know God could make
all well without this, but he will not: there is a natural reason, why we find
ease by this venting, because it does open the sore, and make it as it were
run, and so there comes some ease, but the spiritual cause is it, which
carries it, and it is because God will have acommunion of Saints amongst us; he
will not have us straying one to another, and he knows that by curing
another, we cure our selves, and upon that it is, that the pain of the foul in
this case does not nor shall not stake, till we have acquainted one or other
with our case; so we see, that tho the party to whom we confess, say no more
to us than we knew before, yet the very venting brings some ease: Satan I know
cannot abide this, for few ever open all, but there is a remedy, and his
tentation is at an end, and therefore he urges hard upon the point, to hinder
us by all means from telling any body: What (says he) it will all the Country
over; he will tell his friend, and that friend another friend, and out it
will, and thou art either shamed or undone for ever. Indeed, when God does not
call us to this, it is dangerous to tell our veriest friend; for though he be
our friend, yet commonly we are not his confident friend, but he bath some
other, and he must know it under benedicite, and then he is sick, til his
friend knows it too; who is commonly some third man, and so there is great
danger that it will abroad; wherefore if we can do up our matters by telling
God alone, let no man know: but now when we have tried and it will not be,
then say, God has called me to out with it, and out with it I must, and will
live by faith, The way to have our secrets kept, is not to keep them but to
reveal them.
that God will make them keep my counsel; or if they do not, yet shame me
no shames, I will follow God, Vid. Hook. on Act. 2. 37 p. 243.
and confess I will, what ever comes of it: and here we must know; that when
we find a great disposition in us, to keep it from all the world; that then
Satan means us some great danger, and therefore he will fill our heads, with
a thousand proclamations of shames and dangers, and all to make us keep all
close to our own undoing and ruin, say then, I know by this, that great hurt
comes by my hiding, and great good is to be had by my confessing, in that I
find my self so unwilling to confess it to men, and therefore because I
find my self so loath, I will sure confess, I see, I must tell it some body,
else all will be naught, there lies danger, else Satan would not keep such
ado at me to hide it, and by no means to disclose it to any man living. I
think I may say it, that never any who disclosed all to some godly friend did
ever yet miscarry; but many who, out of some conceits, or of the power of
Satan, cannot be brought to open the vein, after long languishing, have made
away themselves; when then we find a great unwillingnesse (after we have bin
with God) to let any man know our mind, say, there is a mischief meant to me
by Satan; I know by this, in that, it is so sore against my will to disclose,
and therefore to prevent the worst, I will break through, and out of hand
confess to some friend; and in our confessing, we must confess all that
pains our souls, in telling Physicians we must leave nothing material as
touching our disease, that will endanger all; so we must not tell some pieces
only, but for the substance and circumstances, all that is to the purpose we
must discover, else a nail, a stub left in the conscience, will hold the fire
burning; many have undone themselves by this, in that they have left some maine
matter out: by maine matter I mean, that which turns the conscience out of
its peace: think not that we would have Christians run up and down to
Preachers for every thing that moves in the conscience: he makes work, who
will to the Physician for every stitch and ache; but when the trouble of mind
is such, that it wounds the conscience (as Salomons phrase is, Pro. 18. 14.
and every sore is not a wound you know) when it does so distress the heart of
man, that he cannot enjoy God, cannot do his duty as a Christian, nor enjoy
himself, cannot live in his calling as a Man; then it is high time, first to
make up to God, and if we be kept off there, then to make out to Man: when then
we find it such a burden to the conscience that we cannot stand under it,
(For a wounded spirit who can bear?) there dispute no longer, but away to some
one or other; now for the choice we must make.

1. First, if all circumstances concur, let it be some godly and learned
Minister, for though that another speak the same words of comfort, yet they
will sound better out of his mouth, and it is his office, and he has a more
particular promise that his words shall prosper; every thing works much; what
as it is taken, what he says because he is a Minister, will be better taken,
and digest better with our consciences: so we find in Job, that it is
principally and usually the Messenger, the Interpreter, the one of a thousand
that does it.

2. If we see that a Minister cannot be had, or not trusted, or not
comfortably used, any godly Christian will serve: James says to private men;
Confess your sins one to another, and pray one for another: Writing, and
speaking to private Christians, he does not tie us to any auricular confession
to the Priest, for then the Priest were also by the place in James, bound to
confess to private men also; for here is a mutual confessing one to another,
and here they are to pray one for another, Scot. Sent. l. 4. D. 17. q. 1. Aug.
Conf. l. 10. c. 3. Ambro. Sermon. 2. in Psa. 119. Sozom Hist. l. 7. c. 16.
which cannot be to absolve: For if to pray were to absolve, then their Laity
has as great authority by that place to absolve their Priests, as their
Priests their Laity: but to pass them, we say, that a private man may serve
as well, and sometimes better, to let us see that all is from God, and from his
grace alone; a simple Christian man or woman shall do it by speaking a few
plain words out of the Scripture, when many great Divines have bin used, and
can make nothing of it; as sometimes, when the Surgeon gives the cure over;
some woman makes the party as whole as a fish: and what if we our selves, can
at other times say as much or more than we can, yet we must use Gods way; he is
a stander by, and sees more than we can, in and by our selves, and no man is so
fit a Physician of himself, Ad seipsos adhibent medici; aegroti medicos alios.
whether soul or body; but whether it be Minister or private Christian, who is
used, the care must be, that a wise choice be made, Arist. polpit l. 3. c. 12.
and for our choice, let the party be some godly humble man, and one who has
bin in the fire himself, and then he will (as he sees it to be his duty)
confess the same or the like to us, and comfort us with the comfort, he
himself has been comforted by. Take a man of whom we have the opinion, that
he is the sure servant of God, and then when we find by his free confession
to us, that he has had the same or worse corruptions and tentations, then we
shall soon join hand with him, that for all this, we may be the servants of
God too, and that we shall see day, and comfort again; and then we will wait
with content and comfort, as the watchman does for the light, because he
knows, that be it ever so dark, it will be day again: when we have an
assurance for the present, that when we are at the worst, we are the servants
of God, and that we shall in good time be as well and as comfortable as ever
we were; as we see by experience in our friend, whom now we make our Comforter
and Physician, it is easy for us then, to possess our souls with quiet and
comfort.

Another thing, that we are to look to, is, that he be a man who can and will
keep our council; for if he be a blab, the more we conjure him all
secrecy, the more sick he will be (like those in the Gospel) to out with it
all abroad; and it may be, he would keep counsel better if we did not bind
him: and by the way I could wish, that whom soever we make use of; that we
be not too too strict to bind them to secrecy (except in some things the
danger be so great that there may be need of an oath,) for it is our nature,
the more we are kept from a thing, the more earnest we are after it, and
therefore too too severe terms that way, are not so fit. Well, we must then
do what we can, to choose out a man that can hold; and herein I think we
shall do wisely to do as they do, who do try a new vessel, prove it with
Water first, before they trust it with Wine; thus we shall do well and wisely
to sound them, with some lesser matters, and if we find them wanting in
secrecy there, then trust them no further; some cautions are delivered here,
as that we meddle not with men who are full of tongue, of a talkative
disposition, Pro. 11. 13
for such cannot hold for their lives, nor such as can keep nothing from their
wives or husbands (for women may be fitter, and in some cases make use of
women rather than men) nor such as be of an inquisitive disposition; a man
willing to fish out our counsels, is not a likely man to keep our counsels;
indeed, if we come to a man of purpose, to reveal our selves, and when we
come to the Tooth-drawer, our teeth leave aching for a time: if the tentation
withdraw for the present, or that we are so oppressed that we cannot utter;
in this case, the friend shall do full wisely to pierce us, to draw it out of
us, to bid us write our mind, lay it down, and leave it behind us, Epistola
non ^rubescit. Cic. epist. l. 5. ep. 12. Lucceio.
but except in some cases, as these; the man who has this in him, that he is
desirous to know our mind, who does even itch after our secrets, busy and
inquisitive to know what aises us, Percuncta ^orem fugito, nam garrulus idem
est. Mor. lib. 1. Epist
almost whether we will or not; that man is not to be used, he will ten to one,
tell it to one or other: look out then for a man godly, wise, secret, one who
has been sick of the same, or the like himself, an experienced man in
himself and others, a Physician in practice, and a friend too, a bosom
friend; and if we have him a David, a Jonathan, a sworne-brother, a still,
grave, sober spirited, and humble-minded man, and then confess to him and
spare not, confess to him and fear nothing; and when we have so done, let us
not distrust but we shall see a good end; and when we have spoken our mind to
one or two, and we have our comfort under two or thee witnesses, let us not out
with it to any body else in the world; I know spiritual sorrows are apt to
vent themselves when once we begin, for when we find a little ease by
opening the sore to one, we think that the more we open unto, the more ease
we shall have, and so we are in danger to show our case to all we meet, and
here Satan has a Stratagem that when he sees he cannot make us secret our
matters from a friend, then he will urge us to out with it to all, and after
wound us with a sore and heavy tentation, that now we have shamed our selves
for ever: and therefore my counsel here is, Pro. 11. 13
that when we have found a faithful friend, that then we begin and end with
him, except we call in one or two at the most, to have the matter under the
test of two or three witnesses; and before I leave the particular, I must make
bold to call upon such, as are made Physicians to the souls of their friend,
to make use of these things.

1. That they be not over-earnest to fish out men's secrets, for if we mean
honesty and secrecy, they are more bound to us, that we will hear them than
we, that they will tell us, for we are thereby, bound to one great duty more
than we were, and that is to keep secrecy.

2. We must be willing to be made use of by men, as by women, by poor, as
well as by rich. Greeneham.
For as one speaks, who was of great experience this way; there lies a great
corruption in it, when we find our selves more ready, to take the confessions
of Women, than of Men, of young women, than of old, of fair than of foul, of
Gentlemen, and rich men, than of poor: and which we must see that we humble
for and avoid, and be rather for the poor than the rich, for Men than Women,
etc.

3. By all means we must keep council, except the matter stand so, that we
sin in keeping close their secrets; and here if we have cause to doubt any
thing; as though his secrets would be pernicious, we shall do well to tell
him, that if he ask for counsels sake, that then we will hear him; but if
that he have a farther intent and his plot be dangerous, assure him we will
break friendship with him; and rather lose a friend of him, than keep his
sinful secrets, and lose a friend of God: but if it may be done, then by all
means keep it from all, and chiefest of all, some secrets of the wife from
the husband, of the husband from the wife.

4. Confess again to them when we our selves have been healed of the like;
and say I was sick of the same disease, and by taking such or such things, by
using my self to these or those courses, I was cured, and am as comfortable as
ever I was in all my life: ye would not believe how this will settle the heart
of a poor Christian, who has a good opinion of us and our sincerity: do not
stand thinking, that they will never think well of us again, if they do not,
an happy loss, if we may thereby bring them to peace and comfort; but the
truth is, these are but fancies. If a man have a calling from God for the good
of men's souls, to open all his heart, in the sight of all the Parish, men will
think never the worse of him, but the better; and indeed we can confess
nothing one to another, but what we may in a manner know one by another before
hand, since we have all one and the same heart, cut out of the same rock, of the
same complexion and disposition, as touching our lust and Original sin, and
therefore if they confess to us, to have comfort from us, we may do well to
tell them our sins and errors in a mutual manner, Cartw. in Iam. 5. v. 16
as they do their wounds to us.

5. We must pity them and pray for them, and help to carry their burdens: we
of our selves can do nothing, Gal. 6. 2.
but we must commend their state and case to God; as he is to pray for
himself, so we are to pray to God for him, Iam. 5. 16.
and the prayer of a righteous man avails much, and is of force: where many
may fitly come together in prayer, the more the better: but in this case of
secrecy, one only is made acquainted with the matter, and in this matter, the
prayer of one righteous man shall do the deed; for it is not the worth or force
of prayer, but the promise of GOD which is all in all, here we have a promise,
and by virtue of that promise the prayer of one will carry it.

The General Rules after the Tentation is over.

1. We must not be coozened so as to think the tentation is resisted and
conquered, when it is not, nor yet suffer our selves by Satan's deceit, and
that of our own hearts, to be made believe it is not conquered, when it is:
sometimes Satan does for a time withdraw himself, he may, and does in skill,
cease to solicit; and lust may sit still for a space, and all to lull us
asleep, as though all were done, when nothing is done, as though all were
killed, when it is as live as ever it was. The tempter will come, and bring
seven worse with him than before; and our lust will come again, and take us at
some advantage, and do us a spoil: in case we think the tentation ended,
when there is a politic giving over to bite for a season only: What must we
do, to know when the ceasing is, because the tentation is conquered, and when
it is only by withdrawment for a time? Many things might here be said; that
which satisfies is to affirm, that if we have taken pains, used Gods means,
waited Gods time, then the work is done as it should be; but if means, or all
ordinary means to be had have not been used, we have not set God and
prayer, against the motion: if we find that the lust is gone, we know not how
on a sudden, no sooner come almost but gone, hereis cause of suspicion, to
fear that all is but a practice of our great enemy, a purpose to rock us in
security, that he may come and take us in the sin or some other, when we
least think of it, and and stand unprepared. Again, if we find no good
fruits and effects to follow, no good to come of it to our heart and life, that
we are no more humble, no more (if not less) spiritual than before; here is
great doubt that the tentation is gone the wrong way; for if we do drive this
Devil away by GODS means, which are spiritual, as prayer, reading, watching;
spiritual seed-corne, will leave behind it, some spiritual fruit; prayers,
and holy exercises use not to be lost, they fall not in the dust, but
mortify, and sanctify, they both must and do, and therefore if we find
ease, but not grace, Heb. 12. 11
some quiet, but not the quiet fruit of righteousness; for all that I know, as
good the tentation had stayed, as depart thus. But if we find that we have not
only a bare freed once from the stir and power of the tentation; but the
tentation is over, and good, is left behind, more modest, humble, fearful of
sin, careful of God; then the work is done by God, and we have our comfort:
when a man then does find some respit by turning his thoughts over, to think
of the world, that this or that is to be got or saved, be set or sold, here or
there is a purchase to be made; this is not Gods cure, but if the liberty we
now have, over we had, be made ours by turning to God and his ways, then we
may boldly tell our selves, and bid our consciences rest upon it, that we have
gone the right way to work, and that there is no mistake in the matter: and as
we must not think we have it, when we have it not; so we must not think we
have it not, when indeed and in truth we have. Satan does play on both sides,
and his devices to coozen us of our comfort this way are many: what says he,
all that is nothing but a forbearing of old and wonted occasions, and a wicked
man may do this; indeed, we must not lay the fault on the occasion, as the
Tipler does on drink, that it is made so strong; and the Glutton on his fare,
it is so choice, that who can choose but feed by the belly, for the creatures
are no kind of cause. Before the Flood, when men did (as great Divines
conceive) drink water and feed upon plants; Chrysostom. in Gen 9. hom. 29. Rain.
Apol. These. Sect. 33.
we see there was a world of abominations, and therefore we must lay the fault
on our lusts within, not on the occasions without: yet this I say, that if a
man find, that by the use of prayer and the word, a man does in conscience and
with constancy shun all the occasions of that sin, which heretofore he neither
could nor would; there is a cure wrought, for a brunt in some fit, an
unregenerate man may; but to do it still, always, forever hereafter: thus to
do is a sign of power, of grace; and after constancy we must see that we do
it in conscience, that we do not avoid the thing or person, which were to us
occasions of sinning out of hatred, to the person or to the thing, but to the
sin; that our stomach does not rise at them, as they are such or such things
materially, but formally as they are to us occasions of offending, and that by
reason of coruption, not in them, but in us: He that can do that, that man may
say that Satan lies when he tells him, that a wicked man may surcease, by
hiding himself from his old occasions: for in this sense, nothing but grace
and the spirit, and some power of the Holy Ghost, can make a man shake off his
old occasions a man in his sins will be so far from refusing occasions when
they come in his way, that he will look and make after them, and have them he
will, Pro. 23 35
if he may have them for love or money. An hungry man, will through stone walls
for meat; so where the love and reign of sin is, there a man will and must
break through fire and water to have his desires finished; the occasions of
that sin, he must and will follow, what ever come of it: I say it, that
nothing but grace, can make a man abstain from the occasions of sin when he
is tempted; when not tempted, the matter is not so much, and some men without
the strength of grace may forbear, but when the tentation is up, and the
passion is on fire, though a man dye, and (without Gods mercy) damn in the
place, he cannot possibly forbear without the force of the spirit: I dare
affirm it, that he that can, and does, in the order and manner I have set
down either put the occasion from him, or himself from the occasion of a sin
he has been and is tempted unto, that man has made an acceptable conquest of
that lust: and we do wrong our selves I cannot say how much, when we suffer
Satan to persuade us the contrary. The next thing we are to look to, is, that
we do not coozen and deceive our selves, so as to think we have not overcome
the tentation: why? Because we are not rid of evil thoughts; it is conquest
enough, that evil thoughts are borne as a burden and that lust and Satan for
their hearts are not able to bring it any further than thoughts. I know God
could if he would, and would if he saw it good and fit, take away the swarm
of evil thoughts; but for our good they are suffered to fly up and down in
our imaginations, not only to humble us, for as the thoughts are, so we should
be if we were let alone; they show our nature, and when we are come to some
practice and growth, we are then apt to heave up with conceits of our selves
above what is written, to think that we are not as other men are, and
therefore to prevent and discure the malady, evil thoughts are left in us, to
remember us what we are of our selves; as also that by feeling the thoughts
stirring within, and praying against them, we may be kept from acting the sin
in it self, in the deed: This must be borne, for we must know that our inward
lust, ever foameth out a loathsome fume, (loathsome I say, even to the natural
conscience of a man) and would if it were possible defile (as one notes) the
very regenerate part; Greeneham.
sin is to be in us till we dye, and therefore evil motions, suggestions, and
delusions of Satan must be borne withal: the help is, that we do delight in
the law of God, Romans 7. 22
as touching the Inner man; and what if we see them to be more than they were
before, yet it, is because our light is more, our sight is cleerer, our
spiritual sense quicker; so that if we have by prayer won then, delight and
consent away from sin, the more grace we have, the more sins we have not;
but the more sins we see, for that if God should let us see the sins
heretofore, when we had little or no grace, we see now, we then must needs
have despaired we could not have borne it, it being a great work and power of
grace, to be able to stand before the sight of our sins: and again we can
discern more corruption now, than we could then, because our eyes are now more
open, we must not go about, then to conclude against the hair: that sure the
victory is not got, because we see, and feel (perhaps) more evil thoughts,
or our evil thoughts to stir more than before; alas, did we not feel them,
and the burden of them, we would never care to come to God, to have them done
away: and therefore it is rather an argument, that the conquest is comfortably
made, and that the Lord does intend us a good turn, even to help us away with
our lust, more and more every day, for that we find that our lusts do
burden us, and appear in their odious colors more and more every day: make
not that then an argument against us, which is rather for us: and say that I
find it, and feel it more and worse, I hate it more, I delight in it less, I
consent not at all; this is sufficient for our comfort for the present, and
that man who has gone thus far, may well be said to overcome the tentation.

2. The second thing to be considered of, after the tentation, is, that in
case we do catch a fall, and the tempter without, lust within, do blow and
push us down, yet we must not make the matter worse by despairing, for to
despair is a greater fall, than the fall it self; this were to leap into the
fire, to save our selves from the blame: I know a godly man can never utterly
despair, there is still a seed in him, 2 Cor. 4. 8.
and where faith is, there is some hope, where hope is, there is not a total
despair; but doubt we do says Paul, yet not despair, and such doubtings we
have as do make our life uncomfortable and some degrees of despair we do
admit, and for every degree of despair that we do suck in, we do suffer
the loss of a degree of comfort: wherefore we must hold out against thoughts
and propositions tending to despair, rise with David, rise with Peter, and
grow better after-than before the maine push is given, because we sin after
knowledge, so did these two Worthies, and they are in heaven and dyed for all
that in peace and honor. David's conscience when he came to dye, was troubled
about a lesser matter, I mean the cases of Shimei and Ioab: as for his blood
and murder, not a word, why? Because he had made a thorow-peace with God: for
those sins in his life and health-time, he had compounded with his Judge: let
us do so in any hand, resist, hold out, do and suffer any thing, rather than
sin: but if Satan has gone beyond us, lie not in sin, up again; it is not
death to commit sin, but it is, to lie in sin; repentance does give the soul
a vomit, Sicut hi qui habent inclusam, etc. Orig. in Ps. 31. and. Hier. in
Eccl. c. 10.
up comes all again; it shows great love in God, and great faith in us, to
rise up again out of great falls; and when up once, then fortify our selves we
must against relapses: there is a se^ depth of trouble in mind will follow, if
after our rising we fall again into the same or the like offense, this will
cost dear: but yet by the way I affirm, that this may befall the child of
God. In the story of the Judges, the Church up and down did sin the sin of
Idolatry; repented, Perk. Estate of a Christian Sect. 16. Pige at sane peccare
rursus, etc. Tertull. de poenit. c. 7.
and yet fell, again and again: and this were to unchurch the Church of the
Jews, to say, that Gods people cannot do that sin after repentance which they
did do before. And who can think, that Abraham did not repent of that his sin
in the matter of Sarah? yet the next occasi^n, he sinned the very sin again:
and was not that a gross sin, to tell a tale as he did, to lay his wife
open to adultery to save his life? which many heathens would rather have lost
their lives than have endured, and what? to make a bargain, that not for once
or so, but where ever we come, Ge. 20. 30.
do thou say, thou art my sister. If this were not in substance, in
circumstance a gross sin, I know not what is: they did as it were consent unto
it: and that Abraham finding so strange a deliverance by God as he did,
repented not, were straying; and yet after, he fell into the very same sin
again: and one dares say, that David committed adultery often, because he took
Bethsheba and had six wives besides, and ten Concubines: and for murder, Perk.
Conflict of Satan with a strong Christian.
deny it who can, that David went far, when he said and swore that he would be
the death of Nabal, Vid Perk. Cas. Consc. lib. 1. c. 11. Sect. 1 page 284.
Latinae Edit.
and all his innocent family, wherein was a godly and right virtuous wife, and
some religious servants: this was a gross sin, and what if he did not act the
deed? No thanks to him; he was resolved if ever man were: and yet after he
fell into the foul murder of Vriah; the Church in Nehemiah and Ezre fell the
second time, after solemn repentance, into the gross fact of having many
wives: and for the word, we have nothing against it, God will forgive us
seventy times, that is, infinite times; a certain number being put for an
uncertain: me thinks it is a sinful limiting the holy one of Israel in his
free and infinite mercies; of Christ our redeemer in his merits, to say the
contrary as though GOD did forgive us, because we have done the gross sin,
but once after we are in Christ; and for reasons I propose but these. 1. What
ever sin we may repent of, that God may and will pardon: but the sin of
falling again after repentance into the selfsame great offense, is a fault
that a man may repent of, which I thus prove; because it is not the sin against
the Holy Ghost, or there is no sin, but that sin which does exclude
repentance: and that every gross sin done after true repentance, could not be
the sin against the Holy Ghost. I need not prove, because no man can or will
affirm it. 2. It Is on al hauds granted, that a man may fall into some other
gross sin, but not (say they) into the same: But of this they neither can
nor do give good reason, there being no place in the word, nor no ground in
the nature of faith or of repentance; but that a man may as well fall into the
same gross sin as another; as great, because that another sin as great, is
as contrary to the habit of grace and act of repentance as the same. 3. What
may stand with the grace of God, that a godly man may do; but to sin the same
gross sin after repentance, is not incompatible with the grace of God as now
it is in us; for what may stand with Christ, may stand with grace. Prin.
perpet. p. 3. 5.
It is written, that one act of sin cannot destroy the habit of grace, as
though many might: indeed one act of a great and foul fault has done it; as
we see, the Angels fell in heaven; and the fall of Adam in Paradise, in whom,
one act did cast out grace; there grace being not the grace of Christ, the
grace of justification: Vitia Ferina.
and Philosophers hold it, in some ferall vices: but now as the case stands
with us, to double that act again and often, and I cannot say how often,
cannot of it self thrust a man out of Christ: why? Because we are kept in
him, and his graces in us, by the power of God and the spirit of Christ: now
for a man to say, to sin such a sin we treat of, cannot stand with grace in
us, since that grace is kept in by the power of God and of Christ, is to me
uncomfortable divinity. 4. That Doctrine cannot hold, which leaves the
conscience of man without a stay, and so does this: when a man shall be set on
the rack for ever, that he is not in Christ, and why? Because he does sin
the same gross sin after true repentance, or at least, that his repentance was
not true; and if I were not a true Christian, I know not when I shall be; and
if this my repentance were not true, I fear I shall never repent aright. It
must be held against all true repentance, or else there can be no state of the
question made: for true repentance has a breadth with it, and does admit of
degrees: and if they say, that when a man has attained to a great measure of
repentance, then it will carry it for him, that he shall never sin the same
gross sin again. Here the heart of a man can find no sooting, because by
this their assertion, no man can possibly set down, when a man has attained
to the point and degree of true repentance, and therefore they must affirm it
of any true repentance; that whosoever has truly in the least degree, and
measure repented for a gross sin, shall never while he lives, commit the
same again; and if he do, then as yet he is not, nor never yet was in
Christ: which is a tenet very uncomfortable, and no way agreeable with the
sweet principles of the covenant of grace, and the free and infinite mercies of
God, proposed to us in the Gospel. Lastly, this cannot stand, because no man
can satisfy the conscience of man, when the sin he has committed is, or is
not a gross sin. They say that a man may sin smaller sins of infirmity
again and again after repentance, and I say, that there can be no sound
reason, why a man may not after his repentance do the same gross sin again,
as well as an infirmity humbled for, and repented of. But to pass that, the
thing I urge is, that it passes the skill I think of any man living, to set
me down a limit, that so far I may go, and my sin is but an infirmity, but
if I go a point further, that then it is a gross sin; for if I may step one
degree and point further, and yet my sin be an infirmity still, then I say, why
not another degree further? and so, why not another? and so another, and who
can say, when and where we must stay. The conscience of a man in perplexity,
must have a rock to settle upon, but when it is a gross sin, and when it is
not, cannot be punctually defined; circumstances after the case, and many sins
of the first table, are gross and great enough, which yet to many of us, are
accounted of, as no such sins: many determine a gross sin from the matter,
Forma dat Nomen and esse.
but the form is, it that chiefly gives name and nature to a sin, and the
manner is the form of a sin, rather than the matter: and hence sometimes when
the matter is not so great, yet the manner may be such, that it may well go
for a gross sin: the only reason that ever I heard is, for that after a man
comes to repent of a foul fault, a man's sorrow is so great, he feels such
smart, that he will never come there again, because he will drink of that
bitter cup no more. It Is true that such a man will go his ways, and do so, no
more if he can do withal; but I hope our Divinity tells us, that what ever
our sorrows has been, how much soever the grief was; yet except God do
keep us, the remembrance of former compunctions cannot preserve us, when the
wind and Sun, the occasion and tentation do meet. Now show me a place that
has in it a promise, that when our grief has been so great, that then God
will preserve us from ever falling into the same fault: I know GOD does so
tender us, that he uses not to let us come to that pass again, and he makes
our fits of former sorrow, a means through his blessing for to preserve us; but
that a godly man shall ever be so preserved, is besides the Text I think.
Again, I desire proof, that still an end a regenerate man does, when ever he
repents of a gross crime, entertain his heart with a great deal of sorrow;
some I know do, and many, and if you will the most; but that ever it is so,
that we never after conversion repent truly of a gross sin, but our sorrow
is much and great; I think there is no such thing in the word of God: many
have that initiall repentance brought about by the pricking of a pin, without a
Lance; by the sweet music of the Gospel, without any great noise of the law,
and so I say, there after repentance too, when they by occasion and tentation,
fall into some foul fact: and then again, how much this sorrow must be that
will keep one from relapsing and ever doing so again, is past my wit to
conceive the quantity of it; and the conscience must be able to spell it out,
and to say, thus much I must grieve, else my repentance is not right, for such
a sin, and I may fall again.

Now where this full point lies, that a man may be able to speak it; thus much
I must and have grieved, and am now come to the height of sorrow that is
required; and now I know I shall never fall the same fall again. These be
strange riddles, the heart of man I know must come down, it must melt and
break, but yet a little sorrow does it in one, when a great deal does but do
it in another: some men's hearts after sin are like hard wax, great heat is
required to melt it; but others like soft wax, a little will supple it, as we
find that at man's first conversion, some men turn to it without much ado,
with legal sorrows, and the sin before regeneration, I hope, hardens the
heart, more than the sin after, for before, there is nothing but a stone,
nothing but sin and flesh; but after, be the sin committed never so great, yet
there is some spirit, some grace abiding, and so some softness with all. We
Divines do use to teach, that it is the love of God; and not the sorrow for
sin, Vid. Can. Relict part. 1.
which is the cause to keep us from relapsing, and that too much sorrow does
hurt and drive us from Christ. We all agree, that a man may go too far, when
there is so much as does bring us to Christ, Durand. l. 4. D. 17. q. 4. n. 7.
it is sufficient; and that sometimes, a lesser degree of humbling and mourning
will do that: GOD does not delight to see us in our ashes, no further than he
may hear of us, and it is not terror of the law, but the peace of God which does
garrizon and keep our hearts, (...).
and mind, and therefore this reason is of no force, it hangs the conscience on
uncertainty, and no man can determine, when his sorrow is come, to be enough,
and serve the turn in this Divinity: besides who sees not that wicked men do
grieve over and above out of fear or shame or both for some sins and more than
godly men do, for the same or the like sins, and yet who dares say, that by
reason of this their grief, they could never offend in the same again. Judas
did grieve and sob extraordinary, for killing Christ: yet I do not think, but
had the case come in his way, he would have murdered him again: no trusting
him, who presently after killed himself: and we find some, who for murder
fall into those flats of sorrow, that they do run upon their own deaths, and
cause themselves for very remorse of conscience to dye a dogs death. Mat. 27. 5
Let us then say, that it is a dangerous case, for a godly man to sin the
same great sin after repentance, what if it do not put him out of Christ? what
if it do not hang him? Yet it burns him in the hand, whips him up and down the
town, my meaning is, that it does cast him into a bed of miserable sorrow; but
withal we must say, that it may possibly be, that after true and hearty
repentance for such a fault, a child of God may chance to fall into the same sin
again and again: how often I cannot tell, but this I can tell, that how often
soever he sins, let him repent, and return, and his pardon is ready: They
wrong GOD in his mercy, and men in their comfort who do say the contrary.

3. The third duty that we are to look to after the tentation, is, that in
case we do not finish the sin, not act the fault, but do drive away this fury:
that then we be very thankful to God, it is his doing only, it is his grace
that moved him to stand for us, when we were in danger to cast away our
comfort: it is a great mercy to rise again, but a greater too, when God comes
and stands betwixt us and the fall. Of the two, it is better not to sin the
sin, Scot. 3. Sent D. 3. q. r.
than to be recovered after we are down, Sect. Dicitur communiter.
as it is in it self for a man to be preserved from a disease, than to be
cured of the disease. I confess that we have a greater experimental taste,
both of the love and power of GOD, when we are recovered, but yet as touching
our peace and comfort: I hope we all see, it is better not to sin the sin,
than having sinned to be healed, we save a great deal of inward pain and
bitter sorrow by the bargain, Christ I know tells us most Divinely and sweetly;
that to whom much is forgiven, Luke 7. 47.
such do love much, but yet we must not sin many sins, that so much may be
forgiven us, and we love much, this were to turn the grace of God into
wantonness; Jude v. 4.
and that which Augustine has up and down in his Tomes answers all, that
those also are to love much, who have been preserved by the providence and
power of God, from doing such and so many transgressions as some others have:
for why, says he, have we not sinned those sins? was the cause in our nature?
Is the reason in our will? No, but only in the goodness of God; we are then
to thank him, and love him for the sins we have committed, and have had our
pardon for them, and for those many more which we should have done, had not
the Lord been, all one, as though we had done them, and had found a pardon of
them; and one degree more, and that is, that by reason of his mere mercy, we
have been strongly preserved from so sinning against our God, from so
troubling the quiet of our own hearts and in some particulars, from so
scandalizing the Church and people of GOD.

4. The fourth duty after the tentation, is, to make a good use of it, to get
some good out of it, we must come to some fruit after we have been so
handled with such bitter plunges. The Earth after Winter becomes fruitful, so
must we be; now the good that comes by tentation is manifold. 1. A sight of
some corruption we saw not before; the beginning of all our comfort arises
from an humble sight of our corruptions, and it is fit, that when we will not see
them, and abhor them by what we find in the word, we should have the
experience of them in our selves; then we say, till now, little did I think, I
had been thus and thus given to such rebellions, then we cry, ah wretched man
that I am, what a Beast, what a devil am I? This does mightily empty us of our
selves, and then we quickly fill with God, with Christ: this is amends enough
for all our toil, that we are made to see somewhat in our selves, which we
never thought to be in our hearts.

2. The second is to see that there is some sin, not sufficiently and thoroughly
mortified, that as yet we have not gone to the quick of it, and what that sin
is, and now to take it in hand again, and never give over till we break the
heart of it, lest it lie in the wind and do us some spite against another
time. 3. A third is to grow acquainted with the wiles and depths of Satan: A
godly man should be well acquainted with the devil, so as to know and to
find him out in his stratagems, and this is done more by tentation, than by
all the reading in the world. 4. To be acquainted with the goodness and mercy
of God, to be able to find out somewhat to purpose, in the mystery of
godliness, how God does make sin to cure sin, one thief, one corruption to
cut the throat of another, one corruption to prevent a worser, fetch heaven out
of hell, to learn to speak it by experience, and to say, I had sinned, except
I had sinned, I had gone to hell, except I had gone to hell; that the worst
pride comes out of our graces, that our best grace, the grace of humility
(which makes room and way for all the rest) comes out of our sins: Iam. 4. 6.
Now then we should not find our selves, or Satan, or the Lord out, were we
not taught it by our tentations. This made Fox to say, that his graces did him
most hurt, and his sins most good, a Paradox: but by our own tentations we
know his meaning: this made Luther to say, Praefat.
that these three things make a good Divine. Tom. 1.
1, Prayer. German.
2. Meditation. 3. Tentation: this good we have by our tentations, that we
come to know our selves, to know Satan, and to know GOD; such is our estate,
that the furthest about, is the nearest way to heaven; we cannot go to heaven
by Geomitry: we must fetch a compass by the gates of hell, and see what news
with Satan, ere we can relish the sweetness and goodness of the promise, we
cannot else take God for Gods sake, and have heaven on Gods terms; we cannot
come to God but we must follow Christ, and follow Christ we cannot except we
deny our selves, Mar. 8. 34.
and deny our selves we will not, were it not, for the cross, and man would do
any thing, rather than take up his cross; were he not buffeted and beaten to
it by some tentation or other, 2 Cor. 12. 7.
and therefore thank ye tentation, that ever we come to heaven: what ever it
is to bear a cross, when God does lay it on, I am sure it is an hard and an
hard thing, for a man to take up his Cross; and yet by tentatio^s we are
brought to this: He. 11. 35
wherefore we must do our selves this good by our tentations, Tortured, not
accepting deliverance.
when they are gone and over; that now against another time, we know the better
how to do with Satan, that he shall not put such tricks upon us, and coozen us
out of our comfort, and that cheifest of all, by his art and skill. 5. We must
learn for ever after to pity others; and out of pity and mercy, to do them
in their spiritual sorrows, all the help that possibly we can; let us
mourn with them, and have a feeling of their case, and the rather, because
once or often it has been our case. Paul does not say to the incestuous
Corinthians thou art puffed up, but turns himself to the standers by, 1 Cor.
4. 15.
and says not (he is) but (ye) are puffed up, and have not rather mourned:
Chrysostom. de poenit. hom. 10.
now the sense and the fresh remembrance of this, that but the other day we
our selves were as sick as they, and by the mere mercy of God we got our
selves out, should and it will bring us to show all mercy to them, to mourn
over them, and not to pride it over them, as though we were free from ever
suffering the like lust; whereas, by our own experience we rather learn to
walk humbly before God and man; remembering what has bin, and considering what
may be, if we our selves should be tempted. This then is a golden lesson
which our own tentations ought to teach us without book, to restore such an
one with the spirit of meekness, do (says the Greek text there) as Surgeons
do, (...).
who use all tenderness in handling arms and joints, Vid. Bud. in Comment.
when they are out of joint: Nihil sic probat spiritualem virum, etc.
let us do what we can to set them in joint again with all love, Aug. in Gal. 6.
meekness, pity, and compassion, you would not believe what good it will do
a sick soul, Romans 12. 15.
to see another pity his case, to weep with them that weep, it furthers the
cure exceedingly, and we do become the more willing by ods, to set our hand
to help, because we do remember how it stood with us, when we were in the
same or the like case; say I may thank my tentation for this, that I have
either such will or skill to restore my poor brothers soul; and so much the
rather are we to study mercy and meekness, because when we go about to fetch
men out of their sins, men are subject to fret and snarle, it is like wakening
one out of sleep, Multi homines cum a somno, etc. Aug. in Gal. 6.
and then we see how out of quiet they be, ready to braule at their best
friends; so here, and therefore we have need of meekness, and patience which
our own experience in our own assaults and tentations will learn us sooner
than all the teaching in the world. 6. And lastly, by the bitter taste of our
tentative corruptions, we must now out of our own sense, learn to loathe and
to abhor them, that our corrupt nature may be an ugly sight in our own
eyes: we see in the word, that grave Christians have bin the men who have come
to loathe themselves in dust and ashes; so Abraham, so Job, when old, they did
by reason of their sin abhor themselves, in dust, and in that which is worse
than dirt, in ashes, and this we shall never come so thoroughly to do, till we
come by reason of tentation, to be as Paul was, Gal. 6. 14.
a very crucifix of mortification. Ah this self-love, how it makes us carry a
months mind to our lusts, we have a doting humor after our corrupt lusts
still, and therefore al is little enough to bring them out of request with us;
they had need sting us, and that home too: say we have a running sore in our
bodies, which none else can well abide to come near; yet such is our Philovety
and self-love, that we can abide the sight and smell of it well enough; right
so, we are so inward with our own selfe-affection, that albeit our lusts are
a corrupt matter and do stink like any carrion, and would make one sick to
see them, yet we can abide them well enough; our nature is altogether by Adams
fall and our falls become filthy (the Hebrew is stinking) we stink horribly,
and yet, because we have an ill and a stinking nostrill of our own, Habeat
aliquis sanum olfactum animae sentit quomodo puteant peccata. Aug. in Psa. 38.
5.
we can away with the smell well enough. Now comes a tentation, stirs the
wound, makes it stink and smell; we are so peppered with the sorrow and woeful
fruit, of it that we come to take our sins as they are in their kind, and at
last we are so changed and altered, that what we l^ved rather than our life,
that we come to hate as any death: this use we may and must make, by looking
both on our sore and heavy tentation (which we may thank our lusts for) when
once they are past and over.

The fifth and last duty after our tentations are shut up, is to prepare for a
further battle, for an other encounter: Luke 4. 13.
he went away from Christ but for a season, therefore ere long he will come
again; how long it will be first I cannot say, but ere long it will be, he
will stay away no longer than needs must, as soon as ever he can get leave he
will come without sending for: though I name Satan, yet I mean such mixed
tentations wherein lust and Satan do tie together; but because Satan uses to
fire the matter, and to set the wheels going, therefore it is that we do use
to name him, as though all were his doing. The thing I first propose is, that
we wait in daily expectation to have some other fits, for we are too too apt
to dream of, I know not what, peace and freedom after tentation is done away,
and then we are in danger to grow secure, which when our enemy once perceives,
he will then come and make use of his advantage. A boy in the school, after a
sound beating is past, falls to his liberty promising to himself that he shall
not be had to horse yet a while, and is of from his book, till his master comes
again and has him by the skin: so when we have had a scourging with the smart
of some sour tentation, we think now the worst is past, and that we shall
have no more such reckonings: then comes the tempter, calls up our lusts, and
finding us secure, does us a shrewd turn; so we find in the Saints that after
a storm once blown over, they use to catch their falls; when we have stood
free from our usual sickness a year or so, we use to give our selves to
disorder in diet, as thinking that no sickness can now take hold of us, and
then we are over head and ears in some disease ere we are aware; so it is in
the soul, we must then when we are on the other side of some heavy tentation,
do as Mariners do in a calm, mend our tacklings, get our things about us;
as not knowing how soon, how sudden, another, a worser storm may fall: take
heed then after we have put off our fits, of a secret floth; watch still, lie
in our armor, for as sure as we live, if we live any time, we shall meet
with another bout ere long: for when we grow up in grace and come to some
perfection, we shall hear of more sorrows. God has ever been upon his
Saints with greatest trials, when they come to some age and strength. He will
then build with us when we are seasoned, as far as our strength will go we
shall have it. And therefore when old, when Paul aged, do not say I have done;
Philem. 9
now our faith is most, our wisdom most, our graces strongest, and therefore
repent and say, there is worse behind still, we must have some intervalle,
sometime betwixt our fits, some good days to breath in, Ferus. in Job. 3. Sermon
18.
else we should not be willing to live, else we should not have strength to
hold out the next fit; and more fits in their times we must have, else we
should not be willing to dye. Say then I look every day for a fit, and
therefore I will not be without my medicines in a readiness; and in all our
physic be sure to put the blood of Christ: Satan is not so beaten, nor such a
coward neither, but he dares come again, he will put it to the adventure, he
had little hope to do any thing against Christ, never was he beaten as he was
by him, yet he came again, and again, and so he will to us: the thing I
commend then to all our care, is, to stand upon our watch and sure guard. A
question is made by some, whether Satan may come to the same man, with the same
tentation after he is well beaten and conquered: Lib. 2. D. 6. q. 4.
Durand says, he may to others with the same, he may to the same man with some
other tentation, but to come to the same man, with the same tentation, to shoot
the same bitter arrow at the same man who did conquer him, he thinks Satan will
not,; his reason is, because Satan will not come where he has no hope to be
the victor: but says he, he has no hope of having the victory in the same,
and over the same man. As a man who is once beaten in the field, you cannot get
him into the field, with the same man at the same weapons; and a Cock once made
to run away, will fight no more. The answer is, that man is usually beaten in
the field for want of courage, or strength, or skill; but Satan is beaten
only, because we will not give assent and way unto him; and therefore what if
we repel Satan, by resisting him in his tentation: now it may be at another
time we shall not be found in so good a mind, nor in so prepared a
disposition, to resist and deny him in his suite: what knows he whether we
have lost of our former strength, or wit, or will, or grace, or care, and
vigilance? But above all Satan will try, whether that God, who now does not, at
another time for some causes, will suffer us to be led into the tentation. It
is not our strength, but Gods that does it; it lies not simply in our will, but
in the will of God. Aquinas I think is in the right; Satan would come oftener
than he does, Paat. 1. q. 114. art. 5.
but that GOD who knows our strength, or rather our weakness will not suffer
him: and though he loves not to be beaten, and desires not to come where there
is no hope, yet it must be as God will, and not as we and the devils pleasure
is: if we need it, we shall have another trial; it is the devils nature, he is
a tempter, his malice is his formal being, and he cannot choose but come
against us, as far as the Lord shall please to let out his chain: what if he
has no hope to conquer us, yet he knows he shall molest us; He is at no
quiet himself, and he would not that we should have any rest neither, as far as
he can do withal: it does as it were do him good, to go about to do us
hurt: he will, because he must go away for a season, and after a season, he
both will and must come again; and if we grow negligent, lie open and naked,
as not once thinking to hear of him at all, or at least not as yet; then he is
for us, and has his blow, his full blow at us: from hence it is, that often in
the same lust we beat him now, because we are prepared; he comes and beats
us another time, because he takes us unprepared. Again, Satan is not ignorant,
that when we have had as much as ever we can do to get him off at first, we
shall be loath to be troubled there again and that it is a weary hand to be
tired with the same anguish, and this moves him to try the second, the third
time, (...), and sometimes oftener the same way, to prove what he can do; for
he is not to learn, that it is more for want of heart than strength that we
use to yield: these may be the reasons, why Satan comes again many times with
the same assault; but if we look to God, he does order it, that we shall be
tempted in the same vein, because he sees that we by use and experience have
got more skill there than any where else, and that we have our weapons ready
to break the blows which come that way; and thus because our loving father
knows, that now we can tell how better to fight at that weapon and war, than
any other; he out of his goodness, will have Satan come that way, or not at
all. He intends us the victory, and now since our conquest is in the same
tentation, in which we are tried and skilled, both certain and easy over it
is in any other, Satan must come upon us with the very same tricks and
tentations; thus we see that the same tentation does befall us more than once
or twice.

2 Sometimes Satan changes his weapon, and tries us the clean contrary way,
with such assaults as we yet never felt in all our days before: he hopes that
there we have no defense, that we do not expect him at that door, and thus
he thinks, coming in with his blast at a contrary point, to blow us down;
and here we must do as the Pilot does, have our compass ready, and stand
ready to turn our needle to any point, knowing, that our lust within is for
any sin, and Satan has skill at any tentation; all is in a manner one to
him, he can tempt us to covetousness with as much ease and art, as to
prodigality; and therefore what ever our tentation has bin, and what ever our
humor has done, Satan can change hands and so must we expect to find. The
Word will furnish us against him, come when he will, or which way he will, be
it the same or some other way; here we must take council, that say he come
with some other weapon, it ought to be to us an argument, that sure now he
begins to be out of hope, since he does shift his weapons thus. 2. That God
will have him turn some other way, to purge some other stream; another lust,
must have another purgation. 3. Change of physic is good, for that the same
potion always used will not work so well, the longer we are used to the same
tentation, the less it works with us. 4. God will have us learn skill, by
experience at all sorts of spiritual combats, trials, weapons. The sum is,
that since when we have gotten the better of some great tentation, we are
subject to be drawn into spiritual pride or security and so to cast away our
armor: we must learn to expect to hear of another encounter, to wear our
armor about us, to stand ready against all assaies; Hezekiah, Asa, Iehosophat,
after they had gotten through some sore brunts are said then to fall, and this
came because they thought not of it, grew into some co^ceites, were willing to
please themselves, with hopes of freedom or respite; now for a time or for
ever after, or that what was done, was by their own strength and that now they
needed not to look after God in such particular manner any more. By their
mistakes and falls, we must learn to stand still in a continual expectation
and preparation, when one tentation is over and past, that another will come,
and that ere we be many years elder; if it come not so soon as we look for,
there is no hurt done, we are provided against another time. And thus much of
some general rules as concerning tentations in the general.

The SECOND PART: Part II.

Containing some particular Rules, serving to help us in some special cases.
A Great Doctor in our Israel does observe, that the conscience of man is
wounded most with the third Commandment in cases of Perjury; the sixth, of
Murder, the seventh, of Adultery; I may add (besides some others) the
tentations of Blasphemy, against the nature of his Essence, Being, and prime
Attributes of God: these do shake the conscience of a man, because there is a
maine principal in the heart and conscience of man, fully and strongly
convincing him of those particulars, viz. That there is a God, that he is
truth, that he is an avenger of all perjury, that we must let men alone with
their lives and wives; things wherein a man may make restitution and salve the
sore, they do not use to urge so much, when once we are brought to restore that
which by fraud or force we have taken away; but in matters of blood and
unchastity, no restitution can possibly be made to man: for who can help men
to their lives or chastity again? and this is the reason, that these sins
make such a foul cry above others; but of those particulars more hereafter. I
mean first to propose some Rules which may serve all these in common: then
some that are more proper to each tentation in several.

1. We must not make the matter worse than it is, which in those tentations,
which are accompanied commonly with most horror, is dangerous; for as we are
not to lessen the matter, so it is neither lawful nor safe to make the things
worse than they be; to pore into the sore, to break it up into too many
pieces, in this case is perilous: indeed when we are apt to grow secure and
presume, we are advised to aggravate matters to the most; but when we are down
the wind, and subject to despaires and fears, this is not approved to be
either lawful or safe. 1. It is not lawful to make that a sin which perhaps
is not; or that which is a sin, to appear to us greater than it is: things
must be represented unto us in their true colors; and as we must not set the
sin higher than it is, so not the guilt of it neither, this were to sing the
song of Cain, Genesis 4. 13.
My sin is greater than I can bear: He did not say so because it was so; but
it was so, because he said so: we must see that we do not make sins where
God makes none; lest we come to make that not to be a sin which is a sin; and
some men are miserably tormented, for things which are only sins in their
conceit, and not in truth. 2. It is unsafe in all, but most of all in these
kind of tentations, because man is a timorous creature, and when in this vein,
he is apt to be discouraged; fear of discouragement makes a man fall, weakens,
a man's purpose and resolution of resisting; as a boy is many times out in
saying his lesson, only for fear lest he be out, who could say perfect till
he came to say: and a girl being threatened and terrified, breaks the glass
only for fear of breaking it: so when we are in fear joined with
discouragement Satan has a great advantage; Frangere dum met^it, etc. Mar.
Apoph. 111.
and those sins amplified and set up, do mightily faint, and discourage the
heart and spirits of men and who can fight with any heart against an enemy,
that he has little or no hope to conquer. Now when we do make our sins
worser than they are, then it does secretly steal away our hope; and so we
make no great have to resist, nor have no great heart to fight: we then must
learn, not to make it less, lest we be too slothful, nor more lest we be too
fearful; but just as the matter is, as near as we can, that so we may be
fitted and prepared, to fight the good fight of faith, with diligence and
watchfulness.

2. We must not suffer the thoughts of these horrible tentations to tarry in
our minds; 2 Timothy 6. 12.
they are Gods and our greatest enemies, and we must shut the door against
them; what if we dislike and distaste them? Greeneham.
yet as one notes, this rolling of them up and down in our heads, does show
that there is an insensible likening of them in our hearts; we must set our
hatred against them, and thrust them away presently, and hold it a dangerous
thing to think of them. God cannot take it well, if we mislike a thing in
judgment, and do not set against it, with the means God has appointed and
sanctified to that use, Satan will coozen us, as though that our very misliking
of them were enough in things foul, and that there were no fear of danger;
whereas nature it self, does look sadly at these tentations, and the mislike
we feel, may well come from the influence of the law and light of nature. I
have learned that we are never the further off from a tentation, for our
misliking it only, but the nearer, except withal in affection, we humble for
it; as well as distaste it in our judgments: what if the dislike be not,
because it is a sin, but because there is some fear or shame? This is
self-love and pride, and this will work in the sin, if we go no further, and
that by Gods just judgment: our duty then, is not to suffer the thoughts of
such wounding and terrifying tentations, to tumble up and down in our minds,
though we have no mind to them; for either by discouraging us or enticing us,
they will get further hold: but we must cast them off, set the word against
them, and turn our thoughts to some better subject, and chiefly to think on
those two great Days, the day of Death, and the day of Judgment.

3. We must of all see, that we set not against those: of our own strength we
can do nothing, Arist. Eth. l. 7. c. 6.
by our own power against any lust; but least in these, because, Cum quisque
Legem viribus suis, etc. Aug. Expos. proposit. ex Epist. ad Romans
what through fear and horror in some, what through the swinge and violent
torrent of these two passions of anger and lust, a man has but little use of
that reason he has; and so the more he strives this way the worse it is, 2
Cor. 12. 9.
it does but increase our desires to the sin; Aug. in. Psa. 31.
our strength is here to pray and expect, and laying all natural and carnal
weapons aside; let God alone to do all, and out of grace it is, that he does
do for us, what he does in our trials and conflicts; and therefore Paul had
his answer, that all was to be done by the grace and mercy of God; and so we
find that the Lord said not to him, my power, but my grace, is sufficient for
thee: wherefore we must put al upon the power and grace of God, turn Satan to
God to Christ for his answer, set the grace of God against our sins, when
coming to prevent them, when come to pardon them: set the power of God against
the strength of them all; believe it, that the grace of God is sufficient,
either to prevent us, or preserve us. He is in great danger (who in any) but of
all in these potent tentations, goes by his own wit, or reason, or worth, or
strength: He is in safe case, who can say, I deserve nothing, I can do
nothing but hurt my self, and make work for sin and Satan; I mean to put
all upon GOD, who will work mightily in me, and for me; but the grace of God
which is with me; 1 Cor 5. 1
he is all in all, Gal. 20.
he will do all or nothing, that he may have all the praise of his grace.

The helps which serve in several for every particular assault might be many;
some we will propose, and first for those tentations which are in things of
God, then in things of man; for God, we are much assaulted to Atheism, and
Blasphemy; to Atheism, as the greatest sin that is, in that it smites at the
root of all, for to say the truth, all sin is from Atheism: for who would
sin, did he then verily think, that there were a God that saw all, and would
punish all; and such a God, God must be, or no God: and to Atheism, for when
we have sinned, sin does draw toward Atheism, exceedingly wipes out all
notions of a Deity as much as it can; and when we are in sin, we must be
either willing to get out of it by repentance, or else we shall be willing to
turn Atheists; the best of our play then, being to feed our selves with a
conceit, that all is but talk to hold men in awe, and that there is indeed
neither heaven nor hell, no place of torment; that when we dye all is gone, no
otherwise than with a Beast: when the conscience will not get quiet by turning
to God by repentance, Animus qui multorum scelerum sibi conscius est, etc.
then it will seek to quiet it self by unbelief, bearing it self in hand,
Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 6. Hom 17.
that there is no such thing as hell to torment men in: consider withal, that
Satan does all he can to make men Atheists, because, when there is no fear of
God before men's eyes, they will sin all manner of sins that the devil
would have them sin. So Psalm. 14. The foolish has said in his heart there is
no God, what follows? They are corrupt, they have done abominable works; thus
then, when once men take to Atheism, they grow most corrupt and do abominable
works; there is no hoe in sinning then, for what should or can keep the wit and
will of man in, when once we conceit, that there is no such thing as God: the
devil cannot be a flat Atheist, for he believes and trembles; and were it
nothing but the sense he has of the wrath of God, tormenting: why? That is
enough to prove, that Satan does fully and undoubtedly acknowledge a Divine
power. He is not an Atheist, because he cannot, because he shall not, but yet
he bears good will to Atheism, because that sin does much advantage his
kingdom Saint James does prove, C. 1. v. 13.
that God tempts no man, because himself cannot be tempted with evil: by
nature he does hate sin, and therefore he cannot tempt to sin: and Satan
could not tempt Eve till he had sin; nor Eve Adam, till she had sin her self:
all this proves not, but that Satan may and does tempt us to Atheism, a sin
which he himself hates not: for though he cannot sin the sin himself, (as the
devil cannot do the act of many sins, as Adultery) yet he loves the sin; it
is not for want of will that he is not an Atheist; for he would give any thing,
he could turn Atheist, and find some kind of ease, by thinking there were no
God at all: and it is a sin which is incompatible with the estate of a damned
Angel; but now his desire being to damn souls, and this being the most
damning sin that is: he does use all means, to wipe out of the heart of man,
all impression of the Godhead, and the best men that be, have too many
thoughts this way; and (as I showed) it is the masterveine in our Original
lust; and were it not for the law of nature, our sin and Satan would make
monstrous flat Atheists of us all out of hand; but God has so wrought in us,
Perk. Of imaginat. cap. 3.
an impression of a Deity, being the maine pillar of the law of Nature, that we
never can possibly, nor all the devils in hell coming in with their forces,
Calvin. Inst. l. 1. c. 3. Sect. 1. Clem.
bring our hearts to an utter extinguishment of that law, Alex. in Protreptico.
and that principle of natures law; and we do find, that our deepest Atheists
in the world, Dici frequenter audimns O Deus. Cyprian. de Idol. vanit. Molin.
D^ cognit. Dei. p. 7.
when in extremity, and put to it with some sudden affrightment, to use to cry
O God aloud, and therefore this corruption and tentation, is with the more ease
opposed and answered: a man has on his side the works of nature, the law of
nature, the law and fire of his conscience, fearing and trembling at the wrath
to come, but when all is done, that which must and only will hold us against
the tentation when it is strongly put to by Satan, is to fly to the word of
God. The Word says, that there is a God, and therefore I will believe that
there is a GOD: out of tentation, other considerations taken from nature and
diverse acts of Divine providence may stop the mouth of our Lust, which would
not have God in all, Psa. 10. 4.
that is, in any of our thoughts; but when once we are set upon with some
fierce tentation, I would wish al Christians to do these things; the first is
not to enter into dispute with his own reason, for the understanding of man,
is too weak, and too short, to reach the comprehension of a Deity: he that
shall take in his own thoughts, and muse about the nature and infinite Being
of God, shall but let in Satan the more: the counsel then I am bold to give to
the poor Christian, is, in any hand not to study this point, but to take his
mind off, from thinking and disputing this argument, lest he come to say in
his heart, I cannot conceive what God is, and therefore I doubt me there is no
such being. Away then with all reasoning and syllogismes about that subject. 2.
Then cleave to the Word and say though my reason cannot tell what to make of
it, tho lust in me, say there is no God at al, tho Satan say it that there is
no God, and most do live as though there were no God; yet because it is in the
Word, the Scripture says it, and I must and will and do believe it; we must
see both God and Heaven and all in the Word. Tit. 1. 16.
Doubts I know, that have any ground, 2 Pet. 2. 1.
ought to be scanned, 2 Timothy 3. 5
disputed, answered: but Atheism is a denial of the first principle of all
Religion; Mala and impia corsuetudo, etc.
and therefore the best way is to begin and end with the Word, Cie. de Not.
Deor. l. 1.
and to know that such a principal, as is the essence and existence of a GOD
ought not to be so much as questioned. It is a mere scruple, and the safest
way is to reject it as soon and as often as it does come; put it off, as a
thing neither worth nor fit for consideration; we shall find that by often
rejecting such scruples, the conscience will be better confirmed and settled,
than by going about by reason and arguments to answer them. He that shall go
about by the force of his own wit to conquer his Atheism, is in great danger
to fall into some degrees of it; for when he sees that reason cannot do it,
and find out, what this God is, he will come to question all, and to think that
there is no such being. He then does best, who does dispute least, and in the
heat of the tentation, rests himself wholly on the Word.

2. For tentations of Blasphemy, Job. 2. 9.
as Curse God and dye: the servants of God are more afraid of them than hurt;
they are rather bugbeares than such as use to produce in them any real
effects: they carry with them such a deal of horror that they seldom take;
for when once we confess a true GOD, it will make our hair stare to think
of blaspheming him, and so we fall into pitious moodes of terror and horror,
which keeps us from the sin it self: but we must set down what we conceive
may do us help this way.

1. We must get an assurance that God does love us, and then we shall love him,
and love always thinks and speaks well; but if we once take a thought and it
grow firm in us, that God does hate us and will curse us, we will hate him
again and be ready to curse him: and this is incident to us in times of some
great afflictions; as in Jobs case, when God does handle us sore, and worse
than he commonly does others: and we find some circumstances, that we cannot
fetch a president for in the world; never was the like before, then we begin
to apprehend some hard dealing in it, and we grow to conclude, that sure God
does hate us, and then we will be even with him and hate him again. It is
natural and usual for hatred to breed hatred; and when we abhor and hate
God, we begin to enter into some terms of Blasphemy: we all hate God by
nature, but yet there is a further measure of hatred wrought in us to God, when
we conceive, that out of very malice and spleen toward us, he does use us as
he never did nor does use any other; and in this case our very stomachs will
rise, and our blood will swell against the LORD GOD Almighty. To prevent and
cure this, we are to know, that no afflictions be they ever so great, usual,
and unheard of, are any certain signs at all of Gods anger, much less of his
hatred: Job was the first, who was ever used as he was, and his wife showed
her self a weak and a foolish woman; thence to gather the hatred of God to
her and her husband. Jonas had a cross that the world never saw the like
before, yet it was no fruit of Gods hatred. Jacob had sore and heavy
afflictions, yet it went ever for truth, Mal. 1. 2.
(Jacob have I loved) he loved him, when? When he afflicted him. Esau had
more outward matters to his mind than ever Jacob saw: and many great Lords
were of his family, and yet, Esau have I hated;) hold it then, that God does
love us, and when we have this persuasion in us; all the devils in hell, and
all the lusts in Original sin can never make us blaspheme our GOD, whom we
love, and of whom we have this mind, that he does love us: say then, he
loves me, and I love him, and then, one cannot be brought to sin the sin of
Blasphemy. 2. We must get the pardon of our sins, repent we of all our
iniquities, and then the Cross can never wring from us words of blasphemy:
when we are in great sorrows Satan will tempt very strongly that way, and we
fear what we shall do in times and cases of great extremity: I fear me, says
the poor Christian, what I shall do in great afflictions; repent we of our
sins and fear nothing: it is not the greatness of the Cross, but it is the
guilt of sin working with the sting of the Cross, which makes men in their
tribulation to blaspheme. Rev. 16. 11. we read, that the fifth Angel powered
down his viol on the seat of the Beast; and it is written, that they gnawed
with their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the GOD of heaven, because of their
pains and their sores, (now mark) and repented not of their deeds. Here we
see that it was not for their pain, so much as for that they repented not of
their deeds, that they blasphemed. Have we repented, or have we not? If we
have not, then though our pain be not so much we are in danger to blaspheme:
but if we have repented be our pain ever so much, we need not fear, we
shall not blaspheme.

3. Say the worst, have we blasphemed? Yet we must repent of our blasphemy and
hope in God: to despair, is to put our selves out of Gods mercy and
protection: to despair by reason of Blasphemy, is a worse sin than
Blasphemy, they are both against the goodness of GOD, but yet despair, is
against his goodness, his mercy, and his truth. I confess it is an horrible
crime to blaspheme against God; and so much the worser, because it is a sin
somewhat like the impardonable blasphemy against the Holy Ghost: neither is it
in the will of every man, to say, where the difference lies betwixt them. Deus
optimus, maximus; optimus, is before maximus. Vid. Molin. De Cognit. Dei. p. 25.
Besides, other sins are against God in his Greatness, Government, but this
of Blasphemy, does speak against the Goodness of God; and God as he is
represented to us, stands more on his Goodness than his Greatness; and
therefore also this sin of Blaspeming has been ever held amongst the greatest
of sins: all which must teach us by all means to beware of this sin, and we
may the easier take heed of it, and save our selves from it, because it being
against our natural inbred principle of a Deity: Nature it self is afraid of
this sin, which is a great means to stay us from the sin-it self. Satan, I
know, is a great blasphemer, and he will assay hard to it to make us to
blaspheme; but we must set the Word and Spirit of God against it, and let the
Law of nature do all it can against it too. And if at any time we have bin to
blame this way, yet we must know that there is a pardon to be had: I was,
says Paul a blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1. 13.
and Paul is in heaven; and which is worse, he compelled men to blaspheme, Act.
26. 11
yet on his true repentance, all went well with Paul; and so it may and will
with us, if we return as Paul did Christ has it, Mat. 12. 31. That blasphemy
against God is a sin, which may on the same terms, that any the least sin
that is, shall and must be forgiven, I mean, on our repentance. There is a
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which is a sin unto death, and there is no
repentance for this sin, nor no hope; the cause is, because no man can repent
unto life, except God give him the grace: and we have it revealed, that there
is a decree passed in heaven, that the Lord will never afford this sinner the
grace to repent. Diverse other sinners never have this favor done to them as to
repent, but all sinners of this sort are past all hope for ever. There is a
difference, betwixt this blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, and this blasphemy
against God and Christ, not only in the measure, but in the very kind; I know
Satan would feign put it upon us, that we have sinned against the Holy Ghost
when it is no such matter: on ignorant Christians he lays this, that when
they sin against their knowledge and conscience that then it is the sin against
the holy Ghost, when the Spirit has bin at them not to sin, yet they sin and
grieve and vex the Spirit of God: then Satan makes his advantage, oh says he,
this is to sin against the Holy Ghost that it is a sin against the Holy Ghost,
I do not deny; but that it is the sin against the Holy Ghost, is false: I
prove it to be false, because this sin is pardoned. Moreover, we speak of
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; now that every sin against the Holy Ghost
must needs be Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, cannot be proved: and when we
go so far as to blaspheme God, then we make a cry, now it is too late to
think of repenting; this is, says he, that unrepentable and unpardonable
sin against the Holy Ghost. Our answer must be, by denying this to be that
sin, our reason must be, because we are sorry for it, and were it to do
again, we would not do it for a world: but the sinner against the Holy
Ghost, is no whit sorry for his sin, his heart never aches for his offense,
but would have all do it as well as himself, and is desirous to have hell as
full as he could: and he does even wish withal his heart, that wife, that
children, that parents, that brethren, that neighbors, that all might
blaspheme the Holy Ghost as well as himself. It is then nothing but a policy
of Satan, to play upon the ignorance of men, as touching the nature and effects
of this sin, and to bear them in hand, that when they have blasphemed God,
they have blasphemed the Holy Ghost: but we must hold a maine difference to
lie betwixt this blasphemy, against God the Father, and the Holy Ghost, that as
the persons differ, so does the sins against the several persons. As long then
as our blasphemy is against the first and not against the third, we may be
safe; it is but to repent and all is well: they do not prize the infinite
mercy of God according to the infinite worth of it, who think their sin of
blasphemy against God, too great for him to pardon, as though it were possible
for man to sin a sin, which Gods mercy being simply infinite, had not
enough in it to forgive it. This their error is worse than the first to think
so meanly of the rich and high and boundless mercy of the most Eternal and
Infinite GOD: we must now learn better to prize the mercy of God; and say, I
cannot once repent of a sin, be it ever so great and maine, but the mercy of
God is ready to forgive it. Could the Blasphemer against the Holy Ghost repent,
he must have his pardon: conceive we hope of pardon and then we will return
to the Lord by repentance, and the Lord will take away the guilt and wash away
the stain of this great sin.

The third tentation is of perjury: Quo in loco a facinore abhorrebit, etc.
Arist.
Here we must take great heed that we do not forswear our selves, chiefly in
open Court; where, Rhet. l. 1. c. 14.
if any where a man should show himself, a religious, Esta bonus miles, etc.
a true, a just, and an honest man; Iuven. Sat. 8
a fruit it is, of deep Atheism to perjure ones self, and perjured persons
be hated of God and man, wherefore the conscience will deeply and bitterly
accuse for this sin of perjury. I could wish all men who love their own
quiet, and have a desire to sleep in a whole conscience, that they would take
heed that they do not take a false oath: come what will, rather dye a thousand
deaths, it is much against the light of nature, 1 Timothy 1. 10.
and more against the light of Scripture; Lev. 19. 12
and these two will fly in our faces with wild fire, and except God be
merciful to us, make us weary of God and of our selves. And me thinks (by the
way) Women may comfort themselves, against the infirmities and troubles which
have ever bin afflicted on their sex, 1 Timothy 2. 14.
since they were first in the transgression; I say, that sex may see a mercy
that they are not so subject to this sin of formal perjury as men are; they
serve not in Iuries grand or petty, they are not brought in Courts, to take
oaths in Homages and the like; they serve not the office of Churchwardens,
and so are not sworn and deposed any thing so often as men, and hence they
have a great freedom from sinning this vexing sin over men have, which I
would have them thank God for, and amongst other matters, take this as a
recompense for those many inflictions and revenges, which God at first laid on
that sex; so that in respect of this sin and some other tentations, that they
are free from, over men be: they may when they do think of it, even thank
God that they were made women and not men: let not then Satan bring us into
this brake, it is hard getting out of it. Eccl. 9. 2.
Fear an oath, and of all such oaths, 1 Samuel 14. 26.
wherein we do wrong and hurt to men, for though there be sometimes some
corruption in it, as tasting of self-love to our selves, yet for certain,
sins wherein we wrong men whom we see do so much the more torment and rack
the conscience of man; and many men have mightily miscarried for this offense
and sin of perjury; wherefore beware; and now to provide for the worst, we must
tell the man who has done this sin, Ier. 10. 2.
that there is hope in Israel concerning this sin also. David himself was
not still as good as his oath, as in the case of Mephibosheth, 1 Samuel 20. 15,
16.
he fell short of that oath of the Lord which he made to Ionathans house and
family; and because instances work easier on weak spirits than Rules, I would
have such to think of Peter, who did forswear and renounce the person of
Christ, and when? But in his troubles; and where? But in the High Priests Hall,
and who? Why Peter a chief Apostle in the love and favor of Christ his
master; and is not Peter in heaven? Tears of repentance will fetch out the
deepest stain that this sin of perjury can possibly make, but it is the Rule
must settle us at last; and it is, that if we repent of any sin be it never
so great in substance, in circumstances it is as no sin to us. Psa. 32. 5.
I said I will acknowledge my sin; he was but about to do it, and God forgave
the iniquity (the guilt) of his sin. Ier. 3. 12.
If we confess our sins (indefinitely, set down our sins without exception,)
GOD is faithful and just to forgive them; it stands upon him in respect of his
Justness to be as good as his word, to forgive all repentant sinners all their
sins. S. Job 33. 27. If one say I have sinned, he will deliver his soul: say
peccavi, and cry GOD mercy, and we shall (says Solomon) have mercy; mercy
presently, in pardoning of our sins, and mercy, now some and then some, in
healing our iniquities. Never did any man confess his sin to God, Pro. 28. 13
but he went away with his pardon; wicked men may confess to their fellows,
and to good men they may, as Saul did to David; but it is an harder matter than
so, for a man to confess to God, except it be for company, or for outward
glory: but for a man to take God aside to confess alone to him, I think a
wicked man cannot do that. I find no instance in the Word, that ever any
unregenerate man did it. A man had need have hope of pardon to confess to the
Judge: Adam did fly from God, fell to shifting, and so we do all, while we
are as he then was, out of the state of grace. I mean not the grace of
election; no man can have hope of pardon but by faith: and by that I do hold,
that it is a sign of a godly man, to confess all alone to God; and then I can
never believe that a man will confess his sin honestly and ingeniously betwixt
GOD and his own soul except he hate that sin. Now how a wicked man can come
to the hatred of his sin, is past my skill to understand. To come back I say
despair not, it is worse than perjury, it makes GOD a lier, or worse than a
lier, it accuses him of a kind of perjury; for a man to say, there is no
hope, no pardon to be had, repent we never so much; since God has not only said
it, Ezekiel. 18.
but sworn it, that he will not the death of a repentant sinner; repent and
be pardoned.

The fourth is breaking of Vows: a vow broken does crack the comfort of man's
conscience exceedingly. A vow is defined to be a religious promise made to
God, I say, that every vow is such a promise, but al such promises are not
vows, for a vow properly and strictly taken, is, when a promise is made to GOD
of this or that within our power, with condition of obtaining some what at Gods
hands; other promises are simply made, and absolutely without any such
condition of getting any thing from the hands of God; and thus Baptism is
soundly and learnedly denied to be formally a vow. Abbots ans. to Bishop. c.
1. Sect. 1. p. 995.
The Schools teach us, that two things are of the very Essence of a vow.
Bonav. l. 4. D. 38. a. 1. q. 1. Resol.
1. A promise. 2. An obligation and binding of a man's self, and thus we see
he that breaks his vow violates two things. Fractio voti est quaedam
Infidelitatis species. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 88. 3. c.
1. His duty. 2. His fidelity, he deals undutifully and unfaithfully with
God, and from this it is, that breach of a solemn vow does so bite the
conscience, because we do not only fail, but (which goes nearer) forfeit our
fidelity, A double bond is broken, and a double blow is given to the
conscience, and the mind is made to be full of trouble: and now because there
breeds such a stir in the conscience of a man, when once he has broken his
vow, therefore I would wish, that men would be but sparing in making of vows,
there is use and place for vows and great good they do, but it is a duty
^^^^er for a strong Christian than for every young beginner. It is strange to
see, how Satan does push on every boy and girl on any occasion, to run into
a corner and there to make vows; it shows that the duty is not so spiritual,
for a man to tie himself to do that he should do, without any such
obligation, in that we find our selves too too forward to run into vows,
whereas to comfortable duties we are unwilling enough. God loves a willing
people, and we should serve him with a free spirit, Ps. 110. 3.
and vows, Ps. 51. 12.
which are as shackles, are not to be used but in some cases of some
necessity; when otherwise we cannot hold our selves to some particulars in the
worship of God, or in our daily life: Aquin. 22. q. 88.
and his opinion is not sound (as I think) who says, that a work done with a
vow is more laudable and acceptable; than the same work and duty done without
a vow. A vow broken does punish the heart of a Godly man extremely; no man can
say how much, but they who have felt the smart of it: and when rash vows are
made, Satan was never so earnest to move us to make the^, but he does as much
to make us break them, and then, thou art a child of God and a breaker of
vows. Aw^v man, never once go about to think, that there is any favor for
thee in heaven. My advice is then:

First, that we be sparing in vowing, since we break many, and keep few. On
Gal.
Doctor Stanpicius (says Luther) was wont to say, I have vowed to GOD above a
thousand times, that I would become a better man, but I never performed that
which I vowed: hereafter I will make no such vow, for I have now learned by
experience, that I am not able to perform it. This is too much, to say one
will never vow again, who can say what need one may have; what good a vow may
do one? I rather follow him who wills us to vow, Greentham on Psa. 119. v. 106.
but for a time; as a man who has been overtaken with drink in such and such
places, company, or so, may do well to tie himself by a vow, not to come
where they are for a Month or so, and then see what he can do, whether he can
forbear without a vow, and if he can, that is taken best at the hands of GOD;
but if we find some relic of the humor still, then vow for a Month more,
and so at length by times, the conquest will be had; to bind our selves by
perpetual vows is not so convenient, because our nature is even made to break
those bonds that we do bind our selves with for continuance, Quod licet
ingratum est etc. Ovid Amor. lib. 2.
and our mouths will water, Vid. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 35. a. 1 ad 4. Becan. Sum.
tom. 2. tract. 2. c. 5. q. 5. Sect. 6.
our flesh will itch the more to break them: wherefore I have held it an high
point of wisdom, first, to vow no oftener than needs must, and then to do it
but for a short period of time; and whether we do it oftener or seldomer, for
a longer, or a shorter space, to do all by the grace of God, and never once
think to make or to keep our vow so made, but by and through the only and
the special hand of God: his strength must do it, and therefore a vow made
without prayer is never kept.

Secondly, but to provide for the worst; make the case that we have broken our
vows, yet we must not spend our spirits too much with hellish melancholy, so
we shall carry an hell in our consciences, our tormenting our selves with
extremities of legal sorrows will do us no good, nor God no pleasure; we may
hurt our selves by it, and that is all the good which comes of punishing our
selves over and above. The way is to return to the Lord with all speed, and to
bring us to God, we must know, that it is no such sin (as bad as it is) but
that we may be Gods servants for all that; for hardly was there over a more
godly man than Jacob; Genesis 28. 20, 21, 22.
and he we know vowed a vow, and it was to make that stone to be GODS
Chapel, and he being now but a poor man does promise, that in case God
would give him but bread to eat, and clothes to put on, that God should be
his God, and have the tenth of all: but we find that God did not only give
him necessaries but abundances; Genesis 32. 10
he came over with his staff, but he returned with two armies, and now being
made rich, we find no great remembrance of, nor haste to perform his vow. One
would think, if ever man were bound to be as good as his vow, it was Jacob;
yet we find he did nothing in it for a great time, but lingered, as though he
had no care of his promise made to God: for we read, Genesis 31. 13. some twenty
years after the making of that his vow, God was feign by an Angel to pluck
him by the ear, to give him an Item in plain words, saying, I am the God of
Bethell, where thou annointedst the pillar, and where thou vowedst a vow; now
arise, get thee out from this land, and return unto the land of thy kindred.
One would think here were plain English, and round dealing enough, and yet
for all this Jacob is slow and makes no speed to hie him up to Bethel. View the
particulars. 1. I am the God of Bethel. 2. Where thou annointedst the Pillar.
3. Where thou vowedst a vow unto me, all are as so many instances, to put him
in mind of his promise and vow made to God: that he might now arise at last,
and be as good as his word to God: yet for all this Jacob lies behind, delays
the performance of his vow, which sloth and sin of his, Genesis 33.
God did punish. First, by Esaus lying in wait for him. Genesis 34.
Secondly, by having his only daughter deflowred. Thirdly, by the rage and
murder committed by his sons; upon which horrible and hypocritical
Massacre, Genesis 34. 30
the good old man cried out, that they had made him stink; and that now the
next would be, that the Nations would unite and destroy him and his house. Now
the Lord took him, when his heart was down with those heavy tidings and
grievous fears; and just in the nick, God said unto him; Arise, go up to
Bethel and dwell there, Genesis 25. 1.
and make there an Altar unto God, that appeared unto thee, when thou fled'st
from the face of Esau thy brother: and then both long and late, yet at least
being drawn to it, Jacob does perform his vow. It is true, he did it though
it were long first, yet we see, the Lord was feign to fire him out of his
negligence, and to force him to remember himself. His putting off so often,
his long delaying was as great a sin, as our very breaking of our vow,
neither had he ever done it, had he bin let alone; and yet Jacob was all this
while a dear servant of God, and he was pardoned his delaying, his vow, and he
is in heaven: let us not think but our case is good, albeit we have made and
broken many a vow. Repentance will come and heal all again. The sum is,
that we make no more vows than needs must, since Satan is apt to thrust us on
our vows, knowing that our nature is sick to break out when it is so bound;
and when we have failed, then he roares and cries, there is nothing left but
hell and desperation for a covenant-breaker with God; and therefore we must be
choice this way, never to vow, but when we are truly called unto it, and when
we are called to it, to vow, and fear nothing, since we vow not on our own
strength, but only on the power and grace of God: Non sitis p^gri ad vovendum:
etc. Aug. in Psa. 75.
were we to perform the vow by any force, any wit of our own, men should
rather vow, never to vow, than to vow at all: but since we go, by the help,
presence, and assistance of God, when we have a calling to it, vow and spare
not, and if we do fall so far as to break our vows, Ps. 76. 11.
yet let us hold our own, we are not the first, others have done it, and are in
heaven; it is a pardonable sin, repentance will take up the matter betwixt
God and us, and make us as good and perhaps better friends than ever. The best
friendship is often after a falling out, and we must know, that many times
repentance pleases God better, than never to have done the sin, because it
humbles a man more, Luke 15. 7.
and drives a man more out of himself; Ma. 18. 12.
and there is as much says in it, for a man to believe that God on his mere
repenting will forgive him, as there is in holding out against the tentation,
and not breaking the vow at all: neither is it besides the book, to say, that
there is as much grace in it for a man when he is down to repent and return,
as there is in not falling at all; for by our fall the powers of the soul are
weakened, the force of grace is decayed, and the strength of our sinful matter
is confirmed; and the conscience of a man after a fall is as a distempered
lock, the more we tamper with it, the worse; all this shows, that it is a
sign of much love, and great favor of God to repent of a great and foul
fault; it is the vomit of the soul, and of all physic none so difficult and
hard as it is to vomit, and therefore we must comfort our selves and say, I
confess I did God great wrong in breaking my promise, and did highly provoke
him; but I now see, that he means all good to my soul, in that he has
given me the heart and grace to repent of my sin, and this is a fruit of an
upright heart to take displeasure at sin. There is I know an uprightness, and
that is of obedience when we sin but a few sins in comparison: so Ezekiah
comforted himself, Isa. 38. 3.
in that he walked uprightly before the Lord.

2. Another of repentance, Respicere nihilo facilius est, etc. Arist. Polit. l.
4. c. 1.
when we catch many sore falls, sin many great and heinous sins, but yet we pick
up al again, by mourning and repentance; and so David did, and his heart was
all out as upright as ever Hezekiahs was, he was a man after Gods own heart,
and carries as large-testimonies of his uprightness and sincerity, 1 Kin. 11.
4. 15. 3.
as the Old testament has any. Now this uprightness of repentance is as
sincere and shows as true an heart to God, as the other of obedience; rest we
then our comfort on this point, that say, we have not kept our selves to our
covenant and our vow: yet saving that it must and will cost us sorrow upon
sorrow, our repenting of our breach of promise, is as pleasing to God, and
ought to be as comfortable to us as our Not sinning would have been; and since
God thinks never the worse of us for our breaking our vow, we must not be more
just, or more holy than God, we must not think ever the worse of our selves.

The last is unbeleefe and a kind of Atheism, as touching Christ Jesus.
Atheism I call it (with the Apostle,) since he that is without Christ is
without God: Ephesians. 2. 12.
and when a man is a spiritual man, he shall find, that his unbeleefe this
way will mightily punish his conscience, for lose our hold here and all is
lost, it being not faith in God but Christ which does save us; and this is an
high and an hard point of Divinity, here a man is put upon a total denial of
himself, sense, reason and all (but mere pure faith) is against it. A man
has a law of nature, and principles answerable, which teach him somewhat
concerning the Being of God; So Romans 2 15. Paul says, not that the Gospel,
but that the worke^ of the Law is written in our heart.
a man has in him (as he is a man) somewhat which will give a kind of sight
of GOD; but for Christ, his Nature, his Birth, his Offices, his Death, his
Resurrection, natures law has not a letter in it to teach us any thing
concerning these matters: 1 Timothy 3. 16.
they are Mysteries, heavenly Riddles, nothing can spell them and find them out
but faith alone; they are ours only by revelation; as good go about to
foresee future contingents, Mat. 11. 25.
as to find out any thing as touching Christ Jesus, except by the Word and
Spirit only. Things in the moral law, find some seeds in the light and law of
nature; but ask nature at the best as touching Christ, and the answer is, that
the Gospel is foolishness. 1 Cor. 1. 20. 23.
God to be made man, by dying, to conquer death, to rise, and not rot in the
grave, and for manhood, to put it self for the maine of heaven and happiness,
on one who (...) as the worst of the three, was crucified betwixt two thieves,
these are things impossible and incredible to flesh and blood to believe. Mat.
16. 17.
Now here is a field yielding a world of perplexities to the disputer, and
therefore our only course must be, to become fools in our selves, 1 Cor. 1. 20.
that we may be wise in Christ, to rely only on the Word of God, to find out
our Christ in the word, 1 Cor. 3. 18.
to circumcise the eyes of reason; it is faith must do it, I shall lose my
self except I put my self upon, It is written. Say, though I cannot find a
reason of things believed, as touching Christ Jesus, yet I do find a reason
of my believing them, and that is, because I find it so in the Word: I must
live and dye by the book, the Bible must carry it. How do I know that there is
any such thing as sin, but because it is written; I must then pass my soul
upon it. First, that there is Christ. Secondly, that Jesus is the Christ.
Thirdly, what this Christ is, and what he did and does for the salvation of the
Church. Fourthly, that he is, my Christ, my Jesus, my Savior: I say, I must
dye upon it, because these things are in and out of the Word; many scruples
break in, but dare any man set it under his hand, that Jesus is not the Christ,
that any else is the Savior? No. Are we not ready when we are at the worst
(if we be called) to subscribe with our hands to this proposition, that Jesus
borne of the Virgin Mary, was and is the Messiah, the Savior of his people.
Why then, down with all oppositions and dubitations, dash them al out of
countenance with this; I do believe in Jesus Christ, because it is in the
Word, the eye and hand of faith must do it, dye with this in our mouths (he
is he) because the word says so: and I do believe it the rather, because
Satan and lust cannot abide to hear of it. Hold we our selves then to the
letter and tenor of the Gospel, and the tentation will blow away: faith works
strongest at last, where reason is most against it, and we find dying men
doubt least of all about the Articles of Christ, and the principles of faith;
it being a received axiom in the Church of Christ, that says works best and
clearest, when it works alone, and it works alone in things wherein reason
says no, but the word of God says yea. Thus much concerning the particulars
in the first Table; now follows to be treated of some chief of the second
table. The thing we must begin with is, that the pangs of conscience which
arise out of sins in the second Table, were generally greater and stronger
than of the first; and it is, because that there is less of the light and law
of nature in us, of the worship of God, than of the duties of our neighbor; we
have here a double sting, the spiritual conscience cries, and the natural
conscience cries; and when two come together to cry, that cry must needs be
great: it is the better to maintain order and discipline amongst men; that
there is more of natures law in the things of men, than of God, and a greater
light to discern those than these. The world must stand and hold in some
quiet, til the period of it expire, which could not be, were it not for this
bond and law of nature and thus we have it, that in weaker Christians
especially, greatest troubles of mind come, from matters of the second table.
And if you ask what the matters of the second table be, which do most vex the
conscience of a man, and do prove the worst tentations; we answer that men
are usually most disquieted which murder against the sixth, uncleanness,
against the seventh, and theft, against the eighth Commandment. Disobedience
to Parents and Authority, as it is first in the second table, so caeteris
paribus, it is the greatest sin and has the sharpest punishment; Pro. 30. 17*
the Ravens of the Valleys shall pick out their eyes, which is never set down
for a punishment of murder it self; we read not that he that is choleric
with his brother must dye; Mat. 15. 4* (...).
but he that, but speaks evil of father or mother, is a man of death by the
word of God: but yet these cases do not use to stagger the conscience most, in
most, bebecause it is not so flat against the light of Nature, neither are they
held such heinous faults amongst men, and we use to judge too much of the
greatness and soulenesse of sins by custom and the estimate of men, we do
account those the worst sins, not ever which the Word says are the greatest
sins; but such as amongst men in the time and place where we live, go for the
mighty sins, and trouble of conscience does arise from our opinion and
apprehension we have of things, which by the way must teach us, not altogether
to be led by the wrack of our conscience; for conscience is blind in all
unregenerate men, and in the best, it is in part defiled and corrupt and
imperfect, and therefore it is mistaken and cannot be our rule, Romans 9. 1.
and it is our sin, to set our conscience in the room of the Word of God, when
conscience speaks in the Holy Ghost and according to the word, then it must be
heard, else conscience does sometimes complain most of some things that, are
no sins at all, as we see in the Pharisie, who was troubled in mind, if he
should chance to eat with unwashen hands, Mat. 15. 2.
and through misprision and error, Mar. 7. 2.
they thought they did GOD good service, Ioh. 16. 2.
to kill Christ and his Apostles, and therefore we must not set up conscience
too high; put it not in Gods place but when it speaks for God and from God,
and has light enough to see what is what, then when it speaks out of the
word, the conscience must be heard; God is greater than our heart, 1 Ioh. 3.
20*
and therefore we must hold to him and to his Word, which only is his
Interpreter in this world: it concludes not then simply, to say, my conscience
tells me it is a sin, my conscience tells me I am not in Gods favor; but to
return, we must know that those sins do trouble most, which do most disturb
the society of men, for it is the natural conscience that gives the heaviest
blow; there is most light and sight in the natural conscience of man, in those
matters which concern humane societies of men; and so because blood, lust and
theft do undermine the state of mankind, and cast all into confusion: hence it
is that these sins make such a cry as they do, and that not simply, because
they are the greatest that be; nor for that they are most against the nature
or will of God, but because they do most hurt to men, and are most against the
order and government of mankind; before I descend to those particulars, I
would have men to ask the question, whether their trouble be, because the
tentation is bad, or base; or bad and base both.

1. If we be troubled only because the sin is base, and brings with it, or
after it, the shame of the world, than it is from sin and pride that we are
so vexed, and that is made a matter of conscience, which is wholly or chiefly a
matter of self-respects; or if it be within our selves and secret, and yet out
of a conceit of our selves, we are much afflicted that we should be haunted to
do, or drawn to act such and such vile and base corruptions or some
dishonorable passions, then this is from spiritual pride, and all this is no
true trouble of conscience at all; we may know whether it be thus or not, if
that other sins as gross and great in Gods sight, which have in them or after
them no shame, nature shames not at them, the world does not cry shame of them,
but (rather as many sins of profit and delight) are in credit in the world,
and do bring respect amongst men; now if we find, that such sins do pass
without any such trouble: the conscience says as much as nothing, though we
be convinced that they are sins; if thus, then the case is clear, that it is a
trouble which we make, and not which sin or God does make. It is shame as
shame, not sin as sin, that does cause all this cry; it is not for the sin,
but for the effect of sin that we thus complain.

2* If bad and not base, whether to the face of the world or to the natural
principles which are in us, then the troubles that we feel in the conscience
are spiritual and sincere, they are for sin as sin, because it is naught,
or rather, because it is for bidden by God; for many things have no moral
naughtiness in them, yet are sins, because they are forbidden by God; and if
these things trouble the mind, such wounds come the right way and God will
cure them: as because we hear not the Word, receive not the Sacrament, which
in the dictates of nature were no sins, had not Gods written law bin: In a
word, when we find that the blow our conscience does give us, is because the
fact is a fault, a thing forbidden by God: here the matter does run right, and
it is very conscience which moves in that case.

3. When bad and base, both the terror is great, and it proves an occasion of
great humiliation and casting a man down; we are so proud and high in our
own conceits, that base tentations which produce inward shame to the mind of
a man, and if they come abroad, outward shame and scorn amongst men, do
mightily abase a man, and are an excellent cure for spiritual pride. Here we
shall find a mixed passion working fears in the heart, and complaints in the
conscience of a man; for as the sin is bad, so it does trouble because it
threatens the wrath of God, and is accompanied many times with a fore-feeling
of the wrath to come. As it is base so it does draw over the heart and
conscience of a man an inward blushing and shame; and I may say it, that true
internal shame, making the conscience red again with blushing, testifies
repentance more and rather than sorrow. A wicked man may grieve, but for this
spiritual intrinsicall shame, it is not in wicked men: we must note that an
outward shame is in the unregenerate, when they have sinned some sins which the
world does point at; this is a shame before man, and there is some inward shame
also, which wicked men do feel in themselves too, and that is in and for such
sins as are against the law of nature; and such conviction as general
illumination and common graces do cause: here the heart will blush, but in
such sins as are not known to be sins, but by the conviction of the spirit;
here to shame, Spiritual sins are not so base, as carnal sins:
to have an heart as red as fire, with a blushing before GOD, this is a good
thing and proper to the godly, 1. Because they are not so common to us with
Beasts.
and it is most, when the sins are base: think not that there is any sin which
is not base in it self, 2. Because they do not so take away the natural use
of reason.
but to us (and in comparison) we use to name some special sins, base sins;
this is that shame Paul means, Aquin. 2. 2. q. 144. a. 2. ad. 4. m and q 142.
a. 4. 0.
what fruit have you in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? To. 6. 21* Ye
are now, which shows that when, and whilst they were in the state of nature
they were not ashamed of them: Well then, a wicked man may grieve for sin,
because of the punishment feared or felt, or both, because there is wrath
hanging over his head by an hair, because sins lies at the door; Genesis 4. 7.
and here are selfe-respects out of love and care to our skin, because we would
not be punished here, or hereafter: but this shame is not because sin is
punishable, Arist. Rhet. 2. c. 6. Aqui. 2. 2. q. 144. a. 2.
but by reason that it is filthy, it arises from the turpitude of sin, and
this is hearty to make a stand at sin, because it is filthy and ugly. To be
ashamed of some effects of sin, as Adam in his fall, I mean at his nakedness,
Genesis 3. 7.
is in wicked men: but to have this inward shame in the conscience, because of
the innate filthiness and turpitude of sin; this is not in the wicked, nor in
their trouble of mind, and was not in Judas, when I say, there is not only
grief for sin as bad, as punishable; as bad, respecting God, as punishable
respecting our selves, but also a shame in the mind of a man that he cannot
look up for blushing, Luke 18. 13
then it is as it should be; Ps. 40. 12.
and the pang of conscience which comes from this sorrow and shame, is many
times very great, and this is a troublesome estate while it does last, but it is
not danger ou^.

To apply the three sins, I mentioned, viz. Theft, Uncleanness, Murder, do
smite home, partly because they be bad, and partly because they be base.

1. To begin with Theft, we must beware that we do not filch the worth of a
penny from any man, that which in our common notation is called theft, is more
base than the great sin of Rapine, and Robery, because that in rapine there is
some manhood and fortitude showed, Aquin. 2. 2. q. 144. ^. 2. ad ult.
such as it is: but in theft is nothing but a base mind; and because the law
is so strict and flat against theeving; the name of a thief is odious, and it
does pay our hearts home, and there is very much trouble of mind, Furem odio
habet and Sycophantam quisque Arist. Rhet. 1. c. 4.
because men do use to spit at this sin, and the reason is, rather because it
is a wrong to man, than for that it is a sin against God: and sure we must
see that we do keep clean fingers, that by no kind of unjust alienation,
we either take or keep any thing from any body which in right is his; we all
love to be truly and justly dealt with, and therefore nature it self, if it
may be heard speak, will cry fie and shame upon a false finger. Because then
it maks a breach into the meum and tuum of m^n, which we see rather, than for
that it does make a breach in the law of GOD which we see not; this sin does
clogge the consciences of men what ever the full cause be, we find that it does
pester the mind of man; and the conscience, held and hampered with a clogge,
is like a distempered lock which no key will open: we must therefore, to keep
our conscience as free as may be, beware that we do not touch that which is
another: but if we have, do, or shall, what then? We must free our minds
again by confession to God, and restitution to men. Here we see that a great
cause why these same sins of theft do urge the conscience so much, is, because
of the wrong done to men (whom we see) in that as soon as ever we have made
restitution, the mind begins to settle, and the heart to quiet it self
presently. I know if we have means so to do, we must give as a work of
charity, to express our thankfulness to God, a largess to the poor too, as
Zachous did: Luke 15. 8.
but the maine thing which quiets the conscience, is to restore, which is a
work of Justice, the other of Charity: this work of making restitution to the
party wronged, or to the poor in case of defect, that the party cannot be
known or had, will still the Allarum which the cry of unjustice arises in the
conscience of men. And by the way we may note, that the very cause why the
other sins of murder and uncleannes are more dangerous to the peace of our
consciences, is, because that in them there is no possible place left for
restitution (for who can restore to another their life or chastity?) But here,
in theevery there is, and therefore there lies a fair way to hush all in this
sin which does not in those. The sum is, take nothing from no man; it saves
a great deal of horror, if we have, then let him that stole, repent of the
sin, restore the damage, Ephesians. 4. 18.
and steal no more.

2 The next shall be murder, a sin that makes a foul and hellish noise in
the conscience, in that it deprives a man of his life, his best piece: I mean
not to speak of murdering our enemies, or plain killing any, as David did, to
avoid shame or so. Tentations to this sin, are amongst the people of God,
David for one, did it for once, and it did so cast him behind hand, that he
came not to himself about a year after, and then too, by the particular strok
of Nathans ministry; he himself was a Prophet and a rare Saint of God, Luke
15. 17
yet he lost himself for a great time; and Nathan being sent from God, was
feign to go about the bush, and at last to close with him; and to take him as
it were by the throat, and say, thou art the man; David had his fits of mind
in all this space betwixt, 2 Sa. 12. 7.
he roared, he cried, by reason of the quietness of his heart; Ps. 32, 4, 5.
his marrow was dried within him, he was like a chip or hearth, and therefore
this sin by all means must be avoided, and the occasions and causes of it: it
springs from anger and hatred, The cure in repentance* Quis homicida desperetsi
in spem redditus est, etc. Aug. tract. 28. in Joan. Evan.
and these irascible passions must be mortified, and to mortify them we must
deny our selves in our reason, else we shall say, when we are provoked and
abused, that we have reason to be angry; 1 Ioh. 3. 15.
and to beat down hatred we must beware of envy. Mat. 5. 21, 22.
Cain killed Abel for nothing but envy; and the Scribes and Pharisees did what
they did to Christ for very envy. 1 Ioh. 3. 12.
Down with these burning and provoking affections, Mat. 27. 18
and we are safe from the sin: but the tentations to murder, which follow many
of the people of God are to murder ones self, or ones nearest friends, as
parents, wife, children; the cause of this is diverse in selfe-murther, that
which makes way for this hellish motion is discontent, arising for some sin, or
from some heavy cross; and when we are in this case, then because we have not
faith to believe that it will ever be better; and are so full of pride, that
because we cannot be as we would be, we begin to think it is best not to be
at all: we must then labor for faith, to believe that one day it will mend;
if a sin, God will forgive it, if a cross, God will remove it, and to be
content to be any thing, it is no matter what, as long as we be out of hell, and
then this tentation will away: and of all, see that we despair not; for he
that is once out of hope, will desire to see the worst as soon as may be, and so
leap into their own death. Hold out, be patient, wait, stand still, and fee
the salvation of God; Ex. 14. 13
Satan will tempt the Lord Jesus to break his neck; Mat. 4. 6.
and are we better than our master? And when Moses, Eliah, Jonas, and others of
the best sort of Saints, were in a fit of discontent, and grew weary of their
lives, wishing for death I doubt not but Satan gave a push at them, to
dispatch and ease themselves of the present, by cutting off their own days.
Far be it from us then, to think that we are none of the Lords, because we
are tempted or followed with such hideous tentations; or that sure we shall at
last do it, since we are tempted to it long and often: No, no, thousands of
Saints have gone through this tentation; and have happily closed their eyes in
peace: our lives are not our own, the Lord gave them and it lies not in us, to
take away our own lives from our selves; our lives I say, are not our own,
and we neither ought nor can without GODS permission take our lives away. Man
in his life being so near himself as his life is, and the consequent being of
such danger, we must trust and hope that the Lord will hold our selves in
life: I mean not to give any way to any in this sin; for though I see that
many have been weary of their lives; yet in all the Word we read not of any
godly man or woman that ever did it: few escape the tentation that live out
their time; they are to follow Christ in that as in other tentations of Satan;
but in all the word, we read not of any of the generation of the just that ever
did it: that God who kept them, will, if we look up to him do as much for
us. A mavelous matter it is, serving much to humble us, that men who dares
not think of taking away the life of another, should be so pestered with
impulsions to stop their own breath; but to settle the point, we will remove
false means of ease, and set down the true way to peace in this malady.

1. A false means is for a man to yield to much to fears, so as to think to
avoid the tentation, by declining, and not by resisting; as some dare not carry
a knife about them, or when their knife is out, cast it from them, this is to
yield too much to Satan: neither does it help the matter, but rather keep the
tentation in. I will not say what may be fit, when a man is subdued and held
down by Satan, herein weakens may dispense; but while a man is in the
conflict, this is not the way: indeed if a man have his knife about idle
occasions, perhaps it may do well to put it up, to put it out of sight, and so
out of mind; but if a man have it in his hand, about his meals, or any other
good use, then to put the knife up ere one has done, out of these fears, is
to faint and come in too much to the devil; and though one do find some
seeming ease for the instant; yet it is but like drinking cold Beer in the
shakeing of an Ague, the disease will grow the worse after. Right so, Satan
will hold on his tentations with the greater violence: the way to drive away
our tentation, is to keep our knives about us; and when out about some good
and useful employment, by no means to put them up for fear; but to fight it
out against Satan, by setting the Word and Christ against him; and do this a
while, and we shall have peace: so others dare not come, or not abide in such
or such a place, bebause there they use to be tempted to selfe-murther, but
this is not the way: have we business there, or have we not? If none, What
make we there? Chiefly in the night or dark; if we have, then go thither,
stay there out our time; the tentation will more fright us than hurt us, and it
will ere long settle us, Ps. 119. 62
that we shall have as much quiet there as in any room else: some in their
beds, in the dead time of the night are assaulted, they rise, and think that
the way; if they rise to fit themselves the better to pray, I say nothing to
that, I rather commend it; but if we rise and avoid the bed and chamber for
very fear, I like it not: it never helps, the more we rise, the more we may,
we shall never have done, rather we shall grow worse, and the tentation will
grow upon us: what then? Lie still, look to God, to his Word; in any hand
yield not to the devil; to fly the room, the bed, to call for candle, it is
to fly from the devil; we must abide by it, fight it out by faith, and Satan
will fly from us. God would have us stand, and it is best to beat the devil
in the self same place where Satan thinks to foil us: Ephesians. 6. 13, 14.
I am at prayer by my self, or meditating in a secret place, within or without
doors; I am filled with a fearful thought that sure Satan is behind me; what
now? Do not fly the place, go on, make an end, Satan cannot hurt: say, we
quake every joint of us, yet hold on, quake and pray, quake and meditate, and
we shall make Satan quake and fly: neither is it good to be looking behind
one, for it is a service and kind of obeying the devil; a man shall never have
done; but stand our ground, out-looke the devil, say I am about a lawful
work in my right place, I will not turn my feet or face aside for all the
devils in hell. Satan is the Lords enemy, and God cannot take it well, that we
should do any thing for fear of him. Again, I never go over such or such a
bridge, but I am tempted to cast my self in, and therefore I go round about;
or if I go over the bridge, I run over, to be on the other side quickly for
very fear: alas the day, what a miserable life this is, we must not thus
yield, but go over, and not about; and go over, as we use to go on the plain
ground, and as others use to go over the same bridge; do thus with a constant
heart, and after a time or two, we shall be free from such horrors and fears,
else we shall hang in this misery perhaps while we live, as not to dare to go
over such a bridge, but we must run. O Cowards! These be you think but
toies; believe it, there is more in it than you are aware of; it helps against
the devil, it frees the heart of a man from a world of vexing and disquieting
fears: so for our nearest and dearest friends, Satan does sometimes push at
the people of God, to lay violent hands on their wives, their children, and
that in the night; now the way to help all, is not to do as some do, to
rise, to avoid the bed, the chamber, this is a kind of base fearing and
yielding to the devil; lie still, stir not a foot, Satan is soonest
vanquished, and our hearts best eased by resisting: so for children, when we
are assaulted with such hideous tentations, many think to mend the matter by
putting the children out of the room, out of the house, out of sight; this is
but to shift, their their place is to be in the house and room where we are;
it is our duty to have them much in our sight; it does but skin over the matter
for a time to put them away: the best way is to stand to it, and beat off Satan
in those tentations, our children standing by. Now here we must beware that
we do not entertain a tempting conceit, as though we did not love our wives,
we did not care for our children, and were with out natural affection, because
we are haunted with such monstrous motions: This proves indeed that Satan's
tentations are unnatural, and would produce much unnatural effects; this
proves that Satan cannot abide, that families (the groundwork of all
communion amongst men in Towns, and States,) should accord and be in any
peace, this proves, that if Satan might have his way, he would have us all to
be as he is, but so many pititious murderers. First, of our best friends, and
then of our selves: it proves not that we love not our friends, because of
these motions; for a man may be often assaulted to do himself harm, and yet
for all that he does love himself, and tender his own good too for all that:
and therefore a man may well be a tender husband to a wife, and parent to a
child, for all these Satanicall suggestions: for let any other touch the least
hair of our heads, and offer the least hurt, to the worst and least member we
have, we do startle at it; and should any other person or thing come with any
violence toward our children, we will step betwixt them and the blow, and even
venture our own lives to be a means to save theirs: and we find that such
as are vexed with such sudden motions toward their children, are yet so tender
over them, that they will scarce suffer the wind to blow upon them; and sick
with them, when they are sick, reckon of no pain, no care for them, when in any
danger, which shows natural affection to abound. A man is not to judge of the
affections by the feeling motion of them, nor by the stirring of them in his
bowels; nor at all by what he feels himself to be in the tentation, but by
the effects: if there be such fruits which nothing produces but love and
affection, it is past all question that there is no such total want and
general defect that way. We cannot abide to hear God evil spoken of, which
shows that our heart is toward him, albeit for the present we feel not our
hearts and affections to move toward him, our affections are usually most
deep, when they run on without any noise; wherefore what ever Satan puts upon
us, we must hold our own; that for all him and his tentations, and those
impulsions of Original sin, we do love our selves and love our second selves
full dearly, and would be full loath to suffer any wrong to be done to them.

2 The true and right means of help in these bloody tentations are, First, to
labor to be contented with our selves, the peace we have, the comfort we
have, the health we have, the means we have, and considering what we do
deserve; to bless God that it is no worse with us. A cheerful heart is not
subject to such malicious motions of the devil; he uses to work on man whom
he takes to be discontented. We are alone thinking on heaven by some
Well-side, he seeing us alone, taking us to be there, in some discontented
mood, thrusts at us with a tentation to cast our selves into the water: here
run not away, walk on still, proceed in good meditations, thrust away these
thoughts that are put in by the devil; and know that our Original sin is the
receiver worse than the thief. 2. Humble for that we carry about with us,
such a corrupt heart, as will on such occasions take thought of discontent; it
is our proud flesh that will not sit down under some heavey cross; and
because we have not al we would have, and cannot be that we would be, we care
not to be at all: we must have as others have, else we fall a powting
presently; we must learn to be thankful for any life; down with the proud
humor, be not high minded, these thunders and lightnings of tentations are to
fright us, and by such fear to bring us to walk humbly before the Lord. 3.
See what sin we live in, if in any, that is a true cause of deep discontent:
repent of that; do the contrary duty; sin is the proper cause, not to the
cross which makes us weary of our lives; Satan sets our eyes only on the
cross, for he knows, it is out of our reach to remove that; but indeed it is
some sin that does pinch us, and put a sting into the affliction, and we have
it in our hands by repentance to remove the sin, and the cross will remove it
self: Go to God to find out the sin for us, and away with that, if there
be any, and (as when the tooth is once drawn) we shall find ease and peace
presently; if we be not weary of sin, it is but fit, we should be made to
be weary of our selves: if no sin* then know, it is to humble us, and to fit us
for some great piece of service that the Lord means to employ us in. Wait and
join with the tentation, to rend the heart, to bring the mind low, and then
it will be gone. 4. See whether we do not abuse God and our selves in our wives
and children; perhaps, we dote upon them, make so many Gods of them; and if so,
then it is reason that they should by this tentation be made bitter unto us;
that we may have wives and children, 1 Cor. 7. 29
as though we had none at all; or if otherwise we sin against God in them o^
for them, let this go for the cause, why Satan is set on, and let on us, with
such killing suggestions, that we may be corrected in the very thing wherein
we have offended. 5. That which must hit it on the head and do the deed it
self, is to get it off by prayer, by a fast, if need be, and by the Word.
There are some which will not off but by prayer, and fasting; but there are
none so terrible, so strong, but prayer and fasting will give us ease and
comfort against them: but the matter must be sanctified to us by the Word; we
must bring Scripture, not reason* To tell Satan or our selves of the shame, of
the danger to us, to ours, will not do the deed: that which will work the
work, is to set the word of commandment, of promise, of the threatening
against the powers of Satan, I shall sin if I do, I shall offend God: It is
written, thou shall not kill; if not an enemy, then not a friend, if not a
friend, then much less my self. Love to mine enemy, is the reason, why I must
not murder him; love does begin at home, and it runs warmest in mine own
veins, in mine own bosom, and therefore I will not lay hands on my self, I
shall dye the death if I do. The word and prayer will fright him away; sin and
Satan care for nothing, fear nothing but the word: they are the Ordinances and
the power of God, and by his might, do extinguish all the fiery darts of the
devil. 6. Never think of making any mends or satisfaction, by destroying ones
self for any sin: Romans 1. 16
perhaps Judas thought by killing himself to make some amends for his horrible
murder committed against the person and life of Christ Jesus: Satan never does
a man more hurt, than when he comes preaching, and sets upon us with holy
ends; that because we have done this or that grand offense and abuse to God;
that therefore they are to pacify him or to satisfy him, by sacrifising of
our selves. This corrupt Divinity grows in our flesh, as we see by those, who
fetch their penniworth as they think out of themselves, by whipping
themselves: 1 King. 18 28.
a mad part it is for a man to think that by committing murder, the greatest
of all murders upon himself, to make any an ends for their sinful life; and
yet so foolish does the devil make some men. Beware of this deceit, fire is not
put out with fire; no satisfaction can possibly be made but by the blood of
the Lamb, that holy Lamb Christ Jesus: and I would have men beware how they
plead for such as draw their own blood, because thereby they do make way for
Satan, to push hard on the consciences of weak Christians, by bearing them in
hand, that they may ease themselves of some present horrors by killing
themselves, and yet be saved in heaven for all that: such cases perhaps may
possibly be; but for man to plead for such, to exempt them out of the rule,
may make foul work for Satan, to play upon the weakness of many poor
Christians souls I know no medicine (next to the Word and prayer) of better use
to hold such men's hands from their own lives, than fear of being damned in
hell: an indirect plea it is, for any to speak for such, and full of danger;
Givitas eum qui se ipsum necaverit mulctat. etc.
some think thereby to ease perplexed consciences, but it is the ready way to
perplex the hearts, Arist. Eth. l. 5. c. 11.
and engulsie the souls of feeble Christians; they do not know, what hurt
they do to men, under this tentation to vent such unsavory Doctrine; that a
man do well for the main, for all this, that this may be a way to heaven. As I
love not, so I mean not to judge; the way of charity, Inter pontem and fontem
miserecordia Domini.
is to leave Gods secrets to himself; but I urge this, that men would hold
their tongues and pens as much as may be, least in thinking to do good, they
do hurt; and by going thus about the bush, hoping thereby to ease the hearts
of men, do mightily plague and disquiet them: for what will Satan say,
dispatch man, thou may be saved for all this; such a learned man has so
written, has so said. And lastly, we must all work it out with fear and
trembling, and know that we have no safety, no not from our selves; but under
the shadow of the Lord, we are always to stand as in his hands, and keep our
continual acquaintance with, and dependence on God; know that without him, we
are poor weak creatures, that we cannot bear our selves; that the greatest
earthly blessing under heaven, (life it self) is quickly made a man's greatest
burden: that no man can stand before a wounded conscience, before an Angel we
may stand, but we cannot stand before him when he is angry; that man has no
spirit, no courage in him, if God leave him to himself: keep in with God and
pray him to defend us from our selves.

The last, is the lust of uncleanness, which do press upon the conscience as
much, if not more than any, because they are very sensual and of a beastiall
and brutish nature; deprives a man not only of religion, but of the free use
of reason, are many of them committed with and upon another, Cupidi^as si solum
dixerit, etc.
and so a second person is brought within the guilt, Arist. Eth. l. 7. c. 6.
as also by reason of the concomitant fleshly delight, for they are acted with
very great willingness: and when many of them are done, though nature it self
say, No to them, they are done with very much wilfulness: and now, where much
will is, there is much guilt, where much guilt is, there is much horror: and
then again, because these lusts do pervert, the order and course of mankind
irregulating the right succession of families; and in the point of adultery,
and that kind of bastardy, it does put in a strange bird to inherit the nest,
and wear away the feathers, So Ioh. 8. 4.
which is unspeakeable theft, Taken in adultery in the very act.
and to be confessed of the adulternesse; The word translated act is (...).
lest to her foul adultery she add horrible theft that the child of a
stranger carry not away the goods or lands of the family. Id est, in the theft,
perhaps to intimate the great theft which is in adultery.
These and many other concurrant or consequent absurde^ies do make this sin
cry aloud; and it has a special measure and order of uncleanness above any
sin else. All sins are unclean, and Satan is an unclean spirit, but there
is something in it, why the Apostle is so distinct, Mat. 12. 43
as to call this sin above all other the lust of uncleanness. Great care and
diligence is to be used to hold these lusts off. 2 Pet. 2. 10
They are in the Original appointed to preserve the species of mankind: and
as hunger is a potent desire, it being ordained to preserve the person of man
in the individual; so much more these motions are violent and mighty, being
made to make good the succession and propagation of the whole kind of man:
mighty they are when they run in the right channel; but if we suffer them
to take a wrong bias, and to fall into unlawful courses, where Satan drives
them on, how then do they bear down all? And cast a man into such a
subjection, and (as I may call it) voluntary compulsion, 2 Pet. 2. 14
that the Apostle says, such cannot cease to sin. Again, I must borrow leave
to put in this, that we are the rather to take heed of these pollutions
because when we are in once, by reason of the great sense of guilt they carry
with them, in that they fly in the face of both spiritual and natural
conscience at once: they bring men to great terrors and inward horrors making
men believe that there is no hope of such, and from thence, men run upon the
rocks of selfe-murthering tentations; and more, I think, have made themselves
away out of inward fears arising from some unclean prankes, than for any one
thing else: and the cause hereof, is because that these lusts bring great shame
amongst men if once out; but the maine is, because they carry with them great
inward ^^^^e, not only spiritual betwixt (...) and ones self, but natural,
(...) twixt a man and himself: and as we see in those actions of this nature
where they are without sin, yet there is a kind of natural shame. And now
because there is such shame of all sorts, Vt merere, alvum leva. re, liberis
operam dare. vid. Cic. Offic. l. 1.
men are wondrous loath to let any man know what the matter is that troubles
them. And in tentation of selfe-killing, if a man keep the core to himself,
he is in great danger; but if a man do once out with it, after he has been
with God, and it will not do; I say, if then one do out with all, to a wise
and a trusty friend, that he is in the tentation of murdering himself, and
the cause to be some foul unclean pollution; why then one would wonder, upon
what a sudden the heart will feel ease, and the cure is as good as done. But
now because there is such shame, and we are loath to out with it, that we have
been unclean; and the burning fire will hardly quench except one break up
the Boil, and vent the corruption, by opening all our mind to some godly
friend, upon these considerations, I propose it as an excellent piece of
counsel to all, to beware of the lusts of uncleanness; the sin is great, the
consequence greater.

Moreover, this is a great matter in it too; that we do grow into troubles of
mind for sin, according as we do apprehend them in the greatness of them; and
we do conceive much of the greatness of sin, according as the opinion and
judgment of the world goes. These are not in our apprehension; ever the
greatest sins, which the world says are: but which are most out of request
with the world. Now this lust of uncleanness is a great eyesore amongst men;
it is so rated at by many men, as though God had made but only the seventh
Commandment; whereas covetousness and pride far greater sins in themselves
(take them precisely,) are not so esteemed amongst men, no nor amongst common
Christians. A man may go for a great professor, and yet be extreme covetous,
as we see in Judas: but if he be a man given to uncleanness, it is a sin so
out of all credit, that a man known to be infected with it, cannot amongst men
in their opinion go for a professor, as some term themselves; and now
because the world does hoote at this sin, we are apt to ^ind exceedingly in
our consciences; when we are overtaken in this unclean passion; and to grow
toward a bloody conclusion, as though the sin had in it that greatness,
that there were now no hope of us. And this may well go for another useful
consideration, to move us by all means to keep from the lust of uncleanness.
Pro. 5. 11. 7. 26. 31. 3
And lastly, the sin many times weakens the body, and pines away that,
darkens ones semes, shortens ones life, and then comes in a huge cry, that we
have rotted away our life: are guilty of hastening our own death, and much ado
there is to quiet the storm which comes in this way: Wherefore for this cause
also abstain from fleshly lusts. 1 Pet. 2. 11.
We see then that it leaves the greater brand on the conscience, Pro. 9. 7.
because of the dishonor and blot of this sin, as well as by reason of the
dishonesty of it, as also for that there is a degree of uncleannes in this sin,
over there is in any else; which foulness, the heart of man does rise
against: and this cannot but touch us with some degrees of terror also; and
that this sin does carry some special stain of dishonor with it, Pro. 6.
33.
read it in Solamon. A wound and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall
not be wiped away. And in Paul: Who calls chastity a man's honor? 1 These. 4. 3.
Upon these grounds and considerations it was that Saint Peter says, 1 Pet. 2.
11
That fleshly lusts do war against the soul. These are the devils
Captains, and do (meaning to kill us) smite at the head, war against the
soul: other lusts do war against the soul too; but there is some special
matter in it, that these fleshly lusts are said to war against the soul:
shall I say, that it is, because that the other lusts do war as much against
the graces of the soul: yet there is not any that do war more, no, nor in
some respects so much against the peace of the soul; and therefore in Peter's
words we are to be beseeched (of all lusts) to abstain from fleshly lusts.

We will now enter into a particular discovery of such special branches as
may make the matter the plainer. Lust of uncleanness are committed either:
First, with ones self: Secondly, with others. First, we will begin with that
committed with ones self, Aeschines Temar. chum a concione arcendum, etc.
which are greater in themselves, abtract them from all other circumstances
than with any other; Vid. Navar. Manual. c. n. 6.
as selfe-murther is worse than the murder of another; so in and of it self,
this sin is worse than of another. For the rule is, that the sin that does
break the order of love, is the worst, love being the keeping of the
Commandment: So Paul, 1 Cor. 6. 18.
I must not defile my neighbor, Aggravates Fornication for that it is against
our own body.
because I am to love my neighbors chastity; but I am to love my self and
mine own chastity, Vid. Erasm.
before the chastity of any else: Paraph. in 1 Cor. 6. 18.
and this is a foul sin much against nature, and therefore the worse, for
the more unnatural the sin is, the greater the guilt is still in that respect:
and whereas it is thought that there is not that wrong in it, as is in taking
away the chastity of another: I urge, that there is most wrong when a man does
wrong himself: and as the thief does in the candle, so these self
defilements do rot and weaken the body, by the curse of God exceedingly. Vid.
Genesis 38 ver. 9.
And (as in all such inordinate practices) there is a secret kind of murder;
what, if not in the intention of the doer, yet in the condition of the thing
done: God is much displeased with these kind of sins, they are execrable in
his sight, pay the conscience home when they are set before us in their true
and right colors; make people unfit for marriage without the great mercy of God
ever after. I could wish people to marry on ever so poor terms, Quisquis
affectus illos frenare non potest, etc.
rather than to fall into such illicite, dark and abominable practices, Lact.
l. 6. c. 23.
which do grieve the very principals of nature; say, let the worst come that
can, for outward things, it is better to beg than burn in hell; I will trust
in God, I will follow him; he that feeds the Ravens he will provide; I will
rather bring trouble on the outward man, than on the soul: it is wisdom to
look to the soul what ever becomes of the body: whatsoever comes, it cannot
be worse than sin; nay, whatsoever it be, it cannot be bad with us so long
as we obey. For howsoever there may be some difference of Estates in the
general, yet sure it is, that is the best for us in the particular, which God
calls us unto, there lies our peace, our joy, our comfort. 2. With others, and
here comes many kinds; we will begin with the worst first, and that is, Lev.
18. 23 20. 15.
Beastiality, forbidden in the Word, and therefore our corrupt nature and
original sin is capable of it, and when once in too too prone unto it. The
worst things, when the law of nature is suppressed yield strongest delight such
as it is; this must be looked unto, it turns man into a very beast, (...).
makes a man a member of a brute creature; a sin that man would soon fall
into, if the Lord should let sin and Satan alone with us; Phocil.
what one man does, that another may possibly do, we being all of the same
mass and cloth, and that since the law was given, men have run upon this
horrible abomination. Stories, and experience, and law, have showed and do
show; wherefore by all means this soul corruption must be avoided:
Praeceperunt nobis sapientes nostri, etc.
over familiar usage of any brute creature is to be abhorred. And the Jewish
Doctors do charge their novices, Maiemon. More nevoch. par. 3. cap. 49.
by no means to feed their eyes with staring on the generation of beasts for
fear of the worst. It is a pit, out of which those few that do fall into it do
hardly recover: it is like a winter plague, some do recover, but in comparison
of those that perish, a poor few.

2. The next is Sodomy. Iud. v. 7. A going after strange flesh; not only
strange in the law of God, as in fornication it is, but strange in nature: a
sin to which our law of nature has no great mind unto at first; but if our
corrupt lust, Lev. 18. 22
our original sin be let out, So Judge. 19. 22. They would rather do
wickedness on the man, than commit folly with the old man's daughter, a Virgin
(...). Phocil.
we see how it carries too many after this abomination. God would never have
forbidden it in the law, but that our nature is subject to it: we see how it
did overrun Sodom and Gomorrah; when it once takes, how does the sinful
flesh of man run after it? Lots daughters were young, fresh, and maids too;
and yet they would not serve, they must have the men. And To. 1. they forsook
the natural use of the women; therefore it is spoken of such as had wives,
else how could it be said that they forsook the natural use of the women:
and it is said, that such do burn or scald, and not only men with men,
working that which is unseemely, but women also: when given up to this
unnatural pass, do as Paul said, change the natural use into that which is
against nature; that is, so against nature, that posterity, which is natures
end, is utterly lost by it: and such as are acquainted with Stories and Poets,
know that this sin has been too much in many Nations. Arist. in pol lib. 2.
c. 9. and Eusebius. De prepar. Evan. l. 6.
And many particular persons have doted wonderfully after this preposterous
lust, Athaen. l. 13
and have taken more brutish and hellish delight in it, than in those passions
which are according to nature. This then must be avoided by all means, and all
occasions of it warily eschewed; he sin is great, it is a corrupting and a
rotting of the very rudiments of nature; and in all things, look what
corrupts, the foundation and principal of things must needs be worst. The
punishment was great in that utter overthrow of Sodom. In the Deluge, water
from heaven drownds: Erat justa quaedam retributio his qui naturae subverterant
leges, etc.
here, as in their sin, they had over-turned the law of nature: so, in their
punishment, there was an inversion of the course of nature; Chrysostom. Ser. de
Adam. Sadomitis. See the phrase Luke 17. 29. It rained, fire and brimstone,
(not water.)
for not water, but fire came from heaven and burned them, whose lusts were
thus set on fire of hell. It is used as a type of hell, it is a crying sin. The
cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, Genesis 18. 20. Grandis peccatorum clamor
est, etc
There is no sin but has a voice; but this amongst many and above most other
sins has a loud and a crying voice, Salvian. de Guber. Dei l. 1.
it is heard to heaven, it has a loud mouth to accuse, which cry, is nothing
else but the guilt of conscience; and the justice of God, the conscience being
full of matter, and ready to accuse, Miserecordia mea suadet ut parcam, etc.
and God to hear. As a man through importunity, is drawn to execute justice
against his mind, Salvian. Ib.
so this sin does so put God to it, that he must needs proceed, except we come
with hearty repentance; he cannot res, nor be just, till he have sorely and
sharply punished it.

The thing I urge then, since the sin and the guilt is so great, O fuge te
tenerae pue^orum credere turbae: Nam causam justi, semper amo ris habent.
and will make such a noise in the conscience, is, by all means to keep from
the sin and from all spice of it, to shun all occasions of it; to take heed of
that which Quintilian puts off in a Schoolmasters; Tibull: (...).
which is, Nimium est quod intelligitur: and he is so strict this way, that he
will not have bigger and lesser youths sit much together. We may see what
wrought Sodom to this sin; Quae qua^ti sint criminis, etc. Salvian de Guber.
Dei. l. 6.
Idleness, pride, fullness of bread, these must be heedfully avoided: and such
sins as we read, Romans 1. were in the justice of God punished with and by this
passion of dishonor: we must be thankful to God, for the light we have, and
in some measure, walk according to the truth we see. They made God like a
fourefooted beast; and GOD gave them up to a sin, which did abase them into a
worse condition than of beasts; and for such as are unmaried and have not the
gift, and by the use of all the means cannot get it; such must know, that it is
better to marry than to burn: and if they will rather burn than marry, they
are in a foul way to fall into this scalding sin; 1 Cor. 7. 9.
which sin if they commit, brings with it a world of misery; and after when
such shall happen to marry, Luke 17. 27.
by the just hand of God they are suffered, In the days of Noah, says the
Text, They did eat, they drank. etc. But ver. 28. we read, That in the days
of Lot they did eat, they drank, etc.
for a punishment of the former wickedness, to forsake (as Paul says) the
natural use, and run into that which is unnatural: and these are most
monstrous lusts; when all is done, by way of preparation and disposition of our
hearts and thoughts, against these corruptions; It is not said (they married) in
Lots days.
that which will save us from the stain of these filthy puddles, must be the
pure and holy Word of God. Set the Word against the sin, and the sin is laid;
set the Word against Satan in this his tentation, and ^atan cannot abide by it;
Satan (...) no more abide the light of (...) Word, than an Owl can (...)
^^ining of the Sun: say I (...) do it, I may not, I (...), it is forbidden in
such (...) place, and again, in such a place: It is called, not only a sin,
but which shows an height of sinning abomination; both of them have committed
abomination, Lev. 20. 13
says the text. Lev. 18. 22
The punishment of it by Gods own Law, was death, no less than death, present
death; they shall surely be put to death, Lev. 20. 13
their blood shall be upon them: and the law was flat and peremptory, that no
Sodomite must be amongst the sons of Israel: and in that never the like
reformation, Deu. 23. 17
Josiah brake down the houses of the Sodomites which were by the house of the
Lord, 1 Kin. 20. 12.
2 Kings 23. 7. Asa the father, and Iehosaphat the son, 2 Kin. 22. ^.
had swept away those unclean nests in their days: but we see they grew on
again, till Josiah came and made a full purgation. These and such other places,
show that this sin is strong ^^^den, and severely (...), to which add the
wrath (...) God on such in hell, 1 Cor. ^. These are the best medicines that
be; which being rightly used and applied, do ever do the cure. Next, to
provide against the worst; say a man be a sinner in this great wickedness, yet
he must not run away from his father, that will mar all. There be I know
degrees in this sin, but say it be at the worst, yet there is mercy with
God, repentance will make it up again: Ephesians. 4. 19.
it is good to make all have to return, since lasciviousness is a sin which
uses to sear up the conscience, till the time of reckoning for all comes; and
God does sometimes after a while shut up his gates of mercy: Ser. Ne desperamus
si in been operando tardi sumus. Et Hom. 1. m.
and then as Chrysostom notes often, though Noah, Job, Moses, Samuel, and
Daniel, should intercede, 1 Thessalonians. 1.
it would be to no purpose. Ier. 15. 1.
They were men of God, Ezekiel. 14. 14
who in their times did by their prayers do great things and compass
mavelous matters for particular persons, for Families, for Countries; and yet
when the glass is out, and the decree determined is past; when the time is
over wherein God may be found, their prayers for others come in too late; it is
good then to be at it with the soonest: I mean not that ever it is too late
to repent, or that if we repent, we can miss of mercy. Zach. 13. 1
No, no, the fountain stands open, always open in the house of David, for sin
and for uncleanness; and this unclean person (as Paul calls him) if he repent,
he shall find mercy: God forbid we should have such a thought, as though this
sin could stain so deep, that the blood of Christ could not fetch it out: our
meaning is, that whilst the conscience is awake, and we have a fair offer made
us, by the Word and Spirit, knocking at our hearts; it is good wisdom to take
Gods offer; delays be dangerous, for if we will not know the day of our
visitation, God may: and what if in justice he shall refuse to give us to
repent; then let our friends move for us, God will not hear, were they as good
at praying as ever Job, Daniel, Noah, and Samuel were. Let such then who are in
this offense, come in by all means, in all have to the Lord; and when the
Angel moves the water, step into this Bath, this Fountain: know that GOD
would never move our hearts to repent and return, had he not a meaning to
pardon, and to accept: as look into the 1 Cor. 6. and there we read, that some
who were thus sinful were yet sanctified, (...).
were washed, and are now with Christ: and if they, then why not some now? It
is not to the purpose, that they were so before their callings, since Divines do
agree; that there is no one sin that a man may commit before his calling; but
should God leave that man to himself, to his lust, to Satan, he might, and
would, and should, commit the same sin after: neither lies there any reason,
why on our repentance, a sin done before is pardoned; and the same sin if we
repent after, must stand unpardonable: or that a man may repent, of a sin done
before ones conversion, and not repent of the same sin after: add but this,
that the sin committed before, is in it self greater, than the same sin
committed after; for before it is done with a full swing, saving that perhaps,
the law of nature and inbred modesty, does at the first make some recoile; but
after calling, there being some seeds at least of grace in the will, there is
some inward opposition made; it is not done without some saying, Romans 7. 23
nay, in the law of their mind, and so the sin is the lesser. Now if
repentance could do it at first, when the sin was greater; can we question,
whether repentance does fetch it off, when the sin is lesser? Indeed, if no
repentance, no healing, no not of the least known sin; but if we repent, all
our Divinity lies upon it, that such shall be pardoned; and that God has not
peremptorily bound himself, to deny repentance unto life to any sinner, except
the blasphemer against the Holy Ghost; is point agreed on, in our Schools and
Pulpits. Indeed, if such as are in this foul fault do find, that it works a
stupifying, that it seares, takes away, the inward power of discerning things,
that are not convenient, deadens our taste; if such find that their inward
touchstone has now lost its virtue, the danger is a great deal the greater;
because such having little or no feeling of their estate are not as yet in the
way to repentance: but if such find it a fiery dart, burning like any poison,
working a world of troubles in the mind, and a fearful consternation in the
conscience; then there is the more hope, that true humiliation and mercy is not
far off: such have a faculty in them, which will work out of their fears a
desire to be eased; and if once upon sight of the promises, they conceive hope
of mercy, they are in a fair way to repent of their wickedness: and that God
who has made tender of his mercy to worse than Sodomites, Isa. 1. 10.
will receive those to favor upon true sorrow for what is past, and steadfast
resolution to do so no more, for the time to come.

And here I will leave this uncomfortable argument, wishing all who mean not
(say they do escape hell) to carry the smoke of this sin to their graves, to
fly from it. Now because I said, that when in committing a sin the
conscience is against it, the sin is the less; I will not conceal, what a
late Divine says; that the sin is the greater when it is done, when the
conscience does say no: for says he, if this were any sign of a man's having
grace, that in acting his sin, he feels a moving within, against those sins
he does do: it would follow, that great sinners, aye, all sinners might
persuade themselves, that their estate were good, because there is a
con-flicting against vices, out of the principles of natures light; which are
in the breasts more or less of all men living; that in an unregenerate man,
sins against the natural conscience are the worse even in that respect,
because he does them against his conscience is most true: We must then say,
that when the sin is done against the voice of the conscience, sometimes it
makes the sin the less, sometimes the worse: If we, take part with the sin
against the conscience, are angry that our conscience would not let us take
that fill of Delight, and content in committing the sin, and are not willing
that conscience should say any thing unto us when we have done, here the sin is
much the worse, because it was done against conscience: Isay 30. 21
but now if we take part with the voice within, and are heartily sorry that the
temptation and our passion meeting together, do bear down the power of our
conscience, and do what we can, to take part with the reluctation, Understand
all this of a conscience sanctified.
while it, is a doing; and when it is done, nothing in the world troubles us so
much, as that we did not give way to the act of conscience, and keep from the
sin; and do join with our conscience against our lust, and are putting more
strength into the power of grace and conscience against another time. In this
case when we take part with the conscience against the sin, it makes the
sin the lesser, which the ungodly never do; but do join with the sin
against the conscience, and for inward combats, there are some in the
unregenerate where no grace is; betwixt original sin and other habitual
lusts and the Law of Nature, but not with such sins, as nothing says are
sins, but the Word and Spirit of GOD. So Paul styles them, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
In unnatural Lusts, we grant there is some strife in some, yea, in most
unregenerate men; but in other more spiritual sins, there neither is, nor
can be that civil war within, because there is not a power of grace to make
the resistance: how-ever, the wicked do take part with Lust, even against the
Law and rules of Nature; which circumstance does aggravate their sins: but of
the difference betwixt the combat, which is only in the good, and that
combat, which is also in the bad, Dow^.
there is enough and enough said by Divines to Satisfy any man: VVarf. p. 4.
l. 2. c. 8. Sect. 3.
and in this point, all care must be used to keep off unnatural passions:
the sting of conscience is great, the cure is hard, and so much the more
difficul^^ because, what for the danger, and what for the shame of them, men
cannot be easily brought to make their mind known to any man; which gives the
greatest advantage to Satan to work his will upon us: but if any be overtaken,
in any hand let him send up to God; and in case GOD put him off, out with it to
some spiritual man, who must and will, and as God shall be pleased to bless
his labors, shall restore him with the Spirit of meekness. Gal. 6. 1.


Next we are to look over those which are natural; called natural, because
that nature has an end in them: for though the wrong way in unlawful lust,
yet they tend to the propagation and continuation of mankind: and first for
such as are single, then for such as are married.

1. Such are single; if God give them by the use of his means the gift, let
them keep themselves so, if they be wise: if not, then marry, and so marry,
that they attain a principal end of marriage. Paul gives wise council to
Parents, that they suffer not their Virgins to pass the flower of their youth;
1 Cor. 7. 36
his meaning is, when they have need of, and a mind unto that estate: else he
tells us what is best, and here many of our Gentry are too blame, who keep not
their younger sons so much from marriage, but they do post and thrust their
daughters on this estate, albeit they have no mind or need, which is a misery;
as to be made to eat when one is not an hungered: avoid all extremes, and when
God and Nature call, go on in any hand, and that in time, and not stay till
the Lusts of youth, which marriage is to cure, be past: have the house first all
on a light fire, and then go about to quench it; whereas marriage is ordained
to prevent and kill the lusts of youth: and know that if we be about to
provide for our children; then in hope that ere long it will be had, children
will contain and hold in the better, In 1 These. c. 4. Hom. 5. and in Genesis 35.
(as Chrysostom observes;) but in case that they see that we make no have,
Hom. 59.
take no care, they will marry themselves, or else ease themselves by some such
ungodly courses. The counsel then is, to make all good have to enter them into
this estate in fit time; (...).
and in the Interim, to maintain their natural modesty, and spiritual
chastity all we can: speak not an immodest word, (...). Phocil Turpe habitum
erat, etc. Alex.
look not an immodest look, use not any light action in their presence. A
Roman was degraded for that he did but kiss his own wife before his children;
and the ancient Christian was very curious and dainty this way: Geneal. l. 4.
c. 20.
their order was, that men and maids sat so at Church, that one did not,
Philo. De vit. contemt. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 2. c. 28. Chrysostom.
nor could not, see one another; the women-kind had their vailes: And in the
East Churches, Hom 74. in Mat. Neceph. in vit. Chrysostom. Durant. de rit.
I am sure Virgins and Maids, were not used to come at marriages; we cannot do
too much this way; Eccl. l. 1. c. 18. Regius Orat. Christ l. 1. c. 3.
and many take such liberty before, that after marriage they do rue it all days
of their lives. Chrysostom. in Coloss. 4.
Many stay to provide a rich match, Hom. 12.
till it be too late; for all the while the stream is dammed up with
untempered mortar, it does and will rage the more, and a vent one way or other,
it will and must have: and hence we see, that such as are kept from that
estate by a kind of force, are the worst that way that be this day in the
world; as your Jesuits, Friars, and Nuns. It is our corrupt humor, to be
strongest in our passions, where we are denied; and a wound bound up and not
healed, ranckles worse than if it were open: which made the Apostle to call
that Doctrine (which forbids mairage and gave not the gift) the Doctrine of
devils; since it puts a man upon a necessity of sinning a sin, and so foul a
sin as uncleanness, and for want of a natural stream to run over, into
unnatural practices, Viduis, 1 Cor. 7. 8.
which do carry a man and woman much beyond the line, Sic vocat muli^res
nuptas, etc. Parae, in 1 Cor. 7, 8, 9.
and put him far and far from God. And this makes way for some complaint
against widows states, which in some chiefly of the younger sort, 1 Timothy 5.
14.
must needs prove a practice of devils in the Apostles sense, because it does
thrust some women into a necessity of sinning. The Apostle does counsel the
younger widows to marry, to bear children; else says he, they will not,
only they may, but they will marry and wax wanton against Christ.

All that is said is, that these widows may mend it and marry if they will;
but it is hard for women to turn themselves out of house and all, rather than
sin: and if they have nothing, who will have them as things go now. Indeed
amongst the Jews, where they gave money for their wives, this exception would
be of some force; but now amongst us, where money makes the match, they may sit
and fry long enough, ere any will make suite unto them to marry them, when they
must on their marriage be outed of all. What ever they think they may be able
to do while the husband is alive; yet when the man is dead, the widow is in
danger to sing another song: we care not much for that we may and must have,
but when it is denied us, and we are tied from it; then as in the Gospel,
they told it abroad the rather, because Christ bid them tell no body; so the
passions of women will rage the more, because now they must not marry; and a
young widow will be less able to contain and be chaste then when she was a
Virgin. They urge that it is covenient, they so remain, to bring up their
children; but a curse is like to follow that condition, wherein is a needs-must
sin, and all to breed up children: that estate of life is fittest for a woman
to live in to breed up children, wherein she is most free to serve God, and is
most of all preserved from sin. And we see widows that have children and
stand free, will tell you that they marry, to have one to help them to bring
up their children and the sons will stand in more awe of their father-inlaw
than of a woman their mother; and we do see, that men do use to take as great
care for their wives former children, as tho they were their own: and when two
have a joint care, it is better than if one only; and a woman's care and power
is never the less when she has one in commission with her to help her. A
little matter in the taker would help al to turn a widows estate into a life;
and it were nothing in the setter to suffer such as they see have or are like
to have need to marry. Please God and please all; I know now and then, a booty
comes in to suffer such to marry; but of all inconveniences, sin is the
worst, there lies the mischief. Many do sin for want of the medicine, and he
does best, who frees his manner most from sin; neither will they live ever the
longer, because they do marry: the times of men and women are defined by the
Lord, longer they cannot live, sooner they shall not dye: I will not deny, but
want this way, may and does in some bodies breed diseases, as both Physicians
and Philosophers teaco: but I hope no man has this in his head, to bar
widows from their necessary liberty to marry when they will in the Lord, a
purpose to kill them up with discontent, or to cast them into any diseases. I
would I could persuade men to consider the matter, and make their case their
own; and then say, whether setting aside all opinion of merit and
supererogation, the case of a Nun be not easier, who is cloistered up from
having to be amongst men, than of a widow in a widows estate: whose life is
to be up and down in the world, and have much society where men are; and yet
must not be married, except some one will come and have her with nothing.
Examples of any that have so done are so rare, that in my experience I never
knew any.

2. Next when we are to enter our selves and ours into marriage, we must see to
the chief and the principal end, which is (as the state of man is since the
fall) to keep a man chaste: he that maks marriage to be the means in his
intention to make him rich, mary's in the flesh, and not in the Lord, he
cannot with any face invite the Lord to the wedding; Mammon, not the Lord, 1 Timothy 5. 11.
does lead the Bride to Church; the Apostle says, it is not good for a man to
touch a woman, but yet says he, to avoid fornication: he says not, to pay
debts, to get money, to make one rich; let every man have his own wife: v. 2.
but to avoid fornication, Matrimony then was ordained, to make men and keep
men chaste, and not to make men rich. And we do find, that many of those who
marry to be rich, Si qui impediti sunt ex nuptiis. etc. Chrysostom. in Hebr. Hom. 7.
which is their end, and have rich widows too; after marriage, do attain
neither their own end, nor Gods: marry, and after are neither rich nor chaste;
and then they fall upon marriage, with many heavy complaints and cries, and that
if there be any hell above ground, it is in marriage. We must then be before
hand, and marry so seasonably for time, and so wisely and proportionably for
age and other convenient circumstances, that it may preserve our chastity. It
is too late to bring water when the house is burnt: as soon as the sparks
arise and it begin to grow toward burning, and we see the smoke up, go to
Physic; there must be no time of lusting, what ever there be of woing: many
complain of too much trouble in that estate, because they bring sin with them
thither: there be too many who are afraid to marry, but not to sin, and at
last, when it is heard, late marry they do, and rue it all days of their
lives: did we conceive, what the horror of uncleanness is like to be, and that
there is in the sin of fornication, a stain above other sins, that it makes
ones body the member of an harlot; it does defile the soul, 1 Cor. 6. 15
as in their manner all sins do: it does defile the body in making it an actor
in the sin, as many other sins does: it does abuse the body, in making it the
member of an harlot, which no other sin but the sin of uncleanness does and
this will press hard on the conscience, when time shall serve, that in sinning
this sin, the body is thus made the member of a strumpet.

3. When entered into the estate, we must be convinced of the greatness and
foulness of the sin of adultery; it gives a deadly blow to the (...) it self;
it is cried out of exceedingly in the Word, it cuts a-sunder the sinews of
families; we must judge of it by the Word, not by the world. Once (I am sure)
amongst the Papists it was placed among the lesser sins, Cap. Et^ Clerici
extra de judiciis, etc.
and because too many every where stand guilty of this sin; Iac. Cujacius
reprehendit in recit. posthumus ad. c. 4. (...) clerici.
the world has not a right ^^dgement of this sin; it does corrupt the mind
of a man, and takes away the use of the power and faculty of discerning: it
brought Solomon the Wise, Neh. 13. 2.
to run into all idolatry against common sense. And Sampson the strong, (made
Judge of Israel, by a miracle from the Lord, Judge. 16.
and therefore no fool,) though he knew that the harlot would betray him; yet
when he had once tasted of it, he did so lose his right wits, that for his
heart he could not forbear: we must not then think of this sin as the world
does, but as the LORD does; we see, customs takes away (...) and judging
exactly of any sin in the very Church it self, and that a non after Christ, we
find that by reason of use the Christian Gentiles held fornication to be scarce
a sin, as we may see in that Synod in the Acts; and the second Chapter of the
Revelations, Aliquid est dandum adolescentibus.
a trick of youth it was counted, and is amongst too many, but for a trick of
youth, ye for such tricks, God the just will damn men in hell, unless they
repent. In 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. we read, that fornicators (as distinct from
adulterers,) and adulterers, shall not inherit the kingdom of God: and again,
fornicators and adulterers, though men do not as they should, Object.
yet God will judge. Yea, but say a man lie in the least known sin that is,
he must not inherit the kingdom of heaven: and therefore this is no argument
to prove these sins to be great, because they keep out of heaven. But these
sins are named above others, Sol.
to show that a man cannot be fornicator or adulterer and be in Christ. A
common practicer of those sins one cannot be, but he must and shall allow
them, they are of that nature that they will lord it where they be: but other
lesser infirmities a man may practice them commonly, and yet not allow them,
and so notwithstanding be in Christ Jesus. One act does not ever denominate.
These then be sins, whose ordinary use cannot stand with grace, nor is
compatible with ones being in Christ, and by that means they are said to bar
out of heaven (over lesser and smaller thoughts) and thus the argument is good
and firm, hence to prove them to be great sins; what then love cannot do, let
fear do, for God does puni^^ these sins with a chiefly: see this in Peter, 2
Pet. 2. 9, 10.
The Lord knows how to preserve the unjust to the day of judgment to be
punished but chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lusts of
uncleanness.

Being convinced of the heinousness of this crime; the next is, that the
mariage-bed must with all care be preserved in all purity; the tentation is
strong to fornication, stronger to adultery; for the worser a sin is, the
stronger is the impulsion of Original lust unto it: and Satan is more eager to
make men adulterers after, than fornicators before: but here is the difference,
that (as I showed before) except a man has the gift; he that will not take
Gods medicine and marry, let him do what he can, use any, use all other
means, yet he has no promise it shall do: but when married, use the means,
and we have a promise, and an assurance that we shall be kept undefiled, let
sin and Satan do their worst. The chief and necessary means to maintain
conjugall chastity, is for such to-love one another; it is not the having, but
the loving of a yoake-fellow which does keep us clean and chaste.

2. To keep in with God in other matters: for that man, with whom the Lord is
angry, for some other former matter, shall fall into the hands of a filthy
woman. Eccl. 7. 26.
We must not then by lying and living in any other crime, Pro. 22. 14.
give God cause to give us over unto this sinful sin.

3. Such must be chaste betwixt themselves; beware of excess and defect;
Divines t^ll of excess, but if there be too much, there may be too little,
else what means that phrase of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 9.
lest Satan tempt you for your incontinencie: there must be quenching, nor
provoking of lust; raging lust is a great enemy to love, and it is raging, and
is loath to be contented with one; and if not with one, then indeed and upon the
matter with none. Dalliances are forbidden: First, words and talk full of
obscenity betwixt them two is not lawful, they must not by words corrupt one
another chastity: worse than to taint the chastity of a stanger for that
here is, or ought to be most love. What if no body be by, yet God is by, and
chastity the honor and honesty of the estate is by. Secondly, the eyes must be
pure and chaste; else the next will be, that the eyes of such will be full of
adultery, 2 Pet. 2. 14.
it crosses the end of matrimony, which is not to fire, but to extinguish
lust. I have read, that it is against the Law of Nature, for one, without
necessary cause to see his own nakedness; but what ever credit we give to the
judgment of men, we have it in the Word, that Adam and Eve, when there was no
living creature by; the very instinct of nature did teach them to make
coverings to hide their nakedness, from the sight one of another: this I am
sure, that the Lord does use to correct such intemperate couses and practices,
with strong and vexing tentations, after strange flesh, this is the ordinary
effect of this abuse; and they who shall avoid such irregular prankes, shall
find a sweet enjoyment one of another, and true affections stirred up with
more natural delight and heavenly content. Isaac. I know, sported with his
wife, but it was, no body being by; and what if it were such, that the King who
over-saw all, knew thereby that she was his wife, yet it was; in all modesty,
for no d^lliance nor sporting, is allowed to a man with another woman: this
sporting did discover to an heathen, that he was her husband, although he gave
it out that he was her brother. But it was not of that nature we now treat of,
that the Patriarchs and Matriarches carried it with all possible modesty in
those days; we may see it clear by the story of Jacob and Leah. Genesis 29. 25
Believe it, modesty is the best preserver of nuptial chastity; Modesty
keeps the key of Chastity.
marriage is no stale nor cover to any unclean and base practices; Quod unum
habebant in malis bonum, perdunt peccandi Verecundiam. Senec. de vit. Beata,
cap. 12. Peribit ille cui periit pudor. Plau. in Bacch. Erubuit salv^res,
Terent. Moderator cupiditatis est pudor. Cic. de Fin. l. 2.
love does no unsightly nor unseemely thing.

4. The bed must be sanctified, and kept undefiled by the 1 Timothy 4. 5
Word and Prayer. The Word is as Divines show us, up and down, a mighty healer
of this corruption, and it stands like a strong Tower, against all these base
and unclean lusts. To the Word, there must be Prayer adjoined, else we rely
too much on the Physic, and it is not like to do; and if Physic works not
right, it makes one worse; and so here, as we find none so unclean as some
married people; God must then be sent for; to bless the physic to the soul:
other things we know, as eating and drinking must be sanctified by prayer,
prayer is then rather and more to be used here, because the passion is so
strong and reason so weak: where reason is in a manner put besides its present
use, there I hope prayer has greatest place; eating is to take away the
natural passion of hunger, and drink, of thirst; yet we are to pray over our
meals; but here the ordinance is to cure sin, to work on the soul, to heal
a strong corruption, which cannot usually be done without the influence of
heaven; and thence it follows, that we have cause to pray more in this case,
than in eating and drinking: praying, I say, there ought to be, say by way of
supposition, that prayer at meat should take away ones mind to ones meat, why
then we would counsel one to pray for a blessing beforehand: so here, to
pray will bring in the blessing of God, which is all in all in spiritual
medicines, as this is, being, as I said, to cure the sin of the soul; prayer
will keep men that they shall not surfeit, and so come to a loathing nor fall
into a defect, here must be a satisfying, Pro. 5. 19.
as Solomon says, and drinking away our thirst at our own Cesterne, Ver. 15.
lest we hanker after a strange fountain: prayer will make a man keep
himself, Heb. 13. 4.
from all base and absurd and abusive dalliances; it will make and keep the
bed undefiled, and increase love and mutual affection. Love has a sure
foundation, when it is built not on beauty or wealth, but upon prayer and
grace. Satan cannot abide to see men and women in this estate, to live in quiet
and love; and this makes him to use all the art and power he has to trouble
the waters, to blow up the affections after a wrong object; for then when such
lusts are in, love goes out: he knows, that the droppings of love will keep
us from such immoderate desires, which makes him to go all the ways he can to
work, to fill the head full of surmises and jealousies, the heart full of
extravagant lusts, and all to mar the harmony, which ought to be betwixt
couples: the house, the town, is out of quie^, when such are out of love; all
which calls upon such as are married to be as watchful and careful, to keep
all right, to remember that it is the convenant of the Lord, that it is not
made by man but by the Lord; all covenants else that are lawful are a far off,
Pro. 2. 17.
the covenant of the Lord and done in his sight: but here the Lord is a party
and God has a special hand in this bargain; and he sees, as within book,
quite ^hor^w, and is acquainted with all our thoughts a far off* wherefore we
must in thought, in word and in deed, keep close to the party, the Lord has
bound us unto, and wherein we have entered into bond to the Lord for our
faithfulness: such then must be a covering to one another eyes, Genesis 22. 26
else the heart will not stand clean, and the means before prescribed, and
other both natural and moral directions, which we find up and down in
Writers, must be used with all care and conscience, and much diligence, and all
little enough: our nature is catching this way, and once in, it is not so easy
to come off, but rather to run in this case further and further off, or else
grow into discontents, pangs of conscience, terrors of heart, inward gripings;
out of which if we come the right way, it must be with much bitterness,
after we have waded first (...) a kind of purgatory: if we never claw off
those gripings the, right way then such run into a seared conscience, or which
is worse, break prison and thrust themselves out of this world the quite
contrary way. I mean now to grow toward a conclusion, and the rest shall be
taken up in some directions.

1. To prevent these Lusts. 2. To help against the two effects of these lusts,
viz. 1. Horror of the tentation. 2. The deadly blows of senselessenesse which
they give.

First, 2 Timothy 2. 22
for such as are young: these are called the lusts of youth; they are most
strong in youth, and come on worst there: because that their affections are
strong, their judgments weak, and youth do conceit that they may take some
liberty this way, and no man must ask them why they do so. They must be
exhorted to fly the lusts of youth, Timothy was young in age, but old in
conditions; a very true penitentiary, a drinker of water, a very weak crazie
body, a great pains-taker, a man fuller of grace than ordinary, being an
extraordinary Officer in the Church; and yet Paul calls upon him being young
(...) what, only to avoid? No; what, to run? No, but fly from the lusts of
youth, make all post-haste away from them. If Timothy, such a chaste and
chastened piece as he was, had need of such a warning-peece, then all youth
have great need, not to come near the door of her house, Pro. 5. 8.
as Solomon does advise his young Saint.

Secondly, such as are old must not cry holy day, and think that no danger
lies this way: alas the day, age will kill no sin, it is Christ and grace
only that can cure any (...) there were a sin (...); whereof in all, (...)
if this be found, that age does kill it in some: such then as are in years,
must not cast away their weapon, but walk in fear and care this way, yea,
though they be good people. I know the body is then frigid; and there is not
that stirring with that strength: but if Satan come and blow the coals, there
will rise a great flame, a mighty burning: an old house will fire quickly, and
so will old people, if they let Satan alone. Job was not young, and married he
was too, when he said, Job 31. ^.
he made a covenant with his eyes, taking bonds of his senses that he would not
be catched with a maid; and maids are more inductive this way, than such as
are married. Job, not such a man in the whole world again, Job 1. 8.
a chaste man, a married man, one that had children, and now some what in
years, and yet you see his ^are and circumspection this way. No man must then
think to walk at large, because he has the remedy, and is now growing
toward his last declension. Saint Hierome says, that his face was pale with
fasting, that his body was cold, his flesh half dead already; yet he
complains, that in his witheted carcass the flames of lust did boil, and that
his mind was inflamed, and even all in a scalding f^^e with fleshly desires,
and old he was also; and therefore we see in the best men that be, age of it
self is no privilege; none must dare to hear himself bold on his age: Satan
can help an old man and woman to a wanton eye, to a young tooth; sin is not so
much in the act as in the affection, it (...) in the root: and GOD will suffer
such (...) one to fall into burning passions, that by his (...) experience he
may learn to know, that sin is properly and immediately in the soul, and
the soul grows not old; that grace, Arist. de A^im. l. 1. c. 5. Turpe est cum
aetate senueris, and defluxeris, libidinem tamen minime consenuisse.
not age, must be the death of sin: now an old man to fall into the passions
and lusts of youth is monstrous, and proves almost uncurable. To see an old man
covetous, is no such strange sight, but to see him lascivious is a great
eyesore; Na^. orat. 40. p. 648.
as to see an old man to be affected with the Gowte and Stone, Edit. ^aris.
the diseases of age is not so much, Turpe sen^lis amor.
but to see an old body to be taken with the diseases of youth, Petrarch.
is a strange sight, Epist. l. 5.
and proves most dangerous; Epist. 9.
as to have the smallpox, the worms, and other diseases of children; so in
his soul, to find an old body wantonly given, to be carried away with
affections of uncleanness, which are properly and commonly the lusts of youth,
is dangerous: I wish then old people to keep off, and not to thrust themselves
upon the fire, relying too much on their age: yea, say that a man has passed
over his youth, with some freedom this way, and it may be, has not felt
himself much given after this vein, yet he were best see that he hang not
loose when he comes to years, for we have the confession of a most strict and
godly man, Gregory Nazianzen by name, In Carmin. De rebus suis and de Calamit
ani^^ suae.
who having in his fresh and younger time, carried a good hand over these
lusts, when old and even done, he cries out that he was haunted and pestered
most miserably with them. And David a better man than he, yet it was in the
afternoon of his age, 2 Samuel 11.
that he fell into adultery. And when Solomon was old, says the Text, 1 Kin.
11. 3, 4
he doted on an our-landish woman: Neh. 13. 26.
how comes ^his? Like enough, because men being young fear themselves, when
old, they think the worst is past, trust too much to the advantage of the
body, lie not in their armor, have not their weapons ready, and then Satan is
too hard for them. 2. When old, then men are subject to much spiritual pride,
and that perhaps, because they stood so free from this sin, as though they
had been somewhat in themselves; and now to cure that spiritual sickness,
this base tentation is suffered to molest them. 3. If they had been thus set
upon, when hot and young and full of sap, with such strong motions this way,
like enough they should and would have sunk and yielded: and GOD will have
such know by their own feeling, what these lusts mean; wherefore that they
may not receive that hurt by the temptation and impulsion, they have their
hands full of them when old and cold, who did escape them, when green and
young. However, I wish both young and old, by all means to beware of this
Snake.

Thirdly, whether they be, or be not given to this sin, yet care must be
used, to be as much as we can out of the way, when the tentation does come;
such as are much given to this sin have cause to look round about them,
because Satan has such a potent friend in their bosom, he holds a side and a
faction in the hearts of such. This sin is a sin which is much drawn out
by the temper of the body, it holds more of the body than any; as we see it
shows not it self, till the body comes to such an age: it may rather than any
be called a bodily sin; if then we find that by the constitution and grain
of the body, as also by sinister education, or otherwise the mind and heart
run much or more than ordinary this way: such must be at it day and night, to
keep the occasion away all they can; to keep themselves away, not to be
within (as it were) when Satan comes, to call in for all the help they can, to
put the matter into Gods hands, to weaken the corruption, to break the blow of
the tentation, or else mightily to strengthen us; as knowing that such walk in
the midst of dangers, and by care and fear and other means, it is brought to
pass, that such as have most inclination to uncleanness, prove the chastest
of all. That is not properly chastity, when a man has no mind at all, but
frigidity.

If but a little by reason of his temper, he may thank his body: but when a
man feels raging lusts, and yet by resisting, by chastising his body, by
praying, fasting, by following God in the use of his remedies, by begging
chastity from heaven, gets power and strength that is the chaste man. There is
no lust so hot and violent, but Gods medicines being rightly applied will
cool and heal. And now, for such as are not very violent that way, by reason
of education, being ever kept under the wing, or of complexion, or because as
yet by the providence of God have not been much tempted; such are apt to fall,
because they do not suspect themselves, care not to go armed because they
dream of little or no danger: now here Satan has great advantage, for be the
inclination this way with the least; yet if we bear our selves bold, and
Satan be let to have his way, he will make a mountain of a molehill, and
bring men to a miserable pass with scalding affections, let him (the Devil)
have leave to blow the fire, and then (in respect of this sin) the most
naturally chaste men in the world, shall have cause enough to cry out, O
wretched man that I am. Such then as (...) no great matter this way, must yet
be wise, and keep watch and ward, not thrust themselves upon the Devils
dangers, least they smart for it.

4 Both old and young, single, and married, more or less addicted to these
passions. All I say, all are to see that they take these caveats.

1 Religious people must take heed one of another. Many when they meet think
no hurt when they come nigh one another, but are the worse one for another ere
they part: it is no hard matter for Satan to turn religious affections into
carnal: we see in the Elements that are Symbolicall and agree in one quality
the transmutation is easy, as of water into air, because both agree in
moisture, so here because some men and some women bear a dear affection and
love one to another; there lies danger, lest Satan cause it to degenerate into
fleshly lust. This caveat is in Paul, Rebuke the younger women as Sisters, with
all purity, 1 Timothy 5. 2. So that a mortified Timothy had need see to it, that
when he is to rebuke young godly women, he do it, not with some only, but
with all purity and chastity, for fear of the worst. 2. Care must be had of
such as are our kindred in the flesh; the sin is incest, and being great: our
Original sin, when once the veil of modesty is down, and the wall that
nature makes broken, then, I say, our corrupt flesh grows even mad after this
sin, as in Amnon with Thamar. The change is easy, from natural love to
carnal. Again, such as are near in blood, think they may make bold one with
another, and many times fear nothing till they are caught, ere they once
dream of it; and then the world takes no notice to see men and women who are
of alliance (any thing near) to toy and sport one with another, to be
together and alone too, which proves but a cloak for most abominable incest:
I could therefore desire such to see to themselves, and beware of the least
motions and occasions of this foul vice. The like for affinity, I propose it
to men, not to come to near the daughters of their wives by a former husband,
nor the sisters of their wives, nor women to be too bold with the sons of their
husbands by a former wife, nor with the brothers of their husbands, least too
much of the affection he bears to his wife falls on his wives sister. Satan
can turn hands here ere we think of it, and make carnal lust out of that
love, which we bear to our wives kindred. Ad but this, that the daughter or
sister of the wife carries many times the proportion of the wife, and out of
that, the devil can suck much poison; to draw the man to dote on the sister or
daughter of his wife; as on his wives picture, till it go so far that all is
too little for the sister, nothing but bitterness left for the wife; and what
tentations of uxoricide and the like, Satan can destill out of these base and
monstrous births, I leave it to others to judge.

3. Great heed is to be taken of such as are under our power, as of
man-servants and maidservants, and the rather if they be comely, they are in
our way every day, come near our persons, and Satan uses to tempt on both
sides the hedge if he can. See this in Joseph's Mistress, he was a servant in
the house, gave her no occasion, only she let her eyes fix on his person, Genesis
39. 6.
he being a very proper young man and a little and a little, she was overtaken
and went so far, that no bonds of modesty could hold her in; and when Joseph
had got off from her, the Text says, Genesis 39. 10w
he came no more where she was. The occasion must be put a way in all these
tentations what ever we do. Many think they must get the conquest, and yet
keep the occasions by them still: No, Joseph's mistress was to put away Joseph;
had he been a better man, a better servant than he was: Satan coozens us out
of all cry in this, when he bears us in hand that it is no conquest except we
do beat away the tentation, and yet keep the occasion by us: To venture on the
occasion shows there is in the heart an implicit consent to the sin, tho for
the present we seem to feel the contrary.
for he knows that ordinarily, we neither can nor shall get the victory,
except we do put away the occasions from us, when it is such a thing, or such a
person, as may lawfully be removed: God will not remove the tentation, except
we do remove the occasion; to pray that it may away, and yet keep (Joseph)
with us, is all one, as though we should hold our finger in the fire, and pray
to God it should not burn. It is not enough to say, that the fault is not in
Joseph, he does not entice; for if Satan and corruption entice the mistress to
Joseph by the eye, Joseph must be put out of sight, and Joseph if possibly and
lawfully he may, must remove himself too, else in ordinary course the cure
will not be done; and when we have another, and the fire take there too, that
person must be done away also, and so on till at last the conflict will cease,
and the victory will come: it is not enough when once caught, to turn the eye
away: but the object of the eye must be out of sight, that it may be out of
mind and then when another comes, be before hand, prevent the cunning of Satan
by keeping the eye off. Job as honest and as chaste a man as lived, yet he did
make a covenant with his eyes, that he would not think on a maid; by the
course of the letter he should have said, that he made a covenant with his
eyes, that he should not look on a maid; but in stead of saying look, he
says think, because ^ooking usually brings thinking, Job 31. 1.
and thinking, worse. A maid has an inclination in it in one sense, and a cut
loaf a covered cup carries strong poison in it in another sense; whether maid
or married, he does best who binds his eyes from such looking, that he be not
overtaken, and when the fire is once in, he does next best, who puts the object
out of sight and out of mind. Some cry out on their eyes, and does even wish
their eyes out, and in this sense they may as well wish their hands off, their
feet off, their ears off, and member after member til al were off, this is but
to complain of God who made us these members and senses: this is not the way,
it does not please God, and were it as we wish, it would not please us; for
were we blind, all would be one as long as the fire is unquenched within, and
our passions are suffered to be up. We know what Christ says, Ioh. 17. 15.
I pray not that thou should take them out of this world, but that thou
would sanctify them through thy truth: so we are not to wish our eyes out,
but our sin out; and to pray him to sanctify our hearts and eyes by his truth;
and then away out of doors with that which we (being led by our lust) have
made the object and occasion, and it will mend and grow better. It is true,
that if the object be removed, the tentation for the time may cease, and no
victory; as keep a Sow from mire in a Meddow, and the Sow wallowes not, take
away the Lodestone, and the Iron moves not: here is no real change, the
intention of the mind is not changed, nor the affection of the heart neither.
Such have a mind and a desire to the old lust still; but if a man can remove
the occasion of his own proper motion, not another take it away, but he
himself put it away; not be kept from it, but keep ones self of ones own
will from it; this is from grace and here is a victory.

Use these and the like means and hold on for a competent time in using of
them, and we shall conquer, the tentation must and will away: Dis-may not,
though the conquest come not presently: what? Give over because the physic
does not heal at once taking? Be out of heart because all is not done in a
day? It is not so easy to untie a knot in a silken thread; the conscience is
of a fine spinning, and knots knit there, and such as have bin long a knitting
too, will not be undone on a sudden: have patience, give it time and now some
and then some, Gods medicines will heal; and when we find the cure done, and
we get some strength of grace, by all means remember to be thankful, lest
the tentation come again, and bring seven worse than its self. But what if
the ease I find, be only, because sin and Satan in skill do cease to tempt:
if so, then our danger remains, we keep our weapon about us, we may know, if
it be only a ceasing to tempt, and the lust is only for a time asleep.
First, if it be done without using GODS means in Gods fear. Secondly, if we
find that the lust is only left not hated, but if the sin be hated, then it
is more than a bare ceasing from the sin: for Satan forbearing; and sin
sleeping cannot bring us to an hatred of the sin: I speak not only of a
disapproving of the sin, for so a civil man may do; and because it did molest
us, we may thence be brought to a dislike of it; but if we find that we can
hate it, this proves that there is grace in us, a divine nature which is
contrary to that lust: and that chastity is now in the place of the tentation,
and this cannot come only from Satan's ceasing and forbearing. To cease is but
a negative thing, but chastity is a positive quality; which mere negative
ceasing and giving over to solicit and tempt, can never work in us. Thus when
our chaste affections are had out of the fire, and we have attained this power
by spiritual means used, and waiting upon God for the success. Dispute nor,
say, I have gotten the victory, and the God of heaven has eased me of the
vexation, given me a chaste mind to my content and my comfort: with body and
soul both, we must exceedingly rejoice in this virtue. 1 These. 4. 4.
It is a grace which does not only sanctify, but grace and beautify us: all
the paint in the world cannot cast such a shining vernish on the very body of a
man, as chastity does.

Thus much to show the ready way, how to prevent the tentation of lust and
uncleanness. The last of all, is in a word to help us out, in case we do
go too far, we must take heed of both the extremes. 1. That we do not run
upon the Rocks of Despair; there is nothing got by discouragement, during the
time of huge and mighty terrors: it may be we shall have no mind nor heart
to tamper with those lusts again, but yet for other sins, every way worse,
worse to God, and worse to us; we lie all open to them, when we are in great
dejection, as Discontent, Distrust, a secret rising against God,
Unthankfulness, A finding fault with all that God either says or does, No
care of the Word, to reckon no other of the Scripture, than of our very
Neckverse, and a world of mischiefs more, which are the greatest sins:
indeed in these occasions we are very apt to fall off from Gods mercy, to
fry in hellish sorrow: no sins do so fire the conscience of a man, as these
lusts of uncleanness do; they stare in our faces, look upon our consciences,
as it were, with the eyes of so many devils: and in this respect we must take
great heed that we be not quite out of heart; when a man is past hope, he is
in his own sense past grace; and when a man is made a terror to himself,
Biblida quid refer^^? Ovid. de Art.
great danger is at hand; and therefore when frights do come, and such do
find themselves too to apt to join with the motion to despair; look upon
Gods love, bear up in an apprehension and application of his mercy. Look
upon instances in the Word, of better men than we are, who in the same or the
like have seen a good end of all, and are now with the Lord. 2. The other
extreme is to grow senseless, to be past feeling; we are apt in these cases
to feel too much or too little; for if our terrors overcome us, we despair,
if we overcome them by faith, we take comfort, if we put them off by the
flesh; we grow secure, and it is common out of great fears to run into great
want of feeling, and so we find it in the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 13.
that lasciviousness breeds in us a senselessness, it fears up the
conscience, and such come to be past feeling. To open this, there is a partial
want of feeling, when we commit sins and aile nothing in some particulars.
Thus we find that otherwise good people, break out into excesses in buying
and selling, do they care not what in matters of profit and feel nothing; the
conscience sees all, says nothing, or as good as nothing: one would wonder how
men can sell day, (I speak not against giving day, but selling of it,) let out
their money to use, hoard up corn, directly against the Word of God in the
very letter, Pro. 11. 36
make up some pieces of works on the Lords day, are told of it in the
ministry, and yet nothing come of it; why? Because custom in them and in
others has taken away their feeling: covetousness has made them in most
matters of commodity to be past feeling, yet this is but partial; we mean
not to say that those allow those sins, for the point is, that though the Word
be plain, yet custom does so dazzle their eyes, that they cannot in the
particulars see the right: so David and Solomon did multiply wives against that
Text, Deuteronomy. 17. 17. The like did the Patriarchs for Polygamie. And the
believing Gentiles saw not single fornication to be more than a thing
indifferent, Act. 15. 20. 21, 25. Rev. 2. 15. 20. Yet this fornication is
forbidden in the Word. So great is the force of custom: But should these men
meddle half so much in forbidden lusts of uncleanness: oh what pangs rise in
their conscience, they feel it with a witness: But now the passions of
lasciviousness, when once men have broken through the terrors of it, which
usually come first; then they bring a man to a total senselessness to be past
feeling, not only in these and the like affections, but in all universally to
make conscience of nothing, to commit any sins that comes to hand with all
greediness, devour any thing, like some stomachs, and be never troubled with
it: it is so sensual a sin and gives such a blow to the natural conscience
too, that like a sound knock on the head, it takes away all sense and feeling;
let Satan propose what he will, nothing comes amiss; for this sin of
uncleanness fights against both light of nature and grace, and if the natural
conscience speak and we will not hear, and the spiritual conscience cry,
and we will not hearken; the conscience will grow speechless, and speak no
more: and hence it is that such as come to a custom in some covetous
practices* are past feeling in some things for some time, but such as come to a
custom in the lust of uncleanness are soon made to be past feeling simply
and totally, scruple at nothing whatsoever.

Since then the danger is as great as a seared conscience comes to, such as have
broken the peace with God, must return and make all haste to 2 Cor. 12. 21.
repentance; the cry is so great and the sight of it is so odious, and the
sense of it is so grievous at first, and so palpable, that we may with the more
ease come to repent. It is a sin that does convince it self to be a sin,
(till a man has lost his judgment and his spiritual taste,) while it is a
doing, the judgment cries shame, and there is little to do, because our work
lies in a manner only with our affection, whereas many passions of anger, and
pride, and covetousness are such, that the offender is long ere he can be
brought to see the thing to be a sin, the fact to be a fault. But in pollutions
of uncleanness they are so direct against the principles of reason, and so
flat against al show of Religion, that they carry their conviction in their
mouths, which makes the heart the more ready to entertain the work of
repentance unto life. Judah repented, David repented, Lot repented, and so did
Thamar, and so did others, and they were taken into special favor and honor,
as we see them upon record in the first of Matthew. Those sins which much
humble, do much honor; none humble more than such base lusts: David died in
honor, Mary Magdalen is in great honourin the Church of God; Christ to comfort
and honor her, Mat. 28. 9.
appeared first and foremost to her, what ever heales the soul heales the
name. repentance does both. The truth of our repentance will best appear; if
we go away as Judah did and do so no more, Genesis 38. 26
come not near the garment spotted with the flesh; Iud. v. 13
affections of another nature are more apt to bring a relapse than these
passions, they leave such a sting and sent behind them, go away (but with a
smart,) have such a taste, and are such a base sight that few relapse; such as
are by Gods mercy cured of these diseases, are commonly ever after very chaste,
Become as children in all purity and chastity: when we fetch out a great
stain, the cloth is after whiter than ordinary, and so after this staining sin
is washed away: such must be very holy, passing chaste; beware of the least
spark of sin: this is the meaning of that of John the Baptist, Mat. 3. 8.
Bring forth fruits meet or worthy of repentance: how worthy of repentance? It
is that when a man has been at it in the work of repentance; his works and
deeds must afterward be better than ordinary; he must look like a true
penitent, Opus Imperf. in c. 3. Mat. Hom. 3.
that as a Physician can judge by the color of the face that his patient is
recovered, so must our works shine and carry such a luster and color with
them, that one of skill may read it as written in our faces, that there is
amendment of life, that now all is well and sound within.

And say by intemperate courses, one have bin the occasion of hastening our own
end before the time. I grant that there is just cause (as Solomon speaks) to
mourn at the last, Pro. 11. 5.
when the flesh and the body are consumed, and we are accidentally guilty of
hastening our own death, before the time of Natures Period, but never before
the time of Gods council: mourn here and spare not, but yet not as men
without hope, repentance will mend this also. First, hardly one man in a
thousand, but one way or other, more or less, cuts off some of his days. Had
it not bin for one thing or other, he might have lived a day, a year longer;
as I think is plain enough in David, who was bedrid at or about the age his
father begat him; either nature would have lasted, or might have lasted longer
in almost all, were it not for some defect, excess, or default in our selves:
and therefore this accusation lies against almost all. Secondly, this is
besides a man's intention to give his years to the cruel. Pro. 5. 9.
The Libidinous intention is to satisfy this sin in the lusts thereof; in that
there is withal a waste of the radical moisture, and thereby a cutting off of
his days; this is by accident only, and a consequent of the thing done, not a
thing meant by the door. Thirdly, since repentance heales the pollution intended
by the offender, it is against Religion and reason both, to question whether it
will heal the co^sequent consumption not intended. Amen.

OF USURY.
Nehemiah 5. 11. Restore to them even th^^ (...), their Lands, their
^^^e-yards, their Olive (...) and their houses; also the hundred part of the
Money, the Wine, and the Oil, that ye exact of them.
THE matter here is a case of Restitution, Vulg. and Vatabl. Vsura Geneva.
of Lands, and Moneys gotten from the poor by usury, Burdens, Their note is,
you press them with usury.
so our last translation reads it, Ver. 7. The Hebrew is Burden, Deodate.
because usury is a great burden, Gravezze His note is Le usure.
and carries an heavy weight with it.

The hundred part of the money, Exodus 22. 25
is meant either of the year and then it is but one in the hundred; Thou shall
not be to him as an Usurer Heb.
or of the month, as some think then, it is twelve in the hundred. We see
that covetousness is rightly termed, the root of all evil, and of al wrongs
and evil dealings; (besides other sins) else it could not be imagined, that
in their bondage the Jews should thus have grated one upon another. The place,
the time, the scandal, besides, the express law of God, one would have
thought, should have made them forbear: but a covetous heart cannot hold; he
cares more for money, than all reports of God and man.

The next thing of note is, that what comes in by usury (as well as by other
extortion) must ordinarily be restored out of hand (even this day;) it is not
safe to give the heart of man time in any sin, but of all, not in this wilely
sin of covetousness: if ever Satan be a fox and a serpent, it is here; give
him but a space to play, and angle a little with our hearts, with this sin of
worldliness, and he will quickly catch us with a golden hook. It is great
wisdom to be present, the wit of man will distinguish else, and creep out by
one evasion or other; we are too apt to be pleased with any leaf, and shift to
bear our selves in hand that we may lawfully continue in such practices, as
feed this greedy humor, this eating Wolf: do it then while it is called to
day, do it now, lest our hearts deceive us, Iam. 1. 26.
and we deceive our hearts, and so we do it never. Delays are ever
dangerous, but in nothing like as in getting out of the hands of sin, but of no
sin, Quid dicam de usuris quas etiam ipsae leges and judices reddi jubent.
August. ep. 54. Decret. Cause. 13. q. 4. c. 11.
so as to get out of the snare of this sin of covetousness.

The last thing is, that Usurers are bound by the Law of God to make
restitution. What ever comes in this way, comes in at the wrong door, and it
must out again: If the conscience be not ^eared, it makes it sick again;
there is pain, there is no quiet, Job. 20. 15.
till the conscience take a vomit and up comes all: We use to Saint the man,
who does but give over this golden trade of usury, but the truth is, that such
come but half way: our repentance is not through, our sorrow comes not home,
except (as it is here) we do restore. When we leave the practice of usury, we
do not properly leave the sin (as sin) except we restore and turn the stolen
dog home again: when we have not wherwithall, there necessity has no law. The
King of heaven must and will lose and will part with his right, where nothing
is to be had, and there the will does stand for the deed; but where there is no
such answer (that we cannot) but we see that we ought, we have wherewithal
and (will not) here I say it is right and reason, that the Lord should make use
of his authority, and use us according to law and justice.

Now as this act of restitution secures our hearts, so that the bells ring not
backwards in our consciences within; in like manner it makes much for the
safety of our estate without: it sets a mark upon our goods, and they are safe
thereby under the Kings Seal; whereas a little of these ill-gotten profits,
like fellons goods, endanger all; a little you know, brings all the rest into
the tenure of the Crown, and all must be as it were in capite: I am certain,
that a golden wedge will fire all the rest of the stuff; Josh. 7. 11. 24, 25
and therefore he that has been or is an Usurer, he must leave his usury and
make all well by restitution, as he means good to his soul, as he intends
safety to his estate; and it is his happiness that his sin lies in such a
thing, wherein he may make restitution, and lick the parties wronged whole
again: this makes the conscience quiet, helps us to peace, when as in
murders, adulteries, in such and some other the like sins, where there is no
place left for restitution; an hard matter it is, to set such in comfort, when
once the conscience falls a complaining: but here, let the conscience accuse at
the worst, yet as it is a sin, godly sorrow makes all well, and as it is a
wrong, repair is made by restoring; repenting takes up the matter as it is to
God, restoring helps and heales all, as it is to men. The most that can be
said is, that the Vsury-taker paies the use willingly: and where a man parts
with his money willingly, restitution is not of force. Judas might have
retained the money, with the good content of the Priest, who gave it willingly,
yet he did restore it and was bound to do it: and were this good Divinity,
then a great deal of that which comes in by bribery, and dicery may be
lawfully and comfortably kept. If I have received any bribe, I will restore it,
1 Samuel 12. 3.
Then I say, that though it be not against the will of the borrower that the
Usurer keep the use, yet it should be: what if he think that to take use be
no sin in the Usurer? What if he be not convinced, that the fact of the Usurer
herein is a fault; in this case, he may be willing, he should keep it for want
of true light and sound judgment: whereas were he aware of what is truth, that
the Usurer had no right to take it, he would withal think, that the Usurer
has no reason to keep it; and this kind of willingness is an interpretative
unwillingnes. And lastly, I say, that he seems many times to be willing,
because he cannot tell how to help it: the Travellor gives his purse to the
thief, because he cannot do otherwise, or at least dares not; and there is a
moral necessity which is of force, to cause a man to pay use, and to show a
contentedness, that the Usurer should hold it when he has it, because of
great inconveniences, in that he else cannot have money to serve his need
against another time; this is a mixed act of willingness, which is construed to
be naturally, done unwillingly, but willingly accidentally. All this is
grounded on the law of God, Arist. Eth. l. 3. c. 1.
which makes usury a sin, and a sin against justice too. Zacheus did offer to
restore that which he did fetch in by forged cavillation, he might like enough
have kept it, and no man have thought much of it; it was gotten by sin and
restore he would; and what the Usurer takes is his by sin, and restore he
must. The Law, I know, permitted it to the Jews, to the stranger, what of
that? It follows the rather that it is of it self a sin, because permission
is of sins, not of duties; but the thing I say is, there was a law to kill the
Canaanite, and yet I hope, that killing was not murder; no more was that usury
to them a sin. The Law does urge it most, that it be not done to the poor: was
it not because the Jews were then too noble and generous to go a borrowing,
except it were the poorer sort? What, should the Law then forbid that to be
done by rich men, which most rich men never did? Neither is there any one place
giving leave to a Jew, to hire his money out to a rich foe, only to (the
Stranger.)
but after we have prohibitions, plenty that are indefinite; we are forbidden,
we must not rob the poor, because he is poor: good sport for thieves, if
therefore it may be thought to follow, that it is a lawful matter to rob the
rich: neither can the law against usury be thought to be a judicial law of
Moses, for such laws (as such) are known only by some intelligence from the
books of Moses; but Heathens of all sorts, who never once heard of Moses's
writings, have with one voice cried sin upon usury, and shame upon Usurers,
Poets, Orators, Historians, Philosophers, all.

They have condemned this sin by the instinct and light of nature, and
therefore it could not be a political law of Moses. Besides, we have it
forbidden in the New Testament, when judicials were out of date; lend, Luke 6.
35.
says the LORD JESUS, looking for nothing again.

Question is made, whether children be bound to restore that which their
Parents have gotten by use upon use, and left unto them. The negative seems to
be affirmed by a most holy man; Neque enim tu eris obnoxious, quae pater
quesivit iniquo forte compendio: e^si enim quae habes ex rapina collecta sunt,
non tu tamen ca rapuisti.
but my thinks, reason would that we say, such goods should be restored,
though not we, but our predecessors, have gotten them unlawfully; the saddle is
another still in equity and conscience, and it ought to be set on the right
horse: mere possession cannot give us a right title to that, Chrysostom in 1 Tom.
cap. 4.
which in truth and Coram Deo is another. Hom. 12. E. contra Navarr.
And what if the property be altered, Manual. c. 17. n. 270. and seq.
yet that makes nothing against restitution, since a child is bound (by the
grant of all) to restore the price now in his hands, of any thing his father
first stole, and then turned into money. Restitution is to be in the very kind
if that may be; if not, then in that which is answerable and equivalent. The
Schools are divided in setting down the reason of restitution, one side will
have it to be because the Usurer is a damage to the borrower: the other sort
with whom I join, say that it is, because by usury there is no true title
(Iure Divino) no not in justice, to that which comes in that way; and (since
this is the truth) I conclude and say, Vid. Greg. de Val. Tom 3. Dis. 5. q. 21
p^n. 3.
that the child is bound to make restitution, because his father has conveyed
that to him which never was his fathers right, and therefore cannot be the
sons: some cases may free the child, which also would have freed the father,
as when it is not in his power, has not the ability to do it, and the like;
but in ordinary course it is not his own, it is another, and by that reason
he is not to keep it, but to restore it.

Papists teach us, that in case a man be in very necessity when he t^kes use,
and makes profit by his money, yet if after this, necessity cease, he is not
bound to make restitution when he has wherewithal, and this necessity they
stretch and will have reach to his estate. A large field for a man to lose his
conscience in: for when will a man say that he is not in some necessity, in
respect of his estate and condition; and when will he be out of need to bear
up his port? Men will make necessities enough, might this go for good
doctrine. But dangerous it is, and the ground of it is most false: for (say
they) by the law of nature all things are common, (mine and thine) came in
after by law positive. Iure divino omnia sunt communia: etc. Aquin. 2 2 q 66.
a. 7.
Now say they, necessity dispenses with all positive laws, and makes the
goods of another mine, Lumb. Sent. 14. D. 15.
and mine again his; and so they say, that when a man to fill up his
necessities, does gain by use from another, indeed and in right it is but his
own, because then and in that case all things are common, and no man is after
bound to restore that, which when he took it, was but his own. Write (false)
upon these conclusions, for the truth is, that mere necessity of a man's person
does not take away propriety; Ferenda est magis omnis necessitas quam
perpetranda est aliqua iniquitas, Tamen aliud est de necessitate Peccare
aliliud in abundantia* pauper men dicus fur^um facit, ex ^macie pro^essit
iniqui^as. Aug. in Psa. 73.
in great extremity for a man to take this or that, which is another, is to
lay hands on that which is not ones own: what ever it should have been, had
not Adam fallen, I enquire not; but since Adams fall, there is such a propriety
of Meum and Tuum, that no necessity, be it never so urgent, can dissolve.
Tully resolves the case thus, that say a man be on the point to starve, yet
rather than he should take the least matter from another, Porsitan quispiam
^ixerit, non^ ^e igitur sa^iens, etc. Offic. lib. 3.
he should rather famish, it being better to dye the death, than to violate any
man for ones own cause. Erasmus does descant on this quid^^y of the Schools,
Colloq. in (...).
what (says he merrily and truly) is not theft, theft in case of necessity,
nay, though one do it with a mind to make it good again? say one must lose his
life if he do not perjure himself, and bear false witness, does that
necessity make it no sin? say one by committing adultery without offering
violence to the person of the adulteress, may save his own life, does the
necessity of saving ones life make adultery lawful now? Antiochus Seleuci
filius, contrahendis incestis cum noverca nuptiis egra vissimo evasit morbo.
Put the case (says he) that a man must dye or tell a lie, is it not a sin
in this case of necessity to lie? If then mere personal necessity does not
dispense with these Commandments, Appian: de Bell* Syriac Plut: vita Demetr.
Thou shall not lie, Not bear false witness, Not commit adultery: what color
of truth can there be in this, to affirm that any necessity whatsoever can
make that law to be no law, when he says, Thou shall not steal. If necessity
cannot make an others wife at my command; no more can necessity make an others
goods mine own. Gods Ten laws are in the substance of them, the very laws of
nature: and by the Decalogue, there is in all cases of necessity still a
propriety of goods; the argument in Melancthon is firm. The eight Commandment
is a natural law, Quaest. a Paulo Ebero propos. Georgio Mullero an 1552.
it stands Iure Divino; but by the eighth Commandment there is established a
distinction between mine and thine, Vid. Sclat. in 2 Thessalonians. c. 3. v. 12.
and so it concludes strongly, that propriety of things is not by law positive,
but by law Divine and natural. Moreover if that community of things were a law
of nature, it had bin immutable, and al things should and ought to be common in
all times and cases. Neither can any man show, why the eighth Commandment
being a law of nature, should be subject to be dispensed, with by cases of
necessity any more than any other, or all the ten Commandments. All the rest
stand firm in the body of the^ against all necessities whatsoever and
therefore this.

Next, we prove our case out of the Word. There is a stealing for need (says
Solomon,) Pro. 6. 30.
but if this be so, that need maks all things common, there can be no stealing
for need, And the law did count it to be done for need, though a man were able
to make fourefold restitution.
since in cases of necessity, what ever a man takes to supply his need, he takes
but his own, say they. I am sorry then, that any Protestant should write and
print that in this case, necessity takes away all reason of sinning. Ames de
consc: l. 5. c.
This is but to close with Bellarmine, 1. Sect. 17.
as though now in extreme necessity it were (alienated) no longer. De matrim.
lib. 1. c. 27.


The only objection worth the answering, is from Mat. 12 1. where we read,
that the Disciples being an hungered, did pluck and eat the ears of c^rne, and
that therefore (they doing well in it) it is a lawful thing to take that which
is another in case of necessity.

The answer is, that this was not done by the^ on this ground, because
necessity took away propriety, but because it was their own, they took by
the gift of God, who is the right and chief owner of all the creatures in the
World. In Deuteronomy. 23. 25. God had given them a warrant so to do in the Land of
Canaan, and that things were not then made common by necessity it is plain, by
the words which follow in that very text, (But thou shall not move a sickle
unto thy neighbors standing corn; which might have been done without offense
to GOD, or wrong to man; if this were true, which Jesuits teach; that in point
of necessity, not only in respect of one person, but also in respect of ones
condition, nothing is any man's, but all things are every man's: for the case may
be, that a man and his family may be cast upon extreme need, that a sickle
put in his neighbors corn, will not supply the hunger of him and his, so much
as the plucking the ears of corn did stay the stomachs and the hunger of the
Disciples; and yet I think that it was never held but as a thing forbidden to
the Jews by that law, for a man in never so great necessity to put his sickle
in his neighbors corn, and that a Jew was rather to famish than so to do:
which shows the little truth that is in that assertion, that necessity maks
things common amongst men. The Disciples did it, because they had warrant and
leave from God, who was the owner of that corn, and the law of God was on
their side. And for our times, I doubt not but it is lawful for one to pluck
an apple, or to take an ear or so, of corn and eat it, not only for ones
very need, but for ones delight and content. The equity of that judicial law
of Moses, says somewhat, but my ground is, because a man in such cases has an
implicit and tacit consent; the owner sometimes is by when we pluck plums and
apples or so, and we never ask him leave though he look on, and in this
case, he that says not no, says yea: and say he be absent, and we know not
who is the owner neither: yet I think this lawful, because we have an
interpretative consent; we have a moral persuasion, that were the owner by,
he would give us leave to pluck an ear, to catch a pear, with heart and good
will; which motion being in the heart of man, does free him from any theft; and
also we see it a (common) matter: which ordinarinesse of the thing helps to
make this good, that there is in all men a kind of consent and leave,
vertually given to all passengers; and the like to pluck an ear, an apple, or
apples, a plum, a pear, or so: and this is warrant enough if it be not
abused, to save the conscience of a man harmless, against that law of God:
Thou shall not steal; here is no stealing, because here is a kind of consent
of the owner, though not actual, yet vertuall and implicit: and such a tacit
consent is enough, whether the fact be done before the owners face, or behind
his back.

Again, if need did make things so far forth common as might satisfy our
need; then where no need is, we sin if we pluck a pear or so: but we may
lawfully do it only for delight, so also were this new Divinity right: in
case of need, we might satisfy our soul even against the consent of the
owner, he flatly forbidding us; for in their sense (who thus teach) we take
but our own, all which is false; wherefore we must rather speak with the
truth, and say, that not only for need, but for our very delight in the owners
absence (in case he directly forbid us not) we may (I say) lawfully pluck an
^are of corn or so, by virtue of a common supposed consent (intimated in the
equity of that law of Moses) which in such cases does run through the veins of
all mankind.

Lastly, I conceive this matter to be put past al peradventure, by the very
law of God once in force amongst the Jews: commanding the thief stealing for
very need, to make restitution to the forth and fifth, and in a case to the
seventh degree; Exodus 22. 1.
and if, 2 Samuel 126.
selling all to his very shirt would not make up the sum, Pr. 6. 30, 31.
Deodate
then by law he was to be sold and lose his liberty, Annotat. on Pro. 6. 30,
31.
to make restitution for the principal (not for the overplus) of his theft.
Ainsw. on Exodus 22. 3.
Now this Law of God had gone against sense: if need did dispense with
propriety, and give a right and title to so much of ones neighbors substance
as would serve to satisfy ones want: for I hope, reason it self is flat
against it, that a man should be thus bound to make restitution for taking that
which (by their Doctrine) is his own; Aye, common understanding it self at
the first sight is against it, that a man, can be said to steal his own, can
stand bound by Gods law, thus to restore his own: and therefore to return
home again, I conclude and say, that our main point does stand free and firm,
viz. That albeit in case of need (as of some Orphans) a man take use, yet he
is to make restitution: since usury in the law of God and of conscience, carries
a false finger: need is no salve, it only excuses a Tanto, neither can the
Jesuits or any else make any sound proof to the contrary.

FINIS.

