Here begins a litill book necessary and behouefull aenst the Pestilence
^T the reverence and worschip of the blessed Trinyte and of the glorious
virgyn saint marye and the conseruacion of the common well of all christian
people / as well for them that been hole as for remedy of them that been seek. I
the Bishop of Arusiens in the royame of Denmark doctor of Phisike will
write by the most expert and famous doctors auctorised in Phisike sum
things of the infirmyte of pestilence which daily enfecteth and sone suffers
us to depart out of this life.

First I will write the tokenes of this i^firmyte The second the causes whereof
it comes The third remedies for the same The fourth comfort for the heart
and the pncipal members of the body The.v. when it schal be season to be let
blood


First I said the tokenes of this infirmite.vij. things ought to be noted in
the same The first is when in a summers day the weder often times changes.
as i^ the morning the wedyr appears to pain / afterward it apperith cloudy
and at last wyndy i^ the south The.ij token is when i^ so^mer the days
apperith all^ derke and like to mynr and yet it myneth not. and if many days
so continue it is to dread of great pestilence The.iij. tokyn is when great
multitude of flies ben upon the eerthe then it is sign the air is venomous
and infect The fourth token is when the sterres semen often times to fall then
it is token that the air is infect with much venomous vapors. The.v. token
is when a blasing sterre is see i^ the element then it is sign to be sone
after great pestilence or great ma^slaghter i^ bataille The.vi. token is when
there is great lightnynge and thu^dre namely out of the south The.vij. token is
when great wyndes passen out of the south they be foul and unclean. therefore
when these tokenes appear it is to dread great pestilence but god of his mercy
will remeue it

Here after folowen the causes of pestilence
The pestilence comes of.iij. things sometime it comes fro the rote bynethe
Otherwhile fro the rote above so that we may feel sensibly how the change of
the air appears unto us And sometime it comes of both to gider as well fro
the rote above as fro the rote bynethe As we see a sege or preuy next to a
chamber or of any other particular thing which corrupts the air in his
substance and qualite which is a thing may hap every day: And thereof
comes the ague of pestylence. And about the same many physicions be deceived:
not supposing this axes to be a Pestilence / sometime it comes of deed careyn /
or corrupcion of standing waters in diches or slouhes and other corrupt places
and these things sometime be vniuersall^ and sometime particular Fro the rote
above: it fortuneth the causes of the bodies above i^ thayer by whom the
spirit of life is corrupt in a man or in a best: In like wise as Auycenne
says i^ his fourth book / by the form of thayer above / the bodies benethe
lightly be infecte: For thynpressyons above corrupts the air and so the
spirits of a man ben corrupt. This infirmyte comes also from the rote above
and bynethe: when of thynpressyons above / the air is corrupt and of the
putrifaccion or rotyn caceyn of the vile places benethe an infirmite is caused
in a man. and such an infirmyte sometime is an axes. sometime a postume or a
swellyng and that is in many things. Also the air i^spyred is venomous and
corrupt hurti^g the heart that nature many ways is grieved so that he
perceyueth not his harm: For the vryne appears fayer and schewe^h good
digestion yet neuth^les the pacient is like to dye / wherefore many physicions
seeing the vryn of their pacientes they speak superficially and be deceived:
Therefore it is need that euy pacie^t provide to him self a good and expert
physicion. These things wryton before are the causes of pestilence But about
th^se things.ij. q^stions be me^ued. The first is wherefore one dies and
another dies not in a town where me^ be deed i^ one house and i^ another house
there dies none. The.ij. q^stion is whether pestilence sores be contagious. To
the first q^stion I say it may hap to be of.ii. causes that is to say of
that thing that does and of that thing that suffers. An ensample of that thing
that does / the influence of the bodies above be holds that place or that
place more than this place or this place. and the pacient is more disposed to
die than another Therefore it is to be noted that bodies be more hot disposed
of oopyn poorys than bodies i^fect having the pores stopped with many humors
where bodies be of resolucion or opening as men that abusen them self with
wymme^ or vsen often times bathes. or men that be hot with labor or great
anger their bodies be more disposed to this sekenes. To the.ij. q^stion I say
that pestilence sores be contagious because of enfect humors bodies and the
reke or smoke of such sores is venomous and corrupts the air and therefore
it is to flee fro such persons as be i^fect In pestilence time no body should
stand i^ great prece of people for some man of the^ may be infect Therefore wise
phisicie^s visiting seek folk stand far fro the pacie^t holdi^g their face
toward the door or wyndowe and so shall the servants of seek folk stand Also
it is good to a pacient euy day to change his chamber and often times to have
the wyndowes open against the north and eest and to spear the wyndowes against
the south For the south wi^de has two causes of putrifaccion The first is it
makes a man be i^ hole or seek feeble in their bodies: The.ij. ca^ is as it is
writon i^ the.iij. of Amphorismie the south wind greueth the heering and
hurts the heart because it opens the pooris of man and enters i^to the
heart wherefore it is good i^ time of pestilence to an hole man when the wi^de
is in the south to be within the house al day and if it needs to go out yet
let a man abide i^ his house til the son be up in the eest passing southward.

The remedies for the Pestilence
Now it is to wete by what remedies a man man pserue him self fro pestilence
first see the writi^g of Jeremy the prophet that a man ought to forsake evil
things and do good deeds and mekely to confess his sins for whi it is the
hiest remedy i^ time of pestilence penance and confession to be pferred al
other medicines Neutheles I promitte you verily it is a good remedy to void
and change thinfect place: but some may not proffitably change their places
therefore asmoche as to the^ is possible it is teschewe euy cause of
putrefaction and stinking and namely every fleschely lust with wymme^ shall be
eschewed Also the sothern wind which is naturelly infectif therefore spear the
windows against the south as it is said before til the first hour after the
mids of the day then opene the wyndowes against the north Of the same cause
euy foul stinche is to be eschewed of stabyl stinkyng feldes ways or streets
and namely of stinking deed careyn and most of stynking wats where in many
placee wat is kept.ij. days or.ij. nights. or else there be gutters of water
casten under therthe which causes great stink and corrupcion and of this
cause some deye in that house where such things happen and in another house dye
none as yt is said before Like wise in that place where the wurtes and coals
putrefied it makes a noyfull savor and stynking. For like as by the sweet
odor of bawme the heart and the spirits laue recreacio^ so of evil savors
they be made feeble wherefore keep your hons that an infect air enter not in. for
an infect air most causes putrifaccio^ in places and houses where folk slipe
therefore let your house be clean and make clear fire of wode flaming Let your
house be made which fumigacion of herbs which be the leuys of baye tree Ieneper
vberiorgany it is i^ tha poticaue stoppes worm vode rewe nugwort and of the
tree of aloes which is best but it is dear such a fumee taken by the mouth
and eeris opens thynward pertes of the body Also it is teschew all great
replecions because full bodies be lightly infect as auyce^ne says in the fourth
cano^ They that chargen their bodies with repleccio^ shorten their life Also
common bathes are to be eschewed for a litil crust corrupts all the body
Therefore the people asmoche as is possible is to be eschewd lest of infect
brethes some man be infect But when the multitude of people may not be eschewed
then use the remedies following, In the morning when ye use wesshe a litil rewe
and one or two filberd nottes clean with salt and ete the^ and if that can not
be had then ete bread or a toste sopped i^ vinegre namely in troubelous and
cloudy weder Also in time of pestilence it is better tabyde within the house for
it is not holsom to go in the cite or town. Also sprenkle your hows specially
in so^mer with vinegre and roses and with the leuys of vyn tree Also it is good
to wasshe often times in the day your hands with wat and vinegre and wipe your
face with your hands and smelle to the^ Also it is good always to sauo aygre
things. In the mount of pessulane I might not eschew the conpany of people for
I went fro house to house beca^e of my poute to cureseke folks therefore bread or
a sponge sopped in vinegre I took with me holding it to my mouth and nose
because al egre things stoppen the ways of humors and suffers no venomous
things to ent into a ma^nys body and so I escaped the pestilence my felows
supposing that I should not live These things I have proved by my self

The confortes of the heart and the pncipal me^bres
The confortes of the heart be these / faffron Canifex planteyn with other
herbs thy o^e^ the inward spirit and these be good among the common people
where lightly it happeth that one is infect of another therefore beware the
breath of another Also of infect air a man's eyes be made dymme if he bear not
these said things in his hand Also it is holsom to wasshe your mouth face
eyes and hands often times in the day with rosewat meddled with vinegre and if
ye have no rosewat take vinegre: and so these things used ye may go surely
among the people Also a natural laxe of the belly is a great remedy ellis provoke
a laxe by a suppository craftily Use pipille pestilenciales for they be good
they be in thappoticary shoppes Also keep fire al way in your house. for it
lets much thin pssions of the bodies above and clarefied thaier Also it is
proffitable as well for hole and seek folks to drink Triacle: therefore take
it.ij. times a day with clear wyn lymphat or with clear rosewater or with
clear ale: Take a qua^tite of tryacle of a pese and.ij. sponeful of clear wyn
or rosewater or ale dissolve the triacle in the cup and drink hit: and dyne
not til the mids of the day so that the tryacle may have his op^eracion then
chese a good disshe with mete and drink clear wyn and often times drink in
the day but not much to gider for much habondaunce of drink putrefieth the
humors Also beware hot things in mete as pepir and garlik though peper
purges the brayn from flewme and specially the me^bres from viscous humors
yet it makes much hete and hete falls into putrifaccion / bittnes only is
more to plese than hot odor or sauo. also garlik though it purges fleame and
put out evil humor and provoked an appetite to ete and suffers no dry air
to enter: yet it troubles the eyes and makes the head hot. therefore it is
not good to ete garlik The pestilence grows of ten times of an hot cause
therefore all^ metes the lighter they be of digestion somoche they be the better
In the morning ete boilled mete / at even roasted / forbere broth and potage
without they he eygre In the time of pestilence eygre metes be much better
thanne other metes. Also forbere al fruits but if they be eygre as cheryes or
pomes garnates or a litil of a pere or apple by way of medicine because al
fruit enduceth putrifaccion Ete convenient spyces as gynger cynamum common matis
and saffron These be the best sause that may be made for rich people For pour
take rewe sage filberdnuts percelly with vinegre mynst to gider. These be good
and lets putrifaccio^ To be merry i^ the heart is a great remedy for health
of body Therefore i^n time of pestilence beware ye dread not death: but live
merely and hope to live long

For the lettyng of blood
Letting of blood ones i^ the month may be made but aage or other thing
forbede it as pilgryms or feeble persons which have the flixe suffer to be let
blood i^ the wine called basilica on the right or lift side before eting and
after i^cision of basilica be merry and drink wine or ale temperatly: sleep not
that day when basilica is cut If ye feel you grieved to be infect than eschew
sleep and be walking and moeui^g For by sleep thi^ward hete i^duced poyso^ to
the heart and to other special me^bres that vnethe any herb may take away such
poyso^ which should not be if a man would be meui^g to and fro But some would axe
wherefore sleep shall be eschewd. I say that i^ pestilence time anon after mete
if a body list to sleep then such lust shall be forborn^ by a space walking i^
the gardyns or feldes and then make a naturell sleep by the space of an hour
and therefore Auycenne writes that if a man would sleep he must drink a good
draught of ale or wyn before because a man being a sleep draws many humors
and the evil humors be putt down by thumours of a good draught But some would
ask how may a man feel when he is infect. I say that a man which is enfect
that day eteth not much mete for he is replenisshed with evil humor and
forthwith after din he has lust to sleep and feleth great hete under cold.
also he has great pain i^ the forhede / but all th^se things he may put
away by moeuyng of a space hider and thider to ride or to walk he may not for
sleuthe of the body and the weyghte of the same Also a man that is enfect has
lust to sleep euy hour of the day and night For the venym being within the
body troubles the spirit of lyff so that always he would rest and sleep And
also of these tokenes a man schal know and feel him self enfect. and if a body
will not believe this / abide the mids of the day and then he shall feel a
swelli^g under the arm or about the share or about the eerys and therefore
see an hye and a good medeane / forbere sleep because of tho things before
said and y^ is plain that the spirit of life rests i^ sleep and all the
body here and there is venymed: All th^se things I have proved by my self
These things known wha^ a man feleth him self i^fect as soon as he may let
him be let blood plenteously till he be swoune then stop the wine For a litil
lettyng of blood moeueth or styreth venym: and if it be so that a man will not
have many wynes cut to geder / then let him suffer the wine cut to re^ne til
the blood withdraw for a litil bledyng meueth strongly the venym as yt is
said before Also a man whether he be infect or not if he be let blood / let
him forbere sleep all that day til midnight following and allewaye let blood
that wine upon that side of the body where the swellyng appears Therefore if a
swellyng appear under the right arm let blood i^ the mids of the same arm
i^ the wine called mediana / if it appear under the lift arm let him blood in
the mids of the same or in the vain of the lyu which is about that litill
fingre / and if it be about the share / let hi^ blood about the hele upon the
same side if the swelling he i^ the neck let him blood in the vain called
Cephalica about the tho^be in the hand of the same side or in the vain called
mediana of the same arm: or in the hand of the same side about the litil
fingre. And if the swelling appear about the eere / let him blood in the vayn
called cephalica of the same side or in the vain which is between the long
fingre and the thombe lest many venomous veins go into the brayn or let blood
the vayn which is about the litil finger named by the phisicions Basilica. and
if a swelling appear in the sholdres less it with ventosete and first less
the vain called Mediana ^f the swelling be on the back: less it upon the
vayn called pedica mag^ and al these things be made if a man sleep not before
the knowleche of the swelling But if ye feel such swellyng after sleep then on
the contrary part the letinge of blood must be made As if the swelling appear
in the right arm let him blood in the lift arm in Epate or basilica or
mediana. and if a swelling appear under the lift arm let him blood in the
right arm like as it is said of the lift arm: and so of other places of the
body let blood on the contrary part of such swelling. and if the letting of
blood be verray litil and feeble then let the pacient sleep after the mids
of the day and always in the mids of the day he must be in continuell meuyng
ridynge or going moderatly. and afterward if the swelli^g grow let him not
be aferde of death be cause such a swelling puts out all evil and makes a
man verray hole. and that the sooner a swellyng may be made ripe / take this
medicine as follows Brose the leuys of an elder tree and put thereto ground
mustard and make a plaster thereof and put it upon the swelling So^me surgeons
will put triacle upon the swelli^g but do not so for triacle puts out venym:
therefore drink triacle for that puts out the same: Also there is another
medicine Take sengrene hylworth otherwise called wild time maudelyn gras
pla^teyn and a litil rye flower and break all these to gider til ye see water
come out thereof Medyl^ that water with womans milk and give it to the pacient
fasting before sleep and it will work to better for to remeue the swelling.
Also for the swelling when it appeared Take filberd not tes fygges and rewe:
bruise them to gider and lay it upon the swelling These remedies be sufficient
to eschew this great sickness with the help of god to whom be eulasti^g
laud and praising world withouten end AMEN


