The Cobbler of Caunterburie, Or An Inuectiue against Tarltons News out of
Purgatory.

A merrier Jest then a Clownes Iigge, and fitter for Gentlemen's humors.

Published with the cost of a dickar of Cow hides.

printer's device of Robert Robinson (McKerrow 244): "wreath enclosing armorial
bearings -- fretty with a martlet for difference"

AT LONDON, Printed by Robert Robinson. 1590.

The Cobblers Epistle, to the Gentlemen Readers.
A Hall a Hall (Gentlemen) room for a Cobbler, here comes the quaintest squire
in all Kent; The Cobbler of Caunterburie, armde with his Aul, his Lingel, and
his Last, presents himself a Judicial Censor of other men's writings: but me
thinks, for my sauciness, I hear Apelles boy crying, Ne suitor vltra
crepidam. If I do see his Master mend the fault in the leg, I Will abide his
frumpes, and when he has done, I Will say this had not been corrected but for
the Cobbler. Becomes not many a Tinker a tall Pratler? and have not men of my
Trade waded so deep in the secrets of Theology, that they have sought to
correct Magnificat? and then by your leave gentlemen, may not the Cobbler of
Kent who has been the Patron of many good companions, and tossed over a pair of
cards at Trumpe from morning till night, not to be admitted so far as to
find fault with Richard Tarltons news out of Purgatory? Yes, and if he that
writ it will not amend the latchet, I Will on with my nightcap and my spectacles,
and make him shape the leg righter ere I have done. I confess it is a book, and
so is the Colliers Jade of Croyden a Horse as well as the Courtiers Courser:
yet by my faith it has a fair Title: but if Diogenes saw it, he would cry
out as he did against Minda, stop your City that it run not out of the
gates; and infer a like Inuectiue against the Book, for that the Title
conteines more then the whole Pamphlet: but yet in faith there is pretty stuff
in it, but unworthy Dicke Tarltons humor: some where too low for Iestes,
somewhere too hie for style, If I distinguish like a Scholar, Gentlemen,
think that I was borne when the Popes butterflies were abroad, and it may be,
some Friar was my father, and the rather I guess it, for that nature has
wrought that upon my crown, that he had on his by Art: for before I was
twenty, I had a bald pate. Well howsoever, I have found fault, and therefore
have I attempted to amend it, not in the correcting of his work, but in
setting out one more pleasant, and more full of delightful tales for all men's
humors: except those which are so humorous that they count nothing gracious,
but that is too grave. What? a Dog has a day: Semel in Anno ridet Apollo.
Longer lives a merry man then a sad; a Cobbler has less cares then a King: and
an hour past in honest mirth, is worth a tun full of melancholy. Why were
Tauernes invented, but to ripen men's wits? And why were tales devised, but to
make men pleasant? Tush when Read rationem comes, I fear me there will be
less account to be given for honest recreation, then either for the envious
practices that solemn Saturnistes ruminate: or for the sundry schisms the
melancholy michers do publish. If my Principles be false, let no man take
exceptions, but pass it over with a smile: for it is but Cobblers Philosophy.
But I digress, and therefore to my book, wherein are contained the tales that
were told in the Barge between Billinsgate and Grauesend: Imitating herein
old Father Chaucer, who with the like Method set out his Caunterbury tales:
but as there must be admitted no compare between a cup of Darby ale, and a dish
of durty water: So sir Ieffrey Chaucer is so hie above my reach, that I take
Noli altum sapere, for a warning, and only look at him with honor and
reverence. Here is a gallimaufre of all sorts, the Gentlemen may find Salem,
to savor their ears with Iestes: and Clownes plain dunstable dogrell to make
them laugh, while their leather buttons fly off. When the Farmer is set in his
Chair turning (in a winters evening) the crabbe in the fire, here may he
hear how his son can read, and when he has done laugh while his belly
aches. The old wives that wedded themselves to the profound histories of Robin
hood, Clim of the Clough, and worthy sir Isenbras: may here learn a tale to
tell amongst their Gossippes. Thus have I sought to feed all men's Fancies:
which if I do, was it not well done of a Cobbler? If I offend, and they think
there is in it neither rhyme, nor reason, why? a Cobbler did it, and there is an
end.

Farewell from my Shop wheresoever it be.
Robin Goodfellowes Epistle.
A Cobbler become a Corrector? Ho, Ho, Ho: it was not so when Robin Goodfellow
was a Ruffler, and helped the country wenches to grind their Malt: Then
gentlemen, the Ploughswaine meddled with his Teame: the Gentleman with his Hound
and his Hawke: the Artificer with his labor: and the Scholar with his book:
every degree contented him within his limits. But now the world is grown to
that pass, that Pierce Plow man will pry into law, naie into Divinity, and
his duncerie must needs be doctrine: tush, what of higher powers? what of
Universities? the text to put down them, Babes and Sucklings, and no more.
This makes Robin Goodfellow that was so merry a spirit of the Butterie, to
leave all and keep himself in Purgatory, for Hospitality is so clean run
out of the Country, that he needs not now help the maids to grind malt, for
the drink is so small that it needs little corn: and if he should help
them, where he was wont to find a mess of Cream for his labor, he should
scarce get a dish of floate Milk. Why? see you not how cranke the Cobbler is,
that will forsooth correct Dick Tarltons doings, a man famous in his life for
merry conceits, and especially a Book of my publishing? well Gentlemen, if
you suffer it, and Dick Tarlton pocket it up without a revenge, or a dry blow
at his breeche, Robin Goodfellow makes a vow, to haunt him in his sleep, and
after his old merry humor, so to play the knave with the Cobbler, that he
shall repent he meddled so far beyond his latchet. But I will carry my
friends these news to Purgatory, where I know for anger he will almost break
his Taber, and will not rest till he have revenged: we will lay both our wits
together, to put down the paltring Cobbler, and here I make a vow, either to
get the conquest, or else never to come in your sightes: and to say as I was
wont: What Himp and Hampe, here will I never more grind nor stamp.

Yours in choler, Robin Goodfellow.

The Cobbler of Caunterburie.
SItting at the barge in Billingsgate expecting when the tide would serve for
Graves end, diverse passengers of all sorts resorted thither to go down: at
last it began to ebb, and then they cried away; when I came to the stairs
although I was resolved to go down in a tilt boat; yet seeing what a crew of
mad companions went in the barge, and perceiving by the wind there was no
fear of rain, I stepped into the barge and took up my seat amongst the
thickest: with that the bargemen put from the staiers, and having a strong
ebb, because there had much rain water fallen before, they went the more
merrily down, and scarce had we gotten beyond saint Katherins, but that a
perry of wind blewe some thing loud, that the watermen hoist up sails and
laid by their Oars from labor. Being thus under sail, going so snugly
down, it made us all so merry, that we fell to chat some of one thing and some
of an other, al of mirth, many of knavery; that if Cato Censorius had been
there, he would either have laughed at their knauish jests, or else at the
confusion of their prattles, which seemed like a very Chaos of sundry
conceits. As thus every man was striving to pass away the time pleasantly, a
gentleman pulled out of his sleeue a little pamphlet and began to read to
himself: amongst the rest my self was so bold, as to ask him what book it
was: marry quoth he, a foolish toy called Tarltons news out of Purgatory, at
this they fell to descanting of the book, some commended it highly, and said
it was good invention and fine tales: tush quoth an other most of them are
stolen out of Boccace Decameron: for all that quoth the third, it is pretty and
witty. As they were thus commending and discommending, there sat by an
ancient man that was a Cobbler in Caunterbury: masters quoth he, I have read
the book, and it is indifferent, like a cup of bottle ale half one and half
the other: but it is not merry enough for Tarltons vain, nor stuffed with his
fine conceits, therefore it shall pass for a book and no more. No no what
say you to old father Chaucer, how like you of his Caunterburie tales, are they
not pleasant to delight and witty to instruct, and full of conceited learning
to show the excellency of his wit? All men commended Chaucer as the father of
English Poets, and said, that he shot a shoot which many have aimed at but
never reached to. Well quoth the Cobbler, now that we are going to Graues-end,
and so I think most of us to Caunterbury, let us tell some tales to pass away
the time till we come off the water, and we will call them Caunterburie tales.
To this motion the whole company willingly consented and only they stood upon
this, who should begin: If it be no offense quoth the Cobbler, to other
gentlemen that be here, I my self will be ringleader: to this they all agreed,
and the Cobbler began to settle himself: yet before he begin, I will as
near as I can describe you what manner of man he was.

The description of the Cobbler.
HIs stature was large and tall,
His lims well set withal.
Of a strong bone and a broad chest,
He was wide and wildsome in the breast.
His forehead hie and a bald pate,
Well I wot he was a mate
That had loved well a bonnie Less,
For the Lownes eyes were as gray as glass:
And often have I heard my mother say,
The wanton eye is ere most gray.
He loved well a cup of strong Ale,
For his nose was nothing pale:
But his snout and all his face,
Was as red as ruby or Topace.
A voice she had clear and loud,
And well he began sing to a crowde.
He was a stout sturdie squire,
And loved week day good compire.
Drink he would with every man,
In cup, cruse glass, or can:
And what every day he got,
He hoorded up in the Alepot:
That all Caunterburie began lere,
To talk of this merry Cobler^.
Therefore now mark me well,
For thus his tale he began to tell.
The Cobblers tale, Containing the merry Iestes passed between the Prior of
Caunterburie, and a Smith of Saint Austins.
THe Prior of Caunterburie had a covent of Friar Augustines that were endued
with great livings, for the king and he himself had great revenues, that he
lived like a Potentate and was had in great estimation throughout all the
City: Living thus at ease pampred up with delicates and idleness the two Nurses
of Lechery, he minded not so much his book, but that passing one day through
the streets, he glaunced his eyes to see where he might find some handsome
trull that might be his Paramour: many he saw and many he liked, but at last
coming by a Smiths forge, he spied a proper tall woman meanly attired after
the poverty of her husband; but of such a beautiful visage and fair
countenance, that she pleased greatly the Priors eye, that he thought her the
fairest in all Caunterburie: he returned home that way he went out, because he
would have an other look at the Smiths wife, and as he passed by he gave her
a courtesy for his farewell. Well home he went to his Chamber, and there he
bethought him of his new love, and cast in his mind a thousand ways how he
might come to his purpose: At last he sent for the Smith to come look on his
horse, who very hastily hied him to the Priory, where the Prior welcomed him
and entertained him with great courtesy, kissing the Nurse (as the old
proverb is) for the child's sake, and making much of black Vulcan for fair
Venus sake: the poor Smith very carefully looked to the horse, and where ought
was amiss amended it: The Prior and all his Covent gave him great
commendations and thanks, and bid him into breakefast, where he had good
cheer and store of strong drink, which made the Smith passing pleasant: as
they sat at breakefast the Prior told him, since they had made experience of
his skill, and that he was cunning about horses, he was content to make him
Farrier for the Priorie: At this the Smith was very glad: Nay more quoth the
Prior because thou shall have more gains out of the Dorter, seeing thy wife is
a good clenly woman, she shall be Landresse for me, and the whole Covent. The
Smith hearing this, perceived by the weathercocke which way the wind blew,
shakt the head and began to smile: The Prior demanded of him why he laughed:
marry sir quoth he, seeing we are at meat, and mirth is good for digestion, I
will tell you a merry Jest. There was such a poor man as my self that dwelt
as I do hard by a Priory, and he had brought up in his house a little Lamb,
which growing to a sheep would wander all abroad and return home safe at
night without any hurt; at last this little sheep being the poor man's
treasure, seeing the Priory gate open and the yard full of grass went in and
fed there: The wanton Friars that were idle, would often sport with the Lamb
and play withal, and pulled off the wool of the back, that it had almost
left nothing but the bare pelt: which the poor man espying kept up his sheep
and would not suffer it to go any more abroad: yet it had gotten such a sweet
savor in the Priory yard, that as soon as it brake loose, it would thither;
where the Prior and the Friars spying it again, consented and eat it up all:
the good man came to ask for his sheep, and they laughing at him gave him no
other mendes but the horns: So my Masters if my wife should be your
Landresse, I warrant you, if I came to inquire for her, I might have such fees
as the poor man had for his loss: No, no I am well I thank you, if my self
may serve for a Farrier so it is, but my wife (of all men shall not have to
deal either with Priors or Friars. At this they all laughed, but the Prior not
willing to give over the chase, thus made this answer. Why Smith (quoth he)
thou art a fool, thou may have a prouiso for that, for though she wash our
clothes, yet she shall neither fetch them nor bring them home, neither shall
there ever a Friar come at thy house, only the Scull of the kitchen, and I
hope thou fear not him. No quoth the Smith, they be these breechlesse
yeomen that I stand so much in doubt of: but upon these conditions aforesaid,
that she shall neither fetch them nor carry them home, she shall be your
Landresse, upon this they agreed, and the Smith went to his house and told his
wife all. She that was a wily wench thought with her self that whatsoever her
husband fisht for he would catch a frog; and that dealt he never so warily,
yet she would make him one of the head men of the parish as well as his
neighbors. She coniecturing thus with her self, the next morning came the
Scull early (by that the Smith was up and at his work) with foul clothes, God
speed sir quoth he. I have brought your wife the Priors linen; ah welcome
good fellow quoth he, go thy ways up the Chamber to my wife, she is above,
and I think a bed: the Scul trotted up the stairs and saluted the woman:
Mistres quoth he, the Prior has sent you his clothes and prays you they may
be done on wednesday next: they shall be done quoth she with all speed: and
quoth the Scull, his worship wild me in secret to give you a Ring for a token,
and to desire you to think that he loves you as heartily as any woman in the
world: the poor woman seeing a gold Ring, and having never had any before in
her life, held her self a proud woman, and bethought her what good gifts
she should daily have if she had such a lover as the Prior: wherefore she
returned him this answer by the Scull, yt she had ever thought well of him,
but her husband was a jealous fool and watched her narrowly wheresoever she
went, but as far as she might, she was his at command. Home went the Scul,
and the Prior was risen by that he returned, and asked him what news: what
news quoth the Scull, marry thus sir, as soon as I came to the door I found
the Smith hard at his work, and I saluted him by the time of the day, and
asked him where his wife was, saying, I had brought the Priors linen. Go up
the stairs, good fellow quoth he, for I think my wife is in bed, and Sir
there indeed I found her, and truly Sir if you will believe me, me thought
she lay to lovely in her bed to lie with a Smith, so sir I gave her your token
and told her what you bad me: and she made answer that your worship was the
man whom she had ever thought well of, but her husband was a jealous fool,
yet as far as she could she was at his command. This satisfied the Priors
expectation, and on wednesday morning when the Scull should go for his clean
linen, the Prior compounded with him and gave him a brase of Angels to keep
his counsel: saying, Tom (for so was the Sculs name) thou know al flesh is
frail, and we are men as well as others, though our profession be more holy,
therefore Tom so it is, yt I have loved the Smiths wife a long time, and now may
I have opportunity to fill my desires, I will this morning take thy clothes on,
and besmeere my face and with the basket hie for the clean clothes, only I
care for nothing if thou keep my counsel. Fear not that sir, quoth the
Scull, but I will be so secret as you can desire: with that the Prior was
brief for because he longd to be there, and on with the Sculs rags, and taking
his basket on his neck, hied him very orderly to the Smiths house by that time
day did appear, where he found him hard at work: God morrow sir quoth the
Prior, I am come for the linen, go up the stairs fellow quoth the Smith,
thou come very early, my wife is yet in bed. Up trudgd the Prior, and there
he found his Paramour in a sweet sleep, the Prior stepped to her and kissed her,
and with that she wakte, and seeing the Scull, why how now sir sauce, quoth
she, can you not speak before you come up? my husband is a wise man to send
such companions up into the Chamber where I am in bed, twere no matter and
the match were equal, to make him wear the horn for it. Oh be content good
love quoth the Prior, for know I am not Tom the Scull, but the Prior himself
that sent thee the Ring, who for thy sake is come thus disguised: with that he
discovered him self, and she perceived it was he and blushed: he kissed her,
and so coniured her, that while the poor Smith was knocking at the Smithy he
had dudeb him knight of the forked order, and for fear of suspicion putting
his linen in the basket away he went, bidding the Smith farewell. Thus the
Prior and the Smiths wife contented and inioying their hearts desire, the poor
Smith loved her not a whit the worse, neither did he suspect any thing, for the
blind eats many a fly, and much water runs by the mill that the miller wottes
not on: so played it with this Smith, for twice a week came the Prior in his
Sculs apparel to his lemmon, thus it continued till on one morning the Prior
was not well, so that he could not go; but Tom Scul after his woonted manner
went to carry forth the linen, and as he went by the way, he began to think
with himself what a fair woman the Smiths wife was, and how feign he would be
partaker with his Master, hammering this in his head, on he went to the
Smiths house: Now Smith quoth he good morrow, is thy wife up. No quoth the
Smith but she is awake, go up and carry your linen a Gods name: Up came the
Scull, and rushing in at the Chamber door threw down his basket, and seeing
the Chamber dark that he could not be discovered, slipped to bed and entered
Commens with the Prior, and with that got him away without saying one word:
The Smiths wife maruailed at this, and supposing that he had heard some
ruffling, and for fear of her husband had gone away so hastily. Well within
two days after came the Prior again, and after his accustomed manner went up
with his basket and saluted her after the old fashion: I pray you tell me
master Prior quoth she, what meant you yesterday morning that you came so
quiet, and slipped away with such silence after you got out of bed: by this the
Prior perceived that the Scull had cut a shiue on his loaf, and so thought to
dissemble the matter. Faith sweet heart quoth he, I heard a noise, and thought
it had been thy husband that had come up so I coniectured quoth the Smiths
wife, and therefore after you were gone, seeing you were freighted with your
own shadow I laughed heartily: thus as long as they durst they chatted, but at
last the Prior up with his basket and away. When he came home, in a great chafe
he sent for the Scull and made inquiry of the matter, the poor fellow afraid
of sore threatninges, confessed the matter and craude pardon: but the Prior
forgetting his patience fell upon poor Tom the Scull and beat him so sore,
that he had almost killed him: afterward swearing him on a book, if ever after
he went with any clothes, he should go no further then the Chamber door. The
Scul agreed to this, and confirmd it with a solemn oath: but the remembrance
of his sore blows, bred him a mind to revenge: whereupon resolving to do any
mischief to the Prior that he might, one day he went very orderly to his Smith
and carried him to the Alehouse, and there after a long protestation of
silence, revealed the whole matter unto him, how the Prior every day came in
his apparel to his wife, and so made him wear the horns whiles he was busy
about his hammers: at this the Smith fetched a great sigh; alas quoth he, and am
I a Cuckolde? why not you quoth the Scul, as well as your betters? Indeed
quoth the Smith, that is all the comfort that I have, that my betters have had
as hard hap: for the Abbot of saint Peter's that is an holy man, had but one
Lemman, and yet she was not content with twenty morsels: and I am a poor
Smith and a lay man, no marvel then if my fortune be as forked as the rest:
but by the holy Roode of Rochester quoth he, I will be so reuengd on the
Prior, that after I have taken him, he shall hate Lechery the worse while he
lives. I but quoth the Scul, take heed thou plagust not me in steed of the
Prior. To avoid therefore all ensuing danger, if I come to morrow thou shall
know me by this token, I will ask thee whether thou have drunk this morning
or no: if thou hear no such watchword, then know it is the Prior. So be it
quoth the Smith, and upon this they drunk their drink and departed. The next
morning the Smith was early at his work, and the Prior that longde to be with
his Lemmon was as soon awake, and up he got, and on with the Sculs apparel,
and to the Smiths house, and after his accustomed manner bad him good morrow and
up the stairs. The Smith perceiving it was the Prior, because he wanted his
watchworde, hied up presently after him, and took the Prior in bed with his
wife: why how now Scull quoth he? will no worse meat go down with you then
my wife? Before you and I part, I will learn you how you make Vulcan of me
without you were more like Mars then you be. Whereupon his man and he (two
lusty knaves) stepped to him and pulled him out of bed, and thrust him in a great
sack wherein he was wont to put chafe: when he had done, carried him into
the street, and laid him down before his door, and then made his wife take a
flaile in her hand, and thresh as hard as she could: but because he
perceived her strokes were laid on with favor, himself stood behind her
with a great Carters whip, and every time she fainted in her blows he lent
her a lash, that he fetched the blood through her petticoate: the people that
came by maruailed at this Antic, and asked the Smith, what he was a doing?
killing of fleas quoth the Smith, that I found this morning in my bed, and
because my wife is so idle and will not strike home, I stand with my whip to
whet her on. Neighbors therefore give good ear, and mark the end, and see
when my wife has beaten them enough what foul fleas they be, and by my example
learn whenever you take such great fleas in your wives bed, to put them to
the like punishment. The people flocked together to see this sport, and
although the Prior was almost bruised to death (though for favoring of him the
Smiths wife bore many a lash) yet he durst not cry for fear of further
discredit, but lay still and suffered all with patience. At last a multitude of
people flocking together, it chanced that upon serious business the Abbot of
saint Peter's came by, who seeing such a throng, sent one of his men to know
what the matter meant. Oh may it please your Lordship quoth the Smith, such a
sight as you never saw! wherefore for Christ's sake I ask it, that you would
take so much pains as to come over the way and see: the Abbot stepped over the
Channel, and when he came and saw the Smiths wife with her flaile, and him
with his whip, he woondred, and the Smith told him as the rest, that it was a
flea that he took in his wives bed: all this while lay the Prior with a heavy
heart, for fear the Smith should shake him out of the sack: wishing to abide
twice as much torment, so he might escape unknown. As the Abbot about this
matter stood questioning with the Smith, the Scull that mist the Prior that
past his hour, thought the Smith had played some mad prancke with him, went and
put on the Priors apparel, and his Cool over his head that he might not be
known, and went down to the Smiths house ward, where seeing a concourse of
people he hasted him thither. At last the Smith spied him and cried, Oh my
Lord Abbot yonder comes the Prior of saint Austins, it was one of his fleas.
Well knew the Smith it was Tom Scull, but his wife supposing it to be the Prior,
and that he in the sack was the Scul that had deceived her, in despite for
revenge laid on such blows, that she needed no whipping to mend her strokes.
When the Prior came, and after most humble manner had saluted the Abbot, he
desired to know the cause of this strange sight: marry quoth the smith,
Master Prior, I may thank you for this, for a flea of your Priory has leapt
from the Dorter to my wives bed, and finding it there this morning, I put it in
a sack and caused my wife to thresh it, and for that both you and Master
Abbot, and al my neighbors shall see what parlous fleas often happen into women's
beds; I will shake him out before you all, and with that he unbound the sack,
and he threw out the Prior, who being in the sculs apparel, was so
besmiered and so bloody, that he could not be known: Look here Master Prior
quoth the smith, here is the scull of your Priory. Oh notable knave knave quoth
Tom scull, so to discredit our house, what think you of this my Lord Abbot?
is this a sufficient punishment or no, considering by this fault he shall give
occasion of slander to the whole Priory? He is quoth the Abbot, within the
jurisdiction of your censure, and therefore deal with him as you list. Marry
quoth the scul then thus: because it is an open fault, it shall have a more open
punishment; for if it be smothered up thus, they will say that I am a favorer
of sin: with that he called to certain of his covent, for most of the Monks
of the Priory were come thither, how say you brethren quoth he, is it not best
that he stand all this forenoone on the Pillory, and have a paper written on
his head containing the whole matter of his offense? and the smiths wife shall
stand under him with her flaile, and the smith with his whip: and so quoth the
smith shall all Caunterburie laugh at me that come into the market place to
prove my self a Cuckolde. No goodman scull quoth he, it shall not be so, and
with that he pulled of his Cool and said, Masters and neighbors, see here is
the scul of the house, and this beaten in the sack is the Prior himself that
came to my wife in the sculs apparel: at this all the people clapped their
hands, laughed and made good game, to see how simply the Prior stood and in
what a majesty the scull was in the Priors abiliments. At this sight the Abbot
abasht, and the Friars were ashamde: but the scull nothing amassed, began before
all the people to say thus: my Masters quoth he, I was once a scholar,
though I am now a scul, and then I learned this old saying in Latin; Caute, si
non Cast: Live charily, if not chastely: Be not so forward in your follies
that you discover your faults to the whole world, and especially was this
spoken to men of the Church, for in that they know much, and do dehort
others from vice, the people look their lives and their learning should
agree: but when they offend so grossly as Master Prior through his ill
example, to bring a whole house in slander, then are they worthy of double
punishment: for we know Friars are men, and I warrant you, there is a great
many in England have done as much to others as he has done to ye smiths wife,
and yet have escaped without discredit: I hope my Lord Abbot, if you enter into
your own conscience, you can verify as much, and therefore seeing he was so
careless of his credit, let him for ever after (to avoid perpetual infamy of
the house) be banished out of the Priorie. To this they agreed, and the people
that heard this collation said, Tom scull was worthy to be Prior: whereupon the
Abbot and the Friars consenting, and seeing he had good learning, turned away
the old Prior and made Tom scull Prior in his room: thus was the Prior punished
for his Lechery, the Smith reuengde for his Cuckoldry, and the scull for his
blows stumbled on a good promotion.

At this merry tale of the Cobbler, all they in the barge laughed and said the
smith was well revenged: I but quoth the Cobbler, so he was made a Cuckold, and
with a heavy head was the poor smith feign to go to his hammers, being ever
after noted for a Cuckolde through all Caunterburie. There sat a smith hard
by, who grieved at this, that he should descant so upon his occupation, and
the rather perchance he took pepper in the nose, because he was of the same
fraternity, if not with a Prior, yet with some other good fellow, and
therefore in a snuff he began thus to reply: Why Cobbler quoth he, do thou
hold the smith in such derision because he was a Cuckold? I tell thee Cobbler,
Kings have wore horns: and it is a fault that Fortune excepteth from none: yea,
the old writers have had it in such questions, that they have set down diverse
degrees of Cuckoldes. I marry quoth the gentleman, Tarlton in his Purgatory
has divided them into three sorts. Tush quoth the smith, Tarlton was a fool
or he that writ the book, for to tell you truth there be eight degrees, and
that I can prove: At this there was a great laughter, and every man desired
him to tell what they were: that I will quoth the smith, they be these.

The eight orders of Cuckolds.
Cuckold. 1 Machomite. 2 Heretic. 3 Lunaticke. 4 Innocent. 5 Incontinent. 6
By consent. 7 By Act of Parliament. 8 Quem facit Ecclesia.


And because quoth the Smith they may seem dark and obscure to you, I will
briefly make an exposition of them to you, and that is in this manner.

The exposition of the eight degrees of Cuckolds.
1 Cuckolde Machomite is an ancient Cuckold, who has been married some
thirty or forty years, and ever since his first marriage has continued
content in that estate, being so known and notified amongst his neighbors,
therefore being the oldest, he is the foremost.

2 Cuckold Heretic, is he that having a fair wife and honest, is so blinded
with Jealousy and suspicion, as he thinks her to be as dishonest as the best,
but indeed is none, and therefore consumes himself in an heresy.

3 Cuckold Lunaticke, is he that being a Cuckold conceiues such inward grief,
that he suffers his passions to take no rest, but as a man distrackt from his
senses does all things so out of order, as though he were Lunaticke: and
therefore has this title for his humors frenzy.

4 Cuckold Innocent, is he that being simple of himself suspecteth nothing,
but what soever he hears of his wife, believes no more then he sees,
knowing nothing, and therefore suspecting nothing.

5 Cuckold Incontinent, is he that marries himself to a wife of a light
disposition, who makes him a Cuckold the very first day of his marriage.

6 Cuckold by consent, is he that of al other Cuckolds is most infamous, who is
not only headed as bravely as the rest, and has one of light conversation,
but fostereth his wife up in her follies, and is content to keep the door to
his wives lascivious wantonness, consenting to more then the strumpet is
ashamde to perform.

7 Cuckold by Act of Parliament, is such a one that when he takes his wife
faulty is not content secretly to punish the offense, but goes to law with the
man for recompense: the Quest giving him perhaps for damage some i.d.ob.
whereby it is registered in the Court by his own proof that he is a Cuckold,
and therefore is he called Cuckold by Act of Parliament.

8 Cuckolde Quem facit Ecclesia, is he whom the Church makes a Cuckold, and
that is this, when a young man marries a maid or a wife, whom he supposes
to be a maid, and yet has played false before, and perhaps has had a child
or two: In marrying him to such a one he is Cuckolde in the Church, and
therefore called Cuckold Quem facit Ecclesia.

Thus quoth the Smith, have you heard my degrees, and their exposition, and
because I will be quit with the Cobbler for the tale of the Smith, give me
leave a little and you shall hear a merry Jest, but because I will let you
know what manner of man he was, before his tale, hear his description.

The description of the Smith.
THis Smith I ween was a quaint sire,
As merry as byrd on brier.
Iocund and gleesome at every since,
His countenance aie buxsome and blithe,
His face was coaly and full black,
Hued like unto a Colliers sack,
Or as if it had been soild with mier,
Full of wrinckles was his cheeks with the fire.
Well he could sweat and swinke,
And one that aie loved good drink,
For hard by his Forge always stood
A stond of ale nappy and good:
Which made the color of his nose,
Like to the fire when it glowes.
His head great, his brows broad,
Able to bear a great load:
As no man might hold it scorn
On his head to graft a horn.
His coats were fit for the weather,
His pilch made of swines leather:
So was his breech, and before
A dustie apron he wore:
Wherein not to fail,
Was many a horse shoo nail,
And for to fit him every tide,
Hung an hammer by his side,
Thus attyred the Smith began say,
What befell on a summers day.
The Smiths tale, Containing a pleasant jest of a jealous Cobbler, and how for
all his suspicion, he was cunningly made Cuckold.
IN Rumney Marshe by the sea coast, there dwelled a Cobbler, a merry fellow, and
of his middle age: who was wont on working-dayes to chaunt it out at his
work, and on holy days to besturre his stumpes in the Churchyard so merrily
after a crowd, that he was wel-beloued of all the country wenches, and noted
for the flower of good fellowship throughout all the parish. This Cobbler
keeping shop for himself, had in house with him an old mother of his, who
being as it were his servant, desirous to live more at ease, wished him to take
a wife: the Cobbler was loath to be persuaded to marriage, and the reason was,
for that he feared to be a Cuckold: yet at last he cast his eye on a country
less, that was a blythe and bonny wench, and the chief of all the maids of
old Rumney: to her was this jolly Cobbler a suter, and after a little wooing (as
women must be got with praises and promises) the Cobbler caught her, and married
they must be in all haste, which done, they lived pleasantly together, as
fools do presently after their wedding: but after the honnie moon was past,
she like a good huswife fell to her work, to spin and card, and such other
deeds of huswiferie as belonged to the profit of her house: the Cobbler loved
her well, and she wanted nothing that might satisfy her humor, only she was
charged by her husband, not to go abroad a gossipping with her neighbors:
insomuch that either on working-dayes or on holy days, when all the wives in
Romney went to be merry, she was feign as a poor prisoner to keep home:
which although she passed over with silence and patience, so yet seeing his
jealousy was without cause, she vowed with her self if ever a friend and
opportunity served to her mind, to make him wear a horn an inch longer then
all his neighbors: but he kept her short from that, for every day when she
was at home, she sat by him in the shop, where he soong like an Nightingale,
having his eye never of his wives face; or if she sat within, her mother in law
an old jealous woman bore her company; if she went to fetch water, her mother
was at her elbow; whatsoever she did, or whether so ever she went, to be
brief, her husband, or her mother was at one end, which grieved the young
woman. So suspicious and jealous was this Cobbler, that all Romney talked of his
folly: and to vex him as they passed by, would say to him; ah neighbor good
morrow, now that you have gotten a fair wife, we hope to have you one of the
brotherhood, and that the Cuckoo in April may sit and sing in your house as
well as with your poor neighbors. I fear not that quoth the Cobbler, let her
do her woorst, I will give her leave, meaning that he kept such narrow watch
over her, as he could never be deceived, and therefore every day his wife
sitting by him when he was yerking of his shoes, and she at her wheel, then
he would chat out this song.

The Cobblers song.
WHen as the Nobility pull down their towers,
Their mansion houses and stately bowers:
And with stone and timber make hospitals free,
Then the Cobbler of Romney shall a Cuckold be.
When Gentlemen leave of their Peacockly suits,
And that all their works are charities fruits:
Tendering the poor which needy they see,
Then the Cobbler, etc.
When Usurers run up and down with their gould,
And give it to them from whom it was pould:
And Colliers sackes over great you do see,
Then the Cobbler, etc.
When Westminster hall is quite without benches,
And Southwarke Banckeside has no pretty wenches,
When in Smithfield on Fridaies no iades you can see,
Then the Cobbler, etc.
When Maids hate marriage, and love to live chaste,
Virgins forsooth till fourscore be past:
And love not that yoongmen their beauties should see,
Then the Cobbler, etc.
When wives are not wilful, but needs will obey,
When silent and speechless they sit a whole day:
When Gossips do meet, and no words there will be,
Then the Cobbler, etc.
When women's toongs do cease for to wagge,
And shoomakers give not their masters the bag:
When Cuckolds and keepers want horns for their fee,
Then the Cobbler, etc.
When tapsters and alewiues from Berwick to Dover,
Fill thirding deal pots till the drink run over,
When the quart is so full that no froth you may see,
Then the Cobbler, etc.
When Smithes forswear to drink of strong Ale,
And live without liquor whiles their noses be pale:
When in Vintners wine no mixture you see,
Then the Cobbler, etc.
When Dutchmen hate butter, and the Spaniards pride,
When Cardnars do want a trull by their side:
When the Pope like Peter humble you see,
Then the Cobbler, etc.
Every day did the Cobbler use to sing this song, and there dwelled next unto
him a Smith that was a tall and a young lusty fellow, proper of personage, of a
comely visage, courteous, gentle, and debonaire, such a one as this Cobblers wife
could have wished to her Paramour, if time and opportunity would have favored
her fancy: and the Smith seeing what a smocker wench the Cobblers wife was, and
what a jealous fool she had to her husband, sorrowed at the good fortune of
the Cobbler, that he had so fair a wife, and wished that he could find
means to have such a one to his friend: upon this, being next neighbors, and
their houses ioining together, the Smith would oftentimes when his leisure
served him come to the Cobblers shop and talk with him; where between the Smith
and the Cobblers wife passed such glaunces, that he perceived there was no want,
but place and opportunity to fulfill their desires. One day amongst the rest,
Fortune so favored this young couple, that the Cobbler went forth to buy
Leather, and left his mother and his wife in the shop: the old woman not having
slept the last night was heavy and fell a sleep, and the young woman sat
singing at her work. The Smith perceiving this, laid by his hammers and went
to the stal, where he saluted his neighbor, and she returned him the like
courtesy.

At last seeing the old beldame was sure, he began to reveal unto her how
long he had loved her, and how he was sorry that she was combred with such a
one as for his jealousy, above all other men deserved to be made a Cuckolde:
sundry speeches past between the Smith and the Cobblers wife, till at last she
rose, and gave him her hand, that she loved him better then any man in ye
world, and would if any occasion would serve, ever strive to content him.
Then sweet heart quoth he, do me but this favor, feign to morrow some
occasion to go to your Mothers, and come on the further side of the way fast by
such a door, and then let me alone for opportunity to satisfy both our
desires: To this she agreed, and the Smith went to his Shop: presently the
old woman wakte, the Cobbler came home, and all was well.

At night when they were in bed, taking him about the neck she kissed him, and
told him that certain of her friends met to morrow at her Mothers, and that
she would feign go and see them, I pray you good husband quoth she, let
your mother and I go thither, I will not part out of her sight, neither will
we make any long tarriance: ye husband for shame could not deny this request,
but granted it: whereupon the next morning she got her up, and on with her
holyday apparel, and made her as sine as sine might be: the Cobbler seeing
his wife so trickt up in her clean Linen, began to be jealous, and calde
his Mother aside, and charged her by that love she bare him, not to let his
wife part out of her company till she came home again, which she promised
with an oath: so away they went, and the Cobbler he set him down and began to
sing.

The Smith that all this day was not idle, had compounded with an old woman by
whose house she must pass, to favor them with house room, and revealed unto
her all the matter: whose wife it was, and how he would have his purpose
brought to pass: by my troth son quoth she, I have hard much talk of that
jealous Cobbler, and I would do my endeavor to make the Ass were a horn: upon
this they resolved, and she likt well of his policy, and said love had many
shifts, at last the Smith spied his mistress all in her bravery, coming
with her mother in law: the old wife was ready, as she past by the door,
threw a great bowl full of bloody water right upon her head, that all her
clothes, and clean lynnen was marred, being so berayde that she could go no
further: alas mistress quoth the old woman, I cry you mercy, what have I
done? full sore it was against my will: but for Gods sake come into the house,
and shift you with clean linen: if you have none at home, I will lend you of
the best that I have, go in daughter, quoth her old mother in law, it is a
chance, and against an ill turn sometime no man may be: i will go home as fast
as I can, and go fetch you clean linen, the whiles dry your gown, and make
all things else ready. I pray you do good mother (quoth she) and next way goes
her mother in law: and as soon as she was out of doors, the old woman led her
into an inward Parlour where the Smith was, and there these two lovers by this
policy made the jealous Cobbler were the horn.

Whiles thus they were solacing themselves, the old wife she came stumbling
home, and for haste had like to break her neck over the threshould, her fall
made the Cobbler start, and when he saw it was his mother, and that he mist his
wife, he was half mad, and asked his mother hastily where she was: the old
woman short winded was almost out of breath, and for a good space sat puffing
and blowing to fetch wind; at last she cried out: alas dear son, such a
chance as never was hard of: as we went through old Romney, hard by the
church, a woman threw out a bowl of bloody water right upon your wives head,
which has so berayed her linen and her gown, that she could go no further,
and so I as fast as I could came running home for clean clothes: oh for the
passion of God mother quoth he, hie to her chest, and get her clothes ready,
for it may be a fetch to make the poor Cobbler a Cuckhold; a horn mother is
soon grafted: with that the old woman got all in a readiness, and away ran the
Cobbler and his mother together. Well the two lovers out at a little hole kept
good watch and ward, that anon they spied where the Cobbler and his mother came
trudging: in went his wife, and sat her down by the fire, where the Cobbler
found her only sitting with the old woman in her petticoate, drying her gown,
as soon as she saw him she wept: and he although he grieved at the mischance,
yet for that he spied her in no company, he was satisfied, and wished her to
be content, and sent for a pot of beer or two to make her drink: and after he
had seen all well, and his wife in her clean apparel, setting them a little
on the way; home he went again to his shop, and his wife went to her mothers,
where an hour or two she past away the time in chat, and then returned home
with her mother in law. Thus the Cobbler was not suspicious of his wives being
abroad, but took her misfortune for a chance, and the Smith every day
according to his woonted custom, would come and chat with his neighbor the
Cobbler, and sometimes found opportunity to talk with the wife, but never out
of the shop: on a day the Cobbler being from home, and the old woman within
peecing of her hose, the Smith came to the shop, and finding her alone, began
to lay a plot, how to make her husband a Cuckold, while he held the door: she
promised if he would devise it, she would put it in practice, and so agreed they
concluded between themselves, and they brought it cunningly to pass, thus.

It chanced within a fortnight after, that as the Cobbler and his wife lay in
bed, she fell on a great laughter, her husband demanding the cause, she made
him this answer. I will tell you husband a strange thing, so it is, that this
other day when you went to buie Lether, my mother and I sat in the shop, and
she fell fast a sleep, your neighbor the Smith, he, as his custom is, came to
the window, and seeing my mother a sleep, began to court me with fair words
and large promises, and told me, that if I would find the means that when you
were out, I would let him lie with me, he would give me forty shillings. I
shakt him off as well as I could, but he would have no nay at all, but threw
four Angels into my lap: whereupon I took the gold, for me thought they were
four fair pieces, and promised him that to morrow you went forth, and my
mother to, and then he should find me alone in the chamber. Upon this he went
away, and left me the gold, and therefore if it please you, to morrow I think
good you should feign your self to go abroad, and my mother to, and then hide
you in a chamber bard by, and as soon as he is come in, you may stand at the
door and hear all our talk: when you hear me consent, then break in, and
take the Cobbler, and swindge him well, and I warrant you husband there will
diverse commodities rise of it: for not only we shall have this gold, and get
more for amends, but ever after be rid of such a knave.

This motion pleased the Cobbler well, and the rather because the Smith professed
to be his great friend, and yet would seek to do him such disgrace: upon this
conclusion they resolved, and so fell a sleep. The next day in the afternoon,
the Cobbler fained himself to go out, and his mother with him, and after
coming home at a back door went up into the next chamber, and hid
themselves, by and by according unto promise came the Smith, and went roundly
up to the chamber, where he found the Cobblers wife: wherefore straight
shutting the door with a boult in the inside, he fell to set up plumes on the
Cobblers head-peece, the Cobbler he very eastlie got to the door with a great
pollax in his hand, and began to listen: with that he hard the smith offer
fair to his wife: nay (quoth she) I have kept promise with you, for I only
promised to let you up into my Chamber: tush quoth he, this is but a cavil?
and many words past between them: the Cobbler and his mother standing at the
door, with her nay and his yea, till the Cobbler had a new browantler grown
out of his old horns; and then she answered him, seeing nothing would content
him, he should have his pleasure: with that the Cobbler was ready to rush in,
but that his mother staid him, and bid him hark further: and do thou mean
good faith, quoth the Smith? I wherefore else (quoth the Cobblers wife) came we
into this place? why then (quoth the Smith) hear what I will say to thee:
Do thou think, though we be here in secret, that our faults will not be
seen openly? that though thy husband knows not of, and that it is kept close
from the world, that there is not one above that sees all, and will revenge it?
yes vilde strumpet as thou art, and for this cause came I to try thee: thou
have an honest man to thy husband, who loves thee more deerly the^ himself,
who works hard, to suffer thee yt thou shall not want, and will thou in his
absence wrong him? think if ever thou do it, it will come out, and thou
shall be revenged with open shame: I am thy husbands dearest friend, with whom
I am daily conversant, and do thou think I could find in my heart, to offer
him such injury? no: and the^ art not thou more to blame, that being ye wife of
his bosom, wilt betray thy husband, who is deerer to thee then all friends?
fie upon thee vild woman, fare thee well and amend: I will not yet tell thy
husband, unless I spy thee prove light, but I shall never think well of
thee while I live: and with yt he opened ye chamber door, and the cobbler chopped
in, and taking ye smith by ye hand, said, neighbor, I thank you for your good
counsel, I have hard all the communication yt past between you and my wife, and
truly: and with that the Cobbler wept, I am heartily glad I have such a
trusty friend, to whom in my absence at any time, because my mother is an old
woman, I commit the oversight of my wife: and truly neighbor quoth he, I
pray you think never the worse of her, for she told me the whole matter, and
appointed me to stand at the door, that when you should have offered her any
discurtesie, I might have rusht in and have taken you: so that I perceive you
are as honest as she, and she as honest as you, and that your meanings were
both a like. I am glad of that quoth the Smith, that you have so virtuous a
wife, I hope I have done the part of a friend, to pleasure my neighbor: you
have done so quoth the Cobbler, and therefore ere we part, we will drink a quart
of wine. So the Cobbler bestowed good cheer on the Smith, and ever after
accounted him for his friend, and whenever he went out of town, committed
the charge of his wife to the Smith, who at all times had free egresse and
regresse to the Cobblers house without suspicion.

This tale of the Smith made all the company to laugh, and the cobbler he was
stark mad for anger, saying, that if it had been his case, he would have
given him wine with a cudgel: tush Cobbler quoth the Smith, never think but
our art can surpass yours in such wenching matters, and that a Smith can
sooner make a Cobbler a Cuckold, then a Cobbler a Smith: upon this they fell to
iarres, and from words had fallen to blows, if they of the Barge had not parted
them: so at last they were quiet, and made friends. And then the Cobbler he
began to entreat that they would go forward in their merry exercise, whereupon
a gentleman sitting by said; masters, it is so good to pass away the time,
that to continue so honest a sport, I will be next: and thus therefore I will
describe him.

The description of the Gentleman.
HIs stature was of a middle length,
Well ioynted, of a good strength,
Siken writtes report to us
Was that Trojan Troilus:
For he was of comely visage,
And his manners of courteous usage.
His hair in curled locks hung down,
And well I wot the color was nutbrowne:
And yet it was full bright and sheene,
Such wore Paris I ween:
When he sailed to Grecia
To fetch the fair Helena.
His front was of a silver hue,
Powdered thick with veins blue.
His eyes were lumynous,
Christallyne and beauteous:
Gray and sparkling like the stars,
When the day her light up sparres.
His cheeks like the Lilies white,
Or as Luna being bright:
And yet comely thereupon,
Was shadowed color Vermilion:
That gasers all woulden suppose,
How the Lilie and the Rose,
Did maken war each with other,
Which should be above an other.
His suercoate was of Satin blew,
Like unto a lover true:
His hose were guarded along,
With many a broad velvet thong.
His Cloak grew large and side,
And a fair whinyard by his side.
The pummell guilt: and on his head
He had a bonnet color read:
An alder leefer swain I ween,
In the barge there was not seen:
And then thus he began tell,
What in Cambridge to a scholar befell.
The Gentleman's tale. Containing the contrary fortunes that a Scholar of
Cambridge had in his Loves.
IN the University of Cambridge, in Peter's Hostell, there lived a Scholar
famous for his learning, called Rowland, who being placst there by his
friends, so profited, that he grew to be one of ye fellows of the house, being
in great estimation for the honesty of his life, and the excellency of his
learning: he was a man as well proportioned as he was qualified: and had as
well bona corporis, as he had bona animi, and could as well play the wag and
the wanton abroad, as he could apply his Books and study at home: amorous he
was, and one that delighted to feed his eye with every fair face, which after
returned to his great prejudice, thus. It fortuned one day in the Summer
season, that for recreation he walked as far as Cherryhinton, to eat a mess
of Cream, where being very pleasant, as he sat jesting with his Hostess;
there came in a Gentleman's daughter in the town, a maid of exceeding beauty,
so well proportioned in the lineaments of her face, that nature seemed to try
in her an experiment of her cunning. This girl, as wise as she was fair, and
as wanton as she was witty, came in and questioned with the hostess about
some business: Rowland seeing such a Nymphe come sweeping in, thought either
Venus or Diana had come in their Country weeds to bewitch men's fancies: he
cast his eye upon the excellency of her phisnomy with such a piercing look,
that Love entering by the eye, so wroong him at the heart, that forsooth fancy
her of force he must.

Now my young Scholar could do nothing but gaze upon her, for Court her
he could not, unless he should have begun to woo her with some words of
Art, or some Axioms of Philosophy. The young Gentlewoman seeing the Scholar
look so earnestly upon her, began to blush, and so taking her leave of the
Hostess went her way. The Scholar seeing her going out of doors, thought of
the old proverb: Faint heart never woone fair Lady. And therefore called to
her thus: Fair Gentlewoman quoth he, you may see we Scholars have little
manners, that holding the pot in our hands will not make such a sweet saint as
you drink: how say you Gentlewoman, will it please you to pledge me? The
wily wench hearing such a Schollerlike gratulation, seeing by this salute, that
Scholars had read of Love, more then they could say of Love: and though they
could tell what was Latin for a fair woman, yet could neither woe her, nor
win her, turned back again, and with a low courtesy thanked him. He off
with his corner Cappe (for he was a Batcheler in Arts) and with a glauncing
look drunk to her: She like a wanton, pledgde him with a smile. Rowland at
this taking heart at grass, stepped to her, and took her by the hand:
beginning thus to hold her in chat.

Your Town here (forsooth) of Cherryhinton, has made me often play the trewa^t
to come hither for cherries: and as mine Hosts can tell, full many a mess of
cream have I eaten in her house: for we scholars are good companions, and
love to be pleasant: especially if we might have the company of such fair
Gentlewomen as your self: Therefore Mistres, if I chance to come to town to
eat a pound of cherries (if I may be so bold) I would trouble you to take part
with me; and if I meet you at Cambridge, the best wine in the Town shall be
your welcome: the wench (that had much adooe to keep her countenance) thought
to feed him up with fair speeches, till she made him as fat as a fool,
and therefore made him this reply. Truly sir indeed many scholars come to
Cherryhinton to eat cherries: but sir, you are the first man that ever I
drank withal, for scholars be so full of their learning, and fine terms,
that Country wenches cannot understand them, but I for my part at the first
sight like of you so well, that if my leisure serve, whenever you come and
please to send for me, I will as long as I dare bear you company, but now
forsooth time calls me away and I must be gone. With all my heart quoth
Rowland, but truly we must not part without a kiss, which she willingly
took at his hands, and went home: where as soon as she came, she revealed
all to a young gentleman that lay in her Fathers house, who was sure to her:
they laughing heartily at the scholars Courting, and resolving to make good
sport with him ere they had done. But Rowland he that thought every smile was a
fancy, and every maid that laughed on him, loved him, coniectured assuredly by
the familiar courtesy of the gentlewoman, that she was greatly affectionate
toward him: whereupon he began to inquire of his Hostess whose daughter she
was, of what wealth her Father was, what children he had, and what Dowry the
maid was like to have to her portion, as a man resolved the woman was already
woone, because she had given him such gracious favors. The Hostess as well
as she could told him all: which done, he paid his shot, and went to
Cambridge, where he began altogether to muse on the beauty of his Mistres, and
to lay an hundredth plots in his head what were best to be done: at last he
resolved to send a letter to her, to signify his love: or else to go himself,
and to carry two or three of his fellows with him, and so to discourse unto her
how he loved her; but at last he fully determined with himself to write unto
her: wherefore taking pen and ink in hand, he wrote a letter to her to this
effect.

Rowlands Letter to the fair Maid of Cherryhinton.
MIstres Marian,
Aristotle the great Philosopher, for all his wit was in love with Hermia: and
Socrates the sage, could not so far subdue his passions, but that he fell in
feakes with Zantippa: Scholars as they read much of love, so when they once
fall in love, there is no ho with them till they have their Love. The finest
glass is most brittle, and the best Scholars soonest ouergon with fancy. For
an instance, was not Ovid as deep in love, as he was excellent in learning? I
bring in these comparisons Mistres Marian, because the other Sunday being at
Cherryhinton, and seeing your sweet self, I was so overtaken with your beauty
and good behauior, that ever since the remembrance of your face could never out
of my fancy: nor, I think, never shall, although I should be drencht in the
forgetful floods of Lethe. Seeing then my affection is so great, I pray you
consider of me, and be not so unkind, but let me have love for love: and
though here in the university you see me simple, yet my Parents at home are
men of good parentage, and what I want in wealth, I shall supply in Learning:
ponder with your self, and read but the lives and answers of the
Philosophers, and see how they used their wives, with what courtesy, how ever
the women were the most Masters, and had the Sovereignty, which they desire.
Thus hoping you will consider of my Love; desiring you to send me an answer, I
bid you farewell.

Yours in dust and ashes, Rowland.


When he had thus finished his letter, he thought to show him self somewhat
poetical, and thought a letter was not worth a rush, unless there were some
verses at the latter end, and there he affixed as a postscript this
amarousditty.

Rowlands song to his Mistres.
AProach in place Pierides,
My vain in verses to bend:
Dame Chryseis which gaust Homer suck,
Thy tender teats me lend.
Alcmena thou which Jove did rock,
In cradle full of joy:
Eke swath me in those swaddling clowtes,
Account me for thy boy.
Ye Naiades and pretty Nymphs,
That on Pernassus dwell:
Lend me your Muse that I may now,
My Mistres beauty tell.
How that in beauty she does pass
Venus the Queen of Love:
To whom, if I do gain her grace,
I will be Turtle Dove.
Therefore my dear conceive my grief,
And think how I do love thee:
And in some lines send me relief,
For time and truth shall prove me.
Thus hoping pen and paper shall
Thy mind to me short tell:
But love me as I do love thee,
And so my dear farewell.
THus having both finished his letter and his verses, he sent them by a
convenient messenger the next Satterday to Cherryhinton, and that forsooth was
his Hostess: who very orderly sent for the gentlewoman to her house, and
delivered the letters to her, with earnest commendations from sir Rowland. The
gentlewoman in outward show seemed to accept them as gratefully, as he sent
them lovingly, and so hied her home: where presently she called for her new
betrothed husband, and other gentlemen her friends, and revealed unto them how
she had received letters from her new lover the Scholar. All they flocked
about her, to hear what excellent stuff was contained in so learned a man's
letters: but when they heard him how like a Philosophical fool he writ: they
all in a synod peremptorily concluded, that the greatest Clerks were not the
wisest men: and I marvel of that quoth one of the company, for two reasons:
forth one I have heard this old said saw, that Love makes men Orators and
affection whetteth on eloquence: Secondly, there was none more amorous then
Ovid (yet a profound scholar) insomuch that he writ three books De Art
Amandi, and so did Anacreon Tibullus, and Propertius. I but quoth an other, as
they were scholars, so were they well brought up in the Court, and knew as
many external manners, as they did inward principles: but ware my Masters,
when a scholar is once brought up in the Universities, and has no other
bringing up but plain Ergo to plod in, nor conuerseth with none but his
books, and then hap to fall in Love: trust me he will be as ignorant to woo,
as the ploughman to dispute, thinking that women's fancies are won with
Figures, and their thoughts ouerreacht with the quiddities of Art: but of all
that ever I heard write, this sets down his mind the most simply: and
therefore quoth Marian shall he be answered as foolishly, for I my self will
be Secretary. Nay quoth diverse of the gentlemen, we will put in our verdict
with you: No quoth she, try but a woman's wit: that's knauish enough quoth
one of them: and so stepping to her standish she wrote thus.

Marian of Cherryhinton to Sir Rowland of Cambridge, health.
Sweet sir Rowland,
I received your Letters, wherein I perceive that Scholars in love are like to
a Sow with pig under an Apple tree, which either hastily must have a crab, or
else loose their Litter. If I bring in a Country comparison blame me not, in
that I am a Country wench, and have none but plain Country lodgicke, but
howsoever I write, I mean well. Indeed rightly you say, that the finest
glass is most brittle, and the best Scholars soonest pinched with Love, which
I think to be true: for as soon as ever I saw you, how your eyes waited
upon my face, as an object of your delight, I took you to be too wise, kind,
and amorous: and therefore seeing ever since you have been passionate, it were
great pity that you should not have for your pains (even as we use in a
homely proverb) a Country sackefull of love: and the rather you induce me to
think well of you, that you bring in the examples of Aristotle and Hermia, and
of Socrates and Zantippa: whereby you seem to promise, that I shall as they
had, enjoy the sovereignty; and that if I be like them in conditions, you will
be as suffering as they in patience: yet will I neither be so proud toward
you as Hermia, for she rid Aristotle with a snaffle like a horse: nor so
waspish as Zantippa, for she crowned Socrates with a Chamberpot, but between
both: and so wishing you to hope the best, I bid you farewell.

Yours never if not ever, Marian of Cherryhinton.


After she had done her letter, that she might seem to be no whit behind
him in any good will: she leaned her head on her hand, and in a Poetical
fury writ her Lover these verses.

Marians verses to Sir Rowland.
Fear not my dear the storms of Love,
for they are passing sower:
And sometimes sweet as honycombe,
and all within an hour.
Like to a Sunshine Summers day,
When Phoebus shows amain:
And yet ere night from tawnie Clouds,
do fall a shower of rain.
So whatsoever chance betide,
or whatsoever fall:
If Father frown, or Mother chide,
yet must you bear withal.
For why? the Cuckoo does not come
in April more sure,
Then I will fix my love on thee,
for ever to endure.
Thus wishing thee to think of me,
in study or in street,
I bid you heartily farewell,
till we in Cambridge meet.
Having thus ended her song and the Letter, she calde the Convocation of the
merry gentlemen, and showed them her humor in prose, and her vain in verse:
asking if she had done it knauishly enough? I quoth her betrothed husband, and
so exceedingly well, that you shall stand for four and twenty knaves till
Christmas next. Tush quoth an other, women's wits are like Sheffielde knives,
for they are sometimes so keen as they will cut a hair, and sometimes so
blunt that they must go to the grindstone: That is (quoth the second) when you
persuade them to silence or obedience, talk with them but in that doctrine,
and they are mere dunces.

Thus they began to descant of women's wit, but the gentlewoma^ wily enough,
left them all, and went and laid up her letters till Saturday market: Then she
went to his Hosts, and delivered the^ to her, earnestly entreating her, if
she saw sir Rowland, to convey that packet unto him. The Hostess promised her
to do it faithfully, and effectually: and away to Cambridge she went, where
scarce she was set with her butter and her milk, but she spied sir Rowland
come flinging down the Market hill, in his wide sleeude Gown, and his corner
Cap: she need not to call him, for he straight found her out, and she as
soon delivered him the packet: sir Rowland thankt her, and away he went to
his study to read the contents: but it was too far to Peter's Hostell, and
therefore he calde in at a Tavern by the way for a pint of wine, and there he
opened the letter, which when he had read, he perceived by the contents she
loved him: for he being simple, perceived not how she bobde fool with him:
but taking every jest for a sentence, he thought himself the Master of all
worldly content, and that Fortune could not advance him higher on her wheel,
then to have so fair a Maid to his Paramour. Then he viewed over her verses,
and in a great passion praised her Poetry, commended her wit, saying: for
stature she was Juno, for beauty Venus, for learning and qualities Pallas:
thus in meditation of his letter and his love, sat poor sir Rowland, from
eight a clock till eleauen, and then hearing the Hostell Bell ring to dinner,
for fear he should loase his halfepenny chops, he put his letter into his
pocket, and went his way. After dinner, he fell to his old vain: got alone to
be solitary, and then sat ruminating on the good success of his loves,
accompting it rather to his profession, then his fortune, for he thought none
so fair, chaste, nor rich, but a Scholar might win with his Logic. Thus he
passed over day by day in sending of letters to his love, and diverse times
resorting thither, but seldom could he speak with her, for that she fained
some excuse; only when she meant to laugh, then she was for his company. But it
fell out that one Satterday above the rest, that sir Rowland met her in
Cambridge, and finding her with other her neighbors, saluted her, and would
needs welcome her to the town with a pint of Wine, which she took very
kindly, that she might sooth him up still in his vain hope, and forsooth to
the Tavern she and her companions went with him, where they had good game at
our Cambridge wooer: but Marian taking him aside, told him that her father and
her mother had intelligence of their loves, and as far as she could
conjecture, it was by his hostess: therefore she wild him not to make her
privy to his secrets any more, nor to come to Cherryhinton but when she sent
for him, which should be as often as opportunity would serve, hoping though her
father now were not forward, yet in time he would consent, and especially, if
he saw him Master of Arts: with this the Scholar rested satisfied, and they
drank their wine and departed. Thus between them passed on all the Summer,
till the deep of winter, about Christmas, when she on a time and the rest of
the Gentlemen, desirous to be pleasant, determined to have some sport with the
Scholar, and so caused Marian to send a Letter for him, that he should come
that night and speak with her: which she did; and he poor soul no sooner
received it, but in all have hied him in the frostie evening to Cherryhinton:
where when he came, he straight spoke with Marian, and she wished him to stay
in an old Barn while her Father was at supper, and then she would convey him
into a base court, where he should walk hard under her chamber door, and then
when her father were to bed, she would let him in. The Scholar stood there a
while, and Marian came straight and conducted him into a square court, where
Rowland rested him till her father should go to bed. The night grew dark, and
with that passing cold, so that Rowland waxed weary of his standing, and wished
that her father were in bed: there stood the poor Scholar shaking and
trembling in his joints, till it was eleven of the clock: then saw he a light
at the door, and he heard Marian call him: oh blessed hour thought he, that
now I shall both go to a good fire, and to my Lover. Sir Rowland (quoth she) be
still a while, my father and mother is gone to bed, but my brother and two
Gentlemen more are up at Cards, and they have but a set to play, and then they
will to their rest: alas sweet heart (quoth he) I am almost sterued for cold,
yet the hope that I have to enjoy thy presence, does comfort me, that I take
all things with patience. The Gentlemen that stood hard by and hard all this,
laughed at the scholar, and up they went again to their chamber to be merry:
but still walked poor Rowland, beating his hands about him for cold, and
expecting still when his Lover should call him: well there he trauerst his ground
still like a pery-patetian, and only had the sight of the heavens to
contemplate, till it was about one of the clock, and then came they all down
again to laugh: and as soon as he saw the candle at the chinke of the door,
he began to be comforted, and came thither, shaking and beating of his teeth so
sore, that he could not speak. Where are you sweet heart (quoth she) alas how
sorry am I for thy distress, think that the heart in my belly is as cold for
grief as thy ioints are with the frost, feign would I have thee come in, but
the loosers will not part play, and so they sit still, therefore I hope thou will weigh my credit. Oh Marian (quoth he) and his teeth so iarred one against
another, that they could scarce understand him, I am like to perish with cold,
yet were it twice as frostie, and the night thrice as long, I would walk
here, rather then procure thy disparagement: gramercie sweet love (quoth she)
and with that she bid him be still a while, and the Gentlemen all fell a
laughing to hear how kind a fool the Scholar was, and with what patience,
he bid his penance: oh, quoth the one of them, this is but an experiment of
his Philosophical principles, for he reads in Tully: Non oportet sapientem in
aduersis dolor concidere.

I (quoth the second) and Mimus Publius gives him this counsel: Aduersis te
proba, vt fortunam, cum necesse fuerit, patienter insultantem feras.

You say well (quoth the third,) but let him for me make an instance of
himself for such axioms, I will rather be a warm fool, then so cold a
Philosopher. This they began descant upon the poor Scholars myserie, till the
clock stroke three, and then as they were coming down, they heard a noise at
the door, which was this poor Rowland creeping under ye shade for warmth, his
teeth beating so loud, that they might hear them easily up the stairs, all
this moved not my young Mistress to pity, but increast their laughter.
As Soon as he heard them come down the stairs, almost dead, he called out, who
is there: oh sweet heart, it is thy Marrian, quoth she? Then for Gods sake
quoth Rowland, take pity of my life, for I am almost dead, do but open the
door, and let me sit here upon the stairs, that I may have some shelter from
the cold. Alas quoth she sweet love, thou shall and thou will: but when the
door is opened, it makes such a noise, that it wakens the whole house. Rather,
quoth he, let me suffer death, then you be discredited, for if I were to abide
the stone of Sisiphus, the wheel of Ixion, the gripe of Prometheus, and the
hunger of Tantalus, yet had I rather pocket up all these tortures with
patience, then bring thy credit within the compass of the least prejudice: at
this period she left him, and up they went, smiling at the constancy of
Rowland. The Gentlemen they were sleepie, and went to bed, and Marian, as far
as I can conjecture, though it were somewhat before the marriage, that night made
trial of her new betrothed husband, where from three, she lay with him till
six, and then it waxed day light, and she rose; and remembering her lover went
down, opened the door, and found him almost senseless: there wiping her
eyes, as though she had wept, she persuaded him that she was the most
sorrowful woman in the world for his sharp frostie night he had suffered,
protesting she was fallen into an ague, for very fear and grief she had taken
to see him in such distress, and could by no means redress it: but good
Rowland (quoth she) be content, hie thee to Cambridge, and take some hot
broaths, least by this means thou fall into a sickness, and then for very
sorrow I dye: no quoth Rowland, and he could scarce speak or go, fear not me,
for the hope of thy after favors, will be a sufficient comfort for me: and
with that taking his leave for his cold nights work he had a kiss, and so
departed. Well as weak as he was, home he scambled, and got to his chamber, and
discovered to a friend of his, how he was like to perish of an extreme cold he
had taken, if he did not so much for him as to get him a Phisitio^: who
straight went and brought him a Doctor, that with inward potions and outward
oils and unguents so wrought him, that he recovered him to his former health,
although very hardly: for he was so frosen in his loins, and so nipped in the
muskells and synewes, that if his Physician had not been good, he had perished.
It was almost a quarter of a year before Rowland was frolic again: in which
time Marian thinking she had lost her lover with a nut, sent him a present of
apples to win him again, which he received so gratefully that he valewed
the worst of them worth a fellowship, eating them with such an extraordinary
taste, that he imagined them as sweet as Ambrosia, and all for that they came
from his Marian. Thus continued Rowland in his amorous humor until such time
as Marian forsooth must be married: and for that it was aduent, there was no
asking in the church, but they procured a license the day before. As she and
the rest of her friends which were invited to the nuptials were merrily
jesting, oh Lord (quoth she) I had almost forgot my self, to morrow must be
the wedding, and the bride is at Cambridge: why gentlemen it were no bargain
if Rowland were not here: therefore quoth she, I will send for him, and lay
such a plotte that he shall be with us all dinner, and yet taste none of our
meat. I pray you quoth her husband, let us see your cunning in that. Alas quoth
one of the gentlemen, poor Rowland is credulous, and whatsoever mistres Marian
says, he thinks it is Gospel: but if he will be so simple as to think that his
last nights work is not a sufficient warning, he is worthy of what so ever
befalles. Well, upon this Marian sent for him, and come he did in the evening,
where, to make my tale short, she made him walk in his wonted statie till one
of the clock: then she let him into a good fire, where he well warmed him
self, and she lovingly sat by him, discoursing of the last nights work that
he abode so patiently: at last she commanded the maid to lay the cloth that
they might have some quelque chose for a ready supper, which they went busily
about: for Rowland said he was very hungry. As the cloth was laid, and they
ready to sit down the wench came running in, and said, that her Master was
rising, and seeing the light of the fire was coming into the Parlor. Alas what
shall I do quoth Maria^? hide me some where quoth Rowland whiles he be gone to
bed. Come quoth she, here stands a new truncke and a large, come, skippe into
it, and I will for a while rake up the fire and go to bed while the old man be
fallen a sleep: with that Rowland whipped into the truncke, and she locked him
in, and straight in a pleasant humor went to her new husband, where she lay al
night, and left Rowland safe shut up for starting. Still lay he expecting
when she should come, but hearing nothing, extremely weary for very grief
he fell a sleep till the next morning. When the poor scholar awakt and
entered into consideration where he was, he began to be half in suspicion that
he was mocked and abused, still he lay patiently till he heard them of the
house say, God morrow mistres Marian, God send you a good day, to day the Sun
shines fair, you shall have a clear day to your wedding. This word went as
cold to his heart as a knife, that Marian should be married, he made a fool to
suffer such disparagment of his credit: yet as before he was patient in
extremes, and so resolved with content to see the success of his abuse. Well
to Church go the bridegroom and the bride with all their friends attendants,
and married they were with great solemnity: this done, home they came to
dinner, and after they were set and placed in the parlor where this truncke
stood, they fell to their viads which were very sumptuous. The gentlemen
bidding reach down the pigge, the capen, goose, swan, turkey, phesant, biter,
venison, and such dainty cates: all this hard Rowland, and being passing
hungry, wished he had a leg of the worst of them in his hand; still he
stood almost famished and smothered till the tables were taken up, and the
boards shifted, and they fell to dancing. All this heard Rowland, and hearing
the music fell a sleep until supper time, and then he awakt, and heard how
they laid the tables and went to supper where they were passing pleasant, and
the more for that they meant to make sport with Rowland after supper was done,
which continued not long, for they made the more have for that they meant to be
merry. When the cloth was taken up the Bride fetched a great sigh: what wife
quoth ye Bridegroom, why sigh you? in a dumpe? repent you of the match? no
quoth she, but I have a blot in my conscience, and now before you all I mean
to reveal it. I was once beloved of a Cambridge scholar, who loved me
intierlie and suffered much for my sake: then from point to point she recompted
unto them the whole discourse of the loves and fortunes passed between Rowland
and her, whereat the company had good sport.

A man he was quoth she, wise, proper, and well proportioned: and for proof
hold the key, open the truncke quoth she, and I will show you his picture.
Rowland hearing this, armd himself to suffer al: and so the truncke was opened
and he rose out like Lazarus from his grave. Good Lord quoth the company, what
is this a spirit? In nomine Jesus vnde venis? E purgatorio quoth Rowland. And
with that all the company laughed while they could sit. At last when they were
weary with laughing Rowland had silence, he boldly said: thus I am glad
gentlemen that my mishap has made you so merry, and that mistres bride has
so large a plain song to run descant on; Caveat Emptor: this is but a
comedy, but look for a tragedy when soever it falls. And so he went out of
the door sore ashamed that he had such a kindly scoff. The company laughed
well, and he patiently went home thinking how fortunate a man he should be,
if he might live to revenge. Rowland at this misfortune had an insight into the
world and began to wax wiser, that in short time he became to have as much
knowledge in worldly affairs as in his book, and was for his good behavior
and pleasant wit highly had in estimation, not only amongst scholars,
but amongst townsmen, that in all the university he was called the
gentlemanlike scholar. Living thus in good credit, and yet discontented,
because Fortune favored him with no opportunity to revenge: it so fell out at
length that Marian coming every week to Cambridge, espied among the
scholars one whom she cast her eye on, and thought him the properest man in
the whole University: Well, she counted it but a glaunce, and thought as
lightly to pass it over as it slightly entered: for she found love, that
though he entered in by grant of courtesy, yet he would not be thrust out by
force of extremity, in so much that she could not content hirselfe without,
but with the fight of her new friend, which was done so manifestly that the
scholar perceived it, and aiming at the fairest, one Satterday seeing her in
the market offered her a quart of wine, which she took very gratefully, and
began to be very familiar with him, in so much that before they past, force
of love made her so shameless, that she was content to yield to his request,
so that time and place would serve without the disparagment of her credit.

Upon this they concluded, that master Awdrey (for so we will call him) should
grow familiar with her husband, and by that means should he have a better
means to the quieting of his mind. Upon this determination they departed, and
he so brought it to pass, that not only he was acquainted with her husband
but very familiar, that he would carry master Awdrey often from Cambridge
with him to Cherryhinton, and I hope you do imagine he was no little welcome
guest to his wife. Being thus fitted in their passions only watching for
place, lingering off the time at last it was concluded, that she should come on
a Satterday to Cambridge, and feign to stay with a kinswoman of hirs that dwelt
in the town, and so lie with her all night: this stood for a sentence, and so
the next week was decreed. In the mean time it so fell out, that master Awdrey
and sir Rowland being of great acquaintance, and such private familiars that
nothing was holden too secret between them, master Awdrey smothering this joy
in himself, thought to partake it with his friend: and so as he and sir
Rowland were walking revealed unto him the love that had past between him and
Marian, and on satterday was ye night when his posse should come into esse,
desiring him to tell him where he might have a house fit for such a purpose. Sir
Rowla^d hearing this smylde, which made M. Awdrey to inquire ye cause of his
laughter: whereupon sitting down upon ye grass he began to recount unto him the
whole discourse of his loves with Marian, and what sundry abuses he suffered at
her hand, to ye great and utter infamy of scholars. M. Audrey hearing this,
sat a great while in a muse, at last he said, and will women be Crocodiles? to
weep rose water and vinegar at one time, still to dally in extremes, to love
without rea-, son and hate without cause? oh the folly of me^ to be such to
such painted sepulchers, whose painted sheaths hold leaden blades, whose skins
are glorious like pa^thers, but have devouring pa^ches. By that God that drew
that unfortunate femal from that forefortunat Ada^, I hate her as extremely as
I loved her earnestly: and I will not only yield ye opportunity to revenge, but
I will join issue with thee to perform it to ye uttermost. At this Rowla^d was
tickled with inward joy, and taking Awdrey in his arms protested such humble
service for that friendly promise, as ever should lie in his ability to
execute. Thus in this determination of revenge they crossed the fields to
Trumpington, and there they eat a mess of Cream, whither by chance came one
of the Procters, with whom both Rowland and Audrey were very familiar: him
they had in and made him as good cheer as such a simple alehouse could afoord,
and there in private revealed to him all their practice, desiring his
furtherance in the matter. The Procter promised to do what in him lay for the
execution of this merry action: and there amongst them they laying and
confirming the plot, they went all together home to Cambridge, where they past
away the time pleasantly til Satterday came: and then according to promise was
Marian there and met with Awdrey, who interteined her with all the courtesy
that he could, spending the day at the Tavern whiles night came, and then he
carried her to the house appointed such a subaudi Domus as was fit for such a
purpose: and there they supt. In the mean time Rowland had sent a letter to
her husband in Audreies name, that his wife being not well was feign to stay at
her kinswoman all night, and desired him to come to her the next morning, and
that her father and the rest of the gentlemen would come with him, for that
they should see Rowland taken in bed with a pretty wench. This letter in all
have was conveyed to Cherryhinton to her husband, who reading the contents
waxed somewhat jealous, because he had seen very familiar courtesies between
Awdrey and his wife, and thought scholars were sly fellows, and could devise
many such Sophistications to make a man a cuckold: but he conceald his
suspicion to himself, and showed the letter to his Father in law and the rest
of the Gentlemen, who as they sorrowed his wife was not well, so they were all
glad to see such a comicall fortune of Rowland: her husband taking every word
for his advantage, said he would be there by four of the clock to see Rowland
taken up. Thus they all agreed, and were gone by two of the clock, where we
leave them coming to Cambridge: and again to Marian, who after supper sat up
late, but Awdrey filled her full of Wine till she was almost droncke, that she
was very heavy, and desired to go to bed, which she did, and was no sooner
laid but she fell a sleep, and Awdrey slipping out, put out the candle and
sent in Rowland, and bad him now go to his mistres: he went into the chamber
and locked the door, and master Audrey stole out of the house and went to his
chamber, leaving Rowland with his paramour, where I think more for envy of
the man then for love of the woman perhaps he dubde him one of Paris
priesthood, howsoever it was she descried not how it was, but both fell a
sleep: on the morrow by four of the clock was Marians husband, her father and
the rest of the gentlemen at Peter's hostell, where finding the gate open they
went to master Awdreys chamber and raised him up, who quickly slipping on his
clothes, welcomed them, and went with them to find out the Proctor, who
watching for their coming was already with a dosen masters of Art well
appointed walking in the court yard, and presently went his way with them and
came to the house where Rowla^d lay: the Proctor knocked and bade open the door:
who is that quoth the good wife? the Proctor quoth he; open ye door and that
quickly, or I will beat it down: the good man came stumbling down in his
shirt, and the good wife was so amassed that she could not remember to tell her
guestes. The Proctor came in, and by the direction of Awdrey went straight to
the Chamber: who be here quoth the Proctor? none sir quoth he, but a stranger
and his wife: beat it open with a halbert quoth the Proctor: and with that for
have Marians husband ran against it, and the door fell down and he into the
chamber: with that Rowland covered her close, and stepping out of the bed in
his shirt asked what they meant. Ah sir Rowland quoth the Proctor, I am sorry
we have diseased you this morn, I thought full little to have found you here,
what is ye cause you lie out of ye hostel to night? Truly sir quoth he, I was
late abroad this night making merry with my friends, and so I was feign to
take up my lodging here. How do you sir Rowland quoth Marians husband and her
father, I marvel we see you not at Cherryhinton. Oh masters quoth he, when
there is another comedy to play look for me: but if you remember I promised
you a tragedy first, when yt is studied, I warrant I will visit you. Poor
Maria^ lying in bed and hearing all this, how she was betrayed and had laid with
Rowland all night, and how her father and her husband were there present,
thought surely now Rouland to the uttermost would be revenged upon her, so yt
she fell into a great sweat for fear. The Proctor that had his lesson taught
him said, well sir Rowland, had it been any other but you that had bin taken
abroad and in such a suspected house, he should have gone to the Toule booth:
but since you have no other company fare well. Awdrey iogd upon Maria^s husband,
and as they were ready to go out of door, tush M. Proctor quoth he, but I
marvel you examine not who it is that lies with him, it may be a pretty wench.
What? is there one lies with him? I marie is there sir quoth he, and with that
stepping to the bed he threw off all the clothes, and there lay his wife in her
smock.

Sante amen quoth Rowland who is here?
Have you seen such a chance this year?
What a woodcocke to come so soon
From Cherrihinton to Ca^bridge before noon,
And found a Cuckows nest.
Is this masters in earnest or jest?
That Rowland so early in a morn
Should make a knave wear a horn.
What man be not aghast?
For you cannot call back that is past.
At this all the Scholars fell a laughing, and sir Rowland sat him down in
his shirt, and (to make the matter up, that it might be a right black Santus)
while they laughed, cried Cuckowe. The Gentleman seeing his wife, and the father
the daughter, they were in such a mase, that they stood as men senseless:
they fell out a weeping, the Scholars a laughing, the gentlemen a sighing, and
still Rowland kept his wench, and cried Cuckowe: at last Rowland began thus.
Why you my Masters and friends of Cherryhinton, did I not promise you a
Tragedy, and have I not now brought if to pass? I hope this Dame, and you
all remember my frosty night, and how I was brought out of the trunck: now am I
not revenged well? have I not had my penyworts? Yes Villeine (quoth the
gentleman) and first the whore shall die: and with that drawing out his Rapier,
he would have killed her: but the Proctor staide him, and she protested she
knew not how she came there, but thought she had been at home in her bed.
Upon this all the Scholars persuaded the gentleman that Rowland did it by
Negromancie, and that if she were the honestest woman in the world, Magic
were able to do as much: Rowland for very pity affirmde it: and so they
persuaded him not to wade further in the matter for his own credit, but to
clappe it up with silence. She wept and wroong her hands, and her father fate
and shed tears: but at last by the persuasion of the Proctor and the other
Scholars, Rowland and he for all this were made friends: his wife and he
agreed, as a man persuaded she was sackelesse, and that it was done by
Negromancy: and so all merrily went to the Tavern and drunk, they going to
the College, and he to Cherryhinton, with full resolution never more to let
his wife come to Cambridge, for fear of the Scholars Art Magic.

This tale made them all heartily laugh, every one commending the policy of
the Scholar, that had invented so good a revenge. The Cobbler he marked all
very diligently, and swore there was not a more sound history for his turn not
in all the Legenda Aurea: well it made all the Barge merry, and seeing they
were al in a dump, they cried who is next? marry that am I quoth the scholar,
and he began to settle himself, whom I can best describe thus.

The description of the Scholar.
A Man he was of a sober look,
Given much unto his book:
For his visage was all pale,
And Clerks tellen this tale,
That mickle study makes men lean,
As well as does a cursed queen.
Apollo radiant and sheene,
His pattern long had been:
For well skild was he,
In verses and Poetry.
In Palmestrie he had some lore,
In other Arts mickle more.
Mickle could he say at each steven,
Of the liberal Arts seven:
Of the welking and the Axle tree,
Whereon the heavens turnde me:
Of Mercury and Charles waine,
And of the Bears twain:
Calisto and her son conveyed thither;
Which to Seamen show the weather:
When Neptunus with his mace,
Will make smile Amphitrites face.
Many other matters of Sophistry.
Could this Clarke in secrecy.
He could also speak of love,
Of Paphos and of Venus dove.
And perhaps though he were a Clarke,
Yet he could skill in the dark
As well as a man of lay degree,
To dally with a wench in priuitie.
His attire was all black,
But why do I longer clacke?
This Clarke began report,
His story in this sort.
The Scholars tale. Containing the sundry misfortunes that two Sicilian
Lovers had, and how at the end their passionate sorrows came to a pleasing
success.
WHen the king of Tunise was beaten out of his kingdom, and sought to enter
again by force, Iacomin Pierro, and Alexander Bartolo, two Noble men of
Sicilia, and both of Palermo, for the good will they bare to the king, made
certain tall barks, and with their aid maugre his enemies, placed the king
again safe in his kingdom: which done they returned again to Palermo. This
Iacomin Pierro had a son called also Iacomin, and this Alexander had a
daughter called Katherine, these two being neighbors children fell in love
together, insomuch that Iacomin noting the beauty of Katherine, seeing with
his eye her outward excellency, and hearing with his ears her inward virtues
and perfection, entered with such deep insight into her qualities, that he
resolved in himself she and none but she should be the goddess of his
affections: and of the other side, Katherine feeding her eye with the desired
object of his person, and with delight pleasing her ear with the general fame
that ran through all Sicilia of his courtesy, affability, and valor: determined
that none but Iacomin should enjoy the flower of her beauty. These two lovers
being in such a sympathy of agreeing passions, lived a long while with looks,
bashful both to discover the essence of their loves: yet at last Iacomin
taking heart at grass, finding one day fit place and opportunity, discoursed
unto her, how ever since his years could entertain any amorous thought, the
Idea of her beauty and virtues remained imprinted in his heart so deeply,
that none but she could satisfy the end of his incessant desire: which was no
other, then the honest and honorable content of marriage. Katherine who was as
willing as he was desirous, told him that upon that condition, whenever
their Parents should agree, she was ready to be at his command. Thus they
wooed and ended, and all in a short space, for that time parting with a kiss.
This sweet consent of thoughts, continued a long time between these two
Lovers, insomuch that Iacomin resolved shortly to break the matter to his
father, to whom he knew the match would be most pleasing, for that old
Iacomin and Alexander loved together as Brothers. Whiles thus these two Lovers
held their demand in suspense, there fell a deadly jar between the house
of the Iacomins and the family of the Bartolos: insomuch that not only all
Palemo, but almost all Sicilia was in an vproare, for each took Arms against
other, and being men of great Parentage, friends took parts, and they began
to bandy, that they fell to a flat civil dissension. This disagreement
between the Parents, although it was a heart break to the two Lovers, yet
could it not at all disparage their affection, but the greater the Mutiny the
deeper was the impression of their minds. But by this means their meeting was
hindered: yet Love being a privy searcher of secrets, found them out a creuise
between two walls, which parted their houses, and there often times they met
and parled, hoping still some end would grow to this dismal dissension: but as
the fire increases with the wind, so this iar grew greater by time, that the
lovers lost all hope ever to have consent of parents: insomuch, that wholly in
despair of an unity, they concluded to forsake Sicilia, and to go into
Spain, where they had both friends, and there to remain til their families
were accorded. Upon this resolution, Iacomine prouides him a Bark, and laid
it ready in the haven, and when the wind and weather was fair, gave a
watchword to Katherine, and so got her a board, hoist sails and away they made
toward Spain: they were not long gone, but they were mist, and by all possible
conjectures known to be slipped away together, for diverse manifest instancies
were reported of their loves. The fathers fell both into deep passions,
Iacomyn having but one Son, and Bartolo but one Daughter: yea the grief of
their unkind departure, did so work in their Fathers minds, that each
intended more mischief to other, as it were in revenge, that the broils grew
hotter. But as they disse^ted, so these two Lovers accorded every way, looking
for no other Haven but the coast of Spain: but fortune that delights to sport
her self in the variable accidents of love, brought it thus to pass. They had
not sailde three days from Sicilia, but that there fell a great calm, and
certain Galleys that were Rouers under the king of Tmisa, espied this Sicilian
ship: and thinking to have some rich prise, made out and gave onset,
commanding them to yield: the Sicilians, being calm, could not make way from
them, but yet although too weak, stoutly denied to be bourded, and fought it
out to the uttermost, chiefly Iacomine, who was sore wounded: but at last,
they of the Galleys entered, and bestowed the Mariners under hatches, and then
went to rifle the Ship, where they found Katherine al blubbered with tears,
and almost dead for fear, her they took for all her pitiful shrikes and
cries, conveyed her into the Galleys: which Iacomin seeing, took so heavily,
that he was ready to die for grief: but so sore he was hurt, that stir he
could not, but was feign to suffer her to be carried away, whether the mercy
of the slaves pleased to transport her: when they had rifeled the ship, and
found nothing but passengers, away they went with fair Katherine, determining
with themselves to give her for a present to the king of Tunise whom they knew
did love a fair woman, more then half his kingdom, and so fair a creature
as Katherine they were sure he never saw before. Upon this they made sail
toward Tunise, and when they were arrived, the captain of the Galleys,
causing her to dress her in her richest attire, went with her to the Kings
Palace, where when he was admitted to his Highness presence, humbly on his
knees he craved pardon, as one that contrary to his Majesty's laws had bin a
Rouer and a Pirate on the seas: but now loathing that course of life, was come
to submit himself, and having taken that Gentlewoman as a prise at sea,
desired his Majesty to accept her as a present. The king whiles the Pirate
told his tale, kept his eye still on the Gentlewoman, whose beauty he found
such, that he thought her some heavenly creature, shrouded in some mortal
carcass. The king not only thanked the Pirat for his present, but gave him
free pardon, and a letter of mart, with many other rich gifts, so that he
returned richly rewarded: and then turning him to Katherine, he took her in
his arms, kissed her, and gave her such enterteinement as in all roialtie he
could. But nothing could make her cease off from tears, having still her
Iacomin in remembrance, whom she held for dead: which the King perceiving,
commanded that she should be carried to a place of his, standing fast by the
City wall, and there placed and attended upon with all diligence, until she
might be comforted, and thither when it pleased him he would have recourse.
Seated in that house, there she led a solitary life, washing her cheeks every
day with tears for her poor Iacomin: who likewise wounded as he was, was
brought to Tunise, and there left in the Surgions hand, where he was healed:
as soon as he might well go, he went as a man forlorn up and down the
City, looking every where if he might see his Katherine: whereupon he
resolved to pass from place to place, and so to end his days in travel, if
he did not by narrow inquisition find her out: getting therefore his bag and
baggage in a readiness, he was going out of Tunise; and as he passing out the
gates, casting his eye up to the house where Katherine was, who at that time
was looking out of a casement, he espied her, and thinking it should be she,
stood in a mase: Katherine seeing him, and thinking him to be her Iacomin, was
almost ready to fall down in a sound: thus stood the two Lovers at gase; at
last Iacomin called Katherine: Iacomin (quoth she) and with that she clapped her
finger on her mouth, and made a sign, that for that time he should depart.
Back again went Iacomin to his Hostess, as merry a man as might be, and
there staid till it was something late in the evening, and then going to the
place, sought round about the house, and there found a back window into a
Garden, where they might conveniently talk: he had not stayed there long, but
Katherine came to the window, and there after a volly of sighs, quenched with
tears, they began to discourse their fortunes since their departure: Katherine
told Iacomin how she was given by the Pirates to the King for a present, and
how he had placst her there, reserving her for one of his Concubines, and that
she looked every hour, when he should come to defloure her. Therefore quoth
she, since we are man and wife, as we have lived together, so let us dye
together, and enjoy thou the chastity of that body, whose soul has been
ever thine in all amity: I respect not the King, nor what his tortures can
do, therefore at night come hither to this place when it is dark, climb up
on the wall, and so on this tree, and thou may easily come into the
casement, which for the same purpose thou shall find open. At this motion
Iacomin was glad, and so departed, and at the time appointed came: and being
made more nimble by love and desire, he lept up the wall lightly, and so into
the tree, and from thence into the casement, where he found his Katherine
ready to receive him, banquet him she could not, least any might hear, but
feast he did with kisses, or whatsoever she might afford to his amorous
desires, so that in the end, to bed they went, and there with pleasure
recompensed their former misfortunes. Love having thus advanced her champion;
Fortune envying their happiness, meant to have one fling more at them, and
brought it so to pass, that the King that night resolved to have the company
of Katherine, and therefore after all his Lords were at rest, took with him
his Chamberlain, and certain of his Guard, and went to his place where she
lay, coming in by a back gate, having keys for every door, at last opened
the Chamber where she was, and there drawing the curtens to behold his
Goddess, he saw where she lay with a yoongman in her arms fast a sleep: the
king for anger was ready to have killed them, but yet he did qualify his fury
with a royal patience: and called his Chamberlain, and the rest of his Guard,
and showed them this sight, demanding of them if any of them knew the young man:
they all answered, no, but supposed he was some stranger. The King straight
commanded, that certain of his Guard should watch them, and as soon as they
awakt, carry them to prison, and let there in the midst of the market place be
erected a great stake, and in the afterne one, there let them be both consumed
with fire: the guard obeyed the Kings commandment, and he went away in great
choler, and highly discontented. The King departed, these lovers slept
sweetly till the morning, and then they awooke, where present they heard a
rustling of men, who straight told them how ye King was there, what had
happened, and what he had commanded: therefore they made them rise, and then
bound them and carried them away. The two lovers were no whit dismayed at this
news, but embracing and kissing each other, comforted themselves in this, yt
they should, as they lived together so die together, and yt their souls nor
bodies should never part. Straight were they carried to prison, and the stake
was on providing, whereupon the rumor of their burning came about the city,
that against the hour appointed all the city were gathered together, and
forth at last was Iacomine and Catherin brought, and bound to the stake back
to back: They earnestly desired yt they might be bound face to face, but it
could not be granted, which grieved the^: but they comforted themselves with
cheerful words, resolved to suffer death with patience. All the city was
gathered together, and stood gasing on them, and pitying them, that so sweet
a couple should fall in such fatal extremity: the poor souls ashamed, and
hanging down their heads expecting every minute the beginning of their
martyrdom: As thus the fire was ready to be brought came the Lord high
Admiral of Tunyse bye, and seeing such a concourse, demanded the cause: The
people told him as much as they knew. He on his footcloth came to the stake,
and looking upon them seeing them so lovely, asked of them of what Country
they were. Of Sycilia sir quoth Iacomine. With that ye Admiral staring him
earnestly in the face called to his remembrance the favor of old Iacomine his
father. Of what place in Sicilia? my friend quoth he: of Palermo: thy name
quoth the Admiral: Iacomin quoth he: why thou art not (answered the Lord) the
son of Iacomin Pierro? yes quoth he, and this the daughter of Alexander
Bartolo: And if quoth Iacomine you knew those families, do but so much for us
as speak to the king, that we may be bound face to face, and so die, for life
that we hold in skorne. Although the torme^tors were appointed to dispatch the^
by an hour, yet the L. Admiral chargd them not to put any fire to ye wood til
his return; which they promisd: and away gallops ye Admiral as a mad man
through ye streets to ye Kings palace, where when he came, he found ye king in
a great rage, discoursing to his Lords the villainy of Catherin, yt admitted a
stranger into her. The Admiral without any great reverence, as a man full of
choler began thus roughly and briefly. Can they which place kings pull down
kings? Then look thou once again to be beaten out of Tunyse: did Iacomine
Pierro and Alexander Bartolo the two valiant Lords of Sicilia by their force
seat thee in thy kingdom? and now in revenge do thou burn the only issue
of them both? for that two lovers seek the fruition of their loves, so shall
we have Sicilia our enemies, and thou seek a new kingdom. What meanest thou
to use these railing speeches quoth the King? Marie quoth the Admiral, yonder
young gentleman that is at the stake is ye son of Iacomin, and she the daughter
of Bartolo. At this the king stood in amaze, and was half afraid, so that he
cried out to his Lords, yt they should ru^ and bring the couple as they were to
him: which they performed with all diligence. When Iacomine and Catherin saw
the nobles come, then they looked for the fire: but when they heard how they
must be unloosed, and how courteously they were entreated, hope of better
fortune gave them some comfort. Well, away they were carried to the king, who
graciously interteining them, demanded the cause of their bold enterprise,
and what fortune brought them into such a far country. Iacomine straight began
and discourst their particular hap, and what accident (...) they had, whose
sons they were, and what was their contrary fortunes. The king at this
embracst them both, welcomd them, and craved pardon of his rash censure,
cladding them in roial apparel, and inryching them with many costly gifts,
after solemplie married them in Tunise, and kept a great feast with turney and
triumphs fitting their degrees, and after preparing a pretty Fleet, sent them
home to their parents by the Lord Admiral: whose arriual in Palermo was
wonderful strange, in that all thought they were dead. But when they recounted
to their parents their misfortunes, and last the gracious favors of the King
of Tunise, by the help and good persuasion of the Lord Admiral; the instance
of their true love reconciled their fathers and families, that not only the
two lovers agreed, but the two houses ever after continued in peace and concord.

As Soon as the scholar had told his tale, every man thanckt him for his
pains, and said it was a pleasant and a delightful history: amongst the
rest there was an old woman, who for very kindness to hear of their hard
haps, and the good fortunes of the lovers, wept: why weep you mother quoth the
Cobbler? by my troth son quoth she, to think on the chances of love which
are so variable, and by the grace of God if all in the barge will give me
leave, you shall hear an old woman tell a tale that will make you all merry.
Every man desired her to say on: and she being a simple woman, as you shall
perceive by her description, settled her self to her task thus.

The description of the old Woman.
CRooked was this beldam for age,
Huffe shouldred, and of a wrinckled visage:
And as her back and neck was crooked,
So was her nose long and hooked.
Many forrowes in her brow,
Hairy, and bristled like a Sow.
She had a large tawny face,
And therein an il favored grace.
She was mouthed like a Sparrow,
Gated like a wheelebarow,
And of long time beforne
Not a tooth in her head had she borne.
Yet could she chew good ale,
For her nose was nothing pale,
But with swinking at her will
She looked red about the gill.
Mickle talk she had and mickle chat
When with her Gossips she sat,
That threescore years before
The bell for gossipping she bore.
Her apparel was after the elder bear.
Her cassocke aged some fifty year:
Graie it was, and long beforne
The wool from the threedes was worn.
A thrumbe hat she had of red
Like a bushel on her head.
Her kercher hung from under her cap
With a tail like a fly flap,
And tied it was with a whim wham,
Knit up again with a trim tram,
Much like an Egiptian.
Her sleeves blew, her train behind
With silver hooks was tucked I find.
Her shoes broad and forked before,
None such saw I of yore.
This beldam on her merry pin
Began her tale with this gin.
The old wives tale, Containing the wily sleightes of a wanton wife, and how
both cunningly and craftily to the safety of her own honesty and her
husbands discredit, she shifted her lover.
IN a far country there dwelled sometime a gentleman of good pare^tage,
called signior Myzaldo, who had to his wife a very fair and beautiful
gentlewoman. And as the beasts most greedily gase at ye Panthers skin, and
the birds at the Peacocks plumes: so every fair feminine face is an adamant to
draw ye object of men's eyes to behold the beauties of women: experience proved
it true in the wife of Myzaldo, for she being a woman of singular perfection
and proportion, was generally looked on and liked of al, but favored and
loved especially of a young gentleman called Peter, dealing with such secrecy,
that they continually satisfied their desires without giving signior Myzaldo
the least occasion of suspicion; and the means that they performed it with
such secrecy was this. Every week twice her husband rid from home about
certain his affairs, and she very artificially near to the high way that
leads to the town where Peter lay, had placed an asses head upon a tree, and
when her husband was gone forth, she turned ye head toward the town; but when
he was at home, then she always had it looking to her own house: using herein
as some thought, an Embleame, saying, when she turned the Asses head forth, that
the Ass her husband with the long horning ears was gone from home; and when
it stood toward the house, that the Ass kept his chamber: but what soever in
this her conceit was, Peter always knew when to come, and ever when Myzaldo
was from home resorted to his house. Now it chanced that certain boys coming
by and seeing the Asses head stand there, threw stones at it, and hit it so
often, yt at last they turned the Asses head toward ye town: which Peter
walking abroad and spying, thought yt Myzaldo had bin gone from home: and
therefore at night walked toward his lovers house, and coming to the door
finding it shut, according to his accustomed manner, knocked: ye good wife awakt,
heard him and was sore afraid yt her husband should hear him, and so lay
still: by and by he knocked again mor loud: Myzaldo awoke, and hearing this,
asked of his wife who it was that rapt at the door, or what yt knocking meant?
Oh husband quoth she, be still, it is a foul spirit yt hauntes this house, and
yet hitherto we never durst reveal it, and it has, thanks be to God, bin your
good fortune never to hear it before: Myzaldo rycher by far then he was wise,
believed his wife, and asked her if it had done any harm: no quoth she, for I
had learnd a charm to send it hence: friar Rowla^d learnd me it, and if it
knock again, you and I will go down together, and I will say my charm, and so
we shall live at rest. Peter yt thought some other friend had bin with his Le^man,
taking it in scorn yt her husband (as he thought) being from home he should not
be let in, knocked again amain. With yt Myzaldo and his wife arose, lighted a
candle, and went down to the door where Peter was: Then she wished her husband
to kneel down upon his knees while she said the charm. With that she began
thus.

Spirit spirit get thee hence,
For here is no residence:
Here thou may not be
This night to trouble me,
For my husband and I
Safe in our beds must lie,
Therefore from hence go
And trouble me no mo.
Now husband quoth she, spit: and with that he spit, and Peter laughed heartily,
and wished he might spit out his teeth for being at home. This charm said she
thrice over, and every time made him spit, that Peter might be assuredly
persuaded that her husband was at home. Upon this Myzaldo and his wife went to
bed, and heard the spirit no more: for Peter went laughing home to his lodging.
Myzaldo could not sleep this night, nor many nights after, but still
maruelling what this spirit should be, lay a woke. Peter that once or twice
thus was deceived of the ass head, because by some contrary mishap it was
turned, devised thus: yt every night when Myzaldos wife went to bed she should
tie a string to her toe, and then leave the end of it at the door, so that
when Peter came he might wake her, and then if she pulled the string again and
tied it fast, her husband was from home: if she let it slip, then he was in
bed. Thus by the means of this string Myzaldo was often made cuckold, and
sometimes when her husband was at home and in his sound sleep, if Peter pulled
the string, she would rise and go down to him to the door. At last so thus this
game continued, that Myzaldos wife being fast a sleep, and he rising to find
ye chamber pot stumbled upon ye string, and wondering what it meant, or to what
end groped easily and found it tied to his wives toe, and from thence reached
to the door. He, as simple as he was, coniectured, that this was done to make
him cuckold, and therefore for that night said nothing: but against the next
night had provided a great Partisan by his beds side: and when his wife was
fast a sleep he untied the string, and tied it to his own toe; he had not
stumbred a little, but he felt the string pull easily, whereupon he pulled
again, and then Peter thought assuredly that he was gone from home,
whereupon he knocked. Then did Myzaldo rise, put on his clothes, and took the
partizan in his hand, and down he went rustling that his wife wakt, and
hearing him go down so hastily felt for the string that was at her toe, and
mist it: whereupon she perceived her husband had found out the deceit, and
whipping out of the bed ran down the stairs: with that Mizaldo opened the door
and thought to have taken Peter, but he having a glaunce of him being in a
dark night came away, and Mizaldo after him, and raised the watch, yet was
Peter so light of foot, that he out ra^ them al, and escapt. Mizaldoes wife
fearing the worst ran up again to her maid, and wild her to go to her bed,
and lie there, and to abide whatsoever her husband should do to her, and she
would give her a new gown and a new petticote. The wench was content and went
to her masters bed: scarce was she warm there, but up came Mizaldo in a great
rage, and straight laying down his partizan fell to beating of his wife, and
with a whipcord all to lasht her body, that the blood ran down the sheets:
and when he had done, in the dark groped, and found a pair of shears and
clipped off all the hair of her head: and that done, opened the door and went
his way. The wench almost killed with blows, and sore pained with smart lay still
as one in a trance: but as soon as ever Mizaldo was gone, his wife arose and
shut the door, and came to the wench, where she comforted and washed her, and
anointed her, putting on clean linen upon her, and laid clean sheets on
the bed, and so sat down discontented at her work. No sooner did the day
break but signior Mizaldo went with all speed to his mother in law, and there
revealed to her and to his wives brethren how his wife had dealt with him, and
how he had revenged her, yet not sufficiently, but was fully resolved to
bring her this day before the Magistrate, and so absolutely to make a divorce:
the mother fell to weeping, and knowing her own fault when she was young,
entreated her sons that they would make a peace and attoneme^t betweeene
their sister and her husband: they fell to exclaim against her, and said,
seeing she was by her lightness the discredit of her house, they would be the
first and the foremost in punishing such gross offenses. Upon this they went
home with Myzaldo to his house, and there coming up the stairs they found
their daughter sitting very sad: the husband fround and brethren scoulded,
but ye mother whom nature more nearly touched, said, what cheer daughter? what
stir is this between your husband and you? what stir quoth her daughter?
marry I would you and my brethren had gone to my burying when you went to my
marriage to wed me to a dronckard, that all day goes out about whores and
curtisans, and at night comes home late, and perhaps not all night, as he has
done now, and so do I sit all day comfortless, and lie in the night like a
widow while he is abroad with his strumpets. And quoth the mother he is this
morning come to your brethren and me, with an outcrie against you, that this
night he took you with a Lemman at the door, and how he found it out by a
string tied to your toe. Fie upon him dronkard (quoth she) these are his
dreams, when he lies tipled in the Tavern: but I marvel where he has been
to night: marry Dame quoth he, I fear me your flesh and your bones know too
well, for I think you have not one free spot on your body, I so whipped you for
your whoredom, and I think the sheets in the bed can witness, and the hair
that I cut off your head can testify. Now mother (quoth she) and good
brethren, see whether this is an arrand droonkard or not, that tells these
fables, saying, he beat me thus to night, when he touched me not, nor before
this time since yesterday morning, came within these doors: where he says the
sheets are bloody, see brethren see, they are clean: for my skin, take view
of it, if it be any way touched: and for my hair, see how fair and long it is:
how has he then done these prankes? alas, alas, he has fallen amongst his
whores in his droonkennesse, and has used them so, and now to the slander of
me, to the dishonor of my friends, and the perpetual infamy of our house, he
has thus without cause reviled me, where ye see his own lying tongue
condemns him. Mizaldo, seeing neither his wives hair cut, nor her body any
way bruised, fell into a great dumpe, woondering whether he drempt it or no, in
so much, that at last he asked: why Wife? was I not this night at home? at
home, in faith sir no, but with some of your brabs, and I think thou came
home drunk. At this doubtful demand, her brethren began to take her part, and
seeing what he said was false, and al her speeches probable, they raild on him
in most bitter terms, and told him in that he had married their sister who was
an honest woman, and he by all means sought to deprive her of her good name
without cause, who should be ye protector of her honor, they would not put it
up unrevenged, but would to the uttermost do him what injury the extremity of
the law would afford. Upon this, the man seeing how in all things his wife had
disprooued him, thought assuredly that he was not at home the last night, and
therefore desired her to pardon him, and he would never after be taken in the
like offense, and so upon that, by her mother and her brethren they were made
friends, and ever after Peter and she with less suspicion enjoyed their loves.

The old wife having told her tale, every man began to commend the wit of a
woman, who on the sudden is ever most quick, and percing, able so soon to
yield a peremptory excuse, as the occasion is ministered. By that they had told
this tale, they were within sight of Grauesend: whereupon they thought to have
given over, but that a Somner sat by, who was a pleasant fellow; and he began
thus. Gentlemen seeing at the motion of the Cobbler, we have imitated old
Father Chaucer, having in our little Barge, as he had in his travel sundry
tales, and amongst the rest, the old wives tale, that you shall not want the
merriest knave of all the Somners, you shall hear what I can say; and to keep
decorum, as the Cobbler began with the tale of a Prior, I will end with one of
an Abbot: they all thankt him heartily, and he began thus. But first I must, as
hitherto I have done all, describe him.

The description of the Somner.
THis Somner was not very old,
Of a countenance stout and bold:
That would against the truth wage,
For he had a shameless visage.
Squint eyed he was, and his head
Was bad hued, blood red:
A nose he had that began show,
What liquor he loved I trow.
For he had before long seven year,
Been of the town the Ale conner.
His face was full of precious stone,
Richer in Inde was never none:
For Rubie, Pearl, and Chrysolite,
With them all his face was dight
From the brow to the very chin,
Yet to drink he would near lin:
But swincked with all his might,
At every house where he did site.
His conditions were fair and good,
For why he was by the roode
Acquainted with rich and eke with poor,
And kend well every kerne whore,
Or other wife that held no scorn
To make her husband were the horn.
Such a knave he was indeed,
That as true as my creed,
He cited every woman to the law,
Even for the value of a straw.
And sommon them to appear
At the bawdy court as I leere:
Where for money the Somner
Would all their faults clear:
That they should not appear at all,
Before the official.
A Bawd he was, a teltale, and a knave,
Sike an other it is seld to have,
Unless a man should hell rake,
There to find out his make.
Yet began he thus declare,
How the Abbot of Wickam did fare.
The Somners tale, Containing the shifts that the Abbot made to have his love,
and how he raisd a man from death.
IN Wickham there was an Abbot, that was a man of a middle age, lusty and
frolike, and coueted to acquaint himself with all the fair Wives of the
Town, insomuch that every man doubted of this jolly Clarke: yet he made
himself holy, but do what he could, it might not clear the suspicion that
the men of the town had of him: Amongst the rest, he was acquainted with a
Farmars Wife, that was none of the wisest, and yet he had wit enough to
beware of the Abbot. This Farmar exceeded all the rest, not only of the Town,
but of all the whole country about for jealousy, being so suspicious of his
Wife, that he would brook none of his neighbors to come into his house, and
if she glauncst her looks never so little awry, he would straight beat her
while he could stand over her, in so much, that the woman was weary of her
life, and looked as a creature forlorn.

As she was one day walking into the fields to do her business, the Abbot
met her, who took her by the hand, and began to make love to her: she was both
coie and fearful: yet at last the Abbot began so prattle, that she began to
tell him how jealous her husband was, and how weary she was of her life.
Tushe (quoth the Abbot) care not for that, refer that matter to me, I will
straight cure him of his jealousy, if then thou will be my paramour. So sore
was the poor woman troubled with a jealous fool, that she was glad to grant
whatsoever the Abbot would ask, so her husband might be mended of his fault:
make some excuse quoth the Abbot, send him to me to morrow, and then let me
alone: but whatsoever thou hear is befallen him, fear not, all shall be
well. Upon that the Farmars Wife and the Abbot parted, she to her house, he to
his cloister, where he called one of his Monks, in whom he did repose all
his trust, and revealed unto him the whole matter, and what plot he had laid
to bring his purpose to pass: the Moonke condiscended to do whatsoever the
Abbot should command, and so upon this resolution they laughed, and the next
day came the Farmar to the Abbot to have a hie mass said for one of his
Children that was sick: the Abbot made much of him, and bad him to dinner, and
subtly at his last draught conveyed a dormatiue potion into the cup, that
presently after dinner he fell into a dead sleep; that his senses being gone
all men thought he was dead: wherefore presently one of the Monks ran to the
good wife, and told her what had happened to her husband: she cried out and
wrung her hands, and told it to her neighbors: whereupon she and a great
company both of men and women went to the Abbey, and there was he knit up in
his winding sheet, the wife pitifully lamented, and the neighbors comforted
her: the Abbot he said he should be buried in their Abbey because he died
there, and therefore in presence of them all solemnly buried him: which done,
his wife like a sorrowful woman departed home to her house with her neighbors.

As Soon as night came, the Abbot and the Monk, (whom he had made privy to
this practice) went and cunningly took him out of his grave, and carried him
into a deep dungeon, where he could see no light, and there let him lie stark
naked, till such time as the potion had ended the operation, and that he
should wake. At length the Farmar awoke, and stretching himself, finding that
he was naked, and in a place loathsome, dark, and fearful, he could not tell
what to think, but blessed himself, and said, Lord have mercy upon me, where
am I? The Monk that was by attired like a spirit, said, thou art dead and
in purgatory. Dead quoth the Farmer: can dead men speak? Yea quoth the Monk,
and eat too, such meat and drink as is appointed for the dead: This day in
the morning thou did die, and thy wife did bury thee in the Abbey,
accompanied with all her neighbors: and I wretch a spirit of purgatory, am
appointed to torment thee without ceasing, for that in thy life time thou were
jealous, and did misuse thy wife without cause, therefore am I appointed to
vex thee threescore and ten years without ceasing: and with that having a
whippe in his hand, the Monk laid it on, and gave him many a shrewde blow:
At last he left him and went his way, and told the Abbot what he had done.

The Abbot as soon as convenient leisure would serve, stole secretly to the
Farmers house, and there got to bed to the goodwife, and every night lay with
her while her husband was in purgatory: and every day the Monk went down and
allowed him a little pittance of meat and drink: but whipped him most miserably.
At last the Farmer grew to be marvelous penitent and repentant for his faults,
swearing that if he were alive again, he would never be jealous nor
suspicious: earnestly praying his wife that she would forgive him. While thus
the poor Farmer was in his purgatory almost whipped to death, and famisht, the
Abbot and his wife lived in all pleasure and iolity, laughing when they heard
the Monk report what the poor man said in his purgatory: At last she
perceived that she was with child, and therefore they must needs have a father
for it, whereupon they devised to have him out of purgatory, and to bring him
home with a miracle. The next day the Monk came to him according to his
accustomed manner, and whipped him not, but told him that his wife every day
offered a Taper for him, and said so many good prayers, that his sins were
remitted, and his punishment forgiven: whereupon he thankt his wife and made a
vow, if God should restore him to life (as it was impossible) he would not
only leave to be jealous himself, but warn all other men to take heed of
the like fault. Thus continued he without whipping by the space of five or
six days, and at last the Monk in stead of drink, gave him an other
dormatiue potion, so that he fell a sleep.

Then the Abbot and the Monk in the night conveyed him into the place where
he was buried, and so let him lie. About the hour when he knew he would
wake, was the Monk there, faining himself at prayer: and as soon as ever he
saw him stir, he ran away and cried out: upon this all the Monks of the
Cloister rose, and asked what the matter was. Oh quoth he, as I was in prayer
by the Farmers grave, I heard a tumbling and a voice there either of him or of
a spirit? with that the Monks went down and found that there was one alive
within the Tomb: then they called the Abbot and told him, who slipping on his
night gown, ran apace to see the miracle: when he came there, and they were
all gathered together, they lifted up the stone, and there lay he tumbling in
his sheet: so they took him out and undid him, and he looked wan and gash,
but spoke to them and told them, that the Lord at the prayers of his wife had
restored him to life, and that he had been in purgatory, and what punishment
he had abidden for his jealousy. The Monks were proud of this miracle, and
knew that their Abbey should be more famous for this strange wonder, and
straight sent for his wife and his neighbors: who when they came, first the
Abbot revealed unto them, how that he and his Monks hearing the continual
plaintes and prayers the poor widow made for her husband; he did likewise with
earnest Orisons entreat of God, that if it were his will, he would show a
miracle in him, and restore him to life: and now my Masters and friends
quoth he, see the difference between the prayers of an Abbot, and the prayers
of a lay man: for follow me and you shall see what effect they have taken. With
that he carried them into the parlor where the Farmer was, as soon as they saw
him, they were all amazed, and his wife fell down in a sound: whereupon reviving
her he began to say, fear not wife, nor you gentle neighbors, and doubt not
of me* for I am by this holy man and my wives prayers restor ed to life having
been in that most vile place of purgato ry where there is nothing but darkness
and Devils: th ere I have tormented for all my sins, but especially for my
Jealousy being every day punished till my wives pray rs deliverd me; many a
fable beside of his own invention d eclared to them he had seen in purgatory.
At last as he v owed to reform his wife fell about his neck and kissed him,
every one pleased and all the neighbors reioiced, and di verse praisd the Abot
for his holiness. Upon this he and his wife reconciled, walked him home to his
house solemn ly proclaming thanks and there left him. This news was cause of
great gain by the Abbot of Wickam who grew famous in that country, that al men
had him in reverance as very holy and virtuous, and diverse came to see the
Farmer from far: all which he did certify what he had seen in purgatory,
what great punishment for sundry sins but especially for jealousy. Thus he
not only exhorted all men from suspicion of their wives, but ever after gave
his wife such liberty, that she might at her own pleasure be familiar with
the Abbot.

The Somner having told his tale, the people commended the great devotion of
the Abbot, wishing all jealous fools to pass the like purgatory. The Cobbler
he commended all, and said, that they were now welcome to Grauesend: every man
to his purse and looked in it for his two pence to pay his fare: and when they
had done, they rose and went into the town to drink: and because they went
most of them to Caunterburie, they went all to one Inn, where they began to
descant and discourse of the tales that had past: I can quoth the Cobbler
remember them all, and very near verbatim collect and gather them together:
which by the grace of God gentlemen, I mean to do, and then to set them out
in a pamphlet under mine own name, as an inuectiue against Tarltons news out
of Purgatory: and then if you please to send to the Printer, I will leave a
token, that every one of you that told a tale, shall have a Book for his
labor. In the mean time till I have perfected it I Will lay my Cobblers stool
aside, and my self become an Author. I hope you shall find me so fichent in
mine En glish, if I would study you would report I might for my wit vie a
Lilly, Green, or any other in excellency of style. They all laughed, paid their
shot, and went withthe merry Cobbler toward Caunterburie.

^^NIS.

