THE SPEECH OF SIR DVDLY CARLTON LORD AMBASSADOVR FOR THE KING OF GREAT
BRITAIN, MADE IN THE ASSEMBLY of the Lords the Estates General of the united
Provinces of the Low Countries.

Being assembled at the HAGHE.

TOUCHING THE DISCORD AND TROUBLES OF THE Church and POLICY, caused by the
Schismatic Doctrine of ARMINIVS.

Exhibited the 6. of October. 1617. Set forth by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by William Jones, for Nathaniel Brown, and are to be sold at
the great North door of Saint Paul's Church. 1618.

THE SPEECH OF SIR DVDLY CARLTON LORD EMBASSADOVR FOR the King of Great
BRITAIN; made in the Assembly of the Lords the Estates General of the united
Provinces of the Low Countries: Being assembled at the Haghe. TOUCHING THE
DISCORD AND TROUBLES OF THE CHVRCH and policy, caused by the Schismatic
Doctrine of ARMINIVS.
MY LORDS,
I HAVE here presented my self in your Assembly to discharge my self touching
the duty I bear toward God, toward the King my Master, and toward your
Lordships. The apprehension of the public calamity which always accompanies
Schism within the Church, and Faction in the State do give me too much
subject and cause for it. And there being no more cause to dissemble, how that
in the space of few years, men have approached by degrees to the one, and do
at this present proceed with full pace to the other of these precipices. It
were to forget the charge which I have on the one part of his Majesty in the
quality of his Ambassador, and the Oath which I have made to your Lordships
as Counselor of this estate, and the coniunct Interest of the one with the
other, if I should not contribute all that which depends of me, to search and
know exactly the original, progress and present state of this evil, to the
end we may be able to apply thereunto the Remedy which is most necessary.

It is the Rule of Hippocrates Desperatis non adhibere Medicinam. But (God be
thanked for it,) we are not as yet come to so bad estate, although (to speak
freely that which is true of this matter) we are so near to it, seeing how
the mischief goes forward, growing every day worse and worse, that the Remedy
will be fruitless if it be delayed any longer.

Now for to seek the Original of this evil any further back then the time
of Arminius Professor at Leyden, were to disguise the fact. Some others before
him it may be have had the same scruples, and the same troubles in their
consciences upon those high points of Predestination and the Dependences of it;
But the Church has still continued in her peace and quiet; in such sort that
the fountain and spring of the alteration which since his time some have
endeavored to introduce into the true and ancient Doctrine which you have
always professed, and is received and authorized by the common consent of all
the reformed Churches (howsoever some particular men have had an opinion a part
touching the said points) ought to be attributed to Arminius and to none other.

Out of the Ashes and Cinders of Arminius are sprung certain others, who
having wedded his particular opinions during his life, have gone about to
introduce them by cunning force into the public Churches after his death. And
not able to effectuate their purpose by the ordinary ways of Classes, and
Synodall Congregations they directed themselves to my Lords the Estates of the
Province.

After that, followed the change of the name of an Arminian into a Remonstrant;
his opposite, (which seeks to maintain the Doctrine in the ancient purity)
baptized himself with the name of Contre-Remonstrant: But by many instances,
Counter-instances, Propositions, Answers, Replies, Diligences and crafty
subtilties the said Remonstrant at last obtaines his cause against the poor
Contre-Remonstrant; gets (in his favor) a Resolution of my Lords the Estates
of Holland, by the plurality of voices, though against the liking and advice
of many good and great Towns. Triumphs over him in Concionibus, and under
color of five points (which have not as yet passed a lawful examination)
insinuates many others among the people; stames Inuectiues against the Reformed
Religion, and the most famous and reverend Teachers of it; In many places
changes the Pastors and Ancients to set into their rooms such others as might
be at his devotion; proceeds with such rigor as well in the Towns as in the
Country as he gives occasion to revive in these Provinces, on one side the
hateful name of the Inquisition, and of the other side the deplorable words of
Churches vvayling and lamenting; of Churches persecuted; covering himself
always with the title of the Authority public as the only man that
performed obedience to the Magistrate. And giving the Contre-Remonstrant (who
begins to loose his patience, and to separate himself from the body, in
Consequence of this unhappy separation of souls) the reproach of Schismatique
and one mutinous and tumultuarie. Hine Spargere voces in vulgum ambiguas what
was meant to the Magistrate. Et quaerere Conscius Arma for his defense. Men
Armed themselves in the particular Towns and the example passes into the
Provinces.

Thus you have in few words the beginning and progress of our evil. The
present estate of it is an actual Separation (if not a Schism within the
Church; Jealousy (not to call it faction) in the estate; Animosities and
alterations between the Magistrates, sowernesse and hatred amongst the people:
Contempt of the Ordinances of the Sovereign Courts of Justice. Confusion among
the soldiers, being bound by diverse Oaths: rumor and tumult between the
people and the soldiers newly levied and ill disciplined, which is come
already even to the shedding of innocent blood, and of that, there has
followed fear terror and a general amazement. All this within the Country.
From abroad all we understand of it are the mockeries and scoffs of our
Enemies, and the displeasure and extreme sorrow of our Friends.

Contraria inter se posita magis elucescunt, we see then, before the time of
Arminius what was the estate of these Provinces: union in the Church and
Estate; good correspondence between the Magistrates; Christian love and
charity among the people; the Sovereign Courts of Justice respected; the
soldiers (the servants of your Lordships) in peace with all the world except
your Enemies; all cheerfulness, all rejoicing, all acknowledgement of the
blessing of GOD, which has appeared miraculously in the defense of his cause,
in the sight and notice of all the world in your prosperity; whereat the
Enemies of this estate, have remained dismayed and amazed, and the friends of
it greatly comforted.

For the present now that every one sees so clearly quantum dimiss a petitis
praestant, let the Remonstrant take in good part the Remonstrance that
follows, and let him (if he please) serve himself thereof, Mature redeat
repetatque relicta. But if the Doctrine of Arminius be so far spread and
multiplied as there be no more time to give back, but that it behooves to
pass further to a decision, which of the two opinions is more conform and
agreeing to the truth of the Word of God; or at the least what sort of
Christian toleration may be permitted without scandal in the Church, who shall
be a competent Judge in this matter?

To carry this authority to the temporal Magistrate, giving to Caesar that
which belongs to Caesar, were to lean and incline too much of that side, and
to take from God that which is Gods.

Wherefore to proceed with due regard as well toward them to whom God has
given authority over our bodies, as of those that have the cure and charge of
our souls, that which in such occurrences is always practiced, and whereunto
within Christendom at all times men have had recourse. It is a National
Synod; I say National, because the evil being passed from Province to
Province, a Provincial Synod is not sufficient, but only for so much as it
serves for a preparatiue to the National Synod. This is the Remedy which is
found good by the greatest part of the Provinces, and that which is recommended
to you by the King my Master.

As for the Provinces, I will not play the busiebody in aliena Republica,
therein to Judge how much every Province in particular ought in such occasions
to yield to the public. But whilst in this business men stand to dispute the
right of Sovereignty of every Province apart, let them not forget the Oath by
which they are consolidated and closed up into one body which is the Union of
Vtrecht grounded upon Religion. And although they seek to euade and escape by
show of one Article which is, That every Province has its power a part in
matter of Religion, This ought to be understood soundly for the maintenance of
the pure and sincere Religion, and not for the authorisation and allowance of
new and strange opinions; And principally in this Province where we are at
this present, in the contemplation whereof it is to be presumed that Article
was inserted for the better upholding of the Reformed Religion in his purity
without being exposed to the will and pleasure of the other Provinces which at
that time were not reduced to such an Union of the Church as they enjoy at this
present.

But as the points of honor and Sovereignty are nice and delicate if that
respect hinders the consent of the Provinces there is no place on the behalf
of his Majesty, who gives you the same counsel as the most sound and
wholesome, Where there is no pretension, there is no prejudice.

His Majesty foresaw and foretold (some years past) by his Letters and
Ministers upon the occasion of Vorstius the evils which trouble you at this
time; and by other Letters he represented to you the little fruit which would
spring of it in suffering the choice points of Predestination to be carried into
the chair and Pulpits, which were too high and to dark for the capacity of
the common people. In the one and the other occasion his Majesty has
witnessed the sincerity of his affection giving his warnings for the zeal he
carries to the glory of God, and to the duty of the common Alliance which
has for the foot and foundation the common safety settled especially upon the
Unity of Religion. And although his wholesome aduises and prayers were not
received with that respect which was due to his good intentions, but rather
were entertained with most sinister interpretations, having been drawn into
such sense and consequence as was clean contrary to his will, his Majesty
notwithstanding was pleased for the third and last time (having then already
begun his voyage toward Scotland) to solicit you again in that matter by a
Letter of the 20. of March, That you would at last speedily heal the evil by
the way of a Synod seeing you knew not how to prevent it by other remedies.

Lo now his Majesty (God be thanked for it) is happily returned from his
voyage; wherein (although the same has been long, having lasted the space of
six months) he has not changed Coelum nec animum: during his absence I
have forborne to solicit the answer of the said Letter, that I might not
render my self importunate to your Lordships out of time and place. But the
evil being grown to that dangerous estate as I have unfolded it; and having
lately received a new charge to the same effect, and beholding at this present
a full Assembly of worthy and wise personages busied (if I deceive not my
self) about the matter of Religion, I know not how any longer to excuse my
self, without praying you (My Lords) as I do with all earnestnes) to make
such Answer to the said Letter as may give testimony both of the respect your
Lordships bear to the counsels of his Majesty, and of the care you have to
the union of your Church and Estate.

Exhibited in the Assembly of the Lords the Estates general of the united
Provinces of the Low Countries, the 6. day of October 1617. Stilo nouo. And
Signed DVDLY CARLTON.

FINIS.

