A. THANKFVLL REMEMBRANCE OF GODS MERCY. by G. C.

London Printed for Robert M.

Robinson



A THANKFVLL REMEMBRANCE OF GODS MERCY. In an Historical Collection of the
great and merciful Deliverances of the Church and State of England, since the
Gospel began here to flourish, from the beginning of Queen ELIZABETH.

Collected by GEO: CARLETON, Doctor of Divinity, and Bishop of CHICHESTER.

PSALM. III. 2. The works of the Lord are great, and ought to be sought out of
all them that love Him.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Robert Mylbourne, and Humphrey Robinson, and are
to be sold at the great South door of PAVLS. 1624.

TO THE HIGH, NOBLE, AND MOST VIRTUOUS, CHARLES; PRINCE OF GREAT Britain, Duke
of Cornwall, and of YORK, etc. the spirit of wisdom, with increase of honor.
SIR;
AS the great Works of God ought to be had in remembrance of all men, so this
duty is more required of Princes then of other men. Because their charge is
greater then the charge of other men: for they must answer both for the
government of themselves, and of others under them. Wherefore having observed
the Works of God in delivering this Church and State from the cruel plots of
the Adversaries, from the beginning of Queen Elizabeth to this time: I found
my self most obliged to present this to your Highness; both because my
service, next to his Majesty is most due to your Highness; and because the
remembrance of the great Works of God is a Glass fit for a Prince to look
on. For your Highness may be assured that the Adversaries will not change their
disposition, unless either we were reduced to their blindness, or they drawn
to embrace the truth with us. I have made this Collection that by examples of
things past, We may better judge of things to come. My labor herein is
nothing. For I make not the Story, but take it of others. And when I light upon
the best Narration, as that of the Gunpowder treason, I have set it down as I
find it without alteration. Because as that cannot be mended, so to set a worse
Narration in the place thereof, were no less then to abuse the Reader. I leave
the honor entire to them that have made the Story, I take no part thereof to
me. Only my care has been to observe upon those great deliverances the
Works of God, that God may be glorified, and the cause justified which God
has maintained from Heaven. SIR, I suppose it is hard to find a Narration
containing more miraculous Protection of Gods Church, since that time wherein
God showed his Miracles in protecting the people of Israel. Which consideration
may serve to fasten your Highness to the love and service of that great God,
that does so strongly maintain his servants. That as hitherto you have had a
gracious experience of his grace and goodness toward you, so your noble heart
may grow every day more and more in the love and obedience of the truth. We are
all charged by Gods Word to pray for Kings and Princes. That charge which God
has laid upon us all, no man can put off: But when your Highness has
effectually made known your singular care and love to the common good, to the
rejoicing of all faithful men; this must needs draw the hearts of all
faithful men nearer to your Highness. And this is a part of your happiness;
for the fear of God and love of Subjects is able to make Kings and Princes
strong against all their enemies God give his judgments to the King, and his
righteousness to the Kings son, and therewith, all blessings; grace and
honor here, and glory hereafter.

Your HIGHNESS ancient Chaplain, and most humble Servant GEO: CICESTRIENSIS.

ANAKEPHALAIOSIS OR RECAPITVLATION of the chief Passages in this Book.
CHAPTER I.
THE weak estate of this Kingdom at Queen Elizabeth's entrance. Her
government blessed with might and money beyond expectation all on a sudden,
to the terror of the enemies of the Gospel, and comfort of the Professors
thereof. The ancient government of the Low Countries, what it was. The treason
of Arthur Pool discovered and defeated. The Popes Excommunication and curse
against Queen Elizabeth turned by Christ (whose Gospel she maintained) into
a blessing.

CHAP. II.
The rebellion of the Earls of Westmerland and Northumberland related
distinctly by Hieronym. Cat^^a, so strongly plotted, so secretly carried, by
the hand of God disappointed and broken into pieces. Leon: Dacres his over
throw by it. This is the fruit of Popery, and the first effect of the Popes
Bull.

CHAP. III.
A Commotion in Ireland inflamed by Io: Mendoza, extinguished by the Earl of
Ormond* The King of Spain pretends the enlargement of the Scots Queen, but
intends the enlargement of his own Dominion. Don John of Austria goes about
to deliver and marry the Scots Queen. He sends out a perpetual edict of peace
and presently breaks out into war. He dies on a sudden and so his purpose
disappointed.

CHAP. IV.
Stucley his attempt and practice with the Pope and Spanyard for the subduing
of Ireland and England with Italian soldiers by Gods providence annulled.

CHAP. V.
Nich: Sanders sets on the rebels in Ireland, animateth them in their
bloody practices, gets ^ consecrated Banner from the Pope for them.
San-Io^ephus with 700 Italians and Spaniards sent from the Pope and King of
Spain over into Ireland to help the rebels, yields the Fort. The Earl
Desmond a great maintainer of this rebellion, killed by a common soldier in
his wandering. Sanders the firebrand of the rebellion falls mad and dies
miserably of famine. Observations hereupon. The explication of that place 2
These. 2. 10. appliable to the Papists in respect both of their doctrines and
doings.

CHAP. VI.
The Institution of the Colleges of seminary Priests to be the incendiaries of
England; different from the foundation of ancient Colle^ges. The feats of
Father Parsons and Edm: Campian and others to draw the alleagiance of the
English from their Queen. This drew upon them sevetitie of Laws, established
in Parliament against Papists and approved by the parallel example of the Laws
made against the Donatists in S. Augustines time.

CHAP. VII.
The Priests seditious Books against the Queen brings on Somervills furious
attempt to kill her. They move with the Ladies of honor to do it. The Queens
mildness and wonderful mercy toward this vermin. Mendoza, the Spanish
Ambassador for practicing against the Queen is thrust out of England.
Throgmortons confe^ion and condemnation for treason.

CHAP. VIII.
New practices of our enemies discovered not without a miracle by Creightons
torn papers. The mischievous but vnsuccesfull conclusions of Alan, Inglefield,
and Ross against Queen Elizabeth and King James. Parries treason opened; his
confession, and execution. Laws in Parliament enacted against Priests and
Recusants. Philip Howards intention, to leave the Land, discovered before it
could be effected.

CHAP. IX.
The lamentable end of Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland in the Tower. A
pretended title of the King of Spain to the Crown of England. Savage, a
barbarous fellow, upon the instigation o^ Rhemish Priests voweth to kill Queen
Elizabeth. Babingtons treasonable practice to take away the Queens life upon a
motion from Ballard the Priest, defeated; and he with his Accomplices deservedly
punished.

CHAP. X.
The French Ambassadors plot with Stafford to take away the life of the Queen
detected by Stafford himself. The end of York and Stanl^y, traitors to their
Count^^y.

CHAP. XI.
The Spanish preparations for the Invincible Navy. The Duke of Parma treats
of a peace. Delegates sent over about it. The conference of the Delegates broke
off without fruit.

CHAP. XII.
The Invincible Army described. At the first setting out shaken sore with a
tempest. The gests of each day related particularly and punctually. The trusted
in their strength, we in the name of our God; They are fallen, and we stand
upright.

CHAP. XIII.
Trouble from Ireland by Tyrone lurking in Spain. His many dissembling
submissions to the Queen of England. A treaty of peace concluded.

CHAP. XIV.
Upon the coming of the Earl of Essex into England from Ireland, Tyrone
contrary to his promise stirs and rebelleth afresh, and is encouraged by the
Pope and aided by ^he King of Spain. These forces are vanquished by the Lord
Deputy. Hereupon Don John de Aq^ila, a Spanish Captain, who was sent to ay^^e
the rebels and kept Kinsale, capitulates for peace. Tyrone forsaken of his
followers submits himself to the Lord Deputy and is pardoned. Plotting a new
rebellion when he was called by Process to answer a suit of the B. of Derry,
thinking the treason to be discovered by O cane who enforced the Bishop in his
suit, sted out of Ireland. In ^hese troubles and treasons see the Machinations
of Satan's seed against the seed of the Woman, that is, the Church, and the
miraculous deliverances and victories of the Church, according to that, The
Woman's seed shall break the serpents head, spoken of Christ, appliable to the
Church, and particularly to our Church of England, which that B^laam of Rome
seeks now by all means to draw from God, because he knows he cannot prevail
against us till we for sake God.

CHAP. XV.
A great mischief intended to the Kings Majesty at his first entrance into
the Kingdom of England, before his Coronation; Watson and Clark, Priests
administering oaths of secrecy and applauding the project. It came to nothing
by Gods mercy. The Kings Majesty's clemency toward the Conspiratours after
judgment part upon them. No treason in England attempted but had a Romish
Priest in the practice.

CHAP. XVI.
A horrible treason was a hatching and breeding in the last year of Queen
Elizabeth. By Garnetts means and others, the King of Spain is dealt withal
for an invasion; he entertaines the motion, but upon the entrance of King James
did not proceed to any forcible enterprise. The Gunpowder treason takes ground
and life from the doctri^e of Parsons and the Jesuits. It was first propounded
by Catesby to Winter. The oath of secres^e taken by the Conspiratours.
Provision of Powder and Wood for the mine. Their consultation what to do after
the blow was given. The letter sent to the Lord Mounteagle, scanned by the
Earl of Salisbury and other Pr^vy Councellers, but truly interpreted by the
King, in whose mouth there was a divine sentence at that time, so that he did
not err in judgment. The Examination of Fawks. The apprehension and confusion
of the Powder-traytors. God from heaven both by his Word and protection has
manifestly shown our Church to be the true Church, and the Popish Church to be
the malignant Church, and degenerate from the ancient Roman Church both in
manners and doctrines.

Coronis.
The Conclusion contains diverse Considerations proposed to such as are not
well affected to Religion.

A THANKFVLL REMEMBRANCE OF GODS MERCY.
CHAPTER I.
HAving a purpose to observe Gods great and merciful deliuera^ces of the Church
of England, and Gods holy protection of the same, against the manifold, most
dangerous, most desperate practices of the adversaries, that have with strange
malice and cruelty, sought the destruction thereof, and intending to fetch the
beginning of this search from the beginning of the Reign of Queen ELIZABETH,
of blessed memory: I knew no better way how to enter into this Narration, then
to begin with the consideration of the State of Queen ELIZABETH, at her first
entrance; for therein will appear a wonderful Work of God, and my intention
is to observe the great Works of God, that God may be glorified.

When this famous Queen first entered, She entered Anno. 1558.
she found the State much afflicted, and weakened. All the great States about
her, were enemies. Friends none. King Philip, who offered his love and kindness
to her, and would have married her, offering to obtain the Popes dispensation
for him to marry two Sisters; as the like dispensation was obtained by
Ferdinand his great Grandfather, for h^s daughter Katharine to marry two
Brothers, he offering this kindness, and being refused and rejected, grew
first into dislike and discontent, afterward into hatred, and at last brake
out into open Wars. The French King Henry the 2. with whom she sought peace,
fell off also into open Wars. His son Francis having married Mary, Queen
of Scotland, was moved by the Guysians to cause the Arms of England to be
joined to the Arms of Scotland, and to profess the Queen of Scots the heir
of England, and because Elizabeth was accounted by them an Heretic, therefore
they sought to put her by, to set the Queen of Scots in her place, so should
the French King have England also. For the effecting of this, they sent their
Armies into Scotland, purposing from thence to have subdued England. In so much
that Sebastianus Martignius, a young Noble man of the family of Luxenburg, who
was sent into Scotland with a thousand ^oote, and some Companies of horse,
could hardly be dissuaded from entering England presently. So that Spain,
France, and Scotland were enemies. The State was then much troubled and
oppressed with great debt, contracted partly by Henry 8. partly by Edward 6. in
his minority. The treasure was exhausted; Calis was lost. Nothing seemed to be
left to her, but a weak, and poor State, destitute of means and friends. If
she would have admitted the Popish Religion, then might all these difficulties
have been removed But establishing the Gospel, she understood well that she
drew all these troubles upon her own head. Yet she gave the glory to God, and
in hope of Gods holy protection, she established Gods holy truth. And verily
she did not serve God in vain. For it is a thing to be wondered at, that the
Land being then without strength, without Forces, without Soldiers, yea,
without Armor; all things necessary should be so suddenly furnished. She had
provided Armor at Antwerpe, but King Philip caused that to be stayed. Yet was
she not discouraged, but laid out much money upon Armor, though she found the
Treasury but poor. She procured Armor and weapons out of Germany. She caused
many great Gunnes to be cast, of Brass and Iron. And Gods providence and
favor appeared in her protection. For new Mines of Brass were found at
Keswike, that had long been neglected. From Whence there was not only
sufficient matter to supply her wants, but abundance thereof to be transported
to other Countries. The stone called Lapis Calaminaris, whose use is needful
for working in Brass, was also at the same time first found in England. There
was provision made at home also for the making of Gunne-powder. Which was done
first here by her Commandment. For before it was bought and imported. Berwick
before her time, was weak, and had but five hundred Soldiers: She fortified
the Town, made the new inner Wall, and increased the number of Soldiers, and
their stipends, that provision might be made for the training up of experienced
Soldiers and martial men. She provided a Navy, the best furnished that ever
England saw. Neither needed she to do as her Father and Ancestors were wont
to do, when they wanted Ships, to send for Ships and hire them from
Hamburg, Lubeck, Dantisk, Genua, and Veni^e; for she had them ready at home to
serve her. Yea all the good Towns upon the Seacoast, beholding this
incredible alacrity, and forwardnes in their Prince, strived also to imitate
the same, and therefore with great cheerfulness and readiness built Ships
for War. So that in a short time, the Queens Ships and those of the
Subjects joined together, rose to such a number, that they were able to employ
twenty thousand men in Sea Fight at once. The Noblemen, the Gentlemen, and
Yeomen, did all strive to answer so noble a resolution of their Prince. And
therefore great store of Armor and Weapons were every where provided. And
brave spirits were bred and enabled to service, whereby they became an help
and ornament to their Country. So that Queen Elizabeth was quickly grown so
strong, that all her adversaries were not able to hurt her. And was not this a
great work of God? That so weak a Woman should be able to defend her self
against so many, so potent enemies? Yea, and not only to match them, but to
master them? This was Gods doing. Behold what it is to trust in God, and not in
an arm of Flesh. God will have his great Works to be had in remembrance, that
all men, especially Princes may be taught to know that their safety is not in
worldly policy, but in God which never forsakes them that trust in him. Here
then we have a Work, for which we are bound to glorify God. Elizabeth, a
Prince, at the beginning weak, destitute of friends, unfurnished of treasure,
unprepared of all things, had in no other account of her great neighbors round
about her, but as one left as a prey to the strongest that would invade her and
her kingdom: yet preparing her heart to God, giving God the glory,
establishing his truth in her Land, trusting in him: She was in a few years
made strong against her enemies; they feared her more then she feared them.
This is an example can hardly be paralleled. It was a work o^ God in defense
of his Church here, and we yield all glory and praise unto God for his mercies
showed herein. From this example, Princes may take a worthy instruction to rest
upon God, and to seek his glory, and know assuredly, that when they are at the
weakest state, if they give their hearts to God, and their service to his true
Religion, God will raise them to greatness, who has promised to honor them that
honor him, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
and threatened, that they that dishonor him, shall be despised. Before I leave
this example of Gods protection of this noble Queen in her first entrance: Let
this be remembered, that as all the great Princes adjoining, with the Pope and
all, were her great enemies, so there were no friends able to help her: for
they that were friends, and would have helped if they could, stood all need of
her help. The Scots were sore troubled with the French Armies procured by the
Guysians, but she helped them, and protected the King in his minority, and
freed that State from the tyranny of the French government. The Low Countries,
were tyrannised by the Duke D' Alva who changed their government, and
inhibited their meetings in council. For to speak somewhat of the ancient
government of that people, to stop the common imputations cast upon them by
such as are not well affected to them: Their government was by a general
assembly of the States: Their governors were such as were borne within the 17.
Provinces, no strangers. These were anciently the Clergy, the Nobility, and
the Deputies of the Provinces, and of good Towns, meeting together in their
general Assemblies. These so meeting made laws and orders whereby that State
was governed. The Deputies were sent to the general Assemblies, by the
Suffrages of the people, and upon cause they were recalled by the people, and
other sent in their rooms. This manner of government, some of the Dukes of
Burgundy, and some others disliked, as giving too much power to the people, and
to little to their Dukes: and therefore labored to change it, but could not.
Charles the fifth Emperor would gladly have changed their government, but when
he saw that it could not be done without the commotion of the whole State, he
left it undone. Philip 2. Anno 1549. July 8. took his oath, which he made and
renewed again Anno ^555. to keep, maintain, and preserve these Countries in
their ancient rights, privileges, and customs, without breaking them or
suffering them to be broken, in any sort or manner. But when the Duke D' Alva
was governor there under the King, he practiced the contrary, and professed
that the King was not to govern them, as his ancient inheritance, but as upon
a new conquest, making what laws he would, and setting what government best
pleased him. Whereupon his whole drift and practice was for a new conquest of
all the Provinces and Towns. The pretense of religion was sought: but it was
resolved by the Counsel of Spain, to change the whole government, and to
erect a new. This appeared as well by the Dukes open profession, as by those
designs which he practiced upon the persons of some of the Nobility, and upon
the good Towns. For when the Earls of Egmont and Horn, were apprehended and
putto death, mistrusting nothing because they knew no cause to mistrust: they
that did this, could not pretend religion, because these Earls were of the
Popish religion. they could not pretend any disloyalty against them, for their
firm loyalty and their great services to the King, made them so confident;
only it was thought that these Noble men would never yield to the change of
the government of that State, therefore they were cut off. The like appeared in
the strange surprises and cruelty practiced against many Towns, which were of
the popish religion. For diverse towns that were firm to the Spaniard in the
point of religion, and in obedience to the King, when armies were sent to them,
intertaining the armies in all obedience, opening their gates, showing all love
and friendship to the Spanish armies: were of a sudden surprised, and brought
to utter ruin. The Spaniards, killing and massackring all, taking their goods,
abusing their wives and daughters, as the manner of such barbarous men is in a
new conquest, ex^rcising more cruelties against their professed friends, then
they could do to their enemies. Such barbarous cruelties were practiced
against the Towns of Machlin, Maestrich, Zutphen, Naerden, Antwerp, and
others, who were their friends, agreeing in the same religion with them,
holding as then, their obedience firm to the King: yet were they spoiled,
killed, ransacked, and overthrown like enemies. Which strange cruelty declared
that it was not religion that moved this cruelty, but that which the Duke
D'Alva did openly profess, that the King must hold all the Low Countries by a
new conquest, that so he might change the government, and impose what laws he
would.

It may seem a strange use of the Popes Authority which King Philip made, when
from the Pope he got a dispensation of that oath, which he had taken at his
entrance into the Low Countries. This is an use of a Pope fit indeed for them
that would do whatsoever they list without conscience, or the fear of Gods
laws or man's. If such an use may be made of the Popes power, then Popish
Princes must needs in the sight of the world, seem to have a great advantage
over others. But if they may so dispense at their pleasure with oaths and
promises, then may all those of their religion see plainly that there are
neither humane nor divine bands or security that can bind Papists: for when
they please, the Pope will free them from all bands of conscience, from the
laws of God, of man, of nature, of nations. But God will not be thus served.
And therefore by Gods just judgments they that rely upon such ungodly
practices, loose more in the end, then they gain by such profane dealings.
This was the cause of their troubles in the Low Countries. That state being
then so tro^bled, could yield no help to Queen Elizabeth, yet did she
yield help to them.

The King of Denmark, and the Protestants in France, were not able to help
her, nor to help themselves without her means. This must needs be
acknowledged an extraordinary blessing of God, to make her able to withstand
the greatest enemies, and to help all that were distressed for Religion.

This famous Queen though troubled by foreign states in the beginning of her
Reign, yet had great peace and quietness at home. This was the fruit of true
religion: her Subjects lived in peace, and tranquillity; no motions then
attempted. Only in the fourth year of her Reign, Arthur Poole, and his
brethren coming of the race of George Duke of Clarence, who was brother to
Edward the fourth, and Antony Fortiskue, who married their sister, with some
other of that conspiracy, were brought to their trial, for that they had
conspired to fly to the G^ise into France, and thence to come with an Army
into Wales, and there to declare the Scottish Queen, to be Queen of England,
and Arthur Poole Duke of Clarence. All which they freely confessed at their
trial: yet protesting that it was not their purpose to execute this design,
as long as Queen Elizabeth lived: who as they supposed should dye within a
year; for so some cosening Astrologians had told them. Whereupon they were
condemned, yet their lives were spared in respect of their blood. Wherein we
may acknowledge the goodness of God in discovering such a plot, before it took
strength, and the noble nature of the Queen, that dealt so nobly with her own
blood.

Thus the Land within rested in great quietness, for some years. The Church was
established, and increased, learning flourished, godliness and true piety
prevailed, Popish ignorance was driven into corners. The Papists that then
were, were content to keep themselves quiet. Either they kept their Religion
private to themselves, or else they came to our Churches, as most of them did.
But the enemy of all goodness envying this peaceable state of England, stirred
up the Pope to give occasion to new troubles, and to wrap the Kingdom into
dangers. Whereby as the Church has been more troubled, then it was before, so
the Papists have got nothing by the bargain, but lost much, by stirring up the
peaceable inclination of the Prince against them, and by provoking the State to
make severe laws to curb^ them. Who might have lived quietly, if they had not
procured their own trouble.

Paulus IIII. was Pope when Queen Elizabeth began to Reign, this Pope was not
troublesome against her. His successor was, Pius IIII. who seemed to be a
moderate man. For he was moved by the Count of Feria, who served the King of
Spain, to excommunicate Queen Elizabeth, but he thought it not good to
proceed to such extremities. For seeing the Popes authority is a thing
consisting rather in the conceits of some men, then in any truth and substance:
If it should once appear that this thunderbolt of excommunicate, whereby he
has so much terrified the world, should prove idle, ineffectuall without all
po^er, then might this great authority fall into contempt, and so be made
ridiculous. Whether for this cause or what other, he would not be persuaded to
use this extremity against the Queen, An. Do^. 1560.
but sent Letters, showing some love and kindness, by an Abbot Parpalia, by
whom also he sent certain secret Mandates. Which what they were was not openly
known. But some acquainted well with State affairs then, reported that the
Pope offered to recall and disanull the sentence as unjust which was given
against her Mothers marriage, and to confirm the English Liturgy by his
authority, granting also the use of the Sacrament under both kinds, so that
she would join her self to the Roman Church, and acknowledge the Popes
supremacy. And for the effecting hereof, a great sum of gold was promised to
some that should be used as instruments for this purpose. But Queen Elizabeth
remaining SEMPER EADEM, ever like her self, utterly denied to have any thing
to do with the Pope.

But the next Pope, Pius V. that succeeded, took another course, whether a
better or worse, let the event declare. For in the year 1569. he sent out an
excommunication against her, and all adhering to her, This Bull was dated Anno
Dom. 1569. Quinto Call: Mar^.
wherein her subjects were absolved from the Oath of their Alleagance, and from
all other offices and duties, and that all that should obey her were accursed.
Which thing brought more trouble upon the Papists, then upon the Queen, or any
of her obedient subjects. And has openly declared to all the world, that the
Popes curse is a thing proceeding from private spleen and malice, and now
nothing feared but contemned, when all men may see that the Popes curse is
turned by the favor of God into an extraordinary blessing, and that the Pope
is not Christ's V^car in these ministeries, because he is contrary to Christ,
and Christ contrary to him. The Pope cursing, and Christ blessing, the Pope
seeking thereby to destroy the Queen, Christ maintaining her, made her
stronger after this cu^se then ever she was before. Yet it is true that many
troubles did rise thereby, but God turned them all unto her good, that men may
understand the fruit of true Religion established, which brings the
protection of God with it.

CHAPTER II.
THE first poisoned fruit of this excommunication was rotten before it could
ripen. There was an intention of a great and terrible Rebellion. The Duke of
Norfolk was excited to stir what Forces he could, and to join with the
Earls of Westmerland and Northumberland: at the same time an Army was to come
out of Ireland, and another Army to be sent from Duke Dalva in the
Low Countries. If all these had joined together, as the intention was, God
knows what might have in^ued. But there is no counsel can prevail against
God. All the plot was broken in pieces without any other trouble, saving that
which fell upon the plotters themselves, and their instruments. The King of
Spain, who watched all opportunities to do mischief, wrote one Letter to the
Duke of Norfolk, exciting him to raise a power within England, and wrote
another to the Earl of Ormond, to raise a tumult in Ireland. But both the Duke
and the Earl showed the Letters to the Queen, declaring thereby a purpose to
be loyal. The Duke suffered himself to be wrought upon too much by pernicious
instruments. The instruments were the Bishop of Ross, who lay in London under
pretense of being Ambassador for the Queen of Scots, and one Robert Rido^f, a
Nobleman of Florence, who lay in London, in the habit and pretense of a
Factor. These pestif^rous instruments labored to persuade the Duke to marry
the Queen of Scots, who being next heir to the Crown of England, would bring
great hopes with her and by subtle and pernicious counsel drew the Duke so
far, that against his promise made to the Queen, he began to think of that
marriage, and the hopes that might follow the same, and entered in^o a secret
course of writing and receiving Letters from the Queen of Scots, by (...)
Characters. All which together with a Commentary sent to him by the Scots
Queen, the Duke commanded his Secretary Higfo^d to burn. But he laid them
under the Matt in the Dukes Chamber. And being apprehended, declared where they
were. At the Dukes arraig^ment a Letter was produced written to him from the
Scots Queen, signifying her grief for that the Earls of Westmerland and
Northumberland were up in Arms before the Duke had raised his powers. For
Queen Elizabeth, finding whereunto things tended, apprehended the Duke, and
sent for the Earls to come to Court, but because they had once excused their
absence, she sent peremptorily for them, all excuse laid aside, upon their
alleagance to come up. Supposing that if they were innocent, they would come,
but if guilty, then should their purpose sooner break out into open sight. As
it fell out. For they supposing by this, the plot to be betrayed, brake out
into open rebellion, before the help which they looked for from other parts
could come to them. This rebellion was plotted by the Pope, Pius V. and by the
King of Spain, and was so cunningly handled, and carried with such secrecy,
that it was well known to strangers before it was known to us whom most the
matter concerned. And no marvel, seeing strangers were the devisers and first
authors of it. I will therefore declare it in the words of a stranger, who set
it forth in Print at Rome, before it was well known in England. Hieronymus
Caten^ in the life of Pius V. w^iteth thus.

When Pius V. was inflamed with a zeal to restore the Roman Religion in
England, and to displace Queen Elizabeth out of that Kingdom; and yet could
not have his Nuntio Apostolical, nor any other public person fit to effect
this thing: he ordered the matter so, that Robert Ridolf, a Gentleman of
Florence (who ^tayed in England under color of merchandise) should stir up
the minds of men upon the destruction of Elizabeth. Which thing he diligently
executed, not only among the Catholics, but also among some Protestants, who
conspired together herein; some out of private hatred against them that aspired
to the Kingdom, others out of a desire of a change. Whilst these things were
secretly carried, a contention rose between the Spaniard and Elizabeth, upon
the occasion of a sum of money going to the Duke Dalva, but intercepted by
Elizabeth.

This occasion the Pope apprehended to persuade the Spaniard, that he would
help the conspiratours in England against Elizabeth, that so he might have his
affairs in the Netherlands in greater security, and the Roman Religion might
be restored in B^itaigne. The Pope also persuaded the French, showing him that
this he ought to the Scots Queen, affianced to him, and worthily to the Scots,
who by their incursions had withdrawn the forces of England, that they could
do less help to the Protestants of France, neither did the noble
conspiratours of England deserve less favor of him, who by their cunning have
hindered the Queen of England, to give any help openly to the Protestants of
France. In this respect the French King promised them aid for the deliverance
of the Scots Queen, but failed of performance of any thing. In the mean time,
Ridolphus effected thus much, that the conspiratours should draw the Duke of
Norfolk into their society, and make him chief therein, to whom they
promised marriage with the Scots Queen, whereto she consented. The Pope to set
these things forward, by his Bull published, deposed Elizabeth from her
Kingdom, and absolved her subjects from all oath and alleagance, sending the
printed Coppies to Ridolphus, which might be dispersed over England. Whereupon
the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, took Arms against their Prince,
who presently, money and means failing, withdrew themselves into Scotland. The
Duke of Norfolk, with others, were committed to prison. Among them was
Ridolphus, whom the Pope had appointed to help the conspiratours with an
hundredth and fifty thousand Crowns, which thing he could not do being clapped
up in prison. But when the Queen could not pierce into the secrets of the
conspiracy, he was sent out of prison with others, and then he distributed
those Crowns to the conspirators. Who sent him to the Pope to inform him that
all things were prepared in a readiness, and ordered against Elizabeth: and to
entreat the Spanish King, to join his Forces from the Netherlands as soon as
may be: the Pope commended the enterprise, albeit, the Duke Dalva did not like
it, as being full of difficulties, when as Ridolphus in his journey told him
the matter. The Pope sent Ridolfe to the Spaniard, under another pretense, and
to the King of Portugal with ins^ructions; and at the same time writing to the
Duke of Norfolk, promised him aid. He did much urge the Spaniard to help the
conspiratours, and to the end he might the more vehemently stir him up, he
promised if need were himself would go for to help them, and would engage
all the goods of the Sea Apostolic, Chalices, Crosses, and holy Vestments.
Declaring that there was no difficulty in it, if he would send Chapinus
Vitellius with an Army into England from the Low Countries. Which thing the
King of Spain commanded to be done with great alacrity. And the Pope provided
money in the Netherlands. These things were not pleasing to the Duke Dalva,
both because he envied Vitellius this glory, wherein he rather wished his own
son to be employed, and because he feared some hostile invasion out of
France, and proposed it to be considered, whether England being overcome would
fall to the Spaniard, whether the French would not resist that project, and
whether the Pope were able to bring help enough to effect so great a matter.
Notwithstanding the Spanish King expressly commanded him to set upon England.
Ridolf was sent back with money to the Netherlands. But see how God would have
it: All the matter was opened to Elizabeth by a stranger without the Kingdom.
The Duke of Norfolk was apprehended and put to death. Which thing the Pope
took heavily, the Spaniard condoled, who before the Cardinal of Alexandria,
the Popes Nephew, said, that never any conspiracy was more advisedly begun, nor
concealed with more constancy and consent of minds, which in all that time was
not opened by any of the conspiratours: that an Army might easily be sent out
of the Low Countries in the space of 24. hours, which might suddenly have
taken the Queen and the City of London unprovided, restored Religion, and set
the Scots Queen in the Throne. Especially when as Stukley an English fugitive
had undertaken at the same time with the help of 3000. Spaniards to reduce all
Ireland unto the obedience of the King of Spain, and with one or two ships
to burn all the English Navy.

Thus far Catena writes of these things, opening some things that before
were not known to the English. The Book was Printed at Rome An: Dom: 1588. by
the privilege of Pope Pius V.

This is the Narration of a Papist, published at Rome, by the authority of the
Pope. It may seem strange to men that have any feeling of the fear of God,
that a Pope should so boldly publish his own shame to all the world. The Pope
does practice treason against States, sets his instruments to raise rebellions,
stirs up Princes against Princes, one Kingdom against another, and when he
does this, he will not understand that he is, in this doing, the instrument and
servant of the Devil, to disorder the world. If any would excuse this, as
being done against an Heretic: that excuse will not serve here; for I speak
not of excommunicating supposed Heretics, but of raising rebellions against
Princes, to set the subjects to murder the Prince, or to stir up one Prince
to murder another, these things be wicked and ungracious practices, but the
Papists are grown to such an o^duration in these sins, that they judge these
no sins, to murder, or secretly to poison, or by any horrible mischief to
compass their own ends. The things that are by the Laws of God, of Nature,
of Nations, wicked and abominable, against the ordinances which God has set in
the world, must forsooth change their nature, if the Pope command them, nay, if
any of their superiors command such things, their doctrine of blind obedience,
sets them upon any mischief, and so they do not only teach for doctrines
men's traditions, but make doctrines for men's destructions. If the Popes presume
that they have such a privilege, that the things which are horrible sins in
other men are no sins in them: this were in effect as much as for the Pope to
proclaim himself the Man of sin, that runs into all sinful courses with
greediness, with an open profession of the same. For what can any man of sin
do more, then to command sin, to warrant sin, to commit sin, to glory in
sin; If all this be done by the Pope, who can justly deny him this title of the
Man of sin?

But blessed be the name of God, that always delivered his Church here from
such wicked practices, and has brought the mischief that these wicked men
have devised, upon their own head. Now let all understanding men judge where
God is, where godliness is, where Religion and the fear o^ God is. Whether
with them that by bloody, unjust, unlawful practices seek their own ends,
or with them that are persecuted by this bloody Nation, and in patience suffer
all their mischievous and cruel practices, committing the matter to God the
revenger of blood, and trufting in God, rejoice under his holy protection,
being kept in safety by him that commands all the world? For what power could
be able to keep his Church from being swallowed up by such cruel adversaries,
but only the hand and holy protection of our God? Must not we then glorifi^
his name that has done so great things for us? And for our adversaries they
have their power limited, and they have their time limited, and set forth unto
them, beyond which they cannot pass. But the souls of them that rest under
the Altar, whose blood has been shed on every side, by this bloody
generation, for the testimony of Christ; these cry out with a loud voice, Apoc.
6. 10.
Vsquequo Domine? How long Lord, holy and true? Do thou not judge and
revenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? Yet so blind are these
bloud-suckers, that they labor still to increase this cry; but GOD will give
patience to his Saints, and in his time cut off this wicked Nation. Psalm. 59. 5.
Be not merciful O Lord to them that sin of malicious wickedness.

Thus then this rebellion that was so ^^rongly plotted, so secretly carried,
was by the hand of God disappointed, and broken into pieces. We have cause to
bless the name of God therefore: Praised be the Lord, Psalm. 124. 6.
that has not given us as a prey to their teeth. Thus can we comfort our
selves in God. but can our adversaries comfort themselves in their own
mischeifes? The issue was, the Pope and the Spanyard were disappointed, the
World wondered how this State was so soon quieted. An. Do^. 1569.
The Earls Northumberland and Westmerland seduced by a Priest that the Pope
had sent, one Nicolas Morton, came to Durham where they had the Mass set up.
From thence they marched to Clifford Moore not far from Wetherbie, where
hearing that the Scots Queen (for whose deliverance they took arms) was
carried from T^tbery to Coventry, under the custody of the Earls of Shewsbury
and Huntingdon, and that the Earl of Sussex on the one side had gathered a
strong army against them, that Sir George Bows was behind them, having
fortefied Bernard Castle, that the Lord Scroop and the Earl of Cumberland had
fortified Carliell, and gathered an army there in readiness: that the Soldiers
of Berwick with the power of Northumberland were in New Castle, they turned
back again and besieged Bernard Castle. Sir George Bows and his brother Mr.
Robert, being driven by an hard siege, and wanting provision yielded the
Castle* and they and the soldiers were dismissed, carrying their arms with
them as it was covenanted, upon the first news of the fears, which the Earl
of Sussex brought against them, the Earls fled to Hexham, from thence seeking
by-ways to Naworth Castle. Whence the two Earls fl^d into Scotland, the Earl
of Northumberland hid himself in the house of Hector of Harlaw an Armstrang,
having confidence in him that he would be true to him, who notwithstanding for
money betrayed him to the Regent of Scotland. It was observed, that Hector
being before a rich man, fell poor of a sudden, and so hated generally that he
never durst go abroad, in so much, that the Proverb to take Hectors cloak, is
continued to this day among them, when they would express a man that betrayeth
his friend who trusted him: The Earl was afterward delivered into England, and
condemned of high treason and beheaded. Westmerland found means to hide him a
while with Fernihurst and Bucklough, and escaped into the Low Countries, where
being sustained by a poor pension of the King of Spain, he lived a poor life
all his time.

This is the fruit of Popery. It brings Noble houses to destruction. It
pitied their hearts, against whom the rebellion was raised, to see such Noble
persons brought to such a destruction. But the Pope is without pity and mercy,
the Priests and Jesuits that bring such noble men into such snares, have no
pity nor mercy, therefore it behooveth all noble persons to be wise, and to
avoid pestiferous ways, that is, to shut their ears against Priests and
Jesuits. These be pernicious instruments, that secretly convey themselves into
great men's favor, to bring them to ruin, they tell them of the Religion of
their Fathers, but true Religion brings a blessing, and Religion that
brings always a curse is to be suspected. And to say truth the Religion of
Rome as now, is not the Religion of our Fathers. For Religion was changed in
the T^ent Council, and therefore they cannot say they have now that Religion
which their Fathers had. And that Religion was changed in the Trent Synod, is
by learned men sufficiently proved; and we are ready to maintain it: for
where the rule of faith is changed, there must needs follow a change of
Religion, and a change of the Church. But in the Trent Council the rule of
faith is changed. And therefore men may observe a great difference between
these men that are now called Papists, and their forefathers. God blessed their
Fathers, because they served God in sincerity, according to that measure of
knowledge which was revealed to them; for he that serves God truly, according
to that measure of knowledge which he has, and holds the rule of faith: is
without doubt accepted of God, and God does bless such. But after that God
has revealed a greater measure of knowledge, by the spreading of the savor of
his Gospel, they who then forsake the truth offered, are followed with great
curses. And therefore we may plainly observe the curses of God upon them that
forsake God and his truth; Where the Pope curses, we see that God does bless,
and no (...) follows: where God does cur^e, we see destruction follows.

This rebellion was scarce extinguished, when another little flame rose from
this greater combustion. Leonard Dacres the second son of William Lord Dacres
of Gillestand (whose eldest brothers son was killed with a Valting horse) was
much grieved to see so great a patrimony to go from him to the daughters of
the Baron whom the Duke of Norfolk their Father in law had joined in marriage
with his sons. This so troubled Leonard Dacres, that having no other way to
revenge himself, he took the course of impatient and discontented men, An.
Do^. 1569.
to revenge all upon himself, and joining himself to the rebels, striued but
in vain, to deliver the Scots Queen. When they were in arms then was Leonard
Dacres at Court, and offered the Queen all his help against them, and for that
service was sent home. But (as it came to light afterward) in his journey by
messengers with the rebels he had communication, and encouraging them,
undertook to kill the Lord Scroop, and the Bishop of Carliell. Which when he
could not effect, he took Grastocke Castle, and other houses of the Lord
Dacres, and fortified Naworth Castle, holding it as in his own right, and
gathered soldiers about him. Against him came the Lord H^nsdon, with the
trained soldiers of Berwick. Leonard not trusting to his fortified places,
came to meet the Lord Hunsdon, and meeting him when he passed the River Gelt,
after a sharp battle, finding himself put to the worse, his men killed, he
fled into Scotland. And so went into the Low Countries, and in a poor estate
died at Louaine. The Queen by Proclamation pardoned the multitude which he had
drawn to take his part.

This man run a strange course. When he might have been out of danger, he run
into a quarrel which he might evidently see to be lost before he came to it.
But he was drunk with the cup of Rome; for who would run such courses but
drunken men? It may teach others to beware of those that bring such poisoned
and intoxicating cups from Rome.

CHAPTER III.
TO proceed and to declare the pestilent fruit of the Popes excommunication,
which wrought still to the confusion of them that served it. At this time in
Ireland, An* Do^. 1569.
Edmond and Peter Botlers, brethren to the Earl of Ormond, joining with James
fitz Morice of Desmondes family, and with others, ^ought to do service to the
Pope and Spanyard against Religion, and with a purpose to draw Ireland away
from the obedience of Queen Elizabeth. To this end they made a league among
themselves. To inflame this rebellion Johannes Mendoza came secretly out of
Spain: and to extinguish the flame the Earl of Ormond went out of England
into Ireland, who labored so effectually that he persuaded his brethren to
submit themselves. They were put in prison, but that they might not be brought
to judgment, the Earls daily intercession prevailed with the Queen. It
grieved the Earl exceedingly to see such a blot upon so noble a family; And
the Queen was willing to preserve the honor of the house: as for the relics
of that rebellion, they were in short time dissipared by the wisdom of the
Lord Deputy, and the industry of Sir Humphrey Gilbert.

This was but a small motion: but it shows the restles spirits of the Pope
and Spanyard against our Church and State. And we render thanks to God, for
breaking the purposes of our adversaries before they grew great. This is his
goodness toward his Church; and his judgment upon the adversaries.

The King of Spain never rested to stir up troubles to Queen Elizabeth,
pretending the deliverance of the Scots Queen, but it appears that his
intention was for himself, as the Duke Dalva understood it. This is evident by
that which we have mentioned out of Catena. For Duke Dalva was in some fear
that if Queen Elizabeth were overthrown, yet the Kingdom of England might
not fall to the Spanyard, but to the French. So that it was in their intention
certainly to be cast upon the French or Spanyard, and here was no reckoning
made of the Queen of Scots. So that howsoever the pretense was for her
deliverance, yet there was another thing intended. For seeing Queen Elizabeth
was excommunicated and deposed, if she could once be overthrown, then they
made no other reckoning but that England would fall to the strongest. Now the
Spanyard thinking himself the stronger, sought this prerogative for himself,
and therefore he ceased not to raise troubles to the Queen, and the rather,
because he held it a thing impossible for him to recover the Low Countries,
unless he had England. But because he found it a matter of great difficulty
to set upon England, his first enterprise was to set upon Ireland. But when
that succeeded not, at last with all Forces that might be raised, with many
years preparations he set openly upon England. But these things are to be
spoken in order. Only this I premise, that we may know from whom all our
troubles have proceeded.

Many conspiracies brake out one after another, under pretense of delivering
the Queen of Scots. An: Do^. 1570.
To effect this thing, Thomas Stanly and Edward, his brother, the younger sons
of the Earl of Darby, Thomas Gerard, Rolston, Hall, and other in Dar^yshire
conspired. But the son of R^lston which was Pensioner to the Queen,
disclosed the conspiracy. And they were imprisoned all except Hall, who escaped
into the (...) of Man. From whence by the commendation of the Bishop of Ross,
he was sent to Dumbr^to^. Where when afterward the Castle was won, he was
taken, and brought to London, where he suffered death.

Before the Duke of Norfolk was beheaded, there were that conspired to deliver
him out of Prison. The Bishop of Ross at this time a dangerous instrument
against England, An: Do^ 1571.
and as dangerous against the Scots Queen, for whom he labored, gave
desperate counsel to the Duke, that with a choice company of Gentlemen, he
should intercept the Queen of a sudden, and ^rouble the Parliament. To show
that this was ^as^e, he gave some reasons. But the Duke abhorred to hear of
that counsel as pernicious and dangerous: Sir Henry Percy at that time offered
to the Bishop of Ross his help to free the Scots Queen, so that Grange, and
Carr of ^ernihurst would receive her at the borders, and his brother the Earl
of Northumberland might be delivered out of Scotland. But when he was suspected
for the inward fa^iliaritie which he had with Burghly, and de^er^ed the matter
a longer time, this counsel came to no effect. As did also that of Powell of
Samford, one of the Gentlem^n Pencio^ari^s, and of Owen one that belonged to
^he Earl of Aru^dell. These two undertook the same business also for the Scots
Queens deliverance, but the Bishop of Ross stayed that, because he took them
for men of a meaner rank, then to be ^it for that business. After the Duke was
the second time imprisoned, many were for this matter imprisoned also. The
Earls of Arundell and Southampton, the Lord Lu^ly, the Lord Cobham, Thomas,
his brother, Sir Henry Percy, Banister, Lowther, Godier, Powell, and others
were committed, who in hope of pardon, told that they knew.

Barnes and Muthers, An* Do^. 1572.
joined with Herle in a bloody practice to deliver the Duke, and kill certain
of the Privy Councellers. But Herle being the ch^efe in the villainy opened the
Project. When B^rnes was brought before him, and found Herle to be the accuser,
he smiling upon him, said, Herle, thou have prevented me, if thou had stayed
but one hour longer, I should then have stood in thy place the accuser, and
thou in my place to be hanged.

When John Duke of Austria came into government of the Low Countries, An: Do^.
1576.
he found the States strong. The cruelty that the Duke of Dalva and others had
used, was so far from bringing them into a servile subjection, that it rather
armed them with resolution to defend their liberties, their laws, their
religion, and their lives. Which may admonish great Princes to use moderation
in government; for much has been lost by cruelty, nothing gotten by it; but
nothing can serve to moderate restless spirits; such a spirit brought Don John
with him into the Low Countries, who beholding the unlucky ends of them that
strove to deliver the Queen of Scots, he notwithstanding sought to work her
deliverance, and to marry her, and so to enjoy both England and Scotland. But
to hide his purpose the better, he made show of a perpetual Edict for Peace,
as he called it: and for that purpose sent Gastellus to Elizabeth: Who
thoroughly understanding the Dukes meaning, yet as if she had been ignorant,
sent Daniel Rogers to Don John to congratulate for his perpetual Edict of
Peace. Albeit she certainly knew, that he had resolved to deliver and marry the
Scots Queen, and in his conceit had devoured the Kingdoms of England and
Scotland, by the persuasion of the Earl of Westmerland, and of other
^ugitiues, and by favor and countenance of the Pope and the Guyses. And that
Don John had a purpose out of hand to surprise the ^le of Man in the ^rish
Seas, that he might have a fitter opportunity to invade England out of
Ireland, and the North coast of Scotland, where the Scots Queen had many at
her devotion, and the opposite parts of England, as Cumberland, Lankyshire,
Cheshire, Northwales, had many that as he was informed favored Popery.

The truth is, Don John of Austria (as it was known from Peresius Secretary to
the King of Spain,) being before this carried away with ambition, when he was
disappointed of the hope which he had of the Kingdom of Tunis, practiced
secretly with the Pope, for the overthrow of Queen Elizabeth, marrying of the
Scots Queen, and subduing of England. That the Pope might excite the King of
Spain to war against England, as out of a desire of the public good. Don
John before he came out of Spain to go to the Netherlands, did f^rward this
motion in Spain what he could, and afterward sending Esconedus out of the
Netherlands to Spain, did desire to have the havens in Bis^ay, whence a Navy
might invade England. But King Philip (happily reserving England as a morsel
for his own mouth) neglected Don John as a man too ambitious. Queen Elizabeth
understood not these things until the Prince of Orange opened them to her. Don
John in the mean time, prosecuteth the matter of the marriage with secrecy.
An: Do^. 1577.
And to dissemble the matter sent messengers to Que^ne Elizabeth, to hold her
with a tale of perpetual peace; but of a sudden brake out into war, and
took diverse Towns and Castles by sleight and treachery, and wrote to Spain,
that the best course is to take Zealand before the more inner Provinces. And
being prone to believe that which he desired, he wrote that England might be
had with greater ease then Zealand; and he labored by Escouedus to persuade
the Spanish King. But the Queen seeing all tend to war in the Netherlands,
entered a league with the States for mutual help, and sent Thomas Wilkes into
Spain to complain of the headdy courses of the Duke of Austria. And in the
mean time prepared for war. But behold when Don John was in the height of
his pride and ambition, in the flower of his age, in the midst of business and
preparations, He died Anno Dom. 1578.
he died on a sudden, as some thought of the Plague. Some thought that upon
grief, that he was not so respected of the King his brother, he ended his
foolish ambition with his life, afterthat he had embraced in his ambitious
desire the Kingdom of Tunis, whereupon Guleta was lost in Africa, and after
that the Kingdom of England; and had confirmed a league with the Guysians,
without the knowledge of the French and Spanish Kings, for defense of both
Crowns. Thus was the enemy disappointed, the Queen, the Land, the Church
preserved; And have we not cause to remember these Works of God, and to give
God the glory of his own work, that is, of delivering his Church? England was
as a Stage, whereupon diverse entered to play their parts, one after another.
The part that they played was always treason; some was kept farther off by
Gods providence, to do less harm; some brought the danger nearer home. But
GOD taking the protection of his Church in England, none prevailed. And could
any other power but the power and protection of God preserve a Land from so
many, so deadly dangers? Let all mouths be stopped, and let this continual
course of deliverance be acknowledged the work of God.

CHAPTER IIII.
THE next man that came upon this Stage, was Thomas Stucley, but the malice
that he and the Pope by his employment intended against England, was turned
clean another way by GODS providence.

Thomas Stucley an Englishman borne, when he had spent his estate in riot,
prodigality, and base means, went into Ireland An: 1570. And gaping for the
Stewardship of Wexford, and missing the same, began to utter contumel^ous words
against the best deserving Prince, but he was contemned as one that could do
no hurt. From Ireland he went into Italy to Pius V. Pope. It is a thing
incredible what favor he got with the old Pope, that breathed nothing but the
destruction of Elizabeth. Stucley with magnificent ostentation, (as he was a
man singular in ostentation) made the Pope believe, that with three thousand
Italians, he would drive the English out of Ireland, and b^rne the Queens
Navy. And indeed these things he most wickedly attempted afterward, but to his
own destruction.

Pius V. having procured all the troubles that possibly he could against Queen
Elizabeth, seemed to die for spite that he could not hurt her. After him
suceeded Gregory 13. An: Do^. 1572.
This Pope had secret consultations with the King of Spain for the invading of
Ireland and England both together. Meaning under the mask of Religion, to
serve their own ambitious ends. The Popes end was to make his son James
Boncampagno, whom he had lately made Marquess of Vineola, now King of Ireland.
The Spanyardes end was, secretly to help the Rebels of Ireland, as Elizabeth
did the Dutch, and in fair words intertaine a show of friendship on both
sides. The King of Spain had a farther reach, even to get the Kingdom of
England by the Popes authority, that from thence he might with ^^ore ease tam^
the Dutch that were confederate against him. This he found hard for him to do,
unless he were Lord of the Seas, which he saw he could not be, unless he had
England. And there was no doubt but as he owed the Kingdoms of Naples, Sicily,
Navarre to the beneficence of the Pope, so with all his heart he would have
held England by the like favor.

They knowing that the greatest strength of England stood in the navy of the
Queens ships, and Merchants ships, which were also built and framed for
the use of war, thought that the best way to lessen the Navi^, was to set on
the Merchants of Italy and Netherlands, to hire many of the Merchants ships,
seeking diverse several pretenses, and having hired them, to send them unto
the farthest Navigations, that whilst these are absent, the Queens Navy might
be overthrown with a greater Navy: And then at the same instant Thomas Stucley
the English fugitive, might join his forces with the rebels of Ireland.
Stucley a bare-worne deceiver, did no less cousin this next succeeding Pope,
then he had done his predecessor, Gregor. 13.
with admirable bragges. He promised the Kingdom of Ireland to the Popes
bastard son, and got such favor with the old ambitious Pope, that he honored
him with the titles of Marquess of Lagen, Earl of Wexford and Caterloghe,
Vicount of Morough, and Baron of Ross. These be famous places in Ireland. And
made him general of DCCC. Italian Soldiers, the King of Spain paying their
stipends, and so sent him into the Irish war. Stucley came with these to
Portingale, to the mouth of Tagus, purposing to subdue Ireland. But the purpose
of God was otherwise. And that which the Pope and Spanyard had with such
deliberation proiected, was by the council of God dissipated and brought to
nothing. For Seba^tian King of Portugal, to whom the chief conduct of the
forces against England was committed; (for this Prince puffed up with a heat of
youth and ambition, had long before offered all his power to the Pope, to be
employed against Mahumetanes and Prote^tants) was then intised and drawn by
many great promises of Mahomet son of Abdalla King of ^ess, unto the African
war. Sebastian being thus drawn from the English Wars another way, dealt
with Stucley, that first of all he would carry his Italian soldiers into
Mauritania; Stucley finding the Spanish King not against this project, (for the
Spanyard disdeined that the Popes. Bastard should be King of Ireland) went with
Sebastian into Mauritania, and was killed in that memorable battle, An: Do^.
1578.
wherein three Kings, Sebastian, Mahomet, and Abdall-Melech were all slain.
And so Stucley had too honorable an end of a dishonorable life.

By the death of Sebastian the Spanyard was clean drawn away from thinking of
the English invasion for a time, and set all his forces upon the invasion of
Portugal. If this occasion had not drawn away the Spanyard, a great tempest
of War should have fallen upon England (if any credit may be given to the
English fugitives) for they declared that those hug*. Armies which the Spanyard
had provided against England out of Italy, were now all to be employed upon the
subduing of Portuga^l: neither would he be by any means pe^swaded then, to
think of the English invasion, albeit, the English fugitives did much urge
him, and the Pope promise a Cruciata in this War, as in the holy War was
used. The King of Spain was so wholly defixed upon Portugal, that nothing
could remove him from that resolution. Now when it was known that Stucley, and
all his Italians in Mauritania were slain, and that the Spanyard thought of
nothing but Portugal, the English Navy that watched for Stucley upon the Irish
Seas, was called home, and all was quiet in England and Ireland.

By this Pageant we may observe how zealous these holy Fathers of Rome are, not
to win souls to Christ, but to win Kingdoms to their Bastards. Two Popes
proceed in the same course of malice and malediction against Queen Elizabeth,
and one English fugitive makes them both fools. But our part is to remember
who governs the world, and turns the wise and politic counsels of all the
enemies of his Church into foolishnes. We give God the praise, and remember
these things for no other end but to give the glory to him.

CHAPTER V.
IN the next place comes up Nicholas S^nders, that in the defense of the Roman
visible Monarchy ecclesiastical had written. But finding that he could do no
good by writing, he falls now unto another course; to be the firebrand of a
Rebellion in Ireland. James fitz Morice being pardoned for a former Rebellion,
withdrew himself into France, promising the French King, that if he would send
help, he would join all Ireland to the French Scepter, and restore the Roman
Religion in the I Will. But being wearied with delays, and finding himself
derided, from France he went to Spain, and promised the same to the Spanyard.
Who sent him to the Pope. From the Pope at the earnest su^e of Nicholas Sanders
an English Priest, and one Alan an Irish Priest, he obtained a little money.
And to Sanders authority Legatine was granted, he got forsooth a
consecracrated Banner, and Letters of commendation to the Spanyard, and so
returned into Spain. From Spain he came into Ireland, with those Priests,
three ships, and a small company of soldiers. He landed at Smerwick in
Kirria a Chersones in Ireland, An: Do^ 1579.
about the first of July. An. 1579. Where, when the place was first orderly
consecrated, he raised a fort, and withdrew his ships. Which ships were
presently surprised and carried away by Thomas Courtney an English Gentleman,
who with a war ship stayed by chance in a near haven, and so excluded the
Spaniards from the benefit of the Sea. John Desmond and James, brethren to the
Earl of Desmond, speedily join themselves to their cousin fitz Morice. The
Earl himself, who heartily favored the cause, counterfeiting the contrary,
called his men together, in show to resist them, but craftily caused the Earl
of Clanri^ket to withdraw himself, who was coming to help him against the
rebels.

The Lord Deputy understanding by certain messengers that the enemies were
landed: sent Henry Dauil, an English Gentleman, a man of valor, and who had
good acquaintance with the Desmonds, to the Earl of Desmond, and to his
brethren, commanding them presently to set upon the fort, which the enemies had
raised. But that they re^used to do, as a thing full of dangers. And as Dauil
returned, John Desmond follows him; and overtaketh him at Trally in an Inn.
And in the night time, having corrupted the host, came into his chamber, with
some other cutthroats, having drawn^ swords in their hands; where Dauilus
slept in security with Arthur Carter an old soldier, a man of worth,
Deputy Governor of Monmuth. But being awaked with the tumult, when he saw John
Desmond with a naked sword rushing toward him, What is the matter my ^onne
quoth he, (for so was he wont familiarly to call him) nay, said, Desmond, I am
no more thy son, nor thou my father; for thou shall die. And presently thrust
him and Carter which lay with him through with many wounds, and killed them
both. Dauilus his footboy defended his Master, with his naked body, receiving
many wounds to save his Master if he could. Then he killed all Dauils servants,
which lay scattered in diverse places. And returning to the Spaniards all
imbrued in blood, he gloried of the slaughter which he had made. Let this, said
he, be to you a pledge of my faith to you and to the cause. Doctor Sanders
commended this action, as a sweet sacrifice before God. James fitz Morice
blamed the manner of the slaughter, he would have had it rather in the way,
then in their bed. The Earl, when he heard of it, utterly detested it.

When the Spaniards saw but a few Irish join themselves with them, and they
poor and unarmed, far otherwise then fitz Morice had promised, they began to
distrust, to cry out they were undone, to bewail their fortunes, seeing all
ways was shut up so, that they saw no means to escape by Sea or Land. Fitz
Morice exhorts them to expect with patience a while; he told them great forces
were coming to help them. And himself took a journey to the holy cross of
Tippararia, pretending to perform a Vow which he made in Spain, but in truth,
to gather together the seditious of Conach and Vlster.

Whilst he was thus in journey with a few horse and twelve foot, as he passed
by the land of William a Burg his kinsman, and taking some horses from the
Plow, because his horses tyred^: the husbandmen made Hue and Cry, and raised
the neighborhood to recover the horses. Amongst these that went to recover the
horses, were the sons of William a Burg, forward young men, who pursued them
so sharply, that they overtooke them. Fitz Morice seeing Theobald a Burg, and
his brethren, who had indeed in a former rebellion taken part with fitz Morice:
Cosins, quoth he, let us not strive for two or three paltry lades. I doubt not,
but if you knew the cause why I am returned into Ireland, you would join your
selves with me. Theobald answered, It repents me, my Father, and all our
friends of the last rebellion. But now we have sworn our fealty to our most
gracious Princess, who has granted to us our lives, and we will keep our
faith and alleagance: and therefore restore the horses, or I will make thee
restore them. And withal, he ran upon him with his Spear. They sought a while
together. Theobaldus and another of his brethren, with some other were slain.
Fitz Morice also himself being run through with a Sp^are, and his head shot
through with a Buller, was slain with diverse of his men. Queen Elizabeth
hearing of this chance, wrote Letters full of sorrow and love to William a
Burg, comforting him for the death of his sons. She honored him with the
title of Baron of Conell Castle, and rewarded him with a yearly Pension. The
old man being over-^oyed with such unexpected favors, dyed not long after.

Sir William Drury then Lord Deputy, came near to Kilmaloch and sent for the
Earl of Desmond: who coming to him promised his faith and alleagance to his
Prince, and swear that himself and his men should fight against the rebels.
Whereupon he was dismissed to gather his companies, and to return to the Lord
Deputy. John Desmond the Earls brother, who was by the rebels put in the
place of Fi^z Morice; lying in ambush, did entrap Herbert, and Prise, with the
bands which they led, and killed them. Himself being hurt in the face. Some
supplies came out of England, and Perrot was sent with six warre-ships to
defend the coast: the Lord Deputy grew so sick that he was forced to withdraw
to Waterford for his healths sake; and appointed Nicholas Malbey governor of
Connach, a famous and approved Soldier, to follow the Wars. And worthy Sir
William Drury soon after died. Malbey sent to the Earl of Desmond, and often
admonished him of his duty and promise: and seeing it not good to linger in
such a business, he brought his forces into Conil, a woody Country, against
the rebels. There was John Desmond, who in battle array, and with the Popes
consecrated banner displayed, received the forces of Malbey. It was sharply
fought on both sides. But the virtue of the English prevailed; John Desmond
fled first away and left his men to the slaughter. Among them was found Alan
the Irish Priest, who exhorting them to the battle, had promised them the
Victory. Malbey by a messenger sent for the Earl to come and his forces with
him: and when he in vain expected him four days, he came to Rekell a town
of Desmond. Here the Earl began to show himself plainly for the rebels,
after that he had a long time used dissimulation in his words and countenance.
The same night the rebels set upon Malbey his tents in the dark, but finding
them well fortified, they went away and did no harm. After the death of Sir
William Drury, William Pelh^m was sent Lo^ch^e^e Instice into Ireland, with the
authority of a Deputy, until a Deputy should be sent; and the Earl of Ormond
was made goue^nour of Munster, who sent Desmonds son (which he had with him
as a pledge) to be kept at Dublin, Pelham, chief Justice comes to Munster,
sends for Desmond; but he sending Letters by his wife excuses himself.
Whereupon the Earl of Ormond was sent to him, to admonish him to deliver into
the hands of the Lord chief Justice, Sanders the Priest, the foreign
soldiers, and the Castles of Carigofoil, and Asketten, and to submit himself
absolutely, and turn his forces against his brother and the other rebels.
Which thing if he would do, he might obtain pardon of his rebellion,
otherwise he was to be declared a traitor and enemy to his Country. Whilst he
held off with delays and delusions, he was declared a traitor in the beginning
of December An: An. Do^. 1579.
1579. That he had dealt with foreign Princes for invading and subverting his
Country: That he had retained Sanders and fitz Morice, rebels: That he had
helped the Spaniards after they were gone out of the fort at Smerwick: That he
had hanged the Queens faithful subjects; had advanced the banner of the Pope
against the Queen, that he had brought strangers into the kingdom. After this
proclamation, the chief Justice appointed the wars against Desmond, to be
prosecuted by the Ea^le of Orm^nd. The Earl of Ormond with his forces
destroyed Conilo, the only refuge which the rebels had; he drove away their
Cattle, and gave them a prey to be divided among his sould^ers. He hanged the
Balife of Yonghall before hi^ door, because he had re^used to take a band of
English into the Town. And then began to besiege the Spaniards in Strangi^all;
but they fearing such a thing had conveyed themselves out of danger. Yet the
English followed them, and killed them all. And every way through Munster
pressed the rebels most sharply. Desmond and his brethren were so hard driven,
hiding themselves in their lurking holes, that they wrote to the chief
Justice, signifying that they had taken upon them the patronage of the
Catholic faith in Irelan^, and prayed him to take part with them. This showed
their cause was desperate, they had no hope, unless he that was come purposely
against them would help them. The Chief Justice laughing pleasantly at the
motion, went to Munster, and called the Nobles to him, and kept them, neither
would dismiss them, until they had given pledges, and promised their help
against the rebels to join with him and the Earl of Ormond. They thereupon
deviding their bands, sought out the rebels. They forced the Baron of Lixnaw
to yield himself: they besiege^ Carigo^oil-Castle, which Julius an Italian
with a few Spaniards maintained, and breaking the walls by the force of great
Ordnance, they entered and killed or hanged all that kept the place, with Julius
also.

At this time came Arthur Lord Gray Lord Deputy into Ireland. An: Do^. 1580.
An: 1580. Soon after his coming, about seven hundred Italians and Spaniards
sent from the Pope and King of Spain, under the government of San-Iosephus, an
Italian, came into Ireland, under the pretense of restoring the Roman Religion,
but the purpose was to divert the Queens forces, and call her from other cares
to Ireland only. They took land without any trouble, at Smerwick in Kirria;
for Winter, that had a good while stayed in that coast with ships, waiting for
them, was now returned to England, thinking they would not come in winter. They
made the place strong, and called it fort del or. But as soon as they heard
that the Earl of Ormond was coming toward them, by the persuasion of the
Irish they left the fort, and betook themselves into the valley Glamingell,
which was compassed about with high mountains and woods. The Earl took some
of them, who being questioned of their number, and purpose: they confessed that
700. were come, that so much armor is brought that may serve 5000. that mo are
daily expected out o^ Spain, that the Pope and King of Spain are resolved to
draw the English out of Ireland, that for that end they have sent an huge s^m
of money, which they have delivered into the hands of Sanders the Popes
Nuntio, of the Earl of Desmond, and John his brother. That night the Italians
and Spaniards were much to seek, not knowing what way to turn themselves, not
knowing to hide themselves as the Irish do, in dens and bogs, and therefore in
the dark they went back to their Fort; near to which the E^rle of Ormond had
pitched: but being unprovided of Ordnance and other things needful for
oppugnation, he stayed for the coming of the Lord Deputy. Who soon after
came, accompanied with Zouch, Ralegh, Deny, Ma^worth, Achin, and other
Captains. At that time came Winter out of Englan^ with war ships, much
blamed for withdrawing himself when there was need of his service.

The Lord Deputy sent a trumpetter to the ^ort to demand what they were? What
business they had in Ireland? Who sent them? Why they had fortified a place in
the Queens Kingdom? And withal to command them presently to depart. Their
answer was, that of them some were sent from the most holy Father the Pope of
Rome, some from the Catholic King of Spain, to whom the Pope had given
Ireland; for as much as Queen Elizabeth had lost her right in Ireland by
reason of heresy. And therefore that which they had taken, they would hold,
and get more if they could. When the Lord Deputy and Winter had consulted of
the manner of the siege, they brought some Culverings out of the Ships in the
dark of the night; and digging through the bank, they drew them the nearest
way, and placed them. The soldiers also mounted their great O^dna^ce against
the wall, and did beat upon the Fort continually four days together. The
Spanyard once or twice made Sallyes out, but still to their loss. Of the
English none was killed, saving only John Cheke, a goodly young man and
val^ant, the son of that learned Knight Sir John Ch^ke.

San-Iosephus who was governor within the Fort, a weak man, and terrified
with the daily shot, began quickly to think of yielding. And when as Hercules
Pisanus, and other Captains, dissuaded him earnestly from that, as a thing
unworthy of military men, urging that all should prepare for a defense, least
by their negligence they might withdraw the courage of the Irish, which were
coming to help them. But he being a man of singular cowardice, assayed the
minds of the soldiers, and wrought so, that the soldiers sedi^^ously offered
force to the other Captains, that at last they consented to yield. Whereupon
the fifth day, when they saw no hope of help, neither from Spain, nor Desmond,
they put out a white flagge and demanded parley. Which thing was denied them
because they had joined themselves with the rebels, with whom it was not
lawful to have any parley. Then they demanded that with bag and baggage they
might depart, but neither was this granted. Then they intreat^d that this
favor might be granted at least to the governor and some few besides, but
that though they much besought it, could not be granted. But the Lord Deputy,
inveighing against the Pope, commanded that without any condition they should
simply yield themselves. And when they could obtain no more, they put out
their white flagge again, and cried misericordia, misericordia. And so
submitted themselves simply to the Lord Deputy his mercy. Who presently fell
into consultatio^, what were best to do. The adversaries were in number as many
as the English, and danger was feared of the Irish rebels, who were more then
1500* at hand. The English wanted vittails and apparel, so that they were
ready to make a tumult, v^lesse they might be relieved by the spoils of the
enemies out of the fort, and ships were wanting to carry away the enemies. At
last they came to this conclusion, (the Lord Deputy being much unwilling and
weeping) that the Captains should be preserved, the rest should all be slain
promiscuously in terror of others that might attempt so hereafter. The Irish
should be hanged, which was presently executed. The Queen was not pleased at
the manner of this execution, and wished it had been undone, hating cruelty,
though necessary, against such as have once yielded, and was hardly after
drawn to admit any excuse of the slaughter committed. This was done An: 1580.
Some three years after the Earl of Desmond, of a noble house, but of a
barbarous nature, who barbarously had sworn that He would rather forsake God,
then forsake his men, wandering from place to place, was at last found of a
common soldier in a poor cottage. The Earl was in a poor estate, unknown,
till the soldier had almost struck off his arm. Then he descryed himself,
and was killed. Nicholas Sanders that had drawn the Earl into this rebellion,
was at the same time spent with famine, and forsaken of all succor: and being
impatiently grieved at the evil success of this rebellion, proceeding so much
against his desires, seeing neither the Popes blessing, nor the consecrated
Banner, nor the authority by the Pope committed to him, could do him any
help, he lost himself, and ran stark mad, wandering up and down in the
mountains and woods, and finding no comfort died miserably. When he was dead,
there were found in his scrip some Orations and Epistles written to confirm
the rebels, filled with great promises of the Pope and Spanyard. Thus Gods
justice met with a restles and wretched man, and that foul mouth was stopped
up with famine, that was ever open to stir up rebellions against the State
that had uttered so many blasphemies against God, and his holy truth, and
invented so many strange lies against men. This man first of all men, devised a
notorious lie against the birth of the Queens mother; which none of her
enemies ever heard or knew, she being in the hatred of so many Papists, that
would not have spared to have spoken evil, yet was it never heard or known
for forty years after. And the account of the time does prove it false, and
himself like a forgetful liar, does plainly refute himself.

This Pageant of the Pope and his Legate Sanders, we may not let pass without
some observations. Seeing there is no way to exsatiate their cruelty, we pray
that it may please God to remove their coec^^ie and obduration if it be his
good pleasure, that they may once truly see themselves and their ungracious
actions, whereof the sight is now taken from them by reason of their
blindness. For we hold this to proceed rather from their blindness, then from
a wilful and obstinate striving against the known truth; but this we warn
them, to labor to know the truth, and to set their hearts to seek it, least
they be wrapped farther and farther into that great judgment, wherein as yet
they are under his power which works with all power and signs and lying
wonders, in all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.
among them that perish, because they receive not the love of the truth, that
they might be saved. And therefore God shall send them strong illusions, that
they should believe lies, that all they might be damned. which believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Two things are here contained in
these words, which iump with these Priests and Seminaries which the Pope
sends forth; the doctrine which they teach, and the actions which they
practice. Their doctrines which they teach are lies: the Apostle warned us they
should believe lies; this is a just judgment upon such as love not the truth;
Their usual practice is unrighteousness. What greater lies can be invented,
then to say, that Whatsoever the Pope will allow for a tradition of his Church,
that is the Word of God. A lie with a witness, and withal a blasphemy against
the most High. What greater vnright^ousnesse, then to give away other men's
possessions to strangers that have no right to them; to aispossesse Kings; to
give Kingdoms which is none of yours to give; to kill, to murder, to
massacre, to aoe any act of unrighteousness at the commandment of the Pope or
any superior: These I am sure are the practices of unrighteousness; would to
God these men would once look back upon themselves and their own actions,
and consider what a difference is between ancient Bishops of Rome and these of
late; between godly Divines and the Popes Clergy. The ancient Bishops did
never draw the sword to propagate the faith; the Apostles left no such example
to them, but by their labors in Preaching, and their patience in suffering,
they gathered a Church and established the faith; but behold how
unrighteousness, and villainy is now come in place. An ungracious bloody wretch
kills a man in his bed, a man that was his friend; such a thing chancing in the
Wars may be borne with, but in bed to murder his friend, is an extraordinary
sign of barbarous cruelty: And yet that Sanders the Popes Legate should
pronounce this thing to be a sweet sacrifice to God? this passes all
imagination. Can any either practice these things, or commend these practices,
but only such men as the Apostle describes, that are given up to believe
lies, and to work unrighteousness? If any man shall answer me here with that
old worn Cuckoo long, that these things are not understood by them to be
vnrighteo^s which the Pope commands, that they do these things in obedience
to Christ his Vicar. I answer, they that would make such an answer, are either
such as are men of conscience, or altogether without conscience. If they be men
without conscience, I have nothing to say to such, but wish them better then
they do to themselves, that they had some fecling of conscience. If these men
have any spark of conscience, then would I intr^at them seriously to consider
what is that which the Apostle in the place before cited, calls the
deceivablenes of unrighteousness; For this word shows that there is some
plain and downright unrighteousness, and also some deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness. What is that deceivablenesse of unrighteousness? Surely
there is something herein for them to study, that are so ready at the Popes
command to do unrighteous things; and make not Gods Word, but the Popes word
to be the rule to know what is righteous, what unrighteous. When the law of
God, the law of nature, the law of nations, the law of our Land; when I say all
laws forbid a thing, and only the Pope commands it, and commands it against
all laws; then if a man obey the Pope in such things, he is deceived and he
does unrighteously. Here is the deceivablenesse of unrighteousness. But you
must understand that these men are thus deceived by him whose coming is by the
working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying wonders, and in all
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness in them that perish, because they receive
not the love of the truth. Let men that have any care to save their souls,
learn to love the truth, the truth will deliver them. And let them observe
that maintaining of false doctrines and of unrighteous actions, are things
joined together, one follows the other. Now because we see false doctrines or
lies maintained by Papists, and unrighteous and ungracious actions by them
ordinarily attempted; therefore we hold them undoubtedly to be the servants of
Antichrist, who are given up to believe lies, because they lou^ not the truth.
But for our selves, we know that the Scriptures are the Word of God. We believe
the Scriptures. We trust in God. We worship him as himself has revealed and
commanded. If our enemies wrong us, we have recourse to God by prayer; we have
found by continual experience, that God takes the protection of them that
thus trust in him. We have trusted in him, we have found his protection. We
rest in patience and commit the vengeance to God. Is there any man in the world
that knows any thing of religion, that can deny that we are in a good state,
and our enemies in a desperate state? we have comfort, but they can have none.
Consider this you that forget God, least he pluck you up, and there be none to
deliver you. Now, which is our chief end in these collections, for our
deliverance we bless the name of God; and we do acknowledge with all
humility and thankesgiving, that all our deliverances come from the undeserved
love and favor of our most gracious God and Father. And we find our selves
most sirictly o^liged unto this duty, because we see God has made our enemies
his enemies: they cannot fight against us, but they must fight against God; how
much then are we bound to honor and serve this great. God of heaven and ^arth,
that has showed such favor to his Church in England?

CHAPTER VI.
AT this time, An: 1580. the seminary Priests and ^esuites increasing in
England, necessary laws were provided against them. These in truth were
maintained by the adversaries of England as a seminary of rebellion; for so
still they proved. Their first foundation was at Doway in the Low Countries,
where by the procuring of William Alan an Oxford-man, afterward Cardinal,
there was a College provided for them, in the year 1568. Where fugitive
Priests were brought up, not so much in Religion, as in new and strange
practices of treason. The Pope assigned them a yearly stipend. Thus they stood
for some years. But when the Low Countries began to be troubled with Wars,
Requesenius, who was governor there under the Spanish King, did thrust out all
English fugitives out of the Low Countries. Whereupon they that were willing to
make use of such instruments to trouble England, thought good to give
entertainment to them. And therefore two Colleges were set up for the English
sugitiues, the one at Rhemes by the Guises, another at Rome by Pope Gregory 13.
From these Colleges they were sent into England under pretense of Religion,
but indeed to withdraw subjects from obedience to their Prince, and to draw the
Land unto the subjection of strangers: they called themselves Seminaries,
because they were to sow the seed of the Roman Religion in England. And what
is that seed of Roman religion, but the seed of Rebellion? Certainly so it has
ever proved. These men to show their zeal to their new founders, and their
hatred to their Country, disputed and defined the Popes authority by Gods law,
to have the plenitude of power over the whole world in all things
Ecclesiastical and Political: out of which plenitude he might excommunicate
Kings, and after excommunication depose them from their thrones, and absolve
their subjects from all oaths of alleagance. Thus was the Bull of Pius V.
published, An: 1569. From whence rose the rebellion in the north of England,
and those rebellions of Ireland, of which we have spoken. Hanse, Nelson, Main,
Sherwod, Prie^ts, then taught that Queen Elizabeth was a schismatike and an
heretic, and therefore worthily to be deposed; for which they suffered
deservedly; but still others were sent into their places; and though they came
in upon desperate points, as soldiers upon a breach, yet others followed lowed
as desperate as the first. And would not understand that they ventured both
soul and body in the cause of the Pope against Christ; for such is the cause
of treason being commanded by the Pope, and forbidden by Christ.

The Priests and Jesuits at this time spent all their learning and skill to
stir up rebellion in England, giving out in corners, and in public,
Printing Books, to declare that the Pope and King of Spain had conspired, that
England should be overthrown, and left as a prey. This was done of purpose to
confirm their own side, and to deter others from their obedience to their
Prince. An: Do^. 1580.
Whereupon the Queen set out a Proclamation, signifying that she had never
made attempt upon any Prince, only defended her own, not invading the
Provinces of other Princes, though she had been provoked with wrongs, and
invited by opportunity. If any Princes should oppugn her, she doubted not but
by Gods favor, she should defend her own, and had therefore Mustered her
Forces by Land and Sea, and was ready against any hostile incursion. She
exhorts her faithful subjects to hold their faith and alleagance firm to
God, and their Prince, Gods Minister. For others that had shaken off the love
of their Country, and obedience to their Prince, She commands them to carry
themselves modestly, and not to provoke the severitie of justice; for she would
no longer endure sparing of evil men, least so she might be cruel against the
good.

Among the Jesuits that came then into England, Robert Parsons and Edmond
Campian were chief; they had procured a temper or qualification of the Bull of
Pius V. obtained of Greg. 13. in these words; Let petition be made to our holy
Father, that the Bull declaratory of Pius V. against Elizabeth and her
adherents be interpreted: which the Catholics desire to be understood so, that
it bind her and heretics always, but not Catholics, things standing as
they do; But only then when the public execution of the Bull may be had.
These foresaid favors the Pope granted to Robert Parsons and Edmond Campian,
now ready to go into England the 13. day of April 1580. in the presence of
Oliver Manarcus assisting. This was procured to give some content to the
Recusants that were offended at the publication of the Bull, and found that it
did them more harm then good. Parsons and Campian came secretly into England,
and changed their exterior habit and apparel, that they might the better pass
unknown. Sometimes they went like ruffians, sometimes like ministers, sometimes
like noble men, sometimes like soldiers, sometimes like apparitours; they walked
secretly from Recusants houses to Recusants houses, and did in words and
writings roundly set forward the business for which they came. Parsons was the
superior, a man of a seditious and turbulent spirit, armed with audaciousnesse,
he brake out so far among the Papists, against the Queen, as to propose the
pro^ect of deposing of her. In so much, that some Papists themselves (as they
themselves hau^ said) did think to have delivered him into the hands of the
Magistrate. Campian was somewhat more modest, yet by a Book which he had much
labored and brought with him, which as himself says, might be taken with
him, if he were apprehended; did provoke the Ministers of the Church of England
to disputation; the Book was Entitled, A Book of ten Reasons, or Arguments
written politely in Latin to confirm the doctrines of the Church of Rome.
Parsons wrote more virulently against Mr Charke, who had written soberly
against Campians provocation: but Campians ten reasons were thoroughly and
solidly answered by Dr Whittaker. Campian was taken, and brought to
disputation, where it was found that in learning and knowledge he came far
short of that expectation which himself had raised of himself; the whole
disputation was afterward set forth in Print. In the mean time many
threatenings were published against the Church and State of England, and much
speech was of the Pope and the Spaniards preparations to subdue England.

By which manner of proceedings it may appear that the end why these and other
such were sent into England, was not to draw men to God, but to betray the Land
to strangers; for these men cared not what became of England, so the Church of
England might be displanted, and Popery set up again. For which purpose we may
observe the Colleges for Seminaries, set up at Rhemes and Rome. These
Colleges did strangely swerve from the end and foundation of the ancient
Colleges. The ancient Colleges were founded for learning and Religion; these
for mere faction: the ancient Colleges were for the furtherance of godliness
and pi^tie; these for the practices of ^ngodliness^, and ungracious treasons*
Let no man tell me that the ancient Colleges were founded by Papists, and so
were these Seminaries, and therefore for the maintenance of the same Religion:
for this is nothing but coloring and daubing of their new practices from the
sight of the ignorant; for all their hope is in the ignorance of men, hoping
that they shall have the greatest part, because the greatest part are ignorant.
But now God in his mercy has so plentifully revealed the truth, the ignorance
of men is not so great as the Pap^sts would have it; for men are taught to know
that in the Council of Trent, there has been hatched a new birth of Popery.
Where they have changed the rule of faith, which was ever maintained in the
Church of Rome before that time. Whereupon there follows a change of the
Church, a change of Religion. They that founded the ancient colleges, knew not
this new Church, this new Religion, which is newly hatched in the Trent
Council. Therefore these late Colleges of Seminaries are founded upon a new
Religion. This new Religion of Rome is nothing but the pract^se of Treasons
against States. Surely it must be a s^rang^ Religion that must be maintained by
ungodly practices. There was never any Religion that allowed such practices.
And herein the Papists exceed the Heathen, who being guided only by the light
of nature, yet have disallowed such ungodly and ungracious practices which the
Papists use. Let all men consider whence this new Religion of Rome proceeds,
that in ungodly practices is founded and maintained; that all such practices
proceed from the devil, no man can doubt: that God has preserved this Church
of England from all these practices, this is that which causes us to trust in
God, and to give all the glory of our deliverance to his holy name.

Edmond Campian, Ralfe Sherwin, Luke Kirby, Alexander Briant were taken in the
year 1581. and being brought to judgment, were accused of treason against the
Queen and State; that they were directed by the Pope, came into England to
stir up sedition, and to make a strong party; and hereupon they were
condemned as offending against the laws. Campian was demanded whether he took
Queen Elizabeth to be Queen of England by right and law? to that he refused
to answer. Then he was demanded, if the Pope should send an Army into England
against the Queen, whether he would take the Popes part, or the Queens? To
this he protested openly, that he would take the Popes part, and confirmed it
by his handwriting; he was put to death and some others for the same cause.
When as yet from the time of the rebellion, there was but five put to death in
this cause. The Queen thinking that men's consciences should not be forced, did
often compla^ne, that she was necessarily driven to these courses, vnl^s she
would suffer a mischief to fall upon her self and her subjects, by them that
sought to color their treasons under a pretense of conscienc^ and Catholic
Religion. And yet she thought that some of the poor Priests, that were sent,
were not acquainted with the secret plots of treason: but found that their
superiors used these as instruments of their wicked intentions; and they
yielded the whole disposing of themselves to the judgment of their superiors;
for they that were then and afterward apprehended, being demanded, whether by
the authority of the Bull of Pius V. the subjects were so absolved from their
oath and alleagance, that they might take Arms against the Prince? Whether
they held her for a lawful Queen? Whether they yielded their consent to the
opinions of Sanders and Bristow, concerning the authority of that Bull?
Whether, if the Pope should war against the Queen, they would take his part
or hers? To these things they answered, some so ambiguously, some so fiercely,
some by preuarication or by silence shifting: that diverse other Papists who
were not acquainted with the secrets of their villainies, began to suspect, that
surely they nourished some secret mischief: and John Bishop, otherwise much
addicted to their Religion, wrote and soundly proved that the constitution
ob^ruded in the name of the Council of Lateran, from which they founded all
their authority to absolve subjects from their alleagance, and to depose
Princes, was indeed nothing but a decree of Innocentius III. nor was ever
admitted in England. Yea, that Council was no Council, and that nothing was
decreed there by the Fathers.

Suspicions were still increased, by reason of the number of Priests daily
coming into England, and creeping in corners, who secretly sought out the
minds of men, and taught that Princes excommunicated were to be thrown out of
their Kingdoms, that Princes that professed not the Roman Religion, were
fallen from the title and Kingly authority, that they who had taken orders,
were by the liberty of the Church freed from all jurisdiction of Princes,
neither were bound to their laws, or bound to reverence their Majesty: that
the Magistrates of England were not lawful, and therefore not to be accounted
as Magistrates. Yea, and moreover, that what things soever had bin established
by the Queens authority, after the publishing of the Bull of Pius V. were
void altogether by Gods law and man's law, and to be respected as things of no
account. Neither did they dissemble their purpose, that they were come into
England for this end, that this Bull might be effected, and that they might in
private confessions reconcile men, and so absolve them from all faith and
alleagance toward the Queen. This thing seemed to be more easily effected,
when men were absolved from all mortal sin, as the Priests persuaded them,
and this way was the safest, because the most secret, and under the seal of
Confession.

These practi^es extorted of the Parliament held then ^n ^anuary, An: Do^. 1582.
An: 1582* new laws and more severe against these Popish practices. By which
laws it was made treason to dissuade any subject from their alleagance to
their Prince, and from the Religion which was then established in England or to
reconcile any to the Romish Church; the same punishment was to be inflicted
upon them which were so persuaded, or reconciled. To say Mass, was punished
with two hundredth marks, and a years imprisonment, and to be farther punished
until they had paid. To be present at Mass willingly, was punished with an
hundredth mark fine, and a years imprisonment: They that refused to come to
their Parish Churches, were to pay twenty pound a month.

This manner of punishing refractary men, that in matters touching the Church
were troublesome and seditious, was taken from an ancient manner of punishing
such men in the time of St Augus^in, for he speaks diverse times of the
Pecuniary mulct of the Emperors, which was inflicted upon the Dona^ists. And
because the seminary Priests and Jesuits who have bin punished, not for
Religion, but for Treasons in the execution of civil Justice, for offending
against the laws of the Land, have given out, that they have bin perfecuted
for Religion, and some of them have been made Martyrs, (these be a new kind
of Martyrs, not for Christ's cause, but for the Popes cause against Christ, and
against his Word and Commandment.) It shall not be amiss to observe the State
of the Church in S. Augustines time, and the judgment of the Church then,
which in diverse resemblances does answer to our times; for then the Emperor
had that power and authority, which we now give to our Kings. The Pope had no
more authority then, then we would yield him now, if he would maintain the
doctrine that the Popes then did. The Pope was then under the Emperor; the
Emperor punished both Pope and others if they offended his laws. Parmenianus,
a Donatist, complained they were punished by the Emperor, and persecuted, and
called their persecution Martyrdom, as did the Papists that were punished. S.
Augustine answering the Donatists, says: Si quis quis ab Imperatore, etc. If
every man that is punished by the Emperor, or by the Judges which he sends,
must presently be accounted a Martyr, then shall we have all Prisons full of
Mart^rs, etc. And after he says: Lib. 1. cap. 9. contr. Epist. Parmen.
Therefore not every one that in some question of Religion is punished by the
Emperor, must presently be accounted a Martyr; for he is justly punished for
superstition, which he thought to be religion. No man verily that in any
respect is a Christian, dare avouch this; for such men proceeding like blind
men, see not, that they who thus think, proceed so far, as to prove that the
very devils may thus challenge to themselves the glory of Martyrs, because they
suffer this persecution by the Christian Emperors; for as much as their
temples are destroyed over all the world in a manner; their ldols are broken in
pieces, their sacrifices are forbidden, they who honor them are punished if
they be found. Which if it be madness to m^intaine, then it follows that
righteousness is not proved by suffering, but by righteousness, suffering is
made glorious: Math. 5.
therefore the Lord said not blessea are they that suffer persecution, but he
adds that which makes the difference between piety and sacrilege, blessed
are they which suffer persecution for righ^ ^ousnesse, etc. And after he says:
If these men being convicted of their wicked practices, Ibid. t^p. 10.
shall acknowledge that they who are thus punished ^or their mad tricks, may
not be accounted Martyrs, but yet they will say, that these things ought not to
belong to the Emperor to punish. ( Just as the Papists say, the punishment of
their Clergy belongs not to the Magistrate.) I demand then, says Augustine:
Whether they think, that the superior powers ought not to have care of
Religion, and of punishing false religion? Gal. 5. 19.
The Apostle says, The works of the flesh are manifest, which are adaltery,
fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate,
emulation, wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies, envy, murders,
drunkenness, gluttony, and such like. What reason can these men render, why it
should be justice for the Empeperours to punish Idolaters, Murderers, and
such, and not by the same reason to be like justice in them, to punish
heretics. When as they are accounted in the same fruits of iniquity, (...)
(...) Someruill was found strangled in the prison. (For fear belike that he
might have discovered more) Ardern being condemned, was hanged the next day.
This is the common end that Priests bring such Gentlemen unto, who are willing
to hear them and be persuaded by them.

The next year after, (for seldom did any year pass without some treason)
some English Gentlemen began to practice the deliverance of the Queen of
Scots. An: Do^. 1584.
Francis Throgmorton fell first into suspicion, by certain Letters
intercepted, written to the Queen of Scots. As soon as he was committed to
prison, and began to confess something, presently Thomas Lord Paget, and
Charles Arundell, a Courtier, secretly fled the land, and went into France.
These men meeting with other devoted to the Roman Religion, did much complain,
recounting their sorrows among themselves, that the Queen was estranged from
them without their fault, by the cunning of Leicester, and Walsingham, that
them selves were exposed to unworthy contumelies and ignominies, that singular
tricks were found out, and secret snares laid so cunningly, that improvident
men, will they nill they, must needs be entangled in such snares; that to
remain at home there could be no safety for them. It was thought at this time,
that some cunning was practiced to feel men's affections; and that counterfeit
Letters were written under the name of the Scots Queen, and of some fugitives,
known traitors to the State; which Letters might be left in the houses of
Recusans, and that spies were sent abroad to gather rumors, and to catch
suspicions. Diverse were drawn into snares. Among others, Henry Earl of
Northumberland, and his son Philip Earl of Arundell, was commanded to keep
his house, his wife was committed to Sr Thomas Shirly to be kept; and Henry
Howard the Dukes brother was often examined of Letters sent from the Scots
Queen, from Charles Paget, and from one Mope, then unknown. Some blamed the
narrow searching of things, and the manner of drawing men into danger. Others
thought that all the means that might be used to prevent the Queens danger,
and to save her life, was but necessary. And indeed the outrageous maliciousnes
of the Papists against the Queen, brake out daily; for by Books imprinted,
they exhorted the Queens maids and Ladies of honor to do the same against
the Queen, which Judith did against Holofernes. The Author of that Book was
not found, Gregory Martin was suspected, a man learned in the Greek and Latin
tongues, and chosen by the Duke to be the bringer up of his children. Carter
the Stationer that caused the Books to be Printed, was punished for it.

The Queen, that was much traduced for cruelty, knowing her own mildnes, and
desirous to leave a good remembrance of her name behind her, was much offended
with the Judges of the Papists apprehended, if they passed any cruel sentences
against them, which might be injurious to her honor. Insomuch that they were
forced to excuse themselves by public writings, wherein they protested, that
the Priests were much more mildly used then they deserved: that no question of
Religion was moved to them, but only of such pernicious machinations against
their Country, against their Prince, whereof they were either found guilty, or
by the discovery of others, suspected. That Campian was never so racked, but
that presently he was able to walk, or to subscribe to his confessions. But
for Briant, who stubbornly denied to utter by speech or by writing, who was the
man that wrote these secret things which were found about him; to this man meat
was denied, until by writing he would ask it. For all this the Queen was not
satisfied, and therefore she commanded the Examiners to abstain from
tormenting men, and the Judges from punishing. And short after, she commanded
seventie Priests to be sent out of England, whereof some were condemned to die,
all of them were entangled within the danger of the laws. The chief of these
were Gasper Haywod, the son of Haywod the Epigrammatist, who of all the
Jesuits first entered England: James Bosgraue, which was also a Jesuit, John
Heart, the most learned among them, with whom Doct: Reinolds had conference, and
Edward Rishton, a wicked and ungrateful man, who wrote a Book presently after,
showing forth the poison of a cankred heart against the Queen, to whom he owed
his life.

The Lord Paget and Arundell who went into France, were narrowly observed
there, by Edward Stafford, the Ambassador Leiger there for Queen Elizabeth;
but he could not find out what they practiced; yet he dealt with the French
King, that they, Morgan, and some other English fugitives, who were known to
be practisers against their Prince, and their Country, might be thrust out of
France. But it was answered, that if they practiced any thing in France, the
King would by law punish them, but if they had practiced any thing in England,
that of such things the King could take no notice, nor by law punish them: that
all Kingdoms were free for fugitives, that it behooued Kings to maintain
their own liberties: That Elizabeth not long before had admitted into her
Kingdom Montgomery, the Prince of Condie, and others of the French Nation, and
that Segneres Ambassador of the King of Navarre was in England, practicing of
some things that concerned the French state.

In the mean time Bernardinus Mendoza the King of Spain his Ambassador for
England, stole fecretly into France, fretting and fuming, that he was thrust
out of England by a violation of the right of an Ambassador: When as indeed he
was a man of a troublesome spirit, and had abused the reverend right of
Ambassadors, by the practices of treason against this State wherein he was. He
was commanded to depart out of the realm, whereas many thought fit that he
should have been with some severity censured for violating the office of an
Ambassador. For he had practiced with Throgmorton, and others, to bring in
strangers into England, to invade the land, and to remove the Queen. And being
gently reproved for these things, he was so far from offering to excuse these
things with a modest answer, that he began to accuse the Queen and the
Council, for the money taken from the Merchants of Genua, and for helping the
States of the Netherlands, of the Count Antow, of Antony of Portugal, and
charged them with the spoils that Sr Francis Drake had taken from the Spany
trds in the west Indies. But that the Spanyard might the better understand,
that this which Queen Elizabeth had done in sending away Mendoza, was no
violating of an Ambassador, but a censure of Mendoza his wicked practices, Sr
William Wade was sent to Spain, who might plainly inform the King, how
unworthily he had behaved himself in his Embassage: and might also signify,
that the Queen would not have this sending away of him to be interpreted a
renuntiation of friendship, but that she would maintain all offices of
humanity, if he would send any other, that were careful to conserve
friendship between them, so that the like offices were performed to her
Ambassador in Spain. The Spanish King would not admit Wade to his presence,
but referred him to his Council: Wade hereupon declared boldly, that the
custom was received among Nations, that even in burning war, Ambassadors
were admitted into presence of their enemies: and that Charles the fifth
Emperor, Father to the King of Spain, admitted into his presence an Herald
who denounced to him wars from the French King, and denied to communicate the
instructions of his embassage to his Councellers. I diacius the Kings secretary
could by no cunning fish out of Wade what were his instructions, until he
understood the whole matter from Mendoza, then lurking in France. Then the
Secretary laying aside his public person, did familiarly declare to Sr William
Wade, that he was sorry that some men did labor craftily to dissolve
friendship among Princes, and to nourish hatred between them; The injury that
was done, was not done to the Ambassadors but to the Catholic King: that
there was no cause for him to accuse Mendoza to the King, who was sufficiently
punished with an ignominious extrusion out of England, for the fault, if there
were any, which he committed. Neither might he complain if he were not
admitted; for the Catholic King did nothing herein but quit like with like,
seeing Mendoza was dismissed from the Queen, unheard. And as she referred
Mendoza to her Council, so the King had referred him to the Cardinal
Granuillanus. Wade answered, there was great difference in their cases; for
himself he had never offended the Catholic King: but Mendoza had grievously
offended against the Queen, and for a long time through his own insolency
disdained to come, and had committed many things unworthy the office of an
Ambassador; yet he could not be admitted, but returned unheard. The crimes
that he would have objected against Mendoza, were taken our of the confession
of Throgmorton. Throgmorton. An: Do^. 1584.
For Fran^is Throgmorton, when he was apprehended, sent privily one packet of
letters to Mendoza. His other packets being sought and opened, there were two
Catalogues found; In the one of them were the names of all the havens of
England, that were for forces to land in: In the other were contained the names
of the Noblemen, which here and there throughout England favored the Roman
Religion. These papers when Throgmorton saw produced, he cried out that they
were counterfeited, that he had never seen them before, that they were devised
for his destruction. But when he was again brought to the rack, he denied not
to answer what he knew to the questions proposed. Being therefore demanded of
those Catalogues, to what purpose they had been written, he made this
narration; that not many years since he went to the Spaw water, where, with
Ieney and Fr: Inglefeld, he had counsel and communication, how England might
be taken by strangers, and the form of the government changed. For that
purpose he described the names of the havens, and of Noblemen; that Morgan had
certified him by Letters out of France, that the Catholic Princes were
resolved to invade England, that the Queen of Scots should be set at liberty
by the forces of the Guises. To this project there was nothing wanting but
money, and the help that was expected out of England. To effect this the
better, Charles Paget, under the name of Mope, was secretly sent into Sussex,
where the Guise purposed to take land: that he had communicated the matter to
Mendoza, and told him the names of the noblemen, who knew all these things
before fully of the conspirators: Neither denied he that himself had promised
his help to Mendoza, and withal that he admonished Mendoza of those Nobles
that were fit for him being a public person to deal withal, which himself
being a private man could not do without danger. And that he had taken order
with him, and concluded of the means to be used, namely, that the chief
Catholics, as soon as ever the foreign forces drew near, should muster
soldiers in the Queens name, who should ioyn themselves with the foreign
forces. Thus much he confessed willingly.

Yet when he came to judgment in the Guild Hall at London, he denied all, and
said that all these were fained devises to save him from the rack, and openly
accus^d the Queen of cruelty, the examiners of falsehood; seeking a starting
hole from the space of time which passed between the time of the committing his
crime, and the time of his judgment; for in the XIII. of Elizabeth, certain
crimes are made treason, for which no man should be called in question, unless
the delinquent were accused within six months after the crime committed, and
the crime were proved by witness and oath of two, or by the party his own
free confession. Now he pleaded that this time was past, and therefore that he
was not to be called into judgment. But the Judges answered and showed that the
crimes objected against him, were of another kind; for he had offended against
an old law of treason made in the time of Edward 3. which admits no
circumscription of time, or proof. And from that law he was condemned.
Afterward being persuaded and better thinking on the matter, he craved the
Queens mercy, and by writing confessed all at full again, which he had done
before: and as a man unconstant, began to deny again at the gallows.

CHAPTER VIII.
QVeene ELIZABETH at this time, sought a fair opportunity and means to set
the Queen of Scots free: and for that purpose had sent Sr William Wade, that
was now returned out of Spain, to confer with her of the means, and was
about to send Sr Walter Mildmay to bring that matter to a farther end. But some
terrors and fears broke in between them which disturbed that project.
Especially by a discovery of papers which Creighton, a Scots Jesuit sailing
into Scotland, did tare then when he was taken by Dutch pirates. Creighton tore
the papers, and threw them into the Sea; but they were by the force of the
wind blown back again into the ship, not without a miracle, as Creighton
himself said; the papers being brought to Sr William Wade, with much la^our
and singular skill he joined them together again; and found that they
contained new practices of the Pope, the Spanyard, the Guises resolution to
invade England.

Whereupon, and because many other rumors of dangers were increased; to the end
that the wicked and treasonable practices might be in time prevented, and the
Queens life and safety might be procured, upon whose safety both the estate
of the Kingdom, and of Religion depended: A great number throughout all
England, of all sorts of men out of common charity, whilst they showed their
love and care of the Queen: bound themselves by an association (as then it was
called) by their mutual promises, subscriptions of their hands and seals, to
prosecute all such by all their force even to death, whosoever should attempt
any thing against the life of the Queen: the Earl of Leicester was supposed
to be the author of this association. Surely it was useful, and held many in
order. The Queen of Scots took this as devised to bring her into danger, and
was so continually set on by seditious spirits, that if they may have access
are able to draw the greatest Princes to destruction. And what has been their
practice, but to bring great personages and great houses to ruin? Lamentable
experience shows openly the fruit of their malice, and wicked plots for
treason; which they call religion. The Scots Queen led on by her blind guids,
dealt somewhat rashly, but with importunity to the Pope and Spanyard, by Sr
Francis Inglefeld, that by all means they would with speed, undertake their
intended business. There were some also that labored to draw Queen Elizabeth's
affections altogether from the Scots Queen; They told her that Cardinal Alan
for the English Catholics ecclesiastical, Inglefeld for the Laiks, and for
the Queen of Scots, the Bishop of Ross had undertaken, and were among
themselves agreed, and with the consent also of the Pope and Spanyard, had
fully resolved upon these points: That Queen Elizabeth should be deprived of
her Kingdom; the King of Scots as a manifest favourer of heresy, should
utterly be disinherited of the Kingdom of England; that the Scots Queen shall
marry some nobleman of England, which is a Catholic; that this man must be
chosen King of England by the Catholics of England; that the choice so made
must be confirmed by the Pope; that the children of him so chosen begotten of
the Scots Queen, must be declared successors in the Kingdom. All these
things were confirmed to be true by testimony of Heart the Priest. Who was this
noble English man, that should marry the Scots Queen, was now much inquired
after; Sir Francis Wal^ingham sought it out with all diligence, yet found it
not out. There was suspicion of Henry Howard, brother to the Duke of Norfolk,
who was noble by birth, unmarried, and a favourer of that Religion, and in
great grace and favor with them.

These things that were discovered by Throgmorton, by Creightons papers, and
other men's, were matters which bred suspicions and fears though they were
never so effected as they were intended. But we find by these things, that
France and Spain, and the strength of the Pope, were here all combined against
Queen Elizabeth, and King James, for no other cause, but for their religion;
because both Queen Elizabeth and King James, had established the same
religion. Against which religion all the great powers of the world were
combined, and were therefore ready with their utmost indevours to root out
these two Princes from England and Scotland. If a man shall consider the
Councels, the Policies, the strength of these great powers which were set
against these two Princes, it is a matter to be wondered at, how they should
stand against so deep and desperate dangers. Here I wish that a Papist of any
understanding would take this matter into his consideration. And look but a
little further to the end and event of things. What man purposed, What God
wrought. What became of these two Princes, Queen Elizabeth and King James,
against whom the world thus conspired? Queen Elizabeth after so many malicious
proiects against her, by open wars, by secret conspiracies, yet lived to see
all the malicious practices against her, defeated and overthrown, the
practisers themselves ruinated, her people and Kingdom defended, Gods truth
maintained, her service for the truth rewarded, and after all, dyed quietly in
her bed, and has left a blessed memory behind her. King JAMES that was in the
same cause with her, in the same manner threatened for his Religion, to be made
incapable of the inheritance of England, and then neither could he have holden
Scotland, for he must either have all his right, or loose all; for there is no
middle-way in the inheritance of Kings: yet after all these threatened dangers
by the great powers of the world, after a number of dangerous and devilish
practices against him at home; he has not only quietly possessed that which
he had, but is in the peaceable possession of England, with such love, such
gladness of heart and common rejoicing, that the like has not been known in
former times. And which was never done by any before, though much wished, and
attempted: he has in his royal person knit England and Scotland together; he
has not only maintained the truth of Religion by his authority, as all
Christian Princes are bound to do; but also by his wisdom, by his learning
confirmed the truth, drawn many to the knowledge of it by his learned Labors.
Wherein he has not only far exceeded all his progenitors in this Kingdom,
but has left all the Kings and Emperors in the world far behind him in this
honor; so that since the beginning of the time of grace, to this day, the
world never saw a King so furnished and enabled to maintain the truth, and to
discover the blindness and superstition of false Religion. And therefore has
God blessed him with extraordinary blessings; the love of his subjects, the
peaceable estate of Ireland, which before his time was never governed in peace,
especially the fruit of Religion, and the reward of Religion maintained, is the
greatest blessing that Kings can look for. This has been, and is the state
of these religious Provinces; so that men shall say, Psalm. 58. 11.
Doubtl^sse there is a reward for the righteous, verily there is a God that
judges the earth. And because my purpose in writing this Book, is to declare
the great Works of God, in the defense of this Church of England since
Religion planted here by Queen Elizabeth; and to give God all the glory, both
of the planting and maintaining thereof: We therefore remember these things
with great gladness and joy of heart to Gods glory, giving thanks to his holy
name, for the favors that he has exhibited to his Church here, by the
faithful service of these two royal servants of God, in whom is truly
verified that which the Prophet Esaias foretold, speaking of Gods favor to his
Church: Kings shall be thy nurcing Fathers, and Queens shall be thy Nurces. In
these things we can lift up our hearts to God, and give him the glory and
thanks for all his goodness. But can our adversaries do the like, whose
practices against these noble Princes, were wicked and malicious, and by God
confounded? Let men see and confess the hand of God in maintaining them that
maintain his truth, and dishonouring them that dishonor him.

The next year, An: Do^. 1585.
that is An: 1585. there was a Parliament held, wherein there was in the lower
house a Law proposed against Jesuits: Which was judged needful and accepted
of all without contradiction, saving only William Parry, a welsh man, obscure,
of mean fortunes, yet a Doctor of the civil Law, he spoke against that law
which then was exhibited, and said it was a cruel bloody law, and desperate,
and pernicious to the English Nation: Being required to show his reasons for
that strange opinion of his, he obstinately refused so to do, unless it were
before the Queens council: Whereupon he was committed to prison. But after
his reasons were heard and his submission made, he was again admitted into the
assembly. Presently after, he was accused by Edward Neu^l (who challenged the
inheritance of the Neuils, and the title of the Lord Latimer, as next heir
male.) Edward Neuil charged him for practicing the Queens death.

This Parry some two years before returning out of Italy, to the end that he
might win favor and credit with the Queen, declared secretly to her what
Morgan, and other fugitives had practiced to her destruction. Making semblance
to the Queen, that he was conversant with them for no other end, but only to
search out their secret purposes, that so he might the better be a means to
provide for the Queens safety. Whereupon the Queen did not easily give credit
to Neuil the accuser Yet she commanded Sr Fancis Walsingham to ask Parry,
whether he had not dealt with some person discontented and suspected of that
matter, only to try the man. Which thing being demanded, he utterly denied.
The fool saw not, that by this means the Queens lenity opened a way for him
to escape the danger; for surely if he had signified, that only for to try the
man he dealt with Neuil, whom he knew to be a man discontented and suspected,
as he had foretold the Queen, he might have avoided the danger; but they who
in their heart once have given intertainment to wickedness and treason, though
otherwise they be of wit and sharp understanding, are made blind, by a just
judgment of God. Now when as Neuil had no witness against Parry: there was no
great difference between Parry his word and his. But Parry, after some sharp
words had passed between them; was imprisoned in the Tower. Where he freely
confessed thus much.

In the year 1570. (said he) I was admitted a sworn servant to the Queen, I
remained devoted to her Majesty till the year 1580. At what time I fell into
great danger of my life, with great ignominy, (for he had broken into the
chamber of Hugh Hare, in whose debt he was, and wounded him, whereupon being
condemned by law, his life was saved by the Queens pardon) after that, I lived
much vexed in my mind, and getting leave to travel, I went into France; and
had no purpose to return, because I had given my self to the Catholic
Religion. At Paris I was reconciled; At Venice I had communication with
Benedict Palmius a Jesuit, touching the afflicted Catholics in England, and I
signified that I had found out a way to help them, if the Pope, or some
learned Divines would avouch it to be a lawful course. He commended this thing
as pious: He commended me to Campegius the Popes Nuntio at Ven^ce, and
Campegius to the Pope. I moved that I might come to Rome with safeti^.
Whereupon Letters of public credence were sent to me by the Cardinal of Come:
but these were not large enough, and therefore other more large were sent. But
then was I returned into France. Where meeting with Morgan, he signified, that
there was an expectation, that I should perform some especial service to God,
and to the Catholic Church. I answered, that I was most ready to kill, if it
were the greatest subject of England. O but (said he) and why not the Queen
her self? I said that this also might be easily done, so that it might appear
to be lawful. For Watt a Priest, whose advise I asked in this matter,
suppressing the names, told me plainly, that it was not lawful, (and Creighton
the Jesuit is of the same opinion, teaching that evil must not be done, that
good may come: that God is more delighted with aduerbs than nounes, and the
thing that is done well and lawfully pleases him better then a thing good: and
that by the destruction of one, many souls are not to be redeemed, without an
express commandment of God.) Yet for all this seeing I had in Italy bound my
self by Letters and promise, I could not go back, if the Pope did approve
it, and would grant me a plenary indulgence. Which I requested in my Letters to
the Pope, by Ragazonius the Popes Nuntio in France. Who commended the
interprise, and sent my Letters to Rome. Being returned into England, I gat
access to the Queen. And all being removed, I opened the whole conspiracy,
yet hiding many things, with as great art as possibly I could. She heard it
undaunted, vnterrified. I departed daunted and terrified Neither can I forget
that which she said, that no Catholics were to be brought into question for
Religion, or for the Popes supremacy, so that they carry themselves as good
subjects. In this time whilst I stayed daily in Court, seeking to be preferred
with the mastership of S. Katharines, I received Letters from the Cardinal of
Come, wherein the attempt was commended, and I was absolved in the Popes name.
These Letters I showed the Queen; how they did work with her I know not: but
with me they wrought so far, that they set a new courage in me to attempt the
interprise, and took all scruple out of my mind; yet it was not my mind to
offer any force, if by any reasons she might be persuaded to deal more gently
with Catholics. And to the end I should not commit slaughter, always when I
had access to her I laid aside my dagger. So often as I considered her and her
Princely virtues, I was distracted by an ambiguous care, for my vows were in
heaven, my letters and promises with men. And to my self I revolved these
things in my mind. She never deserved well of me. It is true she pardoned my
life; but for such a cause to take away my life, were tyrannical. Thus not
content with my state, I departed from Court; and I light upon Doct. Alans
Book, written against the justice of England. Who teaches that Princes being
excommunicate for heresy, are to be despoiled of their Kingdoms and lives:
that Book did very sharply stir me up to finish mine attempt; I read this
Book to Neuil, whom I entertained at my table; and this was done full six
months before he accused me. After this he came to me, And let us dare, said
he, to do something, seeing of the Queen we can obtain nothing. And he
proposed some things of the delivery of the Scots Queen. I did here interpose;
O but I have a greater matter in my head, and more profitable for the Catholic
Church. The next day he came, and swearing upon the Bible, that he would keep
my counsel, and constantly prosecute whatsoever was useful for the Catholic
Religion. And I swear in like sort. Our determination was to set upon the
Queen with ten horsemen as she was riding in the fields, and so to kill her.
Which thing Neuil concealed all this while. But when the news came, that the
Earl of Westmerland was dead, whose inheritance he hoped to have presently,
not respecting his oath, he opened these things against me. These things Parry
confessed, in the presence of the Lord Hunsdon, Sir Christopher Harton, and Sir
Francis Walsingham, privy Councellers, and farther by his Letters to the
Queen, to Burghley Lord Treasurer, and to the Earl of Leicester, he
acknowledged his fault and craved pardon.

Some few days after he was brought to Westminster hall to judgment. Where
the heads of his accusation being read, he confessed himself guilty. Sir
Christohper Hatton, to satisfy the mult^^de present, thought it fit, that the
crime should punctually be opened out of his own confession. Which Parry
himself acknowledged to be free, not extorted: and the Judges entreated that
he would read them. But the Clarke of the Crown read them: and the Letters of
the Cardinal of Come, and Parry his Letters to the Queen, to the Lord
Burghley, and the Earl of Leicester, all which he granted to be true. Yet he
denied that he was at any time resolved to kill the Queen. He was therefore
commanded to speak, if he had any thing to say why judgment should not pass.
Here he answered with perturbation, as one troubled with the conscience of the
crime, I see I must die, because I was not resolved. And being desired to
speak more plainly, if he would say any thing; My blood, said he, be among
you. When sentence of death was pronounced against him, he ragingly cited the
Queen to the tribunal seat of God. Being brought to the gallows, he bragged
much that he had been a faithful keeper of the Queen, because he had not
killed her. Thus like a glorious Roman Catholic, never once in one word
commending himself to God, he died like a traitor in the court before
Westminster Hall, where the Lords and Commons were then assembled in
Parliament.

In this Parliament some laws were enacted for the Queens safety against the
Jesuits and Priests, who attempted daily horrible treasons from the Bull of
Pius V.

It was therefore enacted that within forty days they should all depart the
Land. If any came in again after that, and stayed here, they should be guilty
of treason: that if any received them wittingly and willingly, or interteined
them, nourished, or helped them, such should be guilty of felony: that they
who are brought up in the seminaries, if they return not within six months
after warning given, and should not submit themselves to the Queen, before a
Bishop, or two Justices of peace, they should be guilty of treason. And they
who had submitted, if they should within ten years come to the Court, or
nearer then ten miles of the Court, that then their submission should be void.
They who sent any money by any means to the Students of the seminaries, should
be guilty of Praemunire. If any of the Peers of the Realm, that is, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts, Barons of the Parliament, should offend against
these laws, he should be tried by his Peers. They who know any Jesuits and
Priests to lie lurking in the Realm, and within twelve days do not detect
them, shall be fined at the Queens pleasure, and put in prison. If any be
suspected to be one of those Jesuits or Priests, and shall not submit himself
to examination, for his contempt he shall be imprisoned, until he submit. He
that shall send any Christian, or any other to the Seminaries and Colleges of
the Popish profession, shall be fined an hundredth pounds. They that are so
sent, shall not succeed in inheritance, nor enjoy any goods what way soever
they may chance. And so shall it be to them that within a year return not
from those seminaries; unless they conform themselves to the Church of
England. If the keepers of havens permit any to pass the seas without the
Queens license, or the license of six Councellers, except Mariners and
Merchants, they shall be removed from their places; the Shipmaster that carries
them shall loose the Shipp and all the goods in her, and be imprisoned a whole
year.

The severitie of these laws (which were no less then necessary for such
times and such mischiefs) made the Papists in England afeard, and among
others, Philip Howard, Earl of Arundell; in so much as fearing least he might
offend against those laws, he purposed to leave his country. He had his blood
restored by the Queens favor three years before. And after that being
dis-favoured by reason of some secret suggestions of certain great personages
against him, he secretly gave himself to the Popish Religion, and made choice
of an austere life. Surely if good instructours might have been admitted to
him, he might have been easily and happily confirmed in the truth. He was once
or twice called before the Council table, and refuted the things obi^cted to
him. Yet was he commanded to keep his house. Six months after he was set at
liberty, and came to the Parliament; but the first day, whilst the Sermon was
preached he withdrew himself out of the company. The Parliament being ended,
being as then resolved to depart, he wrote to the Queen a long and a mournful
complaint, which Letters he commanded should be delivered after his departure:
he complained of the envy of his potent adversaries, whereunto he was forced
to yield; seeing they triumphed over his innocence. He recounted the
unfortunate destinies of his ancestors, of his great grandfather, condemned his
cause not being heard: of his grandfather, who for matters of small moment was
beheaded; and of his father, whom he affirmed to be circumvented by his
adversaries, who yet never had an evil mind against his Prince nor Country.
As for himself, least he should succeed the heir of his fathers infelicitie,
said he, to the end that he might serve God, and provide for the health of his
soul, he had forsaken his Country, but not his alleagance to his Prince.
After these Letters were delivered, he went into Sussex, and having provided a
ship, in an obscure corner, and now being ready to take ship, he was
apprehended by the mean^s of those whom he trusted, and by the master of the
ship discovered, and was sent into the Tower as a prisoner.

CHAPTER IX.
AT that time was Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland in the Tower, suspected
to be of council with Throgmorton, and the Lord Paget, and the Guises, to
invade England, and to free the Scots Queen. He was found dead in his bed,
shot with three Bullets under his left pap: the chamber door bolted on the
inside. The Crowners enquest found a dagge, and gun powder in the chamber, and
examining the man that bought the dagge, and him that sold it, they found that
the Earl had been the cause of his own death. Three days after the Lords
met in the Star Chamber. The Lord Chancelour Broumley, briefly declared that
the Earl had entered into treasonable councels against his Prince and Country,
which now when he perceived that they were come to light, troubled in
conscience for the thing, has offered force to himself. And to satisfy the
multitude then present, he willed the Queens Attorney general, and the rest
of the Queens Council, plainly to open the causes why he was kept in prison,
and the manner of his death. Whereupon Popham then Attorney, beginning from the
rebellion of the North sixteen years before, he declared, that for this
rebellion and for a purpose to deliver the Scots Queen, that he was called
into question, acknowledged his fault, submitted himself to the Queens mercy,
was fined five thousand marks. That the Queen of her clemency took not of
that fine so much as a farthing, and after his brothers death confirmed him in
the honor of the Earldom. Notwithstanding all this, he had entered into
pernicious counsel to deliver the Scots Queen, to overthrow the English
Queen, with the State and Religion: that Mendoza the Spaniard had told
Throgmorton that Charles Paget under the name of Mope, had secretly dealt with
him in Sussex of these things: that the Lord Paget had signified the same to
Throgmorton, as appeared from Creighton the Scots Jesuits papers. And that
Charles Paget had showed the same things to William Shelley when he returned
out of France. After that, Egerton the Queens Sollicitour, inferred the same
from circumstances, and a care of concealing the matter. That when as there was
none in England that could accuse the Earl of this crime, except the Lord
Paget; (with whom Throgmorton had familiarity) he had provided a ship for
the Lord Paget, by Shelley, a few days after Throgmorton was apprehended. So
was the Lord Paget sent away into France. And when Throgmorton began to
confess some things, the Earl departed from London to Petworth, and sending
for Shelley, told him that he was in danger of his life and fortunes, he
entreated him to keep counsel, and to put away those that knew of the
departure of the Lord Paget, and of the coming of Charles Paget. Which was
presently done, and himself sent far off that servant which he used to send to
Charles Paget. The Sollicitour adds, that when he was in prison, he dealt
often with Shelley, the keepers being corrupted, to understand what those
things were which he had confessed. But when by a poor woman secretly sent
between them, Shelley had signified, that he could keep counsel no longer,
that there was great difference between their two conditions; that he must come
under the rack, which the Earl in respect of his place and order was freed
from, and had written to him what he had confessed: The Earl thereupon sighed
and said, as Pantin his Chamberlain has confessed, that Shelley his confession
had undone him. After the manner of his death was declared by the testimony of
the Enquest, and by Pantins testimony. Many good men were very sorrowful, that
a man of such nobility, wisdom, and valor was so lost.

My purpose is in this Narration, to observe the great and manifold
deliverances of this Church. When I am drawn by the course of the History to
open these practices, in which noblemen have been misled: this I confess I
relate with great commiseration; for seeing that Noble houses are the honor of
the King, the ornament of the Kingdom, there is no man that loves the honor
of his own Country, that can write or speak of the fall of such men, but with
grief and sorrow. Of such I will make no other observations, but only the
testification of mine own sorrow But yet here I must observe one thing for the
good and instruction of their posterity, or the like, that they may take heed
of these pernicious instruments, Priests, Jesuits, and those that are
infected, yea and poisoned with the infection of them. These graceless
merchants have utterly undone many noble persons, which without their restless
suggestions and councels, might and doubtless would have bin great ornaments
of their Countries both in peace and wars. Was there ever any noble house in
these times ruinated, without the practice of these wicked miscreants? Let all
the blood that has bin shed in this Land in the Northern rebellion, and at
other times, be laid upon these wicked instruments of blood. And let the world
consider the outrageous wickedness of this generation, that having in
formertimes sucked the blood of the Saints as greedy instruments of the great
Whore, that is drunk with the blood of the Saints: now by a just, but strange
judgment of God, they are fallen into such practices, as shed their own blood
and the blood of such as are misled by them. God is to be reverenced in all his
judgments, and let not men strive against God to maintain a cause which God
will overthrow, with all the maintainers thereof.

And it is not much to be marveiled, if these cunning stirrers have deceived
some of our Nobles, for we see that they have cousened great Kings and Princes.
For soon after this in the year 1586. An: Do^. 1586.
these pernicious medlers, these Jesuits showed themselves in other colors,
for when these bloody instruments that had so long labored the ruin of
England, and were out of hope to restore the Romish Religion to England, either
by the Scots Queen, which was now more strictly kept, or by the King then of
Scotland, who had plainly professed and established the Gospel in his
Kingdom: they fell now to a new and a strange practice, which might make the
world to wonder: they began out of their false and lying forgeries, to set a
foot an imaginary title of the King of Spain, to the right and succession of
the English Crown. To this purpose, as Pasquirus discovered, they sent into
England one Shamiers, (if it be not a counterfeit name) a lesuit, which might
draw the discontented Nobles unto the Spanish side, and throw the Scots Queen
headlong into dangers and despair, signifying to her, that if she should be
trouble some to hinder their designs, that neither she nor her son should
reign here. And stirred up new troubles in France to withdraw her cousens the
Guises from hindering their devises, by wrapping them in new garboiles against
the King of Navarre and the Prince of Condy. In which the King of Spain had a
hand, to set France in troubles, that he in the mean time might the better
proceed in his intentions for England. These desperate courses drew the Scots
Queen into more danger.

At this time a most desperate and pernicious conspiracy brake out, which as by
the free confessions of the conspirators appears, was thus. Some English
Divines of the Rhemish seminary, whilst they seemed to admire as men astonished
or rather doting, an omnipotency in the Pope, did labor to persuade
themselves, that Pius V. his bull against Queen Elizabeth was ind^ted by the
Holy Ghost: and that it was a thing meritorious to kill excommunicated Princes,
yea, and that it was martyrdom to loose their lives in that quarrel. Giffard
a Doctor of Theology, Gilbert Giffard, and Hodgeson, Priests, did so hammer
these devises into the corrupt head of John Savage (who they say was a Bastard)
that he being heady and bloody (a fit instrument for ^esuites) made a vow to
kill Queen Elizabeth. At the same time they set out a Book (for no other
purpose, but with great cunning to draw the Queen and Council into security,
and to lay their ungracious plots more deeply, and so with more ease to come to
that mischievous end they shot at). In which Book they admonish the Papists in
England, that they practice no hurt to the Queen, for that they were only to
use such weapons as are lawful for Christians to use, that is, ^eares,
spiritual armor, daily prayers, watchings, fastings against their
adversaries, this was their ^ox craft. And withal they spread a false rumor by
their whisperers, that George Giffard one of the Queens Gentlemen Pencionaries
had sworn to kill the Queen, and for that cause had wiped the Guise of a
great sum of money.

At Easter following, John Ballard, a Priest of the Remish seminary, who had
assayed the minds of many Papists, to whom he traveled to confer with,
through England and Scotland, was now returned into England. This man had dealt
with Bernardin Mendoza, now the ordinary Spanish Ambassador in France, and
with Charles Paget for an invasion of England. Declaring that now was the
fittest opportunity for that service, whilst the military men were absent,
being then employed in the Low Countries. A fitter time could never be hoped,
for as much as the Pope, the Spanyard, the Guise, the Duke of Parma, had
resolved to invade England, to turn the Wars from the Netherlands. And
albeit Paget had made it evident, that as long as the Queen lived, the
invasion of England would be in vain, yet was Ballard sworn, and sent into
England, to procure all the help that might be to the conspiratours, and the
liberty of the Scots Queen.

At Pentecost following, that silken Priest came into England, in a Soldiers
habit, with a feigned name, called Captain Foscue. This man had conference in
London with Antony Babington, a Gentleman of Darbyshire, young, rich, witty,
and learned above the expectation of his years, and being addicted to the
Romish Religion, had a little before got into France without leave. Where he
had familiar conversation with Thomas Morgan, and with the Bishop of Glasco the
Scots Queens Ambassador. These men extolling the heroic virtues of the Scots
Queen, made to him great ostentation of assured hopes of honor by her means
to be obtained. The ambitious young man was easily drawn to take hold of that
fair glistering estate proposed by them. And they were as ready cunningly to
set him forward; and before he had well thought of the matter, they commended
him by Letters to the Scots Queen. For when he was returned into England, she
saluted him favorably with her Letters; from that time Morgan used his help
in sending Letters to her, until she was committed to the custody of Amice
Paulet. For after that, the young man finding the danger, ceased. With this
Babington, Ballard had conference of the things aforesaid. But he thought
assuredly so long as Queen Elizabeth lived, that the invasion of England would
come to nothing. But when Ballard signified to him, that Queen Elizabeth would
not long be alive; for Savage who had vowed to kill her, was now come into
England; Babington thought not good that so great a matter should be committ^d
to Savage only, least he might be stopped from the enterprise. But rather to
six valiant and resolute Gentlemen, in which number Savage should be one, that
he might not be condemned for not performing his vow. Whereupon Babington took
a new course, for the invasion, touching the ports where the strangers might
land, and the forces that should be joined with them, and the delivering the
Scots Queen, and the Tragic slaughter of Queen Elizabeth, as he called it.

Whilst he was fixed in these cogitations, he received Letters by an unknown
boy; written from the Queen of Scots, in that familiar character which was
used between them. She blamed him, but mildly, for his long silence; and
willed him to send her the Packet of Letters sent from Morgan, and delivered by
the French Ambassadors Secretary. Which he did accordingly. And by the same
messenger sent to her a Letter, wherein he excused his silence, for that he
wanted opportunity of sending since that she was in the custody of Amice
Paulet, a puritan, a mere Leicestrian, and a most bitter enemy of the
Catholic faith. He declared what he had resolved with Ballard, that six
Gentlemen were chosen to perform the tragic slaughter, and that himself
with an hundredth other, would deliver her. He entreated that to these Heroic
Actors (so he called them) rewards might be proposed, or to their posterity,
if they should fail in the action. The twentie-seventh of July, answer was
made to these Letters. Babington his forward desire of promoting the Catholic
Religion was commended. He was warned that it might be undertaken
considerately, and that nothing be moved before they were sure of external
forces: that an association among them might be made, as if they feared the
Puritanes: that some trouble might be stirred in Ireland, whilst the stroke
might be given here at home: that Arundell, and his brethren, and
Northumberland, should be drawn to the side, Westmerland, Paget, and others,
might be secretly called home. The way to deliver her was also prescribed;
either to overturne a Coach in the gate, or to set the Stables on fire, or to
intercept her whilst she rode to take the air between Chartley and Stafford.
Last of all Babington was warranted to undertake for rewards, and to pawn his
credit to the six Gentlemen, and others.

Now had he gathered about him certain Gentlemen, inflamed with a fiery zeal
of the Romish Religion. Of whom the chief were, Edward Windsore, brother to
the Lord Windsore, a young Gentleman of a soft disposition, Thomas Salisbury, of
a Knights house in Denbigh-shire, Charles Tilney, an ancient Gentleman, the
only hope of the Family, one of the Queens Pencionaries, whom Ballard had
reconciled to the Roman Church; both proper young men: Chidioc Tychburn, of
Hampshire, Edward Abington, whose father was the Queens Cofferer: Robert Gage
of Surrey, John Traverse, and John Charnok of Lanchishire, John Jones, whose
father was Queen Mary's taylour, Savage, Barnwell, a Gentleman of Ireland,
Henry Dun, Clarke of the first fruit office. Into this society Polly also
insinuated himself: a man well acquainted with the affairs of the Scots
Queen: a man well skilled in the art of simulation and dissimulation. Who was
thought daily to reveile all their counsels to Sir Francis Walsingham, and to
thrust them headlong into mischief, who were forward enough of themselves to
evil. Albeit, Navus the Scots Queens Secretary warned them to beware of him.

To these did Babington communicate the matter, but not all to each one: his
own Letters and the Scots Queens Letters he showed to Ballard, to Tychburn,
and Dun. He dealt with Tilney and Tychburn, to be the strikers. They at first
denied to dehle their hands with the blood of their Prince. Ballard and
Babington labor to prove it lawful to kill Princes excommunicated: and if
right should be violated, then for the Catholic Religion it is to be violated.
Hereupon hardly persuaded, they yield their consent in a sort. Abington,
Barnwell, Charnok, and Savage readily and roundly without scruple swear to kill
her. Salisbury could by no means be persuaded to be a Queene-killer, but to
deliver the Scots Queen, he offered his service willingly. Babington designeth
Ty^hburn above the number, to help the percussors, of whose fidelity and
courage he had persuaded himself much. But he was now absent, travailing
abroad. Babington commandes that they impart the matter to none, except first
an oath be taken to keep silence. These conspiratours now and then conferred
of these matters in Saint Giles fields, in Pauls-Church, in Tavernes, in which
they had their daily feasts, being now puffed up with the hopes of great
matters. Sometimes commending the valor of the Nobles of Scotland, who lately
had intercepted the King at Sterling: and of Gerard the Burgonian, who killed
the Prince of Orange. And so far they proceeded in their foolish vanity, so
strangly infatuated, that those that should strike the Queen, they had
portraied in lively pictures, and in the midst of them Babington, with this
Verse. Hi mihi sunt comites, quos ipsa pericula ducunt.

But when this Verse was disliked, as seeming too plain: for it, they set in
place these words: Quorsum haec alio properantibus? These pictures were taken,
as it was said, and brought to the Queen; who knew none of their countenances
but only Barnwells, who used often to come in her presence, following the
causes of the Earl of Kildare, whom he served: and she took notice of him by
other marks. Verily one day as she was walking abroad she saw Barnwell, she
looked sharply and undauntedly upon the man, and turning to Sr Christopher
Hatton, Captain of the Guard, and to some others: Am not I, quoth she, well
guarded, who have not so much as one man in my company that has a sword? For
Barnwell told this to the other conspiratours, and declared how easily she
might have been killed, if the conspiratours had then been present. Savage in
like sort reported the same.

Now there was nothing that so much troubled Babington, as the fear least the
promise of external forces might fail. And therefore to make that good, he
resolved to go into France, and to send Ballard secretly before, for whose
passage he had procured license for money under a counterfeit name. And to
remove all suspicion from himself by Polly he in^inuateth himself into Sir
Francis Walsingham, and deals earnestly with him, to entreat of the Queen
license for his passage into France, promising to do some especially service,
in searching and discovering the secret attempts of the fugitives for the Scots
Queen. He commended the purpose of the young man, and promised not only to
obtain him license to travel, but he promised withal great and goodly
rewards to him, if he would do such a service, yet holding him in suspense,
he delayed the matter, and knew his purpose and drift well, having fished all
out by an especial skill he had in discovering treasons, but especially by the
discovery of Gilbert Giffard, a Priest, he was made acquainted with their
intentions, which they thought were kept so secret that the Sun had not
known any thing thereof.

This Giffard was borne at Chellington, where the Scots Queen was kept, and
sent by the fugitives into England, under the name of Luson, to put Savage in
mind of his vow undertaken, and to lurk as a fit means to transmit Letters
between them, and the Scots Queen, because in so dangerous a business, they
could not draw in to serve their turn herein neither the Countess of
Arundell, nor the Lord Lumley, nor Henry Howard, nor Sr George Shirly.

The fugitives, to try whether the way was safe by Giffard to transmit Letters,
first sent blankes many times sealed like Letters and packeted, which when by
the answers they perceived to be truly delivered, now grown more confident,
wrote often of their affairs intended, in secret Characters. But Giffard
before this, whether vexed in his conscience, or corrupted before with money,
or terrified with fear, had opened himself to Sir Francis Walsingham, and
declared with what purpose he was sent into England, and offered all his
service, as from the love to his Country and his Prince, and promised to
communicate to him all the Letters that he received either from the fugitives,
or from the Scots Queen. Sir Francis embracing the opportunity offered,
entertained him courteously, and sent him into Staffordshire, and wrote to Sir
Amice Pawlet, willingly to suffer some of his servants to be corrupted by
Giffard, and to wink at it. But he being unwilling, as he said, to suffer any
of his household servants, by simulation to become a traitor, yet though
unwillingly, he suffered that the brewer, or the man that provided Provender for
his horse, who dwelt near him, might be corrupted by Giffard. Giffard easily
corrupted the brewer with some pieces of gold, who by a hole in the wall, where
a stone was set which might be removed, sent Letters secretly, and received
others, which always by messengers provided for the purpose, came to the hands
of Sr Francis Walsingham. Who opened the seals, coppied out the Letters, and
by the singular cunning of Thomas Philipps found the secret Character, and by
the skill of Arthur Gregory sealed them up again so cunningly, that no man
could suspect that they were opened, and then sent them to the parties to whom
they were directed. Thus were disclosed those former Letters from the Scots
Queen to Babington, and his answers, and others again from her to him, (in
which there was a Postscript cunningly added in the same Character, to write
the names of the six Gentlemen, and happily some other things.) Moreover, the
same day, the Letters to Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador, to Charles Paget, to
the Lord Paget, to the Archbishop of Glasco, and to Sr Francis Inglefeld, were
all coppied out, and transmitted.

The Queen, as soon as she understood so rough a tempest hanging over her
head, both from inward traitors and foreign enemies, she commanded to the end
that the conspiracy might the sooner be quelled, that Ballard should be
apprehended. Whereupon he was suddenly taken, in the very nick, when he was
ready to depart into France. Being taken in Babingtons house. Hereupon
Babington was afraid and sore troubled, and vexed with a thousand cogitations
he came to Tychburn, and with him advises what is best to do. His advise was
that the conspiratours should presently disperse themselves and fly, yet
Babington thought it best to send Savage and Charnok presently to kill the
Queen. But first to put Savage in brauer and more courtly apparel, that so he
might have a more easy passage. And of this project he had the same day speech
with him, in Pauls-Church. But presently changing his mind, and concealing his
secret cares and fears, he wrote Letters to Sir Francis Walsingham, being then
in Court, wherein with great earnestnes he entreated that now at last he might
have license to depart into France; and withal he made suit for Ballards
deliverance, who might be of great use to him in his proposed busin^sse. Sir
Francis with fair promises keeps him from day to day in hope. That Ballard
was taken, he lays all the fault upon Young, that cunning hunter of Papists,
and upon some other Catch-poles; and warns Babington to take heed to such
kind of men, as friendly admonishing him, and easily persuades the young man,
that until the Queen might be at leisure to sign the Bill for his passage,
he would return to London, and lodge in his house at London, to the end that
they might confer more secretly of so great matters. And that by his often
coming, the fugitives might not have any suspicion, when he came into France.
In the mean time, Skidmor, Sir Francis Walsingham his servant was commanded to
observe him most strictly, and should be with him whither soever he went; in
show that so he might be safer from messengers that otherwise might apprehend
him. Thus far Sr Francis Walsingham had closely carried this business
without the knowledge of other of the privy Council, and would have proceeded
farther. But the Queen would not; least (as she said) by not preventing the
danger when she might, she might seem rather to tempt God, then to trust in
God. Whereupon Sir Francis from Court wrote to his man, that he should observe
Babington with an especial care. This Letter was not sealed, but so delivered
that as the man read it, Babington sitting at Table with him did also read it.
Whereupon finding himself guilty, and suspecting that all was disclosed, the
next night when he, and Skidmor, and one or two of Sir Francis his servants,
had supped somewhat freely in a Tavern, he rose as going to pay the reckoning,
and leaving his cloak and rapier, fled away in the dark to Westminster. Where
Gage changed apparel with him, who presently put off the same again in
Charnoks chamber, and put on Charnoks. And conveyed themselves both into S.
John's Wood near to the City. Whither Barnwell and Dun came to them. In the
mean time they were declared traitors throughout England. They hiding
themselves in Woods and by-ways after they had in vain expected money from
the French Ambassador, and horse from Tychburn, they cut off Babingtons hair,
and defaced his native beauty with rubbing his face over with the green
husks of Walnuts. And being forced by hunger they came to Bellamyes house,
near to Harrow on the Hill, who was a great favourer of the Romish Religion.
Where they were hid in Barnes, and fed, and clothed with rusticall apparel.
After ten days they were found and brought to London. Hereupon the City
witnessed their public joy by ringing of bells, by bonefires in the streets,
by singing of Psalms, in so much that the Citizens had great thanks given
them from the QVEENE.

The other conspiratours were soon caught, many of them near the City;
Salisbury in Staffordshire, his horse being killed under him by them who
followed him, and Trauerse was taken with him, after they had swimmed over the
river Weuer. And Jones in Wales, who was not acquainted with the invasion
intended, but only received them into his house, after he knew them to be
proclaimed rebels, and hid them. And had furnished Salisbury as he fled, and
his man (who was a Priest) with a changed Cloak. Only Windsore was not found.
Many days were spent in examining of them, who by their confessions betrayed
one another, concealing nothing.

All this time the Scots Queen and her servants were kept by such a diligent
watch of Sir Amice Pawlet, that those things were altogether hid from her,
though now well known over all England. But after that these were apprehended,
Sir Thomas Gorge was sent to acquaint her with these things in few words. Which
he did purposely when she thought least of the matter, as she was taking horse
to ride a hunting. Neither was she permitted to return, but in show of honor
she was carried about to Noble men's houses. In the mean time, John Manners,
Edward Ashton, Richard Bagot, and William Wade (who ignorant of the whole
matter had been sent into these parts) receiving authority from the Queen,
did commit Navus, and Curle, Secretaries, and other servants, to such as might
keep them asunder, that they might not confer together among themselves, nor
with the Scets Queen. And breaking up the Chamber-doores, they took all
Chesies and Boxes, wherein they found Letters, and sent them sealed with their
seals to the Court. After that Sir Amice Pawlet, being commanded, took all
the money, least she might corrupt some for money, and gave his promise to
restore all again. When the packets of Letters were opened before the Queen,
the Letters of many forrainers were found, and Coppies of many Letters to
others; and about sixty Tables of secret Characters. And some Letters from
certain Noble men of England, with a full declaration of their love and
services. Which thing notwithstanding, Queen Elizabeth dissembled that matter
in silence, and accordingly used that word: Video, taceo; I see and say
nothing. But they smelling the matter, least they might seem to favor the
Scots Queen, after that, began to show themselves enemies against her.

Now Giffard, after he had played his part in this play, was sent away as a
banished man into France; leaving before he went an indented paper with the
French Ambassador Leiger in England, with this instruction, that he should
deliver Letters which he might receive from the Scots Queen, or from the
fugitives, to none other but only to him, who exhibited a paper an swering to
that indented paper. Which paper was by him sent secretly to Sir Francis
Walsingham. Giffard returning into France, after a few months was imprisoned
for his filthy life: and suspected of these things, died miserably; confessing
many of the foresaid matters, which was also found in his papers.

The XIII. of September, seven of the conspiratours being brought to judgment,
confessed themselves guilty, and were condemned of treason. Other seven came
the next day, who denied that they were guilty; and committed themselves to
God and their Country: yet were they condemned by their former confessions.
Only Polly, though guilty of all, yet when he affirmed that he disclosed some
of those matters to Sir Francis Walsingham, was not called to judgment. The
twentieth of that month, the first seven were hanged and quattered in S. Giles
fields, where they used to meet. Ballard, the contriver of all the mischief,
asked pardon of God, and of the Queen conditionally, if he had sinned against
her. Babington (who without fear beheld Ballards death, whilst the rest were
upon their knees in prayer) freely confessed his sins, and after he was taken
down from the Gallows, cried out in Latin, Parce mihi Jesus: the rest in their
order likewise were hanged and quartered.

After the punishment of these, Navus a French man, and Curlus a Scot,
Secretaries to the Scots Queen were called into question upon the Letters that
were taken in the lodging of the Scots Queen, and freely confessed that those
Letters were of their own writing, dictated by her in French, and so taken by
Navus, turned into English by Curle, and written in secret Characters, whereby
she was at last brought into question, which brought her also to her end.

The thing which we observe upon this Narration, is to continue our complaint
of these graceless instruments the Priests and Jesuits, that by their wicked
suggestions bring Princes, Nobles, Gentlemen of good place, which might have
done good service to their Prince and Country, such I say do these wicked
instruments bring to ruin; and seem to take a pleasure in the destruction of
men. May we not see how they come in secretly, and scraule in corners like
Serpents? It is true the enmity is of old set between the Woman's seed and the
Serpents seed: and the Church which is the Woman's seed have felt the experience
hereof at all times. But never had any Church in the world a more lively
experience hereof, then this Church of England, against whom all this has
been wrought. The Church is the house of God, and this Church of England is
here with us Gods house. It is apparent that this house was built not upon the
sand, but upon a rock; for the winds have blown fiercely upon it, the waters
have risen against it, the great and huge tempests have beaten upon it, and yet
it stands. And for this we praise Gods name, that it stands still. And for
this purpose is this small Work undertaken, to give the watchword to all them
that fear God, and love the coming of our Lord, to give most humble and most
hearty thanks unto God for this inestimable favor of God, that after all
these assaults which have been greater in danger, mo^e in number then any
Nation in the world at this day can number: that after all, I say, our Church
stands and flourishes: this is our rejoicing in God, in his goodness and
mercy. But now consider who oppugn us? the serpents seed; for can any man with
any reason deny these men to be the seed of the serpent? I mean the seminary
Priests and lesuites. Are not these the seed of the serpent? They plot, and
practice treasons, they raise rebellions, their heads and hands are full of
blood and murder. And what can the serpent his seed do more? They are men
acquainted with the deepenes of Satan, they lay snares and wicked plots for
des^ructions of States, and least men should descry their mischief, they set a
clean contrary countenance upon their actions, giving out that their weapons
are Preces and lachrymae, Prayers and tears, and that it is unlawful for them
to use any other weapons; even then when they are about their most bloody
designs: and what can the serpents seed do more? Can the seed of the serpent
proceed more maliciously, more cruelly, more deeply in blood then these have
done? Then let them be known to be the seed of the serpent. As for us, we
rejoice to be the seed of the Woman, the true Church of God: we suffer, we are
reviled, standered, called Heretics: We learn of our Master to endure the
cross, to despise the shame: We run with patience the race which he has set
before us. And we serve God not in vain; for we see that there is a reward for
them that serve Him.

CHAPTER X.
THE a next year following, which was the year 1587. the Scots Queen being
before condemned, An: Do^. 1587.
but yet reserved alive, discontented persons, like evil spirits did
continually haunt her; though she her self would have been quiet, yet would
not they let her rest, until their busy and pernicious working brought her to
her grave; for l. Au^^spinaeus the French Ambassador Leiger in England, a man
wholly devoted to the Guysian faction, went about to help the captived Queen,
not by fair means, but by treason. First he conferred secretly to kill the
Queen, with William Stafford, a young Gentleman, easy to be drawn to new
hopes: whose mother was of the Queens bedchamber; his brother was the English
Leiger in France at this time. Afterward he dealt more plainly with him,
touching this project, by his secretary Trappius. Who promised to Stafford, if
he would undertake that matter, not only great glory, great store of money,
but especial grace and favor with the Pope, with the Guises, and with all the
Catholics. Stafford his conscience grudging at so great a wickedness, refused
to undertake it. Yet he commended one Moody, a cutthroat* a man fit for such a
business, that if money were given him, would undoubtedly undertake and
dispatch the business. To him went Stafford, where he found him kept in prison
in London, and told him that the French Ambassador would gladly speak with
him. He answered that he was willing, so that he might be freed out of prison.
In the mean time, he entreated that Cordali^n another of the Ambassadors
secretaries might be sent to him: with whom he had familiar acquaintance. The
next day Trappius was sent to him with Stafford. Who, when Stafford was
removed, conferred with Moody of the manner of killing the Queen. Moody
proposed a course to do it by poison, or by a sack of twenty pound of
Gunpowder to be laid under the Queens chamber, and to be fired secretly.
These courses pleased not Trappius, but he wished that a man of such courage
might be sound, as was that Burgonian who killed the Prince of Orange.

These things were presently revealed to the Queens Council by Stafford.
Whereupon Trappius now purposing to go into France, was intercepted, and
examined of these things. Afterward the Ambassador himself, the twelfth of
January was sent for unto the house of Secretary Cecill, and came in the
evening; where were together by the Queens command, Cecill, Lord Burghley,
Secretary, the Earl of Leicester, Sir Christopher Hatton, and Dauison another
secretary: These signify to the French Ambassador, that they sent for him, to
let him know the cause why they intercepted Trappius, his Secretary, when he
was ready to go into France; and they did open every thing which Stafford,
Moody, and Trappius himself had confessed. And that they might testify the
same in his presence, they commanded them to be called in. The Ambassador who
bending his brows, heard these things with much impatience; rising up, said,
that himself being an Ambassador would not hear any accusations to wrong his
King, or in the prejudice of Ambassadors. But when they answered, that these
men should not be produced as accusers, but only that he might be satisfied
that these things were not fained, nor false: then he rested. As soon as
Stafford was produced, and began to speak, he presently interrupted him, and
railing upon him, affirmed that Stafford first proposed the matter to him, and
that himself had threatened to send him bound hand and foot to the Queen, if
he would not desist from so wicked an enterprise: yet that he spared him for
the singular affection which he bare to the mother, the brother, and sister of
Stafford. Stafford falling upon his knees protested in many words upon his
salvation* that the Ambassador proposed the matter first to him. But when the
Ambassador seemed to be extraordinarily moved, Stafford was commanded to
depart; and Moody was not produced.

Hereupon when Burghly had mildly charged the Ambassador to be guilty of such
a conceived wickedness, both from his own words, and out of the confession of
Trappius: he answered, that if he had been conscious, yet being an
Ambassador, he ought not to disclose it, but to his own King. But Burghl^y
interposing told him, that if that were not the office of an Ambassador (which
thing is yet in question) to disclose such a mischievous practice which
brings the life of a Prince in danger: yet was it the office of a Christian,
to repress such notorious injuries, not only for the safety of a Prince, but
for the safety of any Christian. But the other stoutly denied that; and withal
said, that not long since, the French Ambassador being in Spain, and having
notice of a conspiracy to take away the Spanish Kings life, yet disclosed it
not to the Spanish king, but to his own King, and was therefore commended of
the King and of his Councellers. The Lord Burghley gave him a grave admonition,
to take heed that hereafter he offended not in such a point of treason against
the Prince, and not to forget the office of an Ambassador, nor the Prince her
clemency, who would not wrong good Ambassadors by the punishment of an evil
one, and though he were not punished, yet was he not justified, but did carry
with him the guilt, though not the punishment of such an offense.

Though this intended evil came to no effect, as all the other bloody
practices have bin without effect: yet may we make good use of it to bless
Gods name for all his great and manifold deliverances. That it was
disappointed, it was his goodness: for against those Kings that had not given
their service to God for the maintenance of true Religion, great and bloody
practices have bin committed by less and more contemptible means. And as we
have just cause to bless God for all his deliverances, so the adversaries of
our peace, have just cause to fear, to examine their own doings, and
seriously to consider, whether they have not all this while striven against
God, in striving so long against those whom God does so miraculously defend

Not long after this followed the ignominious prodition of William Stanly, and
Rowland York. This York was a Londoner, a man of loose conversation, and
actions, and desperate. He was famous among the Cutters of his time, for
bringing in a new kind of fight, to run the point of a rapier into a man's body;
this manner of fight he brought first into England, with great admiration of
his audaciousnes. When in England before that time the use was with little
buckl^rs, and with broad swords to strike, and not to thrust, and it was
accounted unmanly to strike under the girdle. This man provoked as he took it
by some injury of the Earl of Leicester, fled to the Spaniards, and for some
time after served among the Spaniards. Afterward being reconciled, was made
Captain of a Sconce near to Zutphen. After all this he was so set upon
revenge, that being corrupted with money, he did not only betray the place to
the enemy; but drew also Stanly with him, being a man that had served with
great fidelity and valor in the Irish wars. Stanly was not easily persuaded
to be false, but this desperate fellow never ceased to draw him into the
fellowship of wickedness with him, by many asseverations and oaths often
repeated; telling him that it was certainly known in England, that he was of
Babingtons conspiracy; that he was already discovered by their confessions, and
that out of hand he should be sent for to the gallows. Thus he persuaded
Stanly to betray the rich and well fenced Town of Deventer to the Spaniards,
against his oath given to Leicester and to the States. And seeking some
pretense of honesty against a fact so dishonest and disloyal, he seemed to
please himself in this, that he had restored a place to the true Lord, which
was held from him by rebels. And being extreme Popish, he sent for Priests to
his company, which consisted of 1300 English and Irish, to instruct them in the
Popish Religion; boasting that this should be the seminary legion, which should
defend the Roman Religion with Arms, as the seminary Priests defend it with
writings. To this purpose Alan, who a little after was Cardinal, sent Priests
presently to him, and wrote a Book also, wherein he commended this
proditorious act, from the authority of the Bull of Pius V against Queen
Elizabeth, and stirred up others to such perfidiousnes, as if they were not
bound to serve and obey a Queen excommunicated. But look I pray to the end.

The Spaniards set York and Stanly together in contention one against the
other; and soon after they poison York, and take his goods: his body after
three years was dug up by the commandment of the States, and hanged till
it rotted. They drew Stanly and his companies out of Deventer, and tossing them
from place to place they make them the object of all dangers, and so used them
with all con^umelies, that some of them died for hunger, others secretly fled
away. Stanly himself went into Spain in hope of reward, and offered his help
to invade Ireland: but neither found he entertainment according to his
expectation, neither could he be trusted; for the Spaniards used to say, that
some honor might be given to a traitor, but no trust: It was now too late for
him to learn, but yet he learned, that he had most of all betrayed himself.

CHAPTER XI.
WE are now come to that fatal year, A. D. 1588.
which the Astrologers called the Marveilous year; Octogesimus octavus
mirabilis annus.
some said it was the Climactericall year of the world. And they that trust
not in the living God, but in superstitions took the opportunity of this
fatal year as they supposed, now utterly to overthrow the Church of England
and State. Which before they could not do. The Pope and Spanyard laid up all
their hopes upon this years destiny.

The rumors of war daily increased, at last it was certainly confirmed by the
news on all sides, that in Spain there was an invincible navy preparing
against England; that the most famous Captains in military knowledge, and the
best soldiers were sent for into Spain, from Italy, Scicily, yea from
America. For the Pope, and some religious Spaniards, and English fugitives, now
recalled the Spanyard to the cogitation of surprising of England, which purpose
was interrupted by the Portugal wars. They exhorted him earnestly to do God
this service, that had done so much for him: now that he inioyed Portugal,
with the west Indies, and many rich Islands: to add England to all, were an
especial service of God, fit for his Catholic Majesty. By this means he
might add these flourishing Kingdoms to his Empire, and so keep the
Low Countries in peace, secure the navigatio^ to both Indies. That the
preparations of Spain were so great that no power was able to resist it. They
made him believe that it was an easier matter to overcome England, then to
overcome the Dutch-land, because the navigation from Spain to England was much
shorter, then to the Netherlands. And by surprising of England, the other would
easily follow.

Hereupon the consultation began to be had, of the best way and means to
oppress England. Alvarus Ba^^anus, the Marquess of S. Cross, who was chief
commander in the Navy, advised first to make sure some part of Holland or
Zealand, by the landforces of the Duke of Parma, and by sending before some
Spanish ships, so to take some place on a sudden, where the Spanish navy
might have a receptacle, and from whence the invasion might with co^venience
begin. For in the English Sea, which is troublesome, the winds often changing,
the tides unknown, the Navy could not be in safety. With him agreed Parma, who
much urged this expedition. Yet others disliked this counsel, as a matter of
great difficulty and danger, of long time, of much labor, of great expense, of
uncertain success. And that neither secretly nor openly it could be
performed, and easily hindered by the English. These thought that with the same
labor and expenses England might be won: and the victory would be sure, if a
well prepared army from Spain, might with a strong navy be landed on Thames
side, and of a sudden surprise London the chief City by an unexpected
assault. This seemed a thing most easy to be effected. And therefore all
agreed upon it. Yet some among them thought good that a denuntiation of the
war should be made by an Herald, which they held a politik devise, both to
remove suspicion out of the minds of neighbor Princes, and to force the Queen
as they supposed, to call to her help ^orrain mercenary soldiers, concelving,
that according to the usual insolency of mercenaries, they would tumult and
spoil the country; and so might the Queen be brought into hatred of her own
people: that so all things in England would be brought into a confusion, which
might be helped by the English Catholics. But neither could this advise be
heard. For they being confident of their own strength, thought it was
sufficient to commend the invincible Navy to the prayers of the Pope, and of
their other Catholics, and to the intercession of Saints: and to set out a
Book in Print, to the terror of the English, in which Book, all the
preparation was particularly related. Which was so great through Spain, Italy,
and Scicily, that the Spaniards themselves were in admiration of their own
forces, and therefore named it the Invincible Fleet.

The Duke of Parma also in Flanders, by the commandment of the Spanyard, built
ships, and a great company of small broad vessels, each one able to transport
thirty horse, with bridges fitted for them severally. And hired Mariners from
the east part of Germany. And provided long pieces of wood, sharpened at the
end, and covered with iron, with ^ookes on the side. And twenty thousand
vessels, with an huge number of fagots; and placed an Army ready in Flanders,
of 103 companies of foot, and 4000 horsemen. Among these were 700 English
fugitives, which were had of all other in most contempt. Neither was Stanly
respected or heard, who was set over the English, nor Westmerland, nor any
other who offered their help: but for their impiety toward their own
Country, were shut out from all consultations, and as men vnominous rejected,
not without detestation. And Pope Sixtus V. that in such a purpose would not be
wanting, sent Cardinal Alan into Flanders, and ren^ed the bulls declaratory of
Pius V. and ^rep XIII. He excommunicateth the Queen, deposes her, absolveth
her subi^cts from all alleagance, and as if it had been against the Turks and
Inf^dels, he set forth in Print a ^ruceat, wherein he bestowed plenary
indulgences, out of the treasure of the Church, upon all that would ioyn their
help against England. By which means the Marquess a Burgaw of the house of
Austria, the Duke of Pastrana, Amady Duke of Sauoy, Vespasian Gonzaga, John
Medices, and diverse other noble men were drawn into these Wars.

Queen Elizabeth, that she might not be surprised at unawares, prepares as
great a Navy as she could, and with singular care and providence makes ready
all things necessary for war. And she her self, which was ever most
i^dicious in discerning of men's wits, and aptnes, and most happy in making
choice, when she made it out of her own judgment, and not at the commandment
of others, designed the best and most serviceable to each several employment.
Over the whole Navy she appointed the Lo: Admiral Charles Howard. In whom she
reposed much trust; and sent him to the west parts of England, where Captain
Drake, whom she made Viceadmirall, joined with him. She commanded Henry Seimor
the second son to the Duke of Somerset, to watch upon the Belgic shore with
40 English and Dutch ships, that the Duke of Parma might not come out with
his forces. Albeit some were of opinion, that the enemy was to be expected, and
set upon by land forces, according as it was upon deliberation resolved, in the
time of Henry the 8. when the French brought a great Navy upon the English
shore.

By Land there was placed on the South shores, twenty thousand. And two Armies
besides were mustered of the choicest men for war. The one of these which
consisted of a thousand horse, twenty-two thousand foot, was the Earl of
Leicester set over. And camped at Tilbury on the side of Thames. For the enemy
was resolved first to set upon London. The other Army was governed by the Lo:
Hunsdon, consisting of 34 thousand foot, and two thousand horse, to guard the
Queen.

The Lord Gray, Sr Francis Knolles, Sr John Norrice, Sr Richard Bingham, Sr
Roger Williams, men famously known for Military experience, were chosen to
confer of the land fight. These thought fit that all those places should be
fortified, with men and mu^ition, which were commodious to land in, either out
of Spain, or out of Flanders* as Milford haven, Falmouth, Plimmouth, Portland,
the I Will of Wight, Portsmouth, the open side of Kent called the Downs, the mouth
of Thames, Harwich, Yarmouth, Hull, etc. That trained soldiers through all the
maritim Provinces should meet upon warning given, to defend these places: that
they should by their best means and power hinder the enemy to take land; if he
should take land, then should they wast the country all about, and spoil every
thing that might be of any use to the enemy, that so he might find no more
vittals then what he brought upon his shoulders with him. And that by
continual Alarums the enemy should find no rest day or night. But they should
not try any battle, until diverse Captains were met together with their
Companies. That one Captain might be named in every Shire which might command.

At this time diverse told the Queen, that the Spaniards were not so much to be
feared without, as the Papists within; for the Spaniards durst make no attempt
upon England, but upon confidence of their help within. And therefore for the
security of the whole, their heads were upon some pretenses to be cut off.
Producing for this thing, the example of Henry 8. For when the Emperor and
French King at the Popes instigation, were combined and ready to invade
England, King Henry presently executed the Marquess of Exceter, the Lord
Montacute, Edward Neuil, and others, whom he suspected to favor the enemies,
which thing as soon as he had done, the intended invasion was stopped, and
proceeded no further. But this advise the Queen utterly disliked, as being
cruel, she thought it enough to commit some of the Papists to Wisbich Castle
in cu^tody; and casting her eyes and mind on every side, she stirred up her
Nobles with Letters often, though they were careful and watchful of
themselves. She certified Fitz Williams, Lord Deputy of Ireland, what she would
have done there. She sent to the King of Scots to warn him to take good heed
of Papists, and the Spanish faction. But he knowing well what a tempest and
desolation was hanging, and threatening both alike, having already set his heart
upon the maintenance of true religion, and resolving to take part with the
truth in prosperity and adversity, which is only able to save and deliver
her maintainers; had a little before refused to hear the Bishop of Dumblan,
sent th^ther from the Pope: and had caused a league to be made among the
Protestants of Scotland, for resistance of the Spaniards: and himself coming
to Anandale with an army, besieged Maxwell and took him, and committed him to
prison, who was lately returned out of Spain against his faith and alleagance,
and came with an intent to favor the Spanish side; he declared the Spaniards
should be held as enemies, and against them caused all with great alacrity to
be ready in Arms.

Among these preparations for war, which were great on both sides, the
councels of peace were not utterly cast away.

Two years before, the Duke of Parma considering how hard a matter it was to
end the Belgic war, so long as it was continually nourished and supported
with aid from the Queen, he moved for a treaty of peace, by the means of Sir
James Croft one of the privy council, a man desirous of peace, and Andrew Lo
a Dutch man, and professed that the Spaniard had delegated authority to him for
this purpose. But the Queen fearing that there was some cunning in this seeking
of peace, that the friendship between her and the confederate Provinces might
be dissolved, and that so they might secretly be drawn to the Spanyard; she
deferred that treaty for some time. But now, that the Wars on both sides
prepared, might be turned away, she was content to treat of Peace, but so as
still holding the weapons in her hand.

For this purpose in February delegates were sent into Flanders, the Earl of
Derby, the Lo: Cobham, Sr James Croft, Dr Dale, and Dr Rogers. These were
received with all humanity on the Dukes behalf, and they presently sent Dr
Dale to him, that a place might be appointed for the treating, and that they
might see the authority to him delegated from the Spanish King. He appointed
the place near to Ostend, not in Ostend which then was holden of English
against the King: his authority delegated, he promised then to show when they
were once met together. He wished them to make good speed in the business,
least somewhat might fall out in the mean time, which might trouble the motions
of peace. Richardotus spoke somewhat more plainly, that he knew not what in
this interim should be done against England. Not long after D. Rogers was sent
to the Prince by an express commandment from the Queen, to know the truth,
whether the Spanyard had resolved to invade England, which he and Richardotus
did seem to signify. He affirmed that he did not so much as think of the
invasion of England, when he wished that the business might proceed with
speed. And was in a manner offended with Richardotus, who denied that such words
fell from him. The 12 of April, the Count Aremberg, Champigny, Richardotus, D.
Mae^ius, and Garnier, Delegated from the Prince of Parma met with the English,
and yielded to them the honor, both in walking and sitting. And when they
affirmed that the Duke had full authority to treat of Peace: the English moved
that first a truce might be made. Which they denied, alleging that that thing
must needs be hurtful to the Spanyard, who had for six months maintained
great Army, which might not be dismissed upon a truce, but upon an absolute
peace. The English urged that a truce was promised before they came into
Flanders. The Spanyard against that held, that six months since a truce was
promised; which they granted, but was not admitted. Neither was it in the
Queens power to undertake a truce for Holland and Zealand, who daily attempted
hostility. The English moved instantly that the truce might be general, for
all the Queens territories, and for the Kingdom of Scotland: but they would
have it but for four Dutch towns which were in the Queens hands, that is,
Ostend, Flushing, Bergen up zom, and the Briel; and these only during the
treating, and twenty days after, and that in the mean time, it might be
lawful for the Queen to invade Spain, or for the Spanyard to invade England,
either from Spain or Flanders. Whilst these delays were made concerning the
truce and place, which at last was appointed at Bourburg; Cr^ft upon an earnest
desire to peace, went privately to Bruxells without the knowledge of the other
Delegates, and privately proposed some Articles. For which afterward by
Leicesters motion, he was imprisoned: albeit those articles proposed by him
were in the judgment of the other commissioners not to be disallowed. But
Delegates have their limits circumscribed, which they are not to pass. At
last, when the English could not obtain an abstinence from arms, and could by
no means see the Charter by which the Duke of Parma had this authority granted
to treat of peace: they proposed these things; that the ancient leagues
between the Kings of England and the Dukes of Burgundy might be renewed and
confirmed; that all the Dutch might fully enjoy their own privileges; that
with freedom of conscience they might serve God; that the Spanish and foreign
soldiers might be put out of Dutchland; that neither the Dutch, nor their
neighboring Nations might fear them. If these things might be granted, the
Queen would come to equal conditions concerning the Towns which now she
held, (that all might know that she took up arms not for her own gain, but
for the necessary defense both of the Dutch, and of her self) so that the
money which is owing therefore be repayed. They answered: that for renewing the
old leagues there should be no difficulty, when they might have a friendly
conference of that thing. That concerning the privileges of the Dutch, there
was no cause why foreign Princes should take care, which privileges were most
favorably granted, not only to Provinces and Towns reconciled, but even to
such as by force of arms are brought into subjection. That foreign soldiers
were held upon urgent necessity, when as Holland, England, and France, were all
in arms. Touching those Towns taken from the King of Spain, and the repaying
of the money, they answered that the Spaniard might demand so many myriads of
crowns to be from the Queen repayed him, as the Belgic war has cost him,
since the time that she has favored and protected the Dutch against him.

At this time D. Dale by the Queens command going to the Duke of Parma, did
gently expostulate with him touching a Book Printed there, set out lately by
Cardinal Allen, wherein he exhorts the Nobles, and people of England and
Ireland to join themselves to the King of Spaines forces under the conduct of
the Prince of Parma, for the execution of the sentence of Sixtus V Pope against
the Queen, declared by his bull. In which she is declared an heretic,
illegitimate, cruel against Mary the Scots Queen, and her subjects were
commanded to help Parma against her: (for at that time a great number of those
bulls and books were printed at Antwerp to be dispersed through England. The
Duke denied that he had seen such a bull or book, neither would he do any
thing by the Popes authority, as for his own King, him he must obey. Yet he
said that he so observed the Queen for her Princely virtues, that after the
King of Spain, he offered all service to her. That he had persuaded the King of
Spain to yield to this treaty of peace, which is more profitable for English,
then Spanish. For if they should be overcome, they would easily repair their
loss: But if you be overcome, the kingdom is lost. To whom Dale replied: that
our Queen was sufficiently furnished with forces to defend the Kingdom. That a
Kingdom will not easily be gotten by the fortune of one battle, seeing the
King of Spain in so long a war, is not yet able to recover his anciant
patrimony in the Netherlands. Well, quoth the Duke, be it so. These things are
in Gods hands.

After this the Delegates contended among themselves by mutual replications,
weauing and vnweauing the same webb. The English were earnest in this, a
toleration of Religion might be granted at least for two years to the
confederate Provinces. They answered, that as the King of Spain had not
entreated that for English Catholics: so they hoped that the Queen in her
wisdom would not entreat any thing of the King of Spain which might stand
against his honor, his oath, and his conscience. When they demanded the money
due from the States of Brabant, it was answered, that the money was lent
without the Kings authority or privitie. But let the account be taken, how
much that money was, and how much the King has spent in these Wars, and then
it may appear, who should look for repayment. By such answers they drive off
the English of purpose, until the Spanish fleet was come near the English
shore, and the noise of guns were heard from sea. Then had they leave to
depart, and were by the Delegates honorably brought to the borders near to
Calis. The Duke of Parma had in the mean time brought all his forces to the
sea shore: Thus this conference came to nothing; undertaken by the Queen, as
the wiser then thought to avert the Spanish fleet; continued by the Spaniard,
that he might oppress the Queen, being as he supposed unprovided, and not
expecting the danger. So both of them tried to sow the Fox-skin to the Lions.

CHAPTER XII.
THE Spanish fleet the best furnished with men, munition, engines, and all
warlike preparation, that was ever seen upon the Ocean, and by that arrogant
Title, called invincible, did consist of 130 ships, wherein there were 19
thousand, two hundredth ninety; mariners 8350: chain^d rowers 11080. great
ordnance 11630. The chief commander was Per^zius Gusmannus, Duke of Medina
Sidonia. (For Antonius Columna Duke of Palian, and Marquess of S. Cross, to
whom the chief government was allotted, died whilst things were preparing).
And under him Johannes Martinus Recaldus, a man of great experience in sea
affairs. The 30 of May they loosed out of the ^iver Tagus, and purposing to
hold their course to the ^r^in in G^llitia, they were beaten and scattered by a
tempest* three galleys by the help of Da^d C^in an English servant, and by the
perfidiousnesse of the Turks which rowed, were carried away into France. The
Fleet with much ado after some days came to the Groin and other harbors
near adjoining. The report was that the Fleet was so shaken with this tempest,
that the Queen was persuaded, that she was not to expect that Fleet, this
year. And Sir Francis Walsi^gham, Secretary, wrote to the Lord Admiral, that
he might send back four of the greatest ships, as if the War had been
ended. But he did not easily give credit to that report, but with a gentle
answer entreated him to believe nothing hastily in so important a matter, that
he might keep those ships with him, though it were upon his own charges. And
finding a favorable wind turned sails toward Spain, to surprise the enemies
shaken ships in their harbors. When he was not far from the shore of
Spain, the wind turned, and he being charged to defend the English shore,
fearing that the enemies unseen might by the same wind be drive^ to England,
he returned to Plimmouth.

With the same wind the 12 of July, the Duke of Medina with his fleet departed
from the Groin. And after one day or two, he sent Rhodericus Telius into
Flanders, to admonish the Duke of Parma, giving him notice that the fleet was
approaching, that he might be ready* For Medina his commission was to join
himself with the Ships and Soldiers of Parma, and under the protection of
his Fleet, to bring them into England, and to land his land forces upon Thames
side. Now as the relator of this story has taken pains to declare what was
done each day, I will follow him herein.

The 16 day there was a great calm, and a thick cloud was upon the sea till
noon: then the North wind blowing roughly, and again the Westwinde till
midnight, and after that the East: the Spanish Navy was scattered, and hardly
gathered together until they came within the sight of England the 19 day of
July. Upon which day the Lord Admiral was certified by Flemming (who had been
a Pyrat) that the Spanish Fleet was entered into the English sea, which the
Mariners call the Channel. And was descried near to the Lizard. The Lord
Admiral brought forth the English Fleet into the Sea, but not without great
difficulty, by the skill, labor, and alacrity of the soldiers and mariners,
every one laboring; yea the Lord Admiral himself had his hand at the work.

The next day the English fleet viewed the Spanish fleet coming along with
Towers like Castles in height, her front crooked like the fashion of the Moon,
the horns of the front were extended one from the other about seven miles
asunder, sailing with the labor of the winds, the Ocean as it were groaning
under it; their sail was but slow, and yet at full sail before the wind. The
English gave them leave to hold on their course, and when they were passed by,
came behind them and got the help of the wind.

The 21. of July, the Lord Admiral of England sent a Pinnace before, called
the Defiance, to denounce the Battle by shooting off some pieces. And being
himself in the Arch-royall, (the English Praetorian Ship or Admiral, he set
upon a ship which he took to be the Spanish Admiral, but it was the ship
of Alfonsus Leua. Upon that he bestowed much shot. Presently Drake, Hawkins,
Forbisher, came in upon the Spanish hindmost ships which Recaldus governed.
Upon these they thundered. Recaldus labored what he could to stay his men, who
fled to their navy, until his ship beaten and pierced with many shot, did
hardly recover the Fleet. At which time the Duke Medina gathered together his
dissipated Fleet, and setting up more sail, they held their course. Indeed
they could do no other, for the English had gotten the advantage of wind, and
their ships were much more nimble, and ready with incredible celeritie to
come upon the enemy with a full course, and then to turn, and return, and be
on every side at their pleasure. When they had fought two hours, and taken
some trial of their own courage and of the Spaniards: The Lord Admiral
thought good not to continue the fight any longer then, seeing that forty
ships were absent which were scarce drawn out of Plimmouth haven. The night
following S. Catharin a Spanish ship being sore torn with the fight, was
received into the midst of the Navy to be mended. Here a great Cantabrian
ship of Oquenda, wherein was the treasurer of the Camp, by force of
Gunnepowder that had taken fire, was set on fire; yet was the fire quenched in
time by the Ships that came to help her. Of these that came to help the
fired ship, one was a Galeon, in which was Petrus Waldez; the foremast of the
Galeon was caught in the tackling of another ship, and broken. This was taken
by Drake, who sent Waldez to Dertmouth, the money fiftie-fiue thousand D^cats,
he distributed among his soldiers. That night he was appointed to set forth
light, but neglected it, and some German Merchants ships coming by that night,
he thinking them to be enemies, followed them so far, that the English navy
rested all night when they could see no light set forth. Neither did he nor the
rest of the navy find the Admiral until the next day at even. The Admiral
all the night preceding with the Bear, and Mary Rose did follow the Spanyardes
with watchfulness. The Duke was busied in ordering his Navy. ^lfonsus Leua was
commanded to join the first and last companies, Every Ship had his station
assigned according to that prescribed form which was appointed in Spain, it
was present death to forsake his station. This done he sent Gliclius an Anceant
to Parma, which might declare to him in what case they were, and left that
Cantabrian ship of Oquenda to the wind and sea, having taken out the money and
mariners and put them in other ships. Yet it seems that he had not care of
all: for that ship the same day with fifty mariners and soldiers lamed, and
hal^e burnt, fell into the hands of the English, and was carried to Weimuth.

The 23. of the same month, the Spaniards having a favorable North wind
turned sails upon the English; the English being much readier in the use of
their ships, fett about a compass for the wind, and having gotten advantage
of the wind, they came to the fight on both sides. They fought a while
confusedly with variable fortune: whilst on the one side the English with great
courage delivered the London ships which were enclosed about by the Spaniards;
on the other side the Spaniards by valor freed Recaldus from the extreme
danger he was in: there was not greater effulminations by beating of ordnances
at any time, then was this day. Yet the loss fell upon the Spanish side,
because their ships were so high that the shot went over the English ships,
but the English having a fair mark at their great ships, shot never in
vain. Only Cock and English man b^ing caught in the midst of the Spanish
ships, could not be recovered, he perished but with great honor revenged
himself. Thus a long time the English ships with great agilitie, were
sometimes upon the Spanyardes giving them the one side, and then the other, and
presently were off again, and took the sea to make themselves ready to come
in again. Whereas the Spanish heavy ships were troubled, and hindered, and
stood to be marks for the English bullets. For all that, the Admiral would
not admit the English to come to grapple and to board their ships, because
they had a full army in their ships, which he had not; their ships were
many in number, and greater, and higher, that if they had come to grapple, as
some would have had it, the English that were much lower then the Spanish
ships must needs have had the worse of them that fought from the higher
ships. And if the English had been overcome, the loss would have been
greater then the victory could have been; for ours being overcome, would have
put the kingdom in hazard.

The 24 day, they rested from fight on both sides. The Admiral sent some small
Barks to the next English shore, to supply the provision. And divided all his
Navy into four squadrons. The first was under his own government; the second
Drake governed; the third, Hawkins; the fourth, Forbisher. And he appointed out
of every squadron certain little ships, which on diverse sides might set upon
the Spaniards in the night, but a sudden calm took them, and so that advise
was without effect.

The 25 day, being S. James day, S. Anne the Galeon of Portugal, not being
able to hold course with the rest, was set upon by some small English ships.
For whose aid came in Leua, and Didacus Tells Enriques with three Galeasses.:
which the Admiral and the Lord Thomas Howard espying, made in against the
Galeasses (the calm was so great, that they were drawn in by boats with
cords) and did so beat upon the Galeasses with great shot, that with much
ado, and not without great loss, they hardly recovered the Galeon. The
Spanyardes reported that the Admiral of Spain was that day in the hindmost
company, and being nearer the English ships then before, was sore beaten with
the English great ordinance, many men sla^e in her, her great mast overthrown.
And after that, the Admiral of Spain, accompanied with R^caldus, and others,
did set upon the English Admiral, who by the benefit of the wind turning,
escaped. The Spanyardes hold on their course again, and send to the Duke of
Parma, that with all speed he should join his ships with the Kings Fleet.
These things the English knew not, who write that they had i^ricken the L^ntern
from one of the Spanish ships, the stem from another, and had sore beaten a
third, doing much harm to her. That the non Parigly, and the Mary Rose fought
a good while with the Spaniards, and the Triumph being in danger, other ships
came in good time to help her. Thus it is in battle, they who are present and
actors report not always the same of the same things; each reporting what
himself observed.

The next day the Lord Admiral knighted the Lord Thomas Howard, the Lord
Sheffield, Roger Townsend, John Hawkins, and Martin Forbisher, for their valor
well employed in the last fight. After this they resolved not to set upon the
enemy until they came into the straight of Calis, where Henry Seimor and
William Winter stayed for their coming Thus with a fair gale the Spanish
Flee^ goes forward, and the English followed. This great Spanish A mado was so
far from being (...) invincible in the opinions of the English that many young
noble men and gentlemen* in hope to be partakers of a famous victory against
the Sp^nyards, provided ships of their own ch^rges, and joined themselves to
the English F^eet, among whom was the Earls of Essex, of Northumberland, of
Cumberland, Thomas and Robert C^cilles, H^ Brooks, Charles Blunt, Walter
Raleigh, William Hatton, Robert Carry, Ambrose (...), Thomas Gerard, Arthur
Gorge, and other Gentlemen of name.

The 27 day at even, the Spanyardes cast anchors near to Calis, being
admonished of their skillful seamen, that if they went any farther, they might
be endangered by the force of the tide to be driven into the North Ocean. Near
to them stood the English Admiral with his fleet within a great guns shot. To
the Admiral Seimor and Winter now join their ships; so that now there were
140 ships in the English Fleet, able and well furnished for fight, for sail,
and to turn which way was needful: and yet there were but 15 of these which
bore the burden of the battle and repulsed the enemy. The Spanyard, as often
he had done before, so now with great earnes^nesse sent to the Duke of Parma to
send forty Flie-boats without the which they could not fight with the English
because of the greatness and slownesse of their own ships, and the agilitie
of the English ships. And entreating him by all means now to come to sea
with his army, which army was now to be protected as it were under the wings of
the Spanish Armado, until they took land in England. But the Duke was
unprovided, and could not come out at an ins^ant. The broad ships with flat
bottoms being then full of ^hinks must be mended. Vittails wanted and must be
provided, the mariners being long kept against their wills began to shrink
away. The ports of Du^kerke and Newport, by which he must bring his army to
the sea, were now so beset with the strong ships of Holland and Zealand,
which were furnished with great and small Munition, that he was not able to
come to sea, unless he would come upon his own apparent destruction, and cast
himself and his men wilfully into a headlong danger. Yet he omitted nothing
that might be done, being a man eager and industrious, and inflamed with a
desire of over-comming England.

But Queen E^izabeth her providence and care prevented both the diligence of
this man, and the credulous hope of the Spanyard. For by her commandment the
next day the Admiral took eight of their worst ships, and dressed them with
wildfire, pitch, and rosen, and filled them full of brims^on, and some other
matter fit for fire, and these being set on fire, by the ministry and guiding
of Young and Prowse were secretly in the night, by the help of the wind set
full upon the Spanish fleet, as they lay at anchor. When the Spaniards saw them
come near, the flame shining and giving light over all the sea: they supposing
those ships, besides the danger of the fire, to have bin also furnished with
deadly engines, to make horrible destruction among them; lifting up a most
hiddeous woeful cry, some pull up anchors, some for ha^^ cut their cables,
they set up their sails, they apply their ores, and stricken with a pannick
terror, in great have they fled most con^usedly. Among them the Praetorian
Galeas floating upon the seas* her rudder being broken, in great danger of
fear drew toward Calis, and sticking in the sand, was taken by A^ias Pres^on,
Thomas Gerard, and Ha^ue^^ Hugh Moncada the governor was killed, the soldiers
and mariners were either killed or drowned, in her there was found great store
of gold, which fell to be the prey of the English. The ship and ordnance fell
to the share of the governor of Calis.

The Spaniards report, that the Duke when he saw the fiery ships coming,
commanded all the fleet to pull up their anc^ors, but so as the danger being
past, every ship might return again to his station. And he himself
returned, giving a sign to the rest by shooting off a gun. Which was heard but
of a few, for they were far off scattered, some into the open Ocean, some
through fear were driven upon the shallowes of the shore of Flanders.

Over against Graueling the Spanish ^leet began to gather themselves together.
But upon them came Drake and Fenner, and battered them with great Ordnance: to
these Fenton, Southwell, Beeston, Cross, Riman, and presently after, the Lord
Admiral, Thomas Howard, and Sheffi^ld came in and all joined together. The
Duke Medina, Leua, Oquenda, Recaldus, and others with much ado getting
themselves our of the shallowes, sustained the English force, as well as they
might, until most of their ships were pierced and to^ne. The Galeon S. Matthew,
governed by Diego ^i^entellus, coming to aid Francis Toletan being in the S.
Philip, was pierced and shaken with the r^iterated shots of Seimor and Winter,
and driven to Ostend, and was at last taken by the Flushi^gers. The S. Philip
came to the like end. So did the Galeo^ of Biscay, and diverse other. The last
day of this month, the Spanish sleet striving to recover the straights again,
were driven toward Zealand. The English lest of pursuing of them, as the
Spaniards thought, because they saw them in a manner cast away. For they could
not avoid to be cast upon the shallowes of Zealand. But the wind turning, they
got out of the shallowes, and then began to consult what were best for them to
do. By common consent they resolved to return into Spain by the Northern
seas, for they wanted many necessaries, especially shot, their ships were
torn, and they had no hope that the Duke of Parma could bring forth his
forces. And so they took the Sea and followed the course toward the North.
The English navy followed, and sometimes the Spanish turned upon the English,
insomuch that it was thought by many that they would return back again. Upon
which report the Queen came into the Camp at Tilbury, and mustered the Army,
riding among them with a Leaders Staff in her hand, and did by her presence
and speech animate both Captains and soldiers with incredible courage.

That day, wherein the last fight was, the Duke of Parma after his vows offered
to the Lady of Halla, came somewhat late to Dunkerk, and was received with some
opprobrious words of the Spaniards, as if in favor of Queen Elizabeth he had
slipped the fairest opportunity that could be to do the service. He to make
some satisfaction, punished the purveiours that had not made provision ready:
secretly smiling at the insole^cy of the Spaniards, when he heard them
glorying, that what way soever they came upon England, they would have an
undoubted victory; that the English were not able to endure the sight of them.
Bernardinus Mendoza did indeed by Books in France, sing a foolish and lying
triumphant song before the Victory. The English Admiral appointed Seimor and
the H^llanders to watch upon the coasts of Flanders, that the Duke of Parma
should not come out; himself followed the Spaniards upon their backs, until
they were past Edenborough frith.

The Spaniards seeing all hopes fail, and finding no other help for
themselves but by flight, fled amain and never made stay. And so this great
Navy being three years preparing with great cost, was within a month
overthrown, and, after many were killed, being chased away: (of English there
were not one hundredth lost, nor one ship lost, saving that of C^^ks) was
driven about all Britain by Scotland, Orcades, Ireland, tossed and shaken with
tempests, and much lessened, and came home without glory. Whereupon some money
was coined with a Navy slying away at full sail, and this inscription; Venit,
vidit, Fugit. Other were coined with the Ships fired, the Navy confounded, in
honor of the Queen, inscribed; Dux faeminafacti. As they fled, it is certain
that many of their ships were c^st away upon the shores of Scotland and
Ireland. More then 700 soldiers and mariners were cast upon the Scottish shore,
who at the Du: of Parma his intercession with the Scots King, the Queen of
England consenting, were after a year sent into Fla^ders. But they that were
cast up upon the Irish shore by tempests, came to more miserable fortunes; for
some were killed by the wild Irish; others by the Deputies co^ma^d; for he
searing that they might join themselves to the wild Irish, and Bingham the
Governor of Connach being once or twice commanded to slay them having yielded,
but refusing to do it: Foul the vnder-Marshall was sent, and killed them;
which cruelty the Queen much condemned, whereupon the rest being afraid, sick
and hungry, with their torn ships committed themselves to the sea, and many
were drowned.

Queen Elizabeth came in public thanksgiving to Paul's Church, her Nobles
accompanying her, the Citizens were in their colors, the Banners that were
taken from the enemies were spread: she heard the Sermon, and public thanks
were rendered unto God with great joy. This public joy was augmented when Sir
Robert Sidney returning out of Scotland, brought from the King assurance of his
Noble mind and affection to the Queen, and to Religion: Which as in sincerity
he had established, so he purposed to maintain, with all his power. Sir Robert
was sent to him when the Spanish Fleet was coming to congratulate and to give
him thanks, for his propense affection toward the maintenance of the common
cause; and to declare how ready she would be to help him, if the Spaniards
should land in Scotland, and that he might recall to memory with what strange
ambition the Spaniard had gaped for all Britain, urging the Pope to
excommunicate him, to the end that he might be thrust from the Kingdom of
Scotland, and from the succession in England: and to give him notice of the
threatening of Mendoza and the Popes Nuntio, who had threatened his ruin if they
could work it; and therefore warned him, to take especial heed to the
Scottish Papists. The King pleasantly answered, that he looked for no other
benefit of the Spaniard, then that which Polyphaemus promised to Ulysses, to
d^uoure him last after all his fellows were devoured.

Now these things be such, as whenever we think upon them, we cannot choose
but lift up our hearts to God; for he has put a song of joy and thanksgiving
in our mouths, and taught us to lift up our eyes to him from whence comes
our help, our help comes from the Lord which has made the heaven and the
earth, Psalm. 121.
he will not suffer thy foot to slip, for he that keeps thee will not
slumber; behold, he that keeps Israel, will neither slumber nor sleep, the
Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy defense at thy right ^and. Then let others
boast of their strength (...) power of God, to be for us against them. Now this
being a thing confessed on all sides, that God was with us against the
Spaniard, why will not our adversaries that are men of understanding, enter
into the consideration of this cause which God has so often, so mightily
maintained? The works of the Lord are great, Psalm. III.
and ought to be had in remembrance of them that fear him. And this duty is
required of us that have seen the great works of God, to declare them to
other: for one generation shall praise thy works to another generation, and
declare thy power. The works of God must be sought out, had in remembrance,
and declared to other. The word of God is the rule of our faith, a direction to
us, a Lantern to our feet, and a light to our paths, but the word of God,
being confirmed to us by his works is made more sweet to us. This must needs
be comfortable to us that have the word of God among us, sent unto us, planted
among us by his own hand; we were as far from deserving this favor, as they
that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death; for so we sat in
^arkenesse, and in the shadow of death: so long as we fate in the ignorance of
Popery, but when it pleased God of his own free mercy to send his light among
us, the truth of his Gospel, and out of the same fountain of his goodness
and mercy raised believing Princes among us which have established his true
religion in our Land, a Queen of such Piety, a King of so great Knowledge, and
Learning, and Piety as knows the truth, and is so able to maintain it: God I
say having of his goodness raised such blessings to us, has ne^uer ceased to
maintain his own work. Let us never cease to give him the glory. But can our
adversaries take any comfort in their doings? The King of Spain may once enter
into the consideration of things, he may remember how he and his predecessors
have been so many times beguiled by the Pope, how often has the Pope and his
Jesuits consecrated his banners, promised him victory against us, as against
Heretics forsaken of God and man; let them know that there is a God that
rules the world, and not the Pope. If they would have their designs to
prosper, they must follow the examples of our godly Princes, who are blessed
for the sincerity of Religion which they embrace. They must give over injustice
and cruelty, for the cruelty of the Spaniards have lost them all that they lost
in the Netherlands: Their pride and cruelty was highly raised against us, but
to their own hurt and dishonor, not to ours, because we trust in God. They
would have extinguished the true lights of Britain, (which then did shine like
two glorious. Candles put in their sockets and held up in the hand of Christ,
and as now, to the comfort of both nations, joined in one great light) these
they labored to extinguish, and to tread down the soul of the Turtle; but our
Prayer is, Psalm. 74. 19.
Give not the soul of thy Turtle Dove unto the Beast, and ^orget not the
congregation of the poor for ever. Consider thy covenant, for the dark places
of the earth are full of the Habitation of the cruel: Arise O Lord and
maintain thine own cause, remember the daily reproach of the foolish: forget
not the voice of the enemy, for the tumult of them that rise against thee
ascends continually. God saved the soul of his Turtle, he remembered the
congregation of the poor that trusted in him: he considered his covenant, he
maintained his own cause, and of this we rejoice. But where are those dark
places of the earth which are full of the habitation of the cruel, as the
Prophet says? Surely let the Jesuits look to that, and let them expound
those word^ if they be able, for surely no man can expound those words, but he
shall find superstition and cruelty inseparably joined together; their
superstition makes the places of their habitations dark places; their
superstition breeds cruelty; for greater cruelty the world has not seen,
then has proceeded from them: truly then may we sing with the Psalmist, the
the dark pla^es of the earth, are full of the habitations of the cruel. There
is no hope to make these Jesuits that have given themselves over to the
service of the man of sin, and to the practice of impiety, of such I say
there is no hope to persuade them, because they love not the truth. But the
Kings and Princes that have been so long abused and beguiled by them, may in
time understand the difference between truth and falsehood, and may join with
our religious Kings, against the great Deceiuer, and our hope is, that they
will understand his deceits and illusions, and forsake him: for otherwise they
must perish with him. They that are wise will understand and consider the cause
which God has so long, so strongly maintained, they will consider the power,
the fury, and rage of our adversaries have been continually frustrated by Gods
power, they may consider that these extraordinary blessings upon Gods Church
among us, and the memorable judgments of the adversaries, are but forerunners
of some greater strokes, and heavier judgments of God against them, if they
will not turn, and forsake superstitious vanities, and serve God with us.
Which God grant, that the Kingdom of Christ may be enlarged, his true Religion
strongly maintained, his name glorified, his people comforted, and let all that
worship not the Lord JESUS, and love not his coming, perish.

CHAPTER XIII.
AFter this great tempest from Spain was past, the Sun did shine as
pleasantly upon England as before; by all the Spanish preparation, there was
not a man called from his husbandry in England, not any artificer from his
trade; there was not so much as one cottage burned; did ever the English make
any ^ourney into Spain, and returned without doing no more harm then the
Spaniards did to us? The English made after this, two iourneyes into Spain,
and in both, did that which they intended to do; that is, ransacked Towns,
and put to flight the Armies which incountred them. But this beyond the limits
of my purpose, which is only to declare our deliverances, and to give thanks
and honor to God for the same.

The next danger intended and threatened, brake out in Spain by Tyrone. They
that have written of Tyrone, say that he was a bastard, a banished fugitive, he
lay lurking in Spain, promising to do some service to the Pope and Spaniard,
as some had done before; he was raised to the honor of an Earl by the Queen,
and being twice in danger (once for a murder, and then for usurping the title
of O-Neale) was pardoned for both. Hugh, Baron of Dungannon, now Earl of
Tyrone, being set on by the Spaniard to work some mischief: A^^^ 1597.
An. Dom. 1597. suddenly assailed the ^ort of Black-water, which done, he wrote
to Kildare to side with him, and at the same instant to Sir John Norrice, (who
was then sent out Lord General i^o Ireland, with thirteen hundredth of the
N^therland old Soldiers, newly retired from the wars in Britain,) to him
Tyrone wrote that he might be mildly dealt withal, and not be driven headlong
upon the dangerous rocks of disloialty: in the mean time he was always
guarded with a thousand Horse, and 6280. foot of Vlster, besides 2300. of
Connaugh; hereupon, he and all his partakers were proclaimed traitors. Thus was
the rebellion raised which was hardly quenched with much blood. Sir John
Norrice was a General as well experienced in war, as any that then lived:
yet in the Irish wars, he was not so acquainted. The advantage of the enemy
was such, that time was rather spent in taking of booties, and frivolous
parlies, then in any memorable exploit. The one looking still for fitter
opportunities, and the other expecting daily his promised succors from Spain.

To spare the shedding of blood, the Queen commanded her Commissioners, the
Treasurer, and chief Justice to confer with Tyrone; who complained of wrongs
offered to him by Sir Henry Bagnall, Marshall: and thereupon exhibited a
petition in humble manner containing that himse^fe and all his followers might
be pardoned, and be restored to their former estates: that they might freely
exercise their Romish Religion; that no Garrison soldiers, Shirriffe, or other
officer should intermeddle within the jurisdiction of his Earldom: that the
company of fifty Horsemen with the Queens pay might be restored to him, in the
same state that formerly he had led them: that the spoilers of his Country and
people might be punished, and that Sir Henry Bagnall should pay him a thousand
pound, promised in dowry with his Sister, whom Tyrone had married, and who was
now deceased. Others also laid out their grieuances conceived, such were
Odonell, Brian Mac Hugh og^, Mac Mahun, and Ever Mac Conly: They received
reasonable answers to their demands. But unto them the commissioners proposed
certain Articles: That they should forthwith lay down their Arms, disperse
their forces, subm^ssiuely acknowledge their disloialties, admit the Queens
Officers in their government, re-edi^ie the forts they had defaced, suffer the
Garrison to live without disturbance, make restitution of spoils taken,
confess upon their oaths how far they had dealt with foreign Princes, and
renounce all foreign aid. These propositions the Rebels liked not, but
departed with a resolution to maintain their own demands. Which moved
General Norrice, aided with the Lord Deputy, to march with his Army to Armagh;
when Tyrone heard of his approach, in great perplexity he forsook the Fort of
Blacke-water, set on fire the villages about, and plucked down the town of
Dungannon, with part of his own house, bewailing his state to be past re^ouery.

The country thus wasted, and no victuals to be had, Norrice set a Garrison in
the Church of Armagh, strengthened Monahan, and proclaimed Tyrone Traitor in his
own territories. Tyrone to gain time, presented to him a fained Petition,
signed with his own hand, cast himself down at the Queens Pictures feet,
vngir^^s sword, and craved pardon upon his knees. And in the mean time dealt
for aides out of Spain; wherein he prevailed so far, that King Philip sent
messengers with cap^tulations, that at a praefixed time h^^ would send him a
competent Army to join with the Irish, that all conditions of Peace with the
English should be rejected, and that the Rebels should be furnished with
munition from Spain.

Hereupon (though there was a cessation from Arms, he began to hurry, and wast
the country, and burn villages, and drive away booties. And having done this,
put on the vizard of dissimulation again, and sued for pardon, which to
effect, he sent the Letters of King Philip his promises, to the Lord Deputy,
with the causes of his own discontents; so he shuffled, that by his
dissimulation, or by the negligence of others, most part of Connaught and all
Vlster were revolted and in a rebellion.

In which estate Thomas Lord Borough was sent Lord Deputy into Ireland; he was
no sooner arrived, but General Norrice being crossed at the Court, or
discontented, died as was thought, through grief. The Lord Deputy set
presently forward to meet with the Rebels, whom he encountered at Moiry, and
defeating them, took the Fort of Black-water. The enemies seeking to rescue
it, were defeated by the Earl of Kildare, but Tyrone thinking all his hope was
gone if he lost that Fort, beleaguerd it. The Lord Deputy preparing straightway
to rescue the place, was suddenly taken with sickness and died.

Tyrone lay still before the Fort of Blacke-water; Anno 1598.
for the raising of his siege Sir Henry Bagnall was sent with fourteen
Ensigns of the choicest troops. These the Earl met near to Armagh, and
being most eagerly bent against S^. Henry, by his exact care and diligence, or
by the others negligence, he got the victory, wherein Sir Henry lost his life:
the English had not received such an overthrow since their first setting foot
in Ireland. 15. Captains were killed, and 1500. Soldiers were routed, and put
to flight. The Garrison of Blacke-water hereupon surrendered, and the Rebels
were thereby furnished with Munition and Armor, and Tyrones glory extolled. By
this the strength of the rebellion was increased.

In this desperate estate stood Ireland, when Robert Earl of Essex was sent
thither Lord Lieuetenant, and Lord Governor General; he led twenty thousand
Soldiers, sixteen thousand foot, the rest horsemen: as soon as he came, he
called a council touching the affairs; It was thought fittest, that Monster
should be first cleared of those petty Rebels lying nearest, whereupon
(contrary to his own opinion, and his directions received from the Queen) he
made first to Monster, and cleared those parts, though with more loss of time
and men, then was well liked of the state here: from thence he went into
Le^nster, against the O Conars, and O Neiles, whom he vanquished. Thence he
sent Sir Coniers Clifford against Orork, himself taking another way to
distract the Forces of Tyrone. Sir ^^niers Clifford was defeated and slain:
whereupon the Lord General made toward Vlster, and came to Louth. Tyrone
showed himself upon the hills on the other side of the River. And falling unto
his wonted vain of dissimulation, desired a parley with the Lord Lieuetenant,
but he rejected it; answering, that if he would confer with him, he should
find him the next morning in the head of his troops, on which day after a
light skirmish, a horseman of Tyrones troops, cried with a loud voice, that
Tyrone was not willing to fight, but to parley upon peace with the Lord
General; which thing was again denied. The next day as the Lord Lieuetenant
was in his march forward, one Hagan sent from Tyrone met him, and declared that
the Earl most humbly desired to have the Queens mercy and peace, and besought
that his Lordship would be pleased to afford him audience, which if he would
grant, then would he with all reverence attend at the foord of the River, not
far from Louth. To this motion at last he consented: and sent to discover the
place, and having a troop of horse upon the next hill, came down alone to the
River. Tyrone attending on the other side, as soon as he saw his approach,
rode into the River up to the Saddle, and with semblance of reverence, saluted
the Lord Lieuetenant. And having had some conference together the space of an
hour, both returned to their companies: after this Tyrone making suit for a
further conference, the Lord Lieuetenant taking with him the Earl of
Southampton, Sir George Bourchier, Sir Warram Saint Ledger, Sir Henry Dan^ers,
Sir Edward Wingfield, and Sir William Constable, went to the Foord; where
Tyrone with his Brother Cormac, Mac Gennis, Mac Gui^, Ener Mac Cowly, Henry
Oui^gton, and O Quin, attended their coming. And upon conference it was
concluded, that certain Commissioners should the next day meet for a treaty of
peace, and in the mean time, there should be a cessation of wars from six
weeks to six weeks, until the first of May, yet so as it might be free on
both sides, after fourteen days warning given to resume hostility afresh. And
if any of Tyrones confederates would not thereto consent, to be prosecuted at
the Lord Lieuetenants pleasure.

CHAPTER XIIII.
THe Queen was presently informed, Anno 1599.
that in Ireland, the Spring, Summer, and Autumn were spent, without service
upon the Arch-rebell, that her men were diminished, large sums of money
consumed without doing that for which he was sent, that by this means the
Rebels were encouraged, and the Kingdom of Ireland laid at hazard to be lost.
Whereupon the Queen wrote somewhat sharply to the Lord Lieuetenant; which
moved him so much, as leaving his charge to be managed by others, he came
into England, hoping to pacify the Queen. When he came, he was commanded to
keep his Chamber, and soon after was committed to the custody of the Lord
Keeper.

No sooner was the Lord General departed from Ireland, but that Tyrone
(notwithstanding the cessation from war, drawing his Forces together, took
the field; to whom Sir William Warren was sent, to charge him with breach of
promise; he answered, that his doings were according to covenants, having given
warning before: his cause was just, for that the Lord Lieuctenant was committed
in England, upon whose honor he reposed his whole estate, neither would he
have any thing to do with the Counselors of Ireland. Hereupon presuming upon
Spain, he sent Odonel into Connaught, received tumultuous persons,
strengthened the weak, glorying every where that he would restore again the
ancient Religion and liberty of Ireland, and expel the English out of Ireland.
To which end, some money and munition was sent from Spain, and Indulgences
from Rome. And for an especial favor the Pope sent him a plume of Phoenix
feathers, for a Trophy of his victories.

Tyrone under pretense of devotion, in midwinter went to the Monastery of
Tipperary, to worship the Cross: from thence he sent out Mac Guir with a
number of rifeling robbers, to spoil and prey upon the peaceable subjects,
with whom Sir Warram Saint Ledger met, and at the first encounter ran Mac Guir
through the body with a Lance, and was likewise run through with his Lance.
Whereupon Tyrone made ready to return from Monster sooner then was expected,
or himself meant.

At this time, Charles Blunt, Anno 1600.
Lord Mountioy, was sent Lord Lieuetenant general into Ireland. At his first
coming, hearing that Tyrone was to depart out of Monster, he hastened to stop
his passage in Feriall, and there to give him battle, which the Earl
prevented by taking another way, having intelligence of the Lord General his
designs. The spring drawing on, the Deputy put himself in his march toward
Vlster, with purpose to drive the Earl to a stand. In the mean time Sir Henry
Docwray at Loughfoil, and Sir Ma^thew Morgan at Belishanon planted the
Garrisons, which they effected with small resistance, and repressed the Rebels
in diverse overthrows.

The Lord General likewise held Tyrone very hard, and with light skirmishes
ever put him to the worst: sothat he now perceiving his fortunes to decline,
withdrew himself backwards into his old corners. The Lord Lieuetenant entered
in Lease, the place of refuge and receipt of all the Rebels in Leinster, where
he show Any Mac Rory-Og, chief of the family of the O Mores, a bloody, bold,
and desperate young man: and so chased out the rest of his companions, as that
never since they were seen in those parts. And though winter began to draw on,
yet marched he forward to the entry of the Mairy, three miles beyond Dundalk.

The passage into Vlster is every way naturally cumbersome, and it was helped
by the Rebels who had fortified and blocked up the entrance with fences of
stakes stuck in the ground, with hurdles joined together, and stones in the
midst, with turfes of earth laid between hills, woods and bogges, and manned
the place with a number of soldiers. But the English brake through their
Pallisadoes, and beat back the enemy. The Lord Deputy placed a garrison eight
miles from Armagh, where in memory of Sir John Norrice, he named the Fort Mount
Norrice. In his return he had many skirmishes. At Carlingford the enemies were
assembled to stop his way, but were all discomfited, and put to flight. In the
midst of winter he entered the Glinnes, that is, the valleys of Leinster, a
secure receptacle of the Rebels. There he brought into subjection Donel
Spanioh, Phelim Mac Pheogh, and the O Tools; of whom he took hostages. Then
went he to Fereall, and drove Tirell, the most approved warrior of all the
Rebels, from his fastness (that is, his bogs and bushes) unto Vlster, and
after some other good services done here, the spring approaching, he marched
into Vlster, fortified Armaugh, and removed Tyrone from the Fort of
Blacke-water, where he had fortified himself.

In the mean time the Pope and the King of Spain labored to maintain the
rebellion in Ireland, and to help Tyrone. Their agents were a Spaniard elected
Archbishop of Dublin by the Pope, the Bishop of Clowfort, the Bishop of
Killaloe, and Archer a Jesuit. These by prayers and promises of heavenly
rewards, persuaded the Spaniard to send succors into Ireland, which he did,
under the General, Don John d' Aquila, a man that conceived great hopes, and
was confident of much aid from the titular Earl Desmond, and Florence Mac
Carly, a Rebel of great power; wherein the man was much deceived; for Sir
George Carew Lord President of Munster, had prevented all his designs, and
sent them prisoners into England, where they were fast. Don Aquila with two
thousand Spaniards of old trained soldiers, with certain Irish fugitives
landed at Kinsale in Monster, the last of October, Anno 1600. and presently
published a writing, wherein he styled himself Master General, and captain
of the Catholic King in the wars of God, for holding and keeping the faith
in Ireland: this drew diverse distempered and cuill-affected persons on his side.

The Lord Deputy gathering his companies, hasted to Kinsale, and encamped near
unto the Town, on the land side. In the mean time, Sir Richard Leuison, with
two of the Queens ships, enclosed the haven, to forbid all access to the
Spaniards. Then on both sides the Canon played upon the town.

But news was brought that two thousand Spaniards more were arrived at Bear
haven, Baltimor, and Castle haven. Sir Richard Leuison was employed upon them,
in which service he sunk five of their ships. Unto these new landed
Spaniards, whose Leader was Alfonso o-campo, O-donel over the ice by speedy
iourneyes and unknown by-ways repaired, unseen of the English. And a few
days after, Tyrone himself, with O Roik, Raimund, Burk, Mac Mahun, Randall
Mac Surly, Tirrell, the Barron of Lixnawe, with the choice of the Nobles,
making six thousand foot, and five hundredth horse. All confident of victory,
being fresh, strong, and more in number then the English, who were out-wearied
with a winter siege with scarcity of victuals, their horse weak with fore
travel.

In this hope Tyrone upon an hill not a mile from the English camp made a
brauado two days together, intending to have put these new supplies of
Spaniards, with eight hundredth Irish, by night into Kinsale, as did appear by
letters intercepted from Don Aquila. To prevent this, the Lord Deputy appointed
eight Ensigns to keep watch, and himself with the President of Monster, and
the Marshall, at the foot of the hill, chose out a convenient plot to give the
Earl battle; who the next morning seeing the English so forward, by his
bag-pipers sounded the retreat; whom the Lord General followed, and forced
them to a stand in the brinke of a bogge, where their horsemen were disordered
and routed by the Earl of Clan-Ricard. The maine battle was charged by the
Lord Deputy himself, who discharged the parts of a prouide^t Captain, and of
a valiant soldier. The rebels not able to withstand him, brake their arrayes,
and fled confusedly in disorder: In the pursuit, many were slain. Tyrone,
O-donel, and the rest flung away their weapons, and shifted for themselves by
flight. Alfonso Ocampo, and six Ensign bearers were taken prisoners, nine of
their Ensigns were born away by the English, and twelve hundredth Spaniards
slain. This victory obtained, dismayed both the Spaniards in Kinsale, and the
rebels. Tyrone was forced into his starting holes in Vlster. O-donel fled into
Spain. The rest of the Rebels were driven to hide themselves.

The Lord General returning to the siege of Kinsale, began to raise Rampires,
and to mount his Cannons nearer the town, in which work six days were spent
without any impeach from the Spaniards. Don Aquila seeking now to get clear
and be gone, sent his Lieuetenant with the Drum-maior to the Lord Deputy;
wherein he craved, that some Gentleman of credit, might be sent into the
town, with whom he might parley for peace. The Lord Deputy sent Sir William
Godolphin, to whom Don Aquila signified, that he had found the Lord Deputy,
though his eager enemy, yet an honorable person: the Irish of no valor, rude,
and uncivil, yea, and (that which he sore feared) persidious and false. That
he was sent from the King of Spain his Master, to aid two Earls, and now he
much doubted whether there were any such in rerum natura; considering that one
tempestuous puff of war had blown the one of them into Spain, and the
other into the North, so as they were no more to be seen: willing therefore
he was to treat about a pace, that might be good for the English, and not
hurtful to the Spaniards. Albeit he wanted nothing requisite to the holding
out of the siege, and expected every day out of Spain, fresh supplies to find
the English work and trouble enough.

The matter thus proposed, Anno 1601.
the English being weak, and wearied with a winter-siege, the Lord Deputy
consented to an agreement, upon these Articles.

1. That John d'Aquila should quit the places which he held in the Kingdom of
Ireland, as well in the town of Kinsale, as in the Forts and Castle of
Baltimar, Ber^hauen, and Castlehauen, and should deliver them unto the Lord
Deputy, or to whom he should appoint.

2. That Don d' Aquila and his Spaniards should depart with arms, money,
munition, and banners displayed. The soldiers notwithstanding to bear no
Arms against the Queen of England, till such time as they were vn^hipped in
some part of Spain.

3. That Ships and Victuals should be granted to them in their departure, for
their money, at such reasonable prises as the country could afford.

4. That if contrary winds enforced them into any other part of Ireland, or
England, they might be entreated as friends, with safety of harbor and
provisions necessary for their money.

5. That a cessation should be from war, a security from injuries.

6. That the Ships in which they should be embarked, might freely pass by
other English Ships, without molestation, and the Ships arriving in Spain,
might safely return back again without any impeachment of the Spaniards. For
security whereof, the said Don d' Aquila should deliver for hostages such three
of their Captains as the Lord Deputy would choose. Tyrone seeing his hopes
gone, his men slain, his restless conscience gave him no repose, he shifted
from place to place in much fear and perplexity. In the mean time, the Lord
Deputy refreshed his weary and winterbeaten soldiers, repaired the decays,
renewed the Garrisons in Monster. This done, he departed for Dublin. From
thence toward the spring, by an easy march well appointed, he returned into
Vlster, meaning to belay the enemy on every side, by planting his Forts, so to
take him in his toil: thus coming to Blackwater he transported his Army over
the River upon floats, Charles Mount.
and beneath the old Fort, he erected a new; which thing so terrified the
Rebel, that he set on fire his own house at Dunganon, and got himself
farthe^ from danger. The Lord Deputy followed him close, spoiled the
Cornefields, and burnt the villages, and booties were brought in on every side.
The Forts in Lough crew, Lough Reogh, and Magher lecond; were yielded up, and
Gar^isons placed in Lough, Neaugh, or Sidny, and in M^naghan; whence with their
continual sallies, they kept the enemies in such fear, that they hid
themselves in woods, complaining and exclaiming against Tyrone, that had
brought them all to ruin for his private discontents, and began to repent them
so far, as they made have who should first come in to the Lord Deputy. The
Earl seeing how the world went, thought good to prevent the worst by his
submission, which in humble letters he sent to the Queen, who gave the Lord
Deputy authority to pardon his life, though hardly drawn to remit his
offenses, his friends daily solicited the Lord Deputy for his peace; which at
last was granted, to put his life and revenues without any condition, to the
will of the Queen. Whereupon all Mellifont accompanied with two persons and no
more, he had access to the Chamber of Presence, where the Lord Deputy sat in
a Chair of Estate. Tyrone in base and poor array, with a dejected
countenance, at the first entrance, fell down upon his knees, and so rested,
till he was commanded to arise; and coming nearer, stepping two paces, he
fell down prostrate, and with great submiss^on acknowledged his sins against
God, and his fault against her Majesty. The next day the Lord Deputy departing
from Dublin, took Tyrone thither, meaning to transport him for England. But
the death of Queen Elizabeth stayed that design, and King James succeeding,
and being received with admirable love of all sorts, at his first entrance
^ardoned Tyrone. And Ireland has been since held in greater peace then ever
in the memory of any stories has been formerly known.

After all this, Tyrone, a man not framed for a peaceable course, but only for
trouble, fell into his last pageant, in this manner. Montgomery was made Lord
Bishop of Derry, (who was after, Lord Bishop of Mead) and because the revenues
of that of Derry and some other Bishoprics near adjoining were so much
impaired, that they were no way able to make a reasonable maintenance; the
Bishop sought by lawful means to get some Lands taken without right or law
from his Bishopric, and to recover things desperately lost, if he could.
This thing could not be effected, without the offense of Tyrone, who had gotten
into his hands the greatest part of the Bishopric lands. In so much, that
Tyrone understanding the Bishop sought to recover the Lands of the Bishopric,
told the Bishop thus much: My Lord you have two or three Bishoprics, and yet
you are not content with them, you seek the Lands of my Earldom. My Lord,
quoth the Bishop, your Earldom is swollen so bigg with the Lands of the
Church, that it will burst if it be not vented. The Bishop intending in a
lawful course to recover the Lands lost, found that there was no man could
give him better light and knowledge of those things, then O Cane, who had been
great with Tyrone: and to make use of him was a matter of difficulty; yet some
means being used to him, he came of his own accord to the Bishop, and told
him that he could help him to the knowledge of that which he sought, but he
was afraid of Tyrone: nay said the Bishop, I will not trust you, for I know
that one bottle of Aqua vitae will draw you from me to Tyrone. Whereupon he
took a Book and laid it on his head, saying, ter liuro, ter liuro: which as
my Lord of Mead said, (who told me this story) is one of the greatest kind
of affirming a truth which the Irish have, and after this ceremony performed,
they keep their promise: O Cane using this ceremony, promised to reu^ale all
that he knew in that matter, if he would on the other side promise him to
save him from the violence of Tyrone, and not to deliver him into England;
which he promised to do. Whereupon the Bishop resolved to bring him to the
Council of Ireland, there to take his confession; as they came along by
Dungannon, Tyrones Son came forth with sixteen horsemen, but finding the
Bishop well appointed and guarded with men, told him that he came forth only
to attend his Lordship some part of the way, and so after, he rode with him a
reasonable way, took his leave and returned. The Bishop feared that he came
to take O Cane from him, and thought that he meant to do it, if the Bishop had
not been better provided then he was. Thus they coming peaceably to the
Council, the confession of O Cane was taken. After this, Process were sent to
Tyrone to warn him to come at an appointed time, to answer to the suit of the
Lord Bishop of Derry. There was no other intention then, but in a peaceable
manner to bring the suit to a trial. But behold the burden of an evil
conscience. Tyrone had entered into a new conspiracy, to raise another
rebellion; of this conspiracy was O Cane. This thing was secret, the Council
knew nothing of it. Tyrone being served with Process to answer the suit,
began to suspect that this was but a plot to draw him in; that surely all the
treason was revealed by O Cane, whom he knew to be of the conspiracy: that the
pretense was a Process, and a trial in law, but the intent was to have his
head. Upon this bare suspicion, Tyrone resolved with such other as was in the
conspiracy to fly, and thereupon fled out of Ireland with his confederates, and
lost al those lands in the North of Ireland, which by his Mies. authority, and
the diligence of his Mies. subjects which have been undertakers, are now
planted with a more civil people, then before.

This story of Tyrone, being compared with that of Stucley, and other Irish
commotions, may prove the implacable mind of the Pope; and the favor of God in
delivering us. Stucley by the providence of God was turned another way, and
came not into Ireland, as he purposed: they who came were ever destroyed. But
no enemy did ever more hurt there, then Tyrone. But when the account is cast
up; what have all the adversaries of England got in the end? They have, like
secret serpents nibled at the heel. And indeed this has bin the practice of
the old Serpent, in troubling the Church. And we have both warning of his
malice, and a promise of deliverance, and in the end to tread on his head, that
now biteth at our heels. The woman's seed shall break the serpents head, Genesis 3.
15.
but the serpent shall bruise his heel. The promise is fulfilled in Christ Jesus
our head, and yet by the Apostle extended to the Church, Romans 16. 20. The God
of peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly. It is true, that this is
done in a spiritual battle, wherein Satan and sin shall be ouerthrown: yet to
comfort his Church, and to teach us to stay with patience the final fulfilling
of his promises, he does in the mean time send many deliverances to his
Church, and many times beats down Satan and Satan's instruments under the feet
of his Church. For is not this a treading down of Satan's head, when we see all the instruments that Satan has stirred up to our destruction, to be by the
hand of God beaten and trodden to dust? Verily, unto us it is a sign of
comfort, and that from the Lord, but to our adversaries a sign of sear. The
true Church of God has a privilege above others in this world, though
persecuted in and by this evil world, yet there appears always an eminent
privilege of the Church. When the Jews were Gods Church, this appeared among
them, what was their privilege? They were called by God from and before al
other nations, not because they were stronger or greater, or wiser, but because
God would fulfill his promise to their Fathers. Romans 3. 2.
And to them were committed the Oracles of God; and as the Apostle does enlarge
the same thing, Romans 9. 4.
to them pertained the adoption, and theglory, and the covenants, and the
giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises. In all which may
appear what God did for them, and what he does for his Church always: but
what are they to do to God? only to worship him according to these oracles,
this law, these covenants, these promises, which God has given them. By these
things then may the Church be known, we may add another thing to these,
whereby we find that God would always be known to be the God of his people,
of his Church; that is, a miraculous protection of his Church, and strange
deliverance out of dangers. This miraculous protection and deliverance, God
showed to Israel d^uers ways; and this has he like wise showed to the Church
of Christians, and then especially when the Church has been most oppugned.
And this mercy has God declared to no Church more, then to the Church of
England: we have the Oracles of God among us, and these we labor to preserve
without mixture, that no Oracles of men may be joined with them in any
equality. This we profess, and for this we suffer. This is our glory, that we
suffer as the Church of God has all ways suffered. This is our glory, that we
are persecuted by a people that have forsaken their God. For they that have
forsaken ^he only preferment by the Oracles of God committed to their trust,
and have against that trust, thrust in men's Oracles, men's traditions to match
the Oracles of God in equal authority: they who worship not God according to
Gods Oracles delivered to them, but according to their own inventions; these
men have forsaken their God. And these be they that glory so much of the name
of the Catholic Church against us, God knows his Church; for the Lord
knows who are his: But our adversaries deal not with God to please him, but
with men to deceive them. If they should deceive some men with the mask, and
with the empty title o^ the Catholic Church, what have they gotten thereby?
God is not deceived, and God will in his time make it known where his
Catholic Church is. God will not have his Catholic Church maintained with
lies, with wicked and ungracious Practices, with treasons and rebellions, with
conspiracies; they who practice such things, can never prove themselves to be
the Catholic Church; but the true Catholic Church is known by holding the
Oracles of God, by worshipping God according to his own Oracles, by suffering
patiently the practices of wicked men, by committing their cause to God, by
trusting in God, and in the power of his might, and by miraculous deliverances
out of danger by the only hand and power of God. This holy and heavenly
protection of God of the Church of England, may plainly prove unto all the
world, that the Church of England is a part and true member of that Catholic
Church that serves God in truth and sincerity, enjoying those privileges and
favors which God does vouchsafe to no people, saving to his own Church.

Now let the Pope go on in his course, and fulfill his measure: let him honor
wretched and wicked rebels, the scum of the earth: let him send a peacockes
tail, as he did to Stucley, let him send a plume of Phoenix seathers, as he
did to Tyrone (if they were Phoenix feathers, or if the Pope did not collude in
one thing, as that Friar did in another thing, who undertook to show to the
people a feather of the wing of the Angel Gahriell; a plume of whose feathers
was more befitting the Pope to send, if his holiness has such command over
Angels, as they say he has.) Let them I say proceed in the works of
darkness as they have done, and as they continue to do: let us trust in the
Lord, who has manifested to all the world by his great, merciful, and
manifold deliverances, that he has taken the protection of us. And as he has
done hitherto, assuredly he will do to the end, if we fail not: for God will
not forsake us, if we forsake not him. Indeed if we forsake him, and fall away
from the truth of Religion, in the Church, and from the execution of justice in
the State; and from obedience to the faith: then may we loose our part in God,
and loose our confidence in his help, and loose the blessed benefit of his
protect^ on. They can never preua^le against us by any other way, then by our
forsaking of God. When Balac the King of Moab, had sent for Balaam the false
Prophet, and by him understood that it was impossible for him to prevail
against Israel, though Balaam was sent to curse them: At last he was informed
by his false Prophet Balaam, that there was no hope to prevail against Israel,
unless there were some means devised to draw Israel into sin against God,
and so would God be offended with them, and then might their adversaries
prevail against them: this advise was most pernicious against Israel. For the
women of Moab were sent among the Israelites to intise them both to bodily and
spiritual fornication. And this indeed provoked Gods anger: and therefore the
Lord commanded Israel to vex the Midia^nites, and to smite them, Numb. 25. 17.
for they trouble you with their wiles. The King of Spain has proved Balaam
the false Prophet, the Pope of Rome, to curse the Church and State of England:
he has been as greedily bent to curse England, as ever Balaam was to curse
Israel. His curses by Gods goodness have been turned into blessings upon us.
The more he has cursed, the more have we received blessings from God. The
Pope perceiving that his curses cannot prevail against us, has entered into
the consultation of Balaam the false Prophet, to send among us Priests and
Jesuits secretly, who as they say, are well acquainted both with carnal and
spiritual fornication. These come among us and trouble us with their wiles.
And if by their wiles we be once drawn away from God, then may they prevail,
but not otherwise then as the d^uell has sometimes permission to prevail
against Gods people. But so long as we stand the Church of God, holding the
Oracles of God committed to us, morshipping. God according to the rules of the
holy doctrine, we may with joy of h^^rt expect the protection of God as we
have had. Of these things what can our adversaries deny? Can they deny that we
have the Oracles of God among us, only reuerencing them? Can they deny the
miraculous pro^^ction of God over us from time to time, against all their
wicked practices? let our enemies be judges herein. Can they deny that the Pope
has run the course of false Balaam against us? Can they deny that their
Priests and Jesuits come creeping in among us, to draw us away from God to be
partakers with them in their superstition and idolatry? these things are
manifest to the world, and to their own consciences: then we leave them unto
the service of their Balaam, let them leave us to the service of our God.

CHAPTER XV.
QVeene Elizabeth after so many bloody and dangerous practices attempted
against her, being mightily protected by God, ended her days in peace and
safety: The enemy was not permitted to hurt her, with all their bloody and
barbarous practices. After her, succeeded our peaceable Solomon, King James,
who labored to establish peace, if it might be: But when he spoke of peace,
they prepared themselves for war.

He was first encountered with such a practice, Anno 1603.
whereof because I know not the truth and bottom, I must follow such relations
as I find. King James our^gracious Sovereign, being called into the right of
his own inheritance, by the great and admirable applause and affections of all
good men from the highest to the lowest of England: And declaring his constant
resolution for the maintenance of Religion, deferred his Coronation till Saint
James day. In the mean time some unquiet spirits entered into a conspiracy,
(their vain hopes for advancing of their Religion, failing) their design as
is said, was to surprise the King, and Prince Henry. Of forces they presumed,
meaning to retain them prisoners in the Tower, and with treasures therein to
maintain their intent, or to carry them to Dover Castle, and there by
violence, either to obtain their own pardons, a tolleration of Religion, and
a remouall of some Counselors of state, or else to put some other project in
execution. To conceal this treason, Watson the Priest devised oaths for
secrecy, and himself with Clark, another Priest taught; that the act was
lawful, being done before the Coronation: for that the King was no King before
he was anointed, and the Crown solemnly set upon his head.

The other persons inuolued in this practice, were Henry Brook, Lord Cobham,
Thomas Lord Gray of Wilton, Sir Walter Ralegh, Sir Griffin Markham, Sir Edward
Parham, George Brook, Bartholomew Brookesby, and Anthony Coply. All which were
apprehended and committed. The sickness being then rife in London, the Term
was kept at Winchester, the place designed for their arraignement, whether they
were conveyed under strong guard. The first brought to trial was George
Brook, brother to the Lord Cobham, Sir Griffin Markham, Sir Edward Parham,
Brooksly, Coply, Watson and Clark. The indictment was, that they had conspired,
first to destroy the King; then to raise rebellion, to alter Religion, to
subvert the State, to procure foreign invasion. These their intents they had
made known to the Lord Gray, whom they intended to make Earl Marshall of
England, Watson Lord Chancelour, Georke Brooks Lord Treasurer, Markham
Secretary: that with the King the Lords also should be surprised in their
Chambers at Greenwich, and the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London should be sent
for, and so shut up in the Tower.

George Brook answered, that he had commission from the King to do that he
did, only to try faithful subjects; but being required to show his
Commission, he could produce none. Sir Griffin Markham, excepting only the
imputation of blood, confessed his offense penitently; alleging it was through
a discontented mind, and desired the Lords to be a mean to the King for
mercy Watson and Clark, (the former of which confessed that he had drawn all
those Gentlemen into those plots) like true Roman Priests, auerred that they
held the King for no King, until he was crowned: and therefore it could not
be treason: alleging that Saul was no King, till he was chosen in Mispeh,
though he had been anointed in Ramoth by the Prophet Samuel. Neither
Jeroboam, who in the days of Solomon had been confirmed by the Prophet to
reign over Israel, until the people made him King, upon the foolish answer
of Rehoboam: making no difference between the mediate and ordinary succession
of lawful Kings in Commonwealths established: and those which God himself
extraordinarily advanced to be scourges to an ungrateful land. It was told
them that in England the King never dies, that there is no interregnum, that
the Coronation is but a ceremony to show the King to the people. Two days
after was Sir Walter Ralegh brought to the bar, he was indicted for combining
with the Lord Cobham (his accuser as it was said in the foresaid designs) he
pleaded, not guilty, and so stood for his purgation. He pleaded for himself a
long time, and with some admiration of men, who thought that a man of such
understanding would hardly be drawn into a plot so foul, and so foolish: yet
he was found guilty, and had sentence of death.

The like judgment, a few days after, passed upon the Lord Cobham and Gray,
arraigned on two several days. The former was indicted for combining with Sir
Walter Ralegh, and George Brook to procure forces from the King of Spain, and
the Archduke for invasion: the other for joining with the foresaid Priests,
Knights, and Gentlemen in their conspiracies. Sir Edward Parham was only
acquitted by the Jury. Of the rest, only three died. Watson, Clark, and George
Brook. Watson had before in Print laid open at large the treasonable practices
of the Jesuits, and at his death left this suspicion on them, that they in
revenge, had cunningly drawn him into this action, which brought him to his
end. After this the Lords Cobham and Gray, and Sir Griffin Markham were by a
Warrant to be executed the Friday next. But the King inclined to mercy, sent at
the day appointed a Pardon for them; the manner whereof was such, as gave
unexpected joy to them that looked for nothing but death. The Pardon was
brought to the place where they were to be executed, by Master Gibb a
Gentleman, so secretly, that none present understood any thing thereof: Sir
Griffin Markham was first brought to the Scaffold (erected in the Castle
Green,) and made himself ready for the stroke of the Axe. When secretly
Master Gibb delivered to the High Shiriffe the Kings warrant to the contrary;
who understanding his Majesty's intent, took back the prisoner (as if he were
first to confront the two Lords, upon some service of the King) and brought him
unto the Castle Hall. Then was the Lord Gray brought forth, who having poured
out his prayers unto God, at length kneeling down for the stroke of death, the
Sheriff bad stay, telling the Lord that some further service was expected of
him; and thereupon led him likewise into the Castle Hall. The Lord Cobham was
last brought forth: who being in preparation, and prayers, the Lord Gray and
Sir Gr^ffin were brought back again. All the three prisoners appearing
together on the Scaffold, the Sheriff notified his Majesty's warrant for the
stay of the execution. At which example of Clemency, unexpected both of the
prisoners and spectators, there arose great shoutes of the people, crying, God
save the King. The condemned wished that they might sacrifice their lives to
redeem their faults, and to repurchase so merciful a Prince his love.

This attempt seemed to be a matter of less danger, because there appeared
neither strength to act the business intended, nor heads to carry it. But our
thankfulness must appear to God for our least deliverances. It is certain by
their confessions that a great mischief was intended, howso^uer they might
seem unable to effect it. And this we may observe, that no treason was ever
attempted without a Romish Priest. The treasons attempted in England, have that
proper and peculiar mark, to have a Priest in the practice.

CHAPTER XVI.
NOw I enter upon a Narration, which may fully open our adversaries to the
world: wherein appears the profundity of malice and cruelty, and
ungodliness, and whereby all men may understand by what spirit these men are
led. The Histories of former times contain no example like it. Which shows
that wicked inventions are grown to a greater ripeness in the Romish
generation. And when they are come to their full ripenesse^ they themselves may
understand what they are to look for. In the mean time let all men understand
the difference between the Church of God, and that which in the Scripture is
called ecclesia malignantium. Odiui ecclesi^m malignantium. Psalm. 25. ^. in
edit. vul^ata.
That Church of the malignant may sufficiently appear by all the former
practices, but especially by this of the Gunpowder treason.

This treason was first thought on in the last year of Queen Elizabeth, when
Henry Garnet the Superior of the malignants here, Catesby, and others sent
Thomas Winter into Spain, to negotiate with the Spanish King in the name of
the English Catholics: First to send an army to them, who were now in
readiness to join their forces with his: secondly, to grantsome pensions to
sundry persons devoted to his service in England: And thirdly, Winter was to
give advertisement of the discontents that the young Gentlemen and Soldiers had
conceived upon the death of Essex, whereby a fit occasion was offered to
forward the popish cause. To prosecute this business, he made for his means,
Father Creswell the leiger Jesuit in Spain, Don Petro Francesa second
secretary to the State, and the Duke of Lerma: all which assured Winter that
the office of his imploiment would be very grateful to his Master. The place
of landding concluded upon by them was Kent or Essex if the Kings Army were
great, if otherwise, then Milford haven in Wales was held fittest. With these
and other like pro^ects Winter all this summer followed the King in his
progress. And lastly had answer by the Count Miranda, that the King would
bestow an hundredth thousand crowns toward the expedition, half thereof to be
paid that year, and the rest the next Spring, when at the farthest he meant
to set foot in England. On whose behalf he willed the English Catholics to
maintain their promise, whom he respected (as was said) as his own proper
Castilians; and further desired their continual aduertisemonts; if in the
mean time it chanced the old Queen to die.

Winter thus laden with hopes, returned from Spain, and acquainted Garnet,
Catesby, and Tresham, with what had passed, which they related to others. All
were glad to hear the news, and rested satisfied, expecting the day. But
before the next Spring, Queen Elizabeth died. To give notice of her death,
Christopher Wright was from Catesby and others sent into Spain. Guy Fawkes was
likewise sent from Bruxells by Sir William Stanly into Spain, both of them to
prosecute the former negotiation, assuring the Spanish King, that King James
would run the same course, and proceed as rigorously against the Catholics,
as the late Queen had done, for whose defense they desired instantly that some
Spaniards might be transported unto Milford haven. Where the English Papists
would be forward to assist them, having in a readiness two thousand horse
furnished for the enterprise. But the Spa^iard would not now hearken to their
motions, or proceed any further to any forcible enterprise

In the mean while, the Jesuits had been tampering to dissuade the
acceptance of King James into England, urging it that death was rather to be
endured, then to admit an heretic. And those that gave him consent, they held
liable to excommunication by the censure of Pope Clement (...). The Papists
seeing their great ankerhold to fail them from Spain, began to enter into
more desperate courses. Catesby took his ground from the doctrine of Father
Parsons: That the whole Schools both of Divines and Lawyers, In his Book
Philopater. Sect. 2.
take this position vn^oubtedly to be believed, That if any Christian Prince
shall manifestly turn from the Catholic Religion, and desire of seek to
reclaim others from the same, he presently falls from all princely power and
dignity, and that also by virtue and power of the law it self both divine and
humane, even before any sentence pronounced against him by the supreme Pastor
and Judge. And that his Subjects, of what estate or condition soever, are freed
from all bond of oath of allegiance which at any time they had made unto him
as to their lawful Prince. Nay, that they both may and ought (provided they
have competent strength and force) cast out such a man from bearing rule among
Christians, as an Apostata, an Heretic, a Back-slider, a Reuolter from our
Lord Christ, and an enemy to his own State, and commonwealth; least perhaps
he might infect others, or by his example or command, turn them from the
faith: yea they affirm further, that if a Prince shall but favor or show
countenance to an Heretic, he presently loses his Kingdom. By this fiery
divinity of their own making, or receiving it from the spirits of error and
doctrines of devils, (for those things that are taught for doctrines, not being
found in the word of God, are doctrines of devils, much more they that are
contrary to the doctrines of Gods word) by these doctrines the
Gunpowder-treason took strength. The Parliament dissolved the seventh of
July, and was prorogued until the seventh of February following, Catesby
being then at Lambeth, sent for Thomas Winter, who had been employed into
Spain, and brake with him upon the blowing up of the Parliament house; who
answered, that indeed struck at the root: but if it should not take effect,
said he, as most of this nature miscarrie, the scandal would be so great,
which Catholic religion might hereby sustain, as not only our enemies, but
our friends also would with good reason condemn us. Catesby answered, the
nature of the disease required so sharp a remedy, and asked him if he would
g^ue his consent. Yes, said he, in this or what else soever, he would venture
his life. But he proposed difficulties, as want of an house, and of one to
carry the mine, noise in the working, and such like. Catesby answered, let us
give the attempt, and where it ^aileth, pass no further: but first quoth he,
because we will leave no peaceable and quiet way untried, you shall go over,
and inform the Constable of the state of the Catholics here in England,
entreating him to solicit his Mai^stie, that the penal laws may be
recalled, and we admitted into the ra^ke of his other subjects. Withal, you
may bring over some confident Gentlemen, such as you shall understand best able
for this business, and named unto him Master Fawkes. Shortly after, Winter
passed the seas, and found the Constable at Bergen near Dunkirk: where by
help of Master Owen he delivered his message. Whose answer was, that he had
strict command from his Master, to do all good offices for the Catholics, and
for his own part he thought himself bound in conscience so to do, and that
no good occasion should be omitted, but he spoke to him nothing of this
matter.

Returning to Dunkirk with Master Owen they had speech whether the Constable
would faithfully help them, or no: Owen said, he believed nothing less, and
that they sought only their own^ ends, holding small account of Catholics.
Winter told him, that there were many Gentlemen in England, who would not
forsake their Country until they had tried the uttermost. And to add one more
to their company, as a fit man both for council and execution of whatsoever
they should resolve, wished for Master Fawkes, who as he had heard, was a man
of good commendation. Owen told him, the gentleman deserved no less, but was
at Brussels, and that if he came not, as happily he might before Winters
departure, he would send him shortly after into England. Winter went shortly
after to Ostend; where Sir William Stanly as then was not, but came two days
after. Winter remained with him three or four days. In which time he asked
him, if the Catholics in England should do any thing to help themselves,
whether he thought the Archduke would second them? he answered, no. For all
those parts were so desirous of peace with England, as they would endure no
speech of other enterprise. Neither were it fit, said he, to set any pro^ect a
foot, now the peace is upon concluding* Winter told him there was no such
resolution, and fell into other speech; asking him of Master Fawkes, whom Sir
William much commended: and as they were in speech, Fawkes came in. Sir William
told him, this is the Gentleman you spoke of; and after they had embraced,
Winter told Fawkes, that some good friends of his wished his company in
England, and appointed to meet at Dunkirk, where they might confer. Meeting
at Dunkirk, they had conference, and resolved both to come into England. They
came first to Catesby: whether came Master Thomas Percy. The first word he
spoke after he came into their company, was, Shall we always, Gentlemen,
talk, and never do any thing? Catesby took him aside, and had speech of
somewhat to be done, so as first they might all take an oath of secrecy; which
within few days after, they did. The oath was this: You shall swear by the
blessed Trinity, and by the Sacrament you now purpose to receive, never to
disclose, directly nor indirectly, by wo^d or circumstance, the matter that
shall he proposed to you to keep secret, nor desist from the execution
thereof, until the rest shall giu^ you leave. This oath was first taken by
Catesby, Percy, Wright and Fawkes, behind Saint Clements. After the oath
taken, they went into the next room and heard Mass, and received the
Sacrament upon it. That done, Catesby disclosed to Percy, and Winter and Jack
Wright to Fawkes the business, for which they took the oath, which they
approved. Then was Percy sent to take the house, which they understood did
belong to one Ferris; which with some difficulty in the end he obtained, and
became Tenant to Whinyard, as Ferris was before. Fawkes underwent the name of
Master Percy his man, calling himself Johnson; because his face was most
unknown, and received the keys of the house, until they heard that the
Parliament was adiourned to the 7. of February. At which time they all departed
several ways into the Country, to meet again at the beginning of Michaelmas
Term. It was thought convenient to have a house to receive provision of
powder and wood for the mine; from which house the provision might be conveyed
to that house which Percy had taken: this was taken in Lambeth, and Keys was
appointed the trusty keeper thereof. When they were agreed to begin and set
things in order for the mine, they were stayed a while, because the Scottish
Lords were appointed to sit in conference of the Union in Percy his house. The
time of their sitting being past, they entered upon the mine, having provided
themselves of baked meats, the less to need sending abroad.

Whilst they were together, they fell into discourse what they should do after
this deed was done. The first question was, how they might surprise the next
heir. The Prince happily would be at Parliament with the King, his Father: how
should they then be able to seize upon the Duke? This burden Percy undertook,
that by his acquaintance, he with other Gentlemen would enter the Chamber
without suspicion, and having some doozen others at several doors to expect
his coming, and two or three on horseback at the Court gate to receive him,
he would undertake ( the blow being given, until which he would attend in the
Dukes Chamber) to carry him safe away: for he supposed most of the Court would
be absent, and such as were there, not suspecting, or unprovided for any such
matter. For the Lady Elizabeth, it were easy to surprise her in the country,
by drawing friends together at an hunting near the Lord Harringtons, and Asby
Master Catesby his house being not far off, was a fit place for preparation
The next was for money and horses, which if they could provide in any
reasonable measure (having the heir apparent) and the first knowledge by four
or five days was odds sufficient. Then what Lords they should save from the
Parliament, which was first agreed in general, as many as they could that were
Catholics, or so disposed; but after they descended to speak of particulars.
Next what foreign Princes they should acquaint with this before, or join with
after. For this point they agreed, that first they could not inioyne Princes to
that secrecy, nor oblige them by oath, so to be secure of their promise;
beside, they knew not whether they will approve the project or dislike it. And
if they do allow thereof, to prepare before, might beget suspicion: and not to
provide until the business were acted; the same letter that carried the news
of the thing done, might as well entreat their help and furtherance. Spain is
too slow in their preparations to hope any good from the first extremities, and
France too near and to dangerous, who with the Shipping of Holland, we feared
of all the world might make away with us. While they were in the middle of
these discourses, they heard that the Parliament would be anew adiourned until
after Michaelmas, upon which tidings they brake off both discourse and working.
About Candlemas they brought over in a Boat the powder which they had provided
at Lambeth, and laid it in Master Percy his house; because they would have all
their danger in one place. Then falling to their work in the mine, they came
against the stone wall, which was very hard to beat through, at which time they
called Kit Wright to their company; but as they were working upon the wall they
heard a rushing in a Cellar, of removing of coals. Whereupon they feared that
they had been discovered, and they sent Fawkes to go to the Cellar; who
finding that the Coals were a selling, and that the Cellar was to be let,
viewing the opportunity thereof for their purpose, Percy went and hired the
same for yearly rent. They had before this provided twenty barrels of powder,
which they removed into the Cellar, and covered them with billets and faggots
which they had provided for that purpose.

After this they thought fit to send Fawkes to acquaint Sir William Stanly, and
Master Owen with this matter, but so that they might receive the oath of
secrecy. The reason why they desired Sir William Stanly should be acquainted
herewith, was to have him with them so soon as he could. And for Master Owen,
he might hold good correspondencies after with foreign Princes. Master Fawkes
departed about Easter for Flanders, and returned in the end of August. He
brought word that Sir William Stanly was not returned from Spain, so as he
uttered the matter only to Owen, who seemed well pleased with the business,
but told him that surely Sir William wou^d not be acquainted with any plot as
having business now a foot in the Court of England; but he himself would be
always ready to tell him, and send him away so soon as it were done.

About this time Master Percy and Catesby met at the Bathe. Where they agreed
that the company being yet but few, Catesby should have the others authority to
call in whom he thought best. Whereupon he called in Sir Euerard Digby, and
after that Master Tresham. The first promised fifteen hundredth pounds, the
second two thousand pounds. Master Percy promised all that he could get of the
Earl of Northumberlands rents, which was about four thousand pounds, and to
provide many galloping horses, to the number of ten.

Mean while, Fawkes and Winter bought somenew powder, as suspecting the first
to be danke, and conveyed it into the Cellar, and set it in order, as they
resolved it should stand. Then was the Parliament anew prorogued until the
fifth of November. So that all of them went down till some ten days before.
When Catesby camevp with Fawks to an house by Enfield-chase, called White-webs;
whether Winter came to them. Catesby willed Winter to inquire whether the young
Prince came to the Parliament. Winter told him that he heard that his Grace
thought not to be there. Then said Catesby, must we have our horses bey^nd the
water, and provision of more company to surprise the Prince, and eaue the Duke
alone.

All things thus prepared: the Saturday of the week immediately praeceding the
Kings return, which was upon Thursday (being but ten days before the
Parliament) The Lord Monteagle, son and heir to the Lord Morley, being in
his own lodging ready to go to supper at seven of the clock at night, one
of his footmen, whom he had sent of an errand over the street, was met by an
unknown man of a reasonable tall personage, who delivered him a Letter,
charging him to put it into my Lord his Masters hands: which my Lord no sooner
received, but that having broken it up, and perceiving the same to be of an
unknown, and somewhat vnlegible hand, and without either date or subscription;
did call one of his men to him for helping him to read it. But no sooner did
he conceive the strange contents thereof, although he was somewhat perplexed
what construction to make of it, (as whether of a matter of consequence, as
indeed it was, or whether some foolish devised Pasquill by some of his
enemies, to skarre him from his attendance at the Parliament) yet did he as a
most dutiful and l^iall subject, conclude not to conceal it, what ever might
come of it. Whereupon notwithstanding the latenesse and darkness of the night
in such a season of the year, he presently repaired to his Majesty's Palace
at White hall, and there delivered the same to the Earl of Salisbury his
Majesty's principal Secretary. The Earl having read the Letter, and heard of
the manner of coming of it to his hands, did greatly encourage and commend the
Lord for his discretion; te^ling him plainly, that whatsoever the purpose of
the Letter might prove hereafter, yet did this accident put him in mind of
diverse aduertisements he had received from beyond the seas, wherewith he had
acquainted as well the King himself, as diverse of his Privy Councillors,
concerning some business the Papists were in, both at home and abroad, making
preparation for some combination among them against this Parliament time: for
inabling them to deliver at that time to the King some petition for tolleration
of Religion, which should be delivered in some such order, and so well backed,
as the King should be loath to refuse their requests; like the sturdy-beggars
craving alms with one open hand, but carrying a stone in the other in case of
refusal. And therefore did the Earl of Salisbury conclude with the Lord
Monteagle, that he would in regard of the Kings absence impart the same Letter
to some more of his Majesty's Council. Whe^eof the Lord Monteagle liked well,
only adding this request, by way of protestation, that whatsoever the event
hereof might prove, it should not be imputed to him, as proceeding from too
light and too sudden an apprehension, that he delivered this Letter being
only moved thereto for demonstration of his ready devotion and care for
preservation of his Majesty and the State. And thus did the Earl of Salisbury
presently acquaint the Lord Chamberlain with the said Letter. Whereupon they
two in the presence of the Lord Monteagle, calling to mind the former
intelligence already mentioned, which seemed to have some relation with this
Letter; the tender care which they ever had to the preservation of his
Majesty's person, made them apprehend, that some perilous attempt did thereby
appear to be intended against the same, which did the more nearly concern
the Lord Chamberlain to have care of, in regard that it does belong to the
charge of his office, to ouersee as well all places of Assembly where his
Majesty is to repair, as his Highness own private houses. And therefore did
the said two Counselors conclude, that they should join unto them three more
of the Council, to wit, the Lord Admiral, the Earls of Worcester and
Northampton, to be also particularly acquainted with this accident. Who having
all of them concurred together to the re-examination of the contents of the
said Letter, they did conclude, that how slight a matter it might at the first
appear to be, yet was it not absolutely to be contemned, in respect of the
care which it behooved them to have of the preservation of his Majesty's person.
But yet resolved for two reasons, first to acquaint the King himself with the
same, before they proceeded to any further inquisition in the matter, as well
for the expectation and experience they had of his Majesty's fortunate
judgment in clearing and soluing of obscure riddles and doubtful mysteries,
as also because the more time would in the mean while be given for the
practice to ripen, if any was, whereby the discovery might be the more clear
and evident, and the ground of proceeding thereupon more safe, just, and easy.
And so according to their determination did the Earl of Salisbury repair to
the King in his gallery upon Friday, being Alhallow day, in the afternoon,
which was the day after his Majesty's arrival, and none but himself being
present with his Highness at that time: Where without any other speech or
judgment given of the Letter, but only relating simply the form of the
delivery thereof, he presented it to his Majesty; the contents of the Letter
are as follows.

My Lord, out of the love I bear to some of your friends, I have a care of
your preservation. Therefore I would advise you, as you tender your life, to
devise some excuse to shift off your attendance at this Parliament. For God and
man have concurred to punish the wickedness of this time. And think not
slightly of this advertisement, but retire your self into your Country, where
you may expect the event in safety: for though there be no appearance of any
stir, yet I say, they shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet
they shall not see who hurt them. This counsel is not to be contemned, because
it may do you good, and can do you no harm: for the danger is past as soon
as you shall have burned this Letter. And I hope God will give you the grace to
make good use of it. To whose holy protection I commend you.

The King no sooner read the letter, but after a little pause, and then reading
it over again, he delivered his judgment of it in such sort, as he thought it
was not to be contemned. For that the style of it seemed to be more quick and
pithy, then is usual to be in a pasquill or libell, (the superfluities of idle
brains.) But the Earl of Salisbury perceiving the King to apprehend it
deeplier then he looked for, knowing his nature; told him, that he thought by
one sentence in it, that it was like to be written by some fool or mad man,
reading to him this sentence in it: for the danger is past as soon as you have
burned the Letter: which he said was like to be the saying of a fool. For if
the danger was past so soon as the Letter was burnt, then the warning behooued
to be of little avail, when the burning of the Letter might make the danger to
be eschewed. But the King by the contrary considering the former sentence in
the Letter. That they should receive a terrible blow at this Parliament, and
yet should not see who hurt them: joining it to the sentence immediately
following already alleged, did thereupon conjecture, that the danger
mentioned, should be some sudden danger by blowing up of powder: for no other
insurrection, rebellion, or whatsoever other private or desperate attempt could
be committed, or attempted in time of Parliament, and the authors thereof
v^seene, except it were only by a blowing up of powder, which might be
performed by one base knave in a dark corner. Whereupon he was moved to
interpret and construe the latter sentence in the Letter, (alleged by the
Earl of Salisbury) against all ordinary sense and construction in Grammar, as
if by these words, for the danger is past as soon as you have burned the
Letter, should be closely understood the sudden and quickness of the danger,
which should be as quickly performed, and at an end, as that paper should be of
bleasing up in the fire; turning that word, as soon, to that sense of, as
quickly. And therefore wished that before his going to Parliament, the
vnder-roomes of the Parliament house might be well and narrowly searched. It
must be confessed that God put this understanding in the Kings heart. For
albeit now upon the event made known, a man may easily see that no other
construction can be made of the Letter, then that which the King made: yet
before the event was known, the wisest did not apprehend that understanding.
And therefore we must acknowledge that God would have it known and brought to
knowledge by the King himself, that all the body of the Kingdom might rest
most under God, beholding to the King, their head for the general deliverance.
The Earl of Salisbury wondering at his Majesty's commentary, which he knew to
be far contrary to his ordinary and natural disposition, who did rather ever
sin upon the other side, in not apprehending nor trusting due aduertisments
of practices and perils when he was duly informed of them, whereby he had
many times drawn himself into many desperate dangers, and interpreting
rightly this extraordinary caution at this time to proceed from the vigilant
care he had of the whole state, more then of his own person, which could not
but have all perished together if this designement had succeeded: he thought
good to dissemble still unto the King that there had been any just cause of
such apprehension. And ending the purpose with some merry jest upon this
subject, as his custom is, took his leave for that time.

But though he seemed so to neglect it to his Majesty, yet his customable and
watchful care of the King and the State still boiling within him; and having
with the blessed Virgin Mary, laid up in his heart the Kings so strange
judgment and construction of it, he could not be at rest till he acquainted
the foresaid Lords what had passed between the King and him in private.
Whereupon they were all so earnest to renew again the memory of the same
purpose to his Majesty, as it was agreed, that he should the next day being
Saturday repair to his Highness. Which he did in the same privy Gallery, and
renewed the memory thereof, the Lord Chamberlain then being present with the
King. At which time it was determined that the said Lord Chamberlain should
according to his custom and office, view all the Parliament houses both above
and below, and consider what likelihood or appearance of any such danger might
possibly be gathered by the sight of them. But yet as well for staying of idle
rumors, as for being the more able to discern any mystery the nearer that
things were in readiness, his journey thither was ordained to be deferred till
the afternoon before the sitting down of the Parliament, Nouemb. 5. Anno 1605.
which was upon the Monday following. At what time he (according to his
conclusion) went to the Parliament house, accompanied with the Lord Monteagle,
being in zeal to the Kings service earnest and curious to see the event of
that accident, whereof he had the fortune to be the first discouerer. Where
having viewed all the lower rooms, he found in the vault under the upper house
great store of provision of Billets, Faggots, and Coals. And inquiring of
Whinyard keeper of the Wardrop, to what use he had put those lower rooms, and
cellars: he told him that Thomas Percy had hired both the House and part of the
Cellar or Vault under the same. And that the wood and coal therein was the
said Gentleman's own provision. Whereupon the Lord Chamberlain casting his eye
aside, perceived a fellow standing in a corner there, calling himself the said
Percy his man, and keeper of that house for him, which was Guido Fawkes, the
instrument which should have acted that monstrous tragedy.

The Lord Chamberlain looking upon all things with an heedfull eye, yet in
outward appearance with but a careless and racklesse countenance, he presently
addressed himself to the King in the said privy Gallery, where in the presence
of the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Admiral, the Earls of Worcester, Northampton,
and Salisbury, he made his report what he had seen and observed there. Noting
that Monteagle had told him, that he no sooner heard Thomas Percy named to be
the possessour of that house, but considering both his backwardness in
Religion, and the old dearness in friendship between himself and the said
Percy, he did greatly suspect the matter, and that the Letter should come from
him. The Lord Chamberlain also told, that he did not wonder a little at the
extraordinary great provision of wood and coal in that house, where Thomas
Percy had so seldom occasion to remain: as likewise it gave him in his mind
that his man looked like a very tall and desperate fellow. This could not but
increase the Kings former apprehension and jealousy. Whereupon he insisted, as
before, that the house was narrowly to be searched, and that those Billets and
Coals would be searched to the bottom, it being most suspicious that they
were laid there only for covering of the powder. Of this same mind also were
all the Counselors then present. But upon the fashion of making the search,
was it long debated. For on the one side they were all so jealous of the Kings
safety, that they all agreed, that there could not be too much caution used for
preventing the danger: And yet on the other part, they were all extreme loath
and dainty, that in case this Letter should prove to be nothing but the
euaporation of an idle brain, then a curious search being made, and nothing
found, should not only turn to the general scandal of the King and the
State, as being so susp^tious of every light and frivolous toy, but likewise
lay an ill-fauoured imputation upon the Earl of Northumberland, one of his
Majesty's greatest Subjects and Counselors, this Thomas Percy being his
kinseman, and most confident familiar. And the rather were they curious upon
this point, knowing how far the King detested to be thought suspicious or
jealous of any of his good subjects, though of the meanest degree. And
therefore though they all agreed upon the maine ground, which was to provide
for the security of the Kings person, yet did they much differ in
circumstances, by which this action might be best carried with lea^t dinne and
occasion of slander. But the King himself still persisting that there were
diverse shrewd appearances, and that a narrow search of those places could
prejudice no man that was innocent, he at last plainly resolved them, that
either must all the parts of those rooms be narrowly searched, and no
possibility of danger left unexamined, or else he and they all must resolve
not to meddle in it at all, but plainly to go the next day to the Parliament,
and leave the success to fortune, which he believed they would be loath to
take upon their consciences: for in such a case as this, an halfe-doing was
worse then no doing at all. Whereupon it was at last concluded, that nothing
should be left unsearched in those houses. And yet for the better color and
stay of rumor, in case nothing were found, it was thought meet, that upon a
pretense of Whinyards missing some of the Kings stuff or hangings which he had
in keeping, all those rooms should be narrowly ripped for them. And to this
purpose was Sir Thomas Kneuet, (a Gentleman of his Majesty's privy Chamber)
employed, being a Justice of Peace in Westminster, and one, of whose ancient
fidelity both the late Queen, and our now Sovereign have had large proof.
Who according to the trust committed unto him, went about the midnight next
after, to the Parliament house, accompan^ed with such a small number as was fit
for that ^rrand. But before his entry into the house, finding Thomas Percyes
alleged man standing without the doors, his Clothes and Boots on at so
dead a time of night, he resolved to apprehend him, as he did, and the^eafter
went forward to the searching of the house. Where after he had caused to be
ouerturned some of the Billets and Coals, he first found one of the small
Barrels of powder, and after, all the rest, to the number of thirty six
barrels great and small. And thereafter searching the fellow whom he had taken,
found three matches; and all other instruments fit for blowing up the powder,
ready upon him; which made him instantly confess his own guiltiness:
declaring also unto him* that if he had happened to be within the house, when
he took him, as he was immediately before (at the ending of his wo^ke) he
would not have failed to have blown him up, house and all.

Thus after Sir Thomas had caused the wretch to be surely bound, and well
guarded by the company he had brought with him, he himself returned back to
the Kings Palace, and gave warning of his success to the Lord Chamberlain,
and Earl of Salisbury, who immediately warning the rest of the Council that
lay in the house, as soon as they could get themselves ready, came with their
fellow Counselors to the Kings Bedchamber, being at that time near four of
the clock in the morning. And at the first entry of the Kings Chamber door,
the Lord Chamberlain being not any longer able to conceal his joy for the
preventing of so great a danger, told the King in a confused have, that all was
found and discovered, and the traitor in hands and fast bound.

Then order being first taken for sending for the rest of the Council that lay
in the to^ne, the prisoner himself was brought into the house. Where in
respect of the strangeness of the accident, no man was stayed from the sight
in speaking with him: and within a while after the Counce^^ did examine him.
Who seeming to put on a Roman-resolution, did both to the Council, and to
every other person that spoke to him that day, appear so constant and set^ed
in his grounds, as they all thought they had found a new Mutius Scaeuola borne
in England. For notwithstanding the horror of the fact, the guilt of his
conscience, his sudden surprising, the terror which should have stricken him
by coming into the presence of so grave a Council, and the restless and
confused questions that every man all that day did vex him with; ^et was his
countenance so far from being dejected, as he often smiled in scornful
manner, not only auowing the fact, but repenting only, with the said
Scaeuola, his failing in the execution thereof; whereof he said, the devil
and not God, was the discouerer: answering quickly to every man's objections,
scoffing at any idle questions which were propounded to him, and jesting with
such as he thought had no authority to examine him. All that day could the
Council get nothing out of him touching his accomplices, refusing to answer to
any such questions which he thought might discover his plot, and laying all the
blame upon himself. Whereunto, he said, he was moved only for Religion and
conscience sake, denying the King to be his lawful Sovereign, or the
anointed of God, in respect he was an Heretic, and giving himself no other
name then John Johnson, servant to Thomas Percy. But the next morning being
carried to the Tower, he did not there remain above two or three days, being
twice or thrice in that space re-examined, and the rack only offered, and
showed unto him, when the mask of his Romi^h fortitude did visibly begin to
wear and slide off his face. And then did he begin to confess part of the
truth, and thereafter to open the whole matter. Out of his conscience, and
especially out of the confession of Thomas Winter have we drawn the praeceding
narration. The confession of Fawkes was taken presently after his apprehension.
The confession of Winter was taken the 23. Anno 1605.
of November, before the Lords of the Council.

They that were first in the treason, and labored in the mine, were Robert
Catesby, Robert Winter, Esquires, Thomas Percy, Thomas Winter, John Wright,
Christopher Wright, Guido Fawkes, Gentlemen; and Bates, Catesbyes man. They
that were made acquainted with it, though not personally laboring in the mine,
nor in the cellar, were Euerard Digby Knight, Ambrose Rookewood, Francis
Tresham, Esquires. John Grant Gentleman, and Robert Keys.

The news was no sooner spread abroad that morning, which was upon a Tuesday,
the 5. of November, and the first day designed for that session of Parliament:
but some of those conspirators, namely Winter, and the two Wrights, brethren,
thought it high time for them to hasten out of the town, (for Catesby was gone
the night before, and Percy at four of the clock in the morning the same day
of the discovery) and all of them held their course, with more have then good
speed to Warwicke-shire toward Couentry, where the next day morning being
Wednesday, and about the same hour that Fawkes was taken in Westminster, one
Grant, a Gentleman, having associated to him some others of his opinion, all
violent Papists, and strong Recusants, came to a stable of one Benock a rider
of great horses, and having violently broken up the some, carried along with
them all the great horses that were therein, to the number of seven or eight,
belonging to diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen of that country, who had put them
into the riders hands to be mad^ fit for their service. And so both that
company of them which fled out of London, as also Grant and his accomplices met
altogether at Dunchurch at Sir Euerard Digby his lodging the Tuesday at night
after the discovery of this treacherous attempt. The which Digby had likewise
for his part appointed a match of hunting to have been hunted the next day,
which was Wednesday, though his mind was Nimrod-like upon a far other manner
of hunting, more bent upon the blood of reasonable men, then of bruit beasts.

This company and hellish society thus conuened, finding their purpose
discovered, and their treachery prevented, did resolve to run a desperate
course, and since they could not prevail by so private a blow, to practice by
a public rebellion, either to attain^ to their intents, or at least to save
themselves in the throng of others. And therefore gathering all the company
they could unto them, and pretending the quarrel of Religion, having
intercepted such provision of armor, horses, and powder, as the time could
permit, thought by running up and down the Country, both to augment piece by
piece their number: (dreaming to themselves that they had the virtue of a
snowball, which being little at the first, and tumbling down a great hill,
grows to a great quantity, by increasing it self with the snow that it
meets in the way) and also that they beginning first this brave show in one
part of the Country should by their sympathy and example stir up and encourage
the rest of their Religion in other parts in England to rise, as they had done
there. But when they had gathered their force to the greatest, they came not to
the number of fourscore. And yet were they troubled all the hours of the day
to keep and contain their own servants from stealing from them. Who
notwithstanding of all their care, dai^y left them, being far infer^our to
Gedeons host in number, but f^rre more in faith and justness of the quarrel.
And so after that this Catholic troop had wandered a while through
Warwickshire* to Worcestershire, and from thence to the edge and borders of
Staffordshire, this gallantly armed band had not the honor at the last to be
beaten with a Kings Lieutenant or extraordinary Commissioner sent down for the
purpose, but only by the ordinary Sheriff^ of Worcestershire were they all
beaten, killed, taken, and dispersed. Wherein ye have to note this following
circumstance so a^mirable, and so ^iuely displaying the greatness of Gods
justice, as it could not be concealed without betraying in a manner the glory
due to the Almighty for the same. Although diverse of the Kings Proclamations
were posted down after these traitors with all speed possible; declaring the
odiousness of the bloody attempt, the necessity to have had Percy preserved
alive, if it had been possible, and the assembly of that rightly-damned crew,
now no more darkened conspirators, but open and auowed Rebels: yet the far
distance of the way, (which was above an hundredth miles) together with the
extreme deepnesse thereof, joined also with the shortness of the day, was the
cause that the hearty and loving affections of the Kings good Subjects in those
parts prevented the speed of his proclamations. For upon the third day after
the flying down of these Rebels, which was upon the Friday next after the
discovery of their plot, they were most of them all surprised by the Sheriff
of Worcestershire at Holbeach, about the noone of the day, in manner following.

Grant, of whom mention was made before, for the taking of the great horses,
who had not all the praeceding time stirred from his own house till the next
morning after the attempt should be put in execution, he then laying his
account without his Host, (as the proverb is) that their plott had, without
failing, received the day before their hoped-for success, took, or rather
stole out those Horses for inabling him, and so many of that soul-lesse society
that had still remained in the Country near about him, to make a sudden
surprise upon the Kings elder daughter, the Lady Elizabeth, having her
residence near to that place, whom they thought to have used for the color of
their treacherous design (his Majesty her Father, her Mother, and
male-Children being all destroyed above.) And to this purpose also had that
Nimrod Digby provided his hunting-match against the same time, that numbers of
people being flocked together upon the pretense thereof, they might the
easilier have brought to pass the sudden surprise of her person.

Now the violent taking away of those horses long before day, did seem to be
so great a riot in the eyes of the common people, that knew of no greater
mystery: and the bold attempting thereof did engender such a suspicion of some
following rebellion in the hearts of the wiser sort, as both great and small
began to stir and arm themselves, upon this unlooked for accident. Among
whom Sir Fulk Greuil the elder, Knight, as became one both so ancient in
years, and good reputation, and by his office being Deputy Lieuetenant of
Warwickshire, though unable in his body, yet by the zeal and true feruency of
his mind, did first apprehend this foresaid riot to be nothing but the
sparkles or sure indices of a following rebellion. Whereupon both stoutly and
honestly he took order to get into his own hands the munition and armor of
all such Gentlemen about him, as were either absent from their own houses, or
in doubtful guard, and also sent such direction to the towns about him, as
thereupon did follow the striking of Winter by a poor Smith, who had lik^wise
been taken by those vulgar people, but that he was rescued by the rest of his
company, who perceiving that the Country before them had notice of them,
hastened away with loss in their own sight, sixteen of their followers being
taken by the townsmen, and sent presently to the Sheriff at Warwick, and
from thence to London.

But before twelve or sixteen hours past, Catesby, Percy, the Winters,
Wrights, Rookwood, and the rest, bringing then the assurance that their maine
plot was failed, and bewrayed, whereupon they had builded the golden mountains
of their glorious hopes: they then took their last desperate resolution, to
flock together in a troop, and wander as they did, for the reasons aforetold.
But as upon the one part, the zealous duty to their God and their Sovereign
was so deeply imprinted in the hearts of all the meanest and poorest sort of
the people (although then knowing of no farther mystery, then such public
misbehauiours, as their own eyes taught them) as notwithstanding their fair
shows and pretense of their Catholic cause, no creature, man or woman through
all the Country, would once so much as give them willingly a cup of drink, or
any sort of comfort or support, but with execrations detested them. So on the
other part, the Sheriffs of the Shires where-through they wandered, conuening
their people with all speed possible, hunted as hotly after them, as the
euilnesse of the way, and the vnprouidednesse of their people upon that sudden
could permit them. And so at last after Sir Richard Verney Sheriff of
Warwickeshire had carefully and straightly been in chase of them to the
confines of his County, part of the meaner sort being also apprehended by him:
Sir Richard Walsh Sheriff of Worcestershire did likewise dutifully and hotly
pursue them through his Shire. And having gotten sure trial of their taking
harbor at the house aboue-named, Holbeach in Staffordshire, the house of
Stephen Littleton.
he sent Trumpetters and messengers to them, commanding them in the Kings name
to render to him, his Majesty's Minister; and knowing no more at that time of
their guilt, then was publicly visible, did promise upon their dutiful and
obedient rendering to him, to intercede at the Kings hands for the sparing of
their lives; who received only from them this scornful answer (they being
better witnesses to themselves of their inward evil consciences) that he had
need of better assistance, then of those few numbers that were with him, before
he could be able to command or control them.

But here fell the wondrous work of Gods justice, that while this message
passed between the Sheriff and them: the Sheriff and his peoples zeal being
justly kindled and augmented by their arrogant answer, and so they preparing
themselves to give a furious assault: and the other party making themselves
ready within the house to perform their promise by a defense as resolute; it
pleased God that in the mending of the fire in their Chamber, one small spark
should fly out, and light among less then two pound weight of Powder, which
was drying a little from the Chimney: which being thereby blown up, so maimed
the faces of some of the principal rebels, and the hands and sides of other of
them (blowing up with it also a great bag full of powder, which notwithstanding
never took fire) as they were not only disabled and discouraged hereby from
any farther resistance, in respect Catesby himself, Rookwood, Grant, and
diverse others, of greatest account among them, were thereby made unable for
defense, but also wonderfully stricken with amazement in their guilty
consciences, calling to memory how God had justly punished them with that same
instrument, which they should have used for the effectuating of so great a
sin; according to the old saying, In quo peccamus, in eodem plectimur.
Inasmuch as they presently (see the wonderful power of Gods justice upon
guilty consciences) did all fall down upon their knees praying God to pardon
them for their bloody enterprise. And after that, giving over any further
debate, opened the gate, suffered the Sheriffs people to rush in furiously
among them, and desperately sought their own present destruction; The three
specialls of them joining backs together, Catesby, Percy, and Winter; whereof
two with one shot, Catesby and Percy, were slain, Winter was taken and saved
alive.

And thus these resolute and high-aspiring Catholics, who dreamed of no less
then the destruction of Kings and kingdoms, and promised to themselves no
lower estate, then the government of great and ancient Monarchies, were
miserably defeated and quite overthrown in an instant, falling into the pit
which they had prepared for others; And so fulfilling that sentence which his
Majesty did in a manner prophecy of them, in his oration to the Parliament:
some presently slain, others deadly wounded, stripped of their clothes, left
lying miserably naked, and so dying rather of cold, then of the danger of their
wounds; and the rest that either were whole, or but lightly hurt, taken and led
prisoners by the Sheriff, the ordinary Minister of Justice, to the Go^le, the
ordinary place even of the basest malefactors; where they remained ti^l their
sending up to London, being met with a huge confluence of people of all sorts,
desirous to see them, as the rarest sort of Monsters: fools to laugh at them,
women and children to wonder, all the common people to gaze, the wiser sort to
satisfy their curiosity in seeing the outward cases of so unheard of a
villainy; and generally all sorts of people to satiate and fill their eyes with
the sight of them, whom in their hearts they so far admired and detested,
serving so for a fearful and public spectacle of Gods fierce wrath and just
indignation. They lived blindely, they practisea diuellishly, they dyed
desperately; Their memory is cursed throughout all generations.

Now what have our adversaries to say to these, or what can we say to these
things, but that there is a God in heaven, that destroys all the purposes of
the Pope on earth? whatsoever have been attempted against us, the Pope is
firm on their side; God has manifested himself many ways to be on our side.
What cause have we then, and how many ways are we provoked to trust in God, to
love him, to worship him, that so miraculously has defended us? to cleave with
all singlenes of heart to that cause that has bin so mightily maintained by
Gods hand and power? And what cause have our adu^rsaries to examine themselves,
and more narrowly to examine the cause which God by so many judgments has
condemned? The people of Israel were mightily protected by the hand of God, and
so long as they truly served God al their adversaries could never prevail
against them, they were defended by power from above, God did watch over them;
but when they fell from God, God did suffer them to fall into the hands of
their enemies. There will hardly be found any president even among the people
of God, that for so many years together they have bin continually delivered
from so many, so cruelly intended, so dangerous assaults. The deepest devises
of malice, reaching even from hell unto hellish men upon earth have been
practiced against us, as this last which came from the deepenesse of Satan:
wherein without sword or spear, without any show of warlike preparations,
their hellish devise was at one blow to root out religion, to destroy the
state, the head with the body, the King with the stat^, the Father of our
Country, the Mother of our Country, the olive branches the hopeful succession
of our King, the Reverend Clergy, the Honorable Nobility, the faithful
Counselors, the grave Judges, the greatest part of our Knights and Gentry, the
choicest Burgesses, the Officers of the Crown, Council, Signet, S^ales, and
of other seats of judgment, the learned Lawyers, with an infinite number of
common people, the Hall of justice, the houses of Parliament, the Church used
for the Coronation of our Kings, the monuments of our former Princes, all
Records of Parliament, and of every particular man's right, with a great number
of charters, and other things of this nature, all these things had the devil
by his agents devised at one secret blow to destroy. Psalm. 124.
If the Lord had not been on our side, may Israel now say, if the Lord had not
been on our side when men rose up against us, they had then swallowed us up
quick, when their wrath was kindled against us: praised be the Lord which has
not given us up a prey to their teeth, our soul is escaped as a Bird out of
the snare of the Fowlers; the snare is broken, and we are delivered: our help
is in the name of the Lord, which has made heaven and earth.

We labor against the Papists to prove our Church a true Church of God: They
on the other side labor to prove themselves the only Catholic Church, and
our assemblies to be, as they call them, assemblies of Heretics. God has
determined this controversy most euiden^ly by his word, and most powerfully
from heaven, by his continual protection of us, and destruction of all the
wicked practices which they have attempted against us. Was there ever any cause
in the world so strongly ma^ntained on the one side, as our cause has been?
was there ever any execrable practices in the world so pow^rfu^ly condemned
from heaven, as their practices have been? God open their eyes, that they may
see and understand that they fight against God. The Church of Rome, so long as
it stood the Church of God, did never practice either by open wars, or by
secret conspiracies to destroy Kings, and subvert Kingdoms: but by the
preaching of Gods word, by examples of piety, and sanctimony, labored to draw
the ignorant unto the knowledge and obedience of the truth: that course is now
utterly forsaken of them; for how can they teach the truth to others, that are
themselves in ignorance and in the shadow of death? or how can they give
examples of an holy life, whose whole practice and conversation is in blood, in
malice, in wicked and wretched actions? And will they never understand that
they who practice such things can not inherit the Kingdom of God? cannot be
the Church of God? cannot pray to God, or expect any blessing from him upon
their execrable practices? there is a manifest change of their Church, and they
will not see it. They ask us, when was this change, under what King, under
what Emperor, under what Pope? But if they were wise, they would first inquire
whether there be a change or no? and then inquire further of the time and
manner of it. We say that which no man can deny, that there is a notorious
change: this is evident, for the Church of old never allowed the cruelty, the
impiety, the execrable wickedness which is daily practiced by the great
Masters of the Church of Rome, and allowed and approved by the Pope. Then there
is a change, and it is evident to all. But this is a change of manners of the
Church, not of the doctrines. If therefore they demand of us, how a change of
the doctrines may be proved: We are able to point out from time to time that
the doctrines which they have invented, were never heard of in the Church
before such times as we are able to point at. Master Jewel the reverend
Bishop of Salisbury, for piety and learning the mirror of his time, has made
full and fair proof, that of those Articles wherein he challenged all the
Learne^ of the Church of Rome, not one of them was ever taught in the Church
before the (...) of Christ 600. his proofs stand unanswered to this day Though
Master (...) ha^^. done his best to examine them, who wanted neither learning
nor eloquence, bu^ only trut^ wanting on his side, the challenge is still made
good. We are also able to point to another time, before the year of Christ
1000. many of the gr^atest and grossest errors in popery was never taught or
heard ^n the Church: as the doctrines of transubstantiation, of the real
presence, as it is understood in the Church of Rome, of the Popes power to
depose Kings, and absolve their subjects f^o^ their allegiance, or to war^ant
their subjects to rebel against them, of he doctrines of Grace, and
justification as now they are taught in the Church of Rome, of the doctrine of
merits whether ex congruo, or condigro, of the seven sacraments, and many
other of this nature, of which we are assured that not one of them can be
proved ever to have been taught or heard of in the Church before the year of
Christ one thousand. We are further able to point to another time, before
which the rule of faith was never changed in the Church, this was their last
attempt in the points of Doctrine, a desperate attempt against the truth. For
from the Apostles time, till the Council of Trent, the rule of faith was ever
held in the Church one and the same; that is, the doctrine contained in the
sacred canonical Scriptures: that this only rule of faith was held in the
Church till the Council of Tr^nt, it is evidently proved by the full consent
of the ancient Fathers, and moreover by the confession of all Writers in the
Church of Rome before the Council of Trent: such as were I^ cant. ca^t. sermon.
30
Bernard, Lib. 1. sent. did. 1
Peter Lumbard In ^ ad Timoth. cap. 6. et Sum. par. 1. q. 1. a^. 8.
Thomas Aquin^s, In prolog Sent. q 2.
Iohann^s Scotus, Praef in Sent.
Durandus, Distinct. 37. c. 14.
Clemens 1. Pope, 1 Sent q. 1. art. 3. cor^^l lit. H.
Cardinalis Cameracensis, Dec. m: sub vtraque specie.
John Gerson, Locor. lib. 3. c. 29.
C^nradus Clingius, Dereuelat Antichr. apud Posseuin Biblioth, sel^ct. lib. 2.
cap. 2^.
Ios. Acosta. Lib 13. verbo, Scriptura.
Alfonsus de castre, and many others. To repeat the testim^n^es of al^, would
be tedious. Let it suffice to repeat one testimony of Aquinas. wherein all
the rest agree. Aquinas in the first place cited says: Prophetarum and
Apostolorum doctr^na dicitur canonica, quia est regula intellectus nostri, and
ideo nullus aliter debet docere; that is, the Doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles is called canonical, because it is the rule of our understanding, and
therefore no man ought to teach otherwise. And in the second place cited, he
says: Innititur fides nostra reuelationi Apostolis and Prophetis factae; that
is, our faith rests upon the revelation made to the Apos^les and Prophets.
Then, traditions was never accounted the rule of our understanding, or that
whereupon our faith must rest, though the same be more fully pr^ued out of the
Scriptures themselves, and from a full consent of the ancient Fathers, as is
otherwhere manifested: yet this I thought here might suffice to declare the
opinions of them that lived in the Church of Rome next before the Council of
Trent, as many of these did, which I have before named. So that this is
evident, the rule of faith was never altered in the Church of Rome before the
Council of Trent. Then did they alter this rule, by putting traditions of
their Church into the rule of faith, and Lucifer-like matching, equalizing and
mating the wisdom of God with their own follies. Then all is changed, when
the manners of the Church, the doctrines of the Church, and the very rule of
faith is changed. What greater change may be looked for hereafter in the Church
of Antichrist, I know not; but this is sufficient to move us to forsake them as
the congregation of the impious, the Church of the malignant. And because they
have forsaken God and his truth, therefore by the just judgment of God are
they permitted to run into so many foul errors, and such wicked and
execrable practices, that neither Christians nor heathen, guided only by the
light of nature could ever approve. If they say, that we also have our faults
and sins: I answer, that when w^ turn our selves to consider our sins
against God, we all find our selves guilty, and not able to answer one of a
thousand that he man justly charge us withal. Our unthankfulness to him is
so great for his manifold blessings, and wonderful protection; our sins we
conceal not from him, we acknowledge unto God, that if he lay his rod upon us
as we have deserved, if he should cast our l^nd ba^ke again into that former
blindness wherein it lay in popery, God is just, we have d^serued great
punishments. But if we turn our selves unto another consideration, comparing
our religion with theirs, our practices with theirs, then I say, though we
cannot justify our selves before God, yet are we able to justify our selves
in respect of them. Let our enemies be our judges. When evil is committed
among us, it is punished, and therein we rejoice, that evil is punished. It
was never found that execrable practices were approved by us, for that were to
forsake religion: but the most wicked practices that have been heard of, are
not only committed by them, but approved, yea and commended: as the killing of
Henry 3. of France was practiced by a Friar, and commended by the Pope. These
be the sins that do ripen them for Gods judgments. For the time will come
when great Babylon shall come in remembrance before the Lord, Apoc. 16. 19.
to give unto her the cup of Wine of the fierceness of his wrath: and again,
therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death, Apoc. 18. 8.
and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire; for strong is the
Lord God which will condemn her. In the mean time we wait upon God, and we
do in humbleness of heart offer up to God the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, that it pleased him of his goodness and unsearchable mercies
toward us, to call us out of Babylon, to give us hearts to obey his calling,
to make choice of this Church which himself has planted in Great Britain, to
enable it to stand against all the furious rage and wicked practices of the
Pope and his adherents.

The Conclusion.
Some Considerations proposed to such as are not well affected to Religion.
1 KIngs and States, when they are miraculously protected by the hand of God,
and delivered from great dangers, may understand what blessing they have by a
Church planted in their State. The Church brings the blessing to the State:
because God regards them that are faithful to him, and for their fakes
blesses the whole.

2 This Church that brings such a blessing to States, is much questioned now,
where it is, and how to find it: for diverse strive for it, and the true Church
is but One.

3 That is the true Church that has h^^d the ru^e of Faith, from the Apostles
time: That is the false Church, that ha^h changed that ru^e.

4 Who hold this rule, and who not, may be known by the holy Doctrines
contained in the Scripture, ex consanguinitate doctrinae.

5 Learni^g is nec^ssary to enable a man to judge aright of these th^^gs: but
Learning may be also in men that are corrupt and vng^dly. And therefore a man
can never be we^l ^nabled to judge of these things, without the Spirit of God
directing his Learning.

6 The true Church is ruled by the Spirit of God, and preserved from errors
and heresies, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail:

7 A lay man, that has the Spirit of God, is better able to judge of the
Church, and of the members thereof* then a man in Ecclesiastical function,
that has not the Spirit of God.

8 They that are contentious, seditious, cruel^, m^licious, vncle^ne,
adulterers, idolaters, murt^er^rs, or such like, have not the Spirit of God The
reason is evident, because these, and such like, are the fr^its of the flesh,
contrary to the fruits of the spirit.

9 From these principles if the Princes that are of the Romish religion wou^d
be pleased to ex^m^ne Themselves, their Religion, their best learned and
religious men, their Doctrines, their Pr^ctis^s; ^hey might b^ a ^enerous
search easily find w^ere is Gods Church, and where is Gods Spirit.

10 Withal they may be pleased to consider the Works of God, his protection
and miraculous defense of his Church; which miraculous defense has appeared
here over the Church of England, as also elsewhere; but more conspicuous here,
more illustrious examples of Gods mercy will hardly be found any where: God
has for many years delivered this Church, preserved us in peace when all the
nations about us have been in bloody wars.

11 It cannot be proved that God did ever in such manner, and so many ways
defend a Nation, but only there where he had a people of his own, his true
Church.

12 It can never be proved that they that profess and practice malice,
cru^lty, sedition, idolatry, and such other works of the flesh, are the true
Church of Christ.

13 They that make falsehood their refuge, and hide themselves under vanity,
have no cause to boast themselves to be the Catholic Church. If we should
rehearse the strange lies which they have invented against Luther, Calvin,
Beza, against d^uers reverend Bishops, whereof some are departed, some yet
living, against the Church and State of England, it would fill a Book to
speak of their particular lies. They understand wel^ enough whom they serve
herein, their practice is to lie, their hope is that every lie cannot be
examined by the common people, they care not though it be found out to be a lie
by some, so it be not found by the multitude, whom to de^ciue is their chief
care; not respecting God, nor truth, nor Gods Church, which is the pillar of
truth, and may not be maintained with lies.

14 How the Pope, the Jesuits, the whole Church of Rome is well known by the
fruits of the flesh, and how the fruits of the spirit of God could never for
these many hundredth years be observed in them, I leave to the consciences of
all to consider, but especially to the great Judge that must judge them and us.
Whose blessed and joyful coming, the true Church does love and wait-for in
faith and patience.

FINIS.
Errata.
In the summarie cap. 14. for who enforced the Bishop, r. who informed the
Bishop. Page 11. for E^communicate, r. Excommunication. p. 4. ^. for swear, r.
swear p. 76 for did tare, r. did tear. p. 78. for othermens, r. other means.
p. 166. for all Mellifont, r. at Mellifont. p. 206. for out of his conscience,
r. out of his confession.


