A SERMON PREACHED IN OXFORDSHIRE; BY NICHOLAS CANTREL, Master in Arts.

Published at the request of Sir RICHARD BLVNT.

LONDON, Printed by H. L. for MATTHEW LOWNES. 1624.

JOSH. 24.15. But as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.
THE best cognizance that saving grace has, is Perseverance, and a continual
increase in grace; according unto that of David; Such as be planted in the
house of God, shall flourish in the Courts of the house of the Lord; they also
shall bring forth more fruit in their age, Psalm. 92.12. Many men indeed begin
well, but in continuance of time they are weary of well-doing, and their end
is not answerable: they begin in the spirit, but they end in the flesh. Oh it
passes, in their younger years, how zealous they are for Gods cause, how dear
his testimonies are unto them: but, as if the heat of their devotion depended
upon their youth, it abates by degrees, and the older they grow, the colder
they are to Godwards. like the foolish Virgins in the Gospel, toward the time
that the Bridegroom is coming, they are sleeping, without oil in their
lamps, and so do lose their reward.

We find by experience, that that parable which our Savior tells us of the
Sower, is too true; and there be temporary believers, who at first receive the
seed of the word with gladness, but the cares of this world, and the
deceitfulnes of riches choke the word, and in the harvest-time of their life
they are made unfruitful. Many, that (like David) have bin as stars in
Israel, to lead the people into the house of God, have grown dim at last,
and lost their glory. Now, as if with Saul, the good Spirit had forsaken them,
and the evil Spirit had taken possession of them, they are not the same they
were: they are changed from their first love, and by transgressing the
commandments of God, do lose that hold which they had of grace. Their neglect
of good duties, their conversation with the wicked of this world, their
reposing themselves upon worldly vanities, are signs whereby it is to be
feared, lest God do glorify himself upon them by his judgments, since they
do leave off to glorify God by their godly life and example.

Therefore it is not enough for a man to begin well, but he must proceed more
and more in goodness and in grace, and every day take-out a new lesson in
piety, and set forth unto the world a fairer copy of his life. The
unprofitable servant was not condemned for not keeping, but for not increasing
his talent. Even reprobates have gone very far in grace, and by their fearful
falling away, have left us examples to take heed how we stand secure of the
judgments of God. He was never truly good, who had not always a desire to
prove better: for if we look into the examples of the Saints and servants of
God, this property we may generally observe in them, and we shall find them
ever to have bin best at the last.

To the end that I may show that to be true in part, which I have spoken in
general, I have brought before your eyes the example of zealous Ioshuah, that
renowned servant of God; in whose mouth the praises of his God (like a
Swan-like song) are now sweetest toward his latter end. The flourishing years
of his life he had spent in the service of Moses, behaving himself valiantly,
in fighting against the enemies of the Lord: and now that Moses was dead, he
was chosen by God to succeed in the same place and charge, namely, to be the
Leader of the Israelites.

It is well worth your noting, to behold how faithfully and carefully this good
servant of God behaved himself in so weighty an office: For when the Lord by
his hand had brought his people into the land which he swear unto their fathers
that he would give them, and had given rest unto Israel from all their enemies
round about, so that now they had a settled policy and government both in
Church and Commonwealth; Ioshuah did not thus think with himself: I have
done enough for my time, from henceforth I will disburthen my self of all
cares and troubles; the rest of my life I will spend with as much delight as I
can, and betake my self wholly unto my ease.

Such imaginations as these, were far from Ioshuah; he knew so high a
Calling as his, did require othergesse resolutions: and therefore his thoughts
were wholly taken up in well-mannaging the affairs of the Commonwealth, in
providing that the Commandments of his God might be put in execution; that
true Religion might every where be established, idolatry banished, and that
God might be glorified all in all; as you may perceive by the 22.23. and 24.
chapters of this book.

As for his own private house and family, the well ordering and guiding of it
must needs challenge the highest praise and admiration of godly and virtuous
minds. No looseness was suffered to reign here, no impiety to infect here,
no busy Sycophants were sufferd to nest themselves here, being the only
instruments which the unhappie world, in these last and dangerous times,
cherishes to its own confusion. None must live with Ioshuah, but such as
would live after Ioshuahs pattern and prescription: None must serve Ioshuah,
but such as would serve Ioshuahs God, in uprightness and sincerity. Such was
his godly resolution, such his care, such his zeal. Nor was this affection in
him by fitts, bred of a sudden and vanishing humor; but it was firm and fixed
in his heart, even to the last minute of his life: yea, and did then appear in
its greatest excellency unto the world, when as he himself was ready to leave
the world.

For now his dying day drawing near apace, this good servant of God (as if his
soul had no other care to possess it, but the welfare of the Church, and the
continuance of true Religion) for this end and purpose assembles the Israelites
to Sichem, their Elders, their Heads, their Judges and Officers; who
accordingly presented themselves before God. Here Ioshuah begins with a
Commemoration of the benefits which God had done for the people, and puts them
in mind of the manifold deliverances which he wrought for them; namely, by
delivering them from the fury of so many fierce and dreadful nations that
fought against them, and by casting them out before them: then, by giving them
a land wherein they did not labor, and cities which they built not, and
vineyards and olive trees which they planted not. For such and so great
benefits of Almighty God, he only requires, that they for their parts would
express their thankfulness by serving the Lord in sincerity and
uprightness, and by having nothing to do with those false gods which their
fathers served beyond the flood, and in Egypt.

Oh how inflamed is that zeal! how indefatigable is that diligence, which
neither the coldness of age can extinguish, nor the feebleness of decayed
nature can diminish! Ioshuah, like a good Steward, being to leave the house of
his Lord, the Church of his God, would leave (as much as lies in him) all in
good order before he goes; would see that true religion should be thoroughly
planted. Like a good Pastor, before he leaves his flock, feign would he gather
together the outcasts of Israel, and bring all into one fold: He would feign
make all that dwelt in Israel, to be true Israelites indeed.

Here (my beloved) you have a fair mirror of piety; but wherein you may
behold the disproportion of these times: For where is that Authority which so
bestirres it self in Gods cause? where is he that will undertake that in his
private house, which Ioshuah does in a Commonwealth? O barren world, which do
gather strength in sin, by running toward thy end! needs must thy sins be
purged with a deluge of fire, since the best amongst us are but briars and
thorns, and have not so much as one dram of Ioshuahs zeal.

Well, but to proceed: Ioshuah (you see) leaves no means unassaied to bring
this good purpose of his to a wished effect. But if this unrulie multitude
would not obey the commandments of God, of that God which had wrought such
great things for them, nor keep his Covenant: If the hardness of their hearts
were such, that they could be content to enjoy his benefits, and perform no
service: he sets before them life and death, this day, to choose which they
will; whether they would serve the gods which their fathers served, that were
beyond the flood; or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land they dwelt. As for
himself, he is firmly bent and resolute, both for himself and his family,
to maintain Gods cause against the whole world; But as for me, etc. Now from
this practice of Ioshuah, we learn what is our duty; namely, this teaches
us, that if all the world would go from God, Yet every one of us particularly
is bound to cleave unto him.

This doctrine which Ioshuah had well laid up in memory, now to make use of
it, and by his rare example to commend it unto posterity, he had learned in
Moses school: Thou shall not follow a multitude (says he) to do evil,
Exodus 23.2. which as it prooves, that we must not suffer our selves to be
carried away into any evil course whatsoever, by doing that which the greater
part does; so especially in the things that concern the honor and worship of
God.

And this stands by good reason:

go from God, is, because though we have never so many presidents in this
kind, yet no multitude can warrant us against the justice and judgments of
God. If we sin with the multitude, we shall be punished with the multitude.
For when we are called to give up our account, it will not be sufficient for
us to say, we have done as we saw others do: but as we are partakers of
their sins, so we must partake of their sufferings too. Mark (my brtheren)
and take Aaron for example, who because he ran the same course with the
people, and being overcome with the importunity of the unrulie multitude,
consented to their idolatry, in making them a golden calfe, and worshipping
it; was not suffered to come into the land of promise, Numb. 20.24.

But on the contrary, if we look unto the examples of the holy men, whose
praises are registered by the spirit of God, we shall find it recorded to their
high commendation, that their hearts were always strait and right in the
service of God: they cleaved steadfastly unto the true worship of God, though
living in the midst of a froward and perverse generation. When all the world
was set upon wickedness, yet even then was just Noah a Preacher of
righteousness, 2. Pet. chap. 2. verse. 5. Abraham built an Altar unto the Lord,
and called upon the name of the Lord, when he dwelt amongst the fierce and
idolatrous Heathens, Genesis 12. Righteous Lot was not without the fear of God,
nor did depart from the commandments of God, though living amongst the beastly
Sodomites; his righteous soul was vexed with the unclean conversation of
those wicked men, Genesis 19. Lastly, in a word, Daniel did not shrink to pray
openly unto his God, notwithstanding that wicked decree of the king were
published to the contrary; whereby he was brought in danger of his life, for
the zeal and freedom of his devotion, Dan. 6.

Alas, Alas (my brethren)! needs must the examples of these zealous Saints
rise up in judgment against us, and condemn the coldness and hypocrisy of
our wretched times: in which the most part of men are ready to startle aside
from the profession of that faith and religion, in which many years they have
bin taught, even upon the least earthly advantage that shall be offered unto
them. If there be hope that they may better their decayed fortunes: if they may
please men, give content, and currie favor; they will easily be brought to
fall from Christ, to renounce his Gospel. Thus the foundations of the earth are
out of course, and none like Ioshuah to bear up the pillars of it.

Let but the sound of a change in Religion strike the ears of men; what a
number of false and wavering hearts will soon be disclosed, who will run
with the multitude, and expose that truth whereby they should be saved, unto
an open shame! And why is this? but because men do not value the great and
precious promises of Christ, as they should; they do not love Christ for
himself; they care not for Religion, further than it may stand with their
worldly and carnal ends. Yet here is a ground of comfort for all them that do
faithfully serve the Lord, and steadfastly cleave unto him; for he will cleave
steadfastly unto them: he will not forsake them, nor leave them in the hand of
their enemies, but will be ready to assist them, and to comfort them at all
assaies. Yea, let them not be discouraged nor dismayed with the manifold
offenses which they find in this world: God will shorten these wretched times
for his Elects sake; when it shall be unto every man according to his faith.
Only in the mean time, let them possess their souls in patience, and
resolve with Ioshuah to be constant in the service of God, how-ever the world
varies; for if they continue to the end, undoubtedly they shall obtain that
promised crown of glory.

Thus much for the connection of my text; the words themselves do now crave
your attention: in which, being (as they are) a Protestation, you have these
two circumstances; First, the party protesting; whose quality and condition
you are to consider: Secondly, the extent of his Protestation.

He that protests here, is Ioshuah the Governor of the Israelites, famous
amongst them for his Conquests in the wars, and no less renowned for his
Counsels in the times of peace; in a word, the chief man among them, both in
power, dignity and authortie: from which arises this point of instruction;
God requires of the greatest men, the greatest zeal for his glory.

A point which you may see notably proved, 2. Sam. 12.7. where Nathan the
Prophet, being sent to reproove David for those heinous sins of murder and
adultery which he had committed, enforces the arguments of his reproof from
the promotion and dignity which God had raised David unto, and from the
benefits which were conferred upon him: Thou art the man (says Nathan, having
made David to pronounce the sentence of death upon himself, by a parable which
he told him): thus says the Lord God of Israel; I anointed thee king over
Israel, and delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, and gave thee thy Lords
house, and thy Lords wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel
and of Judah; and would moreover, if that had bin too little, have given thee
such and such things: wherefore have thou despised the commandment of the
Lord, to do evil in his sight?

And indeed there is good reason why the Lord should require the sincerest and
greatest service of them, whom he has exalted unto the highest places, and
upon whom he has bestowed his benefits more abundantly than upon others. For
first of all, by a like reason; Does not the husbandman expect the goodliest
croppe from that ground upon which he has bestowed the greatest cost and
labor? Do not parents also expect the greatest duty and affection from that
child, toward whom they have bin most indulgent and careful in his
education? So likewise it is with the Master toward his servant: If his
bounty have bin extraordinary toward him, he may justly look for
extraordinary respect and service at his hands. And shall not Almighty God
require of them the sincerest service, and greatest zeal for his glory, whom
he has raised unto the greatest dignity?

Again, secondly, if we look about in the very course of nature, that will
teach us another sufficient reason of this point. The highest Spheres, are not
they the swiftest in motion? and do they not carry about with them the
inferior orbs, by their celeritie? The biggest stars in the firmament, are
they not evermore the brightest? and do they not give luster unto the lesser
stars? Now tell me; If God do prescribe such order to his dumb creatures,
how much more will he require, that the same order should be kept in his
reasonable creature, in his more noble creature (man)? Thus then we may
conclude by a like reason: Men that bear authority, that are eminent in power
and dignity, that excel in riches and Command, are placed in the highest
Spheres of humane society; to this end, that (like sons of God) they might
shine brightly unto their inferiors by their godly life and example.

Such arguments as these, it were fit that they should always bear in their
minds, lest, being great in this world, they forget the hand that raised them;
and that befall them which David complains of: Man being in honor (says he)
has no understanding, but is compared unto the beasts that perish.

For the devil is well seen in subtle sophistry: he uses to frame a
preposterous argument, and to infer (a positione beneficij, depositionem of
ficij) from the position of dignity, the deposition of duty. Let poor men
(says he) and such as be of a lowly and humble spirit tremble at the word of
God. Let them be dejected, and groan at the sight of their sins, who want
the good things of this world to comfort them. Great resolutions become them
that be in great places. Will thou go with the multitude, and bring them
forth into the house of God? This is the way to make thee less than thou art.
Do not trouble thy self with frequenting religious exercises, nor with
mortifying contemplations, which enter through, even to the dividing asunder of
the soul and the Spirit. Learn to have the advantage of thy great fortune;
one hour in a Sabbath is enough to spend in devotion, the rest thou may
bestow upon thy self.

Thus does Satan go about to delude man, and make the blessings of God become
snares in his way; persuading him, that by how much he is above others, he has
by so much, more liberty than others. Where, on the contrary, God is no
accepter of persons, nor regards heeanie man the more for that which he has:
but in as much as he has received all from him, he looks for the greater
fear and obedience at his hands. The more talents a man has received, the
greater account has he to make for them.

The use therefore of this point serves for instruction unto all them whom God
has advanced in this world, upon whom he has bestowed his outward favors and
blessings; to teach them to be always mindful what, and of whom they have
received them, and to be careful to walk worthy of their high calling. These
outward graces, which make men to be esteemed and admired in the world (riches,
honors, power, and preeminence) they are not borne with men, men are not borne
unto them; they have them not by nature: But they are the gifts of God, he
bestows them where he pleases; and where he bestows them, there he expects,
that (like good stewards) men should faithfully dispose of them, Act. 17.21.
to his glory.

God (says the Apostle) has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the
world with righteousness: then shall all men rise to give an account of their
doings. Not the poorest man that lives, but has many ways tasted of the
benefits and bounty of God, and therefore stands accountable for his service
and for his thankfulness. He that has bin unfaithful in a little, shall be
beaten with the fewer stripes; but the mighty (says the wise man) shall he
mightily tormented, Wis. 6.6.

For why? Great and public examples have this condition annexed unto them;
that they cannot sin only to themselves, but must needs redound oftentimes
even unto a whole country. If the master of a house be given to swearing, the
whole family will abuse his example, and take the same liberty in that
horrible sin. If he care not to break the Sabbath by unseasonable sports,
they that live with him, will have as little care to keep it holy.

O let not such a sinister persuasion as this is, blind their eyes; that
because the world flatters them, therefore God will be the more favorable to
them; or because they find God to be more beneficial to them in the things of
this world, that therefore the case will be so with them too in the world to
come. No (says Christ, speaking of them that did put more confidence in their
riches, than in God), A rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven:
Nay, he goes further than so, and tells us, that it is easier for a Camel to
go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom
of God, Math. 19.23.

When Lazarus (as it is in the parable) died, he was straightwaies carried by
the Angels into Abraham's bosom; but Dives when he died was in torments. But
what was it that Dives had done? we do not read of any horrible crime that
was laid unto his charge: Only (this was all) he served the flesh and the
world, in stead of serving God; and did not return that which he had received
from God, to the glory of God. Hereupon was that answer given him: Son,
remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy pleasures, Luke 16.

Thus, though a man may be accounted happy in this world; though he may appear
an honest man to the world-ward; yet is not this enough to save him: he may be
in danger of going unto hell, if he can give no better account of his service
unto God.

Oh how will they do then, upon whom God bestows temporal blessings with a
plentiful hand; unto whom he gives all manner of means, and occasions of
doing good in this life; whom he compasses about with the light of his
Gospel: if after such sweet benefits they be not careful and zealous to
promote his glory? What can I say more than this, that life and death is set
before us, and with bended knees beseech the God of mercy, even the Father of
our Lord Jesus, to make us careful to choose the better part, to make us wise
to our salvation?

Now from the quality of the party protesting, in the next place I come to
the extent of his protestation: [As for me and my house, we will serve the
Lord:] Ioshuah thinks it not enough that he himself be religious, that he in
his own person be the servant of the Lord; unless those that he keeps about
him, be thus piously affected; unless they be religious too. He will bind
all that live with him, in the same bond of duty unto God. None shall serve
Ioshuah, that will not serve that God which Ioshuah serves. I will serve the
Lord (says Ioshuah); yet not only so, but I and my house will serve the Lord.
Hence I commend unto your considerations this memorable doctrine: The true
servants of God will keep none in their houses, but such as join with them in
the true worshipping of God.

This point, if you read the 101. Psalm, you may see proved to the full:
where David, setting down what government he will observe in his house and
kingdom, shows what manner of persons they are that he will refuse, and who
they be whom he will choose to live in his house with him. Mine eyes (says he)
look unto such as are faithful in the land, that they may dwell with me.
Whosoever leads a godly life, he shall be my servant. There shall no deceitful
person dwell in my house: he that tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight. I
shall soon destroy all the ungodly that are in the land; that I may root out
all wicked doers from the City of the Lord.

(suscipere rationem totius) participate of the name and nature of the whole;
shunnes what is contrary to that nature; and most willingly gathers it self
to that which is of the same kind: For example; The least drop of water has
the name of its Element; has the entire properties of it; partakes of the
round figure of that Element; and best agrees and unites it self to water. In
like manner it is with the fire and the rest of the Elements; being homogeneall
bodies, they are not compounded of any parts, which agree not in the name and
nature of the whole. So it is with the true members of that mystical body
whereof Christ is the head; they cannot suffer themselves to be combined with
wicked persons and unbeleevers: no, they will associate none unto themselves,
by their good wills, who are not endued with grace, and goodness, and a godly
conversation, being the true qualities and marks of that invisible Chuch,
whereof they themselves are true members.

A second reason is drawn from the inconveniences which must needs follow,
(infida societas) a treacherous society. Genesis 3.15.
There will be perpetual enmity betwixt the seed of the woman, and the seed
of the serpent. If the son of the bonds woman be suffered to tarry in the
house with the son of the promise, Genesis 21.9.
he will never leave mocking and persecuting, until he be cast out. Genesis
25.22.
Esau and Jacob cannot lie together in the same womb, without struggling
together, and putting Rebecca to pain. 1. Sam. 5.7.
The Ark of God cannot rest with Dagon. Besides, if we admit this unkindly
mixture, another inconvenience must needs happen; the sound members of that
body will be in danger, where there is any rotten member suffered to hang on:
Heresy and Vice are as infectious as the plague it self. When the Apostle
charged the Corinthians to excommunicate, and put out of their assembly the
incestuous person, he urges this reason; A little leaven (says he) leaveneth
the whole lump; purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new
lump, as ye are unleavened, 1. Cor. 5.6.

To conclude this point; they can never truly and sincerely serve God, who do
not cause them that live in their houses, to serve him in like manner.

The use of this serves in the first place for information, to show us what
manner of proficients we are in the school of grace; how steadfastly we cleave
unto the covenant of God; how perfectly we walk in his ways; how near we
have attained to that heavenly communion of Saints. For if our conversation be
in heaven, all our delight will be upon the Saints on earth. We know (says
S. 1. Ioh. 3.14.
John) that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the
brethren. We know by this, that we love God, and that we are beloved of
God, if we love his servants, and make much of them that fear the Lord. Psalm.
101.3.
And then (with David) we walk in our houses with a perfect heart, when with
one spirit, and with one soul, both our selves, and those that be under us, do
serve the Lord; then we shall be sure of a blessing.

When the Lord did so familiarly converse with Abraham, and create him the
father of the faithful, it was with this proviso; for (says he) I know him,
that he will command his sons, and his household after him, that they keep
the way of the Lord, to do righteousness and judgment, Genes. 18. When David
was chosen of God, and pronounced a man after Gods own heart, it was with
respect unto the faithfulness and truth of his, in ruling them that were
committed to his charge, prudently with all his power, Psalm. 78.72.

Would thou find that favor in the eyes of the Lord, that Abraham did? then
thou must follow the steps of Abraham's faith. Would thou be as dear unto
God, as David was? then with David thou must seek to enlarge the glory of
God. Thy eyes must look unto such as be faithful in the land, that they may
dwell with thee: he, and none but he must be thy servant, that leads a
godly life. In a word, would thou, with Ioshuah, enter into the promised
Canaan? then, with Ioshuah, thou must be zealous for Gods cause. Though all
the world should stagger, and revolt from God, and forsake his Covenant; yet
must thou maintain his worship: thou must obey his Commandments; thou must
reverence his word, and bear this resolution; I and my house will serve the
Lord.

The second use of this point serves to discover unto us the backward
disposition of the Christians of this age; in whom we find no such zeal for
Gods glory, no such forwardnes in this service. Alas, alas! where have we one
endewed with Abraham's faith, to teach the commandments and ordinances of God
unto his posterity? where is one inspired with this zeal of Ioshuah, to
protest sincerely, I and my house will serve the Lord? We may run to and fro
with Jeremy, Ierem. 5.1.
and search long enough, before we find the man either amongst small or great.

Tell me; Is not the vigor and force of Christianity strangely abated and
decayed, when most places in the world (like Caiaphas hall) are filled with a
rabblement of Vice; Heretics, Atheists, Epicures (pell-mell) all of all sorts,
saving of good men? We are fallen upon those last and desperate times of the
world, which S. Paul foretold should come, and has lively set forth, 2. Tim.
3.1. This know (says he), that in the last days shall come perilous times;
for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, despisers of those that are good, lovers of pleasures, more than
lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.

The Devil has gotten the start of the world, and has set up in the minds
of men his idols of worldly pomp and vanity. What is more neglected, than the
Commandments of God? what is slighted so much, as his service? and who are so
backward in it, as they that should be most forward? All the counsel that I
can give in this case, is that of David, O consider this ye that forget God,
Psalm 50.22
lest he pluck you away, and there be none to deliver you.

The third and last use of this point, is for exhortation, to stir up those
who have the charge and command of others, unto the careful and conscionable
performance of this duty, by all means to enlarge and advance the kingdom of
Christ: and where God has established them, that there they should establish
godliness. As this is the greatest and weightiest duty that lies upon men in
this world; so has it the greatest arguments, and the weightiest motives to
enforce it.

First, the benefit which the performance of our duty herein, brings with it.

Secondly, the danger that we run into, by the neglect hereof.

Godliness is the greatest gain to a Christian that is: it has not only the
promises of this life, but of the life to come; for, in serving the Lord (says
David) there is great reward. Whereas on the contrary, an everlasting curse of
misery and contempt, is laid upon those wretches that are negligent in his
work.

When the Lord sent his Prophet to reprove Eli, and to threaten the taking away
of the Priesthood from him and his posterity, because his sons ran into a
slander, and their father stayed them not; this is the sentence that the Lord
adds withal: For, them that honor me (says God) I will honor; and they
that despise me, shall be despised, 1. Sam. 2.30.

Would you hear what gracious and singular privileges the true servants of God
have? listen then to that which David tells you: The eyes of the Lord (says
David) are over the righteous; and his ears are open unto their prayers.
Again: The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out
of all their troubles. And once more he adds this in the same Psalm: The
Lord delivers the souls of his servants, and all they that put their trust
in him, shall not be destitute, Psalm. 34. Nay moreover, whosoever he is that
is zealous for the Lord, shall not only have the Lord for his protector and
defender in all his afflictious; but for his Counselor and Director in all his
affairs, as the same Prophet does notablly express it in another place; What
man is he (says David) that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the way
that he shall choose.

These benefits and testimonies of Gods fatherly affection and care toward
them, are ordinary, and daily extended to them: but what solace or delight is
there, that this world can afford, to be compared with the joy and comfort,
which the dying servant of God feels, when he can truly say (his conscience
bearing him witness), Lord, I have brought up them in thy knowledge and fear,
whom thou gave into my hands: I have not hid thy commandments from my
posterity: The talents which I received of thee, lo, here they are increased.
I made it the scope of my life, to set forth thy glory, and to enlarge thy
kingdom: Let not my Lord be angry at the weakness of his unprofitable
servant. I have finished my course, I have kept the faith

Me thinks indeed I hear the Judge of the world pronouncing that sweet
Elogie, (...), Well done good and faithful servant; thou have bin faithful in
little, I will make thee Ruler over much: Enter in into thy masters joy, Mat,
25.21. And will he not on the contrary pronounce that dreadful sentence upon
those that have abused his goods? Servi mali and cunctatores, Ye evil and
slothful servants, where are my Talents? why do I not receive mine own with
advantage? how is it, that ye have buried them in the earth, in the earthly
vanities and pleasures of this world? get ye therefore out of my presence, into
utter darkness. This is that severe sentence which our Savior has forewarned us
of, being as yet conversant amongst us in humility. Wherefore it will be our
wisdom to think of it seriously, that we may be out of the danger of it,
when he shall appear in his glory.

For (alas!) otherwise what unspeakable shame, what horror and confusion will
betide us in that day; when as so many zealous Saints and servants of the
Lord, who have waded through the storms of tyranny and persecution, and have
adorned their constant profession of the Gospel of Jesus, with the innocence
of their godly lives, and have sealed it with their bloods; when these so many
shall be our judges? O blessed Saints whose souls are in heaven, where you do
follow the lamb wheresoever he goes, clothed in white robes, as the livery of
your innocence, and palms in your hands, as the ensigns of victory! how will
your zeal, and your forwardness to set forth the glory of God, condemn the
coldness and backwardnes of your posterity!

Now therefore consider how fearful the estate of Reprobates is: they must
never look to see the face of God: They that will not serve the Lord, the Lord
will cast them forth from his presence: God will spue them forth, whosoever
they they be, that are not zealous of his glory. In the third of the
Revelation, the fifteenth, thus writes the Spirit of God to the lukewarm
Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans: I know thy works (says God), that
thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou werest cold or hot: therefore
because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, it will come to pass,
that I shall spue thee out of my mouth.

O terrible voice of the just judgment of God! Would thou escape this
judgment? would thou not be spewed out of the mouth of God? there is but one
only way set down in the 19th. verse of this chap. Be zealous therefore, and
amend.

It may be, vain men (such is their wretchedness) may cast off the fear of
these judgments for a while, by a continual exchange in vanities; whilst
evil company does spare them no time to think of their end: But what will
they do, when that sad day of their departure comes? when their souls
perforce must be taken from them? when they must leave all, and bid this world
farewell for ever? what flatterer then can send them away with a quiet
conscience, and with solid comfort? what is he that can do them any good, or
stand them in any stead, when in all their lifetime they have not purchased
Christ for their friend?

Remember therefore (O man), Remember whilst thou have time, for what end thou
art placed in this world: namely, that thou art here placed to be a probationer
in the house of God, in a lower strain to resound his praises: where if thou
shall be found a proficient in grace and godliness, then will the Lord advance
thee unto that immortal Quire, unto the fellowship of Saints and Angels, there
to sing unto him more glorious HALELV-IAHS, for ever and for ever.

Well then, this being thus; since the well fare and happiness of man depends
upon the conscionable discharge of that duty which he owes to God, both in
himself, and in those that belong unto him: since it is of such consequence,
that either it procures man's eternal felicity, being carefully and rightly
performed; or being neglected, his everlasting misery: what wise man will not
make it his chiefest study, to approove his ways unto the Lord? what wise man
will not make it the very joy of his heart, to do the commandments of such a
God? what wise man will not bind himself unto his duty, and resolve with
Ioshuah, I and my house will serve the Lord?

I am persuaded, I need use no further inducements to kindle your zeal; the
very mentioning of eternal life being enough to prevail with the soul,
which is created immortal. But perhapps you may put-in that question here,
which was made to Peter and the rest of the Apostles, by those new Converts in
the second of the Acts; What shall we do? what rules can thou prescribe us?
what way can thou set us in this duty? Give me leave therefore, as far as
this scantling of time permits, to propose a few special directions fit to be
put in practice, if you have a desire to perform this duty as it ought to be
performed.

First, whosoever thou art that would serve God soundly and sincerely, thou
and thy family (that ye may be the blessed of the Lord, thou and thy family)
then with David's blessed man, thy delight must be in the Law of the Lord, and
in his Law thou must exercise thy self day and night. Here is true wisdom to
be learned: not such as this world teaches men, whereby to compass their
finister ends; but such as will make thee wise in thy Calling; wise, to save
thy self and them that hear thee; such as will make thee perfect unto every
good work. Let others serve their lusts, and follow the vain imaginations of
their own hearts: let them that lust to perish, adore the god of this world,
and sacrifice unto their own nets; as for thee, whosoever thou art, that
aspirest unto eternity, let not this book of the Law depart out of thy mouth,
but meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe and do according
to all that is written therein: for then shall thou make thy way prosperous,
and then shall thou have good success, Josh. 1.8. A Christians Library may
soonest be furnished of all other Studies: it requires no more books than two;
the one, the book of Gods Law, containing the Theorie; the other, the book of
his own Conscience, which contains the Practice of his duty. Oh what a
happy student is he in the School of grace, that keeps for himself a true
concordance out of these two!

Why do men busy themselves in needless matters, and with a greedy
curiosity feed their fancies with impertinent trifles? What good do our
souls reap by the monsters of Africa, or by the discoveries of America? Lo!
here is that (unum necessarium) which includes the whole duty of man, the
Epitome of all profitable learning, Luke 10.42. Col. 12.13. 2. Tim. 3.15.
which is only able to make us wise to salvation.

These are those books which thou shall be put unto, upon the greatest trial
that ever can befall thee, even upon life and death; not this temporal of the
body, but that eternal of soul and body, before the Almighty Judge of the
world. In the twentieth of the Revelation, and the 12th. I saw the dead (says
John) both great and small, stand before God: and the books were opened, and
another book was opened, which is the book of life; and the dead were
judged of those things which were written in the books, according to their
works.

Well; the seeond rule that I will propose to be practiced, for the right
performance of this duty to God, is this: If thou and thy house would serve
God, so as you ought to serve him, then know, that God has set apart one day
of the week for his service: He allows thee six days, to spend upon thy
self, but requires that thou should dedicate the seventh day unto him: and
lest thou might forget it, he bids thee Remember to keep it holy. Oh deny
him not so small a request, as one day, that has given thee all. Nor has he,
for himself, any need of this from thee, but for thy sake requires it of
thee, with manifold blessings to return it to thee. This day then thou must
exempt from the vain things of this world, and spend it wholly in pious
duties, in religious exercises; in the Word, in the Sacraments; in the works
of mercy and charity. Now thou must rouse up thy soul, and all that is
within thee, to sing praises unto the Name of the Lord, in the congregation of
his Saints. Now think upon the glorious works of the Lord, the sweet hope of
thy redemption; the manifold benefits and consolation that thou enjoyest in
Christ: and then let thy ravished soul burst forth into those glorious
exultations of David; It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to
sing praises unto thy Name, O most High: to tell of thy loving kindness in the
morning, and of thy truth in the night season, Psalm. 92.1.

A third Rule I add, and that is this: As the Sabbath is appointed of God, to
be wholly consecrate unto his service; so thou must let no day pass, without a
special remembrance of God. The Heathens, in their counterfeit Religion, yet
retained this principle; A love princip^um -- to begin the day, and whatsoever
they undertook, by first calling upon their gods: and shame it were for
Christians, to be more negligent in performing this service unto the God of
heaven, the true God, than Heathens were in performing it unto their Idols,
which by nature were no gods. Therefore if thou would be the true servant of
God, thou must every day call upon him, every day pray unto him; privately by
thy self, publicly with thy family: joining together with one heart, and with
one spirit, with reverence, with diligence, with fervencie. This Rule we may
learn from the Apostle: Pray always (says he) with all prayer and
supplication in the Spirit; but how? and watching thereunto with all
perseverance, Ephesians. 6.18.

The common sort of Christians do show by their careless behavior, that they
are foully mistaken what prayer is: they think it enough to repeat the words;
and so the tongue be busy in speaking, no matter what the heart is thinking:
thus they turn the chiefest means of grace into the foulest sin that is,
tempting the great majesty of God by their rash presumption. But if we would
pray as we ought, we must come unto this duty with a reverent preparation,
behaving our selves as in the sight of God. For this is an high and heavenly
duty, which makes us (as it were) familiar with God; whereby we come into the
presence of God, and are vouchsafed, being but dust and ashes, to confer with
that glorious majesty of God: and therefore, unless we mean to pull down a
curse upon our selves, we must take heed how we perform so weighty and divine
a duty, carelessly, formally, and coldly.

I speak this with grief of heart, and to our shame; no garish toy, no
company so vile and hateful in the sight of God, but is able to cause us to
omit this duty, and to break it off. What, my beloved? do we think that God
stands in such need of our devotions, that when we have served the flesh and
the world, he will be contented with the refuse of our time and affections? Oh
no! we may learn far better things of the Heathens; Ignavis precibus fortuna
repugnat: Fortune (say they) resists cold and sluggish prayers. And shall
that service be thought meet by Christians for the true and everliving God,
which Heathens thought unmeet for their blind, their false, their imaginary
goddess? Far be this from us; we have not so learned Christ

A fourth rule to be observed, that we may be the true servants of God, is,
to withdraw our affections from worldly vanities: we must take heed, that
these get not the possession of our hearts; if they do, all that service which
we should perform unto God, will soon vanish and come to nothing. Love not
the world (says S. John) neither the things that are in the world. If any man
love the world, the love of the Father is not him, 1 John 2.15. For indeed,
where the heart is taken up with vanity, what room can there be for piety?
There cannot be two such different masters, as are the God of heaven, and the
god of this world: And our Savior plainly tells us, that no man can serve two
masters, without hating the one of them: Ye cannot (says he) serve God and
Mammon. We must therefore, according to that rule of the Apostle, so use the
world, as if we used it not; so use it, that we fall not in love with the
vanities of it, that we be not ensnared with the deceitfulnes of it.

A fifth and last rule to be observed of us, if we would show our selves
zealous in the service of God, is first, that we should love and affect good
men; cherish them and encourage them; keep them with us, and converse with
them. A true friend (says the proverb) is a friend also to him that loves his
friend. I may extend the nature of this proverb to the true servants of God;
they that serve God sincerely themselves, will make much of the servants of
God. And David puts it for one of the characters and marks of him that shall
rest upon the holy hill of God, to make much of them that fear the Lord, Psalm.
15.4. On the contrary; those that be ungodly and profane, that deride all
piety and religion; such as those are, thy soul must hate and abhor. David
could tell no better way, whereby to make proof of his zeal unto God, than by
such an affection. Do not I hate them (says he) that hate thee? and do not I
rise up against them that rise up against thee? yea, I hate them right sore as
if they were mine enemies. If thou love the Covenant of thy God, thou must
despise them that despise that Covenant: If thou love the law of thy God,
thou must needs hate them that forsake that law: such must not dwell with thee;
such must not tarry in thy sight. Do thou think that he can prove faithful
to thee, that prooves faithless to God? or can thou endure that he should be
graced by thy countenance, that lays a reproach upon thy religion? It Is more
than Christian patience; such was never in David; such was never in Ioshuah.

We count him no loving subject, that harbors those who despise and resist the
laws of his Sovereign. Shall we be so zealous for the honor of a mortal
Prince, and shall we be so careless of the majesty of the immortal God?

In the old law, he that despised Moses law, died without mercy, under two or
three witnesses, Deu. 19.15. Mark now what the Apostle inferres upon this; Of
how much sorer punishment (says he,) suppose ye, shall he be worthy, which
treads under foot the Son of God, and counts the blood of the Testament
as an unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified, and does despite the spirit of
grace? Hebr, 10.29. You see it is no such light matter to fall from the known
truth, and to forsake the Gospel of Christ, being so much more excellent than
Moses law was. Yet we are dumb and silent in Gods cause, and pass over these
things as if they were done in another world, and did no whit concern us;
whilst we suffer that gangrene of heresy to invade our families. Oh be not
deceived: Every master must give an account for every servant he keeps: And
look how many such despisers of the word and truth of God are nourished by
him, so many witnesses will stand up against him in the day of the Lord, to
convince him of coldness and want of zeal.

Here I have just occasion to take up that complaint and reproof which Eliah
used toward the backsliding Jews of his time; How long halt ye between two
opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal be God, then follow him,
1. Kin. 18.21. So say I, If this Gospel which we preach unto you, which ye receive,
be the Gospel of Christ; if it be sole and sufficient means unto salvation,
why do not ye receive it in uprightness and sincerity? why stand ye not up
for Christ, and for the maintenance of his truth? why do ye not labor to
beat down errors, and utterly suppress the kingdom of Antichrist? Take
heed lest your indifferency herein, argue that ye belong not to Christ.

I will say no more, but only close up this point with that of Austin; Non
amat Christum, qui amat aliquid plus quam Christum: He loves not Christ, that
loves any thing more than Christ: or with that which Christ himself speaks;
He that prefers any thing above Christ, is not worthy of him.

I will now draw toward an end: yet before I conclude, one special rub
there is that I must remove out of the way, principally of great men. What is
that, say you? I will tell you: There is a generation of men, than which, never
had the Church of God enemies more pernicious. Saint Paul, in the third to the
Philippians, has set them forth in their lively character. The good Apostle,
considering what mischief they would do in the Church of Christ, could not
speak of them without many a tear: Many (says he) walk, of whom I have
told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of
the Cross of Christ; whose end is destruction, whose god is their belly, and
whose glory is their shame; who mind earthly things.

These walk from one house to another, and Chameleon-like, change their color
at every change of air. These are those ungodly men, of whom S. Jude speaks,
that defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities: by
reason of whom, the way of truth is evil spoken of. Not the Ministers of God,
not the Word of God, no nor that drad and sacred Majesty of God himself, can
pass free from the poison of these men's lips. These are they that buzze into
your ears that cursed policy of wicked Jeroboam, 1 King. 12.31. to make
Priests of the lowest of the people. Hold them short (say they) and keep them
under, lest they be too busy with you.

O full of all subtlety and all mischief, you children of the Devil, Act.
15.10.
you enemies of all righteousness! will you not cease to pervert the right
ways of the Lord? Behold now: whom do you resist? For, what are Moses and
Aaron, but the ministers, but the messengers of the Lord? I say it is the Lord
himself that you strive against: your tongues are set against the most High;
and he will not fail to recompense your deserts with eternal flames.

But as for you whom God advances in this world; if we be so vile, so
contemptible in your sight, not to be thought worthy of access, nor to have
that freedom of speech which befits our place and calling; we must suppe-up
our contempt in silence, and think with David, Psalm. 84.
We had rather be doore-keepers in the house of our God. Nevertheless we
beseech you, that you would sometimes retire out of the vanity and
deceitfulness of this world, into your own souls, and consider of your
selves as you are men; not great and mighty, but frail and mortal, which must
die like one of the people, and give an account as well as the meanest of the
multitude. There comes another world after this, where Herod and John Baptist
shall both meet again, but upon othergesse terms than here in this world
they did: for then the Martyr shall be set upon the Throne, whilst the cruel
King shall be sent unto the Prison.

What joy, what comfort or courage can the Ministers of God have, where the
vilest wretches may insult over them? where they are debarred that liberty
which ever the Heathens had in their better times, Vbi vix sentire que velis,
nedum quae sentias, Tacit. lib. 1. histor.
dicere licet; Where they scarce dare think what they list, much less speak
what they think.

Certainly such contempt of his messengers, God uses to pay home with his
severest judgments, and to furnish them accordingly, where they be so slightly
regarded. The Jews did despise Jeremy, and that word which he spoke unto
them in the name of the Lord: But what was the issue of this? Namely, that the
Prophet should not so much as pray for them, nor the name of the Lord be once
mentioned amongst that ungrateful people, Ier. 44. Ezechiel was restrained of
his liberty, and despitefully handled, by the same stiffenecked and rebellious
nation: What does God do upon this? He makes the tongue of his prophet cleave
to the roof of his mouth; strikes his messenger dumb: and all to heap
vengeance upon them, that he might set the dumbness of his prophet upon the
score of the peoples sins, Eze. 3.25. Micah thinks it enough to keep a
Levite in his house to be his Priest, for ten shekells of silver and a suit of
apparel by the year: he thinks the Lord will be well-pleased with him for
this: But what? was the Lord ever a whit the better pleased with him for this?
No; Micah had a house of gods; and therefore the Lord sends him a wandering
Levite fit for a wicked Idolater, Judge. 17.10.

Well then, to return and make an end of all; Whosoever he is that would be
the true servant of God, must thus think of himself, that he is a member of
that holy and invisible Church, with has none in it but good men, none but
gracious and godly men: therefore such as these he must embrace with a loving
and entire affection; to these he must join and unite himself: yea, and he
must not contemn the faithful messengers of the Lord, but have them in
singular regard for their works sake. As for wicked men, that make but a mock
of grace, these he must fly from as from serpents: they are only set as snares
in his way to keep him from the service of God, and from the performance of
religious duties.

Thus (right Honorable and Beloved) you have heard the sum and substance of
those points delivered and handled, which are included in this pithie and godly
protestation of Ioshuah. First, from the connection of my text, what constancy
and resolution there is, and should be in those that are the true servants of
God. Though all the world revolt, yet they must cleave unto God. Secondly, from
the high estate of him that protests here, you have been taught from hence;
that God requires of them for whom he has done most in this world, that they
should be most zealous for him. And lastly, from the extent of it, you have
heard, that the true servants of God will keep none in their houses, but such
as join with them in the true worshipping of God. You have heard these points
handled and prosecuted at large; I must not dwell upon particulars. Only give
me leave to end with a word or two of exhortation.

As Ioshuah, in the beginning of his speech, sought to stir up the Israelites
unto the fear and obedience of the Lord, by rehearsing what God had done for
them: So may I, with as good reason, lay the same ground of exhortation in the
closing up of mine. Now then, by the tender mercies of our God, by all the
benefits which we have received of him, which are infinite in number,
inestimable in value: by our great and manifold deliverances, not (as the
Israelites) from the downeright violence of Perizzites and Iebusites, but from
the furious and treacherous conspiracies of more subtle, more cruel, more
politic, more malicious, more inhumane enemies: By the sweet peace and quiet
prosperity of our country: By this blessed and free passage of the Gospel of
peace, which does every where display its pure and celestial beams; being hid
in none, but in them that perish: By those better things which God has
prepared for his servants in the life to come, even the joys of heaven, such
as no eye has seen, no tongue can relate, nor ever have entered into the
heart of man.

O let this stir up in us a readiness, a resolution, a zeal to this duty:
To fear God; to love God with all our heart, with all our strength, with all
our might: To refer our actions wholly unto the glory of our God: To serve
him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.

But if such unspeakeable bounty, such heavenly goodness, cannot win our
earthly and wretched souls: yet know this, there is a Hell, and there be
damned; and torments in very deed, such as no patience is able to bear, no
date of time wear out. If ye care not for his mercies, yet fear his
judgments. Nevertheless, why will we tempt and provoke his justice, who is
so rich in mercy? O rather, since there is mercy with God, therefore let him
be feared. This it is which should make us cheerful in the service of our God,
which should make us perform willing obedience to our Lord; Knowing, that if
we serve him here, we shall reign with him hereafter: if we set our delight
upon him here, we shall be satisfied with his presence hereafter; if we give
glory unto him whilst we live here, hereafter we shall triumph with him, and
be received into glory.

Now the God of heaven, etc.

Soli Deo sapienti gloria.
FINIS.

