A NECESSITY OF SEPARATION From the Church of England, prooved by the
Nonconformists Principles. Specially opposed unto Dr. AMES, his Fresh Suit
against humane ceremonies, in the point of Separation only. Also Dr. LAITON,
Mr. DAYREL, and Mr. BRADSHAW, are here answered, wherein they have written
against us. With a Table in the later end, of the principal occurrents in this
Treatise. By JOHN CAN, Pastor of the ancient English church, in Amsterdam.

Prove. 31. 8. 9. Open thy mouth for the dumb, in the cause of all such as are
appointed to destruction. -- And plead the cause of the poor and needy. Ioh.
13, 17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. Printed in the
year 1634.

To every one, that seeks after the truth in sincerity, Salutations.
THere are extant already so many books in the defense of our cause, Our
Apology. Mr. Bar. refutation of Mr. Giffard. A treatise of the minist. of the
Church of England. Mr. Robinsons Justification of Separ. Mr. Penry of the
ministry of England. An answ. to Mr. Stone.
(which never yet received any answer) that it has been in my thoughts a long
time, not to enter publicly the lists of contention about it with any man; but
to employ that small portion, which I have in the knowledge of holy things, more
peaceably otherwise; Not with standing perceiving of late, the general fame,
which was given forth of Dr. Ames his book, and namely in his answer to the
point between the Nonconformists and us, as that it was so learnedly and
absolutely done, that it gave all men satisfaction (the Separatists only
excepted) and that no man would ever be able to make any sound reply therein
unto it. I thought it requisite, to take a through view thereof; which, when I
had so don, and saw the sleightnesse of it, (to say no worse I mean only in the
point of Separation, for in other things he bath answered. D Burg. fully, and
laid him flatt on the ground.
) I conceived with my self, that this common bruit must need arise, either
from some ignorant people, who cannot judge of things which differ, or from
such as have men's persons in admiration, and so like the shadow will follow
them where ever they go, be it right or wrong.

It is known to those, which know the controversies between the formal
Protestants in England, and the Reformists, that the Principles of the later,
by the former are said to be the direct and plain grounds of Separation;
sundry arguments and reasons they allege for it, as the reader may see in their
several treatises. Hooker Eccles. Pol. pref. p. 34. Whitg. 2. Treat. c. 1. div.
2. p. 81 Sutclif. treat. of Disc. c. 15 p. 165. D. Bills. perpetual Goverm. chapter
15. p. 339.

Bancr. Surv. of Disc. c. 33, p. 430, 431, 432. Lo Quaerimon. Ecclesiae. p. 59
60. Answ. to the Petition by the Vice Chanc. and Heads of Oxf. p. 15. D.
Morton, D. Burg.


This thing by the other is not only denied, but withal they proclaim
themselves the main refuters of the Separatists, and do affirm, that they
Repl. to D. Mort. Sect. 14. p. 31. Defense of Petition to the K. p. 103.
never saw any Prelate to confute their opinions any otherwise then by railing
words; But how well they have confuted us, it will appear in the following
dispute, unto which I refer the reader: Only I think good in brief to give
him here a sight of most of their weapons, which they draw out usually against
us, and whereby they endeavor to conquer and quel us quite.

1. Vile calumniations, and bitter scoffs, proclaming us to the world, to be
Schismatics, Brownists, Donatists, etc. and matching us many times with the
most notorious Heretics Dayr. Treat. of the Chapter p. 41.
, and blasphemers Mr. Nichols plea of the innocent. p. 33, 34
, that they can think upon, of purpose to make our persons and profession
odious to all men. 2. Raising up many manifest lies and untruths The scurrulous
Libels, published under the names of Lawne, Fowler, Bullard, etc.
, and gathering together the faylings of some particular persons, which had
walked with us, and casting the same as dung in our faces. 3. Braggs and boasts
of victory; a notable instance for this we have, in a certain preface, made
to Mr. Hildersh. book on Ioh. 4. the author of it, tells his reader there, that
Mr. Hild. had the best in the controversy, between him and Mr. Johnson,
notwithstanding it is well known, he never made any reply to that which the
other had published against him, although he was by diverse earnestly desired to
do it; and this I write from the report of honest and faithful witnesses, who
are yet alive, and will not (I am persuaded) willingly relate any thing but the
truth. 4. Gross contradictions, in seeking to justify against us, the very
things, which by sound arguments and reasons, in their writings against the
Hierarchy, they prove to be evil and unlawful; and this we have manifested in
the answ. to Mr. Bradsh. book. 5. And in a word, falsisications of our
positions, continual begging of questions, larg proofs, for what was never
doubted of, but no proving of the main point in question, either by scriptures,
reasons, or any ancient and sound writers.

These, and such like arguments, have they used hitherto against us; And it is
no marvel, that they are such: for what better should we exspect from them, who
seek to put out that light again, which has been by themselves chiefly
revealed unto many, I know what I say, and have good experience of this thing;
for there is not ten of* an hundred, which separate from the Church of England,
but are moved first thereto, (I speak of outward means) by the Doctrines of
the Nonconformists, either in word or writing, taught to the people: And
indeed, upon their grounds, how can any one do less then separate, if his
heart be tender against every sin, seeing they confidently affirm, that
their ministry, worship, and discipline, is from Antichrist, and in their
Church are swarms Sermon. on Romans 12. p. 65, 66.
of Atheists, Papists, Erroneous, and Heretical Sectaries, Witches, Charmers,
Murderers, Thieves, Adulterers, Liars, etc. Moreover, All Popery Sold. Bar.
(say they) is poison, the root, stalk, and branches; and we cannot be said
sincerely to have repented of Abridgm. p. 23.
the Idolatry, or superstition, whereby we or our forefathers have provoked the
Lord, unless we be ashamed of, and cast away with detestation all the
instruments and monuments of it. Again, whosoever partakes Cartw. Catechis. p.
315. 316.
in the sins of Rome, are also under the same curse: So that we cannot in any
sort communicate with them in their errors, unless we will bear them company
in their destruction also. These are their own testimonies, and we know they
are true; and therefore in obedience to God, and care of our precious souls,
we have left our unsanctified standings in their Assemblies, and through the
Lords mercy to us, do walk in the holy order of his Gospel, although daily
sufferers for it, of manifould afflictions; Rev. 16. 15
Notwithstanding all these things offend us not: for we know whom we serve, and
are most certain, if we watch, and do Christ's work still in his own way. We
shall have a sure reward for it at the resurrection of the just.

And to speak now a word or two unto such as are commonly styled Professors
of the Gospel; whether uncomfortable, or not; The thing truly, which I most
wish unto them, is, tender consciences, and that the Lords house, and his
ordinances may be dear to their souls, and that they may be able to deny the
profitts, and pleasures of this life: for if these things be in them, and
abound, my hope is, that by their judicious reading-over of this treatise,
there will follow much reformation. When some men take a little Physic, they
have their health by it soon restored: but if the same, and a great deal more,
be ministered to others of an other constitution there follows not the like
effect: It is even so in the cause of the soul, such as unfeignedly desire to
know the truth, and have a conscionable resolution towalke in it, do receive
much profitt by the fruitful counsel, which is given them, either by word or
writing. But on the contrary: Those which seek the truth with no better
affection than Pilate Ioh. 17.
did, neither purpose to obey the same more then did the dissembling Hypocrites
in Jeremy: Certainly good advise Chap. 42. and 43.
given to them, is but as Pearls cast before swine and dogs; therefore my
desire is, that the former sort may be viewers only of these lines; and to them
I say, in the words of the Apostle: consider what I say, and the Lord give
understanding in all things.

The following Principles (touching a true Church, Ministry, Worship, and
Government, as also hew quite contrary hereto the English is,) are not taken
out of our writings, but from the Nonconformists, yea even from the chiefest of
them, which for learning, Zeal, judgment, holiness of life, etc. have ever
held that cause. Moreover they are not barely affirmed, but sufficiently
confirmed; and therefore it stands every one upon, to take them the more to
heart; for else, not one, but many of themselves, even Prophets of their own,
will condemn them.

I know, the devil uses many means, to keep people in cursed ignorance; and
among other, one specially is, by dissuading them from hearing such persons,
and reading such books, which might show unto them their evil and sin; and this
he does under a pretense of doing good unto them. Oh! (says he he speaks thus
by false ministers.
) you must beware of false Prophets, and not hearken to that counsel, which
causes to err, avoid the company of all deceivers, and not once look into
their books, etc. Now, by such Siren songs, the crafty Serpent keeps them fast
asleep, till he have brought the poor soul into the pit of endless
perdition*

We would think that man to be senseless, who (taking his enemies counsel)
would shutt all his doors and windows, in hope to get the more light into his
house thereby. The devil daily makes many thousand worse fools in the world,
in causing them to shutt close their eyes against the saving light of the
Gospel, in exspectation that their souls by this means shall be filled with
the more wisdom and spiritual understanding. It is not my meaning, that any
one should believe Prove. 14. 15
things suddenly and rashly, but I would have him as Salomons counsel is, to
look well to his going; and as we take gould by weight, Corn, Cloth, etc. by
measure, so to receive the doctrines of every man by due examination; And this
is only the thing which I do request of thee (good reader) whosoever thou
art, be thou but pleased to put the Principles and inferences here written,
upon their proof, and to hold that only fast, which (after good trial by the
scriptures) thou find to be good and it is sufficient, and I have my desire
of thee to the full.

One thing more I desire others to take notice of, namely, That I judge not my
self bound so much, to justify their Principles, as our Inferences from them.
Jf therefore any shall deny them to be true, my purpose is to give place to
such, whom it more nearly concerns to write in the defense thereof. Yet we
believe their principles to be true, and is there be no Nonc. that will defend
them, we will.
But if any shall oppose us in the Conclusions, I would have them (leaving all
by matters) to follow the truth in love, without gall and bitterness, that so
things may come to a happy and speedy issue. It is well said of a Heathen man,
Magis veritas elucet, quo* saepius ad manu^ venit. Senec. lib. de ira.
the oftener truth comes to hand, the more the l ght thereof appears. I hope
this will be verified in the point now in controversy: for howsoever I doubt
not, but we have said here enough, to justify the matter undertaken;
notwithstanding much more I could have alleged from their writings, concerning
these things, but for the present I content my self herewith, till there be a
further just and necessary occasion given thereof.

I. CAN.

A MANVDVCTION To the following TREATISE.
HOwbeit not any religion should be judged the less true, because few embrace
it: neither the sooner to be followed, for the general good liking and
approbation which it has among men: notwithstanding having now so just and
necessary an occasion to urge men to practice what they profess; I shall
endeavor (by the grace of God) clearly to prove, that this our Way is of the
Apostolic primitive institution, even from their Tenets, which walk contrary
to it. Among other crimes charged upon Nonconformists, (as they are called) by
the Prelates and their Favorites, one chiefly is, that their Principles laid
down against the churches of England, do lead unto separation, and therefore
if they were true to their own grounds, they should not* communicate in the
church assemblyes of England. Many of the Bishops parasites heretofore have
thus accused them, and of late one Doct. Burgess most confidently maintains
the same against them. The which by Doct. Ames is utterly denied. Now which of
these two Doctors in this thing have the truth, J hope it shall evidently be
declared in this treatise following.

CHAPT. 1.
DOctor Burgess, having read, and sereouslie (as it seems) examined the
nature, and true consequence, of the many particular arguments, published to
the world by the Nonconformists, against the great abuses in the ministry,
worship, and Church government of Page 5.
England. Affirmed in his Rejoinder to D. Morton, that the same are the maine
grounds of separation, and for his part, if he believed them to be true, he
would (in all good conscience he protests) proclaim separation Page 232.
from idolatrous worship and worshippers before he slept, and not halt as these
men (by their own positions do) betwixt idolatry and religion: Doctor Ames
in his new book, entitled a fresh suit against Ceremonies denies that any
such thing can be necessarily concluded from their principles: but I will here
show by evident and sound reasons, that the former assertion is true and
certain, and all the arguments brought by the other to the contrary, are of no
weight or force to make good his denial thereof. And because I much desire,
that the reader may well understand our points in dispute. I shall therefore
(if God will) write in order, of them. And first I will begin with their
ministry: and touching it will lay down 4 things.

1. How the Nonconformists do describe a true ministry.

2. How far that of England by their own confession differs from, and is
contrary to it.

3. I will show what inferences and conclusions do necessarily follow upon it.

4. Answer the reasons, brought by Doct. Ames, in defense of their ministry.

NOt to speak of Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, Necessit. discip. 38,
73, 74.
which were extraordinary ministeries, and therefore (as themselves say) are now
wholly ceased. The ordinary Offices perpetually belonging to all true churches,
are only these five, 1. a Pastor or Bishop, which is the Offer. co^fer. page
2. T. C. l. 1. p. 22. and l. 2 pa. 3. and p. 5. 15. Demonst. discip. 46* Mr.
Bates 27.
highest ordinary Ecolesiasticall Officer in any true constituted visible
church of Christ, and they are all equal by Gods institution: and are forbidden
to exercise authority one over another; or exspect any such title as may
import it, or affect preeminence.

His gifts, properties, and conditions in doctrine and manners, are distinctly
set down in scripture. He must be apt to teach and exhort, no yo^g scholar,
able to devide the word aright. Have a continual care to watch over the souls
of those, for whom he must give an account. Discern their diseases, and apply
the word, according to every disease, and every time and occurrant. Briefly
Informat. from Scott. p. 28, 29. Necessity discip. 71. Defen. ag. Slaund of
Bridge. 127. Form ecclesias. govern. p. 123, 124, 125, etc. Demonst. discip.
53, 54.
he must love, cherish, and defend his sheep from ravenous beasts, feed them
in green and wholesome pastures of the word, pray for them, and seal up to
them the promises of God by the Sacraments. Secondly, the Lord has ordained,
that there should be in every congregation Doctors: which is an Office (they
say) different from that of the Pastor; the reasons which they give, are these,
1. Because the Apostle does so distinguish them one from another Romans 12, 7, 8.
Ephesians. 4. 11. 2. Their gifts appear to be diverse, 1 Cor. 12. 8. 3. The Pastor
is commanded to take one course in teaching, the Doctor another, Romans 12, 7,
8. 4. This distinguishing of them makes more for the building of the church,
then to unite and makechem one.

His office is to deliver sound and wholesome doctrine, Inform. from Scott.
page 30.
convince the gainesayers, preserve knowledge, and build upon the rock (which
is Christ Jesus) gold, silver, and precious stones, etc.

The third Officers, as they name them from the scriptures, are Governors or
ruling Elders, who are to Form eccles. Govern. 128, 129, etc. Romans 12, 8 ^
Cor. 12, 28. 1 Timothy ^. 17. Mr. Bate 89, etc.
look to the manners of the people, and to be assistant to the minister in
Government. This Office was established by the Apostles in all churches Act.
14. 23. and it serves to help forward the building thereof, 1 Cor. 12, 28.
and without it the body can not be intyre, Romans 12, 4, 8. To justify this
office, many scriptures, reasons, and testimonies taken from the learned, are
alleged by them, Ignat. ad Trall. Tertull. de Baptist. Ierom. cont. lucrf.
Ambr* upon 1 Timothy 5. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22. Bucer de reg. Demons. disc. p. 56.
Chr. l. 1. Pet. Mar. upon Romans 12. Call. instit. l. 4. c. 3. Sect. 8.

These must be men of wisdom, knowledge and sound judgment, sober, gentle,
modest, loving, temperate Inform. from Scot. p. 13.
etc. Able to discern, and all ways vigilant, for the quietness, welfare,
peace, purity and good order of the Church.

Eccles. gover. p. ^^9.
Fourthly there ought to be in every congregation certain deacons endued with
those qualities whi^^ the word of God describes. That is, they must (...) men
of good report, endued also with the Holy Gho^^* grave, temperate, not covetous
etc.

To prove this office these Scriptures are alleged Act. 6. 1 Timothy 3. 6. Romans
12. 8. 1 Cor. 12, 28. Phil. 1. 1 And also these reasons for it, 1. the Lord
takes care both for the bodies and souls of men, and therefore instituteth,
such offices peculiarly serving for that purpose. 2. That the faithful may be
the more free from fear, and follow their own callings diligently. 3. That
the Church may be the more enriched with heavenly, and spiritual blessings,
for she receives grace and gifts for the discharge of each calling. 4. That men
may be stirred up to help the poor the more willingly, considering that the
Lord has appointed a special office for that purpose. 5. That their should be
no complaints, M. Bates p. 117.
but that all the poor might be comforted against their poverty, and wants.
Their office only consists in receiving the liberality of the saints, and
distributing the same unto the necessity of the poor: and howsoever the
English book of ordering Priests, Answ. to Bancr. ser. p. 14. T. C. l. 1. 190.
2. Admo. p. 61.
etc. Makes this a degree of the ministry, yet the Nonconformists, profess
that that practice is naught and unlawful, and the deacons office is (not to
meddle with the word and sacraments but) only to collect the benevolence of the
faithful, and faithfully to distribute the same, and to prove this, they
render these reasons. T. C. l. 1. p 190. disc. Eccles. 119 Infor. Scott. 31*
demonst. discip. 61. 62. etc.
1. By the Apostles institution these were only to attend upon the provision
for the poor. Act. 6. 4.

The Scripture makes it an ordinary and distinct office (...) others in the
Church, and not to be mingled with any other. Romans 12. 8. 3. No man can in any
tolerable measure discharge the office of a minister, and deacon also. Act. 6.
2. 4. The ministeries of the word be perfect without it. They have also to
prove this thing, the learned generally on their side. Concill. constant. cap.
16. Chrisost. upon Act. 6. Bulling. decad. 5. ser. 2. Buc. de reg. Christ. 14.
Pet. Mar. Romans 12. Call. inst* l. 4. cap. 3. sect. 9. Beza. confess. cap. 5.
sect. 23.

Sixthly widows, or deaconesses whose proper office is to look to the weak,
impotent, and poor strangers, and specially to help such who in their
sicknesses D. Chat. Romans 12, p. 64. M. Bates. p. 66.
have neither friends nor kins folks to administer unto them. This office is
proved of them by these Scriptures. 1. Tim. 5. Romans 12. 8. Romans 16. The grounds
or reasons, which they bring for it are these.

1. Wisdom, to employ such, as being to receive maintenance, from the church,
are fit for nothing but this, and fittest for this. 2. That none may lack any
thing for their good and preservation. 3. That men may be the rather encouraged
to go about the churches businesses, having such to attend them. These Def. of
dis. p. 59. 68. Def. coun. 124. Eccle. Gov. p. 7.
are the necessary and only ordinary functions, and offices which our
savior has ordained in his church, unto the due administration whereof, he
has promised his blessing to the end of the world, and these are perpetual
and to continue for ever, and beside these it is unlawful, for men (following
the devises of their own brain) to institute and ordain any in the Churches
of God. Now the election and ordination Admon. 1. p. 3. Off. of confer, p. 2.
of these officers, must (as they say) necessarily (...) made, by the free
choice of the congregation wherein they are to administer: The Elders going
before, the rest are to manifest either by some outward token, or else by their
silence, their allowance, if they like of the action, or gainesaying, if they
judge it not just and upright. Yea not only may they gainesay it: But if
Necessit. Discip. 28.
there be just cause of dislike make it altogether void and of none effect,
until at the last a meet one be chosen, by the authority and voices of the
Elders, and allowed of by the general consent and approbation of the rest of
Church.

And this was, the Churches continual practice in T. C. l. 2. p. 1. 193.
Eccles. disc. 40. first book discip. 27. 29. M. Bates. 66. Demonst. Discip. 24.
25. etc.
the time of the Apostles, and therefore an ordinance of God to be followed for
ever. Moreover the thing appertains unto all: And it is a course most
effectual to bring the people to obedience, when they shall see him teach or
rule, whom they themselves have chosen. Yea this procures greatest reverence
of the people to their officers. It is also affirmed that this manner of
choosing and making officers, continued so long T. C. l. r. p. 59.
in the Churches of God, as there was any light of the knowledge of him, so
that indeed it ought to be perpetual, Form Chur. Gou. p. 40.
and unchangeable, and may not at any hand either by Church, or Magistrate be
altered: For it is a greater wrong to have any Ecclesiastical officers forced
upon a people against their will, then if they Eng. Putan. p. 6, 7.
should force upon men wives, or upon women husbands against their will and
liking: Here also general counsels and many old and new writers are broughtin
by the Nonconfor. to speak for them in this thing. Council. Nicene Test. Theo.
Conc. Constable. test. tripart. hist. l* 9. c. 14. Council. Carth. can. 1. Con.
Toletan. test. did. 50: Council. Gabil. Can. 10. Cyprian. l. 1. Ep. 3. Amb.
Epist. 82. Ierom. ad Ruffin. Basil. Epist. 58.

And whosoever condemns the making of ministers, after this sort what do they
else, but open their mouths against God and against the truth. Defense of
admon. p. 2.

T. C. l. 2. p. 1, p. 174 Eccles. dis. 35. D. Am. cas. cons. l. 4, c. 25.

Inform. Scott. 26. Ioh. 10. 1, 2


Moreover every officer in the church must be ordained by imposition of hands
of the Eldership, the whole Church joining with them in fasting and prayer; and
without a lawful calling no one must presume to exercise any spiritual
function, or ministry, nor dare to enter in any other way, then by the door.

A notable Example for this purpose, is rehearsed by Moses in Numb. 16.
Whereby it seems, that the Lord meant to ratify the Law of a necessity of a
true vocation for ever. For there we see, that neither the heavens could abide
to see, nor the earth bear so shameless boldness, but the one melting
consumed with fire, such as without a calling would take upon them the
presthood, and the earth gapeping, opened it self and swallowed them up alive,
which ought to be a lesson to us for ever, that no man presume to pervert
Necessit. disc. 10, 11, etc. T. C. l. 1. 54, 63,
or alter that order which God has established in his Church, nor arrogate to
himself that honor which he has by no right and lawful calling obtained: etc.

Moreover none must be ordained unto any office T. C. l. 1, 61, Neces. dis. 19,
Demonst, dis. p. 16,
in the Church, until there be such a place void for him, as is meet, and
fit: for as the Apostles did in planting of Churches, so must it be don in the
building thereof for ever: but they ordained neither Pastor., Teacher, Eder,
nor deacon, but to some certain congregation, that had present use and need
thereof. A roving and Tabl. div. Rea. in Camb. demo. id.
unsettled ministry therefore, is a new and false ministry, merely,
instituted by men. And never read of to be practiced, but by idolaters. Judge.
17. 8.

Again great care must be taken, before consent be given, unto any calling in
the Church, that it appear by sufficient trial, and due examination, that the
person is qualified with those gifts which the word of Eccle. dis. foll. 44, T.
C. l. 2. p. 1, p. 368, Tit. 1, 9, Hos. 4, 6*
God requires, in one of that place: For else there will follow a manifest
breach of Gods commandment: Besides, God will not own his ministry,
thirdly, if he want abilityes, he cannot do the things required of him. As to
divide the word aright, espy the Demons. dis. p. 35, 36.
enemy, and give warning a forehand to the people how to resist him: But
contrariwise will lead himself and his people into hell fire. The truth is, no
unskillful or unlearned man, may be called to the steering of this ^^ces. of
disc. pa. 47. 6.
helm, unless we would have the shipp not only to be in danger, but
willing, to run it upon the rocks. These officers chosen, and made as
aforesaid: ought to execute the office committed unto them, with all T. C. l.
1, p 65.
faithful diligence, and consequently must be continually, resident upon their
charge. This later position, to wit, the necessity of perpetual residence, and
the unlawfulness of Nonresidence, is confirmed of them by good Them. disc. p. 20.
21. D. Tail. Tit. 3, 11, Dr. willet 1. Sam. 14, 28*
reasons. 1. A minister is a shepherd and his charge a flock, now a
shepherd has a flock to feed it continually. 2. Wheresoever God places a
man, there is daily need of his labor and care. 3. The people are in danger
of harm if they be not watched over day and night. 4. The Church requires an
officers residecy with her as a duty of him. 5. If they do otherwise, they
cannot give their people a good example, neither will there be love, and
familiarity between them. etc. Briefly, they hold it, as great an injury, to
force a congregation, or Church, to miantaine as their Pastor, with tiths and
such like donations, that person, which either is not able to instruct them, or
that refuses in Eng. puri. 20, 21,
his own person ordinarily to do it, as to force a man to maintain one for
his wife, that either is not a woman, or that refuses in her own person to
do the Them. disc. p. 21.
duties of a wife unto him. And thus much for the first point, wherein we and
they in judgment do accord, but our practice as yet is contrary each to other.

SECTION. II.
NOw it follows that we truly relate, the present state of the English
ministry, how far it disagreeth, Defene. Godly minist. ag. Bridge* ^2^. pref.
adm. and p. 1^, 27, 47.
(by their own Testimonies) in every particular thing from the positions,
before named, and touching it in general, they affirm confidently, that it is
a base ministry which God never erected in his Church, but came wholly from
the Pope, for say they, not only is the calling of the Hierarchy, but also
their dependent offices all unlawful and Syons plea. 3,
Antichristian, observe the largnesse of their speech, how they comprehend, and
so consequently here co^demn all their Ecclesiastical functions* for indeed
they take all their original of one root, namely the Praelarey, from it I
say, they have their rise, and by it only they administer unto the people. And
whosoever shall deny this, may with as much reason, deny that fire is hott, the
sea salt, the sun shines. etc.

But let us hear what reasons they give, to prove their ministry false and
Antichristian; and every way contrary to that true ministry, of which we have
before spoken; First, they say, that the Church of England, Wants her
Pastors, Teachers, Deacons, and Elders: For which cause she hangs down her
head, for heaviness; her eyes be bleared with tears; her cheeks be defiled
with the water of her eyes, her heart is heavy with sorrow, her bones are
withered with dryness, her whole body is clothed Doct. Chat. on Romans 12. 33.
with sackcloth, she lies in caves and dens, being ashamed to show her face,
having so deformed and maimed a body; If her case and state be so, she has
reason enough to greive: For to want these true officers, and to have
counterfeits placed in their stead, is one of the heaviest and fearfullest
miseries, that can possibly befall any Esa. 3.
people. Yet this thing is affirmed by others of them also. Of which more
hereafter.

Bright. Rev. 3. p. 168. Chr. Mar. p. 41. Admon. p. 2. Soldier. Bar. M. Bates
page 60.
Now concerning elections and ordinations. In these their church stands under
a Romish regiment, and has not left Babylon, but partaketh of her sins, in
the choice of Ministers. For neither are their Ministers proved, elected,
called, or ordained, according to Gods word: But their entrance into the
ministry is, by a Popish and unlawful vocation, strange from the scriptures,
and never heard of in the primitive church. All authority is give into the
hands of the Prelates alone, and their book of ordination, whereby Adm. p. 14
Act. 13. 45 and 14, 23. Def. of Godly mi. ag. Br. 124.
they make Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, is against the very form of the
ordination of the ministry, prescribed in the scriptures; and nothing else but
a thing word for word, taken out of the Popes Pontifical, wherein he shows
himself to be Antichrist most lively.

It will not be amiss if I here briefly relate, in what manner, and form,
their Bishops make ministers, as the Nonconformists do describe it. When the
time (say they) of giveing orders draws near, the B. Bull is set upon the
Church door, to give warning, rhat if any be minded to receive orders, that he
repair to the Prelate at such a time and place. Now this Bull is in latin, so
that the people can not understand the sound of the trumpet, neither indeed are
they desired to come, and object against the persons to be ordained, etc. When
the day of ordination is com, after an exhortation made, and the communion
celebrated, the Epistle and Gospel read, and the Hymn veni creator sung, or
said, the Archdeacon presents to the B. all those that are to take on the order
of Priesthood that day, with these words, Reverend Father in Christ, I present
to you the persons here present, to be admitted to the order of Priesthood.
Then after some demands and answers, of the B. and the other, who are to be
admitted, he demands of the people, who are present there, if they know any
impediment, which may hinder any of these present to be admitted, to the order
of Priesthood, which is a manifcst mockage. For it may be, that none there
present either heard or saw any of them, or all of them before that day, etc.
Then after the oath of the Kengs supremacy is taken, there follows an
exhortation again, with other demands and answers. After this the people, who
are present, are desired secretly to commend the business to God: For which
cause they are all silent for a little space. This don, the B. reads a
prayer, which being finished, they who are to be ordained, sitting on their
knees at the Bishops feet; the Bishop and the rest of the Priests, who are
present, lay hands severally upon the heads of every one of them, the B.
uttering these words, Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins thou do forgive*
^^^y are forgiven, and whose sins thou do retain, they are retained, and
be thou a faithful dispenser of the word of God, and of his holy Sacraments in
the name of the Father, etc. Thus he commands the ordained to receive the
Holy Ghost, as our Lord and Master did.

Now as well may they imitate his breathing, as to usurp these words. Is any
of their curats after the pronouncing of these words either the holyer or more
apt to teach: And whereas he puts a Bible into their hands, he might rather put
their service book: for either they are ignorant and cannot preach, or if they
can, yet may not, till they procure by money a license Alt. dam. 165.
from them. When all this is don the company sing the creed, and receive the
communion together. But it must here be observed that they ordain not any man
wholly at once to the office of preisthood: but lead him by degrees up to the
pulpit: for they must first be deacons (as they call it) for a year, that is
to say, they must receive authority to say prayers, read the Scriptures: but in
no wise administer the sacraments, or preach, without further license: then at
last he is Necel. dis. p. 81. Against Brid. 125. Def. disc. 133. Id. p. 33.
Admo. 15. Alt. d. 161. Necessit. discip p. 20. Eccles. Gov. 127.
made a full minister. This practice is professedly affirmed of the
Nonconformists, to be a vain invention of man's brain, taken from the manner
of Popish orders, and clear against the express appointment of the
Scriptures. Moreover, they will make ministers in their Galleries and Cloisters
at their pleasure; give orders to whom, and to how many they list, without any
trial, either of their judgment in Religion, or of their honestly in
conversation: and sometime make 60, 80, or a 100 at a clap, whereof ^o one is
called or desired to any particular congregation, and when they have done, send
them abroad as rogues, vagaboundes, or maisterlesse servants, into the
country, giveing them their bull to preach in others men's charges where they
list, or else get benefices by freindship, money, flattery, where they ca^ catch
them, or if this fail, they may go up and down like beggars, and fall into
many vile follies or set up bills (as many have don) at Paul's, the Royal
exchange and such like public places, to see if they can hear of some good
master, that will hyre them, and use their labor, or to conclude, tarry in
their college to lead the lives of loytering losels so long as they live. What
a horrible and wicked doing is this! Indeed such times are spoken of in the
stories of the Judges, when Jonathan the Levite, wanting a high place and an
Altar, went roving up and down to let out his service to any that would hyre
him. But it is added in the same place, that there was no King in Israel O Not
without cause may they say (if these things be true) that all reformed Churches
blush, and are ashamed Bright. Reve. 3. 181.
of them. Yea and I am persuaded that if they were fully and truly informed
hereof, they would no more communicate with their ministry, then they do with
that of Rome: For if they did, it would be certainly their great sin, seeing
both of them appear to be false and unlawful.

Thou have heard (reader) who makes their ministers: and also how they are
made: now in the next place, thou shall hear what they say touching their
gifts, and qualificatio^s and if thou will in this believe the Nonconformists:
2. Admo. p. 47. Sold. Barw. Church Polic. 236. 237.
Boys and senseless asses are their common ministers for the most part. yea
notorious idolaters, halting hypocrites, openly perjured persons, idle bellied
Epicures, manifest Apostates, old munks and friars, drunkards, Abstr. 83.
idiots, idols, such as know not a B. from abattle door: or the Lords prayer
from the articles of faith, nor how many sacraments there are: For he that will
wear a surplesse, a cloak with sleeves, a gown, a cap, a tippet (ornaments
fit enough for such deformed coxcombs), read a gospel, Church women, bid
fasting days and holy days, Profane the sacraments, pray at the burial of
the dead, pronounce a curse against sinners upon Ashwensdday and at no time
else, ordain a new sacrament of the cross in the Profanation of Baptisime,
visit the sick with a wafer cake, and a wine bottle, read Exhortat. Gover.
Wall. 42.
homilies, pray for the prosperity of thieves, pirates, murderers, yea a Pope, a
Cardinal, an Archbishop, a Lord B. or any other enemy of God and his Church: he
is a creature fit enough to receive their orders, and by his outward calling
is bound to do no more.

There are besides these, others of them which witness Neces. dis. p. 81.
the same, to make ministers according to their fashion, is nothing else but to
make a service sayer, or a reader Brigt. Re. 3. p. 187.
of prayers out of a book, so that a stark fool, or an arrant knave, may
fulfill all the conditions which they require of Prefa. p. 3.
him. It is certain says Mr. Gilby, he that will use Antichrists rags, may
be made an English Priest, be he never such a dolt or villain. The truth is
the condition of those men, whom the Prelates for the most part thrust into
their ministry, is so contemptible and base, as they affirm, that Ieroboom
never made worse Priests Eccles. Gover. 127
of the refuse of the people to serve his goulden Calves. Nay they say more, If
the devil did make and send forth ministers, he could not find worse men upon
the earth: and if he would have worse, he must bring Dial. str. Chapter p. 82.
them out of hell. Mr. Cartwright says of a certainty, that all the
Ecclesiastical histories extant, are not able to furnish us of so many
unworthy ministers, chosen by all the churches throughout the world, which have
been since the Apostles time, as have swarmed these few years, out of the
Palaces (as out of the Trojan horse) of that small number of Bbs, which are in
England* etc. and there is as much difference between them and the ministers,
chosen in other congregations 2. Rep. 1. p. 537. 148.
beyond the sea, as between gold and copper, or any other refuse metal.

I have not yet declared what the Nonconformists write, touching the most
ungodly courses, used by their Priests, to procure benefices, and how
extremely they tyrannise over the poor people, and will be officers to them,
though they consent not unto it, nay howbeit they be wholly against it, and have
good reason for it, yet if the Patron (whether Popish profane or religious
Preface dioc. T. Fres. suit. l. 2. p. 412.
all is one) and the Bishop do accord in the business: they must necessarily
put their necks under the yoke of this wicked usurper, or remove their
dwelling, though it be to their utter undoing: beside the congregation knows
not, what the conversation is of him, who by the arm of flesh is forced upon
them, neither his fittnesse in gifts for the ministry: This cannot be denied
Assertion. Christ. Chapter pol. p. 252.
(say they) that there is not any one man or woman amongst 40, in any one
Parish among 40, that can tell that ever he, or she, did see, or hear of the
minister appointed, and sent by the Ordinary to be parson, or vicar of the
Parish vacant, before such time as he or she did hear, or see the Parish
Clarke t^ trudge with the Church do^^ ke^e^ to let in the S^xtin, to ring the
bells for the said parson or vicars induction, and real possession. Oh
intolerable bondage! that men should be thus bought and sold like beasts; and
yet there is little hope of reformation, in regard too many will rather submitt
to those slaughterous and inhumane courses, then seek to redeem their precious
liberty, by good and lawful means. And for that base and shameful
beggerinesse, which they use to get benifices, it cannot be better showed,
then Mr. Brightman has truly done it. Thus he writes*

Upon the Apoc. chapter 3. p. 181. Edition. 3.
Let us take a view and make a general muster as it were of the whole
Clergy, and if you will let us begin at the basest under lings. The Curates,
as they call them are both in very deed, and in all men's account a company of
beggarly fellows* In whom a man may see that verifyed, which was threatened
against the family of Eli men bowing themselves to the ground for a pecee of
silver and a morsel of bread, and craving to be put into one of the Priests
offices, that he may have a snappe at a crust of bread* 1. Sa. 3. 36.

Now for the rest, those that by means of their more full purses walk more
lustily, such as we call sturdy beggars, what running up and down is there
among them, what bribing what importunate and impudent begging* what flattering
offers do they make of all their obeisance* and all duetifull complements, that
they may come by these Ecclesiastical promotions? You may see many of them
that post up to the Court, or to the house of the right honorable. The Lord
keeper of the great Seal: For *these two places are like the beautiful Gate
of Salomons Temple, Act. 3. 2. Men come in by this way apace, thick and
threefold, and they are in great hope to carry away some good releife. Others
there are that become followers of Noble men and Peers of the Land, whose
Chaplines they become, either household, or retayners, as I may call them, that
live under their potection; for what end trow ye? Even for this and no other,
that as soon as any Benefice, as they call it, shall fall void, they might
enjoy it by their Lords gift. And does not this I pray ye soeme to be an honest
way to get a Churchliving, no such base and beggarly one, as you speak of? But
is not this currying of favor mere beggary? Is it any whit a lesse^ilt^sy
thing, to come to a Rectory, that is of Gods appointment, by favor, then by
money? If we will judge indifferently, it is all one fault to creep inc,
whither it be by bribing and Symony, or by fawning and flattery.

The rest of the rout in the Country are diligent in attending the common sort
of Patrones; whose thresholds they by watching at, whose wyves they brave and
court as if they were their Mistresses, whose children they cogge with, whose
servants they allure with fair words and promises to be their Spokesmen, and
in every place and point they play the parts of miserable beggars. Some there
are that beg more craftily; like to those that sit in the high ways or in
places where two ways meet, and there they offer pilled rods to passengers,
to get a piece of money therewith, as it were a penniworth for a penny: So do
these men make way for their suits, by large giving of money in hand, or else by
compacting to give some of their yearly Tithes for a gratification* But some
man will say* all this is not the corruption of laws, but the corruptnes of
men. Nay surely, as long as that manner of conferring Ecclesiastical charges
takes place, which has been in use among us to this day, there can be no
remedy applied to cure or prevent, this beggerlines. Do we not sufficiently
find it to be true in experience? In the late Parliament, laws were enacted
severely against it; but what came of that? Nothing truly; but that it made
men deal more closely and cunningly to cosen the law. We must not think to do
any good with our laws, where Christ's laws are not observed, But to proceed,
when once the living is by beggary obtained from the Patron, what a deal of
begging work is there to come, for those Sir John Lack-latines, that
Institution might be had from the B b. Here he must supplicate, not only to
the right reverend Lord B b; but to Master Examiner, to my Lords Grome of his
Chamber, his Register, the yeoman of his Buttery and Larder, yea the meanest
that belongs to him. Not that want of latin and learning will keep him from
entrance into his benefice, but that he that has need of more favor for
dispatch, or speech with my Lord, or the like, must fee the servantes the
better, whose gain comes trowling in this way. There is no Castle so
defenced, which a latin-lesse Ass laden with golden metal may not scale and
conquer. Neither is there any almost so unfit that has the repulse, but by
what engines he prevayleth, let them look to it.

The like is the condition of Prebendaries, Archdeacons and Deanes, Nay are the
Lord Bishops themselves clear of this base beggary? What means then that
continual haunting of the Court, and banging upon the Nobles? Why do they not
stay and wait, till they be sent for? Yea why are they not rather pulled away
from their studyes against their wills? Nay rather if a man should appeal to
their consciences, whither are not some of those fat demeasnes of their
Bishoprics let out of their own accord, to such as they seek and sue to, that
they might farm and hire them, or else are there not other large bribes
covenanted to be given to such as shall stand them in stead, for attayning of
these dignities? But are they only thus beggerlike in their ambitious suing
for their promotions? Nay truly; Some of them are grown so extreemly base this
way, that if they be to change their Sea, they pay not their first fruits, but
by raking together in a filthy fashion an alms from the poor Vicars, which
yet must go under the name of a Benevolence to make a cleanly cloak withal.

Pref. dioc* Tri.
Thus (reader) thou see how wickedly and basely they come buy benefices, and
yet thou have not heard of all their abomination* For the Nonconformists will
tell thee further: that after they have gotten one liveing, they will take
another if they can: yea, and in spite too of that congregation, to which they
were first, and are still personally tied; And after all this they may be
Defen. Godl. minister ag* Brid. p. 5.
Nonresidents, abiding or preaching at none of their many liveings. But forsake
their Flocks, months, years, yea sometime for ever, and leave them to
hyrelings and unlearned men. Yea they may chop and change, sell, and buy like
merchants, so they do it closely; which is such So they are in Rev. 18, 11. 12.
an abomination, as Rome and Trent condemns, and hell it self will scarce
defend. And as the people are in bondage thus to their ministers, so they are
intollerably to Def, disci. 92.
the Prelates. For all power and authority is taken from them, as that they may
not preach to their people except they have their license; and if they have
that, Alt* dam. 175.
yet their preaching is hedged in with penalties, injunctions, caveats, canons,
advertis^ments, that they may not deliver the whole counsel of God. Besides,
they can not receive the best of their congregation to communion, if he be
censured in the spiritual courts: though it be but for not paying of sixpence
be the man otherwise never so innocent, nor keep one from the communion, that
is not presented in those courts, or being presented, is for money absolved
though he benever so Def. Pet. for Refor. p. 206.
scandalous. Thus are they the Chanc^llours and Officials slaves to do what
they command them: If not they themselves must hurry up presently to their
spiritual court, there to stand with cap in hand, not only before a B. but
before his Vassalls, to be rayled on many times at their pleasure, to be
censured, suspended, and deprived, for not observing some of those Canons,
which were of purpose framed for snares* when fart more ancient and honest
Canons are every day broken by these judges themselves for lucre sake: as in
the making of viopian ministers, who have no people to minister unto, in their
holding of commendams, in their taking of money Pref. dio. Tri.
even to extortion for orders, and institutions, in their ^ymony as well by
giveing, as by taking* and in all their idle, covetuous, and ambitions pomp. I
omit here to relate the innumerable profane scoffs, and reproachful names,
given (as they say) by their Prelates, to their gravest Ministers, when they
are brought before them, for they shall be called asses ^eese, fools, dolts
princock boys* beardlesse bays yeaster days bays, new com out of* the shel,
etc. And after much railing in this sort silenced* and put out of their means,
to the utter undoing of themselves, their wvies, children, and others. As I
read these things in their writing^, I thought upon the great slavery of the
Jews under the Philistines, 1 Samuel 13^ 22.
when there was not a sword found amongst them in the day of battle. I confess
in this their condition and case was miserable and bad: but alas, both the
ministers and people of the Church of England (as these men report) are in a
case ten thousand times worse* For the Prelates* under whose Antichristian
bondage they are have quite unfurnished them of the chieffest weapons, needful
for the Lords battle* yea* and have so fast tied them up, with their* Romish
Canons Articles, excommunications, imprisonments* etc. that they can not or at
least dare not give a blow against their spiritual enemies* though there be a
necessity thereof and their souls otherwise are likely to perish* Now I wish
that these people were senceable of these things and that Gods house and his
ordinances were dear to their souls* then doubtless they would break
asunder those chains of unrighteousness: sh^ke Antichrist of, and make any
shift* to come out of Babylon, for to enjoy that light and liberty, which
Christ has so dearly purchased, with his precious blood.

Neces. dis. p. 86*
But to the point in hand. By the former passages it plainly appears, that
the reformists not without great cause, have made humble suites unto Princes,
and Parliaments, for a lawful ministry to be established, throughout the
realm, and that their present ministry might utterly be abolished, with the
rest of Romish abominations; For 2 Admon. Exhort. to Bish. and their Clearg. P.
27.
not only have they indicted their Clergy, to be followers of Antichrist, and
avouched their ministry to be from the Pope: But also they prove this (as we
have showed from their writings) by infallible and undeniable reasons; so that
every upright and sincere person (if he well understand what they say) must
necessarily consent unto it.

I could produce many others of them, which affirm the same thing, but it needs
not, seeing enough hereof has been already spoken. Notwithstanding it cannot
be amiss to set down the words of one more: because the Author was a
Nonconformist of note: generally well beloved, and not undeservedly: now thus
he says, What a miserable pickle are our ministers in, when they are urged to
give an account of their calling: to a Papist indeed they can give a shifting
answer, that they have ordination from Bishops, which Bishops were ordained by
other Bishops, and they or their ordayners by Popish Bishops, this in part may
stop the mouth of a Papist: But let a Protestant, which doubts of these
matters, move the question: and what then will they say? if they fly to Popish
Bishops, as they are Bishops, then let them go no longer masked under the name
of Protestants: If they allege succession by them from the Apostles, then to
(say nothing of the appropriating of this succession unto the Popes chair, in
whose name, and by whose authority our English Bishops did all things in times
past) then I say they must take a great time for the satisfying of a poor man
concerning this question, and for the justifying of their station: For until
that out of good records they can show a perpetual succession from the
Apostles unto their Diocesan, which ordained them, and until they can make the
poor man, which doubts perceive the truth and certainty of these records
(which I wisse they will do at leisure) they Preface Dioces. Trial.
can never make that succession appear. If they fly to the Kings authority,
the King himself will forsake them, and deny that he takes upon him, to make
or call ministers. If to the present Bishops and Archbishops, alas! they are as
far to seek as the other. The effect of his speech is: that those which
receive their ministry from the Prelates (as all do in the church of
England) they can not any way justify the same to be lawful; For howsoever
they may say, this or that in the defense of it: notwithstanding, it is all
either falsehood or vanity, which they say, and herein do wholly deceive
themselves, and every one that believes them.

And thus much in general be spoken concerning the second point; namely, the
differences manifested by the Nonconformists, between a true ministry, and
the ministry of England; as also their judgment of it, that it is Popish and
false, and the many reasons, which they show to prove the same. Now in this we
and they do also accord, and our difference stands only in practice; For they
think (as it seems) that a people may communicate lawfully in a false
ministry: But our judgment and practice is otherwise, both which I undertake
here to prove. 1 by scripture. 2 by reasons. 3 by the testimony of the Learned:
And so we come to the third point, which is to lay down our inferences and
conclusions, which necessarily do follow upon their principles, to wit, that
our separation from their ministry is (by their own grounds) warrantable and
holy; the same being (as they themselves acknowledge) false and Antichristian.

SECTION. III.
ANd first of the Scriptures. To communicate in a false ministry, is certainly
a breach of the second commandment. For what do they, but indeed set up an
idol, yea and bow down unto it, which serve God in, and by, a devised or
usurped ministry. In Song. 1. 7. 8. The faithful entreat Christ to be showed
where he, by his ministry, with his spirit, word, seals, censures, etc.
feeds his flock, that there they might place themselves for instruction and
government, and not turn aside to the flocks of his companions, that is, the
Matthew. 24. 5 24.
congregations of false Christ's and false Prophets, which come in his name
saying, I am Christ and deceive many: Hos. 4. 17. see Iunius on the place.
Again. Ephraim is joined to idols, what were they? among other, the new
Priests which Jeroboam, ordained for the high places: what follows? let him
alone, that is, have no communion with him either in his false Ier* 23. 6. Pro.
5. 3. Mat. 7. 15. Ioh. 10. 4. 5. Phil. 32.
ministry, or other idolatry. Often do the Prophets, Christ, and his
Apostles, forbid men to hear those which thrust themselves into ministerial
offices not being sent of God and from the Church.

Secondly the reasons. 1. To communicate in a false ministry is to do a vain
worship: and therefore unacceptable altogether to the Lord. 2. In this, men
Ioh. 4. 23. Romans 12. 1. 2. Numb. 10. Psa. 50. 18. Tim. 5. 22.
do abet the party in his sin, and so make it their own by imputation, and
inwrap themselves in the same guilt with the offender. 3. God has promised no
blessing to his word but in his own ordinance, though I confess he may, yea
and does grant often times that, through his infinite goodness, which no man can
chalendge by an ordinary promise. 4. To do Mat. 28. 20. Luke 10. 16* 2. The^.
2. 2. 3. 4. Rea. 13. and 14. 9. 12. and 18. 4.
otherwise, is to rebel greivously against the Lord, and to uphold what in us
lies that which the Lord will consume, therefore as no good subject should
assist or communicate with any person in the administration of civil justice to
the Kings subjects (no not though he administered the same never so legally,
justly, impartially) except the same person had a commission from the King so
to do: so neither ought the subjects of Christ's Kingdom, to partake with any
person whatsoever in the dispensation of any spiritual ordinance (though in it
self never so holy) without sufficient warrant and commission from the most
absolute and sovereigne King of his Church Christ Jesus. 5. Such as have
spiritual communion in a false ministry, do embrace the bosom of a
stranger, and so committ spiritual whoredom against the Lord. 6. Christ
sets Ioh. 10. 5.
it down as a property of his sheep to be observed, that they follow not
strangers, but flee from them, for that they know not their voice.

Thirdly, the Learned generally do affirm this same thing. Par^^s in his
Commentary upon Matthew, Chap. 7. 15
says: that all those without doubt, are to be taken for deceivers, who take
upon them the office of teaching without a true calling; and a little after he
says, that so much being discovered: a Christian must shutt his care against
them, and fly from them as from wolves. Musculus on the place says the like:
One note of a false Prophet is, that he comes, not being lawfully called and
sent, and whereas Christ bidds us to beware of such, he means, says he, that
we should not hear them, but avoid them as most certain In Pro. 10. 20.
plagues. Cope, a learned minister in France, speaks as much: and gives this
reason for it, because they destroy both bodies and souls of as many as either
believe or reverence them. And thus much is acknowledged of the Rhemist Tossed.
Ioh. 10. An. 1.
Papists; For thus they write, whosoever takes upon him to preach without a
lawful sending, breaks in by force or favor of men, and by humane Laws, he
is a thief and a murderer. 2 Ioh. 10.
And how men are to walk toward them, they show in another place of that
book: In matter of religion, in praying, reading their books, hearing their
sermons presence as their service, partaking of their Sacraments, and all other
communicating with them in spiritual things, is a great damnable sin to
deal with them. And here it is to be observed, that Mr. Cartwright on this
place in Answer to the Rhem. Test. grants all this to be true.

Exhort. Gover. W. p. 46. Admon. p. 27.
Other Testimonies I could allege, but it needs not; For the Nonconformists
affirm as much: We may not (say they) adventure to go unto him for those
things, which he has no commission to deliver. Another says, that whosoever
preaches by an unlawful calling: ought not to be heard, although he speaks
the truth, no more then the devil was to be suffered, although he professed
Christ. As the firmness of the seal, stands not in the print or form it
makes: but specially that it be set on by one that has authority thereunto:
So much more it is in the case of the Sacraments: for to receive the same in a
false ministry, is to deny Gods ministry, and to give the glory of Note.
it there, where he has not given it: and to deprive our selves of this
comfort; that our hearts may say: Gods solemn Fenner Doct. upon the Sacra* p.
127.
voice speaks, his solemn hand offers and gives, which is here the lively
stay of our faith.

By this it appears, that the danger is marvelous great, to communicate in a
false ministry, a man would pull a sore punishment upon his head, if he should
have a hand to putt by a Princes lawful officer (whether Judge, Mayor,
Bayliefe, etc.) and set up a rebel in the room thereof, and come to him for
justice. He that receives in a false ministry denies Gods ministry, says the
former Author; And so puts a traitor in his place, and takes the holy things
from the hands of a traitor, which is a fearful transgression, and surely
will procure extreme wrath, without true and sound repentance. From all that
has been before spoken, we may here frame this Argument.

None may hear or join in spiritual communion with that ministry, which has
not a true vocation and calling: by election, approbation, and ordination of
that faithful people, where he is to administer. But the present ministry of
the ecclesiastical assemblies of England has not a true vocation and calling,
by election, approbation, and ordination of a faithful people, where they
administer. Therefore none may hear or join in spiritual communion, with the
present ministry of the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England.

Which of the propositions the Nonconformists will deny I know not: but sure I
am, they are both Theirs: Howbeit (it may be) they do not so well weigh their
own principles, as they should; And hence it is, that their practice is not
strictly answereable to their profession, and therefore do give just occasion
(I speak it with grief) unto the Prelates and their Parasites, to insinuate
against them, hypocritical ends, in condemning so greivously the ministry,
worship and government of the English Church, and yet to partake in the known
evils and abuses thereof. But for my part I am otherwise minded then the
Bishops in this thing, and do think, that they do of conscience condemn the
state of that Church: But do not maturely consider the responsive conclusions,
which follow upon their principles.

For which cause I have written of purpose this treatise, to prove that they
cannot justify their Tenets against that Church, and stand members lawfully
thereof. Concerning their ministry, I have showed before, that by their own
confession it is false, and so not to be joined with. And if I should here end
the point, I think every indifferent reader would sufficiently be satisfied.
But because I judge the same to be of importance, to justify a separation from
them: and also that their ministers, are of sundry sorts and degrees, therefore
I will speak a little more thereof and prove further from their writings that
every kind and degree of their ministry is false and Antichristian.

Preface* before the form and man. of ord. B. P. and D.
According to the Prelates Canons, their ministers are divided into. 3. Heads
or orders. Namely Bishops, Priests, and deacons. The first comprehends the
superior, the other two the inferior ministers. What the superior are, few but
know, viz. Archbishops, and Lordbishops, against whose courses and callings,
whole books have been written, to manifest the same to be evil and unlawful.
I shall only here briefly lay down some of their passages touching both,
referring the reader for more full satisfaction, to that which is published at
large by them. As for their Bishops if they be as the Nonconformists report of
them, surely they are not fit for Church or common wealth, for they oppose
(say they) with tooth and nail every thing that is good. They Syonsple^ p. 216.
have had their hand in all the great evils that has befallen their Church and
state: never any good thing prospered that they put their hand too, the King
and state stood never in need, but they always deceived the^: and if
oppertunity serve, they will make peace with their head (he means the Pope) if
it be with the loss of all their heads, if they continue their places: And
hence it is that all the professed enemies of state and Church make use of them
to effect their evil ends as David said of Goliahs sword, there is none to
that, fo says the Pope, Spaniard, and Arminian, for overturning of Id. 232.
a state, and making havoc of a Church, there is none to a Bishop, give them
that.

To the same purpose others. They are the greatest and most pestilent enemies
that the state has, and are likely Hay any work. p. 14. etc. 2. Admon. to
parl. 54. Syons pl. 342. and 337. and 292. Alt* Dam. 35. Rep. to Mor. p. 21
Pref. Ans. Bancr. Pref. offer for conf. Demonst. dis. 79. Mart. Epist. and 33.
37. M. Bates 84. D. State Chu. 20. Offer for confor. 20. 7. 4. Syons pl. 292.
Curt. Chapter pow. 49. Fall Bab. 22.
to be the ruin thereof. Take them for better who will they are no other then a
remnant of Antichrists brood, a viperous generation, Caterpillars, Moaths,
Canker worms, sons of that monstrous Giant the man of sin, men of bloods,
base fellows, murderous tyrants, usurpers, time servers, cages of unclean
birds, unnatural, false, and bastardly governors, Lordly Epicures, proud,
Popish, presumtious, perfidious, Profane, Paltry, and pernicious Prelates,
open enemies to the sincere preaching of the gospel, the scepter of Christ's
Kingdom, and the glory of the Land, men contented to be bawdes unto all kind of
sins, and therefore all the professed and notorious, Atheists, Papists,
blashemers, adulterers, drunkards, and most infamous persons in the Kingdom are
with them, they have further with them the counsel of Achitophel, the courting
of Shebna, the roaring and brawling of Goliath, the cruel pride and vanity of
Hamon, the flattery of Amaziah, the falsehood of Samaiah, and the bloody cunning
of Doeg, these wax worse and worse, and grow to a height of iniquity, greiving
at the increase of good men, and persecute nothing more then holiness, they
care not for King, country, nor their own souls, but for a Bishopric. And
therefore if they can by flatteries invectives, whisperings, or other evil
courses, keep the King and counsel, so ignorant and blind as to be firm on
their side, they care for no more, to be short, the best of them, in some sort
are the worst, because, they hold up the reputation, of that unlawful office
and make way for more wicked successors and their traditions.

Much more then this, yea and worse too, is said of Read Martin Mar-Prelates
works.
their Bb. but I pass it over, as blushing to speak it. Only I here think of
that saying in the Proverbes, when the wicked bears rule, the people mourn.
It was just so with the Israelites, when Pharaoh set cruel tas kemaisters
Pro. 29. 2. Exo. 2, 23.
over them: And it seems their case is much like unto it: indeed some
difference there is, for the Egyptian Def. peti. 261. Epist. Syons plea etc. p.
26^
Lords, only beat the Lords people; But their Prelates (say they) imprison
and kill them also. I should wonder at such horrible injuries, committed in any
common wealth; but that the scripture says, the Kings of the earth shall give
their strenght and power to the beast; Revel. 17. 13.
The truth whereof many can witness by woeful experience: For Princes
generally in those days, have given so much authority unto the Hierarchy,
that they have scarce left themselves power to defend many times, the innocent
cause of their best subjects, or to punish justly the vilest offender: We would
think him a man senseless, that should give up willingly his weapons into the
hand of his enemy; For to do so, were to be murdered himself, and to be
accessarie to it: The Bishops are proved to be the greatest enemies that the
King and State has; Surely then (with reverence be it spoken) it is not wisely
done, that any power is given unto them. For by this means in all likelihood
many will be killed: and not in their bodies only, but in their souls also.

But enough of their persons: Let us hear what they speak of their callings:
The offices (say they) of Archbishops and Lord Bishops, etc. be rather members
and part of the whore and strumpet of Rome, then of the pure virgin D. Chad.
Ser. Romans 12. p. 33.

Vdal. Diol. 2. stat. Chapter p. 20. Offer confer. 2. 1 Admo. p. 13. T. C. li. 1.
p. 88. Curt. Chapter po. 76. Disc. of abus. Chapter 71 and 91.

Defen. disc. 71. D. Chapter ser. Ro^. 12. 37 Curt. Chapter po. p. 64. Repl. to Mort.
85.


and spouse of the immaculat Lamb. Their calling indeed is merely
Antichristian, false, divelish, contrary to the word of God, taken out of the
Popes shop, with their names also; yea it came from the bottomless pit. I say
from heathens, from darkness, and the devil, a thing degenerate, and grown out
of kind, a humane creature, an addition, an institution, an ordinance of Kings
and Princes; As it began with oppressing the only lawful policy and
administration of the church, so the end of it has been the most proud and
ambitious tyranny that ever was in the world. It is as clear as the light, that
they are no branches of Gods engrafting; their ministry has no root in
Christ's testament, but of the earth, new devised, and which can do no good.

As for the Apostles they never knew them, Syon has not heard of them,
Jerusalem, which is above, will not acknowledge them, and no marvail, for
Antichrist, and they are of one, and the same brood and offspring, of one and
the same foundation, his rising was their rising etc. and their traditions and
ceremonies are his, Syons pl. 69.
they had them from him, they are installed, after the same manner of Popish
Bishops, created with the most of the same ceremonies, they are trimmed up with
the same trappings, they have the like attendants, the like arms and
observancy, they usurp the same power and jurisdiction, and exercise the like
tyranny over ministers and people. All their principal reasons brought Def.
disc. p. 165.
to prove their standing, are the same that Turrianus and other Popish writers
alleadg for the Popes supremacy, as indeed they must stand or fall together. It
is evident therefore, that they are no ministers at all in the Strife of the
church Prefa.

Reprofe of Mart. Junior. Mr. Bates 55.


church of Christ, but have and do usurp and invade the name and seat of the
ministry, being doubtless very thieves, robbers, wolves, and worriers of the
Flocks: The Magistrate therefore is to do to them as our Savior dealt (Ioh.
2.) in whipping out buyers, and sellers, and money changers, those might better
come into the Temple then these Bishops into the church of God, and had more
necessary use: but they had abused holy things, and made it a den of thieves.

Not only is this barely affirmed of them: but also they do lay down many
singular arguments and reasons to prove it; To instance these. Those offices
and callings are Antichristian, without which all forms of Governments are
perfect, save only the government of the Kingdom of Antichrist.

But such are the callings of Lord Archbishops and Bishops, as all form of
Governments may be perfect without them, save only the Antichristian Kingdom
where in no case they can be missed. For the Government both of the Church and
common wealth can well spare Answ. to Bancr. Ser. p. 30. T. C. 85.
them, and be never a whitt the more unperfect.

Therefore the callings of Archbs. and Bs. do only belong unto the Kingdom of
Antichrist.

Those Governors are justly called Antichristian, who are Syons pl. 11.
assistant to the Pope in his universal government.

But Bishops, Archbs. etc. are assistante to the Pope in his universal
Government.

Therefore Bishops, Archbs. etc. are justly called Antichristian.

Demonst. disc. p. 12. 13.
That ministerry, which all Christian men and women are bound to submitt and
yield obedience unto, is to be found in the word of God.

But the ministry of Archbishops, Bs. is not to be found in the word of God.
Ergo, there ought not to be obedience yielded to it. He that desires to see the
Prelates arguments answered, and soundly refuted, which they allege to uphold
their vnsanctifyed places and standings. Let him read Mr. Baynes his Diocesans
trial, the first and second reply to Doct. Downenams Sermon, Mr. Parkers
Eccles. Polit* and there he shall receive satisfaction to the full.

Preface demonst. Defen. Ec. gov. ag.

Bridge. p. 88. Protest. Scott. p. 11 T. C. l. 1. p. 96. D. Cha. Ro^. 12. 33.

Second book. dis. p. 85.


Moreover such is their certainty of this thing, that they have often
challenged, yea dared the Prelates unto disputation: offering to adventure their
lives, if the other would but their Bishoprics, to prove that they are neither
Pastors nor Teachers, but officers erected against the word of God, the ancient
fathers, and the modern most learned, and godly divines: And the like they
speak of Archdeacons, deanes, prebanes, canons, and the whole Hierarchye: of
which more hereafter.

If this be so, then by the reasons before showed, it is evident, and most
certain, that no man can lawfully communicate, at any time, in the ministry
of these men, and so much they acknowledge. Why should Gods Syons plea p. 283.
people of what degree soever subject their neck to a Babilonish yoke, should
they not stand fast in the liberty wherein Christ has set them free? if they
sit not in Moses chayr, why should they hear them? If they bring not a
lawful warrant of their calling, why should they be obeyed? to hear and obey
Christ, coming in his fathers name, and Antichristian Prelates coming in their
own name, cannot subsist together.

But because the thing is already sufficiently proved, we will therefore
proceed to a second sort of their ministers. Yet by the way I desire the reader
to take knowledge of one thing. To weet, that the Nonconsormists, by these
positions laid down against their Prelates, do herein certainly condemn
their whole ministry allowed by the Laws of the Land: for if the calling and
office of their Bishops be (as they say it is) of the earth, false, divilish,
Antichristian, etc. Then it follows, that their calling and office, must
necessarily be of the same quality, nature, and condition, to weet, of the
earth, false, divilish Antichristian, which is wholly derived from it, which
receives (I say) and takes its life and being of it only: and no where else.
For if their Bishops have not a right power in themselves, then can they not
transfer it to an other, as the Law says, nemo potest plus juris transfer
in alium, quam sibi competere Rex Iuris. 79.
dignoscatur. No man can give more to another then he has himself. If Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram, when they usurped the Preisthood and Government Number. 16.
of the Church, should (by that false power which they assumed) have ordained
some of the people unto the Priests office: no doubt all the Israelites which
feared the Lord, would have judged their place and standing unlawful: and why:
because they which made them had no commission from God so to do: the case of
their ministry is just so. And it must needs be unlawful, seeing it is made
by them, who like the rebels before named, do usurp the Preisthood and
Government of the Church: and therefore have no more authority to give an
Ecclesiastical function unto any man: then the former had, and so much is
testified by themselves, for they say that their Priests and Deacons, Bishops
and Archbishops, are not made according to the word of God. And they give
reasons that it is not lawful for any one to be ordained by them.

Cathol. confer. p. 130.

Yates mod. of div. p. 257.

See Mr. Masons book of succession of Bishops, published by authority Anno
1614.


And here I must confess that the conformists, keep much better to their
grounds then the other do: for they profess downeright that their ministry
is from the Church of Rome: so that if the Popish Bishops, Priests and deacons,
be good: theirs are good also, they being from them. Now no doubt these men
do well perceive that their ministry cannot possibly be justified, unless it
be by this way of dispute: in this respect their judgment and practice is one,
and so far they are to be commended, and I verily think, that if they were
sure that their ministry brought into the land by the Prelates from Rome is
false and Antichristian, as the Nonconformists affirm it to be* that many of
them would not hereafter ever have any spiritual communion with it. Truly it
would make a man admire, if he should vnderstandly compare together, the
writings of these two companies, touching a church ministry, for in their
opinions about it, they are as contrary each to other as light is to darkness,
Christ to Belial, righteousness, to unrighteousnes, notwithstanding though so
different in judgment, yet they will communicate together in one ministry, but
one of these against knowledge offends surely, and let them look well to it.
for to him that knows to do good and does it not, to Iam. 4. vlt.
him it is sin, that is, his fault is so much the more, and proportionablie
his condemnation shall be without repentance.

Modest. off. Adm. 10. Eccles. Gor. 45. Syon pl. 107. T. C. l. 134. pref. them.
de Eccles. 60. 47. 50. 39. Rem. imp. D. C. 277.
We come now to their inferior ministers, and will begin first with their bare
readers: these poor creatures the Nonconformists do call idle idols, yea
bastardly idols, greedy curres, dumb dogs, slayers of the people, wolves,
ignorant asses, silthy swine, such as are not worthy to live in a well ordered
common wealth, foolish sheapheards, vnsaverie salt, good for nothing, but to be
cast out to the dunghill, cankers of their Church, a swarm of caterpillars,
the trash and rifferaffe of their nation, a woeful crew, a ragged regiment,
which have even covered the Land like the frogs of Egypt, leading many
thousands with themselves into the ditch. It can hardly be expressed how base
and vile Atters. Phile. v. 6. p. 136.
these are generally reputed, indeed they are held no better then thieves and
murderers, which live by the ruin and spoil of the people. Sometime ye shall
hear them in their pulpits so terribly spoken against, that one would think
they would rather return unto their old former occupation of husbandry,
cobling, coo^ery, etc. then ever come again to their Churches or to read,
mattens, and evening song. And touching he Prelates they are esteemed as base
and contemptible, ^very way for putting such dunsticall and unlettered ^r.
John's in their ministry: I could relate many instances of their infamous
caryages therein but it is not my purpose to rake into their dung. The
Nonconformists have don it sufficiently, in so much as they do stink horribly
for it in the nostrels of the people. But to our purpose: If things be so, is
not the ministry then of such men to be left? Yea surely. A man that is fallen
into the hands of thieves and murderers, if by any means he can escape with his
life from them, shall therein be justified by the Law of God, of nature, and
nations, now by how much a spiritual life is better then a corporal: by so
much are they to be commended above the other, which come away from these soul
slayers, and place themselves under the ministry of true and lawful Pastors.

And for further proof of what I say, I desire the reader to mark well, what
is said first against the calling of these men. 2. what, against that work and
service which they do. Their calling, is said to be Adm. 15. 16. Eccl. Gov.
44. Neces. dis. 45. Exh. Gov. 10. 14. M. Bates p. 155.
from the Pope a mere human invention, taken up without any warrant from Gods
word, and brought into the Church by the boldness of men. And to prove that
these are unlawful ministers, many reasons are rendered for it. 1. Because
they want the very life, essence, and being, whereby a minister, is a
minister. 2. The common law, Provincial law, civil law, and statute law,
pronounce all with one voice and consent, that they have no approbation or
allowance, no favor or entertainment from them, or by their authority etc. But
being found culpable they are by definitive sentencs on the part and behoof
of the law, not only to be adjudged guilty of voluntary intrusion into the
right and possession of others, but also to be punished for Abstr. p. 16. 19.
Eccl. Gov. 46. 47. T. C. l. i. p. 70. Eccles. Gov. 46. First book of disc. 30.
31.
taking upon them offices without any lawful calling. 3. They can do nothing,
which appertains to the charge and office of true and faithful sheepheards,
and therefore justly called idols. For they stand for that, and make show of
that which they are not. 4. It is a like to have no minister at all, as to have
an idol in the place of a true minister, yea and in some case it is worse, for
those that be utterly destitute of ministers will be diligent to search for
them: But those which have a vain shadow, do commonly without further care,
content themselves with the same, and so remain they continually deceived,
thinking they have a minister when in very deed they have none. For we cannot
judge him a dispensator of Gods mysteries, that in no wise can break the bread
of life to the fainting and hungring souls, neither think we that the
sacraments can be rightly administered by him, in whose mouth God has put no
sermon of Exhortation. Sol. Barw. Adm. p. 47 T. C. l. 1. p. 33. dia* str. Chapter
93.
5. God rejects them and pronounces that they shall be no ministers to him.
Hos. 4. 6. The retayning of such is a manifest token of the vengeance of God
against all them which do it. 7. Their name and office is taken only of the
Pope that Roman Antichrist, never by God erected in his Church.

Many other reasons they give, to prove them to be unlawful and false
Officers, not sent of Def. per. for ref. 98. 99. 106.
Christ (forall whom he sends he furnishes with gifts) no better then
Ie^oboams Priests. And therefore utterly to be removed, if ever such a
reformation be minded as God shall be thereby glorified and his Church edified.

If any should object that the Prelates, have laid their hands upon them, and
therefore they are ministers. To T. C. l. 1. p. 61.
this the Nonconformists do answer, that when the Bishop has laid his hands
on them, that then, they are no more ministers then they were before.

But there is no need, to spend much time, to prove M. Bates 154.
these men's ministry, false and unlawful: seeing none will reply for the^,
that have any spark of piety to God, or pity toward his people: only some
non-residents that keep poor underlings, or greedy Patrons, that would have
the light of the gospel die: or poor ignorant people that would live at their
own wills, in all licentiousness, these happily would undertake the plea
against Christ, but it were better their tongue should cleave to the roof of
their mouth, then that they should once dare go about the overthrow of Christ's
ministry.

And is not this a ground of separation? yes verily, and if the Nonconformists
will stand to it, I will hence prove a necessity to separate from all
spiritual communion, with the greatest number of their parish assemblies: and
thus I reason.

A dumb ministry being unlawful and false, is to be separated from: their
ministers for the greatest part are dumb ministers: therefore it is lawful to
separate from the greatest part of their ministers. The proposition is manifest
and clear, and I dare say they will not deny it: For besides the reasons
already given, it is confidently by them affirmed that a reading ministry
cannot deliver the Lords holy seals unto the people without great sacrilege,
nor the people, receive at the hands of such without dreadful sins, and
whosoever lists to read the place, he Exhor. Gov. W. 26.
shall see many effectual arguments laid down by the author to prove it, and
this is not the judgment of one alone, but others of them affirm it to be an
unlawful thing, to join with reading ministers in any ministerial duty,
either in praying, or administering Mr. Bates, p. 159. 160, etc.
the sacraments, and he gives 10 worthy reasons for it.

The assumption I prove also by their own testimony: For they say, that
generally throughout the Land Repl. to Powel. 74. Petit. Q. 5.
there are six reading Priests to one preacher. Yea others of them do affirm,
that where the Bb. ordain one minister that can preach, they make twenty that
can not; so that there are many thousand churches in England without preachers,
(Defenc. Pet. for refor. 130.) and in some shyres, people must go 14 or 20
miles to hear a Sermon. defenc. Against Bridge. p. 49.

Now, I wish them to consider well of these things, and to labor what they can
for their brethrens deliverance out of these spiritual robbers and murderers
hands.

He that should come to a deep pit or well, wherein do lie many people,
almost perished, if he should see there, some of them com forth from the rest,
would we not judge him an unmercifull and cruel man, if he should rather seek
to cast them in again, then to help out the other behind in misery: Such as
live under a dumb ministry (by the Nonconformists confession) are in a far
worse case; Therefore I hope hereafter they will give no more carnal counsel,
to persuade those, which are escaped, to com back into that pit again, but
rather will seek to draw out the rest, as their duty is to do.

Secondly, for the work which these idle readers do, we shall have a fit place
herafter to speak of it. Only by the way, I think good to set down here one
of their passages, which is, that bare reading of the word, and single service
saying, it is bare feeding, and rather an English Sol. Barv.
Popery, than a true Christian ministry; yea it is as evil as playing upon
a stage, and worse too: For players learn their parts without book, but these
(at least many of them) Admon. p. 10.
can scarce read within book; how! is their service saying as bad as stage
playing? What, and worse too! truly then it is bad enough* and far be it
from the Lords people to hear it. For if they should do so, they would
sacrifice unto the Lord a corrupt thing, and so be liable justly to chap. 1. 14.
that curse in Malachi.

Thus much for their dumb ministry. It follows next, that we speak of their
parsons, vicars, parish priests, stipendaries, and chaplines. If you will know
(say the Nonconformists) whence all these came, we can easily Admo. p. 15, 16.
answer you, that they came from the Pope, as out of the Trojan horses belly
to the destruction of Gods Kingdom, It is certain, that their names and office
is wholly Sol. Barv.
from that Roman Antichrist, never instituted, either by Christ or his
Apostles. For the church of God never knew them, neither does any reformed
church in the world know them. These are clouds without rain, trees without
fruit, painted sepulchers, full of dead bones, fatted in all abundance of
iniquity; Such as seek not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies.

Mr. Bale, in his exposition upon the Revelation, Chap. 13.
speaks the same, that these are the very names of Blasphemy, written upon
the Beasts head, against the Lord and his Christ: Their offices are not
appointed by the holy Ghost, nor yet mentioned in the scriptures.

Here is enough spoken for the condemnation of their calling, and for the
justification of separation from all communion therewith: From hence I might
frame this argument, Whosoever he be that deals with the holy things of God,
and works upon the consciences of men, by virtue of an Antichristian power,
office, and calling, him the people of God ought not to receive, or join
themselves unto. But all the parsons, vicars, Parish Priests, stipendaries,
etc. that stand over the church assemblies in England, deal with the holy
things of God, and work upon men's consciences, by virtue of an Antichristian
power, office, and calling; Therefoee the people of God ought not to receive
them, or to join themselves unto them.

The first part of this reason the Nonconformists do yield willingly unto, as
it is to be seen in a Treatise between Mr. Fr. Io. and Mr. Hild, about the
ministry of England: As for the other part, I hope they will not now deny it,
seeing they have published it openly and often to the world: yea and many of
them suffered greevous persecutions at the hands of the Prelates, for affirming
it, and other truths of this nature.

But to keep them to their own grounds, in the assumption: I will here lay
down another argument. If their parsons, vicars, parish Priests, stipendaries
etc. Be neither in election nor ordination made ministers agreeablie to Gods
word, the^ is their ministry false, unlawful, Antichristian, and so
consequently they deal with the holy things of God etc. As is before said. But
neither in their election nor ordination are they made ministers according to
Gods word. Therefore is their ministry false unlawful, Antichristian, etc.
Both these propositions I will prove true by their own writings, of the first
thus they say. A due examination of learning and life, going before the free
consent of the Church, whom it concerns: and ordination or laying on of
hands by these to whom it appertains is so required, as if default be made
either in the examination or election, the whole action is disanulled and made
void. I desire the reader to note Defen. of discip. aga. p. Bridge. 109.
well, what they say here: viz. so necessary is a right election and
ordination, to every Ecclesiastical office* p. 108.
that without the same, it cannot possibly be true and lawful. The same they
do again affirm, a little before the place cited. Indeed if their evil had
bin only in life (meaning Popish Priests) or in some principal points of
doctrine it were something: but their defect is in the very calling: For Christ
being the door, and God that opens to the Pastors that enter by it, and all
that enter otherwise are thieves and murderers.

We have also to prove the minor, their own testimony, for they say directly
that not any one of the ^. Adm. 17
forenamed officers are either, proved, elected, called or ordained according
to Gods word, but after the old Popish Prefac. Admon to the Parl.
order, and for this cause, do confess that they have not a right ministry
among them.

It was a great fault in Pharaoh, when he had given his consent unto the
Israelites, that they should freely depart out of Egypt, and go unto Canaan
according to Gods appointment, that he should afterward use all the means he
could to get them back into their former miserable servitude: I have showed by
the Nonconformists grounds, that our separation from their ministry is with
their leave and approbation: and therefore they do not well to seek our
bondage and misery again, the same thing we shall prove, touching their
worship, Government, and Church, in order and place.

If therefore they would have us in earnest, return unto them: Let them first
by the Scriptures justify the things which they have condemned, I say refute
their own books, and build again the things which they have destroyed: and
when they have made themselves transgressors: if we be not able by Gods word to
prove that the things, which we refrain from, are every way as evil as they
have testified, we will (by his grace) acknowledge our error and return again
unto them, in the mean while we shall judge well of our order and manner of
walking: and put up our daily petitions, unto the father our of Lord Jesus C.
in behalf of all Gods elect yet in Babylon, that they may com out from that
unholy state, and do the Lords work in his own way.

It remains to speak now of their deacons office, the which (as the rest
before) is wholly condemned of the Nonconformists. For they ^say, that those
ordained deacons in their Church, Never purpose in their life, to execute any
part of a deacons office, neither are chosen for that end: but only that
within a short time after they may be made Priests: nothing in the world,
differing from Note.
the superstition of popery: where the office of a deacon was conferred only
as a step unto Preisthood, as though it were necessary, that every one which
is ordained an elder should first be deacon, and yet when he is made a deacon,
he is but an idol, yea scarce an idol of a deacon, having noresemblance at all
unto a deacon indeed, but that he is a man. This profaning Dis. Eccl. Gov. p.
108.
of Gods institution, God will not always suffer unpunished, especially when
it is not maintained of ignorance or infirmity, but defended against knowledge
and upon Tab. div. Rea. Ca. Des. dis. 92. def. Godly mi. ag. Br. 108. Adm. 1.
p. 5. and l. 2. p. 61.
willfulness. Others of them do affirm the like: That they have thrust upon
them a counterfeyt and Popish deaconship, a mere humane institution: Foolish,
and made according to Antichrists Canons, without any ground for it out of the
Scriptures, nothing like the ordinance of God for the relief of the poor. And
therefore they have desired that it might be utterly abolished and taken a way.

That a man from those principles may infer a lawful separation, from all
spiritual communion in the ministry of their English deaconship, I think
every one (if he understand what a principle is) will freely grant it. But if
there be any that believes the former positions to be true, and yet will
undertake to prove by Gods word that it may warrantably be joined with, I shall
be willing to read what he can say herein; promising (if I live) either to
yield, or reply again, according to the worth or weakness, which I shall see
to be in the writing for the thing: And because he may not want matter to begin
with, I will lay down this argument for him.

If the present deaconry of the Church assemblies of England be a mere human
institution, and no ordinance of God, but an office taken only of the Pope,
that Roman Antichrist, etc. Then it is not lawful in the worship of God to
have any spiritual communion therewith. But the present deaconry of the Church
assemblies of England, is a mere human institution, and no ordinance of God,
but an office taken only of the Pope, that Roman Antichrist, therefore it is
not lawful in the worship of God to have any communion there with.

The proposition is evident and certain, and cannot be denied. for no man can
lawfully join in communion with a false ministry. As it has bin formerly
proved, by Scriptures, reasons, and the testimony, of the Learned. The
assumption is wholly taken from their own writings. The which if they should
deny: yet can we justify the same against all men.

It may be some will exspect that I should write something of their Lecturers:
And the rather, because they in the judgment of many, are thought to be the
best ministers, of their life and doctrine I say nothing: but as for their
ministry surely it is new and strange, as King James, was wont to say of it.
For the original of their name, manner of entrance, and administration, is
unknown wholly to the Scriptures, and I think never before heard of till in
these later broken and confused times.

Therefore it is no marvel, when the question has Ioh. 1.
been propounded to some of them, as it was by the Pharisees, to John, Who art
thou? that they have not been able for their life to answer the point, neither
could agree among themselves, what kind of ministry it is that they have
taken up; and being hard pressed for resolution, they have ingeniously
confessed, that unless they be Evangelists, they could not see how their
ministry does accord with any ministry mentioned in the New Testament. This
I write upon my own certain knowledge, the persons I think are yet liveing,
whose names for some reason I forbear to express. Howbeit I can and will do
it, if I see there be a just and necessary occasion.

I do not think it strange, that they should thus speak: For indeed, I know
not what they can say better in defense of their standing; Pastors, I am sure,
they will not say they are. For first they do not take any particular charge
of a flock upon them. 2. They perform not the office thereof: For they agree
with the people only, to preach, and not to administer, either the seals, or
censures to them. 3. Their coming unto the people is in a strange sort: for
they make a covenant each with other, for some certain years; and when that
time is out, both parties are free, and so may leave one the other, and do
many times. But a true Pastor may not do so; For if he should he were worse
then an hyreling, which leaves not the sheep till he John. 10. 12.
see the Wolf coming. But many of these, when they see a richer lectureship
coming toward them. 4. He that is the parson or vicar, is taken generally for
the minister of the place; And truly howsoever their calling be false and
Antichristian (as the Nonconformists say) yet in many respects they do better
resemble a true minister, then any Lecturer whatsoever; Therefore not without
just cause do the Reformists utterly condemn this extraordinary office of
preachers, and affirm, Neces. disc. 74.
that they are neither Pastors or Teachers, which the scripture allows off.
And this may be easily proved.

That ministry which is instituted and set up besides those, which God has
appointed in his word, is unlawful and false: But ^he ministry of the
Lecturers in England is instituted and set up beside these, which God has
appointed in his word. Therefore that ministry is unlawful and false. The
proposition is plain and undeniable, and we have their own words to confirm
it; For thus they say: All the ministry is by the word of God, and not left to
the will of men, to devise at their pleasure, as appears by that which is
noted of John, where the Pharisees coming to him, after that he had denied to
be either Christ, or Eltas, or another Prophet, conclude if he be neither
Christ, nor Elias, nor of the Prophets, why Baptisest thou? which had been no
good argument, if John might have been of some other function then of those
which were ordinary in the church, and instituted of God, and therefore John to
establish his singular and extraordinary function, allegeth the word of God,
whereby appears, that as it was not lawful to bring-in any strange Doctrine,
so was it not lawful to teach Mind this ye Lecturers.
the true Doctrine, under the name of any other function then was instituted by
God. Let the whole practice of the church under the Law be looked upon, and it
shall not be found, that any other ecclesiastical ministry was appointed then
those officers of high Priest, and Priests and Levites, etc. which were
appointed by the Law of God, and if there were any raised extraordinarily, the
same had their calling confirmed from heaven, either by signs or miracles, or
by plain and clear testimony of the mouth of God, or by extraordinary
exciting and movings of the spirit of God. So that it appears, that the
ministry of the Gospel, and the function thereof, ought to be from heaven and
of God, and not invented by the brain of men: From heaven I say, and heavenly,
because although it T. C. l. 1. p. 83. Eccl. Gov. p. 7. Demons. disc. 7. Mr.
Bat. 102. Cartw. Chr. rel. chapter 16. p. 28.
be executed by earthly men, and the ministers also chosen by men, like unto
themselves, yet because it is done by the word and institution of God, that
has not only ordained that the word should be preached, but has ordained also
in what order, and by whom it should be preached, it may well be accounted to
come from Heaven and from God.

Again, to devise any other ministry then that which God has appointed, is
condemned by the second commandment.

The assumption is thus proved, first if their Lecturers, have taken ordination
from the Bishops, and exercise by that power only then is their office false
by the reasons before laid down. Secondly if it be objected that they never
received the Prelates orders, or have repented thereof; I answer, yet this
proves not that they are therefore true ministers: For as Iehu, though he did
well to suppress, Ahabs idolatry, yet in that he followed the ways of
Jeroboam, he himself continued still a gross idolater. Even so, howsoever some
may privately report, that they stand ministers by no relation to the Bishop:
yet are they notwithstanding, unlawful ministers, seeing they were never
elected chosen, and ordained according to Gods word: If any reply that they
have their calling of the people. I answer the thing is surely otherwise, as
shall be manifested presently. But if this were granted, yet I deny that any
Church under heaven, has power from Christ to ordain such a kind of
ministry, and therefore if any people should do it, seeing it is against the
Scripture, it must needs follow that it is an unlawful ministry, and so
consequently not to be communicated with, and that it is so I prove it thus.

That ministry is unlawful which none may lawfully give, but none may
lawfully bestow the ministry of a lecturer. Demons. dis, 13.
Therefore that ministry is unlawful. The proposition is evident by their
own principles: The assumption cannot for shame be denied if the nature of it
be considered. For as we but even now said, their Lecturers take no charge of a
flock upon them, they make covenant with the people but for a certain time,
the peculiar works of a minister is not by the people laid upon them, neither
exspected of them: If any object that they preach the word; To this Doctor Ames
gives an answer fully, that the preaching of the gospel is not a work
peculiar to a minister: For such as are private men and out of office, may and
ought to preach the word as occasion is offered, and not only privately, De
consc. l. 4. c. 25. p. 215.
but (says he) in the public congregation, and for this thing he cites these
Scriptures, 1. Cor. 14. 23. Act. 13. 15. And yealdeth many good reasons for it
also. Mr. Bates. 134. Def. of disc. ag. D. Bridge. 129.
Other of the Nonconformists affirm the same thing. As the Church has need of
all men's gifts, so all ought to employ them at public ordinary meetings, yet
so, as good order be still observed.

SECTION. IIII.
THus reader thou see how the present ministry of the Church assemblies of
England, both the greater and lesser, is by the Nonconformists professed and
proved to be all and wholly false. Now we com to the 4. point according to our
division which is to answer the reasons laid down by Doctor Ames, in the
defense of their ministry, and they may be cast into two heads or branches.
First what he speaks for it himself. 2. The reference which he has for help
to M. Bradshawes book, entitled the unreasonableness of separation. We will
first treat of the Doct own arguments. Or rather argument. For I find but
only one, touching this thing in his book. The words Fresh suite l. 2. p. 207.
are these, we utterly deny that the calling of our ministers does essentially
depend upon the Bishops calling.

I know the word our here has in it a mystery, which every body knows not.
For D. A doubtless meant to speak only for some particular churches, because
in his later days he would not undertake to justify the standing, but only
of some ministers in the I have good testimony for this thing.
Land, which were mostly uncomfortable. Now it had been well, if he had
publicly declared so much, and showed the differences, between the true and
false, and proved soundly by Gods word, such to be true ministers whom he so
judged: For a little of this kind of writing, would have profitted more the
professors in England, than a multitude of words, and yet all but one thing,
about 2. or 3. foolish ceremonies, and which are the least evils of many
hundreds among them. There are others of them to my knowledge in this thing of
the D. mind, to weet, that some few ministers only in the land are true, and
privately they do express so much. But in the mean time the people are
ignorant hereof, and therefore walk disorderly, and so greivously sin against
God, and their own souls: But of this enough elsewhere. Therefore to the
matter.

I wish the D. had declared what the ^ssence is of a minister in his judgment,
and whence the calling of his ministers does essentially depend, if not upon
the Bishops calling. For then to use his own words, this question would easily
be decided: but seeing he thought it best in this to be silent. I answer
directly: 1. The ministry of England, as it is established by law, does
certainly depend upon the Bishops calling wholly, and no man's else; and if any
in the Land stand otherwise, he cannot properly be said to be a minister of
that church, but rather is a schismatic from it, according to the formal
constitution of it. And for this we have the testimony of another other Doctor,
and a man better experienced then ever Mr. Ames was in the making of English
Priests, and Deacons. If you (says he writing against Mr. Penry) D. Somes last
Treat. c. 10. p. 123.
repel the unpreaching minister, because of his outward calling, you may by the
same reason discharge the worthiest ministers in the land of the holy
ministry; For all have one, and the same external calling in the church of
England. This witness is true: all their ministers indeed have one and the
same outward calling. I say their best preachers no other then their ignorant
asses and idols have; the difference between them is only in their
qualification for a calling, and in the execution thereof, and not in the
outward calling it self. For in this respect, if any ministry be false and
Antichristian, there is never a ministry then true among them all.

And so much D. Ames seems to acknowledge in p. 410. for there he says, that
power of ordinatio^ is not given (by our laws) to individua vaga, that is to
say vagrant men, of whom the law takes no notice, such as were wont to be
called, Hedge-preists, but to authorized Prelates. Now if none by their law
have power to ordain, but Bb. then are his ministers, either made officers by
them, or else (as I said before) they are not of that church, and so he speaks
not any thing to the matter in hand.

Secondly, there is not any congregation in the land that has any power to
ordain a Church Officer, neither is this either formallie (nor I think
intentially) any where practiced; For the most free Parish has but only a
liberty to admit of a minister, before made by the Bishops, so that the people
give him not any part, much less the substance of his calling^, as Mr. Paget
untruly speaks, but a bare permission, only to exercise Arr. ag* Br. 93.
by virtue of that calling, which he had of the Prelates: Such therefore do
horribly abuse the people, which ascribe that unto the^, which they neither
do, can do, nor inte^d to do, we blame justly the Familists, for their idle
pretense of inward devotion, they manifesting no outward obedience, whereby we
should judge well of them. Yet truly as bad as they are, this in them, can
better be justified, then Mr. Doct. new principle, to wit, that the calling of
their ministers does essentially depend upon the peoples calling. For so I know
he means: for it is so palpably false, as there cannot be a leaf found to
cover the nakedness of it; For as I said, how can it with any coulorable show
be affirmed, that the people should do that thing, concerning which they
neither do, nor intend to do any thing belonging to it, nay more, which they
make account, is done before, and not only so, but do think (at least most of
them) that it does not at all appertain unto the^. Upon this ground a man might
devise and say any thing, but I spare to urge it further, because the man is
not alive to answer me. If any list to make a rejoinder, he shall hear more
Pro. 25. 8.
in my next answer. But before he go forth hastily to strive, let him first
make diligent search among all the Parish assemblies in the land, whether there
be any that do make their own ministers, according to Gods word; that is,
choose them by a general and free consent, ordain them by imposition of
hands, with fasting and prayer, etc. For about this is our question, and not of
their fittnesse to be ministers, neither of the leave, which the people give to
administer among them, after they are made ministers by the Bishops.

Moreover I think, that D. Ames in page 412. does contradict himself, his
words are these. If the rejoinder, would have brought a fitting example, he
should have showed us, that Paul, or Barnabas being at Jerusalem, ordained a
minister, and sent him to Antioche, Iconium or Listra, signifying by letters,
that such a man was appointed their Pastor, though they never knew or heard of
him before: for that had been something like unto the practice of a Bishop who
upon the Patrons praesentation, wheresoever he be, sends his minister, from
the place, or Palace of his residence unto a congregation, 20. 30. or 40. miles
of, which poor despised people, must be content with towling of a bell, as
sufficient notice given of their ministers fittnesse, and their necessity to
acknowledge the same: he speaks so generally, as I take it, his ministers
are here comprehended, and I have good reason so to think, in regard of a
business which he writes of his experience: I was (says he) once, and never but
once, I thank God before a Bishop, and being presented unto him, by a chief
Magestrate of an incorporation, for to be a preacher in their town, the lowly
man first asked them, how they durst choose a preacher without his consent? you
(said he) are to receive the preacher that I appoint you. For I am your Pastor,
though he never fed them. And then turning to me, how durst you (said he)
preach in my diocese without my leave? so that without any other reason, but
mere Lordship, the whole incorporation, and I, were dismissed, to wait his
pleasure: which I for my part have don this twenty year, and more. By this
little the reader may judge, whether the calling of their ministers, does
essencially depend upon the Bishop, or peoples calling.

3. If it should be granted that the Doctors ministers, have their calling
only from the people: yet what is this to the point between him and the
rejoinder, I may use his own words, truly the answer does not look toward
the question. Now mark all readers that have sense, it is affirmed by Doct.
Burgess, whereas the Nonconformists say the calling of their Bishops, and
consequently of the ministers is Antichristian, that separation must hereupon
necessarily follow. How is this answered? not at al: if the proverb be true:
as good never a whit, as never the better. For D. Ames speaks of a certain
ministry which the separatist never to this day, yet saw in their assemblies,
neither have they left any such. If therefore he would have answered the
rejoinders charge indeed, he should have proved that those ministers, whose
calling does essencially depend upon the Bishops calling: which have, I say, no
other election nor ordination, but what they had from them, in a word, which
do administer to the people only by that power and authority, may
(notwithstanding for for all this) warrantably by scripture be judged true
ministers, and be lawfully communicated with in their ministry, and yet the
Nonconformists grounds, published against them, all just, true and good. This
is the very point indeed: for such ministers we have only left, and we know no
other. If there be, let them be manifested to us; tell us their names, their
places; And if we find by scripture their ministry to be lawful, we will
surely have communion with it, as occasion serves. Till then, we purpose by
Gods grace to live as we do, and to practice that which the Nonconformists
profess to be the order, and way which the Lord commands all his servants to
walk in.

4. If the Doctor speak here truth, then have the Nonconformists greatly
abused the princes and state of England, in complaining so often to them,
against the Bishops, and for what think you, forsooth because the Prelates take
away the power of the people, make ministers Defen. Admon.
alone, hence none are either proved, called, or ordaind according to Gods
word, etc. Now how do these things agree together? Is not this yea and nay? It
is so indeed. But imagine, there should be a Parliament again in England, and
the Nonconformists should there petition: that the calling of their ministers
might not essentially depend any more upon the Bs. calling, would not the Bb.
have matter to persuade both houses, not to harken unto them, yea to reprove
them sharply, for moving this thing, seeing they confess they have it
already? But it may be they would say some congregations do not ordain their
ministers; to this the Prelates might reply, that is then their fault; For they
give liberty and power to all alike, and that is none at all; I am sorry they
have laid such a snare, whereby to undo themselves. But usually, this is their
course, when they have any hope, to have the Magistrates help for reformation,
they will truly declare the abuses and corruptions among them to the full,
afterward (nothing being amended) when they are put in mind of their
principles, that is, if such things be true, then necessarily must they leave
the church of England; what do they, but go quite from them again, as I
shall in convenient place, prove it clearly; And is not that a miserable case,
which cannot be maintained, but by gross contradiction. I may well here use
the Doctors own words, Such turning, winding, and running Fresh suit l. 2. p.
132.
against walls, you shall seldom see an ingenious man to use in a good case.

Lastly, howsoever Doct. Ames thought to have crossed much the course of the
Separatists; yet if his words be understandingly weighed, he has justified
them, and made way to a general departure from their ministry. For thus I
reason:

None may hear or have any spiritual communion with such a ministry, whose
calling does essentially depend upon the Bishops calling. But the calling of
the ministers of the church assemblies of England does essentially depend upon
the Bb. calling. Therefore none may hear or have any spiritual communion with
the ministry of the church assemblies of England.

Neces. ^efor. ^1.
The proposition by good consequence is the Ds. own; and herein he agrees with
the rest of the Nonconformists; For in opinion they all hold this thing, as we
have from their writings manifestd. And whosoever should deny the assumtion,
might with as much reason deny that there is any idolatry at Rome, although
it is there both taught and practiced: therefore I think no man will have the
forehead to oppose it. But have not now the people of the Land good cause to
look about them seeing those who count themselves the only men to refute the
Separists, are come to that streigth, as that they will not justify it to be
Lawful, for to join to any ministry in the land, but to that, which a man
should not find among them, if he sought all their Zep. 1. 12. Pro. 14. 15
Churches with candles, as the Prophet speaks. I hope Gods elect yet there,
will take Salomons counsel, which is, to look well to their going.

And thus much for answer to the Doct. reason: now next we should speak of Mr.
Bradshews book, but because I have been long upon this chapter, and the reply
to it will be large. I will leave it therefore till last, and handle other
things in the mean time.

SECT. V.
BEfore I end this point I think it convenient to answer briefly to a few
objections, which I have often heard some to make in the defense of their
standing. Object. 1. Compassion toward the people constrains many preachers
to keep their places: For if they should not, alas what would the people do?

Ans. 1. we may not do any thing against the will and pleasure of God, under
pretense to show mercy Ephe. 4. 32 1 Pet. 3. 8. 1 King. 20 42.
to others. But we are bound to do that which is good and honest, by just and
lawful means: that pity which Christians are to show, must be (...) rightly
bowelled, that is required of God, both for the matter and manner of it.

2. God needs no man's lie. For he has power enough to accomplish his own
purposes. He may thus say: Psa. 50.
If I be hungry I would not tell thee, that is, what need I thee, or any thing
thou can do? I am Allsufficient.

3. The truth is, the people are not helped by this means, but rather
hindered: For if they ceased from preaching in their unlawful offices, the
godly generally throughout the land, would seek where Christ feeds his
flock, and so their state would be much better then now it is.

Object. 2. Though they will not plead to justify their ministry, yet they
hope to glorify God by preaching Ans. so thought the Leper when he published
abroad Mar. 1.
the matter of his healing, but he not being called to do it, sinned greatly
therein therefore it is certain, that* men do then glorify God, when
(leaving their John 15. 8
own, wisdom) they do whatsoever they are commanded, for as M. Perkins
says, the intention to First. vol. p. 699. 1 Samuel 2. 30.
honor God is not good, unless it be an intention to honor him by yielding
that obedience which he commands, now seeing these refuse to keep strictly
his order and ordinances: they take not the right course to honor him. And in
this respect can have little assurance to receive glory and honor of him.
Therefore it is better a man never preach then do any evil in preaching.

Romans 3.
Object. 3. But they hope to do much good by staying in their places. Ans. 1.
The least sin may not be committed if one were sure the whole world might be
saved thereby. 2: It is a great dishonor to God to do any sin to a good end,
as though he could not provide for men's souls without sining against him and
serving the devil. 3. Although we invent a 1000. ways, yet we have no reason
to think that we shall profit others, but only by those means and
instruments which he has appointed for his work. For with those his blessing
is joined: but if we pass the bounds set by God himself, and institute of
our own head, means and instruments to do good by, not only may we fear the
want of his blessing, but the fearful exspectation, both of temporal and
eternal judgments.

Object. 4. But the people do much desire that they would retain their
office. Ans. Beit so: yet seeing God commands them to leave it, they ought to
obey him rather then men: If one had borne arms a while against his prince,
yet should he do well, to lay them down, though his father, mother, and a
thousand more should counsel him to the contrary. I leave the application of
it to others. It was worthily answered by Gideon when the Kingdom with the
Alteration of the Government which God had set over his people, was Judge. 8. 23
presented unto him: I will not rule over you, etc. The Lord shall rule over
you, to weet, according to such order, as he has appointed. Such a holy
answer should they give the people. We will not stand over you by an
Antichristian authority, but exhort you to forsake the false ways of the
world: and to make a covenant with God, that so Christ's Jesus may reign, as
King, Priest, and Prophet over you. 2. Let it be considered Gal. 6.
that every one shall bear his own barden. Though Adam took the womans
counsel, and she the devils, to sin against God, yet they both in their own
persons carried the just punishment thereof. 3. The people understand not so
generally the vnlawfullnes of their ministry as the others do: for if they
did, I think they would as much persuade them, yea more, to leave it by
repentance, then they ever urged them to retain the same.

Object. 5. many of them have good gifts, great learning, and able to preach
the word profitably: therefore in this respect they may be true ministers.
Answ. 1. Be a man never so godly, never so learned, endued with never so many
lively faculties of the ministry, yet he is no minister indeed, unless he
have the ordinance of God upon him, by a true outward calling. He which
understands well the office of a justice, and could sufficiently execute the
place, yet is he not a lawful justice of peace, Heb. 5. 4.
except he be rightly called thereunto? even so etc. 2. If gifts only make men
ministers, then many of the Popish Priests are true Pastors. For they (as the
Nonconformists acknowledge) have great learning and gifts, M. Dayr. pref.
trear. of the Chapter
very great knowledge and skill in the arts, and in languages: are of excellent
utterance, exp^rt and ready in holy Scriptures; can speak and write truly
agreeing with the Scriptures, of sundry of the se^rets of the Kingdom of
heaven: as of God, his nature, persons, attributes, of Christ Jesus his
incarnation, his birth, life, preachings, sufferings, coming to judgment, of
the resurrection, of the life to come, with many other of this kind. The like
may be said of many Lawyers, Physicians, etc. These by the former reason are
ministers also.

Lev. 4. 27. 28. and 19. 17. V. 51. 26. Mal. 3. 16. Mal. 18. 15 1. Cor. 14. 24.
25. Es. 53. 1. 2 King. 17. 13. 14.
Object. 6. many are converted by their doctrine, therefore it seems they are
true ministers.

Answ. 1. men in no office may, and often do turn their neighbors from much
evil. If this be not so, to what purpose should private persons exhort,
instruct, and reprove, any upon any occasion whatsoever. 2. Good Prophets have
seen little fruit to follow their labor: Therefore if this had argued a true
note of their calling, they might have been judged false. 3. If fruit be a
sign of a true minister. Then are many of the Bishops in England, and Rome
too, true ministers. For without doubt some of both have been instruments under
God of men's conversion. 4. It has been the manner always, of wise and learned
men, to esteem of things by the causes, and not by the event, and that
specially in matters* of Religion: for if they should be esteemed of the event,
who would not commend the midwives lying unto Pharaoh, for much good followed
amongst the Israelites: But what if the Lord give his blessing unto his word,
is it to be thought therefore, that he likes well of a false calling? nothing
less, but rather a man might reason thus: for as much as those which preach in
an unlawful office, do sometime edify their hearers: surely then such would
do much more good, if they stood in a right and true calling. 5. To convert is
not the most proper work of a Pastor: but to feed Christ sheep, with sound
and wholesome doctrine: and therefore if it should come to pass, that he never
converted any, yet his ministry nevertheless would still be true and lawful.

Object. 7. Many worthy men did never leave their ministry in England, and
yet dyed comfortablie.

Ans. 1. Without doubt they never saw fully the vnlawfullnesse of it. 2. Men
must do as they are further enlightened and guided by the spirit of God, who
from step to step leads his people. 3. Many of the fathers under the law had
many wives at once, the which thing if any now should practice he could not
exspect the mercy which they obtained, because they did it ignorantly. 4. No
man's ^xamplie must be further followed then the same agrees with the Scripture,
for where David, Peter, etc. do differ from the truth, therein we ought to
differ from them. 5. Had they duly considered the conclusions of their own
grounds, laid down against the abuses of their Church, I am persuaded they
would have changed their course.

Object. 8. But many have their gifts tried by some godly ministers, and so
have their consent and allowance* and this gives them (they think) the true
substance of a true calling.

Ans. 1. These must consider, that it is against rule, to make that which is in
question, the ground of the thing in dispute. For we do deny, that those here
intimated, are true ministers, and therefore their consent and allowance is
nothing to make the thing warrantable, 2. If they were ministers, yet is their
official power confined within the freedom of their own church, and so have
no authority delegated to them from Christ, to give the substance of the
ministers calling to another people. For to do thus, were to be like unto the
Pope and Prelates, the which practice in them they do abhor. 3. It is a
fearful mocking of God* and a high profanation of his ordinance. When men
will take a holy work in hand, and pretend they do it, and yet do nothing
touching the true substance thereof.

A man which has but a little path to keep, and great sea lying on both sides
of him, would surely be drowned, if he should turn out of his way, but a
little, either to the one hand or other; the like may be said of Gods paths,
and institutions: if a man keep not full in the way, do not every thing
according to the pattern. It is all one, whether turning on the left hand, he
embrace the idolatry of the Bishops, or turning on the other hand, follow the
new devises of men's foolish brains, for utter destruction certainly follows
them both.

Now for conclusion, if these lines, by Gods providence, shall come to any of
your hands, which stand at this present ministers in the church of England: my
desire truly is, that you willbe pleased ingeniously to consider the things
here written, and specially how the Nonconformists (such as you cannot but much
reverence and love for their learning and graces) have by invincible reasons
and arguments proved clearly your offices to be false, unlawful, and
Antichristian. Now if you cannot justify your standing before men, ah how do
ye think that ye shall be able to stand comfortably before the holy God, if you
stand longer therein. The Lord give you eyes to see how exceedingly you have
broken the sacred order of the Gospel, and hearts tender against every sin,
that the evil may be put away. And think not scorn (I pray you) to take any
fruitful counsel of me; but harken to the Lord that it may go well with you.
And look as the men which had married them wives of the Heathen, did put them
quite away, at Nehemiahs command: Even so, seeing you have taken upon you a
strange ministry, put it away at Gods command, and do not continue one hour
in it. If you say, what shall we do for the hundred talents? how shall we? our
wives and children be releeved? 2 Chro. 25. 9.
if we leave our benefices, our stipends, friends, and benefactors. I answer
you as the man of God did Amasiah, the Lord is able to give you more then this.
Christ says (as you know well) he that will forsake father and mother, house
and land, for his name sake, shall receive a hundred fould in this world,
beside the possession of life and glory hereafter. Truly there is a great
reward in this promise, and me thinks you should value it to be much more worth
then all the personages, vicarages, Lecture-profitts, etc. in England. Mind
well therefore (good friends) what a large offer the Lord makes, tobuy ^ou out
of your vnsanctifyed places, whereas he might cast you forth headlong, and
inflict upon you many visible and sencible punishments, as he did on Corah,
vzziah vzza, etc. for their usurpation and intrusion. But he offers you a
hundredfould profitt, which is a great matter indeed, and therefore ye are
altogether unwise, if ye do refuse it.

I may say to you, as David to the men of Judah: Why are ye the last to bring
home the King? Surely ye are too flow in helping forward Christ to his Kingdom.
You Answ. Banc. ser. p. 17.
do indeed complain, that the office of Christ, as he is King, is no wise
acknowledged under the jurifdiction of your Bishops in many places of the Land.
But are not you in part the cause thereof, in walking hand in hand with the
rebellious Prelates, to support that divised ministry, which they have
received from the Pope, and do thrust upon the people. Think therefore, oh
what a blow it would give to Antichrists Kingdom, and how it would even shake
and overthrow the very foundation of his house: if such as you would break the
bonds of iniquity, and draw your necks out from the Bishops yoke, and bring
your learning and other good gifts (as the people did the Lords Vessels, which
had been a long time kept in Babylon) to the building and beautifying of Sion:
This would make your faces to shine, and make your names to flourish in all ages
after, as those do in our generation, which according to that light received,
did power out their vtals upon the seat of the beast, to the great discovering
of his lies and beastly vanities. Ye know that some, who were sometime chief
among you, have laid down their ministry, as unlawful: For it being a
dependent office of the Hierarchy, they found it by scripture unwarrantably to
be Ephe. 4. 12
used for the edifying of the body of Christ.

If you have these for an example, you shall do well, otherwise, if either for
cafe, profit, credit, liberty, or other worldly respects, you retain still
this ^iverie of Antichrist and Popes creature, you will loose that honor and
reward which the other (if they make straight paths for their feet) shall
undoubtedly obtain: notwithstanding as Mordecay said to Esther: enlargement
and deliverance shall arise to the Jews from another place. Esther 4. 14.
For God surely will fulfill his word, in abolishing utterly that great scarlet
whore, and all the accursed offices and ministeries, which she has devised,
in spite of all humane policy and power to the contrary, and establish one
day his own ordinances more largely and perfectly, to the singular joy and
comfort of all true believers both Jews and Gentiles.

Moreover let it be considered whether those ministers, which have taken
orders, and offices of the Prelates, and stand by their power and authority,
are not in this, transgressors against the King and the Laws. Yea and might be
legally executed for treason and felony if the King and state were not pleased
to interpret the statute, contrary to the very letter, form, and truth of the
same.

The words of the statute. (Eliz. 27. 2.) are these. It shall not be lawful,
for any Seminary Preis^, or other Priest, or Ecclestastic all person
whatsoever, made, or ordained without or within any of her Majesty's dominions,
by any authority derived, challenged or pretended from the sea of Rome, by or
of what name, title, or degree soever the same shallbe called, or known, to be
or remain in any part of her highness dominions. And every person so
offending shall be judged a traitor, and shall suffer as in case of high
treason. And every person which shall wittingly and willingly receive, relieve,
comfort, and or maintain any such Priest or Ecclesiastical person, shall be
judged a felon without benefit of Clergy, and suffer death, loose and forfeit
as in case of felony.

CHAP. II.
IN this Chapter we will speak of the outward worship, used in the assemblies
of England, the sum whereof M. Bates. 203. Hows. ser. in psalm. 118. p. 18.
Can. 19. Syon pl. 326.
(as the Nonconformists say) is contained in their communion book, and hence
the same is called divine service, (as for preaching, it is held to be no part
thereof) we will follow here the same method. And first I will show what a true
divine worship is, according to their own description of it.

2 How far that in the Church of England, by their own confession differs
from, and is contrary to it.

3 Lay down arguments to prove our separation lawful by the former grounds.

4 Answer D. Ames reasons alleged to the contrary.

M. Bat. 19. Fresh suit l. 1. p. 210.
It is certain that the Lord has given a perfect platform and absolute rule,
how he will be worshipped, in the time of the new Testament, an excellent
direction M. Dike six Evang. Hist. p. 306 M. Perk. Idol. las. in last. vol. p.
698. M. Brins. truewatch p. 28.
for us, how we may acceptablie perform the same unto him, is laid down in
John 4. 23. 24. Two things are there mentioned: spirit and truth, first it must
be a true matter of worship grounded on the word, it must be no devised
worship. For nothing may go under the name of the worship of God, which he
has not ordained in his own word, and commanded to us, as his own worship.
All the parts and means thereof, must be don according to his revealed will:
Even as the service which is given to an earthly prince by his attendants at
court, must be only according to that Kings commandment: so the outward
solemn worship to be Romans 12. 1 Cart. Hist* Christ l. 1. p. 211. Elton upon
Colos. p. 308.
performed unto the King of Kings, ought to be that only, which he alone is
the author and institutor of. As for rules given by men not grounded on the
Scripture, in case of Religion, matters of faith etc. They are not of any
moment, neither are we bound to the observation of them. For the truth is,
whosoever uses those ways and inventions in worshipping God which are not
commanded of God in his word, but be devices of men, Christ says that they
worship him in vain etc. If it have no further beginning Rev. 22. 18
then man's brain, God will give no blessing to it: but sends a curse upon it;
for cursed is he that adds any thing to the word of God: God will ad so much
to his plagues, and the reason is, because he makes himself wiser or better
then God. For if God be perfectly wise, then he knew best what worship would
please himself; and if he be perfectly good, then he would reveal unto us,
what ever he knew fit for us to practice: A gain it is a great injury offered
to God, when we will let his deadly enemies have the ordering and Note.
appointing of his service rather then himself. A King would think it a great
indignity that his servaints, should not yield to his direction, but some base
person that were a professed Romans 87.
enemy, should set down what service he must have, and in what manner he must
be obeyed who shall be his attendants, and what his provision. But much more
absurd and injurious it is, that we will let the wit and will of the flesh Yet
so is it where L. Bb. rule, as it is in Rome and England.
bear sway in Gods worship: for these two do join with the devil, and are
enmity to God. And if we will have this M. Dod upon comman. 2.
pre-eminence in our houses, that our servants must do as we bid them, not
what they themselves think good (for he is a good servant that does his
masters will, not his own) then why should not we think it right, that God
must be Lord in his house, and we must do his service after his appointment,
and not our own.

And not only do they teach these wholesome and good doctrines: but also do
lay down sundry effectual reasons, to prove that men may not worship God
otherwise then he has appointed and revealed in his word. 1. Because we can
have no true comfort M. Hern. upon Psa. 51. p. 4. M. Bates 18. 212. Deu. 16. 21
Chap. 4. 34.
in our devotions so long as they be but limbs of that which Paul terms
voluntary Religion: so long as they are only taken up by us, and not
prescribed to us, make we never so great a show of zeal in the performance of
them: yet it is nothing. 2. All worship devised by man is abhorred by the Lord:
for he likes nothing but what he appoints himself. 3. It is against his
express commandment, that men should bring any of their own devising, near
his ordinances: because he will have no more don in his worship then he
teaches and commands in his word. Park. of the Cross l. 1. p. 62. Colos.
2. 10. 243. Exodus 20. 24. 25. Ba. 205, 257. Syons. pl. 279.
Therefore whatsoever is added, that we are to esteem, to be an Image, which
he detesteth and abhors. 4. Because whatsoever God would have us either to
know, or do. he has fully revealed it by Christ. 5. It is the property of
superstitious and^dolatrous things to infect the places and persons where they
are. 6. It argues certainly that men do not love the Lord and his
commandments, but hate rather both: when they worship God otherwise then he
commands, for although every will worshipper will say that he loves God, yet
God witnesses in the second commandment, that he is a liar, and that he
hates God, in that he hates the worship which he commands, in the love
whereof, God will have experience of his love. 7. The Lord will bless the true
worshippers of him Cart. Chr. relig. cha. 16. p. 103.
unto many generations: both in themselves, their children, and posterity, and
in whatsoever belongs unto the^. 8. We must learn to proportion our worship M.
Dike six Evan. Histor. p. 312. D. Tail. upon Tit. 3. 10. page 7. 15.
to Gods nature, which is simple, in that which is simple there is no
composition or division, therefore in our worship there must be no composition,
it must be vayd of mixture, a linsey woolfey patch worship sauced, spiccd,
sophisticated with humane inventions, does nothing sort with the spiritual
simplicity of the Exhort. to the kirk of Edenb. page 10.
divine essence. 9. God promises his presence only in his own worship, and
therefore neither accepts nor blesses a worship, that is not directed by his
own word. For conclusion: worthily speaks M. Perkins, The second way of
erecting an Idol is, when First vol. Idol. last times p. 674. 675. Ang. de
consen. sa. Evang. l. ^. 18.
God is worshipped otherwise and by other means then he has revealed in the
word. For when men set up a devised worship, they set up also a devised God.
Augustine says of the Gentiles that they refused to worship the God of the
Hebrews, because if their pleasures were to worship him in another sort then
he had appointed, they should not indeed worship him but that which they had
feigned. The Samaritans worshipped the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
they waited for the coming of the Ioh. 4. 22.
Messiah: and yet Christ says of them. Ye worship ye know not what: because
they worshipped the true God by a worship devised of old, and set up by men.
The Lord says to the Israelites ye shall call me no more Baali: whereby he
signifies Hos. 2. 16. with Deuteronomy. 12. 4.
that because the Jews did sometime worship God in the same manner, with the
same images, rites and names, whereby the Heathen worshipped the false God
Baali, therefore they made him indeed to be even as the Idol Baal, etc. Again
John says in his first Epistle, chapt. 2. verse. 24. If that which ye have
heard from the beginning remain in you, ye shall continue in the father and
the Son. Hence it follows, that those which abide not in the Doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles, but set up other forms of worshipping God, abide not in
the son and the father, Gods worship must be according to his nature,
heavenly, divine, and spiritual; but all devised worship is according to the
nature and disposition of the deviser, foolish, carnal, vain etc. Therefore
when God is worshipped not according to his own will, but according to the
will and pleasure of man the true God is not worshipped, but a God of men's
invention is set up. Thus he.

Secondly, there must be a true manner of worship: which is to proceed from the
very heart*root, and to Psa. 103. 1.
be performed with the will, the affections, and all that is within us; For
this gives life, and welbeeing to divine service: as a well proportioned body,
if it want breath, offends us, and we desire to have it taken out of our sight;
For the noisome smell which it makes in our nostrels: even so every worship
(how outwardly glorious, Esa. 1.
and formal soever) void of uprightness, displeases the Lord greatly, and he
bids such hypocrites, to carry the same away out of his presence, because it is
noisome and abominable unto him. Let every man therefore look to this maine
thing, to wit, that he worship God in the truth and sincerity of the inward
man; For in this God only takes delight, and without Psa. 51. 8.
this maine qualification he cannot abide, either the person or action. It is a
thing common with men, when they take a piece of work to do for an other, and
exspect to have a good reward for their labor, Mr. Dike six Evang. hist. 311.
312, etc. Mr. Hern. in Psa. 51. 157, etc.
to be careful so to do it, as the Mr. for whom they do it, may have good
content therein; the like should be our care, whenever we take in hand any
service of God* and hope to be recompensed, to perform the same in that sort,
as the Lord may be pleased to accept graciously of it in Jesus Christ.

In all this we do fully agree with the No^conformists, and are persuaded, that
no man can rightly believe, that his service is well pleasing unto God, unless
it be performed, both for matter and manner, as they have before truly
expressed; and therefore to our power we are careful always thus to do; And
so much the more, because herein we know our masters will, and have promised to
do it; so that, if we neglect it, both Luke 12.
our trespass and punishment will be the greater.

SECT. II.
IN the former Section we have heard, what a true worship is: Now it follows,
that we describe the worship of the English Assemblies, according to the
testimony given thereof, by the Nonconformists.

This worship (for the matter of it) is contained wholly (as was said) in their
Church Leiturgie, in the handling whereof, for the readers better information.
I will first show what they say of the whole book, and afterward of the
particular parts and pieces thereof.

Touching the former, they write thus: The whole form of the Church service,
is borrowed from the Papists, Sold. Bar. T. C. l. 1. p. 131. Abridg. 89 Adm. 1.
p. 9, and 2 Ad. 41. Fall of Bab. 29. Altar. Damas. p. 612 613. Syons pl. 29.
Perth Assemb. 64. Syons pl. 30.
peeced, and patched together without reason or order of edificatio^; yea not
only is the form of it taken from the church of Antichrist, but surely the
matter also; For none can deny, but it was culled and picked out of that Popish
Dunghill, the portuis and vile Massebooke, full of all abominations: From three
Romish Channells, I say, was it raked together, namely the Breviary, out of
which the common prayers are taken, out of the rituall or book of rites, the
administration of the Sacraments, burial, matrimony, visitation of the sick are
taken: and out of the Massebooke, are the consecration of the Lord Supper,
Collects, Gospels, and Epistles. And for this cause it is, that the Papists
like well of the English Mass, (for so King James used to call it) and makes
them say: Surely the Romish is the true and right religion, else the Heretics
in England would never have received so much of it; For some have avouched it
to my face p. 40.
(says the author of the Curtain of Church power) that the service there, is
nothing but the Mass in English, others, that it wants nothing but the Popes
consecration.

These things thus retained it was also thought, that Popish Kings and Princes,
would be the less offended; what marvel, seeing the I^suites themselves are
so well pleased with the ceremonies and service, that I heard one of them (God
is my witness herein) make it his hope that the maintenance of them against
the puritans, would make England the sooner return to Rome in the rest. Mine
eyes and Quo vadis Sect. 4.
ea^es (says Bishop Hall) can witness with what approofe, and applause
diverse of the Chatholikes royal (as they are termed) entertained the new
translated Lyturgie of our Church. Which is the less wonder seeing Pope Pius,
the 4. sending Vincentio Parpatia, Abbot of S. Saviors to Queen Elizabeth
offered, to confirm Cambden in An. 1560. Fresh suit l. 1. 203.
the English Lyturgie by his authority, if she would yield to him in some other
things. Indeed it pleased them so well, that for the first eleven years of
Queen Elizabeth: Papists came to the English Churches and service, as the Lord
Cook shows: others of them, affirm L. Cook. de Iure Regis Ecclesiastico
fol. 34. Syon pl. 90. 91.
the same thing: namely their Churrh service pleases marvelous well the Romish
beast, and his ungodly followers. Witness the pacification of the devonshire
Papists, in the time of Edward the 6. when as they understood it was no other
but the very mass book put into English, witness also the assertion of D.
Carryer a dangerous seducing Papist. The common prayer book (says he) and
the Catechism contained in it: hold no point of doctrine expressly contrary to
antiquity, that is (as he explaine^h himself) the Romish service, only has
not Consider. page 45. Sec. 8. 9.
enough in it: and for the doctrine of predestination, sacraments, grace, free
will, and sin, etc. The new Catechism and sermons, of the puritan preachers,
run wholly in these against the common prayer and Mot. pref. to the Ans.
Catechism therein contained, etc. And thereupon he comfort himself, upon
the hope of supply of the rest, to this effect speaks Bristow and Harding. If
these things be right why not the rest? It shall not be amiss to mark one
accurrence in Q. Elizabeth's time, who being interdicted by the Popes Bull,
secretary Walsingham, tried a trick of state policy to reverse the same. He
caused two of the Popes intelligencers at the Popes appointment, to be brought
(as it were in secret, into England, to whom he appointed a guide (being a
state intelligencer) who should show them in Canterbury and London, service
solemnly sung and said, withal their pomp and procession, which order, the
Popish intelligencers seeing, and so much admiring, they wondered that their
master would be so unadvised, as to interdict a prince or state whose service
and ceremonies so Symbolized with his own: So returning to the Pope they
showed him his oversight, affirming that they saw no service, ceremonies or
Church orders in England, but they might very well have been performed in Rome,
whereupon the Bull was presently called in.

Moreover such is the unholiness of this idol book, 2 Admon. p. 56. Def. Ad.
p. 4. 1. Admo. p. 3.
as the Nonconformists, generally have refused to subscribe unto it affirming
it, to be such a piece of work as it is stra^g any will use it, there being in
it most vile and vnallowable things. And for this cause they have besought the
peers of the realm, that it might be utterly removed, Syon pl. 342. 318. 314.
M. Gilby p. 29.
and many reasons, they have given in several treatises, to prove their
condemnation of it, just and lawful* first because it is an infectious
liturgy, ^o^ish stuff, a devised service, and in it are many Religions mixed
together of Christ and Antichrist, of God and the devil, besides 2 Admon. 57. 1
Adm. 3.
a book full of fancies, and a great many things contrary to Gods word, and
prayers which are false, foolish, superstitious, and stark naught etc. 2. They
cannot account it praying, as they use it commonly, but only reading or 2 Adm.
5^
saying of prayers: even as a child that learneth to read, if his lesson be a
prayer, he reads a prayer, and does not pray: even so it is commonly a saying
and reading prayers and not praying. 3. In all the order of it there is no
edification but confusion. 4. We read not of any such liturgy 1 Ad. p. 14
in the Christian Church in the days of the Apostles, Alt. dam. 178.
nor in many ages following till blindness, ignorance and laziness,
occasioned a prescript form, to be made for idle and dumb Priests. 5. If this
were not, many would make more profession of love to preaching, and hearing
Gods word, but by this means it is neglected, Against Bridge. 43. Curt. Chapter
pow. 42. 45
and despised, for worldings, usurers, drunkards, whoremongers, and other
earthly and Profane people, away with nothing so well as English Mass, and
why? but because it does not sharply reprove them of their sins, Learned dis.
Eccl. Gover. 68. Mart. Sen. p. 2. Practice of princ. addit.
nor disclose the secret of their hearts, but that they may continue in all
kind of voluptuousness, and all other kind of wickedness, and therefore
rightly is it called their sterve-vs book. 6. God has no where appointed,
that the Church should be tied, to read the book of common prayer for his
worship: and therefore to do it, is an high transgression before him, as great
as the sin of Nadab and Abihu, and such are liable unto the like or greater
punishment. 7. If this were praying, and there were never an ill word nor
sentence in all the prayers, yet to appoint it to be used, or to use it as
Papists did their mattens and evening song, for a sex service to God, though
the words be good, the use is naught, the words of the first chapt. in John be
good, but to be put into a tablet of gould, for a soverainge thing to be 2
Admon. 55.
worn, the use is superstitious and naught, and so is the use of this service.

Sundry other arguments of this nature are used of them, to prove their
Service-booke a false, idolatrous, and unlawful worship, the which I purposely
omit, because enough already has been said about it. Yet there is one thing,
which I think good here to note, namely a comparison, which they make between
the Papists and Prelates, in forcing the practice of this foolish stuff:
Questions concern. churching of women p. 11. 12.
Welfare the Papists (say they) for they shall rise up in judgment against
you, (it is meant of the Hierarchy) who like good fellows, yet in plain and
open terms, even bare faced, as it were, do seek to reduce us, and to draw
us to their false and idolatrous worship and service in popery, as namely by
their Mass, mattens, ensong, purification, and other such like, whereas you
must daungerously, and even under a mask or visard, as it were, and not unlike
to him that transformeth himself into an Angel of light, do go about Note.
to draw and allure us to the self same worship and service, but by cleanlier
names and honester titles, etc. Mark (I pray thee) reader what they speak
here, touching their likeness and unlikenesse with the Papists: For their
worship and Service, it is (they confess) the self same false worship, used
in Popere; The difference stands in their Bishops beguileing of the people; For
they do lay more cunning snares and baits then the other, to have their
idolatry submitted unto; as for an instance: The Papists call their trashe,
Mass, etc. the other call it divine service, etc. And why have they left out
the first title, but because they think few people would come to it, if it did
carry still the old name of the Beast upon the forehead of it.

Nothing have the Nonconformists here said against that idolatrous book, but we
also do assent wholly thereto. Indeed in practice we agree not; For they will be
present where the same is used, whether they think it lawful so to do, I
know not, but this I know, that by their grounds laid down against it, every
true believer is necessarily bound to separate from it, and not upon any
occasion to join in communion therewith; and this I will prove, 1. By
precepts. 2. Examples. 3. by reasons. 4. by the testimonies of the learned. Of
all which we will treat in order in the Section following.

SECT. III.
Abridg. Linc. Min. p. 22.
THe Lord in scripture, has laid it as a straight charge upon all the
faithful, to separate themselves from Idolaters, and to be as unlike to them
as may be, specially in their religious observations and ceremonies. The second
commandment proves this effectually, for there is absolutely forbidden all
participation in any feigned service, whether it be to the true God or any
other.

When Jeroboam had set up a false worship, we read that the good Prophets of
that time, and after, called the godly Israelites away from it, and bidd them
in plain Hos. 4. 14. 15. Am. 5. 5.
terms not to join therewith, but on the contrary to keep Gods
commandments and statutes, appointed for his service, without adding any
thing to them, or taking any thing from them. And this they must do, although
the King had confirmed his new religion, by act of Parliament or Counsel, and
therefore no doubt would persecute most grievouslie all the refusers thereof.
Out of which is the English service book taken, as the Nonconform. say. See
Job 14. 4. Mat. 7. 18. Iam 3. 11. See Mr. Bale on the place Esa. 52. 11
The great Whore (much spoken off in the Revelation,) has devised an unclean
service, to worship the true God by; but what counsel gives the Holy Ghost to
the elect concerning it? very profitable, even in these words, come out of her
my people, Rev. 18. 4. that is, forsake her detestable religion, communicate in
none of her vile and odious devises, what coulorable reasons soever, her
unblessed followers make in defense thereof.

Again as this is a duty, so the faithful in all ages have practiced it, a
memorable example whereof we have in 2 Chro. 11. 14. 16. There it is said that
the Priests and Levites, and after them of all the tribes of Israel such as
set their hearts to seek the Lord and. Came to Jerusalem to sacrifice, the
like practice we read of, in Hezekiahs 2 Chro. 30 11.
time, diverse of Asher, and Manasseh, and of Zebulun, humbled themselves and
came to Jerusalem. All will confess, these were good separatists, and they did
lawfully forsake the body, whereof they stood formerly members, notwithstanding
if we take a strict view and inquiry of that ministry, worship, and
Government, which they left at Dan and Bethel, it will appear evidently, that
the same was not more false, idolatrous, and unlawful, then the present
ministry, worship, and government, of the English assemblies is by the
Nonconformists affirmed to be, and because none may think that I speak more
than can be proved, I will therefore here lay down, an Apology or pretext,
which an Idolatrous Israelite, might frame in the defense of the Kings
Religion, taken out of their own writings: and if D. Ames phrase Fresh suit l.
2. p. 80.
be tolerable I will pawn my head, that there is never a Nonconformists, this
day in the world (let him keep to their grounds) that is able to give more
pretty reasons, and coulourable shows, to justify the Religion of the Church
of England; for thus they write:

Course of conformity p. 161.
When the Priests and Levits; according to their duty, resisted the novation,
as liking better of their better warranted old profession: both they, and some
of all the Tribes of Israel following the voice of God in their mouths, were
hardly entreated, whereupon there arose a great schism: The men of Judah and
some of Israel, objected that they had forsaken God; but the most part of
Israel judged them to be renters of the unity of the Kirk, rebels against the
King, who was advanced by the Lord beside all expectation: was their lawful
Prince peaceably disposed, contenting himself with his own Kingdom, providing
for the good estate of his own people, and using all means that they follow
not other gods; and esteemed them to be superstitious Precisians in standing
out against so gracious a King, commanding nothing against any article of
faith, against any fundamental point of salvation, detesting the Gods of the
Nations, and all kind of idolatry. The matters he urged were but
circumstantiall, rituall and variable, and such as the best Kings, having the
Lords approbation, had changed before. They could say that the worship was the
same in substance, that they served the same God who brought them out of Egypt,
with the sacrifices and observation of all the statutes kept by all the fathers
since the beginning of the world. That their Bullocks, which Precisians called
idols, were similitudes representing the only sacrifice of the Messiah, in
whom they looked for salvation. Were there not Cherubines in the Tabernacle and
Temple, and twelve Oxen or Bulls of brass appointed by the wisest King? The
Lord forbids such images only as have divine worship done unto them; like
the Calse in the wilderness, turning the glory of God into the similitude of a
bullock that eats grass. But they could say, that they worshipped not these
Calves more then the images of the Cherubines. Are we so gross when we say,
Behold our Gods, as to think that they brought us out of Egypt? We speak
figuratively, as the Arc was called the King of Glory, and the holy Lord God.
We will rather give our lives, lands, liberty and all, then commit Idolatry
for the pleasure of any Prince; and do abhor the abuse of Images, which is
to bow down and serve them; albeit we be not of that mind but we may have them
and worship God by them; because we know no place of Scripture to the contrary.
The place of worship is but a circumstance; and to tie Gods presence to any
place, who is near in all times and places to them that call upon him, is
superstition. The Arc was not ever in one place but often removed. In Salomons
own time there was two public places of Gods worship, and Solomon sacrificed
in them both. Is not the whole land holy? The promise made to Solomon of a
special presence at Jerusalem, was tied to the condition of keeping his
Statutes and Judgments, wherein he has failed. And therefore as his Throne is
thrown down, which the Lord at the same time promised to establish, so has the
place lost the privilege of holiness. We may plead from Antiquity: for here
is Bethel, so famous for that glorious testimony of his presence given to
Jacob, from whom we this day have the name of Israel, Rehoboam is no wiser then
his father, he may fall into his Idolatry, and so Israel by resorting to
Jerusalem may be snared. All danger of Idolatry would be prevented, the poor
people eased of their tedious journies, and both Prince and people saved from
Rhehoboams conspiracy. All this dinne and division proceeds of the humors of
some contentious and avaritious Levits, seducing the simple people, making them
to think that God cannot be served but in Jerusalem, after their fashion in
every circumstance and particular ceremony: and of the doting of some persons
of the weakest wit and ^ox, delighting to go abroad, to be talked of for
zeal, and more pleased with any worship then that which they have at home. The
observation of the Feast of Tabernacles upon the 15 day of the 8 month, is but
the change of a circumstance of time. The day was made for man, and not man for
the day. It was lawful by Gods own warrant to keep the Passover on the 14 day
of the second month; he cares not for the month so the day be kept. It is
presumption to alter things substantial in matters of faith or doctrine: but
superstition to stand upon circumstances and variable ceremonies. What can be
done, the Lords worship cannot be neglected. If the Priests of Levi make it
nice, will still prove contentious, and lead a faction with them for
strengthening the Kingdom of Judah, upon warrant of Antiquity, before the
distinction of Levi was made for orders sake, others of other Tribes, as well
qualified as themselves, must be put in their places, and they put away as
Abiathar was by Solomon, because he had his hand with Adonijah. It may be when
they see their places well filled, and the charity of profuse people, which
cannot last long, to decay, that their giddines will go away, and they return
to their right wits. The Prophet that came to the King when his hand dried up,
might have been a Witch coming with lying wonders, for he was slain by a
Lion: and howsoever he threatened destruction, he condescended upon no time,
lest he should have been convinced of a lie. Ahijah dealt not with the King in
meekness and sincerity as became a Prophet; but by his bitterness and passion
declared that he was partially inclyned to Judah. Abijah dyed not before his
day. All things come a like to the godly and to the wicked, to him that
sacrifices and him that sacrifices not. Or if his death was vntimous, it was
rather for his secret intentious crossing his fathers courses, then for any
good that was in him toward the God of Israel, as the Prophet would have it.

2 King 19. 18.
In Elias time, there were seven thousand in Israel which bowed not unto Baal.
That is refused to join in that unholy worship, which was don unto him. I
might 2 King. 18. 4. Exodus 20. 5 Ioh. 2. 16. Psa. 119.
here instance Daniels forbearence of the Kings meats because they were defiled
by idolatry.

Thirdly the reasons are these. 1. It shows that the love and zeal of God,
is much in us, when our care is to worship only in his own ordinances, and to
leave the contrary. 2. Men offer a blind and lame sacrifice, when they
communicate spiritually in a devised Mal. 1. Romans 12. 1. 2.
service: who would be so foolish to carry trashe, and dung for a present unto a
mighty Prince, and hope to receive a favor of him, what is a false worship, but
very dung and trashe, yea worse too: and therefore not acceptable to God. 3. So
long as men are willworshippers, it argues they are unregenerate and wicked,
and have not repented of their sins: for one infallible Esa. 30. 22.
evidence of true conversion, is to see the filthiness of idolatry, and to
cast away the same with reproach, and disgrace, and to go from it as far as
it is possible. Rev. 3. 4.
4. To communicate in a false worship causes pollution to the soul. If we
would avoid that which Eze. 43. 7, 8.
would make the body to be full of scabs, and biles and so to be loathsome to
me^: much more, should we detest 2 Chro. 11 15. Eze. 20, 5. Deu. 7, 25, 26. See
Pareus in Am. 4, 2 Levit. 10, 1. 2. Zep. 1. 4. 5 Rev. 18, 4. Lev. 18 3. and 9.
7. Col. 2. 10. 2 King 21, 4, 7. 2 Cor. 6, 16 17.
this great wickedness, which causes spiritual botches and sores to the
soul: and so is odious, before God. 5. By this means, Gods holy name is
Profaned. 6. Christ not suffered to reign as King over the whole man, but
rejected. 7. Such service is don to the devil. 8. The Lord hates vnspeakeablie
all devised worship. 9. Wrath and vengeance without repentance willbe inflicted
upon all the doers thereof. For society in sin brings fellowship in
punishment. 10. In a word, let Gods purity and holiness be considered, and
his charge given unto us, to be unlike idolaters, when we perform public
service unto him; And last of all, if we join to no false worship, but serve
God, according to his revealed will, then is Rev. 14. 4.
Christ obeyed as our King and Lord; the reward whereof willbe glory and
immortal happiness.

Sermon upon Ps. 16. 4.
4. In this we have the consent of learned men generally. Calvin says, we are
bound to separate from all superstitions, which are contrrry, as well to the
service of God* as to the honor of his Son. And a little after, Let us hold
this rule, that all the inventions of men, which are set up to corrupt the
simple purity of the word, and to overthrow the service which God demands,
and allows they are very sacrileidges, wherewith a Christian man may not
communicate without blaspheming of God, that is to In 1 Cor. 10. 14. Chap. 18.
4 Dial. of serving the time.
say, without treading his honor under foot. Pareus to the same purpose says,
that all kinds, occasions, and instruments of idolatrous service, must be
avoided as a most abominable and hurtful Plague, with the mind and body.
Bullinger upon the Revelation sharply reproves those which willbe present at
false worship, and says, that every ones duty is to fly from the same as far
as it is possible. We must forsake (says Museulus) the society of all
unlawful and superstitious services, and join our selves with those that
walk directly in the true religion of Christ. The like speaks In 1 cor. 10.
21.
Piscator, In Apo. 18, 4. In Mat. 18 fol. 143.
Artopeus, In Censura cap. 9 fol. 471.
Bucer, In Psalm. 16. 4. p. 79, 80.
Pomeranus, Paraph. in 1 Cor. 10, 14.
Erasmus, De unit. cc. nu. 2.
Cyprian, In Hos. 11, and Am. 8.
Hieron, De civit. Dei, l. 18. c. 5^.
Augustine, In Levit. 18. 3. 4.
Pelican, and In Hos. 4. 15, p. 156. and verse. 17, p. 158. The. Test* in 1 Cor.
10. 21.
Rivetus. To this the Papists assent also; For speaking of false services
shifted into their Churches, in stead of Gods true and only worship, they say,
that all Catholic men, if they look to have any fellowship with Christ and
his members in his body and blood, etc. must abstain from them, etc. And among
other reasons, they give this, viz. because Christ will acquit himself of all
such as join in communion therewith.

But I need not to spend time, to seek abroad for witnesses; For the
Nonconformists do grant the thing: We may not (say they) have any religious
communion, or Darrell. Treat. Chapter 17. Trial subscript p. 6. Mr. Gilby preface.
Refutat. Rast. 720. upon 2 Com. Idolat. last time 690. T. C. l. 1. p. 131.
partake in divine worship, with idolaters in their false idolatrous worship
(no not in body be present at idolatrous service,) but we must abstain from
all participation of idolatry, yea from all show thereof, Heathen or
Antichristian, and must separate, and com out from among them. The like
speaks D. Fulke, Brinsley, Perkins, Cartwright, etc. and the author of the
Postscript to Mr. Perkins Exposition upon Jude renders this as a reason of it,
not to abstain from communicating with them in their idolatrous services, etc.
were no other but to expose and lay our selves open and naked to all manner of
danger, of infection of our Souls, defection from our God, and in the end of
all destruction, both of body and soul. Now from the last two Sections we may
frame this argument.

If the worship of the English Service book has no warrant in Gods word, but
is a devised, false, and idolatrous worship; then is it unlawful to be
communicated with. But the worship of the English Service-booke has no warrant
in Gods word, but is a devised, false, and idolatrous worship; Therefore is the
worship of the English Service-booke unlawful to be communicated with. I need
not here take D. Laitons compass, to fetch the Bishops Major, and the
Separatists* Syons p^. 85.
minor, to make up an entire Syllogism of separation; For both parts of this
argument are the Nonconformists, And I think they will stand to the
justification thereof, if not against us, yet against the Prelates, if occasion
serve: But if any part be questioned, I know it willbe the assumption, and
therefore in the next Section I will further prove the same by more of their
own testimonies.

SECT. IV.
HOwsoever by the grounds of the Nonconformists, laid down in the second
Section, separation must necessarily follow, from all communion with them, in
the worship of their church service book: yet to have the point more fully
proved. I will here show that every particular part thereof, is affirmed of
themselves, to be idolatrous, false, Antichristian. Touching the book we may
consider two things: first the distinct services thereof. 2. The ceremonies
used in, and about the same; we will speak first of their ceremonies, that is
of the surplusse, cross, and kneeling, in the act of receiveing the Lords
supper. Against these many treatises have been purposely written, I will here
only observe some of their speeches, referring the reader to their books, if
he desire more satisfaction. Of all these ceremonies thus they say: anatomy of
cerem. made by M. Sprint before def. of Pet. to the King.
They were inspired by satan, invented by man, commanded first to be practiced
by the Beast, and his Bishops: Therefore they are Idols of Rome, Babilonish
rites, Alt. da. 189.
part of the scarlet woman her inventions, a Park. cr. l. 1. 28.
Trial. subscrip. p. 7.
Popish fooleries, accursed remnants, and leaves of the blasphemous Popish
Preisthood, known liveries of Antichrist. God never planted them, nor his
spirit inspired them, the holy Apostles never taught, nor practiced them, all
sincere professors, are offended with them, and detest d Gilby p. 5. 14. 17 40.
them. Anatomy of Ce. Fr. suit. l. 2. 27^. Anat. Cer.
The defenders of these carnal and beggarly rites, are tyranous proud
Prelates, Romish Champions and Apostates, Covetuous chancellors, dignifyed
chaplins, alias choplivings, ambitious pluralists, Symonicall patrons, alias
Latrons, and the approvers of them they say are impious Atheists, scandalous
nonresidents, dumb homilists powling registers, proctors, paritors, etc. And
all other Profane livers and wicked haters of God. Moreover we find many
vnanswereable arguments used, in their writings to prove, this trashe to be
against the word of God, exceedingly idolatrous, and so ought not to have any
place in Religious worship, to instance a few. All addition in Gods worship is
directly forbidden in Gods word, Syon pl. 3. 19.
both in the old and new Test. Deu. 12. 32. Rev. 22. 18. But these Ceremonies
are an addition in Gods worship to the word, as they do not deny. Ergo, they
are directly forbidden by the word: All spiritual communion with those
Idolitours amongst whom we live in the mysteries of their Idolatry and
supersition is sin. To use those Ceremonies in divine worship is a spiritual
communion with Idolatrous Papists, in the mystery of their Idolatry and
superstion. Ergo to use those Ceremonies is to sin. M Bradsh. 12. Arg. 6. 7.


To mingle Profane things with divine is to sin: to use these Ceremonies in
divine worship is to mingle Profane things with divine. Ergo, to use those
Ceremonies in divine worship is to sin. Another thus. All things in the
Church ought to edify, these things do not edify, therefore they ought not
to be in the Church. Offenses and superstitions ought to be avoided, these
rites offend and are superstitions, Sold. Bar.
therefore they ought to be avoided. No idolatrous remnants, nor monuments must
be retained; these are idolatrous monuments and remnants, therefore they may
not be retained. Nothing may be thrust into the Church contrary, or besides the
scriptures: these are contrary and besides the scriptures. Therefore they may
not be thrust into the Church. Ans. to the Exam. p. 32. offer for conf. p. 17.
T. C. rest of Second rep. 173. park. cross. lib. 1. p. 38.
I could name many others of this kind. But here is enough, to show the reason,
why the Nonconformists say, that these Ceremonies are not to be received,
though all the Princes in the world do command them, no good Christian must
yield any way to them. But rather avoid them, more then the Ceremonies of the
Turks, and to think no otherwise of them, then of the devil himself.

Thus much for their Ceremonies in general: now a few words of them in
particular, and so to another point. The surplusse is called of them the popes
creature, Admo. 1 17.
a lowsy rag, Sold. Bar.
Popish apparel, Necess. disp. 70.
the whore of Babilons smock, Proposit. about Kneel. 3. park. cross, ^. 1. 9.
id. 187. 71. 1 Adm. 4. Neces. Dis. 69,
a filthy Idol, e charactor of Antichrist, and the devil, one of the pedlerie
wares of popery, and the cast apparel of the harlot of Rome, devised by Pope
Adrian in the year: 796. Who borrowed it as they think, of certain,
Aegiptian Monks, who upon the skinns which they used to wear, for their
apparel, did wear linen garments, from whence the name of surplusse seems
to come: sundry reasons they give to have this trashe abolished. 1. Because it
serves not for comeliness and gravitie, but rather it is rideculous and
stagelike, meeter for fools Alt. Dam. 216. T. C. l. 1, 73 def. Pet. for ref.
46. Par. cr. 17. 8.
and commedians, then for ministers. 2. It hardens the hearts of the Papists,
and causes them to be stiff in their poopery. 3. Hinders the weak from
profitting in the knowledge of the Gospel. 4. It is a massing garment, and
therefore as vndece^t for the holy spouse of Christ, as harlots weeds are for a
grave Matron, 5. Christ and his Apostles, and the fathers in the better times
of the Church made no distinction in apparel. 6. The gray Amice and other
Popish garments defiled with Def. Pet. for Re. 46.
superstition, can make as good plea for themselves as the surplusse can. I
will end this in the words of the Admonition to the Parliament. Copes, caps,
surplesses, tippets and such like baggage, serve not to edification, but they
cause discord, they hinder the preaching of the Gospel, they keep the memory
of Egypt still among us, they bring the ministry 1 Adm. 18
into contempt, they offend the weak, they encourage the obstinate, therefore
can no authority by the word of God, with any pretense of order and obedience,
command them nor make them in any wise tolerable. But by circumstances they
are wicked and against the word of God.

The sign of the cross which they use in Baptism, they say is the mark of
the beast, Sy on pl. 102.
a jugglers gesture Alt. Da. 205.
a magical instrument, Park cross l. 1. 155. 7. 170. l. 2. 56. Fresh suit l.
1. 17. 18.
a rite, and badge of the devil, a harlot which stirs up to Popish lust. If
a maypole should be brought into the Church for children to dance about, and
clime upon, in sign of their desire to seek things above: if a stif straw were
put in the child's hand for a sign of fighting against spiritual enemies, as
with a spear, there would be no more folly in those, then in the cross.

Remove of imputations from the minist, of Devonsh. and Cornw. page 106.
Defenc. Pet. for Refor. p. 29
Again, to prove that no such thing should be used in Baptism, they give
these reasons. 1. Because the word of God is wholly against it. 2. The Cross is
made there a very idol. 3. It is to depart from the plain institutution of our
Savior Christ. 4. It has been idolatrously abused in Popery, and has no
necessary use now. 5. It encroacheth upon the very substance of the Sacrament.
6. It is but a late devise, hatched by the Pope. 7. It is not a ceremony
pertaining to the decency of a Sacrament. 8. It is scandalous and offensive to
good Christians. Lastly, as much may be Alt. Dam. 206, Park. of the Cr. 1, 2,
p. 129
said, for putting salt in the mouth of the child, annoynting with oil the
breast, and shoulders, and the top of the head with holy Chrisme, and to put a
burning taper in his hand, etc. and for the whole waineload of such toys, and
as the proctors of the cross can say for it.

Hence it is that the strictest Inconformists affirm, that it is utterly
unlawful for parents to bring their children to be crossed, and they give many
reasons. 1. Men may do nothing to their children, but what themselves would
have don to themselves, if they were to be Baptized, now what good heart could
endure this idolatry? 2. It is a special dishonor to the Lord, Mr. Bates 260
which men should avoid, both themselves, and in, and by others. 3. This, as
all humane inventions, hinders from the child when it is wittingly don by the
parents, the power of Baptism, as much as is possible.

Disput. upon commun. at confus. comm. 31. Syo^s pl. 70 Disp. up. 73. 70
Touching kneeling in the act of receiving, they say it is Idolatry, a spawne
of the beast, a diabolical gesture, a superstition which prophaneth Christ's
true religion, and makes the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to become an idol
feast. There are many treatises extant at this day against this evil practice,
now among other arguments, laid down by the No^conformists, to prove it an
unlawful gesture. I will briefly here repeat eight of the^. 1. Kneeling in
the act of receaving the bread and wine in the Lords Supper, is a Abridg. 70
Perth Assemb. 35
ceremony altogether inexpedient to be used. 2. It takes away that commendable
gesture, used by Christ and his Apostles in, and after the constitution. 3. The
second commandment of the Law is hereby broken, Idem 46.
and idolatry diverse ways committed. 4. This robs Mr. Bat. 216.
the Lord of that due worship, which he ought to receive from every one. 5.
There is no direction in the whole scripture, either by precept or commanded
example, Abridg. 71
for receaving any Sacraments kneeling, whereas for receaving with other
gestures, there is both. 6. This Per. Assem. 54.
is to conform grossly with the Papists, even in an act wherein the life and
soul, as it were of their idolatry, stands. 7. The primitive Churches for
sundry hundred Abridg. 73 1 Adm. 4.
years after the Apostles, never used to receive the Sacrament kneeling, till
Pope Honorius afterward decreed it. Lastly, this gesture of kneeling holds no
proportion with the chief end and use of this Sacrament, Abridg. 77
nor with that inward disposition of heart, which is then required of us.

And thus much for their surplusse, cross, and kneeling, from all which this
argument may be framed: That worship, in which a man cannot possibly
communicate without sin, he is bound necessarily to separate frrom: but that
worship, in which these Idols are made and used (viz.) the surplusse, cross,
and kneeling, a man cannot possibly communicate without sin. Therefore from
that worship, wherein these Idols (viz. the surplusse, cross, and kneeling)
are made and used, a man is bound necessarily to separate: The Proposition is
certain, and by D. Ames in Lib. 4, cap. 24.
his Cases of conscience acknowledged. Although (says he, we may join to that
Church, in which many defects are to be tolerated, yet not to that in which we
cannot but necessarily partake with sin. The Assumption is assented unto, by
as Judicious and Zealous Nonconf. as ever held Park. Cr. l. 1. 20, 21. 1 Cor.
10, 14.
that cause, and they have brought good proofs for it. First, because men must
fly from Idols and Idolothites, but when they come to worship God, after the
order of the congregation, where these things are practiced they do not fly
from them, but draw near unto them. Mr. Bat. 258.
2. Their bare presence argues their approbation and yielding in show to
ceremonies. 3. Though the personal sins of the minister, do not hurt the
people, yet his ministerial and public sins do hurt, which he performs
from the people to God, and so their joining with him is unlawful. 4. What
example can be brought, where the holy men of God have communicated with such
things.

P. 68.
The author of the dispute upon communicating at their confused communions,
affirms confidentlie, that the sitter is accessory to the sin of the kneeler,
and he gives many reasons for it, whereof we shall have a fit occasion
hereafter to speak.

And now let the reader consider, if both parts of the former reason be true,
as the Nonconformists say: whether this one principle of theirs, will not
justify a separation from most of their parish meetings. For surely I think,
not one minister in the land of 500, but makes, and uses ordinarily those
Idols of Rome, when their public service is administered.

Having ended with their Ceremonies, we are next to treat of the worships
themselves: and because these are diverse, I will speak therefore of each the
more briefly: wishing the reader if he desire to know more Al. Dam. 197. Sol.
Barw. Ques. con. Chur. woe. 54 7. Lear. dis. Ec. Gover. 73. Qu. con. Chapter wom. p.
7. 22.
heerin, to iniquire after their books. Churching of women, after childbirth
they term a superstitious service, a point of popery, a soolish custom:
indeed no other then a plain mocking of God, and prophaninge of his name and
Religion, devised meerelie of men, viz. the Papists. Moreover to prove it a
false and idolatrous worship, they give these reasons. 1. In the whole form
there is no thanksgiveing at all: but a mecre Jewish or Popish purifying, and
therefore it is a horrible mocking of God, to pretend that they give him
praise, when there is not a word spoken, tending or lookinge that way. 2. This
thanksgiveing as they Id. p. 12. Note Id. 7. 23. Id. 14. Ec. Go. 74. Q. con.
Chu. 27.
call it) is even the very same, word for word (excepting the title) with their
purification in popery, the difference is only in this, that the Papists is
in Latin, and theirs in English. 3. Whosoever does this, shows herself,
either to be a low or Papist. 4. The primitive Churches never used it, neither
ought it to be idem. 23.
suffered in any well reformed Church. 5: Chauncellours, officials etc. Are
hereby justified in their crooked, and unconscionable proceedings, 6. This
breeds and nourishes many superstitious opinions, in the simple peoples
hearts, as that the woman which has borne a child is unclean or unholy,
contrary to the 2. Tim. 2. Ec. Go. 74
Apostles word, Who teaches that godly women are sanctified by bearing of
children. Again that it is unlawful for her, upon necessity to go out of
her doors, before she be Churched, that this Churching is a necessary part of
the ministers office etc. Touching the Psalm, I. Adm. p. 13. Qu. con. chapter w.
62. Def. Adm. 1. Ad. p. 13 Ec. Gov. 74. see T. C. l. 1. 67. 68.
121. appointed for that purpose, they say, it is child shlie abused, yea the
words grealy Profaned. Lastly for their other rites and customs viz. the
woman's lying in with a white sheet upon her bed. her coming forth must d and
veiled, as being ashamed to look up for some folly committed: her appointed
offering, the Clerks waiting her home, and the midwives going by her side
forth and back etc. These they term Bables, foolish, and superstitious things.

2 Ad. 17. 1 Ad. 13. Ec. Go. 73 Distinct 5 de conse. cap. de his vero. Sold.
Bar.
The confirmation of children, by laying on of the hands of the Bb. is not (say
they) agreeable to the word of God at all. But a mere device of man, a Popish,
and peevish superstition, brought in by Pope Clement the first in the year
310. Who affirmed that he was no Christian which wilfully left this undone.
Pope Melciades came after, and affirmed it to be a more worthy Sacrament, then
the Sacrament of Baptism. To prove this confirmation a wicked and most vile
practice, these reasons are alleged of them. 1. Because as it is prescribed by
their book, it is made a new Sacrement beside those two which Jesus Christ
ordained. 2 Seeing Def. Pet. for Refor. p. 35, Fe. on the Sacsr. Park. of the
Cr. l. 1, 101, Perth Assem. 92, 9^, T. C. rest sec. rep. 232, T. C. l. 1, 199,
100. Ag. Bridge. slan. p. 107 Eccles. Gov. 73,
the gifts of miracles which the Apostles had, are ceased, this kind of
imposition of hands (which was taken up at first from an Apish imitation
thereof) must cease also. 3. Whereas the ministration of Baptism is permitted
to every hedge Priest, minister, and deacon, the Prelates, do presumptiouslie
and damnablie, to appropriate this alone to themselves. 4. They do not only
pray over them, but impose hands upon them, that by means thereof they may
receive strength against all the temptations of sin, which is to take that power
to them which God never gave them, and to do a thing whereof they have no
promise that any good shall follow: Lastly, this displaced chatechising
brought in steed thereof, vain toys and childish ceremonies to the great hurt
of the Church. Therefore for these reasons it ought to be shut out, and have no
place in the Church of God.

The like they speak of their order and rites, whereby matrimony, is
celebrated in their Churches. The Syon pl. 29 defenc. admon. T. C. l. 1. 199
and 2. rep. 236. Def. Pet. for Refor. 63, 64, 1 Adm, 13
form of it is taken out of the mass book, and therefore called pretty
juggling trash, the ring there used is generally reputed, a Popish and
idolatrous practice, and no less superstition, is there committed in saying
with may body I thee worship, for herein the new married man makes an idol Of
his wife. I omit many other heathenish and Antichristian toys which the
Nonconformists relate, to be observed herein, whereby says the author of the
Admonition, they make rather a maygaime of marriage, then a holy institution of
God. As for their restraint In Chro. Graftoni. sold. Bar. Def. Per. 216.
of marriage in Lent, and other certain times, they call it the doctrine of
devils: devised by Pope Nicholas, in the year 871. And since vpheld by his
unclean birds, for filthy lucre sake. But here the Nonconformists, would have
us to take notise, that howsoever the Hierarchy, forbid sometime this thing;
yet any man may have a Alt. Dam. 195, 196.
dispensation for money, and then those holy times shall have no pollution by
marriage, such virtue money has with it, or such power it has with these base
caterpillars.

First B. dis. p. 65.
Concerning Burials, this they say. All prayers either over, or for the dead,
are not only superstitious and T. C. rest sec. rep. 237, Def. Ad. Syon pl. 29,
vain: but also are Idolatry, and against the plain scriptures of God. No
such thing was used in the Apostles time, and as for their prescript form of
service, appointed for this business, it is taken wholly from the stinking
portuis, and for this cause they name themselves Popish apes. Beside prayer for
the dead is maintained, and partly gathered out of some of their prayers. 1
Adm. p. 1^, Sold. Bar. r Adm. 13 T. C. l. 1, p. 200. Id.
As for the white or balck cross, set upon the dead corpse, and ringing a
threefould peale, the practice is Popish: mourning in Black garments for the
dead, if it be not hypocritical, yet it is superstitious and heathenish:
funeral sermons, they also utterly condemn, because they are put in the place
of Trentalls, and many other superstitious abuses follow thereby. To be breife
the Pre^sts meeting the corpse at the Church style, with the clarke in their
surplusses, the manner of laying the dead in the grave. viz. East and West,
that he may rise with A. Dam. 199. 200, 201, Ec. Go. 75 M. Bates 183.
his face to the East, the Priest offering and mortuarie, the bread and other
thing, given to the poor, distinction of Burials, as some in the chauncel,
some in the Church, and some in the Churchya^des, all these are said to be
naught, idolatrous, unlawful: and therefore the Nonconformists, will have the
dead to be buried in this sort, (holding no other way lawful) namely, that it
be conveyed to the place of Burial, with some honest company of the Church,
without either singing, or reading, yea without all kind of ceremony heretofore
used, First 600. of dis. 65.
other then that the dead be committed to the grave, with such gravity, and
sobriety as those that be present, may seem to fear the judgments of God,
and to hate sin, which is the cause of death, and thus do the best and right
reformed Churches bury their dead, Ec. Go. p. 75.
witout any ceremonies of praying or preaching at the^.

2 Ad. 57.
We com next to their Sacraments, which are (as they say* sinfully mangled,
Profaned, and wickedly ministered: The prescript sorme of service, whereby
their Lord supper is consecrated and administered, is taken Syon pl. 29.
wholly out of the Popish dunghill, the masse-b^oke, and such are the^^
inventions, Prophanations, and superstitions, used in this ordinance, as the
Nonconformists, profess that they eat not the Lords supper, but play a
pageant of M. Gilbie pref. p. 2.
their own to blind the people, and keep them still in superstition, far
from the simplicity of Christ's supper: to make the seely souls believe that
they have an English mass: (which is too true faith the author in the margent)
and so put no difference betwixt truth and falsehood, betwixt Christ and
Antichrist, betwixt God and the devil. I might here lay dowe every particular
thing, which they do herein, as the Priests standing at the North side of the
table, his beginning with the Lords prayer, and a collect, rehearsing afterward
the ten commandments, and the creed: then reading a short exhortation to
those which are minded to receive: their falling down, and rising up again
many times together, their manner of consecrating the bread and wine, taking it
Kneeling, the ministers going up and down to give it to every one with his
own hand, his speaking in the singular number. Take thou etc. Their Alt. Dam.
211. 212 213. 1 Ad. 4. 11
saying over again the Pater noster, with singing, piping, surplusse etc. All
these say the inconform: are disorders, superstitions, Profanation of
Scriptures, and don contrary to the practice of the primitive Churches, and
just after the manner of the Papists.

1 Adm. 12 2 Adm. 57 Sold. Bar. park. cross. l. 1, 71. 1 Adm. 4. T. C. l. 1,
168. Alt. Dam. 203. 204, Des. p. for Refor. 34. T. C. sec. rep. last p. 224.
225. Gilb. end b. 1 Adm. 12
Their public Baptism is full of childish and superstitious toys, and as for
the prayers used therein, they are either foolish or false. And no marvel
seeing they are also taken out of the cursed masse-booke. The conjured font,
(as they name it) was brought in by Pius the first in the year 147. And Pope
Higinus brought in Godfathers, and Godmothers, in the year 143. both which
they call pecces of popery, the interogatories ministered to the infant, a
foolish thing, agreat mockery of Gods service, whereby an occasion is given
to men to utter a lie before the Lord. That the Godfathers and Godmothers shill
promise that the child, does believe and does forsake the devil etc. Is a thing
wickedly put upon them, and baptism by this means exceedingly profaned. Of
the cross we have spoken before: there is yet one thing touching it, which the
reformists, wish us to observe: That is, a most wicked practice of their
ungracious Bishops, these whelps of Antichrist, Curt. Chapter pow. p. 4. 5.
will have infants signed forsooth with the sign of the cross. In token that
hereafter they shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ etc. And to
fight against sin etc. Now mark, what notorius mockers of God these are. For
if any one who is thus signed, does afterward confess the faith of Christ
against Arminians and Papists, and fights against the maine works of the
devil, to weet, the Popish Ceremonies, government, worship, ministry etc.
They will surely raise up against him, the greatest persecution that may be,
and he must either forsake his own country, or they will kill him in prison.

1 Ad. 4. 11. 12. Sol. Barw. T. C. l. 1. 28. 29. 143 T. C. rest sec. rc. 144*
145. 146. Per. Ass, 96* 97.
Moreover touching private Baptism, and ministering the Lords Supper in their
houses, this gear (they say) is repugnant and against Gods word, in effect
like to a Popish Mass, a popish and superstitious practice, foolishly and
sinfully first taken up; For the Sacraments were not ordained of God, to be
used thus, as Charms and Sorceries, but left to the congregation, and
necessarily annexed to the scriptures, as seals of the same, yet not tied to
the material Churches, made of dead stones, but to the church made of livelie
stones: If therefore the congregation be in a wood, house, or cave, the
Sacraments may be administered in a wood, house, or cave, but the same must be
don in the sight of the assembly, Def. Pet. for Ref. 37. 38,
for they are irrigiously handled when they are administered otherwise.
Baptizing by women they also condemn, and hold it to be no more the holy
Sacrament of Baptism then any other daily or ordinary 1 Adm. 12 T. C. I. 1.
144, T. C. rest last rep. 124. Sol. Barw. Alt. Dam. 188. Curt Chapter p. 121, 122 2
Adm. 57 Syon pi. 108. id. 117 Sol. Barw. Alt. Dam. 189. Sold. Bar.
washing of the child.

Lent fast, they say, was ordained by Pope Telesphorus in the year 136. and
they keep it England, for the fame end that the Papists do. Justly,
therefore is it named a Romish Error, a superstitious fast. The service
appointed for that time, is against the seriptures, and Gods name profaned by
the curses and adjurations then used. For their other fasts, they are said to
be monuments of Idolatry, devised of Antichrist, in all the rites and orders
of them superstitious, and directly against Gods commandments. As for
wendesdayes, frydayes, and saterdayes fasts, Bonifacius is said to ordain them
in the year 315. And Pope Calixtin in the year 206. ordained Imber fastes. And
in the year 425. another Romish Beast ordained Saints Eves fasts. And all this
trash and dung was First rep. 80. Sy. pl. 108.
first devised by Montanus, that notable Heretic, as Mr. Cartw. observes from
Eusebius: and for what use serves all this trumperie: but only to keep out,
and Alt. Da. 182. T. C. I. 1. 151. 1 Adm. 11 M. Iac. Art. 22. Scarpius Cru.
The. de Ec. Tri. p. 40. 41.
hinder true fasting indeed.

The observation of holy days: as Christmasse, Circumcision, Epiphanie,
Purification, and all other of the saints, is a breach of the second
commandment; and herein, some part of the abominations of the Romish religion
is practiced; Such therefore as impose this upon men's consciences, do it
without any warrant of Gods word, and therefore the same cannot be kept
lawfully* Many good reasons for this, are showed in their writings, Per. Ass.
p. 63. to 87,
as the reader may see (if he please) in the places noted.

Sol. Barw.
Moreover they do affirm, that the whole prescript service appointed for
these Saints days is idolatrous, Antichristian. Of the same nature are all
their ordinary collects, Pope Gregory and Celasius, they say, ordained them;
and they have them word for word, as they stand in the Blasphemous Massebooke.
I might here show how Ag. Banc. 38. curt. chapter pow 41. 2 Adm. 56 57. Alt. Dam.
185. Abrid. 94. 2 Adm. 57
some of their Collects are charged with Arianisme, others with Popery and
Arminianisme; Many with lies, and manifest contradictions. But to be short,
they tell us in one word, that the saying of them is not Praying, but indeed
wicked prattling. As for the Letanie well naturing the name of a laborious
service in the dust and dirt (for so Homer and others uses the same) it is
borrowed from the practice of the Heathen, as Causabon out of Dionysius
Habicarnasse observes; And is in verydeed nothing, but an impure Mass of
conjuring and charming Exercit. p. 27. Hist. trob. frank. p. 30 Atar. Da. 638.
639. Syon pl. 316. 317. Def. Ad. 4. Cartw. ag. The. Test. p. 2.
Battologies, whereby the name of God is highly profaned, his house and
worship abused, Gods people by it abandoned the sanctuary, and the profane
love no worship so well as it.

The Epistles and Gospells read in their Churches, is a practice taken wholly
from Rome, and they use the very same which the others do. This chapping and
hacking of the scriptures, this rending of it a pieces one from another, is
contrary to the order which God has ordained, and his churches practiced from
time to time, and therefore the Nonconformists have desired that it might be
taken away as an evil thing. Again, in See defense of the minist. reasons,
for refusal of subscrip to the book of com. pr. first and second part, pa. 14,
to 21.
those Epistles and Gospells, which the Prelates cause superstitiouslie thus to
be read: There are sundry words and sentences of holy scriptures left out,
which were given by divine inspiration, for the profit of the whole church: and
many words and sentences of their own foolish brain added to the text, as
parts of it, yea in many places, such absurd things are put, as no reasonable
sense can be made thereof. Besides very often the meaning of the Holy Ghost is
perverted, by a false interpretation of the text, and sundry places applied to
the countenancing, of some points of false doctrine. All this is showed largely
by the ministers of Lincoln in the Abrigement, and the like they say of the
Psalms in the book of common prayer: the prescript number Sold. Bar. Tabl
whereof and Lessons, as the English Priests now observe, were devised by Pope
Gregory the seventh in the year 1073.

That any of the Apocrypha should be publicly read, the Nonconformists hold it
utterlie unlawfuli, 1. Because Cartwr. cat. p. 98. Act. 13. 15 and 15, 22 2 Timothy 3, 16, 17. Abrid. 8. 9 Def. Pet. for Refor. 92, 93.
to use any word publikelie in the church, beside the written word of God,
contained in the Canonical scriptures, is condemned by the second
commandment. 2. In the church of the Jews, in the Apostles time, only Moses
and the Prophets were read. 3. The scriptures are sufficient, both for
doctrine, and manners, and were given to that end. 4. It is the proper office
of Christ to be the teacher of his church, and therefore no writing may be
appointed to be read in the congregation, for instruction of manners, but only
such as have been indicted by his spirit. 5. Many Second part of the defense of
minist. reas refus. subscrip. Mr. Brought. treat. of Apo. p. 23 to 35.
by this means are brought into a great error, thinking that the same is
scripture. 6. These Apocripha books contain a number of shameful lies,
horrible blasphemies, vain vanities, plain contradictions, ridiculous
fooleries, Athean Impieties, Fables, fitter for T^l^machus and Aeneas, then for
Gods people. Notwithstanding though these books be thus false, wicked, and
abominable, yet in their assemblies many of them are commanded to be read, for
first lessons, yea under the name of the holy scriptures of the old Testament,
without any note of difference from the Canonicail, as the lying story of
Susanna under the name of Daniel 13. and in as great a measure for their
proportion as the other. Moreover many of the Apocryphal chapters are to be
read twice in one year, and some thrice, but so are not any of the Canonical
chapters of the Old Testament; but a great part A bridge. p. 7.
of the^ and of the New also, by the order which their common prayerbooke
prescribes, are not to be read at all in their churches. Lastly, the Nonconf.
tell us, that these idle Legends are read upon their great holy days, when
They mean in the opinion of the Bb.
the church assemblies are wont to be best frequented, and oftimes the holy
scriptures must give place to them, as tending more to edification, and
therefore may not be so well spared as the other. Alt. Dam. 193. 2 Adm 47 T. C.
I. 1. 196, 197. Neces. dis. 52. 53. Eccl. Gov. 49.


Reading of Homilies in the church (which is a cushion for idle and blind
Priests to rest upon) is said to be foolish, fond, and unlawful; a practice
never heard of in the church in the Apostles time, neither indeed is it a
means to beget faith, but the instrument of foolish and Park. Cr. l. 1, 192,
etc. Nu. 10. 28 D. Chader. Sermon upon Ro^. 12, p. 53. Let such as have been
pleaders, for humane forms of prayer, answer this if they can.
idol sheapheards. As the Prophets therefore might not in calling the people
together, blow any trumpets, but those which were made and set a part for that
purpose, by the commandment of God, so ought not the ministers of God, to
expound or read openly in the congregation any writings, but only the
Canonical Scriptures, which the Lord has set a part, and sanctified for that
use. Here by the way I wish the reader to note well the last words, viz. that
no writings, ought to be read in the congregation, but the Canonical
Scriptures. This Position is often affirmed by the Learned of the
Nonconformists, namely Mr. Cartwright, D. Chadd^rton, etc. Hence then it must
follow, that all forms of Prayer, devised by men, are unlawful to be read in
the congregation; and therefore where ever this is practiced, men ought
necessarily to abstain from joining therewith.

Def. ag. Brid. 1^6, 117. Abridg. 97, 98.
But to proceed: not only is the reading of Homilies utterly condemned, but
also it has been proved by the Nonconformists, that those which the Bishops
command to be read in their assemblies, have in them many things doubtful and
of dangerous construction, yea sundry erroneous points of Doctrine, and
things most evidentlie false and untrue.

I have been more large in the former points, then I purposed at the beginning,
I will therefore in the rest 1 Adm. 14 2 Adm. 55
be the shorter, touching nunc dimittis, benedictus and magnificat, which they
use to read and sing in their Churches, the Nonconformists say, it is a
Profaning of the Scriptures, palpable folly and vain prattling. Their minister
saying one piece of prayer, and the people with mingled voices to say another,
is Babilonish confusion. Eng. Puritan. p. 20.
The Lords prayer also is horribly abused by their often and vain repetition
of it, being said not less then 8 times at some meetings: other shreds and
short Alt. Dam. 191.
cutts, they handle in this manner. viz. let us pray, glory be to the fathers
etc. Lord have mercy, etc. Christ have mercy, and many like, which is mere
babbling, and cannot be more justly defended, then the Papists beads. Vncovring
the head, making a leg and scraping on the ground, and such like courtesy, when
Jesus is named, is 176, 177.
counted a superstitious foolish and unlawful device, Fall of Bab. 65.
a mocking of God, and a beggarlie sign of obedience, no less is standing at
the Gospel, a thing wickedly devised by Anastatius the Pope, in the year 404.
Their Sold. Bar.
good fridayes service, is utterly disliked, so the holy week Abridg. 91
before Easter, the observation of Gang days, or rogation week, is wholly
Popish, invented by Hilarious the great Sol. Barw. Fresh suit l. 2. 404. Def.
Pet. for Refor. 74 75.
Antichrist, in the year 444. Organs and other Church Music they call idol
service, because it serves not to any edification, but draws the mind to
carnal delight: besides, this was a part of the Levitticall service, which is
now ceased in Christ, and for many hundred Alt. Dam. 156. Fall of Babel 48.
Sold. Bar. Tab. 1 Adm. 15
years after the Apostles, musical instruments, were not known to the
Church, till in the year 653. the old serpent by Pope Vitalianus, brought up
the Organs, and to have them go, about the same time, that beast with Gregory,
and Gelatius, (two monsters like himself) ordained descant, foreward and
backward, plane song, and pricksong, and thus was the Music made up: just as
the devil would have it. Ringing of curfewes upon Hallowe eves, is like the
rest: yea the bells themselves as they are used in their assemblies, are put
unto Popish uses. Sold. Bar. Tabl.
He that first ordained them was Sabinian the great Pope, in the year 603. And
much virtue is attributed to them in popery, as to stir up men's devotion,
perserve fruits: put enemies to flight, still tempests, drive away all wicked
spirits and devils, etc. I do omit to speak of many particular things, used
in their Cathedral dens or Closters, partly because the reader may guess
what there is, by that which has been said: and partly because the dung and
trash there, is so vile and loathsome, as I am not willing to blot paper
therewith. But there is one thing which I had almost forgotten: viz: their
visitation of the sick. Not that it is less superstitious and naught then the
other, for the Nonconformists, affirm the prescript service of it, to be taken
as the rest, out of the mass book, and it is such stuff, as he Page 198.
which wrote the Altar of Damascus, made himself merry when he described the
foolishness of it.

Thus the Assumption is sufficiently proved, the conclusion therefore is
certain. viz. that the worship of the English service book is unlawful to be
communicated with. In the next Section we shall see what D, Ames has to say
against this thing.

SECT. V.
FOr the readers better understanding of the point to be handled in this
Section: I will first lay down the substance of D. Burgesses speech. I have
seen (says he) some of the inconformists confutations, (meaning of the
Separatists) which I confess never satisfied my conscience, for I am and ever
have been of that opinion, that there can be no just confutation of them, made
by such of the Nonconformists, 232.
as have given them their maine principles (what these principles are he
afterward declares. viz that nothing may be established in the Church but what
God has commanded in his word: that all forms of worship not prescribed and
all mere Ecclesiastical rites are will worship etc. That our ceremonies are
idolatrous in the use of them etc. Which principles if I did believe to be
true, I profess in Gods presence I would proclaim separation from Idolatrous
worship and worshippers this day ere I slept, and not halt as these men (by
their own positions do) betwixt Idolatry and Religion.

D. Ames answers to this effect. The confounding of mere rites with forms of
worship is not ours, but only by the rej. his fiction. That every Church is to
be utterly condemned, and so to be separated from, that has any thing in it by
participation Idolatrous, is made Scismaticall by a Scismaticall conceit of the
Rej. etc. His profession of separation (this day before he stepped) is nothing
but a Rhethoricall flourish which he would twice recall, before he would
separate, from those that bow to the Altars, or even those which worship an
vbiquitarie body in the Lords supper, though these are more palpablie
Idolatrous (in his conscience) then the Ceremonies questioned are in ours.

Here is some thing said, although not a word, to the maine point in dispute
which either Mr. D. saw not, or else (and so I rather think) he thought it
best to let it pass in silence. The words which the Rej. takes from the
Nonconformists are, that all forms of worship not prescribed of God are will
worships. And hence inferres separation, now what says D. Ames to this?
nothing at all, but talks of the Rej. fictio^, in confounding mere rites, etc.
But by his leave, I see no such thing in the Rej. but indeed the cause of the
confusion is, wholly of himself, for D. B. lays down forms of worship and
Ecclesiastical rites distinctly, unto both which he should distinctly have
answered, if his meaning had been to satisfy judicious and conscionable
readers. I will not here use D. Ames, comparison of 10. a Style, and 10. a
Nokes, but a more sober one* If a woman should be brought before the Magistrate
for certain crimes, as namely whoredom, and some light carriage, and for this
her husband would be divorced, now imagine that she had a proctor there to plead
for her, which would not mention her adultery at all: But gives some reasons
why a man should not put away his wife for every light carriage, would any wise
judge approve of such pleading? but contrariewise give sentence on the man's
behalf: D. Ames carries the matter just so: The Church of England is charged
by the Nonconformists as the Rej. truly reports of false worship in it, and
also of some idle ceremonies, now mark reader how he pleads for his mother, as
touching the worship he says nothing of it: but of the rites only: which are
evils a hundred fould less then the other* Again that every Church is not to
be left which has some thing in it by participation idolatrous. I know no man
holds the contrary: therefore I cannot tell for what end he speaks it, much
less why he puts a scismaticall conceit, upon the Rej. whose words if they be
well considered, have substance and weight in them, and not conceits, and to
speak truly what I think, D. Ames his conceit, in framing this answer, was
not of the best. For thus they seem to argue, a Church which has something in
it by participation idolatrous, is not to be separated from. The Church of
England is such Ergo. Now according to this argument no false worshippers
should be left, Papists, Jews, nor Turks. who sees not the lightness of it.
Notwithstanding except it be this way applied, for my part I cannot tell what
to make of it. If any object, he meant that the ministry, worship, and
Government of the Eng. Assemblies is not so bad, as to be separated from. I
answer this is yet to prove, the which thing lay now full upon him to do, if
he would have taken the right point, and not needlessly to tell us of that,
which no man either asked of him, or doubted of.

3* Though every Church is not to be condemned, etc. Yet such may be the
corrupt state of some, as separation from them, is both lawful and necessary,
the Nonconformists say as much. So the cause of separation Cart. con. Rh. T.
Iud. 19.
be good: the separation from a company where with we were first united cannot
be blamed: much less condemned of heresy. The thing which the Rej. cheifelie
insisted upon was, that the cause of separation, from the Church of England is
good, if the Nonconformists principles be true, what they are he names. D.
Ames, neither says they be true or false, nor one word to any purpose, unless
this be: viz. it is not lawful utterly to condemn, and so to separate from a
Church for every thing, therefore not for any thing. 4. Touching the matter
here insinuated, against the person of D. Burg. as if he meant not to practice
what he professes, I will leave it to himself to answer, only this I say, if
he and others are so minded as he writes, certainly they shall find nothing in
D. Ames answer, to inform them otherwise. But that they may safely retain
still the same opinion, and separate from the Church of England* when they do
believe, the Nonconformists principles to be true. 5. I wonder what moved the
D. to mention only ceremonies, and to intimate, as if the difference between
them and the Bb. lay now mainly in this, considering (as he knew well) that
these rites are very toys, to other things in question, hear what they say.
The controversy betwixt us, and the Bishop is not for trifles as they would
bear the world 1 Adm. 18
in hand. as for a cap, a tippet, or surplusse etc. But for great Note.
matters concerning a true ministry, and regiment of the Church according to
the word, which things once established the other, would melt away of
themselves.

Again, another thus: the question is not (as it is every day in public
Sermons uncharitablie upbraided) about triffles, and things of no weight, as of
variable ceremonies, and matters of circumstances, which yet are to be squared
by Pref. Cou^terp.
the sacred Canons of holy Scripture, but about matters of no small
importance, even about the great and weighty cause of Christ's Kingdom, by
what laws and offices his heritage is to be governed and protected, that is,
of the whole discipline, of the church of Christ, whether it be to be ordered by
the uncertain and deceivable weights of humane constitutions, or by the
infallible oracles of Gods most holy testimonies. Others thus: our principal
greifes, about the which (alas brethren) Table div. read in Camb. Note.
We have now too long and unhappily contended, are that all false ministeries,
and false Government, devised by men, may be taken away, and a lawful
ministry, and a right church power restored, as for the square cap, and such
other toys, which not without cause we disalow* yet they do not so sore wound
us, as those greater and weightier matters do, T. C. l. 1. p. 71.
from the which all the rest are derived and drawn. To the like purpose Mr.
Cartwright and others. And are not those great and weighty things in question
still? Yes surely, and therefore for what reason D. Ames passes them over
without any words, and speaks of toys and triffles in comparison. Let the
reader judge. Moreover, he had little need to make himself so ignorant, what
the Rei. meant by a principle? what by separation, for if he had had any list
to the thing, he could easily have understood the same, for in truth, a child
may perceive, if he read the place, that D. Burg. intended such principles, as
I before named from their writings, to wit, that they say, they want a right
ministry, worship, and Church Government. But the Proverb is here true, who
so blind as he that will not see?

The author of the Preface to his book, speaks much like thereabout this
point, a little there is added, namely, that Christ (our Teacher) and his
Aposiles did join in the Jews worship, unto which were added many
superstitions, as unlawful as their Ceremonies.

Answ. 1. I may use his own words, he does not prove that which he concludes;
For howsoever many superstitious traditions were used by the Jews, yet whether
they were brought in, and added to their sacred worship, instituted of God, as
any parts thereof, is doubtful, and the contrary more probable. 2. To say, that
Christ and his Apostles did join in that worship, to which many superstitions
were added, is too presumptioeslie spoken; and I wish men, to be more sober,
and not so Fresh suit. l. 2. 321.
boldly to affirm such groundless positions, to justify a corrupt and
halting practice. I know D. Ames has the like saying, that Christ was present
when the traditions of men were observed in Gods worship; But he delivers this
only upon his own word, and therefore we may believe it accordingly. 3. He
says, these superstitions in the Jews worship, were as unlawful as their
Ceremonies. What testimony brings he for it? (as before) none at all. If such
arguments will pass, a man may soon have enough, to fill a cart with. But
note here Page 96.
how greatly they contradict one another: they said even now, that their
Ceremonies are such idols as a man cannot lawfully join with that worship,
where they are used, yet here they say, that they are not worse then were the
superstitions in the Jews worship, unto which Christ and his Apostles joined;
Now which shall a man believe of them? not the later, for he gives no reason
for what he speaks, but the others do. 4. If it should be all granted him
(howbeit he proves nothing) yet it will not follow, that a man may communicate
in the ministry, worship, and Eccles. government of England, unless he can
prove, that that ministry, worship, and Eccles. government, to which Christ
and his Apostles joined, was false, idolatrous, Antichristian, as the
Nonconconformists do affirm the other to be.

Some thought that this point would have been more effectually answered,
specially because D. Burg. pressed it home so close upon them, and took such a
solemn protestation in it, as the like is not to be seen (I think) in the
book; But for my part I exspected no better; For I saw the Rei. had them at
the advantage, and therefore D. Ames was constrained, either to condemn their
own chief Principles, or to justify separation by them, or else to shift off
the point, and say nothing, or (as the very truth is) nothing of it to the
purpose,

Before I end this chapter; I will answer briefly to some objections, which
many are ready to make for their joining in communion with this worship.

Object. 1. Howsoever we do believe that the same is (as the Nonconformists
say) unlawful and Antichristian, yet we think, we may yield our bodily
presence to it, so we inwardly loath the same, and keep our hearts to God
only.

Answ. It is certain the Profane brood of the cursed familists, do hold that
Religion stands not in outward things, and therefore outwardly they will
submitt unto any, be the same never so false and vile, pretending that it is
not the body which can sin but the soul only, the name of them, I know is
generally odious, although their principles are loved and practiced too well:
But that no good man may fall into this snare: let it be considered. 1. The
Lord has created 1 Cor. 6. 19. 20.
soul and body, and by Christ they are both redeemed: therefore it is
necessary that we should honor Rivetus in Hos. 4. ve. 15. and 17. p. 156.
158. An admonition of Coelius secundus Curio to all faithf. Christi. Mat. 5.
16. Scarpius symphon. proph. 238 Gal. 6. 12. Rev. 21, 8. Romans 14. 23.
him, with the whole man, for how else should the whole, enjoy glory and
immortality hereafter. If a wife should prostrate her body to the use of
another man, shall she be excused toward her husband, by saying, that she
reserved him most dear in her heart? no surely: If this be no reasonable
excuse much less the other. 2. It ought to be always our care, so to live as
others thereby may have cause to glorify God: but this cannot be, if our
visible conversation be idolatrous. 3. This is a practice taken up merely to
avoid the cross of Christ. And therefore such doing, bewrays self love,
infidelity, fearfulness etc. Sins which God will punish men extremely for.
4. Whatsoever is not of says is sin: but no man can in faith be present at
that worship which he condemns, and therefore the action must necessarily be
evil. 5. The ignorant by this means are hardened in sin: For Luke 17, 1, 2.
Calv. in Psalm. 16. 4. pa. 60.
when they shall see one that has much knowledge, to be present at idolatrous
service, they immediately think the better of it, and are the less willing to
receive the love of the truth that they may be saved: we would think him a
cruel, and most in humane Bucer in Psalm. 16, 4. p. 102.
creature, which should lay wood or stones in a blind man's way, at which he
falls and breaks his neck, yet they do worse, who by their evil example
strengthen their neighbors in idolatry, for by this means the soul and body
perishes utterly. 6. This practice Mat. 6, 26. 2 Cor. 6. 17, etc. Ps. 16, 4.
Dan. 3* 17 1 King. 19 18.
cannot possibly please the Lord it being wholly against his revealed will*
and therefore the faithful in all ages have always don otherwise. 7. The Lord
in this life, has executed sundry fearful judgments, upon diverse persons,
for allowing in body, that false worship, which in heart they condemned: as
Hofmaster in Germany, Spiera in Italy, Mr. Hales in England, all these died
despearately: and are left for warnings: that no man sin against his
conscience: least he find it to be, a hell upon earth, when he exspects
consolation and peace from it.

Object. 2. But we keep close to God in other walking.

Ans. 1. There are many doubtless in the Land, very strict in the duties of
the 2 Table, and in the private and personal exercises of the first also, so
far as they can go with good leave: but what of all this, yet so long as upon
knowledge they share their service betwixt Christ and Antichrist, they cannot
by any promise of Scripture assure their souls of Gods acceptance thereof in
Mark it well.
Christ. 2. Sound comfort flows from sincere obedience: and therefore
whosoever stocks himself, in See Park. of the cross, l. 1* p. 156, 1^7, etc.
Pet. Mart. loc. com. p. 1125.
any the least parts of the revealed will of God, he is as Iehu, rotten at the
best, even when he manifests most show of Religion. 3. Where there is the
true Love and zeal of God, nothing can be endured of Antichrists, no not the
name of any thing that belongs to him, or is defiled by his polluted members,
there I say will be no countenance given to his idolatric much less any
conformity to the least of his beastly devises: and therefore those which bow
the knee to that Idol book, want the love and zeal of God, specially if they
know it to be the Popes creature, although they carry themselves strict and
precise in some other respects.

Object. 3. But we are persuaded herein we do well.

Ans. so do the Papists, Arians, and other Heriticks, yet are their courses
cursed, and abominable. 2. Our 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
duty is to prove all things, and only to hold that fast, which we have found
by evident Testimony of Scripture to be good and lawful. 3. As a man that is
out of his way, and supposes otherwise, makes his journie so much the worse,
so those which practice false worship, and yet know it not, are in a condition
the more dangerous: and therefore it is nessarie, that men examine the ground of
their perswation, whether the same be right and sound or no.

Object. 4* Howbeit this worship is not as good as it should be, yet we think
it is not so bad, but it may be lawfully used. Answ. 1. We have showed from the
Nonconformists, writings, that the authors of it were the Popes, which were all
Antichrists, now whatsoever comes from T. C. lib. 1 page 204.
them (they say) comes first from the devil, and out of the bottomless
pit. 2. They further affirm that there is no idolatry Cananitish, paganish,
Jewish, or what else soever, Park. of the Cross 1. 1. 37. 38.
worse then Popish: neither shall any suffer greater plagues, then such which
offend this way. 3. Whosoever partakes in the sins of Rome, are surely under
the same curse, for we cannot in any fort communicate Cart. Catachism. of
Christian Rel. page 315. 316. Am. 4. 4. 5 See Brentius on the place. Piscat. in
1 Cor. 10. 21. Pareus ^d. Act. 4 39. Protestat. of the King. sup. page 18.
with them in their errors, unless we will bear them company in their
destruction also. 4. It is a dangerous thing to do any false worship, because
thereby men's transgressions are multiplied, and the devil, and not God, is
certainly served.

Object. 5. The Law of the Lard is, that all should come to hear this service,
and therefore they will be punished which refuse to do so. Answ. 1. Humane
authority is not to be obeyed, if it command any thing against God: therefore
every man, is to look to himself, that he communicate not with the evils of
the time, enduring patiently what it shall please the state to inflict upon
him. 2. In cases of this nature, grace is best tried: for as the skill of a
mariner is most seen in a tempest, and the courage, of a soldier in a fight:
so our faith, sincerity, obedience, etc. Is best discerned by the care which we
take to leave such sins, and practice such duties, as lie most open to
afflictions. 3. We Romans 8. 28
have a promise, that all things shall work together for our good: therefore
it we suffer for Christ, our wise father will so dispose of it: as it shall
serve to help us forward, in the holy way to life and glory.

Eze. 4. 15. Amo. 7. 10 Dan. 3. Luc. 23. 25 Ioh. 19. 12 Act. 7. 6. and 24. 5.
Object. 6. We shallbe charged with sedition, schism, heresy, obstinacy,
etc. if we go not to it. Answ. 1. They do no more against you, in this thing,
then has beone don against our ancients and betters in former times: for so
were the Prophets used, so was Christ and his Apostles served by the Jews, for
restraining their feet from iniquity, and serving God purely. 2. It is a great
comfort to the godly, against all the reproaches and censures of the world,
that their hearts are open and manifest in the sight of God, and that they are
able to approve before him their own uprightness; For such need not fear the
calumniation of men, who have the Lord to approve the actions which they do.
3. We have a gracious Lord and Savior for our judge, who will reward us one day
for our obedience toward him, let men speak of us what evil pleases them.

Object. 7. We shall quite loose the love of our friends, if we refuse to join
with them in this worship. Answ. 1. That love and freindship will never do a
man good, which is purchased with the loss of Gods favor; He has love enough
whom God loves, and whosoever is not beloved of God, is in a miserable
condition, what reckoning soever the world makes of him. 2. Thou shall not be
forsaken of Christ, if thou be for his Ps. 27, 10. Esa. 49, 15 Mat. 19, 29.
sake left of friends. Though my father and mother (says David) should forsake
me, yet Ichovah would gather me. He means, that God would be a father unto
him, and so his condition should be good enough.

Object. 8. But our fear is, if we should separate our selves from this false
worship, that we shall not be able to Rev. 2. 10.
bear the troubles, which will follow thereupon. Answ. 1. If your hearts be
perfect with God, fear none of those things, which you shall suffer; For
surely, he will, either keep you out of troubles, or preserve you safely in
the^, and make way thereby for your greater happiness: So long as a father
carefully leads the child in his own hand, it needs not fear of falling, how
weak of foot 1 Cor. 10. 13. Ioh. 10. 28
soever it be: The Lord by the right hand of his power evermore upholdeth his
people, and therefore they may be persuaded, that no adversary strenght, shall
ever be able to pluck them away from him.

It remains now, that I speak a few words unto you, which are Professors in
England: you see how your stinted-service, devised by the Bb. and translated
from the Mass, is affirmed by your own writers, to be a false and forged
worship; and that it is even so, I appeal to many of your consciences; for why
do you loath to use the same in your families, but because you know it is not
the incense made by fire from the Altar of I have been an ear witness hereof
many times.
the Lord. I will purposely forbear to relate, the innumerable, odious, and
base terms, which you (upon all occasions) cast forth deservedly against it,
only I do exhort you, to be true to your own grounds, and conscionablie to
practice that, which yours have published to the world. If our servants do
that thing which we forbidd them, and which they know is most hateful to us,
they are punished severely for it, and justly too. The Eng. Mass, you know, is
an abomination to the Lord, and his commandment preciselie is, that you
should not partake therewith: Now if you will not harken to his voice, what may
you fear? Truly that his feirce wrath will fall heavily upon you. If the
Separatists only had found fault with that book, your communicating therewith
were somewhat tolerable, but seeing your selves acknowledge it, to be a
devised service. Oh! think how altogether in excusable this your practice is
now before God; In truth it cannot, but provoke him to sore displeasure,
considering how grossly those do mock him, which profess one thing, and do
another.

I would know, what assurance you can have that God is your father, seeing his
promise is not to be our father, but upon this condition that we touch no
polluted 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18.
thing: In words you confess that Leiturgy, to be an unclean thing, can you
then touch it, and yet believe upon good ground of Scripture, that you are his
sonns and daughters in Christ, I spare to speak mine own thoughts* But I wish
you, to look well unto it. It may be you think your disliking thereof is
sufficient, but in truth, God loves no half servants. He that should go, and
ly down in bed with an harlot, and give her the defiance, sinned
notwithstanding: even so how disdainfully soever you either speak or write
against that idol, yet are you still trespassers, so long as you prostrate your
souls unto it, be therefore sincere, and plain in Gods matters, so shall you
have peace, and comfort in the later end.

Marvel not that I am thus earnest with you, alas, how can I choose, the love
of God constrains me, and truly it greeves my very soul, to think, of the
great number among them, which are enlightened, and in their own conscience
fully convinced of this truth viz. that their service book, is unlawful and
Antichristian, and yet partake in the filthiness thereof: surely these do not
consider, that there is no sin, in the eye of the Lord, more hateful then
idolatry* for as a man will bear with much frowardness and unkindness in
his wife, but not suffer her at any hand to committ whoredom, so God will
bear with many sins in men, but he cannot endure idolatry: spiritual
whoredom and adultery, this seldom or never escapes some sencible and
visible punishment.

I will here end this chapter with the words of a learned Conformists. It is
not enough to worship God, D. Sclater upon Ro^. chap. 1. ver. 22. p. 110. 113
except we give him such worship as is seemly for his d^itie, which Paul calls
glo^ysying God as God, and if any ask, what this meet worship is, here spoken
of? it is when God is worshipped according to his will; secondly with worship
agreeable to his nature (viz:) spiritual. In this thing therefore Let us deny
our own carnal wisdom, and cleave precisely Romans 8, 5. Mat. 15. 8. Levit. 10.
1, 2.
to the word of God. How unmeet is it that fleshly wisdom which is an enemy
unto God, should be a framer of his worship? how unprofitable is will worship;
yea how abominable to add or alter the least circumstance in the worship of
God? And howsoever there may be a show of Wisdom in voluntary Religion. Col.
2. 23. Yet being rightly weighed, all the devises of men shall be found
foolish, vain, yea more then sottish in the judgment of God.

CHAP. III.
IN this chapter we will speak of Church Government, observing the former
method, that is, first I will show how the Nonconformists, do describe a right
Ecclesiastical discipline. 2. How far the present Ecclesiastical discipline
of England, by their own Testimony, differs from, and is contrary to it: 3:
Lay down responsive conclusions. 4. Answer to D. Ames objections, and others
which may seem to be against the same.

It is certain that Christ (our heavenly Prophet) has set forth unto us in
the new Testament the ordinary form, and manner of ordering Churches. For
this sundry reasons are given; 1. otherwise the Church Protest. from Scot. 18.
(which is his body) should be left maimed, imperfect, and void of some
special furtherances, and helps for her edification and perfection, but this
cannot be. 2. We read that under the Law the Lord by Moses, ordained a
certain form which was not altered, nor to be altered by any King or Priest
whatsoever: yea from the beginning of the world, even from Adam to Def. Eccl.
Discip. ag. Brid. 14. 15.
Christ, this ordinance the saints ever had, as agreed best with that time for
which it is served, and therefore it cannot be, but that Christ coming in his
own person, (who was the day star and sun of righteousness, from whence all
other borrowed their light) must needs teach his Church a certain Government
for the safety and good thereof. 3. We must either confess this, or else
spoil Christ of his kingly office: for what does more belong unto the name,
office* and Neces. Disc. 5. 7.
duty of a King, then to give Laws unto his Citizens and subjects and to make
such decrees, and ordinances whereby all the parts of his Kingdom may be
Demonst. Disc. p. 2.
maintained. 4. That which teaches every good way, teaches also how the
Church must be governed: but the word of God teaches every good way. Pro. 2.
9. Therefore it teaches how the Church must be governed. 5. No human form is
sufficient, or able to govern the Church of Christ, wherein so many diseases
are to be healed, and businesses to be dispatched, for the good of men's souls,
and preserving the people of God, and upholding the Kingdom of Christ. 6. The
Church is the house of God, therefore it is not to be supposed, since he
requires us to Cipri. in sermon. de Bapt. Chtist. Cip. de prescrip. advers. haer.
Ignat. in Ep. Tral. Ierom. in Esa. 3. Aug. Epi. 137. Amb. in 1 Timothy 5. Cipr. l.
1. Epist. 8. D. Bills. Perpetu. Gover^. page 3. Nec. Dis. 7. M. Bates 147.
Dioces. Trial. 8. Protest. King. sup. 12, 13.
set our families in order, and he among men is counted a careless unthrift,
that leaves his servants to do what they list: that he will himself neglect
to give order, how both steward, and children, and servants should be dealt
with all, besides these reasons, the Nonconformists allege the Testimonies of
the learned to prove the position, yea some of the Prelates best Champions. D.
Bilson (who was Bishop sometime of Winch^ster) says thus. We must not frame
what kind of Regiment we list for the ministers of Christ's Church; but rather
ob^e^v^ and mark what manner of external government the Lord has best liked
and allowed in his Church from the beginning,

And as this Ecclesiastical power, is common to all Churches, and ought to be
in all, for as much as they are all in dependant bodies, and have privileidges
alike: so it is confined and bound within the Limits only of one particular
congregation, and the greatest power ought not to stretch beyond the same, for
in truth it is a great wickedness, for any person, or persons, to take upon
them selves Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, over many Churches, much more over
whole Kingdoms, and Provinces of people. Touching the order or carriage for the
execution of it, this government is committed to a fellowship or company of
Elders, consisting of lawful Tab. divi. Read. in Camb.
and true Pastors, Elders, and deacons, by whose common advise, according to
the precise rule of the Scriptures, both the rest of the Church ought to be
governed, and Offer for confer. 2. Prot. Kin. sup. p. 15.
all Church matters also ordered, and determined, reserving always, that
liberty which God has given to his Church. Of the election and ordinatien, of
these officers we spoke in the first chapter, this only may Mark and make use
of this, you that stand under a selfwild Diotrephes.
be added, that if any of these shall sin, he is as subject to the Censures
of the rest, as any other member of the congregation. If they shall all sin
scandalouslie, either in the execution of their office, or in any other
ordinary manner: then the congregation that chose them freely, has as free
power to depose them, and to place others in their room.

This is Christ commandment: woe therefore to such as know so much and do
neglect it. D. Am. de cons. l. 14. c. 29. page 236.
And because the use of this Church government, serves for to reform abuses:
the brethren therefore are to watch one over another, and when any one sins:
If the offense be private, he must be admonished thereof secretly, and by the
person alone which knows it: for except it be of necessity the fame of our
brother is not to be hurt, his mind provoked, his offense enlarged, neither
suspicion of reproach, and defamation needlessly published forth against him,
but if he refuse to harken, then two or three other members, must be taken for
the purpose, and such as have Cartw. hist. Christ l, 2, p. 357.
best judgment, most ability to persuade, and in greatest estimation with the
offender, and here again love is showed, seeing his amendment is still sought
for, and nor his disgrace: if he will not yet acknowledge his offense, then
must he be brought unto the Church, and there again be lovingly admonished,
and soundly convinced, of his fault, but if he be still incorrigible, and will
not be brought by any means to repentance, then (after long forbearance, much
waiting, and great patience, with grief and sorrow of the whole Church) in the
name of our Lord Jesus, he is to be cast Protest. from Scot. 35. 34
out of the Church, and given over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh,
and to be held as a heathen and publican: But if the offense be public, there
is no use of private admonition: but it must openly be rebuked, and admonished,
yet so, that the same be don circumspectly, seasoned with gravitie, love,
meekness, etc. Always aiming, at the offenders safety, and not his
destruction: and special care is to be had, of every weak offender, with
discretion of offenses: If for all this, he remain incorrigible then must the
Church proceed against him as before.

Yet let it be minded, that no Church governors may upon a^y secret
informations, or suggestions, or private suspicions, go about, to bind men's
consciences to accuse themselves of such crimes, and imputations, as cannot
Engl. Pur. 29.
by Gods word plainly be proved against them, for such a course is most
damnable, and tyrannous, and against the very Law of nature, devised by
Antichrist, through the inspiration of the devil. Moreover, they ought with
all patience and quietness, to hear what every offender can possibly say for
himself, either for qualification, defense, apology, or justification of any
supposed crime, or error whatsoever and they ought not to proceed to censure
the grossest offense that is, until the offender have said as much Id. 28.
for himself, as he possibly is able; For it is an evident Character, of a
corrupt Ecclesiastical Government, where the parties convented, may not have
full liberties to speak for themselves, considering that the more liberty is
granted to Def. Pet. for Refor. 198. M. Perk. vol. 3. upon Iud. 388. Lear. Dis.
Ec. discip. 92. Esa. 35. 8. Za. 14. 21. Joel 2. 17. Rev. 21. Vlt. Psa. 10^.
Cartw. Histor. Christ. l, 2. 359. Neces. Disc. 96. Perk. upon Creed. vol. 3.
212. 1 Cor. 5. 9 2 Thessalonians. 2. 14. 2 Cor. 6. Tail. upon Tit. 3. 10.
speak in a bad cause (especially before those that are in authority, and of
judgment) the more the iniquity of it will appear, and the more the justice
of their sentence will shine.

Again, excommunication must not be used, but as the last and desperate
remedy, even as a chirurgio^ tries all gentle means, before launcing,
searing, or cutting off. Indeed if the cause be great, weighty, and necessary,
then it may not be omitted. Reasons. First, for the glory of God, that it may
appear his house to be no cage of vncl^ane birds, no stye of swine, no den of
thieves, no stews or brothelhouse, but the holy city, the seat and throne of
justice, the temple of the liveing God, where the chaste virgin worshippeth, and
where no Cananite may be suffered. 2. That the worship and service of God may
be kept and preserved from pollution, contempt, and profanation. 3. For the
good of the sinner himself, that he may see his fault, be ashamed thereof, and
reconcile himself first to God, and then unto the church against whom he
offended, and so be saved in the day of the Lord. So long as a harlot has
freely the society of chaste matrons, she takes no shame of her adultery but
when all honest women reject her, then at last, etc. So a thief, if he be
suffered to converse still with true Cartw. in the place before.
men, to have his liberty in city and country to the full, he will not be
ashamed of his robberies, murders, etc. but, etc. It is just so in this cause.
If open sinners be suffered in the church, and admitted to public and private
communion in the exercises of Religion, certainly then (though they declare
their sin as Sodom, and hide it not yet) they will not be ashamed of it, but
rather, think they have not sinned, or it is so light and small, as they need
not make any matter thereof. 4. The honor and the good name of the church is
hereby preserved, which would be lost, if vile persons were left alone therein.
5. That others may fcare, for if Deu. 17. 13. Heb. 12. 25
this course be omitted, it may be a means, to embolden many to do the like.

A member being thus justly excommunicated, he is not to partake in the
spiritual good things, which the Lord communicates in his church, as the
Sacraments, prayer, etc. yet he may be admitted to the hearing of the word,
because that is a means to humble him for his sin, and to bring him to
repentance, which is the end of all Ecclesiast. Censures. Moreover, the rest of
Perk. on the Cr. vol. 3. page 212. Cartw. lib. 2. Hist. Christ 358. First boo.
Discip. p. 52.
the faithful must avoid all kind of familiar conversation with him, be it in
eating, drinking, buying, and selling, yea in saluting and talking with him, so
far as they are not bound unto him, in any of the bands of civil right and
society. I add this, because excommunication unlooseth it not, but such as are
of the family, or affinitic must perform all duties to such a one, which such
a relation has made his due, the husband to the wife, and the wife to the
husband, the child to the father, the servant to the master, etc. so an
excommunicate Magistrate, remains a Magistrate still, and Tail. upon Tit. chapter
3. v. 10. p. 709. 710.
must of all Christians so be acknowledged; Beside all lawful contracts and
promises must be kept, and performed with him, and works of mercy showed to
him if there be just and necessary cause. If the offender afterward shall see
his sin, and desire to be taken Protest. from Sco. p. 35.
again into the communion of the Saints, the church is to assent thereto
willingly, yet so, as the party make public repentance, according to the
proportion of the offense, a verbal profession of repentance suffices not;
For D. Am. de consc. l. 4. c. 29. 2 Adm. 59. T. C. l. 1. 184. Tail. Tit. 3. 10.
712. see A^str. p. 165. to 205. Cart. ref. Rh. Test. Mat. 18. sect. 7. D. Am.
de cons. l. 4. c. 29. 238. Protest. King. sup. p. 14. Discip. Eccles. 130.
Demonst. Discip. p. 97. 98. etc. Crown. Christ. Mart. p. 10. ^ear. D. E^. 6.
99. Discourse. of abus. in the Chapter 88. 89. etc. See Aretius in Mat. 18. v. 17.
so the most holy institutions of God, are exposed to the mockage of the
wicked, and the action of the church placed only in an outward form.
Therefore such evidences are required, which in the judgment of charity do
declare true and sincere repentance, and which serve as probable witnesses of
the thing.

Be it here specially noted, that excommunication, and the absolution or
reconciliation of the excommunicate, are actions common to the whole church,
and not of any private person or persons: For howsoever the Elders for the
peace, profitt, and good order of the church, are to administer these
ordinances, yet the whole church must give their consent freely hereto. In the
Apostles time, and after, till the year 250. every man that was a member of
the church, had in the church his voice in Ecclesiastical censures, causes, and
determinations of the church. Christ does not say, when there is cause of
accusing or Censuring any, tell the Bishops, but tell the Church; and
accordingly in the Mr. Jacob Art. 6. 1 Adm. 6.
times of the Apostles, and long after, as the Epistles of Ciprian do
manifest, they were judged by the word in an assembly of presbyters and
brethren, as the incestious Corinthian, which shows us, that neither one man,
Fall of Bab. 16. Cipr. lib. 3 Ep. 10. and Epist. 14, and 19. August. lib. 3,
cont. Epist. permenn. Ierom. ad Demet. Epist. 1. Bucer de reg. Chapter l. 1. chap.
9 Calv. inst. l. 4, cap. 11 Sect. 6. Vrsin. car. pars 2, page 532. Curt. chu.
pow. 54. Fall of Babell, 30. 31 His. Trob. Fran. 62. Ans. to Bridge. 132 Neces.
dis. 7. Park. de Pol. Ecc. l. 1. c. 15, p. 4*
nor the Presbyters alone were judges in such causes, but Church, which by
scriptures, either cleared, or censured any person accused, as by the word of
God he appeared, either guilty or not guilty, etc. Many reasons are yielded
by the Nonconformists, to prove this thing, and all objections made against it
soundly answered, and the testimonies of the Learned alleged for it, as the
reader may see largely in their books named in the margent. The like they
speak touching the admission of any member into the communion of the church:
that person which is to be joined, ought publicly to com before the face of
the congregation, and there to be examined of his faith, knowledge, etc. and
being found meet by the general consent of the people, he is joyfullie
received. But of this more hereafter.

Moreover if the Ecclesiastical officers, shall refuse to do their duty yet
may the brethren notwithstanding perform Church actions, and the same are to
be esteemed good and lawful. To come unto a conclusion, this form of Church
government here described, is unchangeable, ordinary, best, and perpetual,
common to all true Churches, and to which all states must be subject, as well
the rulers as they that are ruled: yea and the Def. disc. p. 16. 38. First book
disc. p. 54. T. C. l. 1, 48 Park. de Pol. Ec. l. 1. p. 33. Def. disc. page 33.
Fall Bab. 17.
preachers themselves, as well as the poor within the Church, and good reason:
for the same is not a thing indifferent as some think, but a point of the
Gospel, yea of the substance thereof, a matter of faith, and of necessity to
salvation. I mean in such an absolute degree of necessity, as is of any
ordinary outward means, especially to every church, and by consequence to
every soul in it. And therefore as no common wealth can flourish, or long
endure without good laws, and sharp execution of the same, so neither can the
church First book disc. 50.
of God, be brought to purity, neither yet continue in the same, without the
use and exercise of this ordinance, but lies open to all danger and confusion.

Whatsoever the Nonconformists have here said, about Church government, we for
our parts ascent wholly to it, and through Gods mercy toward us do
comfortablie enjoy the same, and wish unfeynedlie, that there were in them,
such zeal of God, and love of his house and ordinances, as to practice once
themselves, the good duties, which they well teach others to do.

SECT. II.
THe Nonconformists in the former Section, gave us a good description of a true
Church government, now let us hear what they say of their own in England, and
compare them together. In this (as in the rest) we shall find great confusion,
No marvail, seeing the matter is of Babylon.
and therefore lest the reader should loose himself, I will observe some order
in the handling of it, and first speak of their Ecclesiastical Officers. 2.
Of their Laws, by which they govern. 3. Of their Courts, where they be
executed; and lastly, of the manner how they are executed; and of all these
breiflie, entreating still the reader to get their books, if he be not
herewith fully satisfied.

In the first Chapter Sect. 3. we were showed what their Bishops are: now some
thing here is to be said of their dependant officers, which most wickedly under
them minister the Ecclesiastical discipline of their Church, namely
Commissaries, Chancellours, Archdeacons, officials, registers, proctors,
doctors, sumners, and the 1 Adm. 17 Alt. Dam. 145. P. Print before T. C. l. 1.
Alt. Da. 35 Pref. Ref. Answ. to Bancr. Alt. Da. 35 1 Adm. 15 Demons. dis. 40.
Dialog. st. Chur. 13.
rest of that, Viperous generation. All these the Nonconformists say, are
greedy Cormorants, servile varlets, a horned generation, base fellows, trash,
the offspring of Romish Babel, murderous beasts, the scourges of all Gods
people* ravening rablers, which thrust away most sacralegiously, that order
which Christ has left to his Church, and proudly tyranize over their
superiors. The Papist is on their side, because he can shelter himself under
them, to hide his idolatry: the Atheist is tooth and nail for them, because by
them he enjoys carnal liberty: the man of most notorious life defends
them, because he can from them, redeem the corporal punishment of his sins by
money: at a word, Dial. strif. Chur. 125. 1 Adm. 17 Demonst. disc. 76. T. C. l.
1. 188.
all the rank adulterers, common drunkards, unthrifts, ruffians, horrible
swearers and dispisers of Gods word take part with them. And no marvel:
seeing these for the most part, are all Papists, and beside either bribers,
drunkards, Epicures etc. So unmeet to be governors, as indeed they ought not
to be members at all Demonst. discip. Preface. De Eccles. disc. 137.
in any reformed Church* Justly therefore are they said to be the root and
cause of all the ignorance, atheism, schisms and treasons, in the Land, the
nurses and cherishers of Recusants, and other Heretics, and of all Demonst.
disc. 40.
the great iniquities and abominations that are committed therein; especially
in regard they live by the faults of men: and will rather increase offenses
(that Sold* Bar. Syons plea 135. 136. Fresh suit. l. 2. 406. Learn. dis. Ecc.
Gov. 99. ^00. Neces. dis. 8, 9. Def. Pet. for Ref. 40, 236. Offer. conf. p. 2.
Confer. p. 131. Thank. ack. p. 2. Alt. Dam. 42, 47. Abstr. 36, and 228. D.
Strif. chur. 13. Mr. Bate 104, etc. Fall of Babell, p 83 Mr. Bate. p. 109, to
115.
their gain may increase) then use means to lessen any: and this experience
daily shows.

As for their names and offices, it is testified by all the Nonconformists that
they are all derived from Antichrist, and are therefore false, earthly,
vnla^full: and the discipline which they exercise: is not prescribed in Gods
word: never appointed by the Lord Christ, but taken wholly, and every part from
the Pope, and used in the time of the greatest darkness under him: yea and it
is defended by the same Canons, whereby his Popedom is supported: so that were
it not for the help of the Papists, they have no authority either from God, or
man, to help them either by reason, or learning.

I may not here omit how the Refor. exceedingly condemn the offices of Church
wardens and side men, and prove the same to be unlawful and hurtful, by many
reasons. 1. Because they are counterfeyts of Gods true officers, namely Elders,
and deacons, which Christ has left in his Church by divine institution. 2.
They retain the mark of the beast in part, by serving the tyranny of the
Hierarchy: so that it is not less warrantable to be a Masse-Preist, then a
Churchwarden. 3. Their functions are devised by men and came first from Rome:
and therefore they cannot Syons pl. 136, 137, and 315. 316. Dial. St. chapter 119.
exspect any blessing, or protection from God in their courses. 4. They are
bound to most unlawful conditions: and so necessarily, either they must be
perjured: or commit horrible iniquity, as to present their minister, if he use
not superstitious Ceremonies: so those which will not com at their devised
service, kneel at the Sacrement, have their children crossed and Bishopped,
women Churched, join with the Letanie, observe their holy days etc. And thus
they minister matter of filthy lucre to the Harpies of the Prelates courts. For
these and such like causes, every good man is exhorted not to touch these
unclean places: for if he do, Learn, dis. Ec. Gover. 109, etc.
he shall surely be defiled therewith. Their Collectors calling, also they
judge unlawful.

1 Admo. Pref. Syons pl. 151. Repl. to Mort. 96. Abst. 19. Alt. Da. 30. Mr.
Bal. upon Revel. 13. 2 Bright. Rev. 3, 195 Syons pl. 31, 36, 37. Demonst. disc.
77. 78, 79.
Thus much of their Ecclesiastical officers, now for their Laws: these by the
Nonconformists, are said to be foolish articles, slavish ordinances, lawless,
perilous, Popish, wicked, and damnable Canons, shameful Idols, very
devilishnesse, and hypocrisy. Invented by the dragon and Antichrist, our Lords
enemies, in the time of popery, without any warrant of Gods word, yea
manifestly against it: and for what end servs it now in England? Surely for no
other: but to strengthen the Kingdom of the beast* and the power of darkness
and ignorance: to breed treacherous Papists, nourish superstition and popery,
uphold the cages of unclean birds, as Archbishops, and L. bb. seas, arches,
cathedral Churches etc. And destroy utterly the Churches of God, by crossing
every faithful minister in the discharge of his duty, and every good
Christian walking in the ways of godliness, and nipping in the head every good
action. For these and many the like reasons the Nonconformists, have often times
desired that all their Ecclesiastical Abstr. 238
decrees, constitutions, provincial and sinodal statutes, Fatherly customs
etc. Might utterly be abandoned and as froth and filth be spued out of the
common wealth. Necessit. Disci. 8. 9,
Yea as infectious and noisome boiles and soars, sent back again to the
stinking sinckes, and channel out of which they were taken.

Offer for conf. pre. Alt. Dam. 25. 26. Syon pl. 32, 33, 47, 48, M. Bat. 170,
172, Eng. Puri. 29, 30, Def. of Pet. for refor. 220, 221, Park. on the cross.
I^r. 4 2. Abst. 19.
Touching the oath exofficio, whereby the Popish Prelates in Rome, and England,
go about to bind men's consciences to accuse themselves, and their friends: the
Nonconformists profess it to be a bloody Law, most damnable and dangerous, as
cruel a racking of the mind, as the most exquisite torture of the body can be,
this was invented by Antichrist, through the inspiration of the devil, that by
means thereof the professors, and practizers of true religion might be
suppressed and abolished. In very deed it is a lawless oath, given and taken
against the Law of nature, contrary to the commandment of Christ. Mat. 18.
and express word of God: against all equity and conscience, contrary to the
common Law, the Canon Law, Counsels and imperial statuts, directly contrary to
the nature of an oath: Beside such as take it cannot swear in judgment and
righteousness, but are forced, either to accuse and betray their brethren, or by
perjury to damn their own souls.

Fall Bab. 33,
As their Ecclesiastical officers and laws, are all and altogether
Antichristian and unlawful: so also are Curt. Chapter 37^ T. C. l. 1, 187, Dioces.
Trial. pref. Dial Sol. Bar. Tab. div. read. in Camb.
their bb. courts said to be Popish, Human devises, presumptious insolences,
such as were never planted by the Apostles in the primitive Churches, but long
after erected by Antichrist, against God, his Church, and the Lawful
jurisdiction of Eldeish p, and therefore as most Profane things they ought, to
be rooted out.

If I were not unwilling, to make this treatise large, I would here write
particularly of their courts, that so every good man might both loath, and
leave them the sooner. Howsoever, something I will say of each: although but
little, for a man may perceive what is in the kaske, if he taste a spoonefull
thereof. Their court of Syon pl. 313, 314. 1 Ad. 16, Sold. Bar.
faculties, is said to be a Romish court a filthy quagmire, and poisoned plash
of all the abominations that do infect the whole realm, out of it are
dispensations given for boys and d^l^s, to have many benefices. For
non-residents, and such as do not preach, dualities, trialities, pluralities,
tot quots, licenses to mary at any time T. C. l. 1. 87.
and place etc. Absolutions for money: and one man to be absolved for another,
breifely the Popish enormities, and deformities of this b^se court, are
innumerable, for it has full power together with the Petty Pope, the Primate
of England, to dispense in all causes, dispensed heretofore by the Pope of
Rome, and more Alt. Dam. 70. 1 Ad. 3.
also. Not without cause therefore have the Nonconformists, desired that might
be pluckd down, and utterly overthrown without hope of restitution.

As for the Commissaries court, that is, a petty little stinking ditch, which
flows out of that former great Sold. Bar. 1 Adm. 16 17.
puddle, a pack of popery a sink of corruption, a sea of idolatry, whereby
Religion and godliness daily decays. In this court as in the other, one
alone does excommunicate, one alone sits in judgment, and when he will, can
draw back the judgment which he has pronounced, having called upon the name
of God, and that for money, which is called the changing of Penance. In this
Court for non-payment of two pence, a man shall be excommunicated, if he
appear not when ^ee is sent for, if he do not as his Ordinary would, from
whom he had his Popish induction and institution, and to whom he has sworn
Canonicam Obedientiam, Canonical obedience, if he learn not his Catechism
like a good boy without book, when it were more meet he should be able to
teach others. To conclude: if he be not obedient to all these Lord Bishops
Officers, by and by he must be cut off by excommunication. And as it is
lightly granted and given forth, so if the money be paid, and the Court
discharged, it is as quickly called in again. This Court pouleth Parishes,
scourges the poor hedgepriests, ladeth Church wardens with manifest
perjuries, punishes wheredomes and adulteries with toyish censures, remitteth
without satisfying the Congregation, and that in secret places, gives out
dispensations for unlawful marriages, and commits a thousand such like
abominations. God Pres. Dioces. Trial. Diol. strif. 110, 120, Learned Disc. of
Eccle. Go. 132. 133. 134.
deliver all Christians out of this Antichristian tyranny.

Their Bb. visitation is (as the Nonconformists say) an ungracious course,
purposely devised to pick the purses of poor men, and to suppress those which
are not friends to the Kingdom of Antichrist. In very truth it is holden for
no other end almost, but to gather up fees, both ordinary and extraordinary,
with daily new devises, to poll the poor Priests of their money, which they
extort for seeing the Letters of orders, for Dynners and such like matters. And
yet a new invented pyl^age, whereby they compel men to buy Books of them for
4 pence or 6 pence, which are too dear of a penny or two pence: and not only
such small Ware, but also great books, being such as every parish is
appointed to buy, must be bought of them for two or three Shillings in a book
dearer, then it may be bought in Paul's Church-yarde: yea otherwhiles, though
the Parish be furnished of them already, they are not authentical, except
they be bought at Master Chauncellers and Official, at Master Registers hands.
As for reformation of any thing in the Church, there are indeed many
presentiments, and men sworn to present matters, but little or none amendment at
all does follow. So that it is a common saying in the Country, when the
presentment is once received, they shall never hear more of it. Soon after
the Visitation or Synod, the petitbribing Sumner, rides forth laden with
Excommunications which he scatters abroad in the Country, as thick as Hail^
shot, against this parson, and that Vicar: This Churchwarden, and that
Side-man, whom he himself, when he came to summon him to the Synod, for a
Cheese, or a Gammon of Bacon, had undertaken to excuse for none appearance. But
when he is once Excommunicated, there is no remedy, but he must trudg to the
Chancellor or Official for absolution, who after he has once absolved his
Purse of a few Groates, gives him his blessing, and sends him away. Answ.
to Banc. p. 35 Ec. Gov. 134.


Their Convocationhouse is held to be an unlawful assembly, stuffed full of
Popish, and profane Chancellours, Lawers and other Ravening Wolves. None are
chosen to come there, but such as are known to be utter enemies Supplic. to
the Parl. p. 47. to 55
to all sincerity; and if it come to pass, that any man there seem to favor
the cause of Christ, he is immediately banished out of their Synagogue. These
Romish birds have always condemned the Lords ordinances; and all of them,
bended and linked themselves together, to maintain gross corruptions, and
Fresh suit ^. 1, p. 115, to 123.
to prevent Christ from bearing rule in the Church by his own Laws. In
memory of man, they never concluded any thing for the common good of the
Church, more then by others was better don to their hands: But much evil has
come from them, and more would, if their commission had served thereto.

I had forgotten almost their high Commission, which is erected (say the
Nonconformists) to suppress the liberty of the Church, and to maintain Alt.
Dam. p. 36, 39.
the usurped power of the persidious Prelates; What is it but indeed the
Spanish Inquisition? Set me up this throne, and Satan shall set up Papistrie,
or any other Religion whatsoever in short process of time; for they sit at the
rudder, and may turn religion as it pleases them, and no doubt will, when
they shall see a fit occasion, and themselves to have able power.

We should come now to the 4. point, which is their manner of proceeding; Of
this something already has been spoken, but certainly if I should here fully
set down the notorious vileness thereof, as the Nonconformists report it to
be, a whole book would not contain the same.

Curt. Chu. pow. page 34. and 6. Q. Chur. wom. p. 28 Def. Pet. for refor. 129.
Park. Cro. l. 1. 148.
Howsoever the Hierarchy will bear with Church Papists, and whoremongers, with
non-residents, idle, ignorant, superstitious, and adulterous Clergy men; admit
freely a Doctor Lamb, or any like monstrous monster, to live peace-ablie amidst
all his known abominations, and let go scott-free, and unpunished known
Atheists, Charmers, Blasphemers, Drunkards, Fornicators, Heretics, Prophaners
of the Sabbath, etc. Notwithstanding those, called Puritans, which will not
observe their Traditions and beggarly Ceremonies, shall be hurryed up and down
to their spiritual Syon pl. page 125.
courts, upon every occasion, and there be scorned, derided, taunted and
reviled with odious and contumelious speeches, eyed with big, and stern
looks, have proctors procured, to make personal invectives against them; made
to dance attendance from court to court, Eng. puri. 26.
and from term to term, frowing at them in presence, and laughing at them
behind their backs; never leaving molesting of them, till they have emptied
their purses, or caused them to make shipwreck of their consciences, or driven
them out of the Land, or lastly Dial. str. Chapter 114. Them. Dis. pre. supp. Gover.
D. str. Chapter 128. 114. 119. Necess. Discip. 15 Lear. Dis. Ec. Go. p. 92.
by imprisonment starved, stifled, and pined them to death. Thus they cherish
vice, and correct virtue, give men leave to be any thing saving good
Christians; Besides, in these unclean stews, all is done for money, nothing is
regarded else, for money any sin may be bought out with them: but those which
will not fee them, shall be cursed and cast into hell; for every triffle,
although they have done no evil at all, but contrariewise for doing that
which is right and good; And this is so manifest a truth, as the Prelates
Creatures have openly confessed: The Church Censures now a days do only
touch the purse, evil doers when they have paid their D. Andr. ser. to the
Convoc.
see, return scott free. If no money, then have at the off enders with the
Episcopal Sword, presently at one blow they are cut off from the Church,
delivered over unto Satan, proclaimed Publicans, Heathens, Anathema; For the
most ridiculous Lear. Dis. Ec. Go. 99 1 Adm. 6. Fresh suit l. 2. 421.
things, and against every good man, these brutish thunderbolts do fly up and
down, and only to be feared of the purse.

And yet this is not the greatest wickedness which is committed by these
peslilent fellows: for it is further affirmed that their learned preachers are
excommunicated many times by foolish boys. No marvel therefore their
censures, are not regarded, and that the Nonconformists, give counsel that no
man should make any conscience of them, for surely they are of no more effect,
weight or consequence, then if a villain or rogue, should give sentence of
death against a lawful Prince. I forbear to mention the bawdy pleading, of
their Doctors, and proctors, in those courts* and the sumners, yea and
Registers themselves, it is so scurilous, unclean and beastly, as the
Nonconformists, say it would greive a chaste care to hear it; For the
Archdeacons and Chauncellours, are fain to laugh it out many times, when they
cannot hold their countenance any longer. Here were a fit place for him, who
published the lying libels, under the name of Lawne, Fowler, Saunders, and
Bullard, for in those courts his unclean tongue might have matter enough to
talk of. 2. Adm. 6.


In the writing of these things there comes to my mind a speech, which a B.
spoke once to me in private. I relating to him certain base, and inhumane
cariages which they did me in his courts, out of great compassion he uttered
these words: I pray God (says he) to keep all good men out of their hands,
his speech was good, but in what a case is he himself all the while, which
vpholds with both hands, these soul murderers, their court and courses, and
yet in his conscience is persuaded that they are all stark naught.

It is not needful that I proceed farther in this point, seeing the
Nonconformists, do generally affirm, that their Church is still under the
Bondage of Antichrists Government, M. Davis. page 2. Syon pl. 1^1. Neces. Di.
2. 3. 8. Brigh. Rev. 3. p. 202. Pref. Dio. Tri. Epi. to Read. Them. disc. Prot.
fr. scott. page 49.
the very same false and tyrannous discipline, that is pourtrayed out in the
Popes Canons, for which cause we refuse say they to have Christ an immediate
King in the immediate government of the Church, so as great indignity is
offered unto him, as if some base underlings unto a King, should commit his
beloved spouse, unto the direction of the mistress of the stews, and enforce
her, to live after the order of a brothel house. I will here conclude with this
argument:

Whatsoever is contrary to the institution of Christ, and his written word, is
Antichristian* and is to be banished out of Church of the God.

But the Government by Lord Bishops, with Episcopal domination, is contrary to
the institution of Christ and his written word.

Therefore it is Antichristian, and is to be banished out of the Church of God.

SECT. III:
WE have heard, what the Nonconformists say, of their Church Government: in
this Section we will lay down our conclusions from it: and these are cheiflie.
3. First, No obedience must be yielded to these Ecclesiast. officers I say, we
may neither acknowledge their authority, nor in any thing, kind, or degree
partake with them in their administration: but strictly avoid the same, as we
would avoid wrath, and vengeance to come. There is no need that I allege
Scriptures, reasons etc. (As before) for confirmation M. Bates 87. 88. 154 Syon
pl. 38. 107. 108. Protest. from Sco. 94. Mart. Iun. 83. 84. Mart. sen.
of this, seeing the Nonconformists, go with us fully in the thing, and do
affirm, that men ought not to appear, in their courts, neither to obey or
regard their citations excommunications, warrants etc. Nor to receive any
absolution from them, in a word, not to yield obedience to them: in any one
thing, which comes from them, as they are Bishops, Archdeacons, Chancellors,
Commiss. officials, etc. For this were an acknowledging of them, and a way, to
maintain them, in their usurpation, pride, Col. 2.
idolatry, covetuousnes, etc. Beside, we should suffer men, to rule then over
us at their pleasure, and so not Gal. 6. 1.
stand fast in that Christian liberty, which the Lord commands us to do.

Moreover it is certain, a man cannot obey the Bishops Government, but he must
necessarily, transgress, against the Laws of the Realm, and to prove this,
an argument may be framed thus.

Whosoever shall allow or countenance in word or deed, any foreign power,
authority, or jurisdiction (and more particularily of the Pope of Rome) makes
himself a transgressour to the King and to the Laws.

But such as obey the B^. Fool. Government, do allow and countenance, in word
and died a foreign power, authority, and jurisdiction, and particularly of the
Pope of Rome.

Therefore such as obey the B^. Eccles. Government, make themselves
transgressors to the King and the Laws.

1 Eliz. 1. 1 Iaco. R.
Both parts of the reason are evident and clear as the light. The former, are
of the words of the oath of Allegiance: Touching the later to weet, that the
Prelates exercise a foreign power, authority, and jurisdiction, derived from
the Pope: We have before sufficiently proved. And therefore it behooves all the
Kings subjects, to look well to this thing, least they be not only forsworn,
but incur also the penalty of the Law: which is after conviction,
forfeitures, judgments, and executions, due to high treason.

Our second inference is, that the public assemblies of England are false and
Antichristian: and therefore to beleft: this necessarily follows upon the
former premises: for if they have not the power of the censures, and of
excommunication: but stand under a government, which came wholly and every part
from the devil, and Antichrist, then is their condition naught: the reason is,
because this power is of absolute necessity, for the Churches of Christ, an
essential property thereof, and serves not only for their well being but the
being it self, for without this there can be no De consc. 1, 4, cap. 24 214.
coupling of the parts and members together. And so much D. Ames, testifyeth.
Now the assemblies of England were not gathered by any such power, but in their
first constitution wanted the same, and had this Def. Pet. for Ref. p. 7.
false power, which is exercised at this day, as the Nonconformists do
aknowledge. Our Arguments which we have used in this point, have been to this
effect.

Every true visible Church has a power immediately under Christ to execute
Church Government. But the public congregations of England have not any such
power under Christ, to execute Church Government. Therefore they are not true
visible churches.

What they will say to this, I know not: but hitherto they have, either been
silent, or answered to no purpose in the world: For it is usually their manner,
to tell us how the Churches in Corinth, Pergamus, Thyatira, etc. neglected to
execute discipline, as though there were no difference between omitting, to
administer the ordinance, and the want wholly of it; yea and to have an
Antichristian and Divelish in the room of it. Indeed herein they well resemble
children, which being not able to read the lesson given them, do skip over,
and take another easy one: So these, leave altogether the point in hand, which
is to prove by Gods word, that a true Church may want in it self immediate
power under Christ, to execute Ecclesiastical Government, and may be subject
to that which was brought-in by the Romish Beast: and talk of a matter, which
I think no man ever denied. It is true, some have assayed to prove it, but
after many thoughts, spent about it, we have had nothing but wind from them:
namely of a city wiihout a wall: of a vinyard, garden, Orchard etc. Wanting a
hedge, fence, bounds etc. And such broken stuff, not worthy of any answer:
For where do they read in Scripture, that this power, which Christ has given
to his Church, is compared to a wall, hedge, etc. But rather may be better
likened, to the power of the body, which receives food, and 1 Cor. 5.
whereby excrements are purged and avoided, the want whereof were prodigious in
nature, neither could the body possibly subsist and live.

And here by the way, I think it convenient, to answer briefly, unto some
reproachful passages, written by D. Lai^en, against the Separatists, he accuses
them, l. 1. cap. 14 page 38.
of strange and unsound conclusions: but names nothing: only from M. Park.
Polit. Eccles. he Englisheth a sillogisme in this manner. If Discipline be so
necessary and also unchangeable, it is lawful to separate from such Churches as
do not use it, (say the Prelates) but Discipline is vnchangablie necessary,
(say the Separatist) Ergo it is lawful to separate from such Churches as do
not use it. The minor he grants to be true but denies the Major, and to prove
it false he gives this reason. For want of an integrall part of the whole; or
of some essential part in it self (though not of the whole) is no sufficient
ground for separation.

He might with more credit and good conscience, have granted the Major also,
then sought to refute it by frothy, empty, and impertinent words: for first he
speaks as a man most ignorant of the nature of Church power, for were he able
truly to define it: he should see that it is of such necessity, as a people
cannot constitute themselves in the right order of the Gospel without it, as
we have before expressed. 2. If the Bishops Major as he terms it be well
understood it, caries this meaning: discipline is so necessary, that where it
is not, there can be no Church ordinances rightly administered: no true
ministry worship* Sacraments, Censures, etc. And it is certainly so, and if M.
D. have any thing to object against it, let him speak out, he knows his
liberty. 3. If M. D. will but hold up his words against the light, he shall see
they have not the face of an answer: for let his words be granted: what is
this to the necessity of discipline, unless he could prove, that the same is
not so essential but a true Church may wholly want it, The which thing, neither
he nor any man is able to prove, and therefore he only beggs baselie the
matter, but proves nothing; and therefore for the warm clothes, whereof he
speaks, he may even keep them himself, to cover the nakedness of his
Argument.

I will not here speak of his irreligious phrase, comparing the holy way of
God, to hatching, neither of his untruth, to say that separatisme was not
before B. Whitgift wrote for Ceremonies. I think the man knows better, to wit,
that from false ministers, worship, etc. the Saints have separated before Whit.
either wrote, or was borne. If our practice be otherwise even by the
testimonies of the Nonconf. let it be manifested. If this will not serve the
turn, let him then take knowledge of what D. Ames says: In the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Fresh suit, l. 1. p. 10.
Reign, there was a Company of honest men, that for the Ceremonies, refused to
join with the Parish assemblies at London, as appears in the examination of
John Smith, W. Nixson, extant in a book called part of a Register. We could
prove (if there were need) in King Edwards Reign, that there were some good
Christians, which would not communicate with the Parish Assemblies, but there
is no use hereof, seeing we have the word of God, to justify our practice.

There is one thing more, which Mr. Dr. much talks of, and makes it even the
burden of his song, i. e. that the Bb. are the authors of the Separatists
Scisme, their practice butteth full upon the others unreasonable and unsound
reasoning. But what if it appear that Mr. Dr. Arguments do lead rather to
separation, and that he speaks one thing, and practices another; Would not
this be a strange sight, especially to himself? Now whether this be so, we
will here try by some reasons, in his own mood and figure. If the book of
Common Prayer, used in the assemblies of England, be an insectious Leiturgie,
Romish stuff, a devised service, and raked out of 3 Romish Channells, it is
lawful to separate from such churches as do use it, (say the Learned) but the
Book of Common Prayer, See before page 9.
used in the Assemblies of England, is an in sections Leiturgie, Romish stuff,
a devised service, and raked Svons pl. 42 318, 314, ^^.
out of 3 Romish Channells* says Mr. Dr.) Ergo it is ^awfull to separate from
such chu^^h^^ ^s do use it, specially when they continue obstinate and
incorrigible in the practice thereof, after due dealing and conviction, as I
suppose Mr. Dr. will freely confess, they have done even after due means
used, both by many godly Learned from time to time, and now at last by
himself. If the ministry of the church of England be unlawful and See before
page 27, 28
Antichristian, it is lawful to separate from it (say the Learned) but the
ministry of the church of England is unlawful Syons pl. 3
and Antichristian (says Mr. Dr.) Ergo it is lawful to separate from it.

Syons pl. 111.
If the church of England has not Christ's Key, she is not his house; (says
Mr. Dr.) But the church of England has not Upon Rev. 3. page 202 Edit. 3. See
before page 136 Syons pl. 85, and p. 3. 314. 181.
Christ's Key, (says Mr. Brightman and others) Ergo she is not his house, and
so consequently to be separated from.

To separate from corruptions is lawful (says Mr. Dr.) the ministry,
worship, and Church government of England are corruptions, (says Mr. Dr.) Ergo
it is lawful to separate from the ministry, worship, and Church government
of England.

I do not gather up these his arguments for any need we have of them, but to
put him in mind of his own take heed: For if he say one thing, and do
another, he may perhaps at last fall worse then upon the quick sands of
separation, even into the bottomless pit of condemnation. And whereas I
perceive he is not willing to be compared to Barrow; for my part I am not
willing that he should, for Reverend Barrow was true to his grounds, and walked
conscionable in the holte order of the Gospel: to which order Mr. Dr. has
been hitherto an utter enemy, but for what reason, let himself look to it. I
have spoken the more, because of this man's insolent boasting against us, and
the untrue reports, which he gives forth of refuting the chiefest separatists:
I hope now the world shall see what ability he has in this thing, or
otherwise all will have just cause to conclude, that Mr. Dr. will speak more
to his good friends in private against us, then he is willing to have
publicly known, to receive an answer to it.

Our third inference is, If church government be a matter of Faith, necessary
to salvation, as is any outward ordinance of God, and wholly wanting in the
Assemblies of of England, then it is the duty of all the faithful there,
(shaking off the Prelates yoke) to erect this power, and exercise the same
among them. I do not mean that any private person should meddle with the
affairs of the Realm, but that every one, in his own person, do place
himself, about the throne of God, leaving the abuses of the public state, to
be reformed, by such as have a lawful calling thereto. It is certain, this
ordinance must be set up, retained, and practiced, though Princes are utterlie
against it: We must not tarry one hour, to exspect a new grant from men, to
do our duties in the true worship of God, when as we have a sufficient grant
allreadie from heaven; for if we do, we shall surely dye in our sins, and
our blood shall be upon our own head. The primitive Christians had not the
Magistrates leave to serve God, yet they did, whatsoever he commanded them:
Their practice is an example for us; and all believers are bound to do the
like, as often, as there is the like just, and necessary occasion: For as the
approbation of men and Angels, makes the ways of God, and works of religion,
never a whit the more lawful, but only the more free from bodily danger, so
neither can their disalowance make unlawful such duties of religion, as the
word of God approves, nor can they give dispensation to any person, to
forbear the practice thereof.

But because my purpose chiefly is, to show the judgment of the
Nonconformists, touching religious ordinances, and the use and practice
thereof, I will therefore lay down their words, that so the reader may see,
how Mr Bate p. 41, 42.
well they, and we, in these things do accord, except in Obedience. The
Magistrate (say they) is but the servant of the Lord, and therefore has no
power to bind the the conscience, neither can he exempt any man from obedience
to God.

Another says, if the Law of man be wanting, yet the Church must not cease
from doing her duty and exercise her power which is granted her by Christ,
who has also promised Alt. Dam. p. 15.
his presence, when two or three are gathered together in his name, therefore
she may entreat, determine, and strengthen her decrees, and constitutions with
Ecclesiastical censures, and punishments, notwithstanding the Prince will not
assent, approve and ratify the Canons of the Church, nor confirm them by his
laws and fortify them with temporal punishments. M. Wing an eminent
Reformist, has 9. reasons in print, to prove that all persons, are necessarily
bound, to practice perpetually the ordinances and commandments of the
Gospel, although the civil Magistrate allow not thereof, and because they are
effectual and weighty. I will here lay them down.

A Collection of sundry matters, to prove the use and practice of Gods
ordinance.
1. If the only sure way for comfort of our souls be the practice of Gods
ordinances for his visible Church under the Gospel, then we are bound to
practice the said ordinances, notwithstanding the Magistrate do forbid the
said practice. But the only sure way for the comfort of our souls is the
practice of Gods ordinances for his visible Church under the Gosp ll. Therefore
we are bound to practice the said ordinances notwithstanding the Magistrate do
forbid the said practice.

2. All the Magistrates power wherein he is actually to be obeyed, is only
where he commands or forbids, from God, or for God. But the Magistrate
forbidding the practice of this way, does not forbid from God nor for God.
Therefore the Magistrate forbidding the practice of this way, is not actually
to be obeyed.

3. Where the Magistrate may not command, and be lawfully obeyed in the
Negative part of any commandment of the first Table, there he may not forbid,
and be Lawfully obeyed in the affirmative. But the Magistrate may not command
and be lawfully obeyed in the Negative of the 2 commandment; Therefore he
may not forbidd and be lawfully obeyed in the affirmative.

4. We cannot justify, specially the continued omission of any duty, and
chiefly of the first table, unless we be by violence restrained from the
practice thereof. But to omit the practice of these ordinances of God for his
visible church under the Gospel, because it is not tolerated or allowed by
the Magistrate, is a continued omission of a duty of the first table, and this
not omitted by reason of a violent restraint. Therefore we cannot justify the
omission of this duty.

5. It is not lawful to omit the duty of charity, to relieve any poor
saint of God, though the Magistrate forbidd it: Therefore we may not omit this
duty of piety, though the Magistrate forbid it.

6. If the Lord foresaw the averseness of Magistrates to the practice of this
church Government, and yet did never exempt nor dispense with the peoples
omission therefore, then we may not omit or forbear this duty, though the
Magistrate do not tolerate it. But the Lord foresaw the averseness of
Magistrates to the practice of this church Government, and yet did never exempt
nor dispense with the peoples omission of this duty. Therefore we may not omit
or forbear this duty, though the Magistrate forbid.

7. Whatsoever was commanded to the 7 Churches, to be practiced under
persecuting Magistrates opposing, that we must not omit, though the Magistrate
does not tolerate it. The practice of Church Government was commanded to the
7 Churches, Revelation 2 and 3. Therefore we must not omit the practice of
Church Government, though the Magistrate does not tolerate it.

8. If the Church Government may be omitted, wheresoever, and whenever the
Magistrate does not allow it, then it does depend wholly for the practice of it
on the will of man. But it does not depend, neither ought it to depend wholly
upon the will of man. Therefore the Church Government may not be omitted, when
and wheresoever the Magistrate does not allow it.

9. If the Magistrate may forbid me the practice of the ordinances of God,
then he may forbid me to be so good a subject, as I can be or may be: But the
Magistrate may not forbid me to be so good a subject to Christ as I can be or
may be. Therefore the Magistrate may not forbid me the practice of the
ordinances of God.

The Nonconformists are not alone in this thing, for all the reformed Churches
affirm the same (viz.) that it is the part and duty of all the faithful to
submitt to the Harmony of confess. Sect. 10. Belgic artic. 28, and French
artic. 26. See the History of Scotland p. 256. and 283.
Doctrine, and discipline, appointed by Christ, yea though the contrary edicts
of Princes and Magistrates do forbid them upon pain of death; And so have
their practices been many ages together, and there is good reason for it: For
the Regiment and Government of the Church depends not (as the Nonconformists
well teach) upon the authority of Princes, but upon the ordinance of God, who
has most mercifully and wisely so established the same, that as with the
comfortable aid of Christian Magistrates, it may singularly Discourse of
Eccles-Govern. p. 9. 10.
flourish and prosper: so without it, it may continue, and against the
adversaries thereof prevail; For the Church eraveth help, and defense of
Christian Princes, T. C. l. 1. p 51.
to continue and go foreward more peaceably and profitably to the setting up
of the Kingdom of Christ, but all authority she receives, is immediately of
God.

Before we proceed to another point, we may here frame this argument: If the
professors of the Gospel in England, have not among them a true church
Government, but are under that which came from the great Antichrist, then are
they bound to set up that ordinance of God, and to to practice it, not
withstanding the Magistrate do forbid the said practice. But the professors
of the Gospel in England have not among them a true church Government, but are
under, etc. Therefore are they bound to set up that ordinance of God, and to
practice it, notwithstanding the Magistrate does forbid the said practice.
These are both their own positions, and so soundly proved, that no man
liveing is able to confute them. But some will say, this is hard to do* I
answer, difficulties must not hinder duties: where we have an express
commandment laid upon us, there al disputation must cease, of hardness,
dangers, losses, etc. Excellently for his purpose speaks Calvine: There is
no travel or labor so great, which we must not endure, to the end we may
enjoy the face of God, how perilous soever the passage be, be it (as they say)
betwixt fire Sermon upon Psalm. 27. ver. 8.
and water, yet let men go foreward to have liberty, to serve and worship God
pur^lie: Is a man in going, pinched with famine or thrist, yet let him not
faint, but scrape the earth rather with his nails, for food and maintenance,
then be turned, or driven back from coming to the Temple of God.

Many use to say: they wish all were well, and pray for reformation. To this I
answer, it is not enough that we desire to have all things well, except we
endeavor to make them so. He that wants and hungers for bodily food, deserves
to starve, except with all he use diligence, and sore labor also, as he is
able to get it. Again, prayers I confess are good, but without practice they
profitt not: The heart which setts the hand at work, and is full of zeal,
obedience, sincerity, Exo. 14. 15
etc. shall do well, and prosper. When Moses stood crying at the red sea,
what says God unto him? speak unto the children of Israel, that they go
forward. I am persuaded the Nonconformists pray daily for their deliverance
from the Bb. government: but here is their fault, they go not forward, but are
like him in the Prove: which lies in the ditch, and cries God help, but does not
seek to help himself, though he can, and is able.

Others think because men's laws are against Christ, that they shall therefore be
excused, in omitting their service unto him, but they will find it otherwise,
and as for this shift, it denotes a most unsound* heart, for as we would repute
that servant very naught, who being commanded by his master to do diverse
things; does only that which serves for his own credit, profit, pleasure etc.
but the rest not being so, (though more weighty and necessary) he purposly
omitteth: so certainly they carry the broad Characters of notable hipochrites
even in their foreheads, which walk only in such ways of Christ as ly open
for them, by the authority of man, where they may go with good leave safely,
and free from all bodily danger* but where the commandments of God, are
hedged up with thorns, by men's prohibitions, there they fowllye step aside,
and walk corruptly* when the Apostles were sent forth to plant Churches, if
they should have left the Lords work, because they were forbidden to preach in
the name of Jesus, they had surely sinned, and would have been greatly
punished for it; are not the ordinances of the Gospel, as strictly to be kept
Upon psa. 51, ver. 7. p. 200, 203
now, as heretofore? yes surely, Mr. Hierom says, that such outward
observances in matters of religion, as are of divine institution, not the least
of them are to be neglected, despised or difused, until he that ordained them
shallbe pleased in express terms, to disanul them. If not the least must be
omitted, then not Church government, because it is a chief ordinance, and
without the which (as I said before) no public worshipp can be rightly
administered.

There are some, which out of tenderness of conscience refuse to kneel in the
act of receaving, and do take the Sacrament sitting. Moreover do meet in
private families, to Fast and Pray together; and are persuaded that herein they
do well, though their practice be forbidden by the Magistrate. Now I desire
these seriously to consider, if they may lawfully perform some religious
duties against Human Laws, why not others? and specially if they be such
duties, as serve more for Gods glory, the furtherance of the Gospel, the
edification of the Church, and salvation of their own souls.

I do not find any thing written by Dr. Ames about this point, although he
well knew that one maine ground of our separation from their Parish Assemblies,
is because (as the Nonconformists affirm) they want the power of Christ, and
stand under that which was taken wholly from the Pope; yet it may be, he thought
that he had said enough hereof, in the Addition of his first book, page 26.
where he repeates certain words, which had been before printed in his reply
to D. Morton: If Page 31.
Gaius (says he) had made a separation from the Church, wherein Diotrephes
lived, whether the Apostle John had been the cause of that scandal, because he
condemned his abuse of excommunication. This speech (says D. Burgess) is the
weakest pretense that could be devised; and truly so it is, and therefore I
marvel, seeing he was told so much that he had not either said something
for his own defense, or blotted it out, that so the weakness and
impertine^cy of it, might never have been seen. Could not D. Ames perceive any
difference, between the abuses there noted by John in Diotrephes, and those
which are mentioned by the Nonconformists, against the Church of England; we
do not read, that Diotrephes is said to be an unlawful and Antichristian
minister, that he had brought into the Church a devised worship, had set up a
false Government, yet such are the faults which the Nonconformists have found
out, in the Church of England; I wonder therefore, that the Doctor should so
much overshoot himself; For though we do not think, that it was lawful,
either for Gaius, or any other member of that Church, to separate, because
Diotrephes played the Diocesan (but they were to stay, and seek his
reformation) notwithstanding we think, yea, and do know of a certainty, that
from a church, where the ministry, worship, and government is unlawful and
Antichristian, we may warrantablie depart; and such is our Separation by the
Nonconformists Principles.

Thus Reader thou have heard the most, and all which Dr. Ames has said, to
maintain the reputation of their grounds, charged with Separatisme; now if
thou considerest how effectually he has refuted the Rejoinder, in the matter
of Ceremonies, but contrary wise about this point of Separation, how he speaks
either nothing, or nothing to any purpose, thou may well perceive that in the
former, he had the truth with him, but not in the other, although (it seems)
he was unwilling in plain terms, to give the case away.

CHAP. IV.
THat the ministry, worship, and church government of England, is not
lawfully to be joined with, we have evidentlie allreadie proved by their own
Principles: In this Chapter we will speak of their Church, observing still the
former order, that is: 1. I will show their Tenets, touching a true visible
Church. 2. How far their English Church by their own testimony differs
from, and is contrary to it. 3. I will lay down our inferences and
conclusions. 4. Answer to such Objections, as may seem to carry most weight
against them.

To let pass the strict signification of the word (church) and also the sundry
acceptations of it; concerning true visible churches, the Nonconformists say,
that there are none, but particular ordinary congregations, Offer for Confer.
page 2. Dioces. Tri. p. 12. Neces. of Ref. p. 64, 65. First part of repl. in
answ. to D. Down. Defen. l. 1. par. 2. p. 44, etc. and second repl. l. 3. chap.
1, p. 177, etc.
such Churches, and such only, they affirm God erected, but as for National,
Provincial, Diocesan, they are now of human institution, and altogether
unjustifiable by the scriptures. The author, institutor, and framer of every
true visible Church, M. Clev. upon pro. chapter 9, ver. 1. p. 3.
is only Christ: for he alone has the disposing of the word, vouchsafing it to
some, and denying it to others; and it is his spirit, which converteth men's
souls, and begets them to everlasting life, and so they become stones for
this building.

For the persons whereof the same are constituted, they ought to be a Faithful
People, called M. Iaco. institut. of true vis. chur. pa. 7. M. Bradsh unreason.
of separ. p. 107. Fall of B. p. 50. 1 T^. 3, 15. Esa. 2, 2. Zach. 8, 3. Esa. 5,
1. Song. 4, 12 Ephe. 4, 16 Son. 4, 10, 7 1 Pet. 2. 9. Psa. 48, 3. Protest. from
Scotl. p. 22. T. C. l. 1. p. 50. Neces. disc. p. 7. M. Bradsh unreas. of sep.
p. 107. Mr. H. upon Psa. 110, ver. 3. fol. 396. T. C. l. 1. p. 51. M. Iacob^
institut. of true vis. chapter p. 2.
and separated from the world, and the false worship, and the ways thereof.
Such I say as keep the Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus; for how
else should the Church be, the House, Mountain, and Temple of the eternal God,
his Vinyard, Kingdom, Heritage, and enclosed Garden, the body of Christ, his
spcuse, love, sister, Queen; a chosen generation, a holy nation, a peculiar
people, and the joy of the whole Earth. Howsoever therefore there may be
Hypocrites, which bear the face of godly men in the church, whose wickedness
is only known to God, and so cannot be discovered by men, yet in the
churches of Christ, there ought to be admitted no drunkard, no whoremonger,
etc. at least, which are known, because the temple of God must be kept as
near as it is possible, free, and clean from all pollutions, and prophanations
whatsoever.

The means whereby men are made fit for this Church of God, is by the word,
when they have well proffited by hearing the same, they are then freely, and of
their own accord, to present themselves to the Lord, that is, either to join
themselves to some true Church already constituted, or by voluntary profession
of faith, and obedience of Christ, to knit themselves together in a spiritual
outward society or Mr. Bate p. 26. Offer for confer. p. 2 Ephe. 2, 12 R^. 9,
4, 5. 1 Cor. 5, 4 Luke 1. 71. Zach. 2. 10 11. Mat. 28, ult. Protest. from Scot.
p. 22. Dr. Ames de consc. l. 4, c. 24. p. 211 212 Rev. 1, 13
body politic; Now every true particular congregation assembled lawfully in
the name of Christ, is an independent body, and has by Christ's ordinance
power to perform all public worship, for unto it appertains the covenant,
the worship, the sacraments, and all ecclesiastical discipline, having also
the promises of peace, love, glory, and salvation, and of the presence of God,
and his continual protection, and for this cause, it is the duty of every
faithful christian, to make himself actually a member thereof. 1, In respect
of Gods institution, Matthew. 18. 17. in which not only the precept is
contained: but a certain necessity of the means. 2. In respect of the
presence of God, and of Christ. For if we will com to God, we ought then to com
to that place where his presence is in a special manner, and where he is to be
found, of all such as secke him with the whole heart. 3. In respect of Gods
glory, the which by this means is publicly propagated, Psalm. 65, 5, and 133,
3
and advanced; For as the name of God in the old Testament was placed in
Jerusalem, so now it is in the Churches of the Saints, although not in this or
that 1 Cor. 5. 12.
place. 4. In respect of Gods covenant and promise, for those which are in the
Church, are directly (as it were) joined to his blessings, the which are there
powered forth abundantly upon them. 5. In respect of our profession, for
otherwise it cannot be, but those evidences Heb. 10, 24, 25. 1 Cor. 11. 17, and
12, 25, 27. Romans 1, 12
will be darkened, whereby the faithful are discerned from unbeleevers. 6. In
respect of mutual edification, which necessarily follows, upon our joining
together in the fellowship of the Gospel.

Touching the manner and order of this joining unto true visible Churches, the
Nonconformists do Fall of B. pa. 30. Curr. Chu. pow. p. 54
describe it thus: He which is to be received, first is to go to the Elders of
the Church, to be well informed and instructed by them, and to have his cause
by them propounded to the congregation, afterward he is to come himself into
the public assembly, all men looking upon him with love and joy, as upon one
that comes to be married, and there he is to make a profession of Faith, and
to be asked sundry needful questions, to which he having well answered, and
being found worthy, by the consent of the whole Church, is joyfullie to be
taken into their communion; and this they say, was the practice of the
primitive Churches: For Lib. 6.
Eusebius reports in his Ecclesisticall History, that a Roman Emperor,
named Philip (who first became a Neces. dis. p. 172. printed at Geneva.
Christian of all the Emperors, and first submitted the Roman Empire unto
Christ desireing to communicate with the rest of the Church, was not admitted,
before he had openly made profession of true religion.

When a people are thus established, in the faith and order of the Gospel,
their care then must be to walk unreproovablie. and as in the natural body,
every several member is (as it were) the member of every other, in serving to
their good, as the eye does see, the Cartwr. Cate. of Christ. Rel. p. 303 304.
hand does take, the tongue does speak, for the good of any other member: so
must it be in the church of God, every person according to his place and
calling ought to be as profitable unto the rest as he can, and Neces. dis. p.
171. 172
specially their godly watchfulness must be, to keep their communion clean
and pure; and therefore no unholy person may partake with them in the holy
sacraments, but such only (as far as men can judge by their outward
profession) that do belong truly unto Christ; When any one among them falls
into sin, T. C. l 1. p. 50.
he must be lovinglie admonished thereof, and brought to repentance, or else to
be cut of by excommunication, if he continue obstinate in his sins. How this
See p. 130 138.
duty of brotherly admonition is to be performed, we have already showed, this
only is to be added, viz. that it ought necessarily to be practiced, and may
not be omitted, for certainly the tolleration of known iniquity, is a grievous
sin of the church, and in its own nature Rev. 2, 20. 1 Cor. 5, 6 Curr. chu.
pow. p. 20. D. Ames de consc. l. 4, p. 212. 213.
tends to the corruption thereof, yea it defiles the communion Hag. 2. 13.
and every one makes himself guilty of the pollution, which does not endeavor
as much as in him lies, to remoove such offenses: In a word, this mixture
which arises by tolleration, much hinders the comfort and edification of the
godly.

As in all the rest, so in this point the Nonconformists and we, are of
judgments alike, and it is our great grief, that they will not join with us
in practice also, and make themselves members of such true visible churches, as
here they have well described, for so should Gods name be glorified, the
Gospel propagated, Satan's, and Antichrists Kingdom much weakened, and
themselves obtain mercy in the great day of the Lord. They pray, let thy
Kingdom come, but how do they think, that ever they shall behold the beauty
and glory thereof, seeing they resolve not to set their hands unto the raising
of it up, but do leave the work wholly to the Magistrate: so that if the arm
of flesh will not build a spiritual temple for the Lord, he is likely for
their part, to have none at all: but whether such courses will not prove ill at
last, I leave it to themselves to think of.

SECT. II.
WE heard before what a true visible Church is, now it follows, that we show
how every way contrary to the former pattern, the English assemblies are
said to be by the Nonconformists. First, they acknowledge, that their
reformation at first after Popery, was Fall of B. p. 30, 31
not rightly founded, because neither then, nor ever since, was there any
profession of Faith publicly made by the persons, which entered into Church
estate, but indeed it was then held, and so it is at this present, a sufficient
Curt. chu. pow. p. 54
thing to be members of their churches, if men come to their service and
Sacraments, take the oath of allegiance, and be conformable to their wicked
Ceremonies, whosoever does this, passes for a Protestant; howsoever in
practice he be a Papist, Arminian, etc. yet is he more regarded then the most
sincere Christians, whom they call Puritants. And by this means it is, that
in the bosom of their church are swarms of Atheists, Idolaters, Papists,
erroneous, and heretical Sectaries, witches, Charmers, Sorcerers, murderers,
thieves, adulterers, D. Chater. Sermon. on Romans 12, page 65, 66 Neces. dis. p.
33. Mr. Perk. on Mat. 6. ver. 9. p. 126, vol. 3.
liars, blasphemers, oppressors, voluptuous persons, whose God is their belly.

Moreover, such is the great ignorance of God, and his truth among them, that
the greatest multitude by many parts, do not understand the Lords prayer, or
the articles of Faith, or the doctrine and use of the Sacraments, there are not
five, among five skore, which do understand the necessary grounds and
principles of Religion, Dialog. concern. strif. of the Chur. pa. 99, 100
but many thousands, which are men and women grown, if a man ask them how
they shallbe saved, they cannot tell.

Mr. Nichols esteemed a forward preacher amongst Mr. Giffar. count. div pa. 48.
them says. We find by great experience (and I have now five and twenty
yeeares observed it) that in those places where there is not preaching, and
private conferring of the Plea of the innocent. p. 218
minister and the people; the most part have as little knowledge of God and of
Christ as Turks and Pagans, and to prove this, he gives an example in his own
flock, for I have been in a parish (says he) of four hundredth communicants,
and marvelling that my preaching was so little regarded, I took upon me to
confer with every man and woman, before they received the communion; and I
asked them of Christ, what he was in his person? his office? how sin came
into the world? what punishment for sin? what becomes of our bodies, being
rotten in the graves? and lastly whether it were possible for a man to live so
vprightlie, that by well doing he might win heaven? In all the former
questions, I scarce found ten in the hundred to have any knowledge, but in the
last question scarce one, but did affirm, that a mau migh be saved by his own
well doing, that he trusts he did so live, that by Gods grace, he should
obtain everlasting life, by serving of God and good prayers.

And it is no wonder, that the condition of the people is generally thus,
seeing they think that all the service of God, to lie in churching, crossing,
kneeling, Quest. co^cer. chur. of wom. page 63.
and being houseled, (as they call it) at Easter; and as for preaching, they
hold it a superfluous and needless ceremony; and therefore when their
service is done, they take it, they may Lawfully go out of the Church, though
the minister be ready to go into the pulpitt.

Mr. Hern. on Psa. 51, page 309. Cathol. confer. page 164. M. Giffard Dialog.
between a Pap. and Prot. p. 38 Preface to his Counterp.
Moreover, they say, that the greatest number of their people, are so wicked
and vile, that were it not to save their purses, and for the Laws of the
Kingdom, which do constrain and compel them, to make some outward
profession, they would make none all. For as Mr. Fenner says: Every man
follows the pride, covetuousnesse, whor^d^me, drunkenness of his own heart,
and no man remembers Joseph; the bars are filled with pleadings, and the
streets are full of the cries of the poor, fulness of meat, and contempt is
among us, and who considers? yet if this our sin were only against men,
and not against God, there might be some hope. But when the mouth of the
blasphemous swearer is not tied up, and the hands of the idolatrous generation
of Atheists and profane persons, be not chained, when the most holy and
precious word of God, is manifestly contemned, the joyful and heavenly tidings
of salvation, so negligently and ungratefully trodden under foot, the true and
faithful messengers pursued, arraigned, and diverse ways afflicted: then if
the old world for malicious imaginations; Sodom and Gomorra for pride,
fulness of meat, and vnmercifullnesse; If Jerusalem for abusing Gods
Prophets, and wilsu^nes were d^stroyd, what may we poor careless people look
for, if we do not repent, but (as it is almost universally feared) speedy
ruin, and utter desolation.

Another says: What Christian heart is so stony, that does not mourn? what
eye so dry, that does not shed tears? yea rather gush out with tears, to
consider and behold, the misery of our supposed glor^^us Church, by the
spiritual nakedness, blindness, and poverty thereof? I mean the great
ignorance, the superficial worship of God, the fearful blasphemies, and
swearings in houses, and streets, so also the direful cursings, the open
contempt of the word and Sacraments, the wicked prophanations of the Lords
days, the dishonor of superiors, the pride, the cruelty, the fornications,
the covetuousnesse, Defen. of certain argum. ag. G. Powel page 61.
the vs^ries, and other the like abominations, almost as grievous, as either
heretofore in the time, or now in the places of popery, when and where there
was no preaching at all of the Gospel.

Neces. dis. p. 9^.
It is also further testified, that the holy things among them, are
prostituted, and set open to adulterers, fornicators, drunkards, and all kind
of vicious and sinful livers; They set no porters at their church doors, to
keep out the polluted, but every unclean person is Plain declar. of Eccl.
disc. p. 172. Curt. chu. pow. p. 40.
permitted to enter freely. I say, all may come boldly to the Lords supper;
they look after nothing but this, that they kneel, which if they do but
observe, be their life and religion then, what it will, it matters not. Thus
are the mysteries of God profaned, in that, they communicate with Papists, and
other unclean people.

To draw unto a conclusion, not only are their congregatio^s, said to be
unrightly constituted, and to be impure and unholy lumps, but (which is the
depth of misery) they Neces. dis. p. 174.
have no means (as they stand) of reformation; for the wholesome remedies,
appointed by the Lord, to keep out unworthie persons, to preserve pure and
clean Gods ordinances, and to take away offenses, is not among them; and here
the reader may see what the reason is, that they say, the walls of Syon ly even
with the Supplicat. page 67. 1 Admon.
ground, and they have not scarce the face of a Church. For if it be as these
men report, it is Babel, no Bethel, which they have erected. I could name
others of them, which write the same things, but we have enough, to raise our
conclusion; the which I will lay down thus:

All true visible churches, gathered, and planted, according to Gods word,
consisted in their constitution of Saints only: But the Churches of England,
after Popery, were not so constituted, but on the conirarie for the greatest
number, of profane people, even mockers and contemners of religion, as
Atheists, Idolaters, Sorcerers, Blasphemers, and all sorts of miscreants, and
wicked livers. Therefore the Churches of England are not true visible churches,
gathered, and planted, according to Gods Word.

There is never a part of this argument, that they can deny, unless they will
let fall their own Principles. For the assumtion, I make no question, but it
will pass without exception, and none of them will have the face to oppose it,
considering how generally the thing has been affirmd, and still is upon all
occasions, both in word and writing. Now that the Proposition may appear as
true also. I will prove the same, 1. by Scriptures, 2. by reasons, 3. by the
testimony of the Learned: Of all which in the next Section.

SECT. III.
IF we take a strict view, of all the Churches which the Lord has constituted
since the beginning of the world, it will appear that at the orderly gathering
and planting, the members of them were all holy and good. I here intend of
visible and external holiness, and so far as men may judge, and not of that
which is within, and and hid from us: For I doubt not, but in Gods sight the
purest congregation on earth might consist at first of good and bad, and yet of
men, every person to be judged truly faithful, and sanctified, until any one
by D. Field of the chapter p. 3, 4, etc. 2 Pet. 2, 4. Jude 6. Eccl. 7, 29.
his iniquity, outwardly committed, appeared otherwise. Not to speak of the
Church of Angels, which God created in heaven, and which were all holy and
good, till some by transgression fell away. Neither of it in Paradise,
consisting of two persons, and both true believers. After the fall, the
constitution of the^ church, in the covenant of grace, was of good matter, and
such was the Lords care, to have the practice of it still preserved, Genesis 12,
1, and 17. Romans 4, 11 Ioh. 15, 19 2 Pet. 1* 4.
that he thrusted out Kain from the same, for the great wickedness, which he
fell into.

The Lord sealed not up with Abraham, the seal of the righteousness of faith,
until he left his Fathers house. and that idolatrous place, wherein he had
lived; which Psa. 45, 11 Rev. 18. 4, 2 Cor. 6.
signifies to us, that all men must necessarily come out of the world, and
from worldly corruptions, or else they are incapable to have a Church covenant
in Christ, confirmed unto them of God.

Romans 1. 7. 1 cor. 1, 2, Gal. 3, 3, Ephesians. 1, 13 Phil. 1, 1, Colos. 1, 2, 1
These. 1, 5, 9,
As for the visible Churches, planted by the Apostles, it is evide^t, that in
their collectio^, they consisted of, such and none other, as were called by the
Gospel, confessed their sins, believed, walked in the spirit, and separated
themselves from the false state, in which they stood members before. Such a
beginning had the congregations in Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Phillipp.
Colosse, Thessalonica, etc. and who dares affirm, that there was one man or
woman admitted a member at the constitution of any of these Churches, which had
been known to be an il liver, and did not first manifest sound repentance
thereof.

The matereall Temple was a tipe of the visible churches under the gospel, now
we read that it was built from the very foundation of costly stones, of
Cedars, 1 King, 6, 17, 18,
Algum, Fi^^e, and the like choice and special trees, and those all prepared
aforehand, hewed and perfect 2 chro. 1, 8, 9.
for the building, so that neither hammer nor axe, nor any tool was to be
heard in the house, in the building of it, no common or vile thing, was used
toward it, neither might any polluted person enter into it, and offer, until
he had repented, and embraced the faith, and been cleansed from his filthiness:
by the gates of 2 chro. 23 19. Lev. 22, 19 and 27, 11.
the house were Porters set, to keep the unworthy out. Upon the Altar there
might be offered no unclean beast, no nor that which was clean, having a
blemish upon it. What in all this was signified? Surely this: Such as will
build a spiritual house for the Lord to dwell in, must be a holy people: for
he is of that infinite Psa. 5, 4, 5, Hab. 1, 13.
purity, that he will not vouchsafe his special presence, unto profane
companies, which join themselves together; and therefore let it be far from
all men to prepare a place for him, with such trash, or to defile his holy
things with such unclean persons, or to offend his nostrels with the stench
of such sacrifices.

The reasons upon which our proposition is grounded, are these, 1. All wicked
men are forbidden expresslie by the word of God, from meddling with his
covenant or ordinances: Now if men to escape temporal punishment, are afraid
to transgress against the Laws of worldly Princes. Much more fearful should
Psa. 50. 16. Esa. 35, 8. Zach. 14, 21. Rev. 21, Vlt.
they be to break his* who is the King of Kings, and will inflict for it, upon
their souls and bodies torments eternally. 2. That which destroys a
Church^, and makes it, either to become a false Church, or no church at all,
cannot be a true Church, or be true matter whereof it is made: but men visiblie
wicked, and profane make the Church, a Synagoge of Satan, Babylon, Sodom,
Egypt; and so to be spued out, and removed. 3. It is against sense and common
reason, that a Church should be constituted of unholy People; For as in a
material See Mat. 3, 2. Act. 2, 37. 41.
house, the wood and stones must be first prepared, and then la^d orderly in
the building; So in the spiritual* men and women must by the word of God
necessarily be first reformed, before they are any way fit, to have any place
therein. 4. They which have no right to the holy things of God in the church,
are not to be admitted into it, neither is that Church, which is gathethered of
such persons, rightly constituted; But men of wicked conversation, have no
right to the holy things of God in the Church, and therefore that Church, Mat.
7, 6.
which is gathered of such, is not rightly constituted. Ephesians. 2, 1
5. They cannot perform the services and duties of members, for they are
spirituallie dead. If a master Romans 12, 1 1 Pet. 2, 5.
will not covenant with one to be his servant, which has in him no natural
life: much less, etc. 6. They have not Christ for their head, and therefore
cannot be of his body; For as in the natural body, there must be first a
natural union of the parts with the head, before there can be any action of
natural communion, between the head and the members, or one member and another;
So in this spiritual body, the members Ioh. 15, 2, 4 5. Romans 8.
must be first united with Christ the head, and become one with him, before
they can any way partake in his benefits, or have communion one with another,
as members of the same body under him the head. 7. They are altogether
incapable of this covenant; For Romans 7, 2
as a woman, which has been once a wife, cannot mary again with another man,
until her first husband be deceased, or she from him lawfully divorsed. so
neither Hos. 2, 19, 20.
can these be married to the Lord, till they have mortifyed their corruptions,
and put the world and Satan away, unto which before they were (as it were)
married 8. The Godly and wicked are contraries, guided Gal 5, 18.
and led by different causes: Now two contraries are not capable of one, and
the same form.

Thirdly, for this we have the judgment of the learned also. There must be
(says Molierus a profession of true In Psalm. 15
religton, and obedience yealded thereto, at least outwardly, to become a
member of the visible Church. Beza says, Annot. in Act. 2, 40
He is rightly joined to the church, which separates himself from the wicked.
Paul calls the Romans Saints (says Aretius) to put a difference between their
former estate wherein In Ro^. 1, 7
they lived, which was unholy and impure, and the condition to which they were
now called. Piscator affirms, The matter of a particular church, to be a
company of believers. Mr. Jacob in his definition of Christ's true Volumen.
These. Theolog. p. 356
visible Church, says, that those which join in a spiritual outward society,
or body Politic together, must be a faithful people. Mr. Bradshaw says, they
must be a people, called and separated from the world, and the false worship,
and Exposi. on Numb. 23 v. 9, p. 158
ways thereof, by the word. The same speaks Mr. Attersoll, and alleges
these Scriptures for it, Genesis 4. 26, and 12. 1. Josh. 24. 2. 3, and 23. 7. 8.
Number. 6. 2. Lev. 20. 24. 26. Ioh. 15. 19. Act. 2 40. 41.

I could name many others, See Mr. Fenner Sacra. Theolog. l. 6, 0. 3, p. 90
which write the same thing, but there is no use thereof. Only it cannot be
amiss to show, how the Church of England makes this, an Article of her Faith,
as the Prelates have published it in her behalf.

Articl. of Relig. 19
The visible Church of Christ, is a congregation of Faithful men, in the which
the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments duly be ministered,
according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things, that of necessity are
requisite to the same.

Thus the Proposition being proved, and the assumption acknowledged to be
true, the conclusion must needs stand firm (viz.) that the Churches of England
are not true visible churches, rightly gathered, and planted, according to the
Scripture; and therefore by necessary consequence lawfully to be separated
from.

Before I end this point, I will here lay down some few Syllogismes, intyrelie
made up, between the Inconformists, and Conformists, all concluding the
forenamed position.

That Church which has not a Lawful ministry, is not a true visible Church:
But the Church of England has not a Lawful ministry; Ergo the church of
England is not a true Babel, not Beth. page 108, Challeng. chap. 1, p. 33, 34,
visible church.

The proposition is affirmed of the Conformists, as Burton, Sutcliffe, etc. The
assumption is granted by the Nonconformists, as we have in the first chapter
largely showed.

The true visible church of Christ, is a society of believing and Faithful
people, and a communion of Saints (so say the Conformists) but the church of
England is not a society of Sntcl. chaleng. p. 40, and answ. to the excep. p. 65
believing and Faithful people, a communion of Saints (thus write the
Nonconform. see p. 169. etc.) Ergo, the church of Engl. is not a true visible
church.

The true church is the Kings daughter, described in Psalm. 45. But the church
of England is not the Kings daughter, so described: Therefore the church of
England is not the true Burton in answ. to H. cholm. p. 100
church of Christ.

The Proposition is laid down by the Conformists, whereby they prove Rome a
false Church. The assumption is the Nonconformists: For if they say the truth,
their members have not those qualities, belonging to the Kings daughter;
neither their Priests nor people. See page 15. 16. 39. 137. 169. 170.

The true church of Christ is the Flock of Christ, but the church of England is
not the true Flock of Christ* Therefore the church of England is not the true
church of Christ.

Burton in the same book page 99.
The proposition say the Conformists is undeniable, Son. 1. 6. 7. Act. 20. 28.
Ioh. 10. 16. The assumption is proved by the Nonconformists Principles,
compared with Ioh. 10. 3. 4. 27. Christ's flock hear his voice, and know it,
and follow it, but the Church of England, submitting to an unlawful
ministry, worship, and discipline, hear not Christ's voice, nor know, nor
acknowledge, nor follow it, but the voice of Antichrist.

Sutcliffe chaleng. chapter 1, page 6, Arg. 9.
The church of God does keep the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, without
addition, alteration, or corruption (thus the Conformists) But the Church of
England keeps not the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, without addition,
alteration* and corruption (say the Nonconformists, see pa. 108.) Ergo she is
not the church of God.

The same book, p. 13, Arg. 19
No society can be termed Gods church, which retayneth not Gods true worship;
(thus say the Conformists) But the church of England does not retayn Gods true
worship; (say the Nonconformists, see page 78. to 113.) Ergo she cannot be
termed Gods church.

Id. p. 27, Arg. 52.
The true church consists not of feirce Lions, Wolves, Tigers, and such like
wild and feirce beasts, but of sheep and Lambs, which learn of Christ, and
are meek, humble, gentle, etc. (so say the Conformists) But the English church
does consist of Lions, Wolves, Tigers, and such like wild, and feirce beasts,
and not of sheep and Lambs, which learn of Christ, and are m^eke, humble,
gentle, etc. (thus affirm the Nonconformists, see page 31. etc. 145. 169.
170.) therefore it is not a true Church.

Here the reader sees clearly, how the Conform: majors, and the Nonconform:
minors, make up intyre Syllogismes of Separatisme. And how they willbe able to
unlose these knots, I know not, except by revoking utterly their own grounds;
which if either of them do, yet I doubt not, but we shall well enough be able
to maintain them against men.

SECT. IV.
NOw we come to take a view, of such exceptions, as may seem to carry most
weight, against our former conclusion; And these are laid down chiefly by Mr.
Dayrell, in his treatise of the Church: this man made a shift, to fill up
there, with words, above thirty sheets of paper; The which subject, if some men
had took in hand, they would easily have comprised all the matter of it, in
12. or 14. leaves. My purpose is not to follow him, in his idle repetitions,
neither to speak much of his contradictions, and absurdities, but in short to
give a full answer to his tedious and tyresome discourses. Touching the
description, which he makes of a visible church, he says thus: All that be,
and remain under the pa. 29. and 41
voice, and call of God, that is, the ministry of the word, etc. be of the
visible church.

Answ. This is a false and profane error; for first, then the vilest
Heretics that ever have been in the world, may be members thereof, as the
Appellites, Cerdonians, Macedonians, Paternians, Patricians, etc. such as held
two contrary beginnings, or Gods, the one good, the other evil; such as held,
that Christ is not risen from the dead; denied the Holy Ghost to be God;
affirmed the body to be created of the devil, etc. 2. Then may excommunicate
persons be of the church, before they acknowledge their sins; yea Tu^^es,
Jews, and Infidles. 3. Whereto leads this Position, but indeed to make the
Church a very stinking ditch, to receave Eze. 16, 28
all filthiness, and to be like the whorish woman, which opens her knees to
every passenger, contrary to the pattern, given us of God, Rev. 21. ult. 4.
If this were true, then should no man for any offense be censured, so long as
he remains under the voice and call of God; For that which is enough to state
one in the Church, is enough to keep him there still, if he retain it. 5. He
speaks contrary to the judgment of all Reformists and Conformists, that ever
I have heard or read of, and contrary to his own writing in other places: for
in page 22. 35, etc. he defines a Church to be a company called out from the
rest of the world, and such as do submit themselves to the true worship of
God. Now there is a great difference between this calling from the world,
submitting to the true worship of God, etc. and only to be under the
ministry of the word. 6. I cannot tell from whom Mr. Dayr* received this
strange doctrine unless it were the Heretic Eunomius, which taught, that so
men were of his religion, it was no matter what their August. de Haeret.
conversation was, nor how many sins they committed. He does often affirm in
his book, that it is not ^. 54,
Faith and repentance, but the Profession thereof, which is Page 244,
necessary to the making of a member of the visible Church. Mark how
blasphemously he speaks; intimating, if men with their mouth speak some few
good words, they may be taken lawfullv into the Communion of the Saints, and
partake with the rest in the Sacraments and Prayer; All be it known to be
notorious murderers, thieves, traitors, sorcerers, witches, whoremoungers, etc.
and so resolved to live, and continue. It is very likely this Mr. Dayr. had a
great Church, seeing he made the door unto it, broad and wide, just Mat. 7, 13,
like the way to hell.

I could here lay down many gross absurdities, which might be truly concluded
from his words, viz. that a Church cannot cast out some obstinate sinners,
neither is she* and the world, to be distinguished, etc. but because the
vanity, and evil of this speech, is enough already showed, I purposely pass
them over.

We have seen one of Mr. Dayr. definitions; now Page 35,
follows another. Let there be an assembly, joined together in prayer, hearing
the word, and receaving the Sacraments, according to Christ's institution, and
it is a true visible Church.

Answ. It is so indeed, and hence this argument against them may be framed: If
in the Ecclesiastical Assemblies of England, there is neither prayer,
preaching, nor sacraments administered, according to Christ's institution, then
are they all false Churches: But the first is true, therefore the second.

The proposition has sufficient confirmation, from their Principles, before
named; the assumption is certain, and manifest, by the doctrine and
description, which he here makes of a true visible church; and there lies
against it no exception.

Page 36.
In the next page he delivers a Paradox (viz.) that men outwardly may submitt
to true worship, and yet be irreligious and profane. Now this is either
falsely or foolishly spoken. If he mean of visible profaneness, and
irreligion, then it is a contradiction, and indeed plain Nonsense; for to say,
that a person, may outwardly submitt to God, and yet outwardly be profane
and ungodly. If he intended of secret and inward irreligion of the heart; In
this sense it is true, but answers nothing at all to the matter, for which he
brings it.

Here also he lays down Mr. ^insw. words, as he says; unto which he makes
no direct reply, but runs to another matter, whereof he had now no cause at
all to speak: He denies that either the Papists, or Anabaptists do profess
true Religion, although they profess, some true and sound doctrine. What moved
him thus to think, I know not, unless it were because these have many errors
in their religion; Now if this reason will stand firm, and good against them,
then it must needs follow, that the Church of England professes not true
religion, though she prof^sse some true and sound doctrins, in regard she
maintains many lies, and vile errors. Mr. Gilb^e, In the table after Sold*
of Barw.
a forward minister, reckons up, above seven score gross points of popery,
remaining in their Church, and many others of them have don the like, as I have
in this treatise manifested. And I think it would ask a better wit, and head,
then ever Mr. Dayr. had, to prove, that there are half so many corruptions,
in the religion professed by the Eng. Anabaptists.

From page 41. to 51. there are certain reasons (as he calls them) to prove the
Church of Eng. and their Parish assemblies true visible churches. As for the
first of them, I deny both the Proposition and Assumption; He says: Whatsoever
people or nation is within the daily voice and call of God, etc. the same is a
true visible Church. This is untruelie affirmed, as I have proved before; and
for his speaking of it again, it shows the more his ignorance in the way of
God; For will any wise man take Lions, Wolves, Foxes, etc. into his sheepsould?
sow tares, or darnel, in his garden, plant thistles, or thorns, in his
Orchard? The Church is the Lords speepcfowld, his garden, orchard, etc. and
therefore if Mr. Dayr. had been so wise as he should, he would not have spoken
so corruptly, but have given rather counsel to keep out unclean persons,
considering what the Prophet says: Holiness becomes thy house o Jehovah, to
length of days. Again, we may perceive by his words, that he understood not
the nature of a visible Church; For as to the constitution of it, there belongs
a holy people, as the matter, so also a uniting and coupling of them together,
which is the form, whereof it consists: As the constitution of a common
wealth, or of a city, is a gathering and knitting of people together in a
civil Policy; so the Constitution Ephesians. 2, 12
of the common wealth of Israel, (as the Church is called) and of the city of
God the new Jerusalem, is a (...). Aristot 3, Polit. c. 1.
gathering and uniting of people into a spiritual Policy; The form of which
Policy is order, as the Philososophers acknowledged, calling Policy an order
of a city; which Order is requisite in every administration of 1 Cor. 14, 40
the Church, as the Apostle teaches; and chiefly in the collection thereof;
And therefore next unto Faith in God, it is to be esteemed most necessary, for
all holy societies. This was one thing, for which Paul rejoiced Col. 2, 5.
in the Church at Collosse, as for their steadfast Faith in Christ, so their
Order also. But Mr. Dayr. will have his Church without Order* or Form; and
what is it then, but a mere, at^xie, or confuse Chaos, a state only fit for
the devils Goats to be in, which desire liberty, and not Heb 12, 13.
for Christ sheep, which are to make straight paths to their feet.

He says, there lies no exception against the Assumption. And why so? because
their Pastors and Teachers are true ministers. Me thinks the man should have
been ashamed, to have begd so much at one time; But to let his folishnesse
pass, we do deny them to be lawful Officer^, and have brought their own
hands against them for it. Secondly, he writes here, against his brethren, yea
(and I think) against his own conscience: For the greatest number of their
Bb. Priests and Deacons, are dumb dogs, ignorant asses, etc. such as either
Eze. 16 49
cannot, or through pride, sullnesse bread, and abundance of See before page 43.
idleness (Sodomes sins) will not preach; and therefore it is untruely said,
that the people generally of England are within the daily voice and call of
God. 3. The later part of his reason, is wholly against himself; sor whereas
his words import, that the people generally of England are impenitent sinners,
and unbeleevers, it must follow necessarily, that they are altogether
incapable of any Church estate, and so much we have formerly proved. Page, 176*
177.
Were it not a ridiculous thing, to set up a house with wood and stones, and
afterward to take Axes, Sawes, Hammers, and other tools, to cut, saw, and
fit them for the building: yet such an unskilful builder Mr. Dayr. shows
himself in his whole book. For he will have idolaters, adulterers, thieves,
conjurers, murderers, and any villain in the Land, to be placed in the Lords
spiritual house, and afterward will have means used to prepare them for the
same.

Not to contend about the proposition of his second argument, howbeit it is
very faulty. I deny the assump. viz. that the people of England do enjoy,
and outwardly submit themselves to the true worship of God: for the worship
which they have, is affirmed of the Nonconformists See page 78. etc.
to be antichristian and unlawful: but let us hear his reason.

If such as both in their life, and at their death served God with the very
same worship we do, have in that worship been saved, then i^ the worship we
now have, true divine worship. But the first is true, therefore the second.

If Mr. Bradshaw had found such a reason in Mr. Iohnsons writing, he would
surely have called him idle head, cracked braind, fool etc. but I leave such
terms to men of his intemperate spirit, and do thus answer. 2. A Papist,
Arminian, or Anabaptist may say as much and upon as good ground, and who dares
deny but many of their religion, have found mercy with the Lord, must it
therefore follow that their worship is good? indeed Mr. Dayr, logic so
concludes it. 2, Men Romans 9, 33.
may serve God with an outward worship, not agreeable to his word, and yet be
saved: for who knows how infinitely good he is to his poor creature. 3. It
is apparent this man had a very ill case in hand, that could not tell how to
maintain it, but by revealing the secret and hid consell of the Lord: for I
wonder how he came to know who in their worship have been saved: if he should
say in the judgment of charity he thinks thus, then his argument must be of
an another fashion, namely, that he thinks their worship is true: for
otherwise it will want shape and proportion. 4. It has been the constant
practice of the godly, to prove their positions by the scriptures, but it is
likely he saw that there was no help for him there, and therefore only makes
use of this reasonlesse reason.

His third argument is foolish and carnal; and both parts of it false. For
first it is incident to the best and purest Churches upon earth to err and to
be deceived, and therefore their sentences and approbations must be examined
by Gods word. 2. If the reformed Churches do justify the English, therein
they condemn greatly their own practice: for in their constitution,
ministry, worship, and government they are as opposite 1. Admonition.
as light and darkness one to the other: and so much the Nonconformists
confess. 3. Seeing the Prophets Christ and his Apostles condemn their Church,
their case is never a whit the better, though all men in the world speak well
of it. 4. The strictest professors, do hold the Church of England as it is
National, Provincial, and Diocessan, false: howbeit they think some
particular congregations in the Land to be true. 5. With such weapons as these
do the Papists fight: and where they can bring one, the others ten, to
witness for them, and their Romish superstitions. I mean Bellarm. de notis
Eccles.
antiquity, universality and such like popular reasons, whereby they seek to
uphold their cursed Kingdom. Lastly, it is untruely affirmed, that all the
Churches of God in the world do acknowledge the people of England to be a true
Church. For there are many which have both professed and prooved the contrary.

Now for his last argument, I deny also both parts of it: and affirm that
neither the mother nor daughters are true Churches* the reason which he lays
down is, as the rest, silly, and most impertinent to prove the thing for
which he brings it. The sum and effect of that which he has written in five
or six pages is this, that their worship and religion is true, because in Q.
Mary's days, diverse Martyrs professed the same, and died in it.

Answ. 1. Here the thing in question is brought for confirmation: the Martyrs
allowed of their worship, be it so, what then, should he not yet have prooved
the same to be lawful? Yes doubtless, if he would have written either
according to rule, reason, or religion. 2. If a Papist should suffer death
under Heathen or Turks, because he would not deny Christ jesus, we think he
may in some respect be judged a martyr, and yet the Romish worship which he
professes, remain still false, and idolatrous. 3. I desire the Reader to
mark how absurdly he speaks: the thing which he undertakes to prove, is,
that their assemblies are true, for this he alleges the Martyrs, now to what
purpose I can not tell in the world: unless he meant that there was such
virtue and efficacy in their sufferings, as the whole Nation thereby was
sanctified, and made Churches. Lastly, this reason is one and the same, with
that which he brought to confirm the second Syllogism, save that for the more
authority of it, he adds the name of the M^rtyrs, the insufficiency whereof
I have there showed and thither do refer the Reader.

In the conclusion he says, Answer me this one argument and so I end. If Mr.
Hooper Mr. Bradford with others knowing the corruptions then in the worship and
ministry, being the same also with ours now, notwithstanding this knowledge,
and not separating, were saved: then men at this day notwithstanding their
knowledge of the corruptions and not separating because of them, may likewise
be saved. But the first is true: therefore the second.

Ans. His former reasons were not more false and foolish, than this is wicked
and profane, for first, wherefore serves it, but in truth to teach men to cast
off all care in seeking Gods glory, by an even walking, and to do so much of
his will as is sufficient to bring them to heaven, and no more* thus he
counsels people to be lovers of themselves more than lovers of God: yea to
love God for themselves, and to serve him for a reward only; but let all
persons, in all places take heed, that they follow not this man's advice, for
if they resolve to do no more, but what they think will serve their turn to
be saved, they will surely miss of that, and for their self love suffer wrath
and vengeance eternally. 2 Howsoever Iwill not judge another man's servant, yet
it is more then he or any mortal man that can infalliblie tell, whether Mr.
Bradford, Mr. Hooper and others were absolutely saved, and therefore he
reasons still most childishly, to prove his matter by things secret, and
known to God only. 3 When Luther, Calvin, and others left the Church of Rome,
might not any popish priest have said as much to them. If Mr. W. Mr. C. with
others knowing the corruptions then in worship etc. Now I perceive if Mr. Dayr.
had been in their place, he would not have separated from that Synagogue of
Satan, and to speak the very truth, he could not do it lawfully upon his own
grounds. 4. That these men knew some corruptions to be in their worship and
ministry, I grant it, but not in that kind and degree, which the
Nonconformists since have manifested, for if they had certainly known that
these things were unlawful and antichristian, and their Church government
taken wholly from the Pope: I believe they would not have joined in spiritual
communion therewith, and therefore Mr. Dair. shamfully abuses the reader, to
say the martyrs saw their corruptions, and they are the same which they have
now: whereas he should have proved, that they saw them according to the nature
of them, and as his fellow brethren have since seen them, and affirmed them to
be, for unless this can be showed, they differ herein as much from the martyrs,
as if one sinned ignorantly, and another against his knowledge and conscience.
5. The saints are taught of God, not to be servants of men, but to live by
their own faith, and Phil. 3.
to press forward toward the mark. and therefore he shows little skill in
the course of religion, to set down this, or that man's practice for a rule
to walk by, unless he had professed himself to be a Familist or perfectist,
and so would make the world believe, that none could err which took such for
example whom he prescribed to them. 6. I cannot tell for what end be propounded
this argument, for imagine it should be granted him, that the Martyrs knew the
corruptions of their Church, etc. and yet were saved: and so are many now in
England, which understand the same: what would he from hence conclude? I
think there is no man on earth that knows; if there be, they might do well,
at the next impression of his book, to set it in the margin, for to cover what
they can, the man's empty, naked, and absurd writing.

Mr. Dayr. having showed his best skill, wit and learning, to prove their
parish assemblies, true Churches: in his second book (according to his
division) he attempteth to confute the description which Mr. Barrow, and the
Brownists (as he maliciously names Gods people) have laid down of a true
visible Church: and about this point, he writes more then an hundred and fifty
pages, all the matter whereof (leaving out his Battalogies and impertinenr
speeches) might well have been written in six leaves of papier. But it seems
the man wanted no money, and therefore would make it up to his reader in Tail,
what he could not do in weight; forgetting in the mean time the proverb, a
little and good; and also what the learned use to say, The worth of a writing
does not consist in bulk and belly: but in the sinews, veins, and arteries,
which with good blood, and spirit, may be comprehended in a little body. But
let us see how he confutes us.

First he lays down our definition of a true visible Church, which is, a
company of people, called, and separated Apol. p. 44
from the world, by the word of God, and joined together by voluntary
profession of the faith of Christ, in the fellow. ship of the Gospel.

Before we ^ome to examine the reasons (if they may be so termed) which he
alleges against this definition, I desire the reader to mind it well, that
we herein do say no more, then what in effect is fully acknowledged, by the
Nonconformists, Fall of Bab. p. 50. Cart. hist. Christ. l. 2. page 359. Dudl.
Fenner. Sacra Theolog. lib, 6* eap* 3. Page, 90. Neces. disc. page 7, Mr Jacob.
defin. Chur. page, 2.
Conformists, Mr Butt. agan. H. Col. p. 100. Sutcl. chal. page 6, 5. Mr.
Atters. on Numb. 23, 9, page 158* and 357.
the Church of England, Articl. of Relig. page 13, Art 19.
the learned generally, Pet. Mart. in in loc. commun. page 741. Vrsin. catech.
explicat, pars 2, page 343. Alstedius Theolog. Polemic. pars 2, page 140,
Piscat. volum. These. Theolog. page 356.
and all the reformed Churches Harmony of confess Section 10, Belg i^k, Articl.
28, and Fren. Art. 26.
upon earth, as is to be seen in their books here named. Yea Mr. Brad.
Vnreason of sepation page 107.
although no friend of the Separatists, yet confesses the whole, as it is here
laid down to be true and good. Notwithstanding, this man comes boldly forth
against us, as if he had been either asleep all his life time, or lived in
some unknown parts of the world, and so could not tell what any body had said
about this thing.

And now for his reasons, in which he is as confused as is the subject for
which he pleads: notwithstanding such as I find here and there, disorderly
written of him, I will reduce into some particular heads. The maine and chief
argument, wherewith he fights against us, for saying, a true visible Church
is a company of people called and separated from the world. is, because
hypocrites and reprobates may beein the Church. And to prove this, he is very
large and tedious: for I dare say, more then half of his book is spent about
it; in alleging for it, Scriptures, Examples and Reasons: But a few words will
serve for answer to it; in regard he talks of a thing, which neither helps
him, nor disadvantageth us, for the question between them and us, has ever
been, about the true and natural members, whereof Gods Church is orderly
gathered, and planted: and not about the decayed and degenerate estate thereof.
But of this he says nothing: only reasons much to this purpose. If a man's
body may have sores, boyles, broken limbs, etc. then is not the body whole and
sound in the definition. If in a garden, vineyard, or orchard, after the
constitution, there grow weeds, thorns, and thistles: then cannot the same in
the description, be said to be planted at first of all good herbs, vines and
trees. But the first is true: therefore the second. Now if such Philosophy be
to be laughed at, then truly much more is Mr. Dayr. Divinity here to be
pittyed: for he denies our definition, to wit, that a true visible Church in
the first collection consists of a people called and separated from the
world: and why? because forsooth afterward some of them may fall into
unlawful and sinful courses.

If all our writings should be read over, yet will it not be found, that ever
we have denied; but many hypocrites may be in the true Church, yea open and
vile transgressors: but here lies the point, if any shall affirm, that the
same may be first gathered, of known lewd, and unconverted men, that indeed
we deny utterly, and can prove the contrary: or if they shall say, that
obstinate and incorrigible sinners, may lawfully See page 176. 177.
be suffered therein, this also we affirm to be untrue, But if they say, that
in a true visible Church, there may be great evils committed, yea and a long
time tolerated, we assent unto it. Howbeit it is certain (as Dr. Ames says)
this forbearance is a grieveus sin before God. If Mr. Dayr. therefore had
well understood, what our negative and affirmative positions are, he might
have spared most of his writing. For throughout his book, he has most falsely
reported of us, by insinuating as if we held all of the visible Church to be
saved, and that no wickedness therein can be committed: now our words tend
only to show, what a Church is, and how every member ought to walk: but if in
some respects they be not so, yet may the Congregation notwithstanding be true
and good.

Mr. Dayr tells us very often of the sins committed in the Jewish Church, so
in Corinth, Pergamus, etc. If he were alive, I would ask him whether they did
well herein; If he should say yea, then were he a blasphemer; if nay, then he
gave us the whole cause, and so might cast his book into the fire. For the
thing which we affirm, is, that every member of the church ought to be holy,
not that they are always so, but should be so, and it is their great fault,
they are otherwise. And here the reader may observe how greatly he has
mistaken the matter: For whereas Mr. Barrow, Mr. Ainsw. and others, do show
from the scriptures, what a true Church is, whereof gathered, how every member
should walk, and how abuses are to be reformed, etc. He (either through
ignorance, or malice, or both) still infers from their writings: that they
held perfection of Churches, that there can be no Hypocrite or reprobate in the
Church, etc. Things groundlesly collected of him.

Of the same nature are the reports, which many of them publish daily in their
Sermons and Books; namely that the main cause of our Separation is, because
wicked men are suffered in their church. But this is untrue, for howsoever (as
I said before) such a tolleration can not be justified; yet this is not
properly the reason, but because their Parishes were at first constituted, as
now they stand, of the members of Antichrist, to wit, the idolatrous Papists,
and of all other kind of most notorious sinners, as whorems. witches, atheists,
swearers, usurers, cursers, scoffers at religion, etc. This profane multitude,
without any profession of faith and repentance, were forced and compelled by
human authority in the beginning of QElizabeths reign, to be members of their
Church, and so have continued, they and their seed ever since: contrary to the
express word of God Acts 2. 30. and 19. 9. Romans 16. 7 and 20. 14. 15. 17. Io^.
17. 14. 10, Ez* k. 36. 38. Phil. 1. 5. Act. ^. 41. 42. 47. and 11. 21. 24. and
17. 4. 34. Romans 12. 5. 2. Cor. 9. 13. Psalm. 110. 3. Esa. 14. 1. and 44. 5. and
6^. 8. Zach. 4 6. and 8. 21. 22. 23. 2. Cor. 6. 14. 15 16. Josh. 23. 7. 8.
Psalm. 94. 20. Mar. 18. 15. 17. 1. Cor. 5. chap. and 6. 9. 10. 1^. Ephesians. 1, 1.
22. 23. and 2. 11. 12. 19. 20. 21, 22.
and this is so evident and certain, as the Nonconformists acknowledge it most
true, beside, we leave them in respect of their ministry, worship, and Church
government, which is also prooved unlawful, and Antichristian by their own
testimony.

Another exception which he takes against our description is, because we say,
a people called by the word of God, this he denies to be true, and affirms
that men may come to be members of the visible Church, and not be called by the
word, and therefore very unfitly is it placed in the description of a visible
Church* page 62. 63.

Ans. We need not wonder when a man undertakes to justify a bad cause that he
uses ordinarily vile, and profane arguments for it. First this which he
affirms is directly against the Holy Scriptures of God. Mat. 28. 19. 20.
Psalm. 19. 7. ^. Cor. 1. 21. Ier. 23. 29. 1. Pet. 23. 25. James ^. 18. Job. 33.
23. 24. Act. 16. 10. Romans 10. 17.
2. Contrary to all example in the old and new Testament. 1. Cor. 3. 9. Genesis
12. 1. Acts 2. 40. and 10. 44. Col* 1. 5. 27. Ephesians. 1. 13. 1 Cor. 4. 15. 1.
These. 1. 3. 5 9.
3. Wholly against the doctrine of his brethren and fellow Priests, and the
learned every where. c 4. The c Atters. on Phil. 10 page 205. T. C. I. 1. p.
51. Clev. on Prove. 9. 3. page 11. Barn. Sep. schism. page 118. By field on Col.
1. 6. page 49.
Scriptures which he names, are both untruly and unadvisedly applied of him,
for first touching that in Exodus 12. 38. Howsoever many Egyptians and other
nations were moved by Gods works showed in Egypt, to go out with the
Israelites, notwithstanding that they should be all taken into actual
communion with the Church, it is only his dream: and no such thing can be
truly gathered from the place: but the contrary is most probable, as I could
(if there were any use) give many reasons for it: see Numb. 11. 4. And the like
d Willet. on Romans 10. obs. 7. page 485. Elton on Col. 1. 7. page 41. Scharp.
Cursus Theo. p. 6. Cent. Magdeb, I. 1. c. 4. page 171. Pisc. Aph. loc. 18. page
101.
may be said unto the place in Est. ^. 17. and this also further added how he
knew (if any were received into the fellowship of the Saints) that the word of
God, was not preached unto them by some means, in one measure or other, before
their admission. As for the other texts, namely, John 2. 23. and 4. 39. and 6.
26. His alleging of them, plainly notes, that his knowledge was not much in
these Scrip. Fort. Christ did not there co^stitute any visible Church. 2. The
persons there spoken of, were most of them members by birth of a true Church.
3. Howsoever the things which he mentions, as miracles, reports, etc. were
great means to confirm the Gospel, and to draw people unto the hearing of the
word, notwithstanding the word alone was the instrument (Gods blessing going
with it) whereby the people were brought unto faith and repentance, Ioh. 4. 42:
4. But wherefore does he instance these examples, seeing they are
extraordinary, and therefore if it should be granted, as he ignorantly
understands the places: yet it will not follow, that there is any other outward
ordinary means to call men out of the world, beside the word: now of this
ordinary means speaks the definition only. 5. Observe how the exception
which he makes here against us, serves nothing to help his case; for if all
the persons which he names, were received into the visible Church, and say it
was by some other means, beside the word, that moved their hearts to obey the
Lord therein; yet how can he prove, that these were outwardly wicked, and
irreligious, known to be Idolaters, drunkards, sorcerers, mockers, liars,
blasphemers, etc. For unless he can manifest this, if all the rest were
granted, yet will it not stead him a whit, to justify the state of the English
Church, which was erected after popery (as he could not deny) of such vile
varlets and unclean creatures. It is therefore worth the noting, what ill
speed Mr. Dayr. has still in all his testimonies, and witnesses: for after he
has pulled them in at the window, or backdoore by the hair of the head, yet
this is his cross, either they stand up against him, or are quite dumb* and
speak not a word, touching the point for which he brings them*

We heard what the reasons are, why Mr. Dayrell disliked our definition. Now
before we come to the last part of his book, there is something to be said
touching the manner which he lays down, of making of Page 63. 64.
Churches by the sword, about this he begins with a tedious comparison of one
that has children and servants which be papists, and by threats will have them
worship God aright, thereupon they frequent the Church assemblies and seem
outwardly to be religious, and are to be accounted of the visible church, and
yet these came not to be of the Church by the call of the word etc. now may the
master and father do this, and may not the magistrate? etc.

Ans. 1. Howsoever parents and masters, are to use all good means, that those
which are under their government may be religious and holy, yet have they not
any more power to make them members of Gods Church (if they be not under the
visible covenant) then they have power to give them saving grace, and
sanctification. 2. Whereas he says, these come not to be of the visible
Church, by the call of the word, that is untrue; For howsoever a person may
come, to the place where a Church is; yet his coming simply there, does not
immediately make him an actual member of it, as he still ignorantly intimates;
For those of his brethren, which were far more judicious then himself, do
T. c. l. 1, Page 51.
teach otherwise: when men do profitt in hearing, then are they to be joined
to the Church. But it seems if Heathen and Turks, would have but come to his
service and preaching, he would have acknowledged them to be part of his flock,
albeit they manifested no repentance at all; If he should say, no, then were he
contrary to his own saying here. 3. This Similitude is against himself; For
first, the Magistrate did not command the Subjects, to go unto Churches,
formerly gathered, and there to be prepared by hearing. but forded them to be
members; they being altogether and every way most unfitt. 2. The worship which
they did, was not according to Gods word, but after the traditions and devises
of men. 3. They neither outwardly seemed religious, nor renounced Popery, nor
professed true religion, but in all this plainly showed the contrary, as we
have before proved by their own writings.

See Mr. Robinso^ns Iustisicacation of separation 205. Mr. Ains. Counterp. 224,
etc.
After this he makes a long narration, to justify this compulsion by the
practice of the ^ings of I^dah: now this point by others has been so fully
answered, as one would think, that Mr. Dayr: should never have had the
forehead once, to have named it, except he had been more able to refute their
arguments. For answer to it: I deny that there is any true proportion between
this Example; and the thing unto which they do apply it. 1. The Jewish Church
was national, but such are none now under the Gospel* neither Provincial,
nor Diocesan, as the Nonconformists do say and prove. 2. Howsoever Iud..h fell
fearfully into sin, yet by virtue of the Lords covenant with her forefathers,
faithfully on his part, remembered and kept, remained still the true Church of
God, and was not (as Israel) quite broken-off, and therefore the Magistrate
compelled not the people, to be members, but to perform the duties thereof,
they being members truly before. Indeed if either Hezechiah, Josiah, Asa, or
Nehemiah, had forced the Fdomites, Egyptians, Babylonians, etc. into the holy
Temple, and there to have sacrificed to the Lord, it had been something like
unto their practice; For the English nation, consisting of many sheires,
cities, towns, and villages, was Romans 11, 16, 21,
never within the Lords covenant, and holy in the root* as Judah was; Howbeit,
it may be, many hundred years past, there were some true churches planted in
the Land, by the preaching of the Gospel, and obedience of faith. 3. The
ministry, worship, and church government, unto which Judah submitted, was the
Lords, and the contrary abolished by her good Governors, as the reader may
see by these scriptures. 2 King 18, 3. 4, 5, 6 2 Chro. 29 2. 3, 5 19, 20, 21,
etc. and 30, 1, 2, etc. and 31, 1, etc. 2 King 22, 12, and 23, 1, 2, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 24, 25. 2 chro. 34 2, 3, 4, 5, 9* 33.
But neither in the beginning of King Edwards, or Q. Elizabeth's reign, was
there such a course taken, but the self same false ministry, worship, and
church government, left to stand, which the Romish beast, had before devised,
and is at this day used in his cursed Kingdom, only some few faults put out:
and this themselves, when they write against the Hierarchy, do avouch boldly.
4. If we consider the Priests and people of the Jews, it will appear
evidently, that there is no agreement or liknesse in the comparison: For these
separated themselves from the filthiness of the heathen of the land, Ezra 6, 21,
^ and 8, 1, 2, 3, 4.
confessed their sins, humbled their souls by fasting and prayer before the
Lord, chap. 9. 1, 2,
sanctified themselves, 2 chro. 29, 5, 12, 21 2 chro. 14, 2, 3, 4, 2 chro. 29,
18, 19,
prepared their whole heart to seek God, 2 Chro. 15 8, 9, 12,
made a covenant with him, frejoyced at the oath, 2 chro. 15, 13,
kept the passover with joy: 2 chro. 29, 25, 27,
But the English at first in every particular were much unlike these people, as
appears by the great rebellions, which they made in many places, because they
thought that their idolatrous service should be put down. Yea so unwilling
were they to leave their idolatry, as the Magistrate was saine to inform them
by a proclamation how they did mistake his reformation.

It seems to you (says he, speaking of their Mattens and Evening song) that
you have a new Service, now indeed it is no other but the old, the selfsame
words in English, which were in Latin, This serves to prove what the
Nonconformists have before said, touching their worship in chap. 2, Sect. 2,
and 4. Acts and Monum. 2, Volum. page 1497. and 1498. edition 5.
saving a few things taken out, so fond, that it had been a shame to have heard
them in English etc. If therefore the Service in the Church was good in Latin,
it remains good in English, for nothing is altered, but to speak with
knowledge, that which was ignorantly before uttered.

To be short, I would have them once to tell us, where they have learned to
enforce and constrain men to be members of their Churches; I think they will
not find a president for it in the world, unless they take it from Mahomets
doctrine: Alcorancap. 19. and 19.
who taught that men should be compelled to the faith by war and sword. For
all reformed Churches practice otherwise. There are no swine and dogs driven in
among the Godly, but whosoever joins; comes freely and voluntarily to them;
sometimes Mr. Dayr. and his brethren, are all for these Churches, but when they
see that their own standing must needs be naught and foul, if the others be
justified, then they will call back their words again, and plead corruptly for
themselves.

Mr. Dayr. has one string yet left to his bow, the which if it should be
broken too, then all the shooting would be mard. Be it granted (says he) that
all our parish assemblies page 81.
were at first no true Churches, etc. yet notwithstanding now they may be, and
indeed are true, seeing that ever since, above fifty years, we have been
partakers of the true word and Sacraments, and many of us effectually called
thereby: and to drive this nail into the readers head, he lays down a
similitude thus. There are many men in a house, but gotten into it, not through
the door whereby is the ordinary passage into it, but by some back door, or
through the window, or happily at some breach violently made into the same house,
were it not extreme folly, or rather madness, because of this manner of
entrance, to deny the inbeing of the aforesaid men in the house.

Answ. A man fallen into the water, will rather catch at a mote, the^ willingly
sink: it is just so with this Mr. Dayr. being loath to fall under the
controversy, which inconsiderately he took up; he talks of this thing and
that: the which if they should be judiciously weighed, would be all fou^^ as
l^ight as vanity. To reply briefly, for it is not worth a long answer. First,
if their Churches were false in the Constitution, then are they so still,
because they stand in the very same state, and have not repented of the evil
thereof, neither since have entered into any visible covenant with God, by
public, and voluntary profession of faith. If two persons should make an
adulterous covenant, who would deem them, to be Lawfully man and wife, so long
as they stood by virtue of that false agreement, which they made at first
together?

2. Their having of the word and Sacraments, proves no more their Churches to
be true, then does a true man's purse, in the hand of a theife, prove him to be
an 2 chro. 36, 18
honest man. As the Lords Vessels were of old in temporal Babylon, so are
there sundry of his Ordinances now in spiritual Babi^^n; and therefore the
Papists can say the like, and all other Heretics; if any should reply, but
these have the word preached, in an unlawful ministry, and the Sacraments
unrightly administered: I answer, the same may be said of the English
assemblies, as the Nonconform. have soundly proved.

3. What their obedience is, the reader may partly guess by comparing their
profession and practice together: The former is showed in this treatise, and
what Ier. 3, 2.
the later is, all may see it at home, by their doings in England. As the
Prophet said of Isra^l, let them lift up their eyes to the high places, and
behold where they have not played the harlot. I could give many instances to
show what small cause they have to boast of their order and manner of walking.
For first, they are not a people separated and called from the world; a duty
much urged in the scriptures, Esa. 52* 11, Rev. 18 4, Psa. 45, 10, 11
and practiced always by the saints. 1 King. 18, 3. 4, Act 2, 40, 41, Ezr. 6,
21, Lev. 26, 20
2. They are not free, but stand most slavishly under strange Lords, expressly
against Gods commandment. Lev^^. 25 42, 1 Co^. 7, 23, Gal. 5, 1.
3. They worship the Lord not in the sincere order of the Gospel, but after an
Idolatrous and Popish manner, which is a fearful and crying iniquity. Ioh. 4,
23 Rev. 14, 9 2 Chro. 11 15, Lev. 10 1, 2.
4. Add hereunto the knowledge, which many of them have, that these things are
evil. It is the saying of King James, that the Puritans are the founders
Meditation upon the Lords prayer, p. 15.
and fathers* of the Brownists, the later (says he) only bold^y putting in
practice, what the former doc teach, but dare not p^rforme. For what end he
wrote this, I let it pass, but the words in part are true: Our separation from
the Church of England, is by their grounds certainly good and lawful, and
therefore they say, and do not. See Mat* 2^, 3,
Now what the reason of it is, I know not; unless to enjoy liberty, pleasure,
profi^t, friends, credit, and such wordly respects.

I do omit the fearful apostasies, which sundry of them have made, from
that obedience, unto which they were come, some for wives, others for riches,
and many to avoid persecution for the cross of Christ. Besides, whom do they
take for greater enemies, then the Separatists? And why? because (as the King
said) these boldly put in practice, what they do teach, but dare not perform.
And for this very thing, many of us have received most greevous injuries both
from their tongues and hands, but the Lord forgive them for it.

4. Be it granted, that some of them are effectually called; what then. do
these make all the rest holy? not in the least: for as a handful or bundle of
corn, shuffled into a field of weeds, though in it self, it may retain the
same nature, yet cannot make the field a cornefeild, so neither can a few good
Christians, sanctify the whole lump of the idolatrous and vile multitude in
the Land, and make them to be the true Churches and people of God.

5. Touching his comparison, it is a begging foolishly of the question; for
first, let them prove themselves, to be in the house, and then they shall hear
what we we will say of the window and backdoore.

From Page 212. to 237. he attempteth to prove, that men may Lawfully join in
divine worship with the wicked. Touching this thing, although it concerns not
much our matter in hand, yet I will write a few words, in answer to his long
talk in this Chapter.

First he says, that the Apostles had religious communion with infidels. But
this is a false doctrine, for a man may preach the word and yet not have
spiritual communion with all which are present and hear the same, and this
must necessarisy be so, because otherwise it would follow, that every one when
he teaches, communicates with the devil, for in likelihood he is constantly
there with the rest: indeed Mr. Dayrels words import no less, but I hope he
has not left any behind him, of so corrupt and vile a judgment.

2. He sets down a manifest untruth: for we do not affirm that there can be
no religious communion* but with Members of a visible Church. our profession
and practice daily is otherwise; yet so, that they be such persons, howbeit not
in a Church state, yet to be judged to be in the faith by their gracious and
holy walking.

3. Whereas he affirms, that we separate from them, because wicked and
profane people are suffered to come unto their worship: this also is untrue,
for we leave them rather, because the worship it selse is wicked and profane,
as we have from their own writings already showed.

4. In page 220. he speaks enough to justify our practice. for thus he
writes. We may not have religious communion, or partake in divine worship, with
Idolaters, in their false and idolatrous worship, Heathen or Antichristian, but
must separate and come out from among them. And a little after he gives a
reason. Idolaters and false worshippers, in their worship, do not worship God,
but indeed the devil. not Christ, but Belial, etc. If this be true, in what a
fearful case then, are the people of the Land? who serve Christ by that idol
book, considering the same is affirmed by the precisest of them, to be an
idolatrous and false worship: yea and I am persuaded that this Mr. Dayr. would
have said as much too, if he had written of it, against the Prelates.

5. By his own confession, they are all levened, through the iniquity one of
another. For thus he says, Page 230.
The open sin of a man, and impunity thereof, defiles them that have
authority and power, to punish the delinquent, and do it not, that is, makes
them also guilty of sin, or to partake in that sin. Now compare with this,
their positions in page 134, etc. where it is acknowledged, that the authority
and power to punish the delinquent, belongs wholly to the whole Church, and not
to the Bh. Chancellours, Officials: Seeing therefore most horrible sins are
openly committed among them, and no means of reformation is used by those
which are thereto only called: It must needs follow, if Mr. Dayr. and his
brethren speak the truth, that all their parishes are defiled, and they are
guilty of each others sins, and do constantly partake in the known
transgressions one of another.

6. Whereas he would have us to prove that the place in Hag. 2. 13. 14. does
signify spiritual pollution and that the Apostle in 1. Cor. 5. 6. by a little
leven, etc. means that the whole assembly may become guilty and defiled by
open sin.

I answer, These Scriptures are not only by us thus interpreted: but also by
D. Ames and other learned De consci. lib. 4. page 212. 213. Pare. in 1. Cor. 5.
Hemin. in Ephesians. 5. 16, 17. Eras. paraph. in 1 Cor. 56. Beza ann. in 1 Cor. 56.
men: and therefore herein, he has them as much as us against him. The like
might be said of other Scriptures which he accuses us of perverting; if it
were needful, I could show how expositors do apply them as we do, and so do
the Nonconformists in all their writings against the Church of England,
notwithstanding this man casts out of his mouth stoods of reproaches after
us. But this will appear to be no new thing, if we take a view of their
writings, which have stood for error and falsehood; for when the truth has
brought for her defense, the evident Scriptures, Papists Greg. Martin. Campian.
Kellison, etc.
have been wont to carpe at the allegations, and interpretations of them, and
challenge their adversaries for corrupting them; the formal Protestants Whitg.
defense of answer to Admonit. in the genesis Tab. s.
in England have done the like against the Reformists, and they now use the
like color against us: but how truly, let him judge, whose heart desires to
know the truth in sincerity. Only I would have it observed, how prettily he
prooves the Separatists to pervert the Scriptures, to wit, because he
understands them otherwise then they do.

Concerning other passages in his book, I judge them not worth an answer. If
there be any, I am willing that he should take them for his advantage, which
undertakes to make a reply unto the things which I have here written.

CHAP. V.
Page 54.
WE heard in the first Chapt. of the reference, which Dr. Ames had unto Mr.
Bradshawes book, entitled, the unreasonableness of separation; now as my
promise there was, so I will (according to the measure of knowledge, and grace,
given me) in this Chapter make answer unto it, that so the godly minded, may
judge, whether the Separatists, or he, are most unreasonable.

That the reader might not exspect to see any thing in the book, proved by the
word of God, the publisher therefore of it (after some scoffing at Mr. Johnson
and others) tells us, that it was not the authors meaning to gather proofs,
etc. and much quotation may prove some thing, but answers not directly to any
thing.

Answ. 1. Whosoever means to settle well the conscience, especially in a main
point of faith and religion, ought necessarily to bring good proofs from the
scriptures, for the things whereof he speaks: For otherwise, either men will
give no trust unto his August. contro. maxim. l. 3, c. 14
words, or if they do, it must be unadvisedly. And howsoever, he putts Gods
word here slightly by, notwithstanding others have otherwise esteemed of it.
Augustine was of mind, that Counsels, Bishops, etc. ought not to be objected
for trial of controversies, but the holy scriptures only,

Another says, I yield the scripture a witness of my sense; and my exposition
without the Scripture, let it be of no Orig. Homil. 9. in Ier. Panormit. de
elect. and ele. potest. c. signif. Fresh suit, l. 2, p. 351
credit: Yea hereto accord the very Papists, We are rather to believe one
private faithful man, than a whole Council, and the Pope himself, if he have
the Word and reason on his side. As D. Ames therefore said, so do we say, we
esteem not any thing like of a thousand objections, fetched from testimonies,
subject to error, as we would have done of one plain testimony divine, if it
could have been produced.

2. That quotation of scriptures should not answer directly to any thing, it
sounds in my apprehension very harshe, to say no worse* for I have hitherto
always thought, that there could be no better answering then by scripture, I
mean rightly all eaged and applied.

3. As many words simply will not serve to untie the knot of a syllogism, so
neither will a few firmly knitt it, except they be spoken to good purpose.

4. For his upbraiding of us with ignorance about Logical forms, I let it
pass, we are, that we are, and do bless God for that small knowledge of
humane learning, which we have received, and do think it a practice most
unbeseeming any of the Saints, to boast of their own ability, much more to
deride others, for their lacks But this is to be observed generally, that those
which stand for bad causes, do after this sort still reproach their
adversaries; thus do the Papists, Defense of the Apolog. of the chu. of Eng. p.
619
the Protestants, so the Protestants, Mr. Hutton against the minist. of Devon,
and Cornwall, p. 9, and p. 151 the 7. confideration. Stones Sermon. on Psa. 120.
the Puritans, and so they us, as here, and in their other writings Sprint
usually. Now to the book.

I thought once to have set down his answer, before my reply, as he has done
Mr. Iohnsons reasons, before his answer: but I perceived then, that this
treatise would be very large; besides, both their books are already in many
men's hands, and therefore I changed my mind* only I do desire the reader to
peruse both their writings, for so shall he profitt the more, by that which I
have here penned.

Answ. to page 1.
I find nothing here, but some insinuating florishes, of his own skill in
Logic, and great contempt putt upon Mr. Johnson, for his unableness therein.
Now, my purpose is, both here and in other places, in a manner altogether to
passe-by his intemperate speeches, knowing that before this time, he has made
his reckoning for them with God.

1 Pet. 3. 9. Ro^. 13, 21,
Besides, it is a Christian part not to render rebuke for rebuke, and a
thousand times better were it to sustain even a legion of reproaches, then for
a man by turning (though but one) to give cause of suspicion, that evil has
got some part of conquest over him. But I marvel, why he says, that Mr.
Johnson in disdain styles them forward preachers; For 1. He knew not the
others heart. 2. To my knowledge, this is a term commonly given, and taken of
them, acceptably, and 1 Cor. 7.
in good part. 3. The Apostle says, Love hops all things; But it is evident
Mr. Bradsh. followed not his rule, which is, when things are doubtful in
themselves, to embrace the best.

Answ. to page 2, 3.
He speaks often of their law, but what law he means, I know not, whether the
common, provincial, civil, or statut; neither what by the true intent of it,
and therefore until some friend of his, do set forth an exposition of it, we
cannot give to it any direct answ. 2. Seeing he grants, to be a true minist.
there must be a qualificatio^, according to the intent of the law, we desire
them, in their next writing, to tell us plainly, whether all their Bb. Priests,
and Deacons, are so qualified: if not, then certainly Mr. Dayr. Mr. Bradsh.
etc. have much deceived the people: For under the color of some few among
them, qualified (as they say) they have cunningly sought, to justify all the
rest; and yet knew, (as it is clear by this man's writing) that their
ministry is false and unlawful. 3. Let the vanity of his speech be here
observed; their ministers are true, if they be, etc. which is, as if a known
harlot, should say, I am honest, if I am qualified, according to the word of
God. 4. He mistakes Mr. Iohnsons words, for he does not say, that the Prelates
are ministers of the Church Assemblies, but of the Church of England;
Notwithstanding, if there were need, we could prove both by their profession,
and practice, that Reply to D. Morton pa. 85.
the Bb. are the proper Pastors of all the Parishes in their Diocesses, and the
rest are curats only to them. 5. If the ministry of the Prelates, belong not
to any ordinary assemblies, then is the same Antichristian, and so
consequently is that which is derived from it; And so much from their own
Principles, we have formerly P. 9, 11, 39.
proved. 6. He should have proved, that that authority and power, which the Law
gives to the Prelates, is lawful, and good; for if the same be otherwise (as
he knew in his own conscience it is) I do not see for what reason he
mentions it, it having no weight of matter against us, nor for themselves.

Unto p. 4.
Answ. 1. To let pass the name Priest, and that likeness which is between
their ministry and the popish See Treat. of the minist. of the Church of Eng.
page 98, 99, etc.
priesthood, because others already have sufficiently handled the thing: I do
deny that they are such Pastors and teachers as are spoken of in Ephesians. 4. 11,
12. and have showed the contrary from their own principles.

2. Note this man's lightness and inconstancy. Sometime he stands for the
justification of all their Ministers, as here, and in page 10. etc. but
otherwhile he will only defend those which are qualified according to the law,
and execute their office, as page 2. 5. 94, etc. Thus a man knows not how to
follow, nor where to find him: Prove. 30. 18, 19.
As the way of an Eagle in the air, such is the way of an adulterous woman: It
is hid and cannot be known.

3. It is untruely affirmed, that their priests and Deacons do exercise the
proper and essential ministry of Pastors and Teachers. For first, most of
them, by their confession, Page 15, 16, 43.
are idle bellied Epicures, senseless asses, and not one of twenty that can
preach. 2. By their law, their Deacons are not to administer the Sacraments,
neither any of those which are full Priests, but according to a Popish
Leiturgy. 3. None of them, neither may, nor do exercise Church-governement,
though they acknowledge it an assenti^^^ and proper part of their ministry.

To the 5, 6, 7. pages.
Answ. 1. Our question is not of what should, or may be in a Land, but of that
which we know is by law established and practiced accordingly. 2. I cannot
think that the Prelates have permitted the ministry of some, which never
received ordination from the papists or themselves: for though it may be
possible, that one or two, may secretly pass without being made Priests by
them, yet that they should permit this thing, I am persuaded he could never
prove it.

3. He often taxes Mr. John's. with absurdenesse, but no man I think could
pass him here. For if it should be granted, that there was a Prelate which for
love or money permitted the ministry, etc. does it therefore follow, that the
ministry of that Church, is any other, but of their Prelacie, Priesthood and
Deaconry, as Mr. Johnson says. For what if some have as much permission under
the Papacy, is not their ministry then of Prelacy, Priesthood and Deaconry?
Indeed so Mr. Bradsh. does infer, but with what wit or truth, let the Reader
Judge.

4. A man may be an unlawful Minister, though he never received the Bb.
ordination, viz. when he runs of his own head, and is not elected, called and
ordained by the free and common consent of a true Church, and such were those
of whom Mr. Bradsh. speaks, if there be any truth in his relation.

5. If some do swerve from some observances, which the Law requires, yet is not
their calling hereby the more true and lawful: for if Monks and Friars do not
keep sometimes all their rules and orders, yet are they notwithstanding the
devils and Popes officers, even so, etc.

6. Though their Law intend not, such a proper priesthood, as was in the Jewish
Church, nor (as in all respects) is now under the Romish beast, yet this helps
nothing their cause, seeing it both tends and establishes such a ministry,
as by their own confession is directly against the word of God:

Page 44. 45, 46.
7. Touching their Parsons, Vicars, Stipe ndaries, Chaplins, etc. we have
prooved from their writings that these names and offices come wholly from the
devil and Antichrist: and therefore his pleading for Baal is altogether here
unusefull as to say, All is one kind of ministry and in this respect they are
Parsons, and in that respect, Vicars, etc. for, as much may a Papist say of
their Parsons, Vicars, etc. and as true too. If therefore he would have
justified these men, he should first have manifested, that his brethren have
notoriously slandred their ministry, and so have taken quite away their
reasons, by showing better, and not needlessely to bring in a tale, which
neither helps him, nor hurts us.

8. His conclusion is pi^tifull: for instead of satisfaction, he leaves his
Reader more doubtful then before: in regard of an exception which he makes
thus, If they duly execute the same, meaning, the office of true Pastors, now
what, if they do not this, as indeed they do not, what be they then? To this
he says nothing: neither will I infer any thing, but leave it as a Quaere,
to be answered by him, which shall next write in the behalf of Mr. Bradsh.

To page 7, 8, 9.
Before I make answer unto the particular things in these pages, I will lay
down some general observations, touching the manner of this man's writing,
both here, and in the rest of his book. 1. Having nothing with any show to
object, like a bold sophister, he makes a flat denialls of expressed truths, as
thus: I say it is false, I deny it, etc. as if the weight of an argument were
sufficiently removed by empty denials, 2. His proofs are always beggarly I
says, or ifs, and may be soes; and does not in all his writing, either
directly, or by sound consequence from the scripture, confirm any one thing,
whereof he speaks. 3. Although in the course of his life, he made show to be
a great enemy of the Bb. and their traditions; yet now against us, he stands
to maintain the vilest abominations in their Churches. 4. Such corruptions as
the Nonconformists generally have condemned, he basely here justifies; and by
the same carnal and corrupt reasons, which the Prelates use to do, so that
his writing is not more against us, then against themselves, and therefore it
concerns them as much as us, to set forth an answer unto it. 5. As Mr. Dayr.
in his book, has showed much ignorance, and contradiction; no less has he
great hypocrisy, in pleading for such evils; as some, which knew him, do
well know, that his judgment of them (at least of many of them) was wholly
otherwise.

It is true, the report goes, that he was not the proper author of it, but
another did it, and got him to father it* This may be so, and it is probable
enough, notwithstanding Mr. Brandsh. evil is not the less, if he should
suffer any one, as the Ass did Balaam, to ride upon him, for to curse the
Israel of God. Now to answer the things particularly.

Answ. 1. When we know what those accessarie parts be, which true Pastors, and
teachers may have of their offices, callings, and administrations, not ordained
by Christ, we will speak more of that point, in the mean time, they may do
well, to consider, that they want not the accessarie only, but indeed the
substanciall and essenciall parts of true offices, etc. and this they themselves
do not barely say, but soundly prove: and to confute this, Mr. Bradsh. has
nothing in all his writing, and therefore their own arguments must needs stand
in force, until they do revoke them, and bring better to the contrary.

2. Whether the Prelates be ordinary, or extraordinary ministers, it is not
material, and therefore the distinction is idle, and impertinent; For if their
office and See p. 34, 35
calling be false, devilish, Antichristian, etc. as the Nonconformists say, we
will give Mr. Bradsh. leave, to place them in what order or degree he will, and
yet his cause shall be never the better by it: but observe, howsoever some time
he undertakes to justify their standing; yet here by a wile, which he uses,
they are left, to shift for themselves.

3. He could not prove, when he was alive, that either the prastise of all the
Priests in the Church of Rome, in all things was according to that
constitution, or their constitution, according to their practice, or either of
them answereable to the strict terms of the Law. What then, might not he
therefore conclude any thing generally against the unlawfullnesse of their
ministry? his words import positively no, but we are sure yes; and so will
every wise man I think (beside himself) affirm too. Notwithstanding his Tenets
usually do lead unto such absurdities.

4. He either, through ignorance, or deceit speaks, besides the present
question. For Mr. John's. to prove them false ministers, mentions their
calling and entrance, according to their Pontisicall, now to this he says
nothing, but talks of their practice: the which, if it should be granted, to
be otherwise then the Law requires, yet it is nothing to the purpose, for which
he brings it.

Would it not make some men laugh, if they should hear one, that is accused to
be a bastard: To maintain the contrary, by this reason, viz. because he does
such duties, as those children do, which are borne under wedlock. The thing
which Mr. Johnson affirms from their own writing, is, that their ministry
begotten by the Prelates, is illegitimate and false; I say those, which take
their offices, and callings from them, are bastardly ministers. Now, mark
(good reader) how handsomely Mr. Bradsh. makes an answer to it. He cannot prove
(says he) that the practice of all our ministers, is in all things according
to the constitution, etc. What then, yet seeing he proves your ministry by
your own confession to be a Child of the Whore, So is the Pope called by the
Holy Ghost, in Rev. 17, 5
it must needs be still a bastard, whether the practice of it be good or evil.

5. I do deny that those administrations, which are performed by their Popish
Canons, and book of common prayer, are the maine, principal, and essential
administrations, which Christ has ordained. For first, these allow of no true
Pastors and Teachers. 2. Require the Sacraments to be unlawsully administered.
Lastly, command an idolatrous worship, and divellish discipline to be performed
and executed in all their congregations.

In page 46. he says, that the Prelates may well laugh at Mr. Iohnsons
simplicity and silliness of wit, that thinks to fright them with such a
bugbeare as this, etc. But may they not much more laugh at the writings, which
his brethren have published against their Canons and servicebooke, P. 139, 140
calling the former slavish Ordinances, lawless, perilous, Popish, wicked, and
damnable Canons, shameful idols, etc. P. 78.
the later, a devised service, the Mass in English, etc. But what of all this,
if they will believe Mr. Bradsh. they need not be frighted with such bugbeares,
as these: For if it should be granted (as it is only for reasoning sake, that
he will do this) that some things are in the Canons and book aforesaid,
which were never ordained by Christ, yet the main, principal, and essencial
administrations, which he commands, are contained in them.

Now, how much better had it been, if this mishappen thing, had had its
mothers womb, for the grave, or being brought out, had been ever kept in some
hole or dark place, where it should never have seen any light, nor any man's
eyes should ever have looked upon it, then to serve in this sort, which it
does; namely, to strengthen the hands of the wicked, greive the hearts of the
righteous, and to discover their own vile halting, and double dealing.

To pa. 10.
Ans. 1. Are the Princes of the earth bound by Gods Laws to mainetaine the
ordinary ministry of your assemblies? then have you from time to time,
shamefully mocked and abused them, in craving so earnestly for their aid, to
have this same quite rooted out, and abolished, 1. Adm.
and a right established in the room and place thereof. 2. The Dumb dogs,
Caterpillars, and idle bellies never had a better Proctor then this man to
plead for their unlawful standing. For he says the Magistrate is bound to
protect their ministry. But how can we believe him, seeing the Nonconformists
teach otherwise, and lay down unanswerable arguments for the same: but as for
him he gives none at all. If any should say, He means not the bare Readers. I
answer, He makes no distinction, nor exception, but speaks generally, and
indefinitely of the ordinary ministry of their Church assemblies. Beside, the
office and calling of these, is for nature and kind the very same which the
rest of them have received. 3. I do not so much admire, that he makes here
some question, whether there be any corruption, in and about their ministry.
And that page 13. he thinks needless to spend any time, in justifying their
Canons, as I wonder he had not down right affirmed, that there are no faults
at all in either of them.

For any one may see by his work, that he meant not now to tie his conscience
short, but would make a little bold with it for the present, and so he might
fetch over a sure blow upon us, he cared not though with every stroke he made
wounds through the sides of his brethren. 4. Seeing he confesses, the
idolatrous ministry of Antichrist is to be abolished. It must needs follow
then, that these scriptures, Rev. 17, 16. 1 Timothy 2, 2 Romans 13, 4 Deuteronomy. 12, 2
P^a. 72, 1
alleged by Mr. John's. are neither abused nor profaned: For such is theirs.
1. Because their entrance into the ministry, is by a Popish, and unlawful
vocation. 2. The service, which they are enjoined to do, is idolatrous and
Antichristian. 3. The manner of performing it, is also unlawful. For they are
to wear surplusses, sign children in Baptism, with the sign of the Cross,
kneel in the act of receaving the bread and wine in the Lords supper, etc. the
which things are very idols. 4. Touching preaching, it is no essencial part of
their ministry: For those which neither do it, nor can, are yet by their Law
as true and Lawful Ministers, as any other among them. And all this, many
Nonconformists of greater note, and zeal, then ever Mr. Bradsh. was, have by
reason soundly manifested, and therefore he has here showed the more pride,
and ignorance, thus still to oppose them, having nothing wherewith to refute
their effectual arguments; But to use his own Page 87.
phrase, a vomit of his coleworts, not twice, but twice twenty times sodden,
that is, bold I says.

To pa. 13.
Does he speak in earnest, that the Prelacie, in and of it self, may stand
well enough with the Offices of the Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, etc. Truly
I cannot think so, and therefore if I should have seen such a passage, in
their writing against the bb. I would have admired at it; but seeing it is put
forth only against the Separatists tush, why may it not pass, though it be
as contrary to their saying otherwhere, as light to darkness.

The author of the Preface, before the Fresh suit, against human Ceremonies,
says, he cannot abide dawbing. Now, I profess in all good conscience, I never
saw to my remembrance, such dawbing in any Conformist; and to say truth, it is
a great deal worse: And for proof hereof, observe what they write in their
writings against the Prelacie:

Syons plea p. 4.
The Hierarchicall government cannot consist in a nation with soundness of
doctrine, sincerity of Gods worship, holiness of life, the glorious power of
Christ's government, nor with the prosperity and safety of the commonwealth.

Remove. imputations from the minist. of D. and Cor. p. 36
Another says: Not Paul himself, if he were liveing, should be permitted, to
continue his function, if he would not conform, as we are verily persuaded he
would not.

Mr. Vdal, Mr. Cartwright, Mr. Banes, Mr. Bates, and many others of them, have
spoken to the same effect, and suffered for this banishment, spoiling of their
goods, yea some of them loss of life. See also before in page 34, 35. 138.

It is reported of a certain Thratian, by name Leicurgus, how imagining that he
was, hewing down a vine with his hatchet, slew his own son, and maimed
Apoll. de Orig. Deorum l. 3.
himself. Much to this purpose is Mr: Bradsh. work: for thinking to refute
us, he quite overthrowes his brethrens cause, and his own too. And whether
this be not unreasonable, let the judicious judge.

If Dr. Ames had not boasted of this man's book, I would not have touched it,
because I knew the bowels of it could possible not be opened, but it would
cause an ill savor to some, in regard it contains most vile and unclean
matter; but seeing they are neither afraid to publish such stuff to the
world, nor ashamed afterward to glory of it, they must give us leave to return
it home to them again, howbeit to their loss and discredit too. This is the
book, which Mr. Page upbraides us, with, Ar. ag. Separ. p. 38.


To 14, 15 page
Answ. 1: Touching the corrupt shifts, which he uses, to justify civil
offices, in Ecclefiastical persons, I will not speak much of it, but do desire
the reader to take knowledge, that the Nonconform. T. C. the rest of the second
reply, p. 1, to 31. Mr. Bates 73, 74, etc. Course of Conformity, p. 20
affirm the thing to be utterly unlawful, and give sundry good reasons for
it. 2. Whereas he says, the same authority that permits their ministers to be
civil Magistrates, does permit them to be drunkards, etc. And by the same Law,
that their ministers may take upon them civil Magistracy; any true Pastors may
take upon them the same authority. To this I say in his own words, what a
shameless man is this to P. 11.
affirm such untruths: for concerning the first, he slaundereth the state, and
in the other he puts the lie on the writings of his brethren, which testify
otherwise. 3. Whether they be made civil Magistrates, by the favor or grace of
Princes, as he speaks, or any other way, it is nothing to the purpose, seeing
the thing in it self is every way, and altogether unlawful. 4. When they
have proved themselves to be true Pastors and Teachers, then there willbe a
fit place, to show, whether the admitting of a civil office^, do change the
nature of a Church ministry or no.

To 16, 17 page
Here Mr. Bradsh* in plain terms, casts his brethren off, and good reason
too, for he sees, that either he must wholly renounce their Principles, or
conclude with them, that their ministry is unlawful. But he tells us, that he
is not bound to their opinions. Well, neither I think are they to his. And
now, seeing he, and they, are thus parted, let us a little consider, whose of
their opinions, in likelihood, are the truest, and best, to be embraced.
Touching the former, I mean the Nonconformists (to say nothing of their number,
zeal, learning, knowledge, sufferings for the truth, etc. In all which they
far exceeded him,) not only do they affirm their ministry to be false;
but as I have often said, and also showed out of their books, they prove by
good arguments, the thing to be so. But as for Mr. Bradsh. he delivers his
opinion upon his own word, and if we will not take that, we must have nothing:
nay truly many times we cannot have his word, sor he turns his tale so often
forward and backward, as no man can tell where, when, or how to believe him:
For instance, sometime all their ministers are true with him, otherwhile they
which be qualifyed only, and such as duly execute their office. Thus he is like
to one that has a mad dog by the ear, and knows not whether it be best to
hold him, or let him go.

For Mr. Barrow, and Mr. Greenwood, as we will not bind our consciences to
their opinions, so neither will we rashly reject the grounds, which they have
taught, and given reasons of, unless we be able to show better, although Mr.
Bradsh. has dealt thus ilfavouredly with his brethren.

To Page 18, 19, 20, 21.
There are fishes name Sepiae (as writers report) who least they should be
taken of their pursuers, do cast behind them abundance of black matter, and
so escape out of sight. By such a wile Mr. Bradsh. thinks here to get away
from us* for with his shifts; and tricks, he puts quite by the matter in hand.
But to answer briefly. 1. There are many hundred Priests in the Land, which
have no particular places to serve in: Is their ministry therefore unlawful?
Indeed he seems here to grant it, as the rest of his brethren do. 2. Seeing
not all (as he confesses) but some of those that have offices are bound to be
members of true visible Churches. I will leave it in this place as a Quaere,
Whether such as neither are, nor by law are bound to be such, are true Pastors
or no? for Mr. Bradsh. had so much forecast, as to say nothing about this
thing; howbeit, it was the maine point in question. 3. He takes it for granted,
that their Churches are true, but brings no proof for it: and except we will
give him all this at once, there is nothing which he speaks to any purpose in
the world. But this we cannot give him, though he beg it shamefully, See before
page 169. etc.
because the thing is otherwise, as their own writings manifest. 4. What if
their Priests be not in all points answerable to their laws, are they then
members of a false Church? indeed either his words carry such a meaning, or to
me they seem non sense. 5. Have not some in the Church of Rome dispensations
to have more cures then one? Yes surely; now do these special dispensations
make the action lawful? such an inference Mr. Bradsh. words have, or else the
man talks he knows not what. 6. Howsoever the matter be not much, whether the
Government which the Bb. exercise in civil and Re moove imputat. from minist.
of C. D. page 46 Syons plea page 4. Page 34, 35 147* Protestat* from Scot. page
88, 89, etc. Altar Damas^. 57, 58, etc.
ecclesiastical cases, do impair the dignity, authority, or supremacy of the
civil Magistrate, seeing the same is unlawful and Antichristian as we have
before prooved. Notwithstanding this thing is confidently affirmed of the
Nonconformists, and they give sundry instances thereof; and therefore the
boldness of this man is notorious, that he should dare in this manner still to
dawbe up the vile things, which his brethren pull down with both hands.

Some men in matters of controversy, care not (as one says) Intus in animo
perdant, modo victores abscedant. Ambro^. To page 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
though they loose the peace of conscience, so they may gain their supposed
victory. If Mr* Bradsh. in judgment came the nearest (as it is reported) of
all the Nonconformists to the separation; surely his soul could have small
comfort in this writing, it containing nothing for the most part, but what is
quite contrary to all their sayings otherwhere.

To let pass his idle scoffing, as imputing it to a (...) necessarily
attending that pen which undertakes the defense of such a cause. In these pages
he shows himself a miserable informer and setler of the cons^ience: for his
counsel is much to this effect; so a man hold some thing, it is no matter what
it be, nor how ungroundedly taken up, to answer his ifs and thoughs, and what is
particularly.

First, What if some (says he) shall say that our Archbb. and Bb. have the
Pastors Office? Answer. Then they shall speak untruely, or else you your
selves do bear false witness against them; in affirming, that they are not
Defen. Eccle. dis. ag. Bridge. page 88, 89 Pref. Dio. Strif. of the Chapter Repr.
Mart. Iun. page 12. Mr. Bates, page 55.
Pastors and Teachers, neither any true ministers at all in the Church of God.

2. What, if one hold, they are not Pastors, but named only so, metaphorically,
as Princes are so called? etc. Answ, This were to hold a thing, which is
contrary to their Law, and directly against their profession and practice.

3. What, if one hold, that the ministers of our particular congregations, are
Pastors? Answer. He has no reason for it, because they have no true calling
unto that office, neither do perform the substanciall duties In title page of
his Rej.
thereof. When Dr. Burges styled himself Pastor of Sutton Coldfeild. Mark
what Dr. Ames writes, in answer to it: It is (says he) such a name or title
as by the Fresh suit l. 1* p. 5.
Prelates rules, is not admitted, and our book of ordination acknowledges no
such Pastors, from whence also it is, that in our convocation church language,
we never hear of a Pastor of one Parish alone. None of our divines in the
Synod of Dort would take to themselves that title, though most others Resp. ad
Epist. 1. Ma.
did in their subscription. D. Andrews, an Archbishop in esteem, censureth
this title for a Noveltie.

4. What though one hold, that our Archbb. and Bb. are Commissioners and
visitors, in causes Ecclesiastical, under the King. Answ. The Magistrate has
no authority from God, to set up such Officers, which shall take into their
hands the rights and privileges, belonging to the whole Church, and therefore
whereas he attempteth, both here, and in page 35. 36. to justify the
Hierarchicall Government; and by this reason, viz. because they take it from
the King. I desire the reader to compare with this base stuff their former
principles, and consider See before p. 34, 35, 147.
whether there be not probable reasons, to think, that he sinned herein
fearfully against his knowledge and conscience.

But to the point in hand, is not here wit, to dispute by ifs and thoughs?
Now, I am not of Mr. Bradsh* merry disposition, to laugh at another fault: But
truly, if a man were so disposed, his silly, and childish words would give
him often occasion enough. For suppose, a Papist should argue, as he does, What
if one should hold, that our Archbb. and Bb. be Pastors, or what etc. would not
every one, that sees it, say, there is in it, neither ryme, nor good reason.
If therefore he had not meant a mere gulling and mocking of the world, he
would not have taught men to hold this thing, and that, or what they would,
without any reason and ground, but have showed first by the word of God, that
the opinions were lawful and good, which he counseled them to embrace.

After this, he tells us, that some of their Priests and Deacons, are Pastors,
and some Teachers; but I have proved the contrary, and therefore both now, and
hereafter do purpose, to let his idle repetitions pass; only if I may
without offense ask a question of them, seeing Mr. Bradsh. makes here this
distinction, and does oftentimes justify the whole Clergy, by what names or
titles soever they be called, I would willingly therefore know, of what kind
their dumb ministry is, whether these Sr. John's be Pastors, or Teachers; for
if they be true ministers, one of these, they must be necessarily.

See before p. 48.
Mr. Bradsh. having a great desire to justify their Deaconrie (howbeit, he
knew that his brethren had condemned it for a false office, as they have it in
their assemblies) demands of us, whether Magistrates may not require some
things of Teachers, not required by the Apostles? Answ. Yes forsooth, but if
they require, before a man shallbe a Teacher, that he enter into the ministry
by an unsawfull and Popish vocation, and shall execute afterward the same in
an idolatrous manner, If he in all this do obey them, he must needs thereupon
become no true minister; and such is their cause, by their own confession; And
therefore the question, as he propounds it, is deceitful and impertinent.

Lastly, he excuses their Priests, which obey the Bb. what obedience (says
he) do they promise to Prelates, but only in things, that they shall judge
honest, and Lawful, and not repugnant to the word of God. If this manner of
arguing be good, what corruptions so abominable but may get contenance? Under
such pretenses, any Heretic may maintain the grossest errors, which he
holds, and practices.

But to let pass any further answer, I desire the reader See Mr. Bradsh. 12
general Arguments against Ceremonies.
to take knowledge, that none of the Nonconformists have more effectually
condemned their Popish Ceremonies than this man, for he has by many arguments
proved, that the use of them is very sinful: notwithstanding behold his
forehead, how in his writing here against us, he seeks by flattering speeches,
to justify the very practice, which he professes in his writing against the
Hierarchy, to be unlawful, idolatrous, antichristian. Remove. imput. from the
minist. of D. and C. p. 22. Fresh suit l. 2, p. 184.
I may well use the words, which they speak against the Conformists: We
abhor this hypocrisy, and leave such temporising unto those, which are
content, to make themselves the servants of men. But its true, as one says:
Extremity drives men unto hard shifts.

To p. 27, 28, 29.
Here Mr. Bradsh. bestirreth himself, to prove their ministry good, by the
Scribes and Pharisees, but this example will not help him in the least.

For first, howsoever they had new names, and in many things were very corrupt,
yet they sat in Moses Chair, See Pareus in Mat. 23, v. 2, p. 578.
that is, came rightly, and Lawfully, to the Leviticall and Preistly Offices,
which they executed in the church of God. But their ministers (as we have
showed it under their own hands) do want this true calling, and therefore the
comparison holds not. It is possible, that two persons, liveing in adultery,
may in sundry respects be no worse, then some, which are truly married: Is
their state therefore one? not so; and why? because the former wanted a right
coming together: So in this cause, in somethings I am persuaded, their
ministers are not worse tha^ the Pharisees, Yet the Nonconf. say, they are
worse, see page 15, 16.
as in pride, covetuousnes, hypocrysie, persecution of the saints, etc. yet
nevertheless, their standing (in respect of the ministry) is not as good, as
the Pharisees; because (as I said before) they have not a true calling thereto,
which the others had.

2. I cannot think, that Mr. Bradsh. should be so ignorant, as in this place
he makes show of. For his words import, that the ability, which the Pharisees
had, to expound the Law, argued them true ministers: But this is false, for
that; and indeed that only, which argued their office to be true, was the Lords
institution, in setting the Tribe of Levi apart for the holy administratio^s;
Exo, 28, ^ Mal, 2, 4* 5 Heb. 5, 4.
of which Family were these, Ioh. 1. 19 with 24.
so many as were employed, in, and about the service of the sanctuary.

3. If the preaching of the word and administration of the Sacraments be
sufficient, to argue a true ministry; then are not only many Papists Priests,
but other, vile, Heretics, and excommunicates, Lawful Pastors and Teachers,
for so much they can do. The truth is, his arguing is no better, then if
Ieroboams Priests should thus have pleaded: Those Priests, that teach Jacob
Deu. 33, 10
Gods judgments, and Israel his Law, that put incense before the face of God,
and burn incense upon his Altar, are true Priests; But these things do we,
therefore we are true Priests. If they shall say, the assumption is untrue, the
like say we of their cause.

4. Howsoever, he often undertakes, the defense of all their ministers, yet
here he leaves the blind Priests in the ditch: And indeed this is the manner
usually of them, they are so shifting up and down, as a man knows not where
there home is, nor when to find them there, for some time the whole Clergy is
pleaded for: when they are beaten thence, then they fly to their best
ministers; when they cannot defend them any longer, then we have an hours
talk of their gifts and services. Thus as a man that sits uneasy, is ever
stirring to and fro, till he be out of his place, so do they shift, and shift,
till they be clean out of their arguments and matter: If they think, I speak
beyond my compass, let them once pitch and insist upon any one of these
grounds, without starting, join issue with us, and come to the particular,
that so a directly named position, may receive a direct and special reply.

To p. 30. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37.
Answ. 1. There is little hope to find any good here, seeing so manifest an
untruth, is uttered in the beginning. He tells us (if we will believe him) that
to communicate spiritually with the ministers of Antichrist, in holy things, is
not to communicate in his Apostacy. If this be true, then unlawful ministers,
may be lawfully communicated with; but this cannot be, for as it was unlawful
to communicate with Corah, or with Vzziah, though they burnt true incense, or
with Ieroboams Priests, though they offered true sacrifices, so it is unlawful
to communicate, with a devised, or usurped ministry, what things soever,
(though good in themselves,) are administered in, and by it. And this we
formerly Page* 27, 28
have proved fully.

2. It is certain, that the ministry of Priests and Deacons, ordained by
Antichrist, is the ministry of his Apostacy, and not Christ's, as he
profanely affirms: for he makes them not according to the institution,
prescribed of God, but wholly after a wicked and divelish device of his own
brain; so that the same is a mere fruit of the Beast and false Prophet, and
no accidental effect, but a most cursed thing, which does as properly flow from
his defection, as figgs from the fig tree, or a child from the seed of the
Parents. As for Luther, Husse, Wickliffe, and others, whereof he speaks, it
is but an absurd and childish begging of the question, seeing it cannot be
proved, that they received a lawful ordinary ministry from the Church of Rome.

3. He says, that the ministry of such Priests and Deacons, which the
Prelates ordain, are the true ministers of Jesus Christ. What every dumb dog,
and all those 60. 80. and a 100. which are made at a clap, and sent forth as
rouges and masterlesse servants, to get benefices, where then can, having no
particular congregation? etc. Yea now all again are justified: for he speaks
without exception^ or limitation. If I were not unwilling to give occasion unto
the Bb. to insult over these me^, I could hence manifest much bad dealing in
them, but I will forbear for the present, and do refer the reader to their
ow^ Principles, 1 Admo. p. 3. Offer for Confer. p. 2. N^ces* dis. p 2^. T. C.
^. 1, p. 193, Eccle. dis. p. 40. Mr. Bates, p. 66. Demon. dis. p. 24, 25. Def.
Adm* p. 2.
which is, that all Ecclesiastical officers ough^ necessarily to be made by
the free choice of the congregation wherein they are to administer. This manner
of ordination, they profess, is only Lawful, and none else. T^ this ascenteth
Dr. Ames, and denies utterly, that the calling of their ministers does
essencially depend upon the Bb* calling. Now, what the reason is, that they are
thus mu table, it may easily be conceived, namely, the differen condition of
the persons* against whom they write for if a man should read over their
books, publisher to the world, against the Hierarchy, he should not (warrant
you) hear them once there to say (as here they do) that it is lawful for
their Prelates, to ordain ministers; but then they will speak out boldly,
that this practice is wicked, and unwarrantable, yea and they can upon such
occasions give good reasons for it also.

Mr. Bradsh, in page 5. justifies the ministry of such among them, as are not
ordained by the Bb. here he says that these are the Ministers of Jesus Christ,
which receive their ministry from the Bb. yea and from Antichrist too, so that
it seems, if men will be Priests of their churches, they may come in any way,
and it is no matter how they be ordained, nor who ordaines them, nor whether
they be ordained or no: indeed his words imply no less, and therefore he must
needs be reasonable. But if the Nonconformists should have seen but half such
rotten stuff in any. Conformists writings, they would have cried out, and that
justly, Dawbing, dawbing.

4. He has little cause to scoff so idely as he does, at Mr. John's. for the
manner whereby he prooves his propositions, considering how he himself never
brings either Scriptures, Examples, Reasons, or human Testimonies to confirm
any one thing whereof he writes. Hierom speaks of some who have their
Syllogismes and argumentations not Non in modo and figura, sed in calcibus.
in mood and figure but in their heels. Mr. Bradsh. is not much unlike these;
for wanting all proof to make good the points which he boldly affirms, he
lay^th about him with his heels, by kicking the person whom he opposes, with
bitter and unchristian floutings. Notwithstanding, the wisdom of God is
marvellously here to be seen, which suffered not this man to countenance his
corrupt speeches with any weight or show of arguments, that so it might
appear, to be penned by him, rather for disgrace of others, then defense of
themselves, and also that none by it might be deceived, but such as are willing
to pluck out their eyes, and to take one that is blind for their guide and
leader.

5. To let pass the unlawful speech, which they use in ordayning ministers
(i. e.) receive the holy Ghost, T. C. ^. 1, page 6^, etc. Altar. Da. pa. 165.
and certain frothy demands, which he moves, to uphold (if he could) the Bb.
Kingdom. The things not being worthy of answer. In page 38. he bewrays great
ignorance, in not putting a difference between a minislerie, and the execution
of it, for these are two distinct things, and therefore it is possible, that
one may be a true Ecclesiastical Officer, and yet never do the services
thereof; as for example, a woman is really a wife, immediately upon her
marriage, I say, before she performs any duty; yea though it should come to
pass, that she never performs any. And therefore Mr. Bradsh. was deceived,
to think, if one be a false minister by ordination, that the administration
of lawful things, makes him true; for it is not so. If the Church of Israel
should have chosen some, not of Aarons house, but of other Tribes, to be
Priests, and they had administered without exception, had these therefore been
Lawful Officers? in truth, according to his understanding they had; but herein
he grossly erred. Mr. Perkins Exposition upon Mat. 7. ver. 16, page 239. Last
volu.
lays it down, as one infallible note of a false Prophet, to come without a
calling from God, and from the Church. I pray observe, although a man should
execute the ministry of a Pastor, notwithstanding if he want a lawful
calling, he is still a false minister in the judgment of this author, and I
think of all wise men, beside Mr. Bradsh.

Again, if one be ordained a Pastor, according to Christ's institution, he has
certainly a lawful ministry; howsoever, things afterward shall fall out; yea
though he should sing Mass and Mattens, as he speaks; but he asks, if any,
that is in his wits, will say so? yes, and prove it also, and if he himself
had not wanted some wit in this point, he would not thus have confounded one
thing so absurdly with another* for as a person may be a servant or subject
truly, and fully, and yet do afterward the actions of thieves, rebels,
Traitors; so a man may take a true ministry, by ordination, and yet both in
life and doctrine do wickedly, and deserve justly to be deposed.

But I guess, wherefore he hales-in these foolish positions; it is probable, he
knew well enough (what gloses so ever he made sometime to the contrary) that
their ordination of Priests and Deacons, by the Prelates, is (as his brethren
say) unlawful and Antichristian; and therefore he hoped now to justify
themselves, in regard of their good services: but this will not help him
neither; for if their administrations were right (which are not) yet would
their ministry be still false, so long as they do retain that false
calling, which they took first of the Bb. they of the Pope, and he from the
devil. This is no otherwise, then according to their own Tenets; for they
say: Whatsoever comes from the Pope, which is antichrist, comes first from
the devil.


To page 39 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47.
Ans. 1. As a man, when in his answers, he purposes to deceive others, his
manner is, to conceal that which should give special light unto the matter: It
is even so with Mr. Bradsh. that he might merely gull the reader, he hides
from him, whatsoever should most serve for his true information, about the
point in dispute. In page 7. he told us, that Pastors and Teachers may have
diverse accessarie parts of their offices etc. not ordained by Christ. Here he
says, that they may in diverse, and sundry particulars, disobey Christ in his
ordinances of worship and Government. Now he does not express in either place,
what these diverse and particulars are, neither durst he, I am persuaded, for
had he, we should soon have joined issue with him. But to leave him in the
midst of his idle words: this I say, when we understand once their meaning,
they shall have our direct answer unto it. In the mean while, I do entreat
them, to consider advisedly of their own Principles, about their Worship and
Government. Touching the first, See before page 72, 78
it is (as they say) contained, in the book of common prayer, the which was
taken out of the vile Massebooke, full P. 138, 147
of all blasphemies* lies, and abominations; and the other is taken wholly, and
every part from the Pope.

2. To let pass many things, which he often affirms, without any proof, I
do desire, that they will show us, in their next reply, some good reason for
that which he writes in page 40. 41. viz. That ministers may execute the
ministry and Government of other Archb^. and Lordbishops besides Christ, be
Archdeacons, parsons, vicars, read stinted prayers out of a book, and observe
other humane inventions, and have their Church Government, according to Canons,
Courts, etc. which were never appointed by Christ, and yet obey Christ in all
the main, essen^iall, and substanciall points of his ministry, worship, and
Government. If they can prove all this, I do not see, but the controversy may
be easily taken up, between them and the Bb. only then, they have just cause to
beg pardon of them, for their pleas against the Prelacie, and the many heavy
accusations, which they have put up, both to Princes and Parliaments, against
them. But if they cannot (as I know they cannot) make good the thing here
avouched, then let it ly as a blot for ever upon their cause, for thrusting
abroad such deceivable trash, especially upon those, which either were Authors
of it, or have since justified so hypocritical and shameless a writing.

3. He once more here rejects, the Principles of the Nonconform* and bidds
them, answer for themselves, touching the Suits, which they have putt up to
the Parliaments, for the abolishing of their ministry. Now, the reason why I
do again note it, is, because the reader may see how impossible it is for any
of them, to justify their standing and writings too; the same being as unlike
each to other, as good is to evil. For the Prelates laughing, whereof he
speaks in this place, I have mentioned it before; this only I add, that never
did Mr. John's. by his simplicity and silliness of wit, give that occasion
unto the Bb. of Mirth, as he has justly of sorrow to all his brethren, by his
dawbing and rotten speeches; for truly in the words of Jacob, they may Genesis
34, 30
say, he has troubled us, to make us, to stink among the inhabitants of the
Land; yea to increase their grief, as Psa. 41. 9.
David said of Ahitophel, and Christ of Judas, so may they speak of him, our
familiar friend, in whom we trusted, which did eat of our bread, has lift up
his heel against us.

From page 48. to 67.
Answ. 1. Mr. Bradsh. says, that there is no ordinary ministerial office,
which Christ has given to his Church, but their ministers either have, or by
their Laws ought to have the same. I have proved before, that this is untrue,
and therefore it is not needful that I should make answer any more to his
bold thredbare, I says. But observe here (to use his own words) what a
juggling Page 52.
method of reasoning he has gotten. Their ministers have such ordinary
ministerial offices, etc. Why? because by their Laws they ought to have them.
Now, may not a man, by the same manner of arguing, prove that there are no
Thieves, Traitors, Whoremoungers, etc. within the Kings Dominion, in regard by
the Laws, every one should be true, loyal, chaste, etc. But this later, I
think, would be laughed at of all, notwithstanding to the very same effect, is
only the other, or else it serves for no use at all, but to show, that the man
had more will to do mische^fe, then he had, either wit or skill to accomplish
the same.

2. I pass over again his idle scoffing at Mr. Johnson, for quotation of many
Scriptures. Indeed Mr. Bradsh. was careful to shun this fault; for he has
not from the beginning, to the end of his book, brought one proof from the
word of God, to make good any one thing whereof he speaks, but as if he were
one of the illumated Fathers of the Familists, delivers his yea and no
always upon his own bare word.

3. Many grievous errors are bound up in this invective of M. Bradsh. but for
lying here is one that surmounts them all,; namely, that the Prelates do not
thrust them into a ministry, but leave them to be called and chosen by the
people; or those Patrons, unto whose fidelity the people, P. 56, 57, 58.
have committed this charge. This (as I have showed) is very false. And truly
it is strange to me, that they should dare affirm, so known and apparent an
untruth; for according to their law, profession, and practice, whosoever is
ordained by the Bb. has immediately upon his ordination all the essenciall and
substancial parts of a minister, is (I say) as true in their understanding, as
these, which have a people, or have bought benefices of their Patrons; yea
although he should never have any particular congregation, to administer unto.
Therefore welfare the Conform. for howsoever, their courses are stark naught,
yet they will own their errors, and not shift them off (as these do) by
groundless devises, the which they can no more prove, then that there is a man
in the moon. They have labored these many years, to get away this power of
making ministers from the Bb. But seeing they are now out of all hope to gain
it, they persuade the people, that it is only but a leave and liberty, which
the Prelates grant; And touching the ministry itself, they have it else
where. Oh, horrible mocking and abusing of the world! a mere invention of
their own, having no show or color of truth in it.

4. If the Prelates do not put them into a ministry, but leave them to be
called or chosen by the Patrons, then it must follow necessarily, that either
they are made ministers by those Patrons, or else they are none at all. But
this I will leave as another Qu^re. Moreover, because my desire is, to come
speedily unto some particulars with them. I do therefore demand some good
proof, for the things which this bold man here affirms. First, that the
people have committed this charge, unto the fidelity of Patrons. 2. If they
have, whether the thing be lawful or no? And to give the reader in the mean
time some information about the point, this I would have him to know, that
howsoever An^tomy of Cere. made by Mr. Sprint before defore def. of Pet. to the
K. Learn. discourse. of* Eccl. Gov. p. 125. M. Bright. on Rev. 3, p. 194, Edit.
3. Alt. Dam. p. 170.
here against us, they plead for these Patrons, yet in their writings against
the Prelates, they tell quite another tale, for there they call them all
Latrons, and profess their places to be unlawful and wicked; and give many
worthy reasons thereof. And no doubt, this is true, which they say; for indeed,
the bondage is intolerable, which the poor enslaved people suffer at these
men's hands. If some one in a Parish, had entayled to him and to his heirs for
ever, the power of appointing husbands and wives to all the people therein, the
slavery were unsufferable, although in a matter of a civil nature: but how
much more then unspeakably great is their sin, which loose this spiritual
freedom! And greater those Patrons, which keep it: and greatest Mr. Bradsh.
and such fellows, who labor what they can, to maintain so vile and wicked a
thing.

5. Seeing he asks what errors we can prove in their Church, and is so
audatious, as to affirm, that those set down by Mr: Iohs. An answ. to Mr. H.
Jacob. his defen. of the Chur. and minist. of Eng. page 63, 64. A treatise of
the minist. of the church of Eng. p. 10, 11, 12, etc.
are pretended. I will therefore give in some particulars (for it were
impossible to name them all) published under their own hands, and professed
of them to be the poysonsome Leaven of Antichrist. M. Gilby in the table, Luke
22, 2^


1. The Popish names, and offices of Archbishops. 2. Lord bishops. 3. Their
titles of Primacy, Lords grace, etc. contrary to the commandment of Christ.
4. Their visitations* and power, which they exercise over their brethren. 5.
Their Lordly Dominion, revenues, and retinew. 6. Their black Chym^re, or
sleevelesse coat, put upon the fine white rochet, with other Popish apparel. 7.
Chauncellours. 8. Deanes. 9. Subdeanes. 10. Archdeacons. 11. Officials. 12.
Chaunters. 13. Commissaries. 14. Prebendaries. 15. Apparitors. 16. Parsons. 17.
Vicars. 18. Parish Priests. 19. Idle readers. 20. Vagabound ministers of no
place. 21. Chapleynes. 21. Canons. 22. Petty Canons. 23. Virgerers. 24. Rector
Chori. 25. Epistlers. 26. Gospellars. 27. Queristers men and boys. 28. Singing
Clerks. 29. Organists. 30. Organ blowers. 31. Beadmen. 32. Sextins. 33.
Impropiations. 34. Ministers, not made, neither by election, vocation, nor
aprobation, agreeable to Gods word. 35. Deacons, made to other purposes than the
scriptures appointe. 36. The horned cap. 37. The tippet. 38. Surpl^sses. 39.
Copes in great churches. 40. The t^mporall offices of Ecclesiastical persous.
41. A dumb ministry. 42. The Popes accursed Canon Law. 43. The Prelates
articles and injunctions from time to time newly devised. 44. The Church
wardens eath, to present to their courts, all the offenses, faults, and
defaults, committed in their Parishes against the aforesaid articles. etc. 45.
The court of faculties, from whence are had dispensations, licenses,
tolerations, etc. 46. Dispensations, to eat flesh, at their times forbidden.
47. And licenses, to marie in any time of the year, and in privileged places,
by means whereof, many are married without their parents knowledge, or consent,
yea and many stolen oftimes from their Friends, and so married. 48.
Dispensations for boys and dolts, to have benefices. 49. Dispensations for
nonresidents. 50. and for plurality of benefices, as they having of 2. 3. 4.
or more To^quot, as many as a man will have, or can get. 51. Their
institutions, inductions, proxes, etc. 52. Absolving the dead dying
excommunicate, before they can have (as they call it) Christian burial. 51.
Houseling the sick. 52. Private Baptism. 53. Godfathers, and Godmothers. 54.
The ring in marriage. 55. Bishopping of children. 55. Churching of women. 56.
Prayer over the dead. 57. Lords supper to be received kneeling. 58. Lent. fast.
59. Cross in Baptism. 60. Hallow eves. 61. Imbring days. 62. Frydayes and
Saterdayes fast. 63. The hallowed font. 63. Marriage forbidden at certain
seasons of the year. 64. The oath ex officio. 65. Apccripha books, which have
in them errors, lies, blasphemies, magic, contradiction to the Canonical
scriptures. 66. an Antichristian discipline. 67. Private communion. 68. Their
administering of it, not with the words of Christ's institution, but with other,
taken out of the Popes Portuis. 69. Reading homilies. 70. Corrupting the
scriptures, in mistranslating many places, adding to the text, and leaveing
quite out many parts thereof.

Many score of vile errors, besides these, I could name, from their writings,
but this is enough for the time. Only I request the reader, to observe the bad
dealing, which is here showed. The corruptions, which Mr. Johnson mentions in
his trea^ises, to be in the church of England, are only such, which he took
out of their own books. Namely, the Admonition to the Parliament, sold, sold.
Bar. Tabl. T. C. his first and second reply. Neces. dis.
Yet see, how they will bear now the world in hand, that these are but
pretended matters, when indeed (as I said) they are only their own Principles,
set forth by their own hands, and justified still upon all occasions, when
they deal against the Hierarchy. It seems therefore they are not willing,
that any, saving themselves, should say, that their Bb. their Courts, Canons,
Officers, Ceremonies, Service, etc. is Antichristian and unlawful; for if we
say but word for word the same, which they say before us: They cry out
pretended errors, and yet the things are true when they speak them. Now, if
this be not unreasonable dawbing, I know not what is.

But he asks, how we can prove, that these things are taught in their
Churches? If a Papist should have thus replied, unto one, which had written
against their transubstantiation, images, holy water, etc. it would have been
counted an idle and foolish put off; for what if they be not always taught,
yet these are their sins, in regard they both profess and do them, and have
them established by Law, in their congregations.

The like may be said of the errors, fore named, as authority commands them,
so they are constantly practiced, and upon all occasions defended publicly and
privately. Besides, if any one shall open his mouth, to show the evil of them,
he is subject to be immediately sil^need, suspended, excommunicated by the
Lords, the Prelates. And to prove this, let their terrible Canons bear
witness; for thus it is enacted:

Canon. 4.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the form of Gods worship in the Church
of England, established by law, and contained in the book of Common prayer,
etc. is a corrupt, superstitious, or unlawful worship of God, or conteyneth
any thing in it, that is repugnant to the scriptures; let him be excommunicated
ipso facto, and not restored, but by the Bishop of the place, or Archbishop,
after his repentance and public revocation of such his wicked errors.

Canon. 6.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the rites and ceremonies of the Church
of England, by law established, are wicked, Antichristian, or superstitious, or
such as being commanded by lawful authority, men who are zealously and godly
affected, may not with any good conscience approve them, use them, or as
occasion requires, subscribe unto them; let him be excommunicated ipso facto,
and not restored until be repent; and publicly revoke such his wicked errors.

Canon. 7.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the government of the Church of
England, under his Majesty, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and
the rest that do bear office in the same, is Antichristian, or repugnant to
the word of God; let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and so continue, until
be repent and publicly revoke such his wicked errors.

Canon, 8.
Whosoever shall here after affirm, or teach, that the form and manner of
making and consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, conteyneth any thing in
it, that is repugnant to the word of God, etc. let him be excommunicated ipso
facto not to be restored, until he repent and publicly revoke such his wicked
errors.

6. Where he demands, what one truth of religion we can name, that is not,
or has not been (when just occasion has been offered) taught by some of
their ministers? Although this be not much material, touching the point in
controversy, seeing none of them teach true doctrine, but in a false and
Antichristian calling, which is utterly unlawful to be done; notwithstanding
if we will believe the Nonconform he had small cause to bragg thus of their
preaching. For first, their ministers 2 Admon. p. 47. Asser. Christian. Chapter
pol. 236.
for the most part are ignorant asses, and loytering idle bellyed Epicures,
which either cannot, or do not teach at all. 2. A number of those, which do,
are profane, and heathenish Orators, that think, all the grace of preaching
lies in affected eloquence, in fond Fables, to make their hearers laugh, or in
ostentation of learning of the latin, their Greek, and Hebrew tongue, and of
their great reading 2 Admon. p. 52.
of antiquities: when God knows most of them, have little further matter,
then is in the in the infinite volumes of common places, and apothegmes called
to their hands. 3. Howsoever some of them deliver many sound truths, Out of
their own mouth, they condemn many times their sinful practices. 1 Samuel 12, 5
yet they do not lay the axe to the root of the tree, I mean, seek to
suppress such evils, as reign most among them. We would repute that
Physician unwise, which has a patient under cure sick of a great fever, and
he gives him a medicine, which serves only to heal the gout or dropsy. Now,
in truth, such unwise Physicians are the best of them: for the main disease,
which cleaves to the foul of the people, is false worship. But what course
take they about it? Thus they do: they administer good things, to purge out
pride, drunkenness, etc. But leave all the while this Capital disease alone,
by which means many persons perish, and are utterly cast away.

Now, these have not the Prophets for an example: for it is marvelous
observable, when the ten Tribes fell away from the true worship of God, that
all those Prophets, whom the Lord then sent early, and late after them,
applied their doctrines even altogether (as it were) against the sins of Dan
and Bethell: Read the Prophesies of Hosea, Joel, Amos, and Michea, who were
Prophets, especially ray sed up, to recover that people.
as the spiritual sickness of Israel was idolatry, so they gave them
constantly such souveraigne medecines, as served best to cure the same; And
indeed this course of teaching is only profitable: for as a small stroke
downright upon the nail, is better then a thousand besides it: Even so, a
little home matter, against the present evils of the people; as namely, their
devised service, false ministry, Antichristian Government, etc, would profit
them much more, then all their loud and long crying out, of judgment,
judgment; only against swearers, drunkards, usurers, whoremoungers, etc.
because the former faults are more generally committed, and have taken deeper
root in the hearts of old and young.

7. Concerning the defense, which he makes for reading their book of Articles
and Canons in the church, a few words will serve in answer to it. 1. If it were
true, which he says, that they do not this thing ministrially, yet their
fault is not the less. But he speaks falsely herein, for this is laid upon
them as a proper part of their Office; and none else but they, by their Law,
either do, or may do the same. 2. If they do not teach them for truths, then
it must be for lies, and errors; if so, their evil is the greater, and
proportionable thereunto, without repentance, will Gods vengeance be upon them
for it. 3. His answer here, is quite beside the point* and he seeks merely to
cozen the reader; that which Mr. Johnson mentions, is their Articles and
Canons, very vile and wicked things by their own confession; To this he
replyeth: may not a man in the weakness of his judgment and in infirmity, at
his first entrance, into a calling, conform, and subscribe to some things, not
so warrantable and true, etc. Note how punctually he speaks, and comes up, as
near to the matter, as York is to the Lands end, a man in the weakness of
his judgment, etc. may do some thing, etc. Ergo, he may conform to the
damnable Canons, and articles, read them to the people, etc. By the same manner
of arguing* he may be a ^ew, a Turk, a Heathen* any thing. And not only in
this place, but such senseless shifts are common with him, throughout the
book; for whereas it is proved in Mr. Iohnsons writing, that their ministry
is ^nlawfull and Antichristian, because neither their Offices, calling, nor
administration, is according to Gods Word, but (as they say themselves) all
taken from Antichrist. He childishly tells us, that true Pastors and Teachers
may want some accessarie parts of their Offices, etc. which answers nothing
to the point; nor is more to any purpose, then if a convicted traitor would
seek to prove his cause, to be otherwise, for that he wants some accessarie
parts of a true subject. 4. Touching the distinction which he puts between
reading the Canons to the people, and not teaching the ^rrours contained in
them. I shall leave it, as another Demand: how they can prove, that these
falsehoods and lies may be read in the manner that they are, and yet be neither
taught nor justified?

From pa. 68, to 83.
Answ. 1. If it be unlawful (as he says) outwardly, and but in appearance to
join with Idolaters in their Idolatry, then has he showed himseIfe all this
while an unreasonable man, to pe^swade us to return again unto their service,
considering if we should, it were upon their own grounds, to join with
Idolaters in Idalatry; but this we dare not do, neither I think would they,
if they did fear the Lord and his righteons judgments, as they should, and
mind advisedly their own writings. They have a long time been named
Professors, and fitly so: for truly, their profession is good, When they
write against the Prelates.
and therefore in this, they and we do well accord, as I have before showed:
But those, which willbe Christians indeed, must be more than Professors, to
weet, practisers, and doers of all the Lords commandments, so far as they
know, according to their power and ability.

2. I would know, what scriptures there are, which do witness, that there was
false worship in the Jewish Synagogues, and of what kind it was, and proof
also that Christ was present, where, and when the same was practiced. These
Doctrines we find often in their books against us, but to this day never saw
their reasons for them; and therefore we are persuaded, they are merely their
own dreams, purposely taken up, to countenance by them, if they could, their
insincere walking.

3. I cannot see what profit any reader can have by Mr. Bradsh. writing; for
whofoever desires to know what ministers are true among them: First, he must
(if he will follow his direction) search their Laws, to know what is their
pres^rib^d about this thing; afterward, make diligent inquiry of the true
meaning thereof, then go among the Clergy, to examine, whose office, calling,
and administration, is according to the Law and the intent of it. Quaere. To
whom must men go, to know the true meading of the Law.
Now, is not he unreasonable, to put poor people upon such hard taskes;
notwithstanding unless they do all this, they are as far to seek in the
thing, as ever they were; for any satisfaction he gives them; But no doubt, if
Mr. Bradsh. had had a good cause in hand, he would have referred his reader to
the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, and not used such carnal and idle talk.

4. He says, it is lawful to communicate in that Worship Where the Ceremonies
are used; but we cannot believe him, for his brethren both affirm, and prove
the contrary. And here now is a fist place, to write down the words, whereof
mention was made in page 99. partly, because the author is a principal
Nonconformist, and partly to discover the rashness and folly of this
inconsiderate man, which durst without any reason, (more then boldness) still
justify the very things, which his brethren, by many sound Arguments, have
manifested to be evil and unlawful. Thus he writes:

A dispute upon communicating, at co^fuled co^munions, page 68, 69, etc.
The sitter is accessorie to the sin of the kneeler. First, he endures the
kneeler by his presence, and makes him think, that his kneeling is neither
scandalous nor idolatrous. You say, your sitting condemns his kneeling. No
such matter. But in communicating with him, you approve it as indifferent, as
when ye sit in time of prayer after Sermon, When another is kneeling, or
standing* For shall you communicate With an idolater in the very act of his
Idolatry? and not be accessarie in countenancing it With your presence. If you
do damn it as scandalous, or idolatrous, Why communicate you with bim? If you
build up that, which you destroyed, you make your self a irespasser. The
Apostle forbids the Corinthians to converse, or eat With a brother
idolater, 1. Corinthians. 5. and yet you will eat and drink With him, When he is
committing the very act. The Apostle forbids not society With him in
public Assemblies, but only in private, and Where he commits the act, till
he be reclaimed. Next, the communicant with the kneeler casts himself into
tentation, by setting before him an evil example, Which may induce him to do
the like, especially, if the kneeler be a person of any credit and countenance.
Many are disquieted With the sight of a monster, or carcass many months
after. It is an evil token, When you can be so Well content to see such a
monster in our Kirk, and your heart not rise Within you. If you should present
your solfe to the Mass in the same manner, and With the same liberty, custom
would so harden the heart, that in the end you would halt With the lame, and
conform in every point. It will creep like a Ring-Worme: seems it now
tolerable, the next day it Will seem holy, and the third day necessa^ie. So
bewitching sins are idolatry and superstition. Thirdly, you are partaker of
an Idol feast. Start not at this I say: for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
may be turned into an idol feast, and has been a more abominable feast then
ever Was any among the Heathens. And howbeit, there may be some difference
betwixt the Formalists, and the Papists, arising upon the diversity of inward
opinions and conceits of Christ's real presence in the Elements, yet if both
their gestures be idolatrous in their August. hom. de Pastor.
own kinds, the Lords Supper is made an idol feast. Non ad diabolum pertinet
quis isto, vel illo modo erret, omnes errantes vult quibuslibet erroribus. It
is nothing to the Devil, whether a man err this way, or that way whatsoever
way they err, all that be in error, he seeks to be his. Fourthly, the
communicant advances this innovation, and sets forward this gross
corruption by his presence and communicating with the kneeler. For if the
kneeler^ were left to themselves, they would be ashamed of themselves* whereas
now they are comforted, and hardened in their sin, and some follow their
example. Fides pura Hieron. ad Ioanne^ Hierosol.
moram non patitur ut apparueri^ scorpius, illico conterendus est. Pure faith
suffers no delays. As soon as the the scorpion appears, it is to be bruised
says Hierom. Fourthly, a confusion of gestures lawful, and unlawful, is
brought into the Lords table, some sitting like ghuests at a Feast, as Christ
and his Apostles sat; others like supplicants kneeling and adoring upon the
knees. This confusion is not like that variety of gesture, in time of prayer,
when some sit, some stand, some kneel. For all the three gestures are there
indifferent. But not so here.

If men are polluted, by receiving the Sacrament with those which kneel, then
much more, when withal they take it where the same is administered, by an
unlawful person, and according to a prescript form^, culled out of the
blasphemous Massebooke. And this is their present cause, by their own
confession; I wish therefore, they would take due consideration of it, and
speedily reform themselves herein. They profess to be espoused unto Christ:
Now, mark the similitude, if a betrothed virgin, before the day appointed for
marriage, should prostrate her body to a stranger, she disables herself for
ever hereby from being his wise: Their marriag day, they make account, shall be
celebrated in Heaven; But now, if in the mean while, they defile their souls
and bodies with the unclean acts of Idolatry, what reason have they to think,
that they shall enjoy the sweet comfort, and pleasure of so heavenly and blessed
a husband.

From page 84, to 92.
Answ: 1. Though it should be granted, that in a true constituted Church some
matters incerely Ecclesiastical may be imposed through humane srailty; yet this
helps See chap. 2. Sect. 2, 4 and chapter 3. Sect. 2, chapter 1, Sect. 2 4.
their cause nothing at all; in regard, that a false worship, an Antichristian
Hierarchy, or Church Government, and unlawful ministry therefrom derived, is
imposed upon, and by the people slavishly submitted unto.

2. Though every humane Ordinance be not of that nature, as to make that Church
and Ministry false, where it is used; yet some are, or else there are no false
Churches and Ministers in the world; and such humane Ordinances, there be many
in their Parish Assemblies, as from their own Principles, we have showed.

3. Though it were generally granted of all, that thoses Churches and
Ministeries are to be communicated with all that have some thing in, or
appertaining to the constitution thereof not instituted by Christ; yet it will
not thence follow, that we may with such, as in their constitution were wholly
false; but such are theirs.

4. Grant this, that all are not false Churches, which do not, or by the Laws
of man are not suffered to use their power. Notwithstanding such congregations,
as do altogether P. 149, etc.
want this power, and stand under that, which was taken every part from the
Devil and Antichrist, are certainly false, and so not to be communicated with
all; And this is their present state, if they speak truly themselves.

5. Admit, that those may be true Pastors, who are outwardly by man's Laws
subjected to a superior Ecclesiastical Officer. But for this thing I shall
exspect, to see some proof.
Yet can it not hence be concluded, that their ministers are true, seeing
neither their Offices, calling, administrations, etc. are agreeable to the word
of God.

6. If the Offices of Provincial and Diocesan Bishops be contrary to the
Scripture, then necessarily that ministry, which is derived from it, must be
so also. And this conclusion the Papists have drawn from the writings A
detection of diverse notable untruths, etc. p. 188, etc.
of the Conformists. If our English Prelates be no true Bishops, then surely
neither be the Priests, or Ministers, or Deacons, that be ordained by them; and
so consequently the congregation of England, is not the true Church of Christ.

Here we have again much rude scoffing, and such crowing (to use his own
terms) as if he were some cock of the game, that has picked out the eyes, and
broken the necks of all that have been set against him. The proposition
(says he) is false, the Assumption is false, the consequence is false. But for
proof, a man may find as soon a needle in a bottle of hay, as any for the
things which he boldly denies. Moreover, the points in controversy, which are
of greatest weight, and moment, he either puts quite off, by a fine trick, they
P. 83, 88.
need no answer, or else answers to them, besides the matter. For an instance
to this purpose, writes Mr. Johnson: Every true visible Church of Christ, or
ordinary Assembly of the faithful* has by Christ's ordinance power in it
self immediately under Christ, to elect and ordain, deprive, and depose their
ministers, and to execute all other Ecclesiastical Censures. But none of the
Parish Assemblies of England have such power: Therefore they are not true
visible Churches of Christ.

Both parts of this reason he proves from their own writings; now mark his
reply to it: All are not false Churches, which do not use this power, etc. And
is not this (think ye) wittily answered? We say from their Principles, that a
true Church cannot be without power; But their Churches are wholly without it.
For answer, he tells us, a true Church may want the use of it. We say so too.
But does it follow, because a man in a sound, has not the use for the time, of
that life, which is in him; therefore one may be quite without life and yet not
dead. To this effect he reasons, or else (as Paul says of 1 Timothy 1, 7
some) he understood not what he said, nor whereof he affirmed, but spoke evil of
the things which he knew not. Iud. 10.


Answ. ^^ p. 92. 100.
Mr. Bradsh* having used all the wit and skill he had to refute the former
Reasons: in these page in a mocking contradiction of Mr. Johnson, he undertakes
to prove that the public ministry of the Church Assemblies of England, is
true and lawful. I have neither time nor mind, to follow him in his vagaries,
and idle repetitions, but will set down, in few words, the sum of his long
talk, and give answer to it briefly. First, thus he says:

To have such gifts, as Christ ascended to heaven, for the work of his
ministry, to be outwardly called to that work, by such a Church as professes
the fundamental points of the Gospel; to instruct the people committed to
their charge, in the Doctrine of the Law and Gospel: to administer unto them
the holy Sacraments of Christ, and to be their mo^th in prayer unto God are all
the things essencial, appertaining to the office of true Pastors and Teachers.
Such is the ministry of our assemblies.

Howsoever. I will not contend much with him about the Proposition, which is
lame to the ground; and a far better might have been framed briefly thus: To
have such an office, as Christ in his Testament has given to his Church; a
lawful calling and entrance thereunto, and a lawful administration thereof,
according to the said Testament, are all the essencial, etc.

The Assumption is false. 1. Their ministers have not the gifts, whereof he
speaks, and so we have manifested from their own writings. 2. I do deny,
that their Bb. of whom they take their ministry, are Psa. 26, 5.
a Church in any sense, saving the malignant, and therefore if all the rest
were granted, yet hence would his whole argument (like the unwise man's house)
fall to Mat. 7.
the ground. 3. Though they instruct the people in some Doctrines of the Law
and Gospel, as do Papists and all other Heretics; notwithstanding the
reading of the Servicebooke, in form and manner, the celebrating of marriage,
Churching of women, burying of the dead, conformity, and subscription, are more
essencial to their ministry, and more necessarily required by the Laws of
their Church, then preaching either of the Law and Gospel is. And so much Mr.
Bradsh. elsewhere affirms: Those that yield to Ceremonies, need not preach at
all in their Churches, except they will, no nor do any other part of divine
service, if they will maintain a Curate, that will keep the Ceremonial Law,
and fairly read or singe the Kings Service, as they call it. you must
observe, he wrote this against the Bb. 11. Argum. ag. Cerem.
4. For the Sacraments, they are (as they say) wickedly mingled, and profaned,
and wickedly administered. Besides, if we will believe Mr. Bradsh. when he
speaks out against the Hierarchy, they have diverse Sacraments, which are not
of divine institution, administered in their 9. Argum.
Churches, viz. the Cross, Ring in marriage, Surplesse, etc. 5. The prayers,
which they are to make unto God, must of absolute necessity (without partial,
dispensation, or manifest violation of their oath to the Bishops) be foolish,
false, and superstitious. I mean, when they read their servicebooke. 2 Admon.
page 57


But I desire the reader to observe how wittily he confirms the Assumption.
It shall be sufficient (says he) that we can set forth unto him such a
ministry in sundry of our Church Assemblies, of which all those points may be
truly verified. Who would have thought that Mr. Bradsh. having blotted many
leaves of his book, with mere scoffing at Mr. Johnson, about his Logic,
should so grossly overshoot himself in terms of reasoning. For what wise
man, but he, would have laid down a Position, that comprehended indefinitely,
and generally all the ministers of their Assemblies; and to prove it, says, we
can show some such. It seems then, that those (some such) must make all the
rest true. Intruth, so he inferres, or else his argument (as he says often of
Mr. Johnson) is cracked braind, and lacks not truth only, but sense also.

There are some merchants, who to put off the false wares, which lie upon their
hands, will show the buyer a little that is good, and by this means cunningly
shift all the rest upon him, and so deceive him: The like subtilty uses Mr.
Bradsh. here, and often in his book, that he might persuade the reader to
believe that all their Ministers and Churches are true, he shows him some of
the best; in hope that under these, he shall craftily put all the rest upon
him. I mention these his deceiveable shifts the oftener, that we may have
hereafter more honest dealing. If they will justify all their Ministers and
Churches, let them say so directly; If but some few, as in their writings they
still intimate, I desire them to speak it out plainly, and not to carry the
thing so covertly, as if they would have the poor people to believe, that they
meant all, when themselves are persuaded the greatest number are false and
Antichristian.

Another reason, which he brings, to prove their ministry Lawful, is, because
they profess the Pope to be Antichrist; renounce all Ecclesiastical homage to
him, and maintain all the members of the Church of Rome to be Heretics and
Idolaters. etc. To this I say, quid verba audiam cum facta videam. It is true,
I know, many great errors of that Church, they opppose and have left,
notwithstanding, they retain the self same Ministry, Church Government,
Service, Courts, Canons, etc. which they brought out from thence, uphold them
still (I say) to the uttermost of their strength and power; and hate, revile,
imprison, banish kill, etc. those which will not conform thereto. And hence it
is Pap. supp. an. 1604. Reas. of religion. 13
the Papists say, that from their treasure house, the religion now established
in England, has learned the form of Chrining, marying, Churching of women,
visiting of the sick, burying of the dead, and sundry other like, as the book
(translated Panegyr. Missae, cap. 11, 12. and Demonst. dogm. cap. 7.
out of theirs) declared. So Iacobus Gretzerus alleges against the Reformed
Churches their Servicebooke, for their Popish holidays, Dr. Tucker, and their
Late book of Canons, both for the sign of the Cross, for kneeling in the act
of receiving the Sacrament. For the whole Hierarchy, from the Archbishop
downwards, and diverse other their superstitions. So Cornelius Scultingius In
his Hierarchica Anacrisis.
cites Whitgift, and takes whole leaves out of him, for defense of their
Hierarchy. Relect. against Whitak. cont. 2. q. 3 art. 3.
Stapleton also uses the foresaid Doctors arguments, to uphold thereby their
discipline, and professes, that they are built upon one foundation. I could
multiply authors of this nature, Rhemist. in 10. 21, 17.
but it needs not, only let it be here minded, that all these testimonies are
acknowledged to be true of the Nonconformists. Is not therefore their
profession great against the Pope: they clal him (they say) Antichrist and the
Beast, etc. Yet notwithstanding in respect of many maine and foundamental
Orders, and Ordinances of his Church, they wallke along hand in hand with him.
So that, they are much like to one, which calls a woman, etc. Whore, Whore,
and lies with her all the while in the bed, and commits folly with her.

Answ. to p. 100. 110
Nothing is here said, but the former things again repeated. Indeed, he
undertook to answer certain demands, but he kept himself off, so covertly
from the points, that he has left them far more obscure and dark then they
were before. For this cause I have thought it necessary to propound unto them
13. questions, all gathered from Mr. Bradsh. shifting answers, and idle putt
offs, with request, that they would answer them directly and sincerely, and
from the scriptures; and so doubtless the controversy between them and us
will be brought the sooner to an end.

1. Whether the office of Lecturers in the Ecclesiastical Assemblies of
England, be not new, and strange from the scriptures? If not, whether they be
Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, Elders? etc.

2. Whether the civil Magistrate has power to set over the Churches of
Christ, in his Dominions, such Commissioners and overseers, as the present
Hierarchy is, or no?

3. What be those Ecclesiastical Officers, which some true Churches in England,
have these many years been without, either all, o^ chiefest of them?

4. Whether the calling, entrance, administration, and maintenance of any of
the public Ministers of the Church of England, be unlawful, and
Antichristian, or no?

5. Who are those Ecclesiastical Officers, in the Church of England, which
neither in name, nor in deed, are true, as he himself confesses?

6. Whether it be lawful for the Ministers of the Gospel, to be maintained by
tithes and offerings, etc. in the manner and form, as it is practifed now in
England, or no?

7. Whether all the Parish Assemblies of England be true visible Churches or no?

8. Where are those Churches in our Kingdom, from whence we have separated,
which do consist, as now they stand, of a company of people, called, and
separated from the world, and the false worship, and ways thereof, by the word
of God, and are joined together in the fellowship of the Gospel, by voluntary
profession of faith, and obedience of Christ?

9. What are those parts and parcells, in the book of Common prayer, which is
not the true worship of God, whereof he speaks?

10. Whether it be Lawful, to have communion with the English Leiturgie, as it
is ordinarily now used in their Churches?

11. If the true worship of God be prescribed, in the book aforesaid, we
demand then in what part thereof the same is contained?

12. Whether those, which join to the Ecclesiastical Ministry, Worship, and
Orders of their Cathedral or Parishional Assemblies in those things, which are
not performed therein, according to the true meaning and intent of their Laws,
do sin, or no?

13. What is the true intent and meaning of these Laws, and to whom does it
properly belong, to give the interpretation of them?

Thus having finished, what I purpose to write for this time, I commend now the
same to the best acceptance of every well disposed reader. Beseeching God to
make us more and more of one mind in the truth, and to give us all hearts, to
walk sincerily in it, until our changing come.

ISA. 48. 18, 19, 20. O that thou had hearkened to my commandments, then
had thy peace been as a River, and thy righteousness as the waves of the Sea.
Thy seed also had been as the sand, and the offspring of thy bowels like the
gravel thereof: his name should not have been cut off, nor destroyed from
before me. Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the C^ldeans* etc.
FINIS.
A TABLE Of the principal things, contained in this Treatise.
A.
ADministrations performed, according to the book of Common prayer and Canons
unlawful. page 219. Administrations, in themselves good, may be done by false
ministers. page 236. Apocripha unlawful to be read in the Church, and reasons
thereof. page 108, 109. Dr. Ames writing, for their ministry answered. page
55. 56, etc. and for their worship. p. 113, 114, 115. and about their Church
Government. p. 162. 163. Archbishops, see Bishops.
B.
Baptism in the church of England, unlawfully administered. p. 104. Benefices,
how they are obtained by the ministers of the Church of England. p. 17, 18, 19,
20, etc. Bells, as they are used in their Assemblies, unlawful. p. 112. The
English Servicebooke, taken out of the vile Massebooke. p. 78, 79. The
wickedness of the Bishops described. p. 31, 32 33. Their offices false and
Antichristian, and reasons for the same. p. 33. 34. 35. They cannot give a true
ministry: p. 37. Their book of ordination, taken out of the Popes Pontifical.
p. 12 The manner of burialls in England unlawful. p. 102 Mr. Bradsh. his
scoffing. p. 212. 227. 235. 240. Uncharitableness. p. 212. Absurdnesse. p.
215. 216. 240. 250. Ignorance. p. 236. Contradictions. p. 221. 232. 234 Dr.
Burgess Protestation, to become a Separatist, if he did believe the
Nonconformists Principles. p. 2. 113
C.
No man may administer in the Church, without a lawful calling. p. 8. 9 The
calling of their Ministers does essencially depend upon the Bb. calling. p. 55.
56 Ceremonies condemned; and why. p. 92. 93. 94 They are the least evils of
many in their Churches. p. 116. 117 Canon Law unlawful, and reasons for it. p.
139. No person by their Canons may speak against the abuses of their church p.
246. 247 No true visible church, but a particular ordinary congregation p. 164
To the right constitution of a true visible Church, it is of necessity, that
all the members be holy and good. p. 165. 174. 176 177. 178. 185. 193. 242
Churches of England false, and reasons thereof. p. 149. 169. 179. 180. Civil
offices in Ecclesiastical persons unlawful. p. 242 All their spiritual Courts
in Eng. unlawful. p. 141 No man ought to appear at them; reasons for it. p.
148. The manner of their proceedings in these Courts. p. 145. 146 The
Commissaries Court described. p. 141. 142 The high Commission like the Spanish
Inquisition. The Convocationhouse described. p. 143. 144 Church wardens Office
unlawful; reasons for it. p. 138 Conversion no sign of a true ministry. p.
66 Their Collectes in their Assemblies Idolatrous. p. 107 Confirmation of
Children unlawful, and reasons for it. p. 100. 101 Cross in Baptism
unlawful, and reasons for it. p. 95. 96 Excommunication, and the absolution of
the person, are actions common to the whole Church. p. 134 Churching of women,
see women.
D.
There ought to be Deacons in every true church; reasons thereof. p. 4. 5.
Their Office consists only in receiving and distributing the benevolence of
the Church; and arguments for it. Idem The Deaconrie of their Church Assemblies
is an unlawful office. p. 48 The office of a Doctor is distinct from that of a
Pastor; and reasons for it. p. 4 Mr. Dayrels description of a visible church
refuted. p. 182. 183. The reasons which he lays down, to prove their Parish
Assemblies true Churches; answered. p. 185. 186. 187. 188. 189* etc.
Discipline, see Government.
E.
The Election of every Ecclesiast. Officer must be by the free choice of the
whole Church where he is to administer. p. 7. 8 The Ministers of the Church of
England are not Elected, according to Gods word. p. 12 Obstinate sinners must
be excommunicated. p. 131. Reasons for it. p. 132. How the Church is to walk
toward such. p. 133. And when, and how to receive them again. p. 134 70.
Gross Errors, practiced in the Church of England. p. 243. 244 Examples,
proveing the unlawfulness of communicating in a false worship p. 84. 85, etc.
F.
The Court of Faculties described. p. 141 Their Fasts are Popish. p. 106 So is
the Font. p. 104
G.
A certain form of Church Government is prescribed by Christ; reasons for it.
p. 128. 129. The same is unchangeable, ordinary, and common to all Churches. p.
135. A matter of faith, and necessary to salvation. p. 136 It cannot be a true
Church, which wants it. p. 149 This Government must be set up, and practiced,
though the civil Magistrate allow not thereof. page 15^. and reasons for it. p.
156. 157. 158, etc. The Church Government in England, taken wholly and every
part from the Pope, page 138. 147 Men cannot submitt to it, without breaking
the Law of the Land. page 148. 149 Governors or Ruling Elders ought to be in
every true Church. page 4 Godfathers in Baptism Popish. p. 104 The manner of
reading the Gospells and Epistles condemned. page 107 Gifts make not ministers.
page 65
H.
Homilies unlawful to be read in the Church; Reasons for it. p. 109. 110. The
observation of holy days superstitious. p. 106 107 The Hierarchy impaires the
authority of the civil Magistrate. page 227
I.
What Ieroboams Priests could have said for their Religion. page. 85. 86, etc.
Such as maintain ill causes, upbraid others with ignorance. page 211
K.
The example of the Kings of Judah; vainly alleged to justify King Edwards,
and Queen Elizabeth's; compelling of their subjects, to be members of the Church
p. 201. 202 Kneeling in the act of receiving of the Lords Supper, an idolatrous
gesture; reasons why unlawful. p. 97 The sitter is accessory to the sin of
the kneeler. p. 252. 253 King James his saying of the Puritans. p. 205
L.
The ministry of Lecturers, in the Assemblies of England, new and strange from
the scriptures; and reasons thereof. p. 49. 50, etc. Dr. Laiton answered, and
his principles proved, tolead unto separation. p. 151. 153. 154 Such as take
any Ecclesiastical Office from the Bb. transgress against the Law of Realm.
p. 71. 72 Letanie no better then blasphemy and conjuration. p. 107 The Learned
against communicating in a false ministry. p. 27. 28. 29. and false worship.
p. 90. 91
M.
The manner of marrying in England unlawful. p. 101 Members are to be taken
into the church, by making public profession of faith and repentance. p. 135.
167 Every man that is a member ought to have his voice in the Ecclesiastical
causes of the Church p. 134 Reasons, why men should make themselves members of
true visible Churches. p. 166 What makes members of the Church of England. p.
169. The great wickedness of them. p. 170. 171. 172. The ministry of England
taken wholly from Antichrist. p. 11. Proved to be false. p. 219. 222. Their
manner of making ministers. p. 12. 13. 14 What they are for qualification. p.
15. 16. and practices p. 21 Men may be unlawful ministers, though never
ordained by the Bb. p. 68. 215 Unlawful ministers not to be communicated with
in any thing they do. p 26. Reasons for it. p. 27 Conversion of men to God, no
note of a true ministry. p. 64 The Ministers of England of one constitution.
p. 56 True ordinary ministry, tied to a particular Assembly. p. 10. A roving
and unsettled, false p. 9 Music in the Church unlawful. p. 111
N.
The profession and practice of Nonconformists, how they differ. p. 205. 206
Their Minors and the Conformists Majors, lead to separation. p. 179. 180 Not so
true to their grounds as the Conformists. p. 38. 241
O.
Oath ex officio, why unlawful. page 140 No Obedience must be yielded to the
Bb. Government. p. 148 Five kinds of ordinary Ecclesiastical Offices, only
belonging to every true Church. p. 3. 4 Officers not simply necessary for the
public administrations in the Church. p. 135 The Church may depose her
officers. p. 130 Offenses how to be suppressed in the Church. p. 130. 131. and
why. p. 168 The Officers of the spiritual Courts in England described. p. 137.
Their places Antichristian p. 1^8 Brethren out of Office may teach publicly in
the Church. p. 54 Order and form required in the collection of all true
Churches. p. 186
P.
Pastors are all equal by Gods institution. p. 3 These are wanting in the
English Assemblies. p. 11 Parsons, Vicars, etc. unlawful officers. p. 44. 45
Parents ought not to bring their children to be Crossed in Baptism; and
reasons for it. p. 96 Patrons places unlawful. p. 242. To be present at
Idolatrous worship, unlawful. p. 119. 120. And namely where the Ceremonies are
used. p. 98. 99 Power given to every particular Church. p. 257 An essencial
property there of. p. 149 Preaching of the Gospel, no part or property of the
ministry in Fngland, but a thing casual. p. 259 The manner of preaching there.
p. 248. 249 Neither preaching nor administering the Sacraments argue a true
mininistery. p. 232 Not enough to be Professors. p. 251 Their Priests and
Deacons take their ministry from the Prelates, and no where else. p. 241 They
have not the essencial ministry of Pastors and Teachers. page 214 Prelates,
why worse then the Papists p. 82 Of Pollution by other men's sins. p. 208. 209
Q.
None must be chosen into any office, but such as are well qualifyed for it; and
reasons thereof. page 9. 10 13. Questions, propounded with request to be
answered. p. 262. 263, etc.
R.
Reading Priests described: p. 38. Their ministry unlawful, and reasons for
it. p. 40. 41. A sin, to communicate in their ministry. p. 42. What service
they do, p. 44. The greatest number of the English ministers are such. p. 43
Every Officer must be Resident in his place, and why? p. 10 Rome and England
how like in Church Ordinances. p. 261 The judgment of the Reformed Churches no
good argument to prove the Church of England true by. p. 188. 189
S.
Sacraments profanely administered in the church of England. p. 105. 172 More
Sacraments then Christ ordained administered in their Churches. p. 259
Sacraments, administered in private houses, unlawful. p. 105 Service book, a
devised worship, and reasons for it: p. 80. 81. 82 The Scribes and Pharisees
misapplyed, to justify the ministry of England. p. 231 Sidemens office
unlawful. p. 138 Our separation, why. p. 196. 207 Lords Supper, how abused. p.
103. 104 Surplices unlawful, and reasons for it. p. 94. 95 Scriptures, how
abused in the Church of England p. 108
T.
Toleraticir of sin in the Church hurtful* and why. p. 168
V.
Visitation of the sick, as used in England Popish. p. 112 Bb. Visitation
described. p. 142* 143
W.
Widows, an office in the Church, and reasons for it. p. 6 God has
prescribed a perfect platform, how he will be worshipped. p. 72 Reasons, why he
should be worshipped, according to the same. p. 74. 75 The worship of the
church of England is contained in the book of common prayer. p. 78 Churching
of Women unlawful, and reasons for it. p. 99 The word of God, the only means,
to fit men for Church Estate.
Z.
True Zeal will not endure any thing of Antichrists. p. 107
FINIS.
ERRATA.
For Eder read Elder. p. 9. lin. 13. For honestly read honesty. p. 14. lin. 25.
For as read at. p. 28. lin. 20. For thelr read their. p. 103. l. 23. For nor
read not. p. 131. l. 2. For Hierom read Hieron. p. 161. l. 29. For number 38.
in marg. read 61. after Arrow. ag. Br. p. 224.

