CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS drawn from the Canons of the last Sinod, and other
the Kings Ecclesiastical and statute law, ad informandum animum Domini
Episcopi Wigornensis, seu alterius cuiusuis iudicis ecclesiastici, ne temere
and inconsulto prosiliant ad depriuationem Ministrorum Ecclesiae: for not
subscription, for the not exact use of the order and form of the book of
common prayer, heretofore provided by the Parishioners of any parish Church,
within the Diocese of Worcester, or for the not precise practice of the rites,
ceremonies, and ornaments of the Church.

Prove. 25. 2. The glory of God is to conceal a thing secret, but the Kings
honor is to search out a thing. Esai 51. 7. Hearken unto me ye that know
righteousness, the people in whose heart is my Law, fear ye not the reproach of
men, neither be ye afraid of their rebukes. Cod. de Episcopis and Cleric l.
null. li licere.

Nec delatoris nomen suspicionemque formident, cum ^ides atque industria little,
tam laud, quam honestate, ac pariter pretate, non careat, cum veritatem in
publicas aures, lucemque deduxerint.

1605.

To the Right Honorable Lords, the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable privy
Counsel.
MOST Noble Lords, may it please your good Lordshippes, to be put in
remembrance how the holy Ghost calls and entituleth the Princes of the earth
by the name of Gods. By which so rare and admirable a style, so high and
supereminent a title, men of your estate, condition and quality be taught,
that as your names are, so should your persons be, Gods by name and calling,
therefore every way such manner of persons, as the most high God, the God of
Gods, has commanded you to be.

That is to say (as Job says) Deliverers of the poor and fatherles, Cap. 29.
when they cry, and there is none to help; eyes to the blind, and feet to
the lame; diligent in searching out things you know not; breakers of the chawes
of the Lions, and the pluckers of the pray out of their teeth. That so you
being covered with Justice, as with a Robe, and with a crown, the blessing of
them which are ready to perish, might come upon you, and the distressed being
succored, might have cause to praise you.

And (most Honorable Lords) by so much the more have we presumed to tender unto
your Lordships favorable examination, these considerations, by how much the
more your fame, praise and honor may be sounded, and resounded throughout all
the Churches, when you shall be well pleased to become humble intercessors unto
our most gracious and Christian Lord and King, for a more temperate, mild, and
charitable course, by the Diocesans and other ordinaries, hereafter to be held
against the Ministers; until they shall defend their late censures, penal
proceedings and sentences, for omission of rites, ceremonies, ornaments, etc.
to be in every due regard and circumstance answerable to the Kings
ecclesiastical Laws and Statutes.

In the mean season, that more rigor and severitie of law has of late been
used in some of their Consistories, then was meet, these considerations with
their reasons drawn from the laws, statutes, and Canons, which them selves
profess and practice (if rightly they were applied to their proceedings) may
sufficiently witness. For by these grounds and reasons, if inquisition or
information had been made, or taken, sentences of grace and absolution, rather
then of disgrace and condemnation ought (in our judgment) to have ensued.

If we should be demanded, what color of law or reason they can pretend, for
their form and manner of proceedings, we might rather have cause to wonder,
then be able to yield any reasonable answer to such demand. And therefore as
they be old enough, so good leave shall they have from us, to make answer for
them selves.

Only thus much we might be able, reasonably to defend, that a good government
being lightsome, can not brook the darksomnes of that which is evil. And on
the other side, that an evil government, being darksome, can not but fly the
lightsomnes of that which is good. If the government then of the Church by
Diocesans, and other ordinaries, had been lightsomnes, and not rather
darksomnes, it could not have come so to pass, as it has done, that the
Moon, as it were abashed, and the Sun, as it were ashamed, should fly
before the obscurity of most gross darkness: That lamps of pure oil, and
candlestickes of fine gold, standing and burning day and night in the temple,
should be removed and put out: and that in steed thereof, both wooden
candlestickes, and lights of bulrushes, should be brought in, and set up.

Nay, if we had not seen it with our eyes, and heard it with our ears, it
would have seemed a wonder, altogether incredible unto us, that not one (so
far as we can learn) among 2. or 3. thousand Ministers (some whereof are
notoriously known, to be ignorant and unlearned, some idle and non resident,
some common bibbers and tavern haunters, some dycers and gamesters* some
fighters and quarellers, some wanton and adulterous, some simoniacall and
usurious, some pompous and ambitious, some greedy and covetous, some swearers
and swaggerers, and some profane and void of all honesty of life) should so
much as once in two years, for any of these gross impieties, be publicly
admonished, or marked with the least note of disgrace, for not conformity to
the holy laws of God: And yet notwithstanding, that a third or fourth part of
three or four hundred painful, discreet, learned, grave and godly ministers,
within less then six months, should be suspended, deprived, or deposed some
from their offices, and some from their benefices; not for commission of the
least of the grossest of these sins, but only for omission of the least of
the commandments and traditions of men. If we say we had not both heard and
seen, and known these things, we could never have believed them to be true.

Nay if we had not heard it, and known it, how incredible might it be, that
sundry learned and godly Ministers, vowing, protesting, and offering to
testify upon their corporal oaths, that they abstayned from the use of
ceremonies, for none other cause, but only for fear of offendinge God,
wounding their own weak consciences, and scandalizing their brethren, could
not for all this, by the Diocesans be accepted, but commanded away and put to
silence.

Now alas (Most noble Lords) if such a course of Justice, and such an hand of
judgment, by your Lordshippes, or other the Kings Justices and Officers were
held in the civil government of the common weal, what outcries would there
be made in all the corners of the land, yea and with what swarms of disordered
and riotous persons, would the Kings Dominions, in short space, be oversflowen
and pestered?

It is true (my Lords) we confess, that non relatione criminum, sed
innocentia rei purgantur. And therefore to excuse any Minister wherein he may
justly be blamed, is far from our mind and purpose. For we grant that every
one must bear his own burden, and that every man ought by his own
innocence, to purge himself, be other men's offenses never so great, or seem
his own, in his own eyes, never so small.

But we have therefore balanced the toleration of scandalous and unlearned
ministers, with the molestation of learned and godly Ministers, to the end your
Lordshippes understanding the number of sins and impieties every where daily
abounding, by the multitude of the former, and the scarcity of godliness in
every place to be seen, by the pa^citie of the later, your Lordshippes by your
wisdoms might foresee, and by your authorities prevent that pestilent
contagion of ignorance of Gods revealed will, which by this preposterous
sufferance, of the one, and violent progress against the other, is ready to
infect the whole Church, and by consequence, to lay wast the common weal, as a
pray to the popish faction.

For is there not by this me^nes a way prepared and made ready for the greatest
part of the people, to revolt from the Gospel to popery? and so from their
natural and Christian Lord and King to a foreign and antichristian Pope? For
let the book of God be once sealed up from the people in English, as in time
of popery it was sealed up, unto our fathers in Latin; and let the people by
example of the wicked and scandalous life of Ministers be drawn along in their
own natural corruption, who will not be ready to assist every Jesuit and
Seminary, when he shall preach popery, the very mistress and mother of all
corruption and rebellion?

The wearing of a whit Surplice, and the feyned making of an ayrie cross in
Baptism, how little the popish faction, by the same will be quieted and kept in
awe, the late outrageous starting out in Wales, and their madd combynings in
other places, may be a good caveat for your Lordshippes to consider: whether
their driftes be not rather to enterprise a more public disturbance, then to
continue them selves within the listes of that obedience whereunto they were
constreyned in the reign of our late Sovereign of blessed memory, Queen
Elizabeth.

Your Lordships therefore could not but perform a most acceptable service,
first unto God, and his Church: secondly unto the King and his Realm, if your
Lordships would be pleased to be petitioners unto his Majesty, that by his
Regale and Supreme power, there might be an healing of the former error, and
uncharitableness of the Diocesans and other ordinaries. For it can not be denied
but that by their manner of proceedings, they have sinned against God; in this,
that they have aequaled, nay rather in some things preferred their own Canons
and Decrees, before the commandment of God. And therefore it cannot be but
that they have herein, as much as in them lay, provoked the wrath of God
against the King and his whole Realm, if by the Kings zeal, this their so
gross a sin be not reformed. My Lords, we are well advised what we speak
herein before your Lordships, for we speak nothing but what we prove thus:
Whosoever for not wearing a Surplice, or for not crossing in Baptism,
suspendeth or depriveth a Preaching Minister, otherwise vnreproveable for life
and doctrine, and not suspendeth, nor depriveth, but tolerateth an unpreaching
minister, scandalous in life, and ignorant of doctrine, the same person
prefers in this thing, the observation of his own Canon and Decree: before
the commandment of God.

But some Diocesans and ordinaries, for not wearing a surplice, and for not
making a cross in Baptism, do suspend and deprive preaching Ministers,
otherwise vnreprovable for life and doctrine, and yet do neither suspend, nor
deprive, but tolerate unpreaching ministers, scandalous in life, and ignorant
of doctrine.

Therefore some Diocesans and Ordinaries in this thing, prefer the
observation of their own canons and decrees, before the commandment of God.



We could heap argument upon argument, unanswerable to this purpose, but we
should then pass the bounds of an epistle, and become over tedious unto your
Lordshippes. Only therefore we most humbly beseech your Lordships in the
behalf of the faithful Ministers of Christ, with patience to hear thus much*
viz. that for their dissenting in matter of ceremony, from the Diocesans, they
ought no more by the Diocesans to be traduced for factious sectaries, or
seditious scismatickes, then the Diocesans them selves ought to be traduced,
for such manner persons, by their own dissenting from the Cardinals and Popes
of Rome.

For there being as little difference between a sect, and a scisme, as there is
between a besome and a broom, and there being also as small odds between
faction and sedition, as between an edifice and a building, it follows, the
Ministers dissenting from the Diocesans of England, or the same Diocesans
dissenting from the Cardinals and Popes of Rome, if neither of them be
seditious scismatickes, that neither of them can be factious sectaries.

When Paul was accused by Tertullus, that he was found a pestilent fellow,
Act. 24.
and a moover of sedition among all the Jews thorough all the world; the
Apostle answered that they neither found him in the temple disputing with any
man, neither making vproare among the people, neither in the Synagogues nor in
the City. Art not thou (says the chief Captain, Act. 21. 38
speaking to Paul) the Egyptian, who before these days raised a sedition, and
led out into the wilderness, four thousand men that were murderers? By which
places it appears, that a seditious or factious person, by the holy
scriptures, is adjudged to be such a kind of person, as who boasting himself,
rayseth, leads, or draws away much people after him, and unto whom much
people resort and obey: yea and by the civil law, Act. 5. 36. 37.
not every one that omitteth some duty commanded, but such a one as gathers
people together, or stirs the^ to make a tumult, and shall draw him self
and his followers, to some place of safety to defend him self and them
against an evident commandment, Cod. de seditio li. 1.
and public discipline, only such a man, I say, by the civil law is to be
punished, as a seditious and factious person. For these kind of me^ only are
properly said, seorsum ire, and parts facere. Seditio then being quasi seorsum
itio, and faction quasi partium factio, yea Glos. lind. de heret. c. 2 verb.
sectam
a sect also, being sic dicta, quia fit quasi sectio, vel divisio: and a Glos
lind. de Magis ca. 1. verb. scismatum.
scisme, being illicita divisio, per inobedientiam, ab vnitate Ecclesiae facta,
vel illicita di^cessio eorum, inter quos vnitas esse debet: it follows, that
whosoever by inobedience, or tumultuouslie goes not a part, or makes not a
part from the unity of the Church, but either in doing, or suffering, quietly
submits him self to the laws, that he can neither be factious sectarie, nor
seditious scismaticke.

And indeed (my Lords) from hence is it, that the Diocesans and whole Clergy
of England (ever since they made a separation from the unity of the Church of
Rome) have falsely been named, and reputed sectaries and scismatickes, as
though they had without cause divided them selves from the unity of the true
church of Christ. Whereas in truth, the Church of Rome by her Apostasy,
having cut her self from the unity and universality of the doctrine and
discipline of the true and mother church of Jerusalem, is her self become the
most notable and prime sectarist and scismatick of all the world. And of whose
schisms our Diocesans, so far as they partake with her, can not be but
guilty. Unless then the Diocesans can approve them selves, touching their use
of ceremonies and Diocesan government, to stand in unity with the true and
new Jerusalem, in these days repaired and departed from the old scismes and
sects of Rome; we assure our selves that they shall never be able to prove
those ministers which stand not in unity either of judgment, or practice with
them, but be conscionably and so lawfully divided in these things, from them,
for such division, to be sectaries or scismatickes? For it must be an unlawful
discession, by inobedience, from the unity of the first and mother church of
Jerusalem, and not a lawful departure, upon conscienc, efro^ the unity of the
daughter^church of England, that makes a sect or scisme. For otherwise, ought
not all other Churches stand in unity of ceremonies and government with the
church of England? or unlawfully dividing them selves from the church of
England, must they not become scismatickes and sectaries? And how then are not
almost all the christian and reformed churches in the world, not only almost,
but altogether scismatickes and heretics? For have they not divided them
selves from all those rites, ceremonies and ornaments, yea and from that manner
of Diocesan government, which are yet retained in the Church of England?

My Lords, I confess that brevitie and perspicuitie are two commendable graces
of the tongue and of the penn; and such as in all men's speeches and writings,
are much to be affected. But yet how long or tedious soever already I have
been, I most humbly beseech your Honorable Lordshippes, to license me to pass
on one step further, especially the matter being of such importance, as the
same may not well be passed over with silence.

It has pleased Sir Edward Cook Knight, his Maixsesties Attornie General,
with all candor and charity, to confirm and satisfy by demo^strative profes,
all such as were not instructed in these points following; First, that an
ecclesiastical Judge, may punish such Parsons, Vicars etc. as shall deprave, or
not observe the book of common prayer, by admonition, excommunication,
sequestration, or deprivation, and other censures and process, in like form
as heretofore has been used in like cases by the Queens Ecclesiastical
laws, though the act of primo Eliza had never insflicted any punishment for
depraving, or not observing the same.

Secondly, seeing the Authority of an Ecclesiastical Judge, is to proceed,
and to give sentence in ecclesiastical causes, according to the
ecclesiastical law, that the Judges of the common law ought to give faith and
credit to their sentence, and to allow it to be done according to the
ecclesiastical law, when the judge ecclesiastical has given sentence in a
case ecclesiastical, upon his proceedings, by force of that law. For (says
he) cuilibet in sua art perito est credendum.

Now then, as these two points be plainly taught and demonstrated unto us, so
also even by the same demonstrative reasons, it is clear, that there must be,
first, a depraving, or not observing of the book: secondly, that every
sentence given by an Ecclesiastical Judge, in a case of depraving, or not
observing of that book, must be given, according to the ecclesiastical law,
and upon his proceedings by force of that law in like form, etc.

From whence it follows, that all sentences touching depravation or not
observatio^ of the book, be either void sentences by reason of nullitie, or no
good sentences by reason of iniquity and injustice, if by the Judges
Ecclesiastical, upon their proceedings, the same sentences have not been given
by force and according to the same laws, in like form as heretofore has been
used in like cases by the Kings. Ecclesiastical Laws; or if the factes
charged upon the Ministers, by the judges ecclesiastical, by the letter and
intendement of the law, be no depravations, or not observations of the same
book. And therefore to the end all questions touching these two points, might
hereafter utterly cease, and be quite buried, your Lordshipps could not
perform a more acceptable service to the King, the Church, and Realm, then by
an humble importuning his Majesty, to have it explaned by parliament; both who
(by the letter and true meaning of the Statute) be depravers or not observers
of the book, and also what laws Ecclesiastical, may, and of right ought to
be called, indeed and truth, the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws. For unless
as well touching these points, as touching the former points of Sir Edward
Cooks, it be thoroughly decided, what is the binding and assured law, how should
the Ministers, or others, content and satisfy themselves with an undoubted
truth?

And that this manner of controversy about the invaliditie of sentences, of
deprivation, given by ecclesiastical Judges, is not a controversy now first
moved, but that the same has been long since handled and discussed, is a
matter yet remaining (I doubt not) upon public record. For whereas sentences
were given in the time of King Edward the sixth, for the depriving of Steven
Gardener, from the Bishopric of Wincester, Bonner from the Bishopric of
London: Heath from the Bishopric of Worcester: Day from the Bishopric of
Chester: Tunstall from the Bishopric of Durham: Vessay from the Bishopric
of Exeter: wherein many grave and learned commissioners were employed: as the
Archbishop Cranmer, Ridlie Bishop of London: Goodrick Bishop of Elie; Sir
William Peeter, and Sir Thomas Smith, the Kings Secretaries: Sir James Hales,
one of the Judges of the Law: Master Gosnell, Master Goodrick, Master
Lisley, Master Stamford, men notably learned in the common laws of this
Realm May. Leveson, and May. Oliver, Doctors of the Civil Law, nevertheles
the same sentences, were in the time of Queen Mary, revoked and disannulled
without Perliament, within the space (as mine Author says) of three days, by
virtue of other Commissioners, for faults found in the processes, viz. that
the former Commissioners had proceeded ex officio, without authority, contrary
to the Kings Ecclesiastical Law: sometimes quod iuris ordo non fuerit servatus,
etc. sometimes that the Interrogatories were ministered to diverse persons
without knowledge of the defendants, etc. sometimes that some of the witnesses
were examined privately without oath: sometimes that their exceptions and
appellations, were not admitted, but their persons committed to prison,
pendente appellatione, etc.

And therefore (most honorable Lords) it is to be considered, if the like, or
greater and more notorious defaultes and enormities, be to be found in any
sentence of deprivation, given ex officio, by a Diocesan governor at this day,
whether the same sentence ought to be maintained as good and just, or rather
whether the same ought not (as the Kings law requires) to be reversed and
disannulled, as evil and erroneous?

And thus I leave and commend unto your most honorable care, circumspection,
and vigilancie, the hearkening and spying out, by all the possible ways and
means in your highest wisdoms, you can best devise, how the good laws,
statutes and Decrees of the Church and Realm, being duly executed, a learned,
virtuous, paynfull, and godly Ministry may be nursed and suffered to grow up.
And how on the other side, an Idle, Ignorant, Scandalous, and godles ministry
may (as worthily it deserves) be cut down, and trodden under foot: The one by
a perpetual Decree and ordinance of God, has establishment from heaven, and
therefore without sin and offense to God can not be neglected: the other
springs from below, and is much like to an evil herb, or weed, which if it
be not speedily rooted up, but suffered to spread, will soon so overspread
the gardens of God, with vice and impiety, as there will scarce be any room
left, for virtue and piety, the one by use, and execution of the Kings
ecclesiastical laws, may easily be cherished: the other without abuse and
contempt of the same law, can not in any sort be tolerated.

It was said unto Shebna, the Steward of the house of King Hezekiah: What have
thou to do here? and what have thou here, that thou should hew thee out a
sepulcher, as he that heweth out his sepulcher, in an high place, or graveth an
habitation for him self in a rock?

But, oh, you most noble Lords, are not as Shebna in the house of Hezekiah,
Isa. 22. 11.
but you are unto King JAMES, and his house, as was Eliakim unto Hezekiah, and
to the house of King David. As the key of the house of King David was laid
upon the shoulders of Eliakim, so is the Key of the house of King James, laid
upon your shoulders. If you shall open, no man shall shut; if you shall shut,
no man shall open. Would your Lordshippes then be fastened as a nail, in a
sure place, as Eliakim was? And would you desire to be the throne of the glory
of your Fatbers houses, as Eliakim was to his? You must then he clothed with
the garments, and strengthened with the girdle of Eliakim: yea and you must be
Fathers, to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of the City of God. Yea
Shebna, though he were in man's judgment so fastened, as though he should never
fall, yet must his face be covered, and he him self rouled and turned like a
bale in a large land. Yea he must be driven from his station, destroyed out
of his dwellinge place, and bidden to depart. Nay the burden that was upon
him, must be cut off, that the Chariottes of his glory, may be the shame of
his fathers house.

These things, most honorable Lords, if you accomplish and bring to effect,
you shall approove your selves unto the great and mighty GOD, to be such little
Gods under him, as you may not be ashamed at his glorious appearance, but may
rejoice and be glad, that your worthy and divine acts, have been aunswerable
to your divine and worthy names. And thus the God of power, and Majesty,
confirm, strengthen, and stablish your hearts faithfully and courageously to
do the work of God, and of his King.

The Corrector to the Christian Reader.
THis tempest (good Reader) having blown down so many poor Parsons houses,
uncovered their Churches, and overthrown their Pulpits, has wakened me to
behold the harms and to consider the danger, least staying under the roof of
a tottering building, I might, perhaps, be suddenly overwhelmed with the
ruins. Hereupon I betoke me to examine the foundations upon which this house
so sore beaten does stand: I found the groundworkes good and sure, even Christ
and his Apostles with all the sacred word of God. The walls I perceyved well
strengthened with buttresses of the fairest and firmest stone, that the Temple
has been repaired within these last times. I grew secure that howsoever the
tiles did fly about our ears, yet the walls and the substance would abide:
Notwithstanding I looked about me still for more props, no store being
superfluous in such extreme peril, and, by Gods good providence, I light upon
this worthy Treatise, very learnedly written and with great judgment, whereby
I receyved comfort and confirmation a fresh. In it I beheld how the vehemency
of the storm forced things clean contrary to the current of our own laws;
And from hence I conceyved this tempest would be blown over anon. For can his
sacred Majesty, when he shall thoroughly understand how his statutes are
abused, suffer his most loyal subjects to groan any longer under such heavy
oppression? It cannot be, but together with his high Court of Parliament, he
will at last take order that the ambition of none shall be of greater force,
then his regale decrees. I have thought good to imparte unto thee this
treasure, that thereby thou may learn what the Laws of the Land require in
this case, and may labor by prayer and by what dutiful and lawful means
thou can to obtain remedy.

Farewell.

Certain considerations drawn from the Canons of the last Synod, and other
the Kings Ecclesiastical and statute law, ad informandum animum Domini
Episcopi Wigor^ensis seu alterius cuiusuis iudicis ecclesiastici, ne temere,
and inco^sulto prosiliant ad deprivationem ministrorum ecclesiae: for not
subscription, for the not exact use of the order and form of the book of
common prayer, etc.
FIrst by the letter of the statute 25. H. 8. cap. 19. it seems to be a
plain case, that no constitutions, canons or decrees, by what name soever they
be called, ought to be made, promulged, or put in execution within this
Realm, unless the same be made by the whole clergy of the Realm, assembled
by the kings writ in their convocations. For as by these words (the Clergy of
the Realm) inserted in the submission and petition of the clergy, By whole
Clergy we mean the Archb BB. and other learned of the clergy heretofore
usually assembled in convocation by the Kings writ.
the whole clergy of the Realm is understood, even so likewise, these words,
(clergy of the Realm) being repeated in the body of the act, can not well be
taken and understood, to be meant of part of the clergy, but of the whole
body of the clergy of the Realm. For otherwise the body of the Act should not
accord, and be answerable to the submission.

The last Synod then, being (as appears by the title of the book of canons)
but a provincial convocation, for the province of Canterbury, consisting only
of the Bishop of London, president of the same convocation, and the rest of the
Bishops and Clergy of the said Province, it follows (the Archbishop of York
and the Bishops of that Province, and so the whole Clergy of the Realm not
being assembled with the Kings writ to this Synod, The articles of religion
1562. were agreed upon in convocation by the whole clergy of the Realm, vide
13. Eliz. ca, 12.
that the constitutions made in this Synod, have nor been made by the whole
clergy of the Realm, according to the true intent and meaning of this
statute, and consequently, that they ought not to have been promulged and
executed at all, especially within the province of York. But to let this
pass, and not simply and altogether to stand upon this point, being also
ready, upon better reasons, to alter our opinion, be it for the time admitted
and granted, that the canons, and constitutions of the last Synod, Par in
pare^ no^ habet im perium, and therefore York not subject to Canterbury*
according to the true meaning of the statute, were lawfully made and
promulged. Nevertheless, for so much as throughout all the Canons, there is not
so much as mention once made of any sentence of deprivation, from an
ecclesiastical benefice, for any crime whatsoever: from hence it seems
evident, that the Synod never intended, that the pain of deprivation should
follow upon refusal of subscription, or for the not use of any ornaments,
rites or ceremonies, required and enjoined by those canons.

Besides, for so much as the Synod by the 36. canon, and other canons
mentioning the use of ornaments, rites and ceremonies, has appointed and
ordained some certain and special peynes, yea and peynes far less then
deprivation, for the offenses aforesaid: hereupon on also it forcibly ensues,
that deprivation for those offenses, by the Synod, are cleerlie secluded.
Poenalia sunt odiosa: odia sunt sf. de li. and posthu. l. cum quida.
restringenda; poenae igitur ^f. de poen. l. interpretatione. de poe. did. l.
^poenae. Lyud, de celeb. miss. c. vle. verb. animabu^, and Lind. de co^ces^i.
preb. ^^esurientis verb procurantes.
molliendae, potius quam exasperondae.

And againe^, statutum poenale non est^ extendendum ad casus non expresses, sed
stricte debet intelligi sicut iacet in suis terminis. And therefore it is
concluded that constitutio poenalis, licet detur omnimoda similitudo, and
subsit ^adem ratio, non tamen trecipit extensionem, ad non expressa, quia talis
extensio fierit per hommem non habentem potestatem condendi legem.

The pain then by the Synod being appointed for not subscription to be no
greater pain, then not to be suffered, to preach, to catechize, or to be a
Lecturer, or Reader, etc. It follows that the Synod adjudged, the pain of
deprivatio^ to be too great a pain for the offense of refusal, to subscribe,
ex quantitate poenae, cognoscitur qua^ titas delicti: qu^a poena de^et esse
mag. char. cap. 14. Panor. in (...), querenti de verb. siguif. nu. 5.
commensurabilis delicto. And thefore this offense being adjudged by the pain
to be but small, the pain can not be extended to deprivation. Quia poena non
debet excedere delictum, and beneficium non est auferendum alicui etiam a Papa,
sine magna and manifest a caus^.

Panor, in c. multa de preb nu. 10. ca. statut. de cle^. lib. 6.
to have been inflicted, for the offense of refusal, yet if upon any words of
the canon, a doubt might have risen, whether deprivation should follow or no,
in this case, cum simus in poenalibus, verba capi debent, in potior^
significatu, vt euitemus poenam.

Nay more if by the wo^ds of the canon, vere and proprie sumpta, it were
without all controversy; that deprivation for refusal, might be inflicted,
nevertheless this pain by the opinion of Baldus for this offense in some case,
is not to be inflicted: Statuta poenalia semper intelliguntur (says he) habere
inse clausulam. si delicta dolo committantur. If refusal the^ should be made
upon conscience, and consequently, not per dolum: The pain cease, as a pain
by common right, not comprised within the canon; yea and in this case, the
pain cease though the conscience be erron^ous, contra legem conscientiae,
non est obediendum superiori, etium Panor c. inquisition. de sent. excom. nu. 3.
Papae: duplex enim est lex. quaedam priuata seu conscientiae, quaeda^ publica:
priuata est potentior publica: hinc dicimus quod quae spiritu Dei aguntur, non
sunt sub lege Panor. in cad aures, de aeta. and cual ^.
publica. And therefore conscientia quanquam erronea, and scrupulosa sequenda
est, Panor in c. per tuas ex iii. nu 3. and 4. desimo L. Bald. de nihi^urand. l
vide.
si non potest de iure informari, and veniens contr^ conscientiam suam, etiam
scrupulosam, aedific at ad Gehennam, ^d est, committit peccatum mortale, quod
punietur paena Gehennae: id est ignis aeterni. And another he says, quod nemo
debet grauare conscient^am suam, sed salutem animae suae, praeferre cuicunque
officio. And an other concludes, propter scandalum vitandum potest de iure
omitti obedientia, Simon de Graph. de casibus conscientiae, pa. 359.
quod quidem procedit, vt non solum supersedendum sit obedientiae superioris,
ad scandalum vitandum, cum ipse quod iniquum est praeceper^t, sed etiam cum
aliquid just um praeceperit.

Bilson, Exacting the oath 1. Part. 33.
though not in Iudiciali, yet in foro conscientiae, holds and teaches in
effect the very same in these words: we (says he) grant, he that wounds a
weak conscience, sins against Christ: we may not for things indifferent,
trouble the weak minds of our brethren.

Nay by Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, The institution of a christian man
dedicated to K. H. 8. fol. 57. 58.
Edward Archbishop of York, and all other the Bishops, Prelates and Archdeacons
of the Realm, it was concluded and agreed in manner, form and effect
following, viz. One Rule or canon is necessary to be considered, concerning the
obedience which is required unto the rules and canons ordained by the Priests
and Bishops. For as much as that part of the jurisdiction of Priests and
Bishops which consists only in outward ceremonies, and such things as be
themselves but mean and indifferent, surely there is no other obedience
required in the same, but that men may lawfully omit, or do otherwise then is
prescribed by the said laws, and commandments of the Priests and Bishops; So
that they do it not in contempt or despite of the said power and jurisdiction.
But have some good and reasonable cause so to do, and offend not, nor slander
not their neighbors in their doing. For in these points, Christian men must
study to preserve that liberty whereunto they be called and brought by
Christ's blood and his doctrine. That is to say: Although men ought to repute
and think that the observation of holidays, fastingdayes and other
constitutions, be expedient and necessary for such ends and intentes as they
be made for. And though men ought to repute and think that all the said ends
and intentes be very good, expedient and necessary, as well for a common order,
etc. yet surely men may not esteem them but as things indifferent, and of no
such necessity, but that men may upon causes reasonable, well omit and leave
the same undone, so that it be not in case of contempt and sclander. This rule
and canon men must diligently learn.

Yea: but did Ma. Answer.
Bilson speak that in the person of the Magistrate, or in the person of a
brother? As for the rule and canon mentioned by the said Archbishops of
Canterbury and York, and other Bishops and Prelates, it is to be understood
of such ceremonies and ordinances, as the Priests and Bishops prescribe unto
the people, and not of politic constitutions of the Church, given or
confirmed by the Magistrate.

Well: but if a Christian Magistrate (notwithstanding the dignity of his
person) be a christian brother, Reply.
would not my Lord of W: (if he were demanded) answer, that a Christian
Magistrates sword, is committed unto him rather for quieting, then for
troubling: for healing, then for wounding of the weak consciences of his
Christian subjects?

For in that, that Princes and subjects, meeting in the communion of Saints, be
therein brethren, how should the person of a Christian Magistrate (though in
excellency h^ f^rr surmount the persons of all his subjects,) alter the nature
of a Christian truth, in a Christian community? And if it be a truth in
christian community, that Christian brethren, ought not to trouble the weak
minds of their Christian brethren, in things indifferent, does not a
christian Magistrate sin, if he obey not this truth? but to let this pass:
where you demand, whether M. Bilson speak in the person of a Magistrate, or in
the person of a brother: I refer it to the judgment of all men, whether in
that place of his book, his words immediately going before, and following
after, do not as directly touch the Magistrates office, as by any possible
means they may. For he in that place mainteyning the Magistrates authorite,
touching his lawful requiring of an oath unto the supremacy, both for coacting
and correcting such, as deny the lawfulnes of the same: And for this purpose
having cited the desperatenes of the Donatists, who slew themselves, rather
then they would be forced to forgo their fancies, in the end says thus: How
beit we grant that he with wounds a weak conscience, sins against Christ.
Whereupon also again follow these words, a little after; we may not for things
indifferent, trouble the Weak minds of our brethren. A Christian Magistrate
then, (for of a christian Magistrate he speaks) sins against Christ, if he
trouble the weak minds of his Christian brethren, or wound their weak
consciences for things indifferent. And so this reply might suffice also, unto
that exception made touching the rule and canon of the Archbishops and Bishops,
before rehearsed, had not them selves in express terms, more fully cleared
this point. For they make no manner difference or distinction, between the
precepts and ordinances of Priests and Bishops, rightfully made by authority
of their jurisdiction, whether they be confirmed, or not confirmed, by the
people, or christian Magistrate: But they affirm directly the same precepts
and ordinances being once receyved by the common consent of the people, Fol. 57.
and authorized by the laws of Christian Princes, that no other obedience is
required to them, but that men may lawfully omit, or do otherwise, then as is
prescribed by the said Laws and commandments, of the Priests and Bishops, so
that they do it not in contempt or despite of the said power and jurisdiction.

Yea moreover (say they) although men ought to repute and think, that all the
said ends and intents, be also very good, expedient and necessary, as well for a
common order and tranquillity, to be had among the people, as also for the
better instruction and inducement of the people, unto the observation of these
things, wherein consists indeed that spiritual justice, and that spiritual
honor and service, which God requires of us; yet surely men may not esteem
them, bus as things indifferent; and of no such necessity, but that men may
upon causes reasonable, well omit and leave the same undone, so that it be not
in case of contempt and sclander.

And unto these cases, 7.
(especially at this time, above all times) special regard is to be had, even
by the Provincial or Ecclesiastical law it self; for seeing in every
Diocese, there be not a few of the principal Pastors (alleging the holy
Scriptures, for the ground of their upright consciences) that refuse not upon
will, but upon conscience; not upon contempt or despite of the power of
Bishops, Constit. o^. c. ecclesias: ne dig. tra^ ad sir. and glossa ibid verb
^^^ltitudinis.
but upon reasonable cause, and without offense or slandering of their
neighbors, to subscribe and use the ceremonies, it is plain by the same
ecclesiastical law, that they ought to be respected and tolerated: Propter
multitudinem, vtique seuerit^ti detrahitur: supersedendum ergo correctioni, vbi
pacis perturbatio timetur. Item vt scandalum vitetur, lustos homines, aliquando
simulare oportet, ob suam and aliorum salutem, vt scilicet grauiora vitentur.
Hoc ergo casu faciet quilibet Praelatus, pro salute hominum, quod just potest;
nec vltra existimet, se habere, quod faciat, ne ad instar imperiti medici, vno
collirio, omnium oculos curare conetur.

And unto this also agrees, that which is alleged by Panormitane, 8. Panor.
in 1. de cler, ^grot.
in a case of the substraction of the fruits of an Ecclesiastical benefice,
from a Clarke, who by reason of sickness and infirmity, is unable to discharge
his cure. Quilibet clericus: (says he) dicitur miles Dei, and militat in
Ecclesia: And therefore he concludes that Clerici non debent terreri, nec
inhumaniter tractari, ne cum alij, exemple hui^smodi essent deterriti, inueniri
forte non posset, qui vellet clericatui inseruire, and ecclesiae militare: hoc
enim videtur turbare statum ecclesiasticum, nedum praesentem sed etiam suturum:
And further (says he) Potest adduei haec ratio multum notabilis in argumentum,
quod clericus, non debet priuari beneficio suo, sinc causa, etiam per Romanum
pontificem, nam existente infirmitate, and sic impotentia seruiendi, cum non
subtrahi debeat beneficiam, ne ex hoc turbetur status Ecclesiae, ergo multo
fortius, vbi nulla subest causa rationabilis: But in the case of refusing to
subscribe, or for the not using the rites, ceremonies and ornaments, for
conscience, there is no reasonable cause of deprivation, therefore, etc.

Furthermore if the canon had decreed, that a Minister refusing to subscribe,
should be punished by ecclesiastical censure, in this case the pain of
deprivation, ought not to be inflicted, because by this clause (Ecclesiastical
censure) is understood interdiction, suspention and excommunication, which be
poenae multum fauorabiles, and in animarum remedium inductae; and does not
comprehend deposition, deprivation, or degradation, quia illae poenae sunt
multum odiosae.

Lastly, were it so that the Synod had indeed decreed, that a Minister for
refusal to subscribe, should be deprived from his ecclesiastical benefice: and
were it so likewise, that a Minister should indeed refuse, not upon conscience,
but upon a self will, and dolo m^lo to subscribe, in this case I answer, that
the Minister can not lawfully for this offense, by this provincial canon be
deprived: The reason is this: Beneficia ecclesiastica secundu^ antiquam
ordinationem sunt perpetus, (...) did. faperversu^, extra. de t. aegrot. (...)
totum. ^ag. chart. (...). H. 8. c. (...) ^9.
and habent fundationem ^ lure communi, which ancient ordinances, being
agreeable to the common law of the Realm, and confirmed by the high Court of
Parliament, can never be disanulled by the Synod: Quia non potest inferior
disponere, nec contra ius commune, nec contra legem superioris, maxim in
praeindicium tertij.

Considerations for the not exact and precise use, of the Book of common
prayer, attained and gotten by the Parishioners of M. for the Minister to use
in the same parish Church.
IT is provided and enacted, ^liza. c. 2 ^. 6.
that the books concerning the said services, shall at the costs and charges of
the parishioners of every parish, be attained and gotten, etc. And that such
parishes, where the said books shall be attained and gotten, etc. shall within
three w^ckes, after the books so attained and gotten, use the said service,
and put the same in ure according to this act: from whence it seems to
follow, (the Minister not being commanded to attain and get the said book) if
the parishioners have not hitherto attained and gotten the said book, that the
minister of the same parish, is not bound to use the said service, and put the
same in ure, which is not attained and gotten for him, to be used and invred.

That the parishioners of the said parish church, have not hitherto attay ned
and gotten the said book, seems to be manifest upon these considerations:

The Book which the Minister of the same Church is bound to use, should differ
from the book of common prayer, authorized by act of Parliament, 5. and 6. Ed.
6. But in four points, that is to say: one of alteration, or addition of
certain lessons, to be used on every sunday in the year, an alteration and
correction of the form of the Letany, and two sentences only added, in the
delivery of the Sacrament, to the co^municants, and none other, or otherwise.

But in the book attained and gotten by the said parishioners, ther^ be more
alterations, then are specified in the statute; The form of the Letany is not
corrected and altered, and moreover there is some detraction from the very
matter of the book, which detraction ought not to have been made, and which is
contained in this prayer following:

From the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable enormities,
Good Lord deliver us. And as touching the form of the Letanie of K. Edw.
book, whereas the same by the letter of the Act, seems by the Parliament, to
have been altered and corrected (for the words stand thus, viz. altered and
corrected, and not to be altered and corrected) yet now so it is, that the same
form remains still in the parish book unaltered, and uncorrected. For the
whole form, order, and disposition of prayers, which is in the Letanie of the
parish book is the same form, order and disposition of prayers which was in
the Letany of K. Ed. book, Except unhappily we shall say, that the
transposition and alteration of the prayer of Chrysostom (by the book of K.
Edw. according to the nature of the letter of that prayer appointed to be read,
last of all the prayers in the Letanie) is an alteration and correction of the
form of the Letanie, when as notwithstanding the transposition and alteration
of that prayer by the parish book, appointed not to be read last, but before
sundry other prayers, is rather a plain corruption, and not a correction, of
that part of the form of the Letanie: For this transposition is as if an
husbandman, should set his cart before his horse; or as an Orator should place
his conclusion before his proheme.

Again it can not probably or reasonably be gathered, that the Parliament
mentioning an alteration and correction made of the form of the Letany, did
inte^d by the words (form of the Letany altered and corrected) that part of
the matter of the Letany was or should be altered and corrected. For the matter
of that prayer was good, and without fault, and needed no alteration and
correction at all, yea and had the Parliament detracted or intended, that that
prayer should be detracted out of the Letany, and that by the detraction
thereof, the form of the Letanie had been altered and corrected, then would no
doubt the Parliament have spoken properly and plainly in this case, like as the
same did in the other two cases, in this or the like manner, viz. one prayer
against the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable enormities,
detracted: In like sort, I say, as it enacted, one alteration or addition of
certain lessons to be used on every sunday in the year, and two sentences
only added in the delivery of the Sacraments to the communicants: wherefore the
Parliament, in the excellency of their judgment and sharpnes of their wisdom,
by th^se words (form altered and corrected) necessarily implying, that the
form of the Letany of King Edwards book, was faulty and corrupt, it can not
by any reasonable construction be gathered, that the Parliament by form of
the Letanie, did intend any part of the matter of the Letanie, which was good
and sincere. For if we speak properly, and not tropically, plainly, and not
obscurely; iudiciously, and not ridiculously; (as all Statutes and all wise
Lawmakers speak or ought to speak) we can not say, that any part of the
matter of a thing, is the form of a thing. For what a vanity were it to call
the matter of a loaf, the form of a loase? The matter of an house, the form
of an house? or the matter of a man, the form of a man? much more vainly then
needs must w^ speak, if we call the matter of a mast of a ship, the form of a
ship; the matter of the clapper of a bell, the form of a bell; or the matter
of the whit of an egg, the form of an egg. Wherefore it can not otherwise be
intended by the Parliament, but that the faulty and corrupt form, order, and
disposition of prayers contained in the Letany of King Edwards book, was, or
at leastwise, should have been corrected and altered into an holy and sincere
form, order, and disposition of prayers, and not to have continued still
faulty and corrupted, as the same was in the beginning and first original
thereof. Yea and that this indeed was the true meaning of the Parliament, is
more fully confirmed unto us out of the doctrine of one of the Homilies,
commanded publicly to be read in the churches: For common prayer (says the
Homily) is rehearsed and said by the public Minister, The second part of the
right use of the Church.
in the name of the people and the whole multitude present, whereunto they
giving their ready audience, should assent and say Amen. But in the Letany of
the bo^ke attained and gotten by the Parishioners, the form of prayers is not
framed after this manner. For in some part of the Letany the Minister only
repeateth some thing, for the which the people pray, and so it comes to
pass, that the people only pray, and not the Minister: yea and so the
Minister supplieth the place of the people, and the people the place of the
minister. Again in some other parts of the Letany, the minister prays for
one thing, and the people following, pray for another; By means whereof, the
faulty and corrupt form, order and disposition of prayers in the Letany,
disagreeable to the doctrine of the Homily, remains unaltered and
uncorrected, contrary to the act of Parliament and doctrine of the church of
England.

Concerning addition and alteration specified in the act, there be diverse and
sundry other alterations, and some additions also, in the parish book;
differing from the book of King Edward, in wel-nigh l. material points. And
for the use of which points, if the Kings Judges and Justices should as
strictly and rigorously proceed, as the Bb. have done, and yet do, for the not
use of the Su^plice and Cross, they might bring all the ministers of the
church within danger of six months imprisonment, and of the loss of one
years profit, of all their spiritual promotions to the King. For these words
of the statute, that all and singular ministers, in any Cathedral or Parish
church, etc. be bound to say and use the Mattens, Evensong, celebration of the
Lords Supper, and administration of each of the Sacraments, and all their
common and open prayer, in such order and form as is mentioned in the said
book so authorized by Parliament in the fifth and sixth years of the Reign
of King Edward the sixth with one alteration, etc. and none other or otherwise:
These words (I say) do as exactly and precisely bind all Ministers to use the
book of King Edw. and none other or otherwise in all points (excepting the
excepted) as they bind any Ministers to use the rites and ceremonies,
mentioned in the said book: But how can any Minister use that order of
service, and none other or otherwise, which is appointed in the book of fifth
and sixth Edw. 6. (excepting the excepted) when as some other order of service
(exceptinge the excepted) is concluded within the book, provided by the
Parishioners? And for the use of which book, rather then for refusal of the
vs^ of which book, a minister is punishable by the statute. And to make the
thing which we have in hand to be undeniable, and without cavil: namely, that
the book provided by the Parishioners, is not that book, which is authorized
by act of Parliament: it is to be noted (besides the alterations and additions
specified in the statute) that there is one great and main alteration,
between the two books, of sundry chapters, appointed to be read for the
first lessons, at Mattens, and Evensong, upon diverse festival days. Which
alteration also, it is evident, that the same was made generally, and for the
most part from the better, to the worse, namely from the canonical scriptures,
to the Apocriphall writings: from whole chapters, to pieces of chapters, and
that as it seems not without fraud and collusio^ to the Queen and Realm. The
proof of which alteration is apparently scene by the several kalenders, of
both books. Unto which kalenders, for the first and second lessons, (except
the same be proper lessons) at morning and evening prayer the minister is
referred. For in a Rubric before Te Deum, at morning prayer, it is said: There
shall be read two lessons distinctly with a loud voice; the first of the old
testament, the second of the new, like as they be appointed by the calendar,
except there be proper lessons assigned for that day. And in the order for
evening prayer it is thus said: Then a lesson of the old Testament as is
appointed likewise in the calendar, except there be proper lessons appointed
for that day. And after Magnificat: then a lesson of the new Testament; Now
these first and second lessons, whether they be proper or not proper lessons,
assigned by the parish book, that many of them do vary from the first and
second lessons, appointed by the book of 5. and 6. Edw. 6. is plainly to be
seen, not only by the kalenders of both books, but also by the order
appointed for proper lessons: A pattern whereof at certain feast days
follows: Calendar of King Edwards original printed book. Calendar of the
Parishes printed book. Stevens day Morning prayer. 1. lesson Esa. 56 Morning
prayer. 1. lesson. Pro. 28 Evening prayer. 1 lesson. Esa. 57 Evening prayer. 1.
lesson. Eccle. 4. Saint John. Morning prayer. 1 lesson. Esa. 58 Morning prayer.
1 lesson. Eccle. 5. Evening prayer. 1 lesson. Esa. 59 Evening prayer. 1 lesson.
Eccle. 6. Innocents. Evening prayer. 1. lesson. Esa. 60 Evening prayer. 1
lesson. Wisd. 1^ Upon the circumcision day both books agree saving that King
Edwa. reads the whole 10. chapter of Deuter. at evening prayer, and the
Parish book but part: upon the Epiphanie, the chapters at morning and evening
prayer, for first and second lesson by both books are the same. But the
Genealogy of our Savior Christ mentioned in the third of Luke, by the Kings
book is appointed to be read, whereas by the Calendar and one rubricke in the
parish book, the same is appointed not to be read.

King Edw. Calendar. The parish books Calendar. Convers. of Paul. Morning
prayer. 1 lesson Ge. 46 Morning prayer. 1 lesson Wisd. 5 Evening prayer. 1
lesson Genesis 47 Evening prayer. 1 lesson Wisd. 6 Purification of Mary. Morning
prayer. 1 lesson Ex. 12 Morning prayer. 1 lesson Wisd. 9 Evening prayer. 1
lesson Exo. 13 Evening prayer. 1 lesson Wisd. 12 Mathias. Morn. prayer. 1
lesson Number. 33 Morning prayer. 1 lesson Wis. 19 Even. prayer. 1 lesson Number 34
Evening prayer. 1 lesson Ecclus. 1 Annunciat. of Mary. Morning prayer. 1 lesson
Jos. 21 Morning prayer. 1 lesson Ecclus. 2 Evening prayer. 1 lesson Jos. 22
Evening prayer. 1 lesson Ecclus. 3

Edwa. book appoints, no

Whereas the parish Book appointed proper chapters as well for the first as
second lessons upon all those days.



King Edwa. Calendar. The parish books Calendar. Mark. Morn. prayer. 1 lesson
2. K. 3 Morn. prayer. 1 lesson Ecclus. 4 Evening prayer. 1 lesson 2. K. 4
Evening prayer. 1 lesson Ecclus. 5 Philip and Jacob. Morn. prayer. 1 lesson 2.
K. 15 Morn. prayer. 1 lesson ecclus. 7 Evening prayer. 1 lesson 2. K. 16
Evening prayer. 1 lesson ecclus. 9 Barnabe. Morn. prayer. 1 lesson Hest. 3
Morn. prayer. 1 lesson ecclus. 10 Evening prayer. 1 lesson Hest. 4 Evening
prayer. 1 lesson ecclus. 12 King Edw. Calendar The parish books Calendar.
Peter. Morn. prayer. 1 lesson Job. 31 Morning prayer. 1 lesson ecclu. 15
Evening prayer. 1 lesson Job. 32 Evening prayer. 1 lesson ecclu. 19 James.
Morn. prayer. 1 lesson eccl. 10 Morning prayer. 1 lesson ecclu. 21 Evening
prayer. 1 lesson eccle. 11 Evening prayer. 1 lesson ecclu. 23 Bartholomew.
Morn. prayer. 1 lesson ezekiel. 3 Morn. prayer. 1 lesson ecclu. 25 Evening prayer.
1 lesson ezekiel. 6 Evening prayer. 1 lesson ecclu. 29 Matthew. Morn. prayer. 1
lesson micha. 7 Morning prayer. 1 lesson ecclu. 35 Evening prayer. 1 lesson
Nahu. 1 Evening prayer. 1 lesson ecclu. 38 Michael. Morn prayer. 1 lesson
Zecha. 7 Morning prayer. 1 lesson ecclu. 39 Evening prayer. 1 lesson Zecha. 8
Evening prayer. 1 lesson ecclu. 44 Luke. Morn. prayer. 1 lesson Iudu. 13
Morning prayer. 1 lesson ecclu. 51 Evening prayer. 1 lesson Jud. 14 Evening
prayer. 1 lesson Job. 1 Simon and Jude. Morn prayer. 1 lesson Sapi. 17 Morn.
prayer. 1 lesson Job. 24. 25 Evening prayer. 1 lesson Sapi. 18 Evening prayer.
1 lesson Job. 42 All Saints. Morni. prayer. 1 lesson Wisd. 3 Morn. prayer. 1
lesson part of Wis. 3 Evening prayer. 1 lesson Wisd. 5 Even. prayer. 1 lesson
part of Wis. 5 Andrew. Morni. prayer. 1 lesson Esai. 5 Morning prayer. 1 lesson
Pro. 20 Evening prayer. 1 lesson Esai. 6 Evening prayer. 1 lesson Pro. 21
Thomas. Morn. prayer. 1 lesson Esa. 48 Morning prayer. 1 lesson Pro. 23 Evening
prayer. 1 lesson Esa. 49 Evening prayer. 1 lesson Pro. 24

Unto these alterations there is one maine difference to be added and fit in
this place to be observed, concerning certain days, wherein proper lessons
are to be read. For by the book of King Edw. it is said proper Psalms and
lessons for diverse feasts and days, but by the parish book, the title is
after an other manner. viz. Lessons proper for holy days. From whence it
follows that all those days wherein proper lessons are to be read, are by
that title accounted to be holy days: which is repugnant to a Rubricke of the
same book, entitled: These to be observed for holy days, and none other.
Out of which Rubric (amongst a number of holy days there specified) six days
be secluded from being holy days; for the which six days notwithstanding,
proper lessons are appointed to be read, as upon holy days: and these six
days be the days following: viz. the day of the co^version of Paul, Barnabes
day, Wensday and Thursday before Easter, Goodfriday, and Easter even. It
seems therefore not to be so safe a matter, as men are borne in hand it is,
for ministers absolutely to subscribe, that there is nothing in the whole book
of common prayer, repugnant to the holy word of God, seeing there is so gross
and palpable a repugnancie in the book it self. Consentiet null^, qui secum
dissidet ipse. Unto which repugnancie also may be added an other repugnancy
more absurd. For besides the alterations and additions before specified, and
not comprised in the statute, there is a Rubric added, which not only
repugneth the book of K. Edward, but also crosses the calendar, as well of the
parish book it self, as of the book of K. Edward. By which Rubric also
there is a detraction from the book of K. Edward, worse then the former of the
Letany. Because this Rubric appoints only part of the first chapter of
Saint Matthew, and part of the third chapter of Saint Luke to be read,
whenever by the calendar or book, those chapters come to be read. Whereas
the calendar of both books appoints the whole first chapter of Saint
Matthew, and the whole third chapter of Saint Luke to be read upon diverse days
in the year. As for example, both books on the first Sunday after the
nativitie, appoint the whole first chapter of Saint Matthew to be read for the
Gospel. Which whole chapter also is appointed by the kalenders of both books,
to be read for the second lesson of morning prayer on the second day of
lanuary, the third of May, and the 31. of August. The like is to be observed by
the kalenders, for the reading of the whole third chapter of Saint Luke, for
the second lesson at morning prayer, upon the 21. of February, the 19. of June,
and the 17. of October.

But these chapters are no part of the Book of common prayer, Objection.
and by the Preface before the second part of the Homilies, a Minister may for
some chapters of the old Testament, read some chapters of the New, as to him
shall seem to tend more to edification.

By your leave, Answer.
this your exception seems to be but an homely, and frivoulous exception:
For though the chapters be no part of the book of common prayer, yet be the
chapters part of the matter of the common service of the church prescribed by
the book: yea and the formal and orderly reading of such and such chapters,
at such and such times, is part also of the order and form of saying the same
service. Insomuch as neither Mattens nor Evensong, in matter and form can be
song or said, without the chapters be read. And as for the preface to the
Homilies, that by the same the minister is at liberty to leave some chapters
of the old, for some chapters of the new Testament, for first or second lesson,
what does that help the falsification of the parish book, when the same, in
place of six and twenty, or thereabouts, of Canonical, has appointed so many
of Apocriphall chapters, upon feast days to be read? Or how can the Preface
exempt a Minister from being punishable before the Kings Justices, if he shall
follow some private preface, and break the Kings public edict?

But both books agree in many points, Objection.
and namely that the Minister in Baptism shall make a cross upon the childs
forehead, and shall say: We sign thee with the sign of the cross, etc. And
therefore how soever the books may differ in some more points then are
mentioned in the Statute, yet clean to disavow the book of common prayer
provided by the Parishioners, not to be the book of common prayer, which the
Ministers in their daily minist^atio^ are bound to use, is but a cavil, and
reproves the whole state of Prelacie and of the Realm, who have received and
used the same book, ever since the first year of our late Queens Reign.

King Henry the eight, Answer.
writing to the Emperor against the Pope, tells him, that a free man
ignorant of his freedom, does not therefore become a bondsman, because
ignorantly he submits him self to servitude; No more (say we) is the State
of the Realm, liable to reproof, when having committed the ordering of these
affairs to the fidelity and circumspection of the Clergy, it has been
abused by the Clergy. Howsoever the State then of the Realm have received and
used the book, attained and gotten by the Parishioners, it mattereth not to
the point in question. For if the Clergy unwitting to the State, have caused
or suffered a book to be printed and published, which has but the show of a
book, then (as it seems) has the Clergy no law, but the show of a law to
enforce the use of such a book, as the State has not authorized. And
therefore we may not for clearing the Clergies just reproof, confess an
untruth, and still conceal a kind of injustice (unwitting to the State)
executed by the Clergy, under a color of Justice, as if their injustice by
color of error, were maintainable by the State: For so contrary to all
reason and good duty, (which we owe to the state and to the Church) we should
not only interlace the innocence of the State, with the guiltines of the
Clergy, but also mingle the churches industry, with the Clergies ill
husbandry. It is therefore no cavil, to oppose a just and true answer, to an
untrue and unsound plea:

For albeit the two books agree in many points, and specially in mencioning
the making of a cross, etc. nevertheles the parish book, can not therefore
any more truly be counted, that book which is authorized by act of
Parliament, then can that coin be reckoned to be the Kings coin, which has
in it, nine parts silver, and the tenth part copper, nether is it any more
lawful for an ordinary, to press the use of a book, in it self corrupted,
though in many points it agree with the original; then it is sufferable for
the Kings Justices, to enforce the use of a coin in it self counterfeite,
though in form and charactere, it be like the Kings Image and superscription.
Wherefore the mention made in the parish book of making of a cross, etc. not
being a matter of power sufficient to warrant the parish book; but the book
authorized by act of Parliament, being a matter of power to warrant the making
of a cross, etc. we may justly avow the book of common prayer, attained and
gotten by the parishioners, not to be that book, which the Ministers in their
day he ministration of divine service, be bound to use, notwithstanding the
making of a cross and signing the child in the forehead with a cross, be
therein mentioned: If reply be made that this plea would but little ease or
advantage the Ministers in case the right book should be reviewed, corrected
and new printed, we then reioyne and aver. First, that the day is past long
since, before which time this work should have been refined, and that
therefore it is now too late, without a new law, to reviewe and amend the same.

Secondly, that this plea will not only, but little ease and advantage the
nullities, iniquities and iniustices of sentences heretofore passed, by the
ordinaries under color of that book, but also much advantage the King and his
state, if his Majesty might be pleased to do as King Ioash, king of Judah, or
as K. Henry the eighth, king of England did: king Ioash, in, or about the
beginning of his reign (as it seems) having appointed the Priests to take
all the silver of dedicate things brought to the house of the Lord, and
therewith to repair the broken places of the house, wheresoever any decay was
found, and the Priests until the three and twentieth year of his Reign, not
having mended, that which was decayed, nor repaired the ruins of the Temple,
the king (I say) because of the Priests negligence, commanded the Priests to
receive no more money, and took from them the ordering of the money, and
committed the same to his Secretary, and to Ieho^ada the high Priest, who gave
the money made ready, into the hands of them that undertook the work, and
that had the oversight of the house of the Lord, of whom there was no
reckoning taken, because they dealt faithfully.

If the Priests then of our age, have not only not within three and twenty,
but not within three and forty years published that book, which is mended
and corrected by the Queen and her state, in the first year of her Reign;
but also for the space of eight and forty years, have suffered a corrupted
book, to be intruded into the place of a true book, we commend it to the
wisdom of our Sovereign Lord king JAMES, (who is as an Angel of God to
discern between things that differ) (there being no high Priest in our days
like faithful as was Iehoiada the high Priest in the days of king Ioash)
whether his Majesty might not be pleased for the redress of this and other
corruptions in the Ecclesiastical state, 2* K. 12. 4. 5
to appoint as king Henry the eighth did, an other Cromwell, to be his
Majesty's Vicegerent and Vicare general over the Clergy.

Unto these differences and alterations between the two books, not mentioned
in the statute may be annexed, both an addition of certain new prayers, and
some alteration also of the form of the old prayers to be said after the end
of the Letanie. By addition in the parish book, there be set three several
prayers, not any one of them mentioned in the Kings book, viz. A prayer for
our Bishops and Curates, beginning thus: Almighty and everlasting God, which
only workest great marveilles, send down upon our Bishops and Curats, etc.
Secondly, a prayer out of the 2. of Corint. 13. 13. viz. The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. And thirdly, a prayer beginning thus: O God whose nature and
property is ever to have mercy, etc.

And whereas by the form of King Edwards book, the Letanie should ever end
with this collect following: viz. Almighty God, which have given us grace at
this time with one accord, etc. and so this collect should be after the prayers
for rain, for fair weather, in the time of dearth, in the time of war, and
in the time of any common plague, or sickness, as the time requires. This
collect (I say) by King Edw. book appointed to be said after all these
prayers, is by the parish book set before all these. Yea and it is to be said
also, before the prayer beginning: O God whose nature and property is ever to
have mercy. By means whereof the very form and order of some prayers,
appointed in the Kings book, and by the statute commanded to be used, and
none other, or otherwise is so transposed, and inverted, as that the minister
observing the parish book, can not but break the order and form of common
prayer, commanded to be used, and so can not but cast his body, and one whole
years fruits of his benefice, upon the kings Judges, and Justices mercy.

Moreover, besides these additions and alterations, in the end of the Letany of
King Edw. book, there is one prayer inserted, which by the parish book is
wholly left out, namely: O God merciful Father, which in the time of Heliseus,
etc.

Lastly, at the latter end of the communion, in the kings book there is one
Rubric concerning kneeling at the communion, which Rubric is not in the
parish book, and the same begins thus: Although no order, etc. There is
also one Rubric among those Rubricks which are in the parish book not to be
found in the Kings book, beginning thus: And in Cathedral or Collegiat
Churches, etc.

Wherefore the parish book, in so many and material points, being thus
grossly corrupted, and no one true original copy provided by the parishioners
for the ministers to use, it seems to be a very lamentable and woeful case;
that subscription to a feyned record should be thus straightly urged. And that
so many learned, peynfull and godly Ministers for refusing to subscribe, or
precisely to use an vnauthenticall scedule, should be grieved and molested.

By what guyle, or by whose cunning so foul a stratageme, to the deluding of
the Queen, the Lords, and commons in Parliament assombled, was first wrought,
we know not. Neither have we any reason to charge any of the Clergy now
living, with so foul and gross an abuse. Because there is not one of the
Clergy, to our knowledge, living, that in the beginning of our late Queens
reign, had ought to meddle in Church Government, or survey of printing books.
But this we may speak, and not speak (as we think) untruly that some one
guilfull priest, or other, unwitting to the Queen and State, yea and it may be
unwitting to the Clergy too, was suffered to shoufle, and to set the cards
with the sleight of a false finger. For otherwise, it could not possibly have
come to pass, that so many chapters of the Apocryphal writings, should be
conveyed into the parish book, in steed of so many chapters of the true and
authentical scriptures, appointed by K. Edw. book; especially the same
chapters, in the parish book, (as it were of set purpose) being ordered to be
read, when all the people are solemnly assembled, together upon festival days.

Wherefore these differences between these books being apparantlie true, and
the statute having decreed, that the minister shall be bound to say, and use the
Mattens, Evensong, etc. in such order and form, as is mentioned in the same
book of King Edward, with such alterations and additions, as be mentioned in
the act, and none other, or otherwise, and the parishioners not having atteyned
and gotten the said book, it is a matter that worthily and necessarily
requires the consideration and resolution of the Kings learned Judges and
Justices: Whether a Minister by the letter of the statute be bound exactly and
precisely to use a book atteyned and gotten by the parishioners, the same
book not being authorized by the letter of the statute? And if not, then
whether the Minister by the letter of the statute, be to loose and forfeite to
the King, one years profit of all his spiritual benefices and promotions, and
his body to suffer imprisonment by the space of six months, if he shall
refuse to use some part of a book not authorized. For it seems (as yet) to us
absurd, that a Minister should be urged to use such a book, as for the use
whereof, he has no authority, or that he should be punished for refusing the
use of such a book, as for the use whereof, he is by the law punishable.

But be it granted, that the very book authorized, and none other is atteyned
and gotten by the parishioners for the Minister to use; then is it again a
matter carefully to be weighed, and for the full contentation of the minds of
all persons to be resolved, by the Judges, what manner of fact is to be holden
and adjudged by the Letter of the Statute, to be a breach of the statute, and
for the which fact, a Minister, before the Kings Justices, is punishable in
manner and form expeessed in the Act.

For the better resolution of which question, it shall not be amiss to repeat
in this place the first clause of the body of this Statute. For in the clause
of the repeal of the statute of Queen Mary, and reviving the book of king
Edw. it is said; that the laid book shall stand and be in full force and
effect, according to the tenor and effect of this Statute, the tenor and effect
of this statute then, is to be noted, the words whereof are these:

And further be it enacted by the Queens Highness, Note that the Lords only,
and not Lords spiritual and temporal, are mentioned: spiritual Lords
therefore were not of this Parliament. For by diverse statutes when only Lords
are mentioned, temporal Lords are included, and spiritual Lords excluded.
with the assent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
and by authority of the same, that all and singular Ministers in any
Cathedral or Parish church, etc. shall from, and after, etc. be bound to say
and use the Mattens, Even song, Celebration of the Lords supper, and
administration of each of the Sacraments, and all their common and open
prayer, in such order and form, as is mentioned in the said book so
authorized by Parliament, in the said fifth and sixth years of the reign of
King Edward the sixth, with one alteration or addition of certain lessons to
be used on every Sunday in the year, and the form of the Letany altered and
corrected, and two sentences only added, in the deliverie of the Sacrament to
the communicantes, and none other or otherwise.

Out of which clause one special point for the better understanding of the
whole tenor and effect of the statute is to be observed: Namely, that the
Parliament has wholly in this branch omitted, and not once mentioned the use of
any rites, or ceremonies, in saying and using the Mattens, Evensong,
celebration of the Lords Supper, and administration of each of the Sacraments.
So that unless such rites and ceremonies, as be mentioned in the book of K.
Edw. the sixth, be respectively part of the order and form of saying and using
Mattens, Euensong, celebration of the Lords Supper, and administration of each
of the Sacraments, etc. it can not be denied, but that rites and ceremonies
mentioned in that book, are secluded out, and not comprised within this branch;
and therefore not commanded by this branch to be used.

The 2. branch of the body of this statute follows in these words:

And that if any manner Parson, Vicare, or other what soever minister, that
ought or should sing or say common prayer mentioned in the said book, or
minister the Sacraments, etc. refuse to use the said common prayers, or to
minister the Sacraments, etc. as he should use to Minister the same, in such
order and form, as they be mentioned and set forth in the said book, or shall
wilfully standing in the same, use any other rite, ceremony, order, form or
manner of celebrating of the Lords Supper, openly or privily, or Mattens,
Evensong, administration of the Sacraments, or other open prayers, then is
mentioned and set forth in the said book, etc. or shall preach, declare, or
speak any thing in the derogation or depraving of the said book, etc. and
shall be thereof lawfully convicted, according to the laws of this Realm, etc.
shall loose and forfeite to the Queens Highness, etc. for his first offense,
the profit of all his spiritual benefices and promotions, coming and arising
in one whole year next after his conviction. And also, that the Parson so
convicted, shall for the same offense suffer imprisonment for the space of six
months, without bail or mainprise.

Now by the letter of this branch, it can not be denied, but that four
several kinds of offenses mentioned in the same, by what soever minister,
they shall be committed, are every of them punishable alike, by one and the self
same manner of pain, notwithstanding the offenses seem to be of diverse
natures. One consisting in the refusal of the use of common prayer; an other
in the refusal of the administration of the Sacraments, in such order and
form, as they be mentioned and set forth in the said book. A third upon a
wilful and obstinate standing in the same, in using some other rite or
ceremony, then is mentioned and set forth in the said book. And a fourth in
speaking against, or depraving the book, or any part thereof.

As for the which speaking against, or depraving the book, the letter of the
Statute seems to be so plain, as that no manner scruple can be moved, what
the mind and intendement of the Parliament was, about the speakers against, or
depravers thereof.

But touching the offense of a Ministers refusing to use the said common
prayers, and of his refusing to minister the Sacraments in such order and
form as they be mentioned, and set forth in the said book, and wilfully and
obstinately standing in the same, of his using any other rite or ceremony,
then is mentioned, etc. these Queres following, reallie and properly arise from
the letter of the foresaid two former branches.

For seeing there is no mention at all made of rites and ceremonies, in the
former branch, and seeing also there is no punishment by the second branch,
mentioned to be inflicted upon a Minister for the refusal of the use of rites
and ceremonies, but only upon a wilful and obstinate standing in the same,
for the use of other rites and ceremonies, then are mentioned and set forth in
the said book, it seems doubtful and questionable.

First Quaere.
Whether a Minister conscionably refusing to use some of the rites and
ceremonies mentioned and set forth in the said book, be punishable before the
Kings Justices, in manner and form before expressed, unless wilfully and
obstinately standing in the same, he shall use any other rite or ceremony,
then is mentioned, etc.

Second Quaere.
If a Minister that is bound to minister the Sacrament of Batisme, do not
refuse to minister the same Sacrament, in such order and form as is mentioned
and set forth in the said book, but shall in very deed and truth minister the
same Sacrament in such order and form, as is mentioned and set forth in the
said book; whether the same Minister be punishable before the Kings Justices
in manner and form before expressed, for not making a cross, or not signing
the child in the forehead with a cross, after the sacrament of Baptism is
fully and perfectly ministered? For so this sacrament be ministered in such
order and form, and with such rites and ceremonies preceding baptism, as be
mentioned in the said book, and none other rite or ceremony, with wilful
obstinacy be used in the ministration of Baptism, it seems clear by the
letter and sense of the Statute, that the Minister is not punishable, before
the Kings Justices, by the pain of imprisonment, etc. for omission of the
cross after baptism.

For this fact (of not crossing after baptism) not being within the letter of
the Statute, it is absurd to say that the same fact should be punishable by the
law, when as the same fact is not within but without the compass, scope and
letter of the law.

That this omission of crossing, is an omission after the ministration of
Baptism, and not an omission of the order and form mentioned to be in the
ministration of Baptism, is made clear unto us, by the decree of all the
Lords spiritual, and Clergy, by the Kings confirmation, under the great
seal of England, and by the opinion of some great Lawyers and Judges,
published in open seats of Justice. For this has been decreed, confirmed and
published that the making of a cross, and signing the child in the forehead
with a cross, is no part of the sacrament of Baptism; and that baptism is
fully and perfectly ministered, without these rites and ceremonies.

This case then of the omission of the cross after baptism, being most clear
by such a cloud of witnesses, that the same is not an omission of that order
and form appointed to be in the ministration of Baptism, it seems to be a
thing most clear, that a minister by the letter of the Statute, is no more
punishable before the Kings Justices, for omission of the Cross after
Baptism, then is any person by the letter of the Statute of Queen Mary
punishable by the Kings Justices, for maliciously or contemptuously molesting,
letting, vexing, or troubling, or by any other unlawful ways or means
disquieting, or misvsing any Preacher, not in, but after his sermon, preaching
or collation.

Third Quaere.
Whether a Minister that ought or should say common prayer in any parish
Church, be punishable before the Kings Justices, in manner and form before
expressed, if he shall not refuse to use all, but shall use some of the said
common prayers, in such order and form, as they be mentioned, and set forth in
the said book? For it is not said in this clause; if he refuse to use all, or
any of the said prayers, but it is said, if the Minister that ought to singe
or say common prayer mentioned in the same book, refuse to use the said common
prayers, etc. If then he observe the order and form of the book, by saying
some of the prayers, in that order and form as they be mentioned in the
book, though he say not all and singular the prayers, it seems by the
letter of the statute that he is not punishable, before the Kings Justices:
Indeed if the book had appointed, but two prayers only, as it has appointed
but two Sacraments only, and the Minister in this case should have refused to
say one prayer, and only have said the other prayer; in this case it seems to
be without all controversy, that he should have violated the law, because the
letter of the law says, if he shall refuse to use the said common prayers,
which word prayers being of the plural number, must conteyne two prayers at
the least.

Fourth Quaere.
Whether a Minister that ought or should use the rites and ceremonies,
mentioned in the said book of common prayer, be punishable before the Kings
Justices, in manner and form before expressed, if he shall not refuse to use
all but shall use some of the said rites and ceremonies, in such order and
form as they be mentioned and set forth in the said book? For it is not
enacted, that the Minister shall use all and every the said rites and
ceremonies, or if he shall refuse to use any of the said rites and ceremonies,
but it is said, or shall wilfully and obstinately standing in the same, use any
other rite, ceremony, order, form, or manner, etc. By which Letter of the
Statute, it seems that the Minister is none otherwise punishable before the
Kings Justices, unless wilfully and obstinately standing in the same, he
shall use some other rite, ceremony, order, form or manner of celebrating the
Lords Supper, then is mentioned, etc.

And upon this clause (as has been heretofore generally conceaved) certain
inditements, exactly framed even by some Justices of assizes sitting upon the
bench, against certain Ministers, for the not observation of the book, before
other of the Queens Justices have been traversed and avoided, as being in this
point erroneous, and not agreeable to the intendement of the statute. Yea and
it has been the opinion of some great Lawyers, who have been since Judges,
that it is almost impossible to frame an indightement against a Minister, for
the breach of the first part of the former clause of the statute, which is not
traversable and avoydable.

Fifth Quaere.
If a Minister bound to say common prayer in any parish church, shall not
refuse to use, but indeed shall use the said common prayers, in such order and
form as they be mentioned in the said book, whether he be punishable before
the Kings Justices, in manner and form before expressed, if he refuse to say
any part, chapter or section, of the said book, which part, chapter of section
conteyneth no prayer. For howsoever the whole book be authorized, yet the
pain seems in this case to have been inflicted, only for the omission of
prayer, and not for the omission of every part, chapter or section of the book.

Besides these questions and their reasons there be other reasons to induce
us, to be of opinion that a Minister before the Kings Justices is not
punishable in manner and form, above expressed, for his refusing to use all and
every prayer, and prayers; rite, and rites; ceremony, and ceremonies; section,
and sections, in such order and form as they be mentioned and set forth in
the said book.

In the preface to the book it is confessed, that nothing can almost so
plainly be set forth, but that doubts may arise in the use and practicing of
the same, and therefore for the appeasing of all such diversi^ie, and for the
resolution of all doubts concerning the manner how to understand, do, and
execute the things contained in the book, it is provided that the parties that
so doubt, or diversely take any thing, shalresort to the Bishop of the Diocese,
who by his discretion shall take order for the quieting and appeasing of the
same, so that the same order be not contrary to any thing, contained in the
said book. And in the two last clauses of the preface, it is said, that all
Priests and Deacons shall be bound to say daily the morning and evening
prayer, either privately or openly, except they be let by preaching, studying
of Divinity, or by some other urgent cause.

And that the Curate that ministers in any parish Church or Chapel, being at
home, and not otherwise reasonably let, shall say the same in the parish
Church or Chapel, where he ministers. From which places of the preface,
(being part of the book) it is plainly to be gathered, that the intent and
meaning of the Parliament was not to have the Ministers to be punished before
the Kings Justices, in manner and form before expressed, for refusing to use
all, and singular the prayers, rites, ceremonies and sections, in such order
and form as they be mentioned in the said book, if either upon the Ministers
doubts rising in the use and practice of these things, the Bishop by his
discretion did not take order for the quieting and appeasing of the same; or if
the Minister by preaching the word, studying of Divinity, or by some other
urgent or reasonable cause, were let so to do.

And if no Minister, in any of the cases before me^cioned, be punishable, by
the Kings Justices in manner and form above expressed, then it is manifest by
the provisoes following, that the Archbishops and Bishops have no power and
authority, by virtue of this act, to inquire and punish the default of any
minister, in these cases, by admonition, excommunication, sequestration, or
deprivation.

And this not only by the letter of the last provisoe, ordained for
corroboration of the Archbishops, Bishopps, and other Ordinaries power and
authority, but also by the provisoe next and immediately following that
Provisoe, is a matter most clear and undeniable.

Provided always, and be it enasted, etc. That all and singular Archbishops
and Bishops, etc. shall have full power and authority, by virtue of this Act,
as well to inquire in their Visitation, Synodes, etc. to take accusations, and
informations, of all and every the things above mentioned, done, committed or
perpetrated, within the limits of their Jurisdictions, etc. And to punish the
same by admonition, excommunication, sequestration, or deprivation, etc.

If then a Minister shall not do, commit, or perpetrate any of the things
above mentioned, and so not be punishable by the Kings Justices, it follows
that the same minister is not punishable by the Ordinary.

And this also by the next Provisoe is more plain, by which it is enacted:
That What soever person offending in the premises, shall for his offense first
receyne punishment of the Orainarie, shall not for the same offense est soones
be convicted before the lustices; And likewise receyving for the said first
offense punishment by the Justices, he shall not for the same offense est
soones receyve punishment of the Ordinarle: No offense then punishable before
the Justices, no offense punishable by the Ordinary.

From all which premises it seems that the Queen, the Lords and Commons,
never intended to impose such an exact and precise observation of the book of
common prayer upon the Ministers, as that in no place, nor at any time, they
should omit the reading, saying, or using of a chapter, a prayer, a section, a
rite or ceremony, upon pain of imprisonment, etc. before the Queens
Justices, or upon pain of deprivation before the ordinary.

And therefore the intent of the Parliament, not being so much to bind the
Minister to such an exact and precise observation, as to seclude all orders and
forms of prayers, ministration of Sacraments, use of rites and ceremonies,
not mentioned and set forth in the said book, it seems very unreasonable,
and much derogatorie to the authority of that Parliament, that Archbishoppes
and Bishops, who were all secluded from that Parliament, should by their
extentions, constructions, and interpretations (as it were) invert the plain
meaning of the Parliament, and that, ea qua sunt destinata in vnum sinem,
should by them be converted to an other end.

But now if the Archbishops and Bishops (at the abandoning of the Popes power
out of the Realm) have (as we confess they had) an ordinary jurisdiction by
the statutes of the Realm, reserved to their Arch^episcopall and Episcopal
seas, shall thereupon think, that lawfully by their ordinary jurisdiction
only (without regard of any Authority granted unto them by the statute) they
may proceed ex officio, to punish these defaultes, then we pray their Lordships
to resolve us, by what law, besides this statute, they may so proceed.

First, this book before 5. and 6. of Edward the sixth, was never alive, and
being once dead by the statute of Queen Mary, was but restored to life by the
Queens statute of Reviver. Before this statute the^ was revived, these
offenses were no offenses, for where no law was, there could be no offense.

Besides, we have some reason to conceave thus well of the Ordinaries, that
they should be more prudent and discreet, then to justify their criminal
process ex officio, by a plenarie power, or a sovereign pleasure. And to say,
that ex officio, by virtue of the popish canon Law they may lawfully proceed to
suspension, excommunication, or deprivatio^ of any Minister of the Gospel, for
the not observation of the book of common prayer, we assure our selves, that
so to say, were to say amiss, yea and more then ever they will be able to
prove.

First, the whole form and order of common service, administration of
Sacraments, use of rites and ceremonies, as they be mentioned and set forth in
the book of common prayer, by all the grounds and rules of that popish law,
is adjudged to be erroneous, scismaticall and heretical. And therefore the
refusing to use the same book, or any part thereof, is so far from being
punishable by the same law, as by the same law, it is a matter worthy of high
praise, and commendation for a Minister to refuse to use it.

Again, what a vain part were it, for an ordinary to plead the popish canon
law, for the validity of his proceeding ex officio, when as the whole body and
every title, chapter and versicle of the same law, at the petition and
submission of the Clergy has long since been for ever adnulled, made void
and of no value, by an act of Parliament? In regard whereof, and in regard
also, that every ordinaries process ex officio, may be as well justifiable in
respect of him self, as aequall toward the Kings subjects, it much every way
imports him, that his proceedings ex officio, be tempered hereafter with
better mortar, and grounded upon a surer foundation, then be the maxims and
principles of that law. Namely it behooveth that they be founded and
established upon the Kings, either ecclesiastical or temporal laws and
statutes, of which sort of the Kings laws we may bouldly and honestly say,
that the Popish and foraine canon law is none: which saying also of ours we
briefly prove thus:

The Clergy of the Realm, as well for their successors, as for themselves,
having (like humble and obedient subjects to the King) promised in verbo
sacerdotij, that they would, never from thence forth, presume to attempt,
allege, claim or put in ure, or enact, promulge or execute any new canons,
costitutions or ordinances, provincial or other, etc. It was enacted by
authority of Parliament, according to the said submission and petition of the
Clergy, that neither they, nor any of them from thence forth should presume to
attempt, allege, claim or put in ure any constitutions or ordinances
Provincial or Sinodalls, or any other canons. All canons then (by these words
or any other canons) of what sort or degree soever, whether domestical and
homebread or strangbread and foraine canons, before that time made, were once
utterly forbidden to be attempted, alleged, claimed or put in ure, by which
means they were once, concerning their practice and execution, with us
adnulled and made void, And therefore so many of them, as at that time were
not, or since that time have not been revived and reauthorized, ought not to be
attempted, alleged, claymed or put in ure at this day.

It remains then to be discussed, what canons, constitutions, ordinances
Provincial or Synodall, or what other canons, were at that time, or have at
any time sithence been recommanded, and reestablished; unto which point from
the whole scope and plain letter of the statute, we answer, that only such
canons, constitutions and ordinances provincial or Synodall, may be attempted,
alleged, claimed and put in ure, as were made before that time, by the
Clergy within the Realm, and were not contrariant nor repugnant to the laws,
statuts and customs of the Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the Kings
prerogative Royal. And that therefore all canons, decrees, decretall, sextes,
clementines, extravagants and all other whatsoever constitutions and
ordinances, Papal, being strangers and aliens from the common wealth of
England, and not begotten by the Clergy within the Realm, are forbidden at
this day to be attempted, alleged, claimed or put in ure: The reasons of
which our answer drawn from the letter of the statute, be these:

The Parliament having enacted, as before is mentioned, did nevertheless
(according to an other branch of the petition of the Clergy) not only give to
the King and 32. persons, by him to be nominated, etc. power and authority to
view, search and examine the said constitutions and ordinances Provincial and
Synodall, before that time made by the Clergy of this Realm; but also
enacted, that such of them, as the Kings highness and the said 32. persons
should deem and adiudge worthy to be continued and kept, should be from thence
forth kept, obeyed and executed within this Realm; All canons then made before
that time, without the realm, being secluded by the Parliament, from the view,
search and examination of the King and 32. Persons, though he and they had
deemed and adjudged the said canons to have been continued, kept, and obeyed:
yet notwithstanding the same Canons ought not to have been kept, obeyed and
executed. For only such canons, by the King and 32. Persons, ought to have been
deemed and adjudged worthy to be continued and kept; for the continuance and
keeping whereof, power and authority by Parliament was given to the King and
32. Persons. But such canons, constitutions and ordinances, Provincial or
Sinodall only, and not Papal, were committed, etc. Therefore Papal being once
disclaymed, and disauthorised by Parliament, and not again committed by
Parliament, to view, search and examination, were never by intendement of
Parliament, to be continewed, kept and obeyed within this Realm. And this
again most pregnantly is confirmed unto us by the last provisoe of this act,
the words whereof are these:

Provided also that such canons, constitutions, ordinances, and Synodalls
Provincial being already made, which be not contrariant or repugnant to the
laws, statutes and customs of the Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the
Kings prerogative Royal, shall now still be used and executed as they were
before the making of this act, till such time as they be viewed, searched or
otherwise ordered and determined by the said 32. persons, or the more part of
them, according to the tenor and effect of this act:

Now by what other words, then by these of this provisoe, could the Parliament
more fully and clearly have expressed their mind, that the same, by the tenor
and effect of this provisoe intended for ever wholly to seclude all Papal and
foraine canons, from being used and executed within this Realm? For at the
petition and submission of the clergy, the Parliament having first enacted,
that neither they, nor any of them from thencefoorth, should presume to
attempt, allege, claim, or put in ure any constitutions o^ ordinances
Provincionall, or Synodalles, or any other Canons: And again, at the petition
and submission of the Clergy, the same Parliament having committed to the
view, search; examination and judgment of the King; and 32. persons, such
Canons, constitutions, and ordinances, or the said Canons, constitutions, and
ordinances provincial and Synodall, which as thertofore had been made by the
Clergy of this Realm: And lastly by this proviso, the same Parliament having
enacted, that such Canons provincial, constitutions provincial, ordinances
provincial, and Synodalls Provincial (for the word Provincial by the whole
tenor and effect of this Act, can not in this place but have reference to
every of these words) shall still be used and executed, etc. till such time
as they be viewed, searched, or otherwise ordered and determined by the said
two and thirty persons, etc. Seeing these things (I say) be thus, First
submitted, then afterward committed, and lastly provided, and not one word,
syllable, or lotter aiming at the continuance, use, keeping, or obedience of
the popish canon law, it can not be averred by any, unless he be too too
conceited, and opiniative, that the Canon law or any part thereof, made by the
Pope without the Realm, may lawfully at this day be attempted, alleged,
claymed, or put in ure within the Realm, by any Judge Ecclesiastical what
soever: yea and thus much also is confirmed by a statute 37. H. 8. c. 17.

Howsoever therefore the Kings of England, deryving their Ecclesiastical Laws
from others, Sir Edward Cook, de iure reg. eccle, fol. 9.
being proved, approved and allowed hereby and with a general consent, are
rightly and aptly called the Kings Ecclesiastical laws of England in like
manner as those laws which the Normans borrowed from England, were called the
laws of Normandy, and as those laws which the Romans fetching from Athens,
being allowed and approved by that state, were called Ius civil Romanorum,
howsoever I say this be true, nevertheles hereupon it will not follow that
those Ecclesiastical laws thus borrowed and derived from others, may then any
more rightly and aptly be called the Kings Ecclesiastical laws of England,
when once by and with a general consent in Parliament, they have been
disproved and disallowed; Yea and when also they have been utterly adnulled,
and commanded never to be put in execution within the Realm of England: From
whence it seems to follow, that whatsoever subject shall take upon him, full
and plenarie power to deliver justice in any cause to any the Kings subjects,
or to punish any crime and offense within the Kings Dominions by virtue of
those laws, once by so absolute and high an authority disanulled, that the
same person denies the Parliament, to have full power to allow and disalow
laws in all causes, to all the Kings subjects, and consequently, that the
high Court of Parliament, is not a complete Court for the whole and intyre body
of the Realm.

Wherefore, albeit we grant (as the truth of the Kings law is) unto the
Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordinaries, that lawfully they may proceed to
inquire in their visitations and Synodes, and else where, to take accusations
and informations of all and every thing and things above mentioned, done,
committed, and perpetrated within the limits of their jurisdictions and
authority, and to punish the same by admonition, suspension, sequestration, or
deptivation, though thus much had never been provided by the statute:
nevertheles we desire to be resolved, whether any minister ought to be
punished by these, or any other censures and process, before the ordinary,
for any offense mentioned in this act, if for the same offense the same
Minister, by virtue of this act, be not punishable before the Kings Justices?
And therefore for example sake, put this case, viz. That a Minister for the not
crossing of a child upon the forehead (after baptism is fully administered) be
indighted before some of the kings Justices, and afterward upon a traverse
before some other of the kings Justices, the same Minister be found to have
ministered the same sacrament of Baptism, in such order and form, as in the
book is prescribed. Notwithstanding the omission of this ceremony, after
baptism, and that upon such a traverse, the indightment, before the said
second Justices, be found to be insufficient in law, and the Minister by the
same Justices be adjudged not to be in danger of the penalty of imprisonment,
etc. because his such not crossing is no offense against the law, we demand (we
say) in this case, whether the same Minister, by the Bishops of the Diocese,
may be suspended, or deprived from his ministry, or from his benefice for the
same his not crossing, yea or no.

Considerations against the deprivation of a Minister, for the not use of a
Surplice in divine service.
IN the whole body of the statute, there is not one syllable or letter, from
the which any semblance of reason can be deduced, that any Minister of the
church, for refusing to use, or for the not using of any ornament appointed by
the statute, or by the book to be in use, should be punished with the pain of
deprivatio^. For what soever punishment a Minister, for the breach of the
Statute, may sustain, by the kings Justices, the same is only to be imposed
for such offenses, as are specified before the last provisoe of the statute.
Ornaments therefore of the church provided to be retained, and to be in use,
being not contained in those premises, or things mentioned before the second
provisoe, concerning the Archbishops and Bishops authority, and for refusing
whereof, a Minister, by the premises is punishable, it follows (there being
no punishment for refusing the use of ornaments in the last provisoe) that the
not use of ornaments, is not punishable before the kings Justices. And if
there be no punishment appointed to be inflicted before the kings Justices for
the refusing to use any ornament, the^ much less is there any punishment to be
inflicted for the refusal of the use of a Surplice. For the Surplice is so
far from being commanded to be worn, as an ornament, in every service of the
church, as the same is not so much as once particularly mentioned, either in
the parish book, or in the statute.

Nay by the general words, both of the statute and the book, the Surplice is
wholly secluded from being appointed to be an ornament of it self, in some part
of the service of the Church. For if with the same in some part of the service
there be not a Cope provided to be worn, the Surplice may not be worn. For
the better manifestation whereof, it is necessary that we set down the words
of the Statute, of the parish book, and of the book of the second of K. Edw.
the sixth: unto which book of king Edward, for the use of ornaments, the
Ministers be referred, both by the parish book and statute of 1. Eliza. c. 2.
the words of which statute are these:

Provided always and be it enacted, That such ornaments of the Church, and of
the Ministers shall be retained and be in use as was in the church of England,
by authority of Parliament, in the second year of the reign of King Edward
the 6. until other order shall be therein taken by authority of the Queens
Matestie, with the advice of her Commissioners, appointed and authorized under
the great seal of England, for causes Ecclesiastical, or of the Metropolitan
of this Realm. Thus far the statute: the words of the parish book follow:

It is to be noted, that the Minister at the time of the Communion and other
times in his ministration shall use such ornaments in the Church, as were in
use by authority of Parliament, in the second year of King Edw. the sixth,
according to the act of Parliament, in that case enacted and provided. The
words of which book of the second of King Edward, are these:

Upon the day and at the time appointed, for the ministration of the holy
Communion, the Priest that shall execute the holy ministry, shall put upon
him the vesture appointed for that ministration, that is to say, A white Albe
plain, with a vestiment or cope:

Afterward it is said thus: Upon Wensdayes and Fridayes the English Letany
shall be said or song, etc. And though there he none to communicate with the
Priest, yet those days (after the Let any ended) the Priest shall put upon him
a plain Albe, or Surplice, with a Cope, and say all things at the Altar, etc.

From all which places it is plain, First, that no Minister, at any time upon
Wensdayes and Fridayes, after the Letany ended, was bound simply to wear a
surplice at the Altar, for it was in his choice, to put upon him a plain Albe
or Surplice, with a Cope.

Secondly, that no Priest upon the day and at the time appointed for the
Ministration of the holy communion, might put upon him a Surplice, but only a
white Albe plain, with a vestiment or Cope.

Thirdly, that no Minister upon Wensdayes and Fridayes, when he read the
Letany, did wear, or was bound to wear an Albe, or Surplice and Cope. For it
had been in vain and a thing ridiculouse for the book to have willed the
Minister, after the Letany ended, to put upon him those ornaments, if in the
time of reading the Letany, he had had them upon his back.

Fourthly, that no minister at or in any of the times and services aforesaid,
is bound to put upon him a Surplice, unless therewithal he wear a Cope. For
the use of ornaments ought to be according to the act of Parliament. And
therefore where no Cope, there by the act no Surplice: where no Altar to goo
unto after the Letany ended, there no Surplice to be put on after the Letany:
where a Communion with a white Albe plain, and a vestiment or Cope, there a
communion without a Surplice.

There is yet one other special observation before touched, though for an
other purpose, worthy to be reiterated in this place against the use of the
Surplice at the communion, reading the Letany, and saying prayers at the Altar.
And that is this: Namely for that as well the Statute 1. Eliza. as the parish
book has revived and commanded the use of those ornaments, according to the
Act of Parliament, 2. Edw. 6. which were repealed and forbidden by the book of
the 5. and 6. of King Edward the sixth.

It is to be noted, The order where morning and evening prayer, etc. fol. 1.
says the book of 5. and 6. of King Edw. 6. That the Minister, at the time of
the communion, and all other times, in his ministration shall use neither Albe,
vestiment nor Cope, but being an Archbishop or Bishop, he shall have and wear
a Rochet, and being a Priest or Deacon, he shall have and wear a Surplice only.

And here it is to be noted (says the parish book) that the Minister at the
time of the communion, and at all other times, in his ministration, shall use
such ornaments in the church as were in use by Authority of Parliament in the
2. year of the reign of King Edw. the 6. according to the Act of Parliament
in that case made and provided, which were as the book of K. Edw. says, an
Albe with a vestiment or Cope, at the communion, and an Albe or Surplice with a
Cope, upon Wensdayes and Fridayes after the Letany ended.

But by the Provincial constitutions, Objection.
ratified and confirmed by Act of Parliament, the parishioners are enjoined, at
their costs and charges, to provide a Surplice, and in vain were this charge
laid upon them, if so be the Minister were not bound by the law to wear it.

It is true, Answer.
and can not be denied, that all parishioners are enjoined, and that every
Mass Priest is bound by the Provincials, the one sort, to provide, the other
to wear a Surplice, for and at the celebration of the Mass, and for and in
the use of other popish services. The reason of the use of which Surplice, by
the popish Glosers and Provincials, is yielded to be this; Lind de celebra.
Missae c. l^^theamina
That the Priest must be clothed with white, to signify his innocence and
purity, and also ob reverentiam and Salvatoris nostri and totius caelestis
curiae, quam sacramento altaris consiciendo and confecto non est dubium
interesse.

But how does it follow, either from the provincall, or reason of the
provincial, that a Minister of the Gospel is bound by the provincial to
wear a Surplice at the ministration of the word and Sacraments of the Gospel,
when the doctrine and service of the Gospel is contrary and repugnant to the
service and doctrine of the Mass?

And when by the statute the Provincial is not to be used and executed, but as
it was used and executed before the making of the statute, which was Anno 25.
of King Henry the eight, at what time the service of the Mass, called the
Sacrament of the Altar, was only in request. A Minister therefore of the
Gospel, by the Provincial is no more bound to wear a surplice, then by the
Provincials and other laws of the Realm, he is bound to say a Mass: For the
Provincial appoints a surplice to be worn at the Mass and other
idolatrous services, all which services and which Mass (as being blasphemous
to the sacrifice of our Savior Christ once made upon the cross, and repugnant
to the holy worship of God) is abrogated by the laws of the Realm.

Now then it were to be wished that all states were given to understand, by
what equity, law or good conscience grounded upon the said statute, books or
Provincials, sundry grave, learned and godly Pastors and other Ministers, for
sundry years passed, have been deprived, suspended or excommunicated from
their benefices, dignities, promotions and ministeries, for not using the
surplice?

If the Archbishops, Bishops and other ordinaries, have heretofore proceeded
lawfully in this case, by any other right then statute law, it were greatly to
be wished, and a thing tending every way to their honor, credit and
reputation, that the same their Justice were made publicly known, to the end
all manner persons and states; might rest them selves fully satisfied and well
persuaded of the integrity of such their proceedings, as whereof they now stand
in doubt.

For our parts we acknowledge, that the Queens Highness had authority by the
statute with the advice of her Commissioners, etc. or Metropolitan, to take
other order for ornaments. But we never yet understood, that any other order
was taken accordingly: and especially in any such sort, as that the
Archbishops, Bishops and other Ordinaries might warrant their sentences of
deprivation to be lawful against the Ministers, which refuse to use the
Surplice. By the Advertisements whereupon (as it seems) they did principally
rely, and by authority whereof they did chiefly proceed, it is apparent that
neither the letter, nor intendement of the statute (for the alteration of
ornaments) was observed: And that therefore the commandment of wearing a
Surplice in steed of a white Albe plain, by the advertissementes, was not
duly made.

For though by her Highness letters it does appear, that she was desirous, as
the preface to the advertiseme^ts imports, to have advise from the
Metropolitan and commisioners, that she might take order; nevertheles that
her Highness, by her authority, with their advise, did take order and alter the
ornaments: this (I say) does no where appear, no not by the advertisements
them selves. Howsoever then the Metropolitan upon the Queens mandative
letters, that some orders might be taken, had conference and communication, and
at the last, by assent, and consent of the ecclesiastical commissioners, did
think such orders as were specified in the advertisements, meet and convenient
to be used and followed: nevertheless, all this proves not that these orders
were taken by her Majesty's Authority. For the Metropolitan and
Commissioners, might think, agree and subscribe, that the advertisementes were
meet and convenient, and yet might these advertisements be never of any value,
as whereunto her Highness authority was never yielded.

But be it granted that the Surplice by the Advertisements, The Bishop by his
ordinary jurisdiction has no authority to deprive a minister for not wearing a
Surplice.
or other canons, has been duly authorized, yet hereupon it can not be
concluded, that an ordinary by his ordinary Jurisdiction, has power to
deprive a Minister from his benefice for not using a Surplice. vbi non sertur
in contra facientes aliqua poena, constitutio est imperfecta, and modicum
prodesse poterit, quoad contra facientes, there being the^ no peine mentioned
in the advertisementes to be imposed upon a Minister for the not use of a
Surplice, how should a Minister for the not use of a Surplice, suffer the loss
of his benefice, which is one of the greatest peynes?

Hereunto happily it will be answered, ff. Si quis ius diceat non obte l 1. and l
2. si quis in iu^ vocat.
that vbi certa poena statuta est, non debet Iudex ab ea recedere, vbi vero non
est statuta, tunc est imponenda ad arbitrium Iudicantis. And further, that,
respectu poenae infligendae proper contemptum Iudicis; non reperitur provisio
regulariter, a lege facta, and ideo Judex potest arbitrio suo poenam imponere.

Touching which answers it may briefly be replied, that the pain spoken of
in the civil law, is generally understood of a pecuniarie pain, to be
assessed and applied to the silk; or more specially, it may be understood,
that among many corporal peynes, the Judge arbitrarily may choose which shall
seem to him most modicinable. Now, these kind of peynes, it is manifest, that
neither of them by the ordinary Jurisdiction ecclesiastical, in the church of
England, can be imposed for contempt.

And as for that which to the same effect may be alleged, Foraine cano^ law
abolished, 25.
out of the foreign canonistes or foreign canon law, thus stands the case: The
whole plott and frame of the building of the canon law (as before has been
proved) is clean ruinated and wasted. H 8. c. 19.
From whence it follows, that all the posts, summers, walls, plates,
rafters, and roof of that palace, A Bishop by the foreign canon law, has no
jurisdiction.
with all the iron, leaden and wooden implementes, and vtensilles thereof, be
all likewise rotten and naught, else but dross and canker. And so from the
Nullitie thereof, it is to be inferred, that an ordinary can not defend or
practice his ordinary Jurisdiction by that law, against any of the Kings
subjects. For all strange and foreign law, is both a strange power, and a
foreign traitor to the Kings crown, and for that cause, can not be pleaded in
any of the kings ecclesiastical courts, without being in danger of loosing
her head.

Howsoever then this rule, An ordinary by the Kings ecclesiastical law cannot
impose an arbitrarie pain for not wearing a Surplice.
in the romish consistories, by the Romish law, be true that an Ordinary for
inobedience or contempt, may impose an arbitrary pain, where a statute or
constitution has appointed no pain: yet because this rule is an irregular
enemy to the regiment of the kings Crown, it seems that the kings subject is
wronged whenever an ecclesiastical ordinary, for contempt, shall impose
arbitrarily, any pain, for the which pain he has not express warrant from
the kings ecclesiastical law.

Besides, if the Romish canon law, were the Kings ecclesiastical law, yet does
not the former exception prove, that a Parson or Vicare, may be deprived from
his benefice, by the ordinaries jurisdiction, for the not use of a surplice;
only the said exception affords thus much: viz. that if an ordinary
iudicially and canonically (as they call it) according to the sanctions, not of
the English, but of the Romish church, have admonished a Minister to wear a
surplice, the exception (I say) affords in this case thus much, that his
ordinary for contempt may impose an arbitrary pain, if so be nether by common
right, nor by constitutiue law, there be an ordinary pain imposed. But now so
it is, that this case falls not out to be within the compass of the pain of
deprivation, for not wearing a surplice. For it is contempt only, and not the
not wearing of a surplice, that arbitrarily may be punished in this case:

Why then though an ordinary be not able by the Kings Ecclesiastical laws,
Objection.
to draw in a Ministers deprivation, principally and by the head, for not
wearing a surplice, yet it seems that he may draw in the same consequently,
and as it were by the tail; namely, by chardging him with wilful perjury or
obstinat contempt; for the which causes he may justly be deprived.

Nay, Answer.
soft good Sir, your conclusion is without premises. For who ever granted
that the Romish canon law was the Kings ecclesiastical law? howsoever then,
from part of mine answer made to the exception, of contempt, you might gather
that by the Romish canon law, the deprivation of a Parson or Vicare, for
contempt, may be drawn in by the tail, though not by the head; nevertheles
we still deny that any Parsons or Vicares deprivation, directly or indirectly
by the head, or by the tail, either for contempt or perjury, pretended to be
committed for inobedience to canonical admonition, can justly be inflicted by
the kings Ecclesiastical laws.

First we affirm (as erst has been said) that as well the branch as the
budd, the tail as the head of the Romish canon law is clean cut of from the
body of the kings ecclesiastical law.

Secondly, that the oath of canonical obedience, exacted by the ordinary from
the Parson or Vicare, has ever been exacted hitherto, only by virtue of the
foraine canon law, and not so far (as we can learn) by any the kings
ecclesiastical laws.

And therefore perjury against a Parson or Vicare, for refusing to wear a
surplice at his ordinaries command (by the kings ecclesiastical laws) can not
be objected; For where there is no lawful oath taken, there no lawful
punishment for the breach of the same oath can be inflicted, by means whereof,
one half of the tail before spoken of, is disiointed.

And as for the other half, viz. that for contempt of the ordinaries
jurisdiction, a Parson or Vicar (having promised reverently to obey his
Ordinary, and other chief Ministers unto whom the government and charge is
committed over him; Following with a glad mind and will their godly
admonition, and submitting them selves to their godly judgments) that a
Parson or Vicar, I say, may lawfully for contempt be deprived from his
benefice, if he refuse to put upon him a Surplice at his Ordinaries admonition,
and upon his Ordinaries judgment, this might have some color, if the
Ordinaries admonition and judgment by the holy scriptures, could be proved to
be a godly admonition, and a godly judgment: or if the former rule were a rule
as well drawn from the Kings ecclesiastical law, as from the forain canon law;
or if there were no certain pain by the Kings ecclesiastical law appointed
for contempt: or that among diverse certain peynes, deprivation were one. But
seeing the same rule is none of the Kings ecclesiastical rules, and that
admonition, suspension and excommunication, and not deprivation by the Kings
ecclesiastical laws, be certain and ordinary peynes, to be inflicted for
contempt, it follows by the Kings ecclesiastical laws, that an Ordinary may
not arbitrarily, at his pleasure, for such contempt, inflict the pain of
deprivation.

Nay, were it true that the Romish and foreign canon law, touching this point of
punishment by deprivation for contempt, were in force within the Realm of
England, yet we affirm, even by the same law, that a Parson or Vicare, for the
not wearing of a Surplice, in divine worship, at his Ordinaries commandment,
is no more by his Ordinary, to be deprived from his benefice, having a
reasonable cause to refuse the wearing of a Surplice, then is a Bishop to be
deprived by an Archbishop from his Bishopric, for not putting in execution
some of his provincial Decrees; when as the same Bishop has any reasonable
impediment, not to execute the same decree. For this Rule, contemptus fit, ex
ce ipso, quod dum possunt hoc facere, illud tamen exequi contradicunt, is of no
more efficacy against a Minister subject to a Bishop, then it is against a
Bishop subject to an Archbishop. For as Episcopus est ordinarius omnium
Presbyterorum suae Dioceseos, so is Archiepiscopus, ordinarius omnium
Episcoporum suae provinciae. And therefore as it may be said, quod praecipitur
Rectori, seu Vicario, ab Episcopo imperatur ei, and quod Lind. de constitut.
ec. quia incontinentiae. verb praecipimus.
imperatur necesse est fieri ab eo, and si non fiat, poenam habet; so likewise,
vbi preceptum Archiepiscopi est factum Episcopo, ibi necesse est vt obediat.
vnde verbum verb. praecipimus.
praecipimus, habet vim sententiae definitiuae, as well by an Archbishop against
a Bishop, as by a Bishop against a Parson or Vicare.

For as haec dictio praecipimus, used by a Bishop to a Parson or Vicare,
importat aliquid de voluntate and authoritate Episcopi faciendum, vel non
faciendu^, so by the same word used by an Archbishop to a Bishob, tenetur
Episcopus cui praecipitur, quod praeceptum adimpleat, voluntate and authoritate
Archiepiscopi. In like sort then, as a Bishop to save him self, both from
contempt, and the penalty of contempt, may allege, and plead against an
Archbishop, that he did not therefore obey and execute his Metropolitanes
commandment, by reason of absence out of his Diocese, sickness or other
reasonable impediment, even so every Parson and Vicare to avoid contempt, may
plead for his innocence, against the admonition of a Bishop, that Iustam
habet excusationem, quare illud non debeat, ex. de conc. praeb. c. quia etc.
vlt. de elect. Lind de casti. quia verb neglexerit. Lind. de sen ten. excom.
verb. contemp. glos in verb contempse^it c. 1. de appell. li. 6.
vel non possit, vel nolit facere. Non enim potest dica sponte negligere, qui
potestate^ faciendi, quod incumbit non habet. Et negligens dicitur, qui
desidiosus, vel inconsiderains est, ad ea quae agere debet, cum non subsit
rationabile impedimentum and contemnere dicitur, qui sine causa, non facit quod
preceptum est. Et contemnere videtur. Jdem esse quod aspernari, vel non curare,
and hoc est verum quando non subest causa. Whereupon Linwood concluding, that
propter inobedientiam possunt subditi little benesicjs priuari, quia graviter
pecat; qui obedientiam infringot hoc verum est, says he, si sponte, and sine
causa hoc siat. Let us then for examples sake only, suppose that the Bishop of
Chichester, commanded by the Archbishops grace of Canterbury, to proceed to the
deprivation of M. N. Vicare of P. in the Diocese of Chichester, for his not
co^formity in wearing a surplice, should notwithstanding his commandment,
spare the said Vicare his deprivation, and being convented before his
Metropolitan to answer this contempt, should for his excuse allege that he
had received letters of special grace, in behalf of the said Vicare from the
Kings Majesty, by which he was required to respite the said Vicare, and to
assign him a longer day. Suppose this (I say) for examples sake to be true, I
demand in this case, whether the Kings letters directed to the Bishop, were not
a reasonable impediment and just cause, to save the Bishop from the penalty of
contempt, (which by the canon law, is the loss of his Bishopric) for the not
execution of the Archbishops provincial Mandate. If all the Advocates of the
Archbishops consistories, must needs grant that his Highness letters were a just
excuse to exempt the Bishop from the penalty of contempt, how much more justly
and reasonably may those Advocats conclude, that the same Vicare was to be
excused from contempt, against the Bishops admonition, when for his defense he
alleged, and was ready by his oath to have avowed the testimony of his own
conscience, rightly (as he was persuaded) grounded upon the holy commandment
of the most high God, that he durst not for fear of wounding his own
conscience, and displeasing God, to wear the surplice in any part of Divine
worship? For if the request of an earthly king superior to an Archb. be a
reasonable excuse, to save a BB. from contempt against an Archb. How much more
ought the authority and precept of an heavenly king, be a just and reasonable
impediment, to save a minister, from contempt against a Bishops admonition?

Unless then a Bishop will avow and be able out of holy writ, to justify that
a Ministers conscience (especially a Ministers conscience, who walks (as
Zakarias did) in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord without
reproof, Luke 1.
can not be any just or reasonable excuse or impediment, why he ought not, or
may not, or will not in Divine worship wear a surplice, being thereunto
admonished by his ordinary, unless (I say) the Bishop out of holy writ be able
fully to prove that such a Ministers conscience is no just or reasonable cause
to stay him from wearing a surplice in Divine worship, in this case I say, that
even by the Romish canon law it self, there can no contempt be charged upon
such a Minister, for not obeying his ordinaries, first, second and third
admonitions; the reasons whereof, even out of the same canon law have been
alleged before in the first part of these considerations.

But to leave the foraine canon law, and all the rules thereof, as being no
branches of the Ecclesiastical laws of England, let it be granted that before
the statute of 25. H. 8. c. 19. some canon or constitution Synodall or
Provincial, had been made, or since have been made, by the Clergy of the
Realm, in their co^vocation assembled by the Kings writ, that a Parson or
Vicare, for perjury or contempt ecclesiastical, should be deprived of his
benefice; nevertheless it seems that the same is a void canon, and a void
constitution: Because it is contrary or repugnant to the laws and customs of
the Realm: By which laws and customs no free man of the Realm, can be
dispossessed, of his franck tenement, for contempt or perjury in any of the
kings temporal Courts. All Parsons and Vicars then canonically instituted and
inducted, being not subjects at this day to any forain power, but being freemen
of the Realm, in as large and ample manner as any Layickes, the Kings other
subjects be, it seems that a Parson and Vicare (by the laws and customs of
the Realm) being a Freehoulder, should for none other cause loose his
Freehould, then for the which like cause, a Layicke may loose his.

Yea and because no Layicke by the laws and customs of the Realm, may be put
from his Freehould for contempt, no though the same contempt be committed
against the kings Proclamation, or any decree made in his high Court of
Chancerie: by so much the more unreasonable it seems to be, that a Parson or
Vicare for contempt against his ordinaries admonition, should be deprived from
his benefice, by how much a contempt against the Kings commandment, is more
heinous then is a contempt against the ordinaries admonition.

You mistake the cases, Answer.
and as it seems, you understand not the law. The Freehold of a layick, and
the Freehold of an ecclesiastical person be not of one nature. The former
belongs unto him by a title invested in his person, but the latter
apperteyneth unto a Churchman, in the right of his Church: If then the
Churchman be displaced from his Church, it follows by a necessary
consequence, that he must likewise be discharged from his freehold. For he,
being in the eye of the law dead unto his Church, can no more enjoy the
freehold which he held in the right of his Church, then can a dead Layick any
longer hold a Franktenement, in right of his person. And for your better
satisfaction herein, I would have you to consider, that the like course of
Justice is kept and ministered against certain officers in the common weal:
which officers, so soon as for any just cause they shall be put from their
offices, do withal and forthwith loose such their freeholdes, as jointly with
their offices, and in regard of their offices they held.

The Master of the Rolls and Warden of the Fleet, having their offices
granted for term of life, though other of them by the same grant be seized
of a freehold, the one of the house called the Rolls, the other of the house
called the Fleet: nevertheles if the first be put from his Mastership, and
the second from his Wardenship, neither can the one, nor the other, by the law
and justice of the Realm, reteyne either of those houses, as his Freehold; For
as the houses were jointly with their offices, and in respect of their offices
granted. So their offices being once taken from the^, they must withal by
necessary consequence forgo those their houses, which for the time they held as
their freeholds.

Well: if this be all that may gaynesay our position, then be not our cases
mistaken, neither yet have we so ignorantly urged and applied the law and free
customs of the Realm, as you would bear us in hand. For though we grant,
whatsoever you have excepted, to be true, yet can not the same be a bar
against our pleading. Reply.
For we have hitherto pleaded no more in effect, but thus, viz. that a Parson
or Vicar during his ministerial function, being in the eye of the law, no dead
but a living person, and a free man of the Realm, ought no more, for a
contempt unto his Ordinaries admonition, by any law of he Realm be
dispossessed from the freehold, which in right of his function he enjoys,
then can a Layicke for contempt unto the Kings commandment, be disseised of
his.

And what if the Freeholdes of a Layick, and of an ecclesiastical person, be
(as you say they be) diversely possessed, the one by right of church, the other
by right of person, what does this (I say) impugn our saying, that no
Freeholder for contempt of the Kings commandment may be punished with loss of
his freehold, when the great Charter of England tells us, that a freema^
shall not be amerced for a small fault, but after the quantity of the fault.
And for a great fault, after the manner thereof, saving to him his contenement or
freehold. If then unto every freema^ punishable by the law, though his fault be
great, his Contenement or Freehold ought to be reserved; it seems much more
reasonable to follow, that no Churchman, being a freeman of the Realm, may for
contempt be punished, with loss of his Contenement or Freehold.

And that you may consider (against our next conference) more deeply of this
matter, let me put this case unto you viz. That a Churchman and a temporal
person, both freemen of the Realm; for one and the self same contempt against
the king, were punishable by the great Lords in the star chamber, or in any
other Court, by other of the Kings Justices; would our laws and freecustomes
of the Realm (think you) justify, that the spiritual person, enioyning still
his spiritual function, might in this case be mulcted with the loss of his
benefice, and yet the temporal person not to be punishable by the loss of his
freehold?

The examples produced by you, relieve no whit at all your case, nay rather
they stand on our side, and make good our part. For how long soever the Master
of the Rolls and Warden of the Fleet, do enjoy their offices, for so long
time, by your own collection, they ought to enjoy their Freeholdes, annexed to
their offices; yea and you assume in effect, that they may not lawfully for
contempt, or any other cause, be disseised of their freeholds, so long as they
be possessed of their offices.

Now then, if from the identity of reason you would conclude, that a Parson or
Vicare for contempt lawfully deposed from his ministerial function, should in
like manner lawfully loose his freehold, annexed to his office, as the Master
of the Rolls, and Warden of the Fleet, put from their offices, should loose
theirs, we would not much have gainsaid your assertion. For we hold it
unreasonable that a Parson or Vicar deposed from his ministerial function,
should enjoy that freehold or maintenance which is provided for him that must
succeed in his ministerial charge. But then your assertion would make nothing
against us. For so you must prove that your officers for contempt only, may
lawfully be put from their freeholds annexed to their offices, and yet
notwithstanding remain the same officers still.

And then indeed; from some parity or semblance of reason, you might have
inferred, that a Parson or Vicare for contempt deprived of his free hold,
annexed to his function, might notwithstanding such contempt, enjoy his
ministerial function still. But to dispute after this sort, were idly to
dispute, and not to dispute ad idem. For how does this follow? The Kings
officer, if for contempt he be displaced from his office can not withal but be
displaced from his freehold, which jointly with his office, and in regard of
his office, he possessed.

Therefore a Parson or Vicare for contempt, may lawfully be deprived from his
benefice or freehold annexed to his ministerial function, and yet
notwithstanding enjoy his ministerial function still. And this is the maine
point and general case (for the most part) of all the Ministers which at this
day for contempt, stand deprived. For among all the sentences pronounced for
contempt, there is scarce one to be found which deposes a Parson or Vicare
from his ministerial office, but only which depriveth him from his Church,
Parsonadge, or Vicaradge. Whereby the unreasonableness of certain ordinaries,
in their process of deprivatio^s, become so much the more unreasonable, by how
much more unreasonable it seems to be, that any public officer should
lawfully be continued in his public office, and yet not be suffered to enjoy
any public means, to maintain the same his office.

And thus much have we replied unto your answer, made unto our pleadings, that
by the laws and freecustomes of the Realm, a Parson or Vicar, being a freeman
of the Realm, may not for contempt unto his ordinaries admonition, be deprived
from his freehold, if so be you grant that he may enjoy his ministerial
function still. As touching the laws of the church, it has been already
sufficiently demonstrated, that there is then no contempt at all committed
against an admonition, when the party admonished can allege any just or
reasonable cause of his not yielding to his admonisher. And if no contempt in
such case be made, then no deprivatio^ from a benefice, or deposition from the
ministry, in such case ought to follow.

Considerations against subscription, to the book of the form and manner of
making and consecrating Bishops, Priests and Deacons.
WHat the reason or cause should be, that subscription unto this book of
consecration and ordination of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, has been of l^te
years, so hotly and egerly pursued by the Lords of the Clergy, is a mystery,
perhaps, not of many of the laytie well understood. And how soever under color
of the maintenance of obedience to the statute of the Realm, whereby this
book is confirmed, the same subscription may seem to be pressed: nevertheles
if the maine drift and reason of this pressure, were well boulted out, it is to
be feared, that not only the unlawful supremacy of an Archbishop is sought to
be adva^ced above the lawful supremacy of our Soverayne Lord King James; but
also that the Synodals, Canons and Constitutions made by the Clergy, in their
convocation, are intended, if not, to be preferred above, yet at leastwise to
be made equal to the common law and statutes of the Realm.

By the ancient laws and customs of the Realm, one parcel of the Kings
jurisdiction and imperial Crown, has evermore consisted in granting
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, unto Archbishops, Bishops and other Prelates. For
the maintenance of which imperial jurisdiction and power, against the usurped
supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, diverse statutes, not introductorie of new
law, Cook de lure. regis eccle. fol. 8
but declaratorie of the old, in the time of King Henry the eight, King Edward
the sixth, and of our late most Noble Queen deceased, have been made and
enacted.

Yea and in a book entitled The Institution of a Christian man, composed by
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, Edward Archbishop of York and all the
Bishops, fol. 53.
diverse Archdeacons and Prelates of the Realm, that then were, fol. 55.
dedicated also by them to King Henry the eight, it is confessed and
acknowledged that the nomination and presentation of the Bishoprics,
apperteyned unto the kings of this Realm. And that it was and ^halbe lawful
to Kings and Princes, and their Successors, with consent of their Parliaments,
to revoke and call again into their own hands, or otherwise to restreine all
the power and jurisdiction which was given and assigned unto Priests and
Bishops, by the license, consent, sufferance and authority of the same Kings
and Princes, and not by authority of God and his Gospel, whenever they
shall have grounds and causes so to do, as shall be necessary, wholesome and
expedient for the Realms, the repressing of vice, and the increase of
Christian faith and religion,

Ever since which time (until of late years, the late Archbishops of
Canterbury, with the counsel of his college of Bishops, altered that his
opinion, which some times in his answer made to the admonition to the
Parliament, he held) it was generally and publickely maintained, that the
state, power and jurisdiction of Provincial and Diocesan Bishops in England,
stood not by any Divine right, but merely and altogether by human policy and
ordinance alone. And that therefore, according to the first and best opinion
and judgment of the said Archbishops, Bishops, etc. the same their jurisdiction
might be taken away and altered at the will and pleasure of the kings of
England, when soever they should have grounds and causes so to do.

Mary since, when as the Discipline and government provincial, and diocesan
ministered and exercised by the late Archbishop deceased, and his Suffraganes,
was diversely handled, disputed and controverted, not to be agreeable, but
repugnant to the holy Scriptures, and necessary also for the repressing of
vice, the increase of faith and Christian religion, to be changed; they
hereupon justly fearing, that the most virtuous and Christian Queen deceased,
upon sundry complaints made in open Parliament, against their many unjust
greevances, would have reformed the same their manner of government; they then
presently upon new advise and consulation taken, boldly and constantly avouched
the same their government, to have been from the Apostles times, and agreeable
to the holy scriptures; Do. Sutclif. Doct. Bilson
and therefore also perpetual, and still to be used, and in no case to be
altered, by any king, or Potentate whatsoever.

By means of which this their enclyning to the popish opinion, and holding
their Jurisdiction to be de iure divino, and professedly mainteyning in the
Homily (whereunto also subscription is urged) that the King, 2. part of the
right use of ye Church
and all the Nobility, ought to be subject to excommunication, there is now at
length grown such a main position, of having a perpetual Diocesan and
Provincial government in the church, that rather then their Hierarchy should
stoop, they would cause the Kings Supremacy, which he has over their said
Jurisdiction, to fall down to the ground; In so much as by their supposition,
the King has no authority, no not by his supreme power, to alter their said
government at all. And to this end and purpose (as it seems) in their late
canons have they devised and decreed, this book of ordination, to be
subscribed unto. Which subscription can not but quite and clean overthrow the
Kings supremacy and ancient jurisdiction, in the most dangerous degree. For
if their Provincial and Diocesan orders and degrees of Ministry, together
with their jurisdiction, be to be used, (as established and derived unto them
by the holy scriptures) how then can it be in the power and jurisdiction of the
King, to grant, or not to grant the use of Provincial and Diocesan
Bishopisme and jurisdiction? Or how may the provincial Bishops, with their
Diocesan Suffraganes, be called the kings ecclesiastical officers, if their
jurisdictions be not derived unto them from the king? For if they be called
Gods Bishops, or Bishops of Gods making, how then may they any more be called
the kings Bishops, or Bishops of the kings presenting, nominating and
confirming?

Nay, besides, who then can alter them? who can restreyne them? who can revoke
or recall their power and jurisdiction? who can resist them? or what king of
England may pluck his neck from under their yoke? Nay, how should the kings
Supremacy (as by the ancient Laws of the Realm it ought) remain inviolable,
when his Royal person, whole Nobility and Realm, is subject and liable to
the censure of the canon Law, excommunication? Which law the Provincial and
Diocesan Bishops to this day, in right and by virtue of their Provincial and
Diocesan jurisdiction, and none otherwise, do still use, practice, and put in
execution?

Besides, If Diocesan Bishops be scripturely Bishops, the^ may they stand
without y^ King. Dioceson Bishops hither to vphelde only by the laws of the
Realm.
if Bishops Provincial and Diocesan (as they be described in that book) be
commanded in the Scriptures, and were in use ever since the Apostles times,
then ought they to be in the Church of England, though the King and his law
never allowed, nor approved of them. But to hold this opinion, as it will
uphold the Popes supremacy (because the general reasons which uphold a
Provincial Bishop, will uphold a Pope) so will it once again, not only
impeach the Kings supremacy, but also be repugnant to the laws and customs
of the Realm. By which supremacy, laws and customs only, the provincial and
diocesan Bishops have been hitherto vpheld. For seeing the laws and customs of
the Realm, do make the Kings nomination, presentation, and confirmation, the
very essence and being of a Provincial, and Diocesan Bishop with us, So that
these offices ought to be held only, from the authority, gift and grant of
the King: how ought not the kings nomination, presentation, authority and
gift, yea and the law it self, in this case wholly cease, if the order, degree,
ministry and jurisdiction of a provincial and diocesan Bishop be founded in
holy Scripture? Unless we shall affirm, that, that was in the Apostles times,
which was not, or that, that is to be found in holy Scripture, which is not?
Namely that there were in the Apostles times, and that there be in the holy
Scriptures, no Bishops but provincial and dioceasan Bishops to be found? And
that by the law of God and the Gospel, every King and Potentate, has supreme
power to suffer none but Provincial and Diosan Bishops to be in the Churches.

So that by subscription to allow, that provincial and Diocesan Bishops, be
Scripturely Bishops, and that their jurisdiction and power, is a Scripturely
jurisdiction and power, is to deny that their jurisdiction and power, depends
upon the kings jurisdiction and power, or that by the kings gift and authority
they be made Bishops.

But how does subscription (you will say) to the book of ordination approve
the orders and degrees of provincial and diocesan Bishops, to be by Divine
right, rather then by humane ordinance? How? Why thus: it is evident (says the
preface of that book) to all men diligently reading holy Scripture and ancient
Authors, that from the Apostles times, there have been these orders of
Ministers in Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests and Deacons. Yea and by the
whole order of prayer, and of Scripture read, and used in the form of
consecrating of an Archbishop or Bishop, it is apparent that the order of an
Archbishop or Bishop, consecrated by that book, is reputed and taken to be of
Divine institution. And therefore seeing the names of those orders of Ministers,
must necessarily be taken and understood of such orders of Ministers, as be
set forth and described in the body of that book, it must needs be intended,
that the Ministers by their subscription, should approve the orders of
Ministers, mentioned in that book, to be of Divine institution, and
consequently, that provincial and diocesan Ministers or Bishops, have not
their essence and being from the nomination, gift and authority of the King.

Besides, if we should understand by the word (Bishop) him that has the
Ministry of the word and Sacraments, as the Pastor and teacher; and by the
word (Priest) the Presbiter, that is the Governing elder; and by the word
(Deacon) the provider for the poor, then for the Ministers to subscribe to the
book of ordination, would no way justify those officers or degrees of
Ministers, which are described in that book, but would indeed utterly subvert
and overthrow them. Because the orders and degrees of a provincial and diocesan
Bishop, of a Priest and Deacon mentioned in that book, be of a far differing
nature from those orders and degrees of Ministers, which are mentioned in the
Scriptures: because they only agree in name, and not in nature.

Wherefore seeing there be other orders and degrees of Bishops then Provincial
and Diocesan Bishops found in the holy Scriptures, and seeing also Kings and
Princes being Vicarij Dei, be commanded to authorize all things for the truth;
and nothing against the truth: it seems necessary that his Majesty should
not only restrain the Provincial and Diocesan Bishops, from urging
subscription to this book of ordination, (being so derogatory (in their sense
and construction) to his supremacy as nothing can be more,) but also to keep
the Bishops them selves within the tether and compass of the word of God. For
if the word of God, do approve amongst the Ministers of the Word and
Sacraments, a primacie of order only, and denies unto them any primacie of
jurisdiction and power in ecclesiastical government, (as the learned
Protestants have proved against the Papists touching Peter's supremacy) then
will it follow that ours also ought to be reduced to the same compass, both
for the Kings Majesty's safety, and the Churches good. Least Princes giving
them more then God allows them, they shoud them selves loose that right and
authority, which they ought to reteyne in their own Royal persons.

Now that it may not be objected that we beg the question of Scripturely
Bishops, not having any primacie of jurisdiction and power in ecclesiastical
government, (to let pass all particular reasons of the Protestants against the
Papists in this point) it shall suffice in this place to produce for witnesses
six and forty Jurors, against who^ no chalendge or exception can be taken;
Namely the said Thomas Crammer, Archbishop of Canterbury: Edward Archbishop of
York: John Bishop of London: Cuthhert Dunelmem Steven Winton: Robert Cariolen:
John Exon: John Lincoln: Roll and Coven and Lichfield: Thomas Elien: Nicholas
Sarum: John Banger: Edward Herefordien. Hugh Wigornen. John Roffen. Richard
Cicestren. William Norwicen. William Meneven. Robert Assaven. Robert Landaven.
Richard Wolman, Archdeacon of Sudbur. William Knight Archdeacon of Richmond:
John Bell, Archdeacon of Gloucester: Edmond Boner, Archdeacon of Lecester: William
Skipp, Archdeacon of Dorset: Nicholas Heeth, Archdeacon of Stafford Cuthbert
Marshall, Archdeacon of Notingham: and Richard Curren, Archdeacon of Oxford:
Together with William Cliff, Galfrid Downs; Robert Oking, Radulf Bradford,
Richard Smith, Simon Matthew, John Fryn, William Lukemaster, William May,
Nicholas Wotton, Richard Cox, John Edmonds, Thomas Robertson, John Baker,
Thomas Baret, John Hase and John Tyson, Sacrae Theologiae, iuris ecclesiastici,
and civilis Professores.

All which Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons and Prelates, having with one
voice and accord showed unto King Henry the eight, that diverse good Fathers,
Bishops of Rome, did greatly reprove and abhor (as a thing clean contrary
to the Gospel and the Decrees of the church) that any Bishop of Rome, or
elsewhere, should presume, usurp, or take upon him the title and name of the
universal Bishop, or of the head of all Priests, or of the highest Priest, or
any such like title; proceed further, fol. 59. 60.
and in the end conclude, and give up their verdict thus. For confirmation
whereof, it is out of all doubt, that there is no mention made, neither in
scripture, neither in the writings of any authentical Doctor or Author of
the Church being within the time of the Apostles: That Christ did ever make, or
institute any distinction or difference to be in the preeminence of power,
order, or jurisdiction between the Aposties them selves, or between the
Bishops them selves; but that they were all aequall in power, order, authority
and jurisdiction. And that there is now, and since the time of the Apostles, any
such diver^^tie or difference among the Bishops, it was devised by the ancient
Fathers, etc. For the said Fathers considering the great and infinite multitude
of Christian men, and taking examples of the old Testament, thought it
expedient to make an order of degrees, to be among Bishops and spiritual
governors of the Church; and so ordained some to be Pa^riarkes, some to be
Primates, some to be Metropolitanes, some to be Archpishops, some to be
Bishops, etc. Which differences the said holy Fathers thought necessary to
enact and establish, by their Decrees and constitutions, not for that any such
differences were prescribed and established in the Gospel, or mentioned in any
Canonical writings of the Apostles, or testified by any ecclesiastical Writer
within the Apostles time. And thus far their verdict.

But let us grant, that orders of Bishops, Priests and Deacons be contained
in the holy scriptures, yet if those orders of Bishops, Priests and Deacons
which are established in the book, be not the same orders of Bishops, Priests
and Deacons, which are authorized by the scriptures: then (through the
aequivocation of these words; Orders of Bishops, Priests and Deacons) there
being afalacie: how should this form and manner of subscription be lawful?
viz. that the book co^teyneth nothing contrary to the word of God, and that
it lawfully may be used? For only such orders of Bishops, Priests and Deacons,
ought to be acknowledged, subscribed unto, and used, as by the holy scriptures
are warranted. And therefore such as are contained in the book, if so be they
be diverse from those which are approved in the holy scriptures, how should they
without sin be subscribed unto, and used? Unless we shall affirm, that
Ministers of the Gospel of God, may rightfully approove of such orders of
Ministers, as the Lord and Law giver of the Gospel never allowed ne approoved.

And thus much have we spoken touching not subscription, touching the not exact
use of the order and form of the book of common prayer, and touching the not
precise practice and wearing of the rites, ceremonies and ornaments of the
church.

Wherein if we have spoken otherwise then as for our speaking we have warrant
from the Kings laws, our earnest desire is that it may be showed unto us
wherein we have erred. For if there be any thing whereof we be ignorant, we
shall be willing to be taught the same, and having learned it, to yeald to the
practice thereof.

In the mean time, seeing not to wear a Surplice in the ministration of Divine
service, not to make a cross in Baptism, and not to subscribe, etc. in it
self, is not a sin against any commandment of God, nor a thing scandalous
unto the people: And seeing also the Parsons who refuse to wear and use the
same, be in every respect men of good note, condition, fame, quality and
behavior, yea and such as against whom, no misdemeanor for doctrine or life,
which might aggravate their offense, can justly be objected, we may lawfully
(as we think) conclude in their behalf, that de aequitate and misericordia
iuris, they ought to be respected and tolerated, rather then for their refusal
merely standing upon their consciences (whether erroneous or not erroneous, it
skilleth not) de rigore iuris, (if there be any such rigor) to be suspended,
excommunicated or deprived, yea and in so general and doubtful a case of
conscience, upon so slender a ground of perjury or contempt, upon persons every
way so peaceable and well qualified, and wherein no scandal has ensued, we
suppose it can not be showed among all the decrees and sentences recorded,
among all the Popish canonists, that ever any Popish ordinaries, in any age
have used the like judicial rigor against any their Popish Priests.

It is to be noted, that the foraine canon Law, is none otherwise in any part
of this Treatise intended to be the Kings Ecclesiastical law, then only upon a
false supposition of the Archbishops and Bishops: Because the same law is yet
used and practiced in their Consistories, notwithstanding it has been long
since abolished by Act of Parliament.

God save King JAMES.

Faults escaped in printing.
In the Epistle.
Fol. 2. page 1. lin. 12. say we, for (say we) Fol. 4 page 1. l. a fine. 9.
efrom, for from. Fol 6. page 1. l. a fine 3. Wincester for Winchester.
In the Book.
Page 11. l. a fi. 11. appointed for appoints. Page 11. l a fi. 6. appointed
for appoonteth. Page 12. the 8. line is superfluous. Page 19 l. 7. expcessed
for expressed. Page 22 l a si 10 ad in marg. 1. Mar ses. 2. 6. 3. Page 24. l.
14. fifth for fifth. Page 24. l a fi. 11. decretall, for Decretalls. Page 35. l.
11 provincalls, for Provincials. Page 36. in fine, in marg. diceat for dicent.
Page 37. in marg 25. is to be added to H. 8. etc. Page 39 l a fi. 10 preceptum
for praeceptum. ibid in mar. cc. for. c. Page 40. in mar. casti for cousti. and
contemp. for contem. Page 42. l. vlt he for the. Page 43 l. 17. a si enioyning
for enjoying. Page 46. l. 8. Ardbishops, for Archbishop. Page 47. in f. in mar.
Dioceson for Diocesan. Page 48. l. 12. Dioocasan, for Diocesan.

