The three books of Cronicles, which John Carrion (a man syngularly well seen in
the Mathematycall sciences) Gathered with great diligence of the best Authors
that have written in Hebrew, Greek or Latin.

Whereunto is added an Appendix, conteynyng all such notable things as be
mentyoned in Cronicles to have chanced in sundry parts of the world from the
year of Christ. 1532. To this present year of. 1550.

Gathered by John Funcke of Nurenborough.

Which was never before prynted in Englysh.

Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.



^o the most excellent Prince, Edward the syxte, by the grace of God, King
of England, France and Irelande, Defendour of the faith, and in earth,
immediately under God, supreme head of the church of England and Irelande: your
graces humble and obeysaunt subject Gwalter Lynne wysheth abundance of all
grace and Godlynes with a long and prosperous raygne.
COnsyderyng that the knowledge of things past (most excellent prince) is most
necessary for such as would pass over the time to come in a decent and Godly
order, and that the greatest nombre of your Majesty's people do not
understand other languages, then their natural tongue:

I have thought it my duetye (being one that spends all his time in the
setting forth of books in the English tongue) amongst all other to set forth
this short Cronicle.

Wherein is briefly declared all that is needful to be known, concerning
things done in times passed. The learned have (...) the latyne tongue, and
therefore my labor may seem the less profitable unto them. But yet if my
knowledge would have served me to have translated it as eloque^tly as it is
written in latyne: I doubt not but the learned also might have found some
swetnes in my labors. And not wythstandynge my rudenes (most excellent
Prince) I trust your majesty will (after your accustomed clemencye) accept my
good will, which thing I do not doubt shall encourage all faithful english
men to embrace my labors and gather the fruytes of the same. To praise the
work which being set forth to be read of all men will praise it self, were
but a labor half lost, for such a thing needs no praise, but is so
manifestly good that all men that read it shall be forced to praise it. Other
praise therefore I will not give it, but that it is a work worthy the name of
so excellent a prince as your mayestye is, and therefore worthy to be embraced
of all your faithful subjects. Which thing I most heartily wyshe to come to
pass to the glory of God, your Maiestyes honor, and the profit of all your
faithful subjects. Sobeit.

Your Graces humble subject and daily Orator Gwalter Lynne*

The (...) ^eadynge hystoryes.
ALthough the readyng of Hystoryes be profitable to every man in general, for
many causes as we hereafter shall declare: yet does it chyefely belong to
kings Histories are books of kings and princes.
and great men. And hystoryes may worthily be called their books, because that
the knoweledge of them is profitable and necessary for all them, which are
ordained to rule a commune wealth. For not only the Heythen hystoryes do make
every where much mentyon of princes, but also the hystoryes of holy scripture.

For beside that, the holy scryptures do make Historyes of holy scripture.
mentyon of the will of God and of his word, and also of Christ's spyrytuall
kingdom, they teach also of polityke administration, and set forth many
notable examples, which are necessary to be known in the governance of a
commune weal, and by the which, the minds of Princes may be sturred and
inflamed to the endeavor of right pryncely virtues.

The hystoryes of the Heythen, declare of the Historyes of the Heythen.
ofsprynge and beginning of great realms, and for what causes alteracyons and
great chaunges do befall in realms: besides that, they do contain also
precepts of vocatyens and powers, by the which commonweals be stablyshed
and preserved. And for this cause chefely are hystoryes worthy to be called the
books of great princes and lords.

Saying now, that it is necessary that every man had need of two manner of
powers, namely, the politic or external, and beside this by the faith and
dread toward God, the examples of either of them are propoundid and set before
us in the histories. And that we may first speak of civil powers, Princes,
and all such as are set to govern great things, must first and chefelye
considre and behold those What must be marked in the exa^mples of princes.
examples and histories, by the which they may be admonished how they also
may faithfully behave themselves in governing a common weal. In this must
they set before them the examples of good princes and kings, and must learn of
them by what means and with what vocacions chefely they have used in
gouernynge or rulinge empyres, that they have had respect to nothing save only
to the commune profyt, that they have only considered and exercised justice and
equite, that they have punished greueously sin, that they have not warred for
every cause, but that they have often kept peace by the polytyque forberynge of
iniuryes. Also in their defense, they were of a doughtye and strong courage,
they have used great gentylnesse and loyalte toward the good and peaceable.
Fynallye they have endeavored to enuyrone their realms with strong fortresses
and great power, besyedes the anauncemente of Godliness and good manners.

In the examples of tirauntes must they mark ye What is to marked in ye
examples of tirauntes.
contrary, namelye, that their ends were full of miserye, and by reason of
their crueltye, per^y^yous: and so there happened deadly alterations in the
commune weal. Of this wise is it evident that Pharao peryshed by reason of
tyranny, and for like cause were the Roman kings driven out. Oftymes also
have Princes undone themselves each other by reason of pride, envy or hatred,
the which sometime grew of a thing of no value. Like as Pompeius had no cause
to oppress Julius Caesar, save only envy. The laws of ye Graccyans among the
Romans do bear witness, that new alteracyon or change, does often give
occasyon of cruel wars. Another has the Turkysh empire his ofsprynge by any
other occasyon, save by heresy and dissentyon of learning and doctrine of the
faith. Dangerous conspyracyons cause often times that kingdoms are overthrown,
the which witnesses the example of the Athenians, which lost their
governance and goods by reason of such leagues as they had made. To observe
and mark such things in readyng of hystoryes, does greatly avail them that
bear rule, that thereby they may learn to beware in their governance, lest
any such like do befall: For such cases do daily befall. Yea though the
persons do sometime change in common welthes, nevertheless so much as is
concerning the equalytye of mattiers, the world is and always abides like
to himself.

Wherefore Thucydydes (which was excellent The say saying of Then cidides
concerning histories
both in knowledge of Martyall affairs, and had himself endured a great and
contynuall war, the which he him self wrote, with diverse other things) said
most truly: Histories is a treasure which never ought to be laid out of our
hands: that w^ being helped by the same, may the more commody ously in treat
of the affairs that for the most part in the commune wealth. So noble a
treasure verily are histories, by ye which that they that have governance of
the commune welche, are aduertysed of sundry publyke matters.

Besides these also are there found in historyes How hystoryes do profy^e
prynate (...).
such examples, which do profet every private person severally, such as these
be: The magistrate must be obeyed. They, which rebelled against the higher
powers, were never unpunished, as Absalon, Catilma, Brutus, Cassius and such
like that were therefore punished. Of faithfulness of friends, as Ionathas,
which saved the life of David. Of the punishment for aduoutry and such like
wicked deeds, as it appears by ye example of David. What needs many words
even as in all sciences are set forth examples to be followed: so are in
histories set forth and painted examples of al kind of virtues. Ye and in
examples and things committed is more evidently seen the worthiness of
virtues, yea and also of what uncleanness and dishonesty vices are, than in
precepts or doctrinees: Because that examples being set before us as images,
do not only teach openly, but do also admonish, stir, and inflame the minds
yt are honestly brought up, that they may be kindled toward virtues and
honesty with a certain plesur and love. For who could be so cruel of mind,
which should not be moved, if he did read some excellent and laudable deed, or
an example of vengeaunces.

I have brefely showed, how the examples of politic virtues and civil causes
must be observed in A Christenman must search the commandments of says
and fear out of hystoryes.
reading of histories: Now does it pertayne to a Christenman, to whom
godliness appertains that he may know that out of historyes are to be
gathered instructyons of faith and fear of God. For these are the chefeste
virtues of Godly men, that are allowed before God. And though the hystoryes
of the Gentyls do not teach us that God cares for us, or that God works
with us: a godly heart nevertheless shall mark this, namelye, how commune
welthes are kept and preserved in the world from heaven, and that it is the
workinge and deed of God, to revenge violence and wrong, and that God does
oftentimes distribute his excellent virtues among the Heythen. For princes
can not keep their kingdoms against Satan, without the singular benefit of
god, and the aid or assistau^ce of great virtues. And of this wise shall the
mind of a godly man think by himself, that such notable acts and punishments
are the worck of god and shall by them learn to fear God, that is to say, that
tiraunces are greueously punished, according to that sentence: he that takes
the sword, (that is, he that takes upon him the authoryte of vengeance,
without a commandment,) the same shall perish with y^ sword. Contrary wise
may be seen also that good princes are kept and preserved of God: and the same
have the heithen perceued also, ye princes do rest upon the aid of the gods.
For Homer the poet says, that God holds for the his shyide in battle, to
defend princes. He faineth also that every prince is in sauegard by the
defense of his god, as it appears that the goddess Pallas was with Achilles
in battayll. etc.

Althese things are most clearly expressed in y^ histories of the holy
scripture, as in Abraham, David, Ezechias and other kings, whom God has
defended. And their examples are prepounded to every prince, yt they may be
assured that god does of likewise defend the good. For the histories of holy
The distre^ce of holy and proph^^^ histories.
men and Heithen men do differ in that, that in y^ histories of holy men are
set forth and declared the witnesses of Gods works, the which also do not only
treat of politic matters, but do chefely shadow and declare unto us Gods
kingdom, that God gives his word, that freely and of mercy he will save: the
which thing the histories of the Gentiles can not speak of.

Therefore ought every Christen man chefely to know the holy scripture, that out
of them they may What holy histories do teach.
learn the doctrine and confirmation of faith. First how al things are
created of God, how sin did begin, that Christ has set up his kingdoms
against sin, that he has given his word, that Christ was promised, and that
he is come to abandon sin and to save us. Item how God, when he had given his
word, has always preserved and maintened Christ's kingdom, and that Christ's
kingdom, that is the true believing, have always ben co^uersaunt under the
cross sense the beginning of y^ world, and yet nevertheless are saved, that
Satan with the greatest power of the world has assaulted the word of God. Item
that God has wonderfully always kept his promise, above the understanding and
thought of men's wit or wisdom. Item that God has set before us both the
examples of his dredefull vengeance, and also of grace or favor. Of this wise
have king David and other gotten remission and forgiveness of sins, that by
their examples we may be comforted, and believe that God will forgive. Nether is
y^ to be omitted, that God has given us al manner of prophecyes of exterior
kingdoms, to stablish our minds, that of the accomplishment of their chance,
we might have witness, that our word is come of God, and that none other
faith saueours is true. Item that we should be warned when Christ must come,
and when the end of the world is to be looked for. Ite^ for so much as we
know that all things spoken of in the prophets are come to pass, that we
may believe, that those shall happen also, the which holy scripture says
shall befall.

Moreover to understand prophecyes arighte, it is greatly necessary to know
the order of kingdoms, the nombre of the years, and many other things,
which in reading of Heathen hystoryes do offer them selves: the knowledge
whereof is chefelye necessary for Christen men, that they may the better
understand the propheties, and have the better judgment of them.

Of all this truly may every man judge, how much profit is taken out of
the reading of hystoryes, and the great profit or fruit that commyth of them
ought dylygently to steare and drive every man to know them.

After what order hystoryes must be comprehended and red.
HE that will read hystoryes to profyt, the same must comprehend all the
times sense the foundacyon of the world into a certain order. For there were
some that diuyded the world therefore in seven ages, and have rekened them
diversely: but those, where they endeavor to set an order, they do nothing but
set all things without order. As for me, I will follow the renowned saying of
Ely the prophet, which has excellently dyuyded the world Ely has dyuyded the
wo^lde into (...) ages.
into three ages with the which he shows the greatest chaunges of the world:
also what time it behooved Christ to come, and how long this state of the world
ought to last, and thus it is.

The saying of Helias house.
THe world shall stand six thousand years and after shall it fall.

Two thousand years without the Law.

Two thousand years in the law.

Two thousand years the time of Christ.

And if these years be not accomplyshed, our sins shall be the cause,
which are great and many.

That is to say, the world shall stand two M. years without any prescript
admynistration, and certain law of the word of God: but when these be gone,
there shall be given the circumcysyon and law: besides this shall a certain
polytique law and service of God be institute out of Gods word, and this
state shall last two thousand years. After this shall Christ follow, and the
time of the gospel shall likewise stand about two thousand years: but here
shall some years want. For God shall with the hayste of his coming prevent
it, that the years of this age shall not be accomplished, the which Christ
himself in the, xxiiii. chapter of. S. Matthewe, says: Without those days
had been shortened, all flesh should not be saved.

We shall in writing of the hystorye use this order, The first age.
and divide the book in three parts, whereof the first shall comprehend those
things, which are chanced between the times of Adam and Abraham. For those
are the first thousand years: Of these is not much written, but such
things as are most worthy of memory, and of these times, there is no
certainte, but of that which is found written in the Bible.

The next age of two thousand years, shall be The second age.
counted from Abraham, until Christis coming: all though concerning to the
full number of the years, the time is not accomplyshed. For as we have said
before, God makes hayst to the latter day. As for this age, is the propre and
bery age of the world, in the which the most mighty kingdoms and monarchies
have succeeded each other by a certain order: nether has the world ever so
declared his force and might, as in this age. Wherefore we shall divide this
time in four monarchies. For it seems, that God would the world to be
maintened by a certain governance in his place, that a certain means of shame
and honesty might be conseruid, and the wicked might be punished, and for that
cause has he institute Monarchies. Such Monarchies are kingdoms, where the
chief and What Monarchies ^^^, and of (...)hat pups(...).
upper power of al things pertains to one alone for the conservation of
commune peace and right. Such a monarchy was of so great puissaunce, that the
exterior of foren kings, could not withstand or oppress it. And by a certain
ordinary succession There ^e only ^oure Monarchies.
were only four such monarchies. The first was of the Assirians, y^ second of
the Persians, after them the Greeks, at the last y^ Romans. And to the honor
of such an empire or superiorite, has God exalted The honor of the Em^^re
remay(...)h by the (...)s.
y^ Germans before other nations in these latter times. For though the Roman
empire be some deal minished now a days:) for as it was prophesied before it
was y^ pleasure of god that y^ monarchies should finally decay) nevertheless
the majesty remains by the Roman empire, nether is there any king, but he
has a respect toward yt kingdom. Moreover though we have not always alyke
mighty Emperoures, nevertheless God prouidinge so, there happens sometime an
Emperor of such power, yt the majesty of the empire may be conserved: and that
to hold up the religion and concord of al natyons. The Germane princes, and
chefely the electors ought to estime grearly this their honor, that they have
such high autoritye committed them of God, to preserve religyon, justice and
commune peace. For verily, it is of great force that this monarchy be
preserved, thoug it be not so very great. Therefore ought y^ princes to beware,
lest there rise any seeds of sedition and discord among them, which might give
occasion to cause this empire to decay. For when this empire, wyich is the head
of al good governance or administration in the world now a The empire must be
saved and kept by all means.
days, should be divided, pulled asunder or waisted, it could not be but that
there should follow a perturbation of al degrees in every part of Christendom:
the which is greatly to be doubted, without God do prevent such misery with his
last coming. For holy scripture does comfort us, and teach openly, that after
yt this German empire shall decay and fail, yt latter day shall straight way
follow. This is sufficient to be spoken of monarchies, lest any man be
ignorant that al histories, and al things done in the world, must be referred
to these monarchies. And besides that y^ observing of the order does aid y^
memory it does also not a little help thereunto, yt one may se how and for what
causes kingdoms are changed: whereby is to be learned how al those things are
to be eschued, which co^munely bring chau^ges of kingdoms. The last age from
y^ natiuite of Christ until the worlds end, does like wise contain two M.
The third age.
years, although we have said before, that the years of this age should not be
whole, that the two thousand years may be complete. This sentence of Elias
truly contains many notable doctrines, and is chefely to be considered
therefore, because that from the natiuite of Christ, it speaks also of that
time, in the which the end of al things is to be looked for, and therefore
have* I set it in the beginning of the book, that it might be committed to
every man's hearing. But how that the Rhomane monarchye did begin after the
incarna^yon of Christ, and how the succession came to the Germans, also how
the Mahometysh or Turkysh empire began, and how the Popyshnesse has gotten
increase offoren power, all these things shall we show in this third part.
But this also is chefely to be noted with diligence in readyng of histories,
The kingdom of the world and Christ's Kingdom*
that God has institute two manner of kingdoms: the one a worldly kingdom the
other a kingdom of Christ: and therefore it is necessary to mark here* how
that the church has begone even from the beginning of the world, and by
whatt manner God has always kept her. Therefore that godly minds may have a
confyrmation of their faith, we shall note by the state the time of each of the
kingdoms, where and by whom the kingdom of Christ was, and what state it was
in than: the knowledge of which thing, brings no small profit to godly
readers.

Adam is set in a Paradyse of pleasure, to whom is forbyden the tree of life.
Genesis. ij.

Adam and Heua are deceived by the suttelty of the serpent. Thence comthe
transgressyon of the commandment, and Sin.

The first book of the Cronicles, which conteyneth the first two thousand
years, From Adam until Abraham's time.
HOly scripture does teach us, Adam and Heua.
that God created heaven and earth, after that man, Adam and Heua, and sat them
in paradyse, that is, that they being set out of danger of death and sin,
might live in the earth happily: but when they forgot the commandment of God
given, they fell into the danger of sin and death. But forasmuch as all this
is clearly written in the holy Bible, out of the which they ought to be
learned, it is invaine to speak thereof here: it is sufficient only to
aduertish the reader, that the world stands by these beginninges, and that
Adam and Heua are created of God, which are the ofspringe of all mankind.

Moreover, about the very time of creation, did The institution of civil power
and of all laws.
God institute the ciuyll adminystratyon, when he gave Adam power over all
those things, that are in the earth and sea, that he should use them, and
should set a good order in all those things that are exterior. That
commandment of God is the spring and beginning of all laws, and
whatsoever civil ordinances there are, are begone of it, the which are
approved and allowed of God, by reason of this commandment given to Adam. The
church has her beginning here also: For The beginning of the church.
the commandment, wherein they should exercise their fayeth, and fear
before God, was here given: but when they began to sin, has God disclosed
the power of Satan, and against it has promised the Gospel or glad tydynge
of the woman's sede, that is of Christ, that Christ should come, and wayst
Satan's kingdom, and should deliver us from sin and death into liberte.

This was the first preachinge of the Gospel, which began the church and
Christus kingdom. The first preaching of the Gospel.
For in the church must not only be preached the commandments of good
works, but also the forgiveness of sins by Christ: for thereby only are
we reconciled to God, and endure against death and all manner of temtation, when
by faith we take the promise of forgiveness of sins: And of this wise took
Adam and Heua consolacion out of the word that Christ was promised, and of
these two persons is the church first begonnne. Beside this was it necessary
also, they The beginning of temporal afflic^ions.
should suffer temporal afflictions: for they were driven out of paradyse:
that is, they were subject to death, and all manner of other myseries, and so
lived their days in labor and trauayl in that land, which the Jews
possessed afterward. For it is written, that they were created by the city
Damascus.

Of Cain and Abel.
Scripture says that Adam and Heua brought forth children, and that Cain
slew his brother Abel. And here begins the persecution of the saints of
the wicked men, and is and example very dredefull. For this manslaughter
happened for none other cause, Persecution for the true gods service
than for y^ service of god, the which, when it is done purely, Satan can not
abide it: for the which cause he sturreth Cain to slaye his brother, that the
word of God and sincere doctrine may be quenched. And this deed shows how
vehement is the ire of Satan and rage: also what man's fraylnesse and
blindness is. There are by the way rehearsed in this history weyghty and
grave preachinges of the judgment of Christ to come, of the dredefull
vengeance for sheddinge of blood, the which to rehearse here, were to long.

Cain after that he fled his fathers sight, he began The city Enoch.
to build the city called Enoch. His children invented all manner of
handycraftes and sciences. Finally for the manslaughter was he punished, for he
dyed a like kind of death.

Of Seth.
AFter this was Seth boren to Adam. this man being famous and renomed for his
endeavor of honest and godliness enforced after Abel to auaunce and augment
Gods kingdom. Of this Seth were afterward engendered holy fathers, and the
remnaunt of this kynred remained: But the posterytie of Cain was whole drowned
in the floude. Josephus witnesses Adam and Seth finders of sciences.
that Adam and Seth made two tables, the one of brass, the other of stone, and
that in them were graven the word of God and prophesyes, by the which the
word of God was kept. He writes moreover, that they divided the year into
twelve months, and that they observed first the course of stars and taught
it. For it had not been possible, that the mind of man could have attained to
the searching of so high and wounderfull things, without God had opened them
the knowledge of them. Wherefore to Adam and Seth we must ascribe the word of
god, the figures of the letters and the greatest sciences. There are also many
witnesses among the Greeks, that the writing and all sciences are come of the
Jews aunceters. For Herodotus writes in his fyfte book, that the Greeks have
received their sciences and letters of the Phenices.

The age of Adam was nine hundredth and thirty years, and reached until the
time of Noes father: but he dies hundredth and. 26. years before Noe was
borne. But in this time is written to be happened nothing worthy of
rehearsal, until Noes time, save only genealogy: that in the mean while we
may know surely, of whom it behooved Christ to be borne. But nevertheless by
the way makes scripture mention of the death of Enoch, Enoch is an ^^^mple of
everlasting life.
that he be taken up by God: the which deed God has set before the worlds
eyes, that it might know and believe that there is immortality after this
life, and that God shall judge, and save the good truly, but punish the wicked.

Of the Flood.
THE scripture makes mention that the world was punished of God, and joins
thereto the occasions thereof, namely that it begann to peier: and among the
chefest of the euels are named the despisynge of God, aduoutry and tyranny, in
the which is used all manner of wylfulnesse and wantonness. For of this wise
says the text: The childeren of holy men began to become Gene. ^^*
tyrauntes upon earth, by the which is signified, that when Gods word was
despised and his worship, they lived vnmaneredly and an unbridled life, they
oppressed the weak and poor, according to their pleasure, and used
wylfulnesse of rulinge as they would. For cause of these things did God
threaten the world with the floude: and before the same should come, he wylled
Noe to preach it an hundredth year before, that some being converted, might
be saved.

When Noe was six hundredth year old, came the floude, and according to
Gods commandment, went he into the arcke with his wife and his three sons
Sem, Cham and Iaphet, taking with them their wives, and was saved. The residue
of men and beasts has the floude taken away and destroyed. And are from the
creation of the world, until the time of the floude, thousand, six hundredth
and six and fiftye years.

Of the time after the Floude.
When Noe had now ben above an half year in the arcke, and that the flood
mynyshed, the arcke rested upon the hyghesthyl of Armenia: and after the years
end, when the earth began to dry, Noe was commanded of God to leave the
arcke, wherein he had now ben a whole year. Than did God ordeine as it were a
new world again. For first he gave his word, by the which he promised not to
drown the world again, and in token of certayntye, he gave the Raynebowe,
which should admonysh us of the promise made: and of this wise has he set
before us tokens of benevolence and mercy, to exercise the faith: He has also
than permitted the lybertye to ^^^ (...)e of flesh ^^^st (...)ed
cate flesh, the which the holy fathers before the floude did never use. Beside
this gave God a new commandment of outward administration, and commanded
more plainly that mansleyers should likewise be putt to death, by those, The
example of vengeance.
that be lawfullye permittted, that is by the officers. Of this wise than is a
new state of the world ordained again.

All these things have I brefely recyted, specially that every man may call to
mind, and way by himself, how great Gods wrath is for sin. For God would
cause the world to be more ware by this example, because he wyliudge and
avenge: it is also showed that God shall once judge the whole world, for he
will not that sin be unrevenged or unpunished. Some have written, that seeing
the world has first be drowned with waters, it may be gathered by natural
reasons, that it shall after this be consumed with fire. Yea and this is worthy
to be marked, that they which belong to god, are kept of him, though they be
few, abject and despised.

This is also to be noted in this place, that the ciuyll power is ordained, and
punishment for manslaughter. For that is nerehande the head of all civil
exercise of justice, after the which all other cases and trespaces ought to be
judged.

Of the Tower of Babel.
AFter the floude when mankind was now increased, the Tower of Babel, and the
city of Babylon was begone to be builded by the Chaldees, that they might begin
a kingdom there, and subdue to them other nations or people. But this
enterprise has God overthrown: For when they all used before one language, it
befell that after the commune speech was changed, The proprietye of speches.
they spoke one one manner of language, another another, so that they understood
not each other. Wherefore there was a division of speches, and the work it
self was left imperfect. The posterite of Noe than was strowed here and there
in the world, the which the figure following shall declare.

Sem the eldest son of Noe, of whose kynred Sem.
is Christ, has with his childeren possessed that part of Siria, which is
toward the East. For of Aram his son, came the Syrians: of Assure, came the
Assyrians: of Arphaxat, came the Chaldeis: of Elam are the Persyans spronge.
Cham.


Cham the second son of Noe, has optayned that country, which goes
toward the South. Of Canaan, are come the Chananeis: of Mizraim, came the
Egyptyans: of Chus, came the Ethiopians: of Saba, came the Arabians. Iaphet.


Iaphet the longest son of Noe went to the North and West, and this is the
father of us all, and therefore his name found by the Poets, which have
called him Iapetus. Of his son Iauan or Iaon are the Greeks, which are
called Jones: Jones are ^^^ first (...)s.
for they be the first Greeks. And the voice Ianan or Iaon, is no doubt the
same, whom the Latins do call Ianus. Wherefore Ianus has (...)lages.


They used to paynte him with a double vysage, before and behind, because that
of him be sprouge both the nations, the Greeks and the Latins: and as often they
would begin any thing, they worshipped him with a spngulare honor, by the
which they wytnessed that they counted The Macedones.
Iaon their father. Iaons son was Cethim, of whom are called the Macedones,
and this confyrmeth the first book of the Machabees, and the word Machetim
sygnifyeth in Hebrew of Cethim, of the which is spronge the word Macedo. For
Stephanus the expounder of Greek words, writes that the ancient did say
Macetis.

Iaon had many children, Elisa and Dodanim, of the which have their
beginning the Aeoles Aeoles.
or Hellas and the Dodoneies: all these are the first of the Greeks. Of Tarsis
Iaons son, is Tharsus in Cilicia called.

Iaphet had other chylderen also, Gomer, Magog, Tyras and Mesech. Of Gomer are
the Cunerij or Cimbry as witnesses Eusebius. Of Ascanes Gomers son came the
Tuiscones, that is, the Germans. Of Magog are spronge the The Germans.
Scythe, and of them are begone the Turks. Of Thyras come the Thraces. I have
brefelye showed what part of the world each of Noes chylderen has possessed,
the which does greatly avail better to understand many hystoryes.

Of the first Monarchye.
THat it may be understand how the work of God must be known and honored
in those things that the magistrate or superiorite does: we have aduertysed
before in the preface, that God willed to entertayne the world by four
Monarchies, to the intent that policye, justice and correction might be
entertained among men: for this cause are many things The four Monarchies
are proposed to Daniel. Dan. ij.
spoken here and there of these Monarchies in holy scripture God has proposed
them to Daniel two manner of way: First under the figure of a great man, whose
head was golden, the breast of silver, the belly of copper, the legs of iron,
the fete partly of earth, partly also of iron. And lest we should not know,
that then finally shall y^ end of the world be, there is added, how that the
stone Christ does break his fete, that the man himself do fall, and so do the
world cease.

Daniel him self has expounded this vision of the four monarchies. For he
says that the head does signify the first kingdom, that is, the Monarchy
of the Assyrians. The breast of silver, sygnifieth the kingdom of the Persians.
The belly of copper, signifies the kingdom of the Greeks. The legs of iron
signifies the kingdom of the Romans. The fete of iron and earth, signifies
the state of the Empire of Rome at this time, namely that now a days is much
less and weaker, than it was wont to be.

The four beasts showed unto Daniel do also pretend these four kingdoms.
The Lioness, sygnifyeth the force of the Assyrians. The Beer sygnifieth the
Persian empire. The Leoparde signifies Alexander. By the fourth beast are the
Romans signified. And there is added that beside the Roman empire there
shall rise an other empire full of cruelnesse, and such one that shall make a
new law against Gods word: And that is the Mahometish and Turkysh empire now
a days. God will have us so truly warned, that as we know the histories of
all the world, we should consider that the time of finishyng be not far of,
and that of this wise we should have wherewith to confirm our faith.

In the Bible it is manifest, that the first kingdom began by Nemrod among
the Babylonians, and the scripture calls him a valiant hunter before God,
that is, a mighty prince, which with force subdued men to obey. And he is
Nemroth Gods hunter.
called a hunter before the Lord, as Gods hunter: whereby it is signified,
that the civil power is ordained of God, as a vengeance, and that she be a
minister of God. Wherefore the first Monarchye began by the Chaldeis, as
witnesses also Xenophon, and the successors of Cham raygned first, of the
which did Nemroth issue. For though Noe had cursed his son Cham, yet
nevertheless did God in the mean while by a wonderful destiny differ the
vengeance and promise. Howbeit the kingdom remained not by the posteryte of
Nembroth. For there rose a new kingdom by the Assirians thorough Assure, by
whom also the city Niniue was builded. Out of Niniue went the Assyryans, and
subdued the city of Babylon, the which Diodorus Siculus does write: and by
this occasyon is the Monarchye translated from the Chaldeis to the Assyrians.

Strabo and other did make mention of the city Niniue.
Niniue, that it lies in Assyria: whereby it may easily be gathered, that
Niniue and Babylon have been two several cities, not one of diverse names. Many
kings are there rehcarsed in this Monarchye: Howbeit seeing there is nothing
notably written of their deeds, it makes no great matter to rehearse their
names only: only this behooves it the reader to remember, that this Monarchye
began near hand before the end of the first two thousand years, which
were accomplished before that time, when Abraham was fyftye year old.

Hitherto have we treated of the first age of the world, in the which may be
seen of the creation of the world, of the church, and ciuyll administration
ordained of God, beside that of other wonderful deeds showed in the world by
god. But The church from Noe ^^^^ Abraha^m
the church, came from Noe the patriarche, until Abraham, which was eight
and fyftye year old, when Noe dyed. In the mean while when this Monarchye
began, ungodliness and idolatry began to rise here and there in Babylon,
and the true word of God was in the mean time quenched.

second book of the Cronicles, of the four Monarchies, the which likewise
comprehends two thousand years.
Forasmuch it is before all things necessary and profitable in histories, to
consider the times and order of things that are happened: I willed to part
this Cronicle in most great and certain nombers, which may easily be
perceived and kept in memory, in the which nevertheless might be
comprehended the most and principal chaunges of the world. After than that we
have finished the first age, we shall undertake to speak of the two thousand
years following, in the which also appeared the greatest power of the world,
and the most greatest monarchies have followed in order.

Of the first Monarchye of the Assyrians. Ninus king of the Assyryans.
WE have admonished before that the Chaldeis have reigned first by the
Babylonians, but they remained not long in the empire, but that the Assirians
the neighbors of the Chalde is obtained the kingedome and they begin the
history of king Ninus: which being become most puyssaunt in the East at the
Zoroastres fynder of witchcrafte*
last also had war with Zoroastres king of the Bactrians. It is said that
this Soroastres fand first wytchcraft, and to have taught the course of
heaven, and the stars with great diligence. As the war was fynyshed that
Ninus had with Soroastres, he dyed, leaving his heir a young son.

Of queen Semiramis.
SEmiramis the mother of the child, ruled her self after the kings decease.
For the feared in so new a kingdom, and where they were not all yet of their
fre will subdued, that for the chyldes youth, the people might have speded to
rebellion, and lest she should be despised, by reason of woman kind: wherefore
she used man's garment, and feigned her to be the kings child. She was doughtye
Semiramis used man's garment.
and excellent in princely affairs, and augmented the borders of the dominion
with vanquishynge countries, and making fortresses. She raygned happily and
with great praise xlij. years. She fortifyed Babylon with costly buyldynges,
dyches and walls enuyroned about it. When the mother was dead, Ninias the
son raygned with good quietness: and of this wise was the superiorite of the
world and Monarchye by the Assyrians a great season, But, forasmuch as there
is not much written of the kings following, I will pass over the rehearsal of
their names, because the good reader can not well keep them in mind. Whosoever
will know them, may seek them by many other writers.

Nevertheless it is no doubt, but that manys and sundry chaunges are befallen
in this Monarchye, the which may easily be gathered out of the Bible, which
witnesses, that the Assyrians possessed Babylon, long before the time of
Cyrus, howbeit they were two kingdoms: the one of the Ninevites, the other of
the Babylonians. But for what causes or when these mutations were, that is
utterly unknown. Herodotus writes that the Assyrians kept this Monarchy five
hundredth years, and that after that long time there was no certain or fyrme
kingdom, but that the Medes used a proper kingdom, and likewise the Chaldees
by the Babylonians, and the Assyrians had their kingdom at Niniue, and among
the kings had now the one ouerhande, now the other. Finally the Medes being
become mighty, drew the upper Monarchy to them, taking also the city
Babylon. These things seem most lykest, to the which agree those that are
written of Sardanapalus, not only by Metasthenes, but also Bion, of whom
Agathias makes mention.

Of Sardanapalus.
WE must speak a little of Sardanapalus, how he was depryued of his kingdom,
and that afterward the kingdoms were divided. When God will punyshe the
world, he gives it lecherous princes. By the histories A lecherous prince.
it is manifest, that Sardanapalus nothing regardyng the governance of the
kingdom, ga^ Sardanapalus wantonness.
him self only to pleasures, in so much also, that ^^ used to paynte and
color him self, to make h^^ beawty, and to clothe him with women's garment.
It is said that he sat in the mids of dishonest women, and used all manner of
uncleanness. How should not such an empire have had a pyteful end? When now
the Medes and Babilonians were fallen from him and rebel, and that he had
lost the battayll against his enemies, neither could no where merchandes be
more salfe, he set ye castle at Babylon in The death of Sardanapalus
fire, and burnt him self in it. Howbeit (as writes Duris) he sent before his
three sons to Niniue: and hereby it comes, that after the decease of
Sardanapalus, the kingdoms are divided. Bolochus reigned at Babylon, which
fell from Sardanapalus with Arbace. Arbaces kept the kingdom of the Medes.
The posteryte of the Assirians dured a certain space of years by them of
Niniue. Many years have these three kingdoms fought and stryuen for the
Monarchye.

Of Egypt.
WE have suffycyentlye spoken of this first Monarchye, but how many years
there be, until the time of the second monarchye, shall we note hereafter. At
this time must we show brefely a few things of other kingdoms, which are
come up beside this monarchy. For the The kingdom of the Egyptians.
very large empire of Egypt was in his flower, that which was governed by the
posteryte of Cham: which was governed by the posterite of Cham: but as
concerning his power, it was less then the monarchye: as now a days the
kingdom of France is mighty in deed, but yet it is less then the Empire,
concerning there power, or the dignite of his majesty.

Of Abraham and the spyrituall kingdom.
LEst we be ignorant in what state the word of God and the church was, we must
also speak of the spiritual kingdom. Abraham Abraham was in Ninus time.
was in the time of king Ninus. For when he was old about fifty years, the
first two thousand years had an end, and the kingdom of the Assyrians was
already begone. And that more is, when now the true worship of God and his
word began to come out of use in the kingdom of Babylon, There went out of
Chaldea into Mesopotamia, Their.
with his two sons Abraham and Loath, lest he also might be stained with the
wickedness of the superstition that the Chaldees used. This idolatry Vr of the
Chald. es.
does the scripture call Vt Chaldeorum that is, the Chalde fire. For when in the
sacrifice of the true Godly (the fire falling down from heaven) kyndled the
oblacions: the wicked following their examples, kyndled a fire, and so set up a
new Gods service, that with such a work, they might serve God, without the
expressed word of God, and without the knowledge of the promise of Christ to
come. Hereafter also in the histories is the same fire called Orimasda, that
is, holyfyre, the which kings caused also to be carried before them upon a
horse. The first occasion The first occasion of ydolatry.
of ydolatry among men began by this fire, before Images were used. But lest y^
word of god should utterly be quenched, God renewed afreshe the promise of
Christ, and added a new ceremony too the word, the which as a token, should
keep the remembrance of the word in men's minds. For true doctrine is
lightely put out of men's minds, without it be beaten into the peoples minds
by outward tokens and ceremonies. To that was Abraham chosen of God, the which
when he was old three score and fyften years, he was commanded of God to go
into Chalde, leauyng Mesopotamia, where a new promise was made him, that the
sede of Abraham should possess the land of Canaan, and The true wi^g of the
promise made to Abraham.
should bear rule in it: and also that the sede of Abraham, namely Christ
should come, by the which God would bless all nations, that is, that GOD
would be appeased by that sede and taking away the power of sin and death,
give life everlasting To this promise has God added circumcision, the
Circumcision is the token of promise.
which should be a sign of promission, and a provocation to believe. And
therefore remained always afterward in the church or congregation the word and
spiritual kingdom of Christ among a certain people, that is, in Abraham's
posterite, among the which it was necessary to have been always some, which
were true beleuers and Godly. As for the whole history of Abraham, is fully
written in the holy Bible. In this place suffiseth it to show in what time
Abraham has been, and what chaunges (...)gion are happened in the mean
season. But the promise was other whiles repeted to Abraham. As for the
circumcision was given him When the circumcision was given.
when he was four score year old and nine, thee year from the creation of
the world two thousand and seven and forty, some count it to our Iubile two
thousand and fifty.

Abraham had of Agar his handmayden a some Agar. Ismael.
called Ismael: the same began to grow in strength and puisaunce by the
Arabians, and the Agareny in Arabia bear the name of this Agar, of whom we
shall speak afterward.

Of the destruction of Sodom.
THE four score and nyntenth year of Abraham's age has GOD for thee
abominable evil deeds, horrible and uncomely lecheryes, destroyed five cities:
Sodom and Gomorre, and the other cities lyeng thereby, burning them with fire
from heaven. The place where the cities were is become a great marasse, whose
length and breadth conteyneth the space of certain miles: even yet at this time
as though it were full of pitche does burn with continual smoke and vapor for a
token of Gods indignacion and vengeance for so great sins. This happened
the three hundredth and fourscore and eleventh year after the floude, after that
Noe was dead the fourtieth and one. Of this wise has God other whiles
wytnessed to the world, that he will be avenged and judge sinners.

Of Isaac.
AFter this was a son borne to Abraham, of his wife Sa^a, called Isaac, Isaac
a figure of (...)st.
of whose sede is Christ. For he did bear his figure, when God commanded that
he should be offered of his father: whereby is signified, that Christ should be
a sacrifice, with the which should sin and death be disamilled. And by this
example it is signified again, that God will forgive sins, raise the dead,
and give everlasting life to the beleuyng.

Isaac had two sons Jacob and Esau. Of Esau Jacob Esau. The Edo(...)
(...)fore (...) was called Edom (...) was called Israel
have the Edomites in Arabia their beginning: for Esau was called Edom, that
is, reddish, because he sold his brother y^ right of y^ first borne, the which
God has blessed, for a mess of potage y^ was somewhat reed, despysynge the
blessyng of God and his benefyte for love of his belly. But Jacob was surnamed
Israel, that is, prince of God, of whom the people Israel have their of
spring. But for all these things must the Bible be looked.

Of Joseph Jacobs son.
BEcause Joseph is rehearsed among the chief and most wysest governors, we do
worthily here make mention of him. For he taught the Egyptians both the
religion and ciuyll manners: and above all is it worthy to be marked, that the
man which was endued with holiness and Joseph a man sage and holy.
the holy ghost, had set up a very hard and rigorous manner of rulyng, and that
where the whole kingdom of Egypt was large and wide, he joined them together
as members of one body: so that we may learn thereby, that rygour is most
nedeful to entertayn the people in there office or duty, and allowed of God.
For the common people is commonly destroyed by liberty. But for because he
came into Egypt by the conspiration of his brethren, that he was sold of
them, and also what chance he had in Egypt, of all this is there fully
written in the Bible. For by this wonderful occasion God wylled him to come
into Egypt, that in the same kingdom also might be taught the true worship of
God and that the promise of Christ's coming might be made manifest. For God
would ever have his word preached even in the greatest kingdoms: also that by
this occasion God might feed Jacob and his posterite in the time of derth.

Of Moses, and of the punishment of the tyrant Pharao.
ALthough God had promised to the posterite The cause of affliction.
of Abraham the possession of the land of Canaan, yet has he differred the
promise a long season, that through the word they might have in the mean while
wherewith to exercise their faith: ye he suffered them before to be sore
punished in Egypt. For as says the book of Genesis, Jacob and his children
fled into Egypt in the time of derth, where they dwelled a long season, the
which we shall note hereafter. But when Pharao ouercharged the people without
measure and remission, and used tyranny, insom uche that he commanded also to
sley in contynently all the mankind that were borne: God sent Moses, to lead
the people of Israel out of Egypt, the which after many wonders, brought the
people to the redd see. Pharao followed them with great force, trusting to
obtain his mind that he might s^aye them: for there was no place to escape,
seeing of the one side they were closed in with hills, of the other side with
the sea, and Pharao the tyrau^te lay upon An example of grace and goodness.
them behind. But here declared God, that when extreme necessite lies upon
them that be his, he is nere by them, and hears them. For the water went
back, and gave the people way a great space, that they might pass without any
danger: but the tyrant followed into the sea unhappily, which was drowned with
the water that returned into his first course, and with him the choice of the
people of Egypt. Here the^ has God set forth again An example of vengeance
a new example to the world, that he will judge and be revenged of wicked
tyrauntes, and all that despise godliness.

What time the ten commandments were given.
THe fyftyeth day after that the chylderen When y^ law was given.
of Israel were gone out of Egypt, when they iournyed through thee desert by
mount Suiai, were the ten commandments given, with incredible magnificence
and majesty, namely with a voice out of heaven full of fear and dread. This
work of God is such, as none higher did ever happen to men at any time in the
world. For the doctrine of the ten commandments conteygneth the su^me of
the godly wisdom, and in a brefenesse does comprehend all manner of laws and
constitutions that can be any where. Therefore is it needful to know the time in
the which such a wayghtye law was given of God, namely the year from the
creation of the world two thousand, four hundredth and four and fyfty. Seven
hundredth, four score and eyghtene after the floude.

S. Paull says, that the law was given after The time from the promise made
to Abraham, until y^ going out of Egypt.
that the promise was made, four hundredth and thyrtye years. For the same is
the nombre of the years sense the time, when Abraham being old three score and
fyftene year received the promise until that time when Israel was brought out
of Egypt by Moses. And thesam that is read in the xii. chapter of Exodus
that Israel dwelt in Egypt four hundredth and thyrty years, the same may not
be rekened from the time that Jacob went into Egypt, seeing Joseph was than in
his flower. And that this was not the nombre after Jacob only, may easily be
gathered here by, that Caath went with Jacob. And he begat a son A^ram, whose
son was Moses. Now can it not be that between Caath and Moses have been four
hundredth years. Wherefore the four hundredth and thyrty years, whereof there is
read in Exodus, are to be counted from that time, when Abraham came first from
Mesopotamia into Canaan, and was afterward conversant himself in Egypt. And
that the mind of S. Paul may the better be understand, I shall gather the
number of y^ years so^what more dilge^tly There are five and twenty years
until the birth of Isaac, from the time that Abraham came first in to the land
of Canaan, what time he himself was three score and fyftene year old.

Isaac begat Jacob when he was three score year old.

The four score and tenth year of Jacob was Joseph borne.

Joseph lived an hundredth and ten years.

After Joseph until Moses was borne are three score and five years. And this
nombre of the years does Philo note also.

Moses was four score year old when he led the people out of Egypt. If
these years be numbered together, they mount to the nombre of four hundredth and
thyrty. So much time was there sense that the promise was first made to
Abraham, until that time that Israel came out of Egypt, and after that was
the law given. Now has God given this Israelitysh people a certain policy and
a several kingdom, in the which can nothing be required, that pertayneth to
Gods service, to the presthode, also to the ciuyll justice: that finally there
might be a certain people, which should have the word of God, and of the
which Christ should finally be borne. By this people than has always been
the church, Gods kingdom and hystrue word, until that christ had suffered:
the which must be marked, so that no man be ignorant that she church has
always been, and that God has sense the beginning of the world reveled his
word, and to have kept it always with us.

Of the princes or rulers of Israel.
FRom the departing out of Egypt until the beginning of Saul's kingdom were
three hundredth three score and nine, years the which the text of the syxt
chapter of y^ third book of kings does declare. Now had this people after
Moses decease^ princes, which partly were created by the aucthorite of wise
men, partly were by a singular calling raised up of God, by the which are
notable things done: and of this wise declared God, that he is faithfully with
them that be his, and to defend them, though they seem sometime to be tossed
with the waves of peryls. These princes by an Hebrew costume were Princes we^
called Judges.
called Judges. Howbeit for somuche as their histories be written in the Bible,
we shall only rehearse their names, that the order of thee Cronicles, and
course of the years may the better be observed.

Moses raygned.xl. years. Iosue xxvij. Othoniel xl. Ehud lxxx. Barach with
Debora the prophetisse xl. Gedeon xl. Abimelech iii. The same committed murder
upon his own brother, and got thee kingdom too himself by sedition: and
therefore was he not long after unpunished himself also. Chola xxiij. Iair
xxi^. Iephthe vi. Abessan vij. Abdon viij. Sampson xx.
After these governed y^ people these high priests: Ely xl. years. Samuel xl.
years.


The Kings of Israel.
THe judges of the people of Israel were not succedyng by enheritaunce:
therefore was not the governance among that people firm or certain, save
only with the high priests: but God ordained sometime wise princes among the^
in stead of a garnison, and those raised God now here now there. But the
people evil contented with this incertaintie of governance, required of
Samuel the high priest too have a certain king, the which might govern the
kingdom. Samuel willing to do nothing rashly, asked counsayl of God. god showed
that he was very wroth with that wilfulness of the people demaundyng a new
king and commanding ye people to be grievously punyshed therefore.
Nevertheless God did in the mean season The institution of kingdoms and
kyn^e^ ^e of ^^^.
grant to the making of the king and institutyng and continuance of a
kingdom. The power of the kingdom, and administration of it, is confirmed here
with words of no small importance: the which must chefely be considered.

Moreover it is to be marked, that God is not dyspleased because he does
mysprayse the governance of a king (for he does manifestly confirm it) but
he is displeased with thee peoples desire of newfanglinesse in changing that
commune wealth, The chaungynges and renewynges of kyngdo^s displeases God.
which he him self had instituted. For God will not suffer the change of the
kingdoms, which are ordained by him. Also are we admonished by this example,
that we eschew any mutacion at all. In this history are there many other
notable commandments, the which for shortness, I must The confirmacion of
ciuyll governance.
ouerpasse. This one thing will I only rehearse, that the civil governance,
the aucthorite of princes and kings is here confirmed of God, when he speaks
of the right and duty of a king.

Saul reigned forty year, and was destroyed for Saul.
his ungodliness, and all his kynred was destroted.

David reigned forty year, and God punished David.
him for aduoutry committed, and by sedition was he driven out of his kingdom
by his own son Absalon: But God restored him into the kingdom, and punyshed
the sedition grievously. Absalon died a strange death.

Solomon was forty years king, but after his Salmon.
decease, was the kingdom divided in sundery parts for the aduoutry of David.

Of the Kings of Judah, of Salomons lineage and kynred.
ROboam king raygned seuenten years. Roboam.
And when he would not obey thee Counsayll of the elders, in minyshynge the
charges and exactions of the kingdom, he caused with his rygorousnesse, that a
change of the kingdom is casued. For he ^^^owed The occasion of the kingdom
of Samaria.
the counsel of young men, another would release ought according to right.
Wherefore deciuered from him the most part of the kingdom, and did begin a
new kingdom in Samaria, the which was the occasion of many great battayls on
both parts. As for the posterity of David, retained the kingdom in Judah, and
the tribe of Benjamin, followed that king.

Abia reigned three year, and in battayll vanquished Abia.
the king of the ten tribes in Israel.

Asa reigned fourtene year. The same obtained Asa took away the wicked Gods
(...).
great praise, because he rooted out the wicked worship of God, which was
institute against the word of God: in so much, that he favored not his own
mother in this behalf: for she also followed a sundery worship of God. For this
cause gave him God good fortune against the Arabians, the which he vanquished
in battayll. At the last was he punished also of God, for a certain
conspiration that he had made, leauyng the trust in God.

The mydde or half part of the worlds age.
ABout the twelft year of this king Asaes reign, are accomplyshed there
thousand years of the world, that is, the mydde or half part of all the
worlds age, according to Elias saying, the which we have noted in the
beginning of the book. Henceforeward may be marked, that in co^tinently after
happened most greatest and sodayn chaunges in all kingdoms, that there did
arise battayles and man slaughter, for the last time of the world did draw on.

This is also to be noted, that the public well The Jews are elder.
the Jews are elder than of the Greeks and Romans: whereby it may easily be
gathered, that all other nations have their spring of the Jews auncetry, and
that the eldest doctrine, yea even Gods word has been by the Jews fathers or
auncetres.

Iosaphat raygned five and twenty years: Iosaphat a defender of the religion.
he is allowed for his endeavor of religion, and that he has exercised all
kinglye duetyes with great diligence. And for that cause did god* give him
excellent victories. Elias the prophet was in his time, which was taken up
quieke into heaven: and so Elyas was in the mydle age of the world.
rayseth God a prophet, even in the mids of the worlds age, no less of
famous doctrine then miracles, that the word and promise of Christ might be
sometime renewed. The rest than of the three M. years of the world, began
under this Elias. After Elias, succeeded Eliseus the prophet. As for these two
prophets, how they have reproved the Eliseus.
wicked service of God, and what miracles they have done, is sufficiently
treated in the Bible.

Ioram reigned eight years: he commanded Ioram a setter up of new Idolatry.
to kill his brethren even the eldest, and was a beginner of a new Idolatry,
wherefore he was also worthily punished of God: he dyed vanquished of the
Philistenes. the which carried away his wives and chylderen, save Ochosias,
which was the youngest.

Ochosias reigned only one year, and according Ochosyas.
as his father did, he permitted the false service of God to be set up,
wherefore he was slain. But when his mother Athalia saw that her son Athalia.
was dead, she caused to be slain all them that were a live of the kings
blood, and of this wise was the kingdom translated from Salomons posterite:
that hereby we may learn how rygorously God Example of ^e^geaunce.
does punish sin. Before all things must princes consider and mark this,
that God does rout out the kynred of great princes because of wickedness.

Athalia the mother of Ochosias kept the kingdom with violence, and used seven
years great tyranny. At the last she was worthily punished, when through the
commandment of the high priest she was slain.

Of Nathan and his posterity.
IN the rehersall of y^ fathers, of the which Christ is borne, has Luke the
evangelist est out Solomon. For Salomons post rite was destroyed: nevertheless
David's posterity succeeded in the kingdom, according to Nathan David's son.
the promise of God. David had also a son Natha^ of whom Luke makes mention.
Of his kynred were these kings of Judah following, namely.

Ioas reigned forty years: the same was of notable Ioas. Ioiada.
godliness, so long as Ioiada y^ high priest lived, whom he obeyed: afterward
fell he to ungodliness and Idolatry, and caused zachary the prophet the
Zacharias the prophet.
son of Ioiada to be slain before the temple, of whom Christ does also make
mention in the.xxiij. chapter of Matthew. Wherefore God willed to punysh him by
the Syrians, and finally was he slain by his own servants.

Amasias was king nine and twenty years: Amasias ^usi ^^ godliness.
this also was conversant in Godliness at the first, and herkened to the
prophets: whereby he did luckely vanquyshe thorough God the Id^means. But
heyng after become haut and presumptuous, he made war of pure wilfulness and
with out constraynt, in the which he was taken and finally dyed.

Ozias raygned two and fyfty years, the same Ozias which also is called
Azarias.
was also called Azarias. The same was at the first also Godly, and overcame
the Philisthines. Afterward when he would himself offer in the temple
against the ordinance of God, he was stryken Ozias. Amos. Micheas. Jonas.
with leprosy. In his time lived Oseas, Amos and Micheas, which prophesied
against either kings of Samaria and Judah. Jonas was ^lso at this time, which
was sent to preach to the king of the Assirians.

Ioatham reigned likewise syxten years: the same Ioatham.
was Godly, and fought luckely against Ammon.

Achas reigned likewise syxten years: he set Achas.
up false worshipping of god and of over great superstition and perverse
opinion of godliness, he builded every where throughout all the land chapels
and altars: wherefore God suffered him and all his royalme to be grievously
punyshed and spoiled.

Ezechias reigned nine and twenty years: Hewas Ezechias ^ godly king.
a Godly king, he restored Gods worship, auoidyng Idolatry, he gave the
priests their tenthes again. And because these are true feats of good
princes, therefore has God given him noble victories. For when the king of the
Assyrians besyeged Jerusalem he called upon God for aid, and the city was
delivered of the syege, by the angel slaing Esaye.
the enemies. Esaye the prophet was in the time of this king in great
worship, by whom the king was instructed in such things as pertayne to the
fear of God. But in the syxte year of Ezechias, The waystynge of Samaria.
gat the king of the Assyrians the city of Samaria, and led away the ten
tribes of Israel in bondage. The most part of this were the people of God,
that were fallen from Judah, and had set up a propre ^he wasting of Samaria.
kingdom. But when the kings of Samaria were afraid lest the people should
fall again to the kingdom of Judah, the which was ordained of God, if they
should sometime resort to Jerusalem feastly, to do their sacrifyce, and to
hear the word of God, according to the ordinance of the law: they set up a
certain peculiar or propre Gods service, a propre doctrine, and a sacrifice
against Gods word: and so have they abused all things against the word of
God under pretense of Gods name, to entertayne the private power of their
kingdom.

Against this worship of God are sometime sent prophets, to the sauegarde and
conservation of many: in the mean season have the mighty with all The (...) a
w^^ ^^d worship (...)th not (...)shed. The example of the fear of God.
stubbernes kept their false gods service. Wherefore, God has grievously
punished these kings with wars and vproures, neither lasted the reign of
this empire long by any kyndred, in so much also, that at the last God suffered
the kings and people to be led away. Duly ought this example make us
afraid, that we learn to fear God: For if god spared not the posterite of
Abraham, unto the which happened so manifest promises and so great, but has
suddenly overthrown their kingedome, and cast them out: who is so sure minded,
which can believe that we shall escape fre? But in mine opinion Samaria i^ a
figure of the church of the East.
that part of Samaria* seems to bear the figure of the church of the East
and of the Greeks: for like as Israel carried away by the Assyrians into
Samaria, came never again: even so also the church or congregation of the
East is utterly destroyed by the Saracens and Turks. And as it happened to the
tribe of Judah afterward: I fear me lest it chance likewise also to the West
part. It is to be feared truly that God shall handle us more rygorously,
because of the greatness of our misdeeds. Houbeit God would in the mean
season bless the sede of Abraham before all nations. Wherefore ought the godly
reader consider this example by himself, and pray God, that he will chasten us
with mercy, and not to cast us utterly away. This kingdom dured only two
hundredth and four and forty years. That time verily was very short,
specially seeing this people had so excellent promises, even of outward goods
also, and in the mean season had they war also and vproures. So little does
God suffer the wicked service of God unpunished. The wastyng of the kingdom of
Samaria was done the three thousand, two hundredth and fourtieth year after the
creation of the world. Manasse the son of Ezechias succeeded his father
Manasse a wicked king
in the kingdom of Judah, and reigned five and fifty years. The same restored
the false Gods service, and for false zele of godliness, he burned in
sacrifice his own children. He persecuted the prophets. Esaias y^ The death of
Esaye.
most holy prophet has he caused to be cut asunder with a saw and slain: at
the last was he taken o^ his enemies and carried away. Howbeit when he
knowledged his trespass, and called hartyly upon the Lord, he was taken freely
to mercy, and God Manasse an example of ^^pe^te^s.
has set him for an example to sinners, that they doubt not, but that God
shall have mercy, and assuage his wrath and vengeance, if they turn from
their wickedness. Amon reigned two year: he Amon.
was a wicked king, wherefore he dyed with the swearde of his servants.

Josias reigned thyrty and one year: he took away Josias.
the wicked worship of God. He overthrew the chapels and Idols: he commanded
to burn the bones of false prophets. In his time were the books of The books
of Moses ^^^ found.
Moses found again, which had many years be lost. That truly is a notable
example, that wickedness and men's traditions does grow so excedingly and
prevail, that holy scripture is so greatly despised, y^ even the very books be
lost. But God so providing and for seeing, she is nevertheless at the last
restored and brought to light. This history no doubt does The figure of pure
doctrine before the worlds (...)de*
show the figure of the last times in the church, to y^ which the true and
sincere knowledge of the word shall be opened, even before the end of the
world. But though Josias was a very godly king, yet wanted not he finally
his error. For when he had now lived in good peace a great while, and had done
many noble acts, being waxen hardy, he thought he might have no misfortune by
reason of his godliness. Wherefore he warred upon the king of the Egiptians,
the which nevertheless demanded conditions of peace. But because he took
that war by trust of man's power, he dyed of a gre^^ wound that he had gotten
in y^ battayll. Ioachas reigned Ioachas.
three months: and was carried away into Egypt.

Ioakim reigned two years. In his time invaded Ioakim. Nabuchodonosor. Daniel
Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon all Iewry, whose tributary he became: many men
were led away, among the which was also Dauiel yet young. Afterward when Ioakim
kept not the bond or treaty, Nabuchodonosor came again, and taking Ioakim,
caused him to be slain at Jerusalem, and his body to be cast amongs y^ other
dead carcases, without the city, according to y^ prophesye of Jeremy which
prophesyed that he should be buried as an ass. Ioachim or Ieconias was king
three months: Ioachim ^^ Ieconias
Nabuchodonosor about this time being come again, beseged the city: Ieconias
yielded him self freely through the counsel of Jeremy the prophet, unto whom God
had reveled, that Jerusalem should be destroyed, and the people carried away:
howbeit he should not wholly be destroyed, but y^ he should once come again, and
Jerusalem should be builded again. Ieconias was kept in Babilo^ by god, because
he had obeyed y^ voice of the prophet, the which we shall note hereafter. The
best of the people were led in captivity at Babylon with* Ieconias, and also
all the most costlye vessels and ornaments that were in the temple at
Jerusalem. Sedechias Sedechias.
raygned eleven years: he fell from the king of Babylon, whom he would not
give tribute: for which cause Nabuchodonosor came again and besieged the city.
And though Jeremy counseled him, that he should yield him self, (for it were so
foreseen of god, y^ the people* should be led away, and Judah punyshed) ye^ would
not he obey, ^oldened and trusting too Gods promise, that the people of Judah
should not perish. This did Sedechias boaste, and the high priests did
interpretate the promise of God peruerfly. For God could nevertheless save his
people, though he did suffer them to be carried away and to be punished a
certain space. And thus was Ieremias prophecy despised, specially because it
was so long differed, another did it so come to pass. Beside this had the king
of Babylon been now three times in Iewry, and yet had not profited in besieging
the city of Jerusalem. Moreover it was now y^ eleventh year, in the which
many were fled out of the city, the town yet saved. These things were the
cause, that after ma^s judgment they stiffly trusted, that nothing less
should be, then that general destruction, which Jeremy had prophesied. Also
was An example of great hunger.
the city every where fortified with fortresses, against the power of the
enemies. But Nabuchodonosor destroyed them with hunger for when he besyeged the
city a year and an half, it is said that there was such hunger, that many
did eat their An example of men's stony hertes.
own children. So stony hart^ed is man's nature in her purpose that where she
was constrained with so great necessity, yet refuses she to come and take
succoure and consolacion of God. For if they had yielded themselves after the
prophets counsayll, though the banyshement had been hard to them, yet might
they have had peace at the least way The death of Sedechias.
with the aliens. Finally when Sedechias took the flight, he was taken, and
after that saw he his children slain in his presence: but his iyes were put
out, the city of Jerusalem was destroyed, the temple that God caused to be
builded, was burnt, the best of the people of the Jews, was carried away to
Babylon into bondage, this example ought earnestly admonyshe us, that God will
not spare other kingdoms and princes, but that he will greueously punyshe
sin, seeing he has used so great rigor against this kingdom, the which
he him self did set up, for the scripture witnesses that God has punyshed
Judah, with innumerable kinds of punishments for his sins: and added thoose
sins which were the chefest sins, namely, despysyng of Gods word, the
wicked worship of God, tyranny against the true preachers of Gods word and
prophets.

The destruction of the city happened the three The destruction of Jerusalem.
thousand three hundredth and three score and therten year sense the creation of
the world.

The years From David until this spoylynge of the city Jerusalem are five
hundredth and sixten.

Hitherto remained the kyngly name by the posterity of David, amongst the
which were many notable and renowned kings, as the like in none other
kingdom. For that kingdom of Judah had God specially created, and governed it:
but because they were not without sin, therefore were they The kingdom of
Judah.
punyshed of God, and the kingdom was changed. For the kingdom of Judah was
kept in captivity in Babylon three score and ten years: howbeit in the mean
season did God declare himself so, that it might be perceived that he cared
for his people and church, and that he never would forsake her. For he sent
notable prophets, as Daniel amongst the Babilonians, which converted also
Nabuchodonosor was converted of Daniel.
Nabuchodonosor ye king. For when he was punyshed by Gods judgment for his
ungodliness, and was become mad and woodde, so that he differred nothing
from a beast, Daniel prayed God for him, and he was restored: afterward
coming to his right mind again from his wickedness, he renounced his
Idolatry, and as he was taught of Daniell, he took upon him Gods true service.

After Nabuchodonosor, raygned his son Euilmerodach. Euilmerodach
The same commanded to entreat Iechonias the king honestlye, and according
to his kyngly dignitye, the which by the commandment of Jeremy the prophet,
yeldynge him self freely, went also in exyle. And after this wise did god
fortunate this king, which believed the words of the prophet: though he was in
danger for a season. Of this wise verelye was David's kynred saved from
destruction by God, through gods providence the which we shall declare at large
hereafter.

After Euilmer odach succeeded Balthazar in the Balthazar
kingdom. The same was a despiser of godliness and Gods word, he restored of
a new the old and abrogate Idolatry of the Chaldeis: he used the vessels that
were carried from the temple of Jerusalem at his bankettes: he mocked the God of
the Jews, and for a reproach, he caused to be song, that the God of the
Chaldeis was a true God, and greater than the God of the Jews. But what
happened. These blasphemous Blasphemies are not unpunished.
voices brought the destruction of the whole kingdom. For there was clearly
seen a hand that wrote upon the wall, that Balthazar should perysh with all
his kingdom. The same happened the very same night: for the Medes and Persians
fell suddenly upon the Babylonians, and gat the kyngedome, and killed the king
Balthazar. This example witnesses also that the blasphemies against God,
remain not unrevenged.

Now has the time of the first monarchy an end, The end of the first
monarchye.
vntyllthe Perses and king Cirus. Between the birth of Abraham and king Cirus
are a thousand, four hundredth and four scor and fyften years, in the which
was y^ monarchy first by the Chaldeis, after that by the Assyrians. But when it
began to be alienated, now prevailed the Assyrians than the Babilonians,
until the Medes and Perses did grow, and finally gat Cyrus Babylon,
recovering the Monarchy and making all one.

It is chefely to be considered, that the whole kingdom of the Jews is
comprehended under the time of this first monarchy: where by it is evident The
Jews are most ancient.
that the Jews are most ancient people, and that only their histories are
certain and true of the first kingdoms of the world.

Of the Greeks.
WE shall now note brefely the state of the Greeks, in the times of the first
Monarchye: where by it shall be easily The historyes of the Jews are elder than
of the Greeks.
gathered, that the histories of the Jews are much more ancient, than the
Greeks: for all their histories are written after the first Monarchy. Nether
can the Greeks rehearse any thing certayue or of longer space, than that their
Olympiades do show. But the Olympiades began the eight and thertyth year of
king Osias. And if that be diligently rekened, When the Olympyades (...)
it shall appear to be about two hundredth year before the monarchye of the
Peries. But because of unlearned readers I shall leave the Olympiades, and
show brefely what has happened by the Greeks in the time of the first
monarchye.

The country of Greece had no certain king, The country (...).
as other nations, but there were in it partly many princes, partly also mighty
cities, and sundry great chaunges happened with the princes. For the cities
encreasyng in puyssaunce, could not well suffer Princes, as we have seen in
Italy in our days, and as I shall afterward set some examples, which are
profitable to know, and have true witness of hystoryes. For there are few
historyes with the Greeks before the battayl of Troy.

Of the battayl of Troy.
THE battayll of Troie happened before the time of David, the which may be
proved by the witness of Virgil. For he says that the kingdom of Alban,
dured three hundredth years. Of this wise says he of that kingdom of Alban.
Three hundredth years wholly, shall be the raygne undoubtedly. Before the end of
this raygne began Rome to be builded, the which we shall declare afterward.
And if ye reken backward the number of the years, ye shall find that from the
time of the buylding of Rome, until the beginning of Salo mons kingdom, are
three C. and three years. And it is evident that the battaill of Troie was not
long before. Some history writers do differ here, which say that this battayl
was of more antique, but I could prove the contrary by many arguments, the
which I do now pass over, because of brefenesse. Forsooth this one thing is
worthy to be marked, that the occasyon of the Trojan battayll is spronge of
adultery. The occaspon of the battayl of Troie was aduoutry.
For Paris the son of the Trojan king, led away Helena the wife of Menelaus
prince of Greece, the hefe of the Greeks and the cytezens taking this (...)
displeasure, making a conspiracy, went to Troie, (...)nd besyegyng it ten whole
years, at the last they (...)anne the castle Ilium and the city Troy, and
(...)ayeng king Priamus, the kingdom of Troy (...)as wholly quenceed. From
Troy sailed Eneas Eneas.
(...)to Italy, in ye which he possessed that part, which (...)as called
Latium. He began here a new kingdom, Latium. Ascanius which also was
called. Iulus.
and builded for his son Ascanius, which was also called Iulus the city
Alba, in the which (...)he posteryte of Eneas reigned, until the time (...)hat
Rome was builded. In the battayll of Troie (...)ere many doughty and renoumed
princes, whose (...)ames may be sought other ways. Out of Thes^alia Achilles.
Hector.
was there Achilles, of whom Hector the most (...)aliaunt captain of the
Troianes was slain: (...)nd Achilles him self at the last was slain also by
(...)isle. For the Troianes had married to him a daughter of Priamus, and as he
satt knelinge in his prayer before the altar in the temple, he was strycken
through with a dart of Paris by a decepte.

Of the battayl of Thebe.
NOt long before the battayll of Troie, there was another of Thebe much more
cruel. The occasyon of the battaill of Thebes.
For seeing the kingdom of Thebe was fallen of right by inheritance to the
two brethren Ethrocles and Polinices, they agreed together upon this condition,
that they should reign every one a year one after y^ other. Howbeit when
Ethrocles had received the kingdom, he would reign continually contrary to
the appointement. Ethrocles. Polynices.
Wherefore his brother Polynices being constrained, fled to Adrastus king of the
Argies, the which as he had given him in marriage his daughter, he Adrastus.
would set him into the kingdom again by force, but Adrastus was slain
before Thebe with other princes. Ethrocles and Polinices brethren, meting
together by chance in battayll were slain with woundinge each other. The
discord of the brethren was the cause of this great and doleful slaughter of
the brethren. Another was the war yet fynyshed: for other princes beseged the
city again afterward with a mighty power, and gettinge it, did at the last
overthrow it.

Of Hercules.
ALytle before this time, that is, shortey before Saul was made king by the
Jews, lived Hercules in Greece, which Hercules of Tyrinthus.
before other princes is chiefly praised for his noble virtues. His elders
were Amphytryo and Alcmena boren of the city Tyrinthus, which lies not far
from Argis. But Amphytrio Tyrynthus
fled to Thebe, because that in a discord between his brother and him, he
slew him: and for this cause fortuned Hercules to be borne at Thebe, and here
he showed the first proof of his power. Minya.
For when they of Minya a town in Thessalia, (which at that time were of
renoumed puyssance, and raygned in the city Orchomenus,) assaulted the town
of Thebe, Hercules defended it, driving the enemies of from it, and took the
city Orchomenus, Orchonemenus.
the dominion whereof began than to fail. This city was most rich, whose
great praises are in Homers worckes, for her plentyfulnesse. This victory gat
Hercules first a great name, in so much that afterward other princes of Greece
came The deeds of Hercules.
freely to him: therefore was he every where a maker of peace, he aided princes
and cities, he revenged and chastysed unrighteous deeds, and against them that
he had helped, used he great meekness, another laid any charge upon them,
that they were not able to bear. These are the things for the which he
deserved so great praise, as none other prince the like. Afterward took he
his yourneye into Asia, where he overcame king Laomedon, and slew him: but in
this vyctory, used he a very kyngly moderacion of mind. For he saved the
kingdom, another would destroy it, but gave the possession thereof to
Priamus, as to the true heir. And because he restored the kingdom to Priamus,
it is easy to guess what time Hercules lived. Beside this he made the sea in
Italy and Spain safe from robbers, and for this cause, caused he to be raised
two rocks in the utter coasts of Spain and Aphrica, which should always bear
witness of this deed. For at this Hercules pillars.
time yet are they called Hercules pyllers. Charles the fyfte, the most
victorious or most valiant Emperor, has these at this time as a peculiar
badge, namely that he may be known to be sent to us of God, to the intent that
in this troublous state of the world, he may be in whole Europa as an
Hercules, to restore again with his prowess and strong victorious hand,
peace and instyce.

Hither to have we spoken of the notable things that are happened in Greece in
the time of the first monarchye. But I shall nevertheless add a few things
beside these: For in reading of hystoryes must specially be considered, what
state the kingdoms were of, what religions, what manner of laws, Finally what
sciences they had, wherein they floryshed. When the sons of Noe dyed, the
(...) of (...) after (...)
true understanding of Gods word peryshed also in Greece: though in the mean
while they retained of thepr fathers the manner of ceremonies, and sentences of
godliness, yet nevertheless was the ungodliness increased, and otherwyles
was one or other Idolatry set up. For enery one ymagyned for him self an order
to worship God, according as his constraint and necessite compelled him. For
it is spoken of a Poet: The first fear that came to men mortal. Caused gods
that be immortal. That is most euidente and true in fayninge of the wicked
service of God. For noman is so cruel of nature, which being in necessyte,
that does not seek God: and for so much as he knows not that God must be
sought by faith only in Christ, he falls to some outward work, and faineth
some new manner of worshippyng God. Of this comes The occasion of all manner of
ungodliness.
the fountain and spring of all the vngodlynesses nere hand that are in the
world. Nether needs any man suppose, that men erred so greatly, that they
thought Images and contrefaitures to be God: for they knew right well, that
they were wood and stone, but they were of this opinion, that this work and
this service pleased God, and that he would be worshipped of this manner: where
as yet God will not be worshypped by unfaithfulness without only Christ by
what manner of work or fashion soever it be. And so could they never be sure,
whether God were favorable to them: for no man can surely persuade himself
the same, without the manifest promise of God, and without Christ. The The head
of Idolatry.
head then of all Idolatry is to trust in a peculiar and in a forged worship
of God, excogitated of his own head and in the mean season nevertheless, to
doubt in tribulations whether God will be favorable. This doubt I say is the
principal part of Idolatry. And the ungodly, which nevertheless estemeth
him self good and wise, does in this point much differ from the tren christian
and godly. Such How much an ungodly does differ from a christian.
an ungodly man has goodly virtues and very shynyng works: but his heart
doubts whether God be favorable to him. As for a godly man and true
Christian, may well be less then he, concerning other virtues: but in his heart
he is surely persuaded that he is in the favor of God, according to ye
promises for (...)sitting in a chere upon the den, prophesied of things to
come, out of the which den, in the mean while came smoke and blast of
winds. Of this wise is it said to have been happened at Delphis. After that
these prophecies were supposed to be written of the priests, as undoubted south
saynges: and because they were doutfully written, they might be taken
diversely. These were deceates of the deuel, wherewith he begiled the world.

Of Homerus and Hesiodus.
BY the Greeks only were first the best learned With the Greeks were p^^t^^
first of renow^^e.
poets, which were partly musicians partly priests: some of them also were
w(...) seen in phisyck and astronomy. These comprysed their wisdom and
learning with verses short sentences. But among them, whose works are yet
manifest, were Homerus and Hesiodus the What time (...)erus ly(...).
chief. Cassius writteth that Homerus lived after the battaill of Troie three
hundredth and three scor(...) years, and before the fondacion of Rome even there
about which may be gathered to have been about that time, when Iosaphat
reigned in Iewry His dwelling was at Smyrna, which lies in the forth part of
Asia, where the most ancient of the Greeks dwelled, which were called Jones
and Acolidas. And all though Homerus was not mighty in governance of the
common wealth, it seems yet that he used the company of the greatest princes
of all Greek. For he described of the best m(...)ner the kynred and ofspringe
nearehande of a(...) princes: and his books are even a myrour of all ciuyl
occupation and princely virtues. For he has painted Homers books are a myrour
of all ciuyl and princely virtues.
and set forth all things, that can befall in governing a commune wealth.
Besides this also what is the duty of princes and great men in there counsels
gathered together, and in other afferes whatsoever they be: he has set them
forth so conningly, that he seems to be most exercysed in parliamentes, and
diuising of most weyghty matters apperteining to kingdoms. Moreover the sage
writers did never praise so highly no poets writing, as the poetry of Homer,
the which Alexander the great would never suffer to be out of his hands,
because he might have, wherout he might be admonished and taught of the duty
and virtues of an excellent king.

Hesiodus (as witnesses Porphirius) lives an Hesiodus a pressed at Helicon.
hundredth year after Homer. He was a neighbure or priest of the mount Helicon,
where was a great and a famous temple. His writings are for the most part
sermones of good manners. For they are short sentences, comprisinge the pyth of
all kind of virtues: but they treat nothing of Christ. For this heavenly
doctrine was hydden to the Gentyls. This poets writings, conteyne also as it
were a just and perpetual Calendar, ordained after Hesiodus books.
the course of the Son, and the observation of those stars, which show
the difference of the year. This book is worthy to be learned by rote of young
children, and it seems that wise men of Greece, have in times past apprehend
their children here to know these noble sciences. But the poet Hesiodus, a man
of notable learning and temperaunce at the end dyed wretchedly by some of his
friends, which did evil recompense him for his good deeds.

Of the buildinge of the city Rome.
PRoca King of Alba had two sons (...). (...). (...).
Numitor and Amulius. Now had the father determined to give the kingdom to his
son Numitor, because he was the elder: but Amulius that was the younger, drove
him out, and usurped to him the kingdom. And lest he might fear any danger
by the issue of Numitor, he stew his son Agistus by fraud, and his brothers
daughter* Rhea Syluia, bound he with (...) Syluia.
a vow of perpetual chastitye in the company of the virgins Uestales. But she
being made greatwith child, brought forth two twynnes, which afterward were
called Romulus and Remus. But when Amulius knew of this deed, he caused the
mother to be kept in prison, and the children to be trowen into the floude of
Tyber, to drown them. When the children were now set at the brinke of ye
water, by chance came a wolfesse out of the next mountains, which gave the^
soucke, until they were found of the Kings shepherde, who bringinge them
home, took them his wife to nouryshe.

Wherefore when they were waxen great, and herd of the pretended murder in
their youth, of Amulius, and that the Kingdom was taken from their uncle
Numitor by force, they determined to avenge the tyranny, and by occasion slew
king Amulius, restorynge their uncle Numitor into his Kingdom. Of this wise
does God not suffer An example of vengeance.
unrighteousness to be unpunished. Romulus and Remus brethren, builded
afterward a city in hat place, where they were found and laid.

When strife was risen among the brethren, for so The strife of Romulus and
Remus for ye realm.
much as they were equal in age and strength, which of them should raygne:
they agreed that the Gods should judge it, so that whose should have the
greater flight or voices of birds, the same should bear rule.

To Remus therefore did first fly six great ravens, afterward flew twelve
for Romulus. Now when Remus demanded the Kingdom by reason of the first
flight, there rose again debate between the brethren. It is a wonder, how
fearcely men's minds betossed with couetousenes to bear rule, another can it
lightelysuffer and be quiet But what needs many words? At the last raise a
commotion, Remus was slain, and Romolus raygned alone, of whom also has Rome
the name By this appears that ye city of Rome, was builded by the posteritye
of Eneas. For Syluia the mother of Romulus, had her spring of Eneas. But for
as much as Romulus Father was unknown, they fayneth that the god Mars was he,
because of a more honester cloak or pretense of the ^aute. But how Romolus did
ordeyne his kingdom, and what wars he made, does Titus liuius write. I will
only show brefely the order of the times, and what notable chaunges of realms
are happened in the mean while that every man may know, what is chefely to
be marked in reading of all hystoryes: another shall we also passcouer these
wonders, that are happened by some heavenly providence, that we may se that
unrighteous is punyshed of God, and for what causes common wealths and
Kingdoms are changed.

Pomponius Atticus and some other, which reken the number of years most
dyligently, does When Rome was ^^y^deth.
affirm that the city of Rome was begone to be buyldeth, in the beginning
of the third year of the syxte Olympias: that is, the tenth year of Ioathan
King of Judah, but after the creation of the world, the three thousand, two
hundredth, and one.

Rome was before Christ's birth, seven hundredth and nine and twe^tyyeare. I will
also add, that Varro writes, the twelve great ravens, to sygnifye the time
and lastyng of the city, namely a thousand and two hundredth year. For every
great ra^en should sygnifye a Seculum, that is a hundret year: and this is no
evil interpretacion. For from the beginning of the cities building, until
the time of Honorius and Archadius, when it was destroyed of the Gotes, was a
thousand and three hundredth years.

The kings raygned at Rome two hundredth and four and forty years, as
witnesses Liuius.

Eusebius adds also two years.

Romulus xxxviij. Numa xliij Tullius hostilius xxxij. Tullius hostilius

Alha the city, and punyshed their gouernoure which was a true breaker with
dew punishment.

He gave anotable example to men therein, how traitors ought to be punyshed.

For he caused him to be bound and stretched The death of Metius Suffecius.
out between two wagons, and with horses driven sundery ways, to be pulled
insunder, and toren to pieces. The kingdom of Alba ceasyd here, and this
happened alytle before that time, when Manasses raygned in Iewry.

When Alba was overthrown, the posteritye of the Troyans, chefely of Julius
the son of Eneas, write to Rome, leaving Alba the which after ward became
mighty by the Romans, took all the monarchy alone, in the time of Julius Caesar.

Therefore was it well prophesied of Homerus, concerning Eneas, that his
posteritye should have dominion everlastingly: and that is no doubt to be
understand of the Roman dominion: for their monarchy is the last. But we
shall speak more larger of these things hereafter after Tullus Hostylius
succeeded in the kingdom and raygned.

Ancus Martius. xxiiij. Ancus Marcius. Tarquinius Priscus. Seruius. Tullius.
Tarquinius Priscus. xxxviij. Seruius Tullius xliiij.
In his time began the monarchy of the Persians and for because I might be
brefe, therefore wylled I also to comprehend here the kings of Rome, because
they for the most part all reigned before When the monarchy of of the
Persians, began.
the monarchy of the Perses: during the which few things worthy of
remembrance are befallen by the Romans, undoubtedly whose puyssaunce was not
great before that time.

Tarquinius Superbus raygned xxv. years was driven out of the kingdom, for the
abhominacion of his son Sextus Tarquinius, the which Tarquinius Superbus.
did by violence misuse the most honest wife Lucrece, which moved with
shamfastnes of such wickedness pierced herself with a swearde, eue^ through the
heart. Her kynsfolke moved with the wickedness Lucrecia.
of the deed, drove out the king. This example does also witness, for what
causes God does suffer kingdoms to be changed, and tyranny to be An example of
vengeance
punished. This is enough spoken of the beginning of the foundation of the
city, and whence happened the first change of the common wealth.

Of the second Monarchye.
WHen the Jews had been three score and ten years in exile by the Babylonians,
as we have said before, the king of Babylon Balthazar king of Babylon.
Balthazar was punyshed of God* because he blasphemed the God of Israel, and
used the vessels that were ordained for the tempels use, in his bankettes. For
the Medes and Perses were fallen into his kingdom, and took the city of
Babylon, with the kingdoms of Chaldee and Assyrya. Worthily therefore is this
to be called the second monarchye: For the greatest kingdoms of the world,
began now to grow together, too the which all Asianearehande was joined
afterward by the Persians. Here ought y^ godly mind before all things to
consider these noble benefytes and works of God, which brought again all
thee world in one certain body and a lawful empire, that justice and honesty
might be maintained. For it were necessary, that all civility and good laws
should peryshe among men, without God chose and ordained sometime mighty
monarchies, and puyssaunt princes, the which might defend them, and if they
were decayed, to restore them again.

This monarchy of the Persians was knowento the Greeks, and for the most part
are happened in this monarchies time, whatsoever notable and The histories of
the Greeks begin at thee Persians.
great fetes are done in Greece. And thereby comes that the Greeks begin
their histories at the Persians, the which it seems to have little knowledge,
what has been done in other kingdoms, before the Persians times.

As for the order of the years in histories, I must here aduertyse the reader,
that I have hitherto borrowed the rekenyng of the years out of holy scriptures,
the which show by order the count of the years, even from the creation of
the world, untyll these seventy years, in the which the Jews were kept in
the Babylonicall bannyshment. Moreover, in the holy Bibels are contained
certain Cronicles of the years, until the time of the Perses: but after that
is thee order of the years not so well kept, save that Daniel says, that there
are four hundredth and seventy years, from that time that it was granted to
the Jews to repare the city Jerusalem until Christ was borne. And of so easy
a thing, some men makes a great question, of countinge these years a right,
in the which we shall show to be no difficultye. For Daniel has very well
expressed and marked the time of Christ's coming.

The beginning of the Monarchye of the Persians.
BUt that the nombers do agree with the seventy years aforesaid, we shall reken
in the Monarchy of the persyans a hundredth nynety and one year. Although the
Greeks do reken the number of these years greater in the Monarchy of the
perses. Howbeyt this is come thereby, that the Greeks, have not begone first
to reken when these seventy years were expyred, but that about a twenty years
before. And of this wise must the reckoning of Philo The rekeninge of the
Gre^^^^ Philo.
and other Grecians be made equal. For the Jews begin in the year of Cyrus,
after that he had won the city Babylon. But the Greeks reken those years
wythal also, the which he had reigned before: but they are not to be referred
to the years ensuynge. Moreover that the matter may the better be
understand, according to the order of Philo, we shall first rehearce the high
priests, after that, shall we also adioyne the Persian kings, as the Greeks
do reken them.

But he that understands Cyrus kingdom to begin after the conquerynge of
Babylon, the same may easily lay together the number of the Greeks with these.
CxCi. years.

Jesus the high pressed. xxxvi. Ioakin his son in his fathers absence. viii.
Jesus being returned. xx. Ioakin again. xlviii. Eliasib. xxi. Ioiada. xxiiii.
Ioathan. xxiiii. Iaddus. x.
Summa of the years is. CxCi. Josephus witnesses, that Iaddus lived when
Alexander went into Asia.

The Persian kings as the Greeks do reken them.
Cyrus xxix. Cambises vij. and. v. months. Darius Hystaspis son. xxxvi.
Xerxes xx. Artaxerxes with the long hand. xl. Darius the bastard. xix.
Artaxerxes Mnemon. xl. Ochus. xxvi. Arsames. iij. Darius. vi.
The order of the times does for the most part allow this nombre. For as
the historye writers have lived at sundery times: even so has every one made
mention of his king, that raygned at Herodotus Theusidides
his time: even as Herodotus makes mention of xerxes, Theucydides of
Artaxerxes with the long hand: after these made Xenophon mention of Xenophon.
Darius the bastard and his younger son Cyrus, he wrote also of Artaxerxes
Mnemon: Xenophon went a warrefare also, in those wars, that were used at
these times. Therefore the late writers do greatly err of the Jews, they be
very dull asses, which set but four Persian kings, lesing more the^ an
hundredth years in this evident counting of the worlds years: of the which
do spryng more greueous errors.

In Daniel and Esdras is mention made of the Persian kings, but they varye in
some names from the Greeks. As for me, (that all things may be known more
manyfestly) I will brefely show what my mind is. Metasthenes is of some
rejected, Metasthenes
because he names some Persian kings other wise, then the Greeks. But for so
much as Esdras and Philo do not disceuer from him, I do not reject those
kings, which Metasthenes reherseth. For it is no doubt, but that Esdras was
perfect of the kingdom and state of the Persians, for Esdras was s^^^^ed and
^^^^gh^ in the Persian matt^^s.
so much as it is evident that he was one of the chief of the realm and of
the kings counsayll. Metasthenes does set in this order the Persian kings,
and these be the first wherein they vary: but Philo and Esdras keep the same
order.

Darius and Cyrus to gether two years, and after that Cyrus alone xxij.
Artaxerxes Assuerus xx. Darius Artaxerxes with the long hand xxxvij. Darius the
bastard xix. Artaxerxes Mnemon lv. Ochus xxvi. Arsames iiij. Darius vi. Darius
reignynge with Cyrus.

This variaunce after my mind may easily be judged. Of the first Darius,
which reigned with Cytus, have the Greeks no certainte (for so much as says
Daniel,) he never reigned, and therefore was his name all together unknown, to
men of strange nations. And Daniel has separated this Darius from Cyrus. For
he says that Darius of Media was Cyrus of Persia. Now do the Greeks reken
only the Persian kings, another do they myngle with them the Medians affeirs,
whose kingdom was already translated too the Persians: therefore do the Greek
writers dissent nothing from the holy scriptvres, though they leave out Darius,
seeing they count only the Persian kings. Josephus writes that this Darius
were Cyaxares, the son of Astyages, of whom Xenophen writes, the which I
will not strive wythall.

The second Artaxerxes Assuerus, is Darius Artaxerxes, Assuerus.
Hystaspis son, and Cambyses is passed over, because he reigned his father
yet living, or not long after his fathers death. For the Persians had this
custom, that when ye king went forth on war, they ordained another before,
which should supply ye Cambyses.
kings rowme being abse^t. And by this occasion was Cambyses ordained king and
governor of y^ realm of Cyrus his father, when he made war against the
Scythyans, with the which he had war six years: and for this season did
Cambises reign, whom the Greeks say to have raygned seuenyeare, the which
must be understand of that time wherein, the father was yetlyuing. And the
historyes of Assuerus do witness that he was Darius because Philo writes that
these kingdoms be recovered of him again by war, which were fallen back
and rebelled, when Cyrus had foughten with the Scythes having no goodlucke.

The third was called Darius Artaxerxes Wherefore Darius Artaxerxes was called
with the long hand.
with the long hand: the same do the Greeks simply call Artaxerxes with the
long hand: and he had the name thereof, that his right hand was longer than
the left, whom Metasthenes calls Darius, Esdras does call him Darius and
Artaxerxes indifferently: for they used these names none otherwise, than our
Emperors use the names of Caesar and Augustus, But that Artaxerxes does
straight way follow Darius in order, that is happened for this cause, that
Xerxes forthwyth in the beginning of his raygne went in to Greece and that in
the mean space Artaxerxes ruled the kingdom in the East. And because Xerxes
remained not at hand in the East, therefore do not the Jews make mention of
him, but hold Artaxerxes, for the king, seeing he being made governor of
the kingdom rules so long as Xerxes was from home. After this is there no
varyaunce more, and of this wise may the hystoryes of the Bible and Greeks be
made very well to agree. The disagreynge of the years ryseth thereof y^ some
Kings governed the other yet lyuinge: and there by is it come, that some other
have gathered the years otherwise.

Of Cyrus. Cyrus.

CYrus the first Prince of the Monarch of the parsiansis rekened one among the
most doughtyest Kings and lords of the world. For beside the manyfold
excellent and very princely virtues, had God given and endued him with sundery
luck and fortune in rulynge, and very excellent vyctoryes of his enemies: yea
he fortuned to be taught and instruct also by Daniel the prophet in godlynes
and in the true worship of God as holy scriptures do witness, Such kind of
Princes, being so garnyshed with How great men ought to be followed.
the virtues of God, ought we to honor, as noble gifts of God, by the which
God will help the world, retain men in their vocacion, have modestye kept
and peace, finally to have laws ordained. And seeing it is so, it is a very
ungodliness either to despise or to set naught by such Princes, as the commune
sort of people do. But this Cyrus is worthtely to be counted among such
ministers of God and very excellent Princes of the world. Another can the
nobleness of kynred be required in him. For it so pleasyd God, that the
worthynesse of governance be kept and maynteyned and by men auanced with most
high virtues, and renown of their auncerters. And for so much as God has
preferred with so high honors, therefore ought they likewise to be honored of
us, as a most excellent gift, of God.

The father of Cyrus was a prince, or a governor The father of Cyrus.
of Persia, borne of the ofsprynge of Sem: his mother was borne of the kings
blude of Medes.

And Herodotus writes, that Astyages king of the Medes saw in a dream, out
of his daughters Astyag^s (...).
womb to grow a vine, whose spring should over shadow whole Asia.

Of this was the conjecture taken, that a most mighty prince should be borne
of her. Therefore when Cyrus the child was now borne, Astyages feared, lest
his kingdom should be removed from the Medes, to the Persians. For the which
cause he commands his usher Harpagus, to put forth the child to be slain.
But when Harpagus busied to slain it, he was saved by a wonderful destiny: So
vain are men's enterpryses and studyes to hinder Gods counsels. The chyide was
taken to the shepeherde to bear it upon a hill, that thete it might dye for
honger: the shepeherde was also commanded not to leave the child, until it
were dead, and to show this same to Harpagus, that he might certifye the king
the truth of the things, and to se the child buried according to the
dignity. But what did happen? At the same time by chance, when the shepeherde
brings this child: into his house, his wife was delivered of a dead child:
the which when she herd of her husband that this child should be laid
abroad to perish, whom beside the comlynesse of bewty, she perceived to
declare some kyngly strength and courage, and also because it was borne of the
kings blood: she counseleth and prays her husband to lay her dead child
in his stead, and to take it her for to bring up for hers. She admony sheth
him also to commit no murder with the kings child, chefely saying no
danger can befall or happen to the realine by this child, for as much as it
shall be brought up and taken for the shepeherdes child.

The shepeherde follows his wives counsel he send word to Harpagus that the
child is dead.

Who sends some to see wheter it were so, and causes the child to be
buried: and all this is shows the king for a truth. In the mean while is
Cyrus brought up by the shepeherde: and as he grew up by process, forth with
appears in him kynggly towardness, and sharpness of wit.

Moreover among the children (as the children costume is) he ordained a
kingdom, and him that offended, did punysh greueously.

But it happened by this chance, that when he had beaten a gentleman's child
very rygorously for a transgression, he was accused to the chyldes elders, the
which made complaynt to the king.

The king calling and demanding of the child, he maruayleth at his great
grave constancye and the wisdom in answering, than to the chyldes age. Being
streght way astonyed in his mind, he aduysed him of the time, wherein his
daughter was delyueted, and as he had searched out all the circumstances of his
age the time and the bringing up he knew that it was his cosyn, his daughters
son, the which in time past he had commanded to be destroyed. Knowing him
he kept him in his court a certain space: and when Astyages did now dout no
more of him, by reason of his syngular towardness and honesty, the which did
shine in the child, he sent him into Persia to his elders. Howbeit the king
was in the mean while greatly wroth with Harpagus, for the deceate, because he
did not accomplish the kings commandment, in slayeng at that time the
child. He commands Harpagus youngest son to be brought to the court: the
which wha^ Harpagus The notable crueltye of Astyages
had done, the king commanded to slaye him and seethe him and to set it
before Harpagus for to eat without his knowledge: but when he had now eaten
enough, Astyages commanded to bring the head, fete and hands of the child
that were hewn of, and show them to Harpagus, that he might se that he had
eaten the flesh of his own child.

As harpagus saw the head, he knew the kings deed, and also whence the
occasion came: but all grefe suppressed, he worshpped the king according to
his wonted reverence and dread, thynkyng in the mean season to be once greatly
revenged of this tyranny of the King. But Harpagus ever after ceased not to
stere up the chief of Media and the most The deed of Harpagus ^^^pu^t Ast^yes
tyranny.
puyssant nobles to fall to the Perses, and to make Cyrus King: he shows it
to Cyrus also, and exhorts him to invade the kingdom, another suffer the
tyranny, that the King has used against other of them to be unrevenged.

And that the enterprise be secret, he hydeth a lettre in the belly of a holow
hare, and takes him to a trustye messenger to bring it into Persia to Cyrus,
and sends no word else by the messenger, but that king Cyrus him self do
flee the hare. Cyrus finding the letter, and knowing Harpagus counsel,
makes continently ready an host, and goes against the Medes. Astyages on the
other side commands his army to withstand the enemy, of the which he makes
Harpagus chief captain: but when the field should be fouten, he yielded both
him self and his army wyllyngly to Cyrus. Wherefore Astyages having lost the
kingdom of Media, was vanquyshed. Howbeit Cyrus saved and kept him, and caused
him to be entreated according to his royal dignity. This alteration happened
in the kingdom of the Medes, by reason of the kings tyranny, for the which
also the whole empire was translated to the Perses.

After this warred the most rich Cresus upon Cyrus in the fore part of Asia,
whom Cyrus Cresus king o^ Asia*
metyng with an host, overcame, and took in the whole kingdom, and winning
the most strongest city Sardis, took Cresus prisoner. But when by the kings
commandment, Cresus should be burned, and was now upon the pyle of wood, he
cried with very pytefull waylynge: O Solon, Solon. Cyrus woundred at this
noise, and caused to demand for what cause he did so cry now and than, with
so great doulfulnes. Than he syghynge from the dep^st of his heart, said:
Solon was in times past a most wise man among y^ Athenians, whom I did sometime
greatly worship, when he was with me, and I showed him all my power and
treasures, and finally asked him, whether any misfortune might ever happen to
me, that were so well fortified with riches and power, against all chances of
fortune, and against the power of my enemies? But Solo^ answered to The grave
^^ ^^^ighty (...)*
that with a rebuke: That noman is so happyin this life, which before his death
can be called happy of every side: nether is any man so mighty or puyssaunt,
whom an unhappy chance can not make feeble and overthrow. But that as than he
being safe by reason of prosperitye, he said he despised those words, another
could he dread this notable fall, the which he had now proved: and because
that now first he understood Solons saying, therefore did he now name him
before his death, and that he wyshed al men to remember in prosperity
aduersytyes, which may befall, lest they become proud for the present
felicity, to enterprise or undertake ought, that by chance might bring
mischief to them. When Cyrus heard this, he was moved ^^ trample o^ pitye.
with pitye toward Cresus, saying: That hereafter he would not entreat
Cresus so cruellye, which had intymes past be a most mighty king: for he knew
that he was a man also, and to him also it might befall, to have need of an
other man's help and mercy. After this commanded he Cresus to be brought to
him, and had him in great reverence, as a great prince, and used his counsel
in governance.

Cyrus demanded of him also, by what cause he had taken this war, whether he
were moved, by the answer of Apollo, whom he had asked counsel before? To
this answered Cresus, saying: That Apollo counseled him right well with these
words, Know thy self, and all thing shall prospete. He did not refuse this
counsel of Apollo. For when his host had gotten the worsthande in aydinge the
Assyrians, he had purposed thenceforth to live in rest and peace, chefely for
so much as he saw Cresus to have such prosperity and power in bringinge all
things to pass. But when he was praised of the cities that lay round
about, and of his great princes for his power and conning of warrfaringe, he
was again deceived by pride and vain glory of him self, and was so by the
other princes made captain of the war against Cyrus. And that by these
praises he was brought, to take the answer of Apollo otherwise, and that he
thought he was such a one in deed, as he was praised, namely, that he was no
less in power, than king Cyrus, and by these means had he taken the wars in
hand. But hitherto is enough spoken of Cresus. Hereof may notable examples be
taken, Example that princes do often, war constrained by no necessytye. What is
to be considered in king Cyrus.
that princes be often brought to war by no constraynt of necessytie, and to
their great hynderaunce, by the counsel and flattery of them, which can
falsely persuade and extolle with vain praises their power and virtues.

In king Cirus is chefely to be considered, that in so great prosperities of
all things, he used great moderation of mind, and that in so great violence
of victories, he swaged tyranny with meekness.

Cyrus than took in all the kingdoms from Persia, until the first borders of
Ionia: from thence being returned, he besieged the city Babylon, which seemed
most strongest against all force How Cyrus ^^^ Babylon. Euphrates.
of man's power. But Cyrus wanne her, and that by this means: The floude
Euphrates runs through the city by some ryuers: dyggynge thorough his
caucyes, he led the course of the water another way, and as the flood was
dried, men might safely go into the town on foot. Beside that had he his
espyals, which showed what time the Babylonians were at rest, and so brought
he his army into the city in the still of the night, when they douted nothing
less.

But what needs here to praise and auaunce much the prosperytie of Cyrus?
seeing it may easily be thought and considered, that it is Gods work, and
not of man's wisdom or power, that so many and so strong tounes and kings be
subject to his kingdom, unto whom it seems no man's power nearehande might
wythstande. For those high monarchies are ordained and conserved by an heavenly
power, for to preserve the state of a common wealth, against the will of
Satan. Moreover after that Babylon was won, than began that kingdom of the
Perses first to be called a monarchy: For the head city or see of the
monarchy, Babylon is the h^^de city of the monarchye.
was Babylon, and the kingdoms of Chalde, Assyria, Medes and Persians be now
brought under one empire. The most part of Asia was joined thereto also, and
other great countries, which border upon these kingdoms. Cyrus governed these
kingdoms with great praise, insomuch that no princes praises, whereof historyes
do make mencyon, can be compared with his commendacions and ^uauncementes.

I suppose that this monarchy began after that Babylon was won in the three
score and tenth year after that the Jews were led into captyuyte in
Babylon. But sense the creation of y^ world, the year of three thousand, four
hundredth and three and forty, and before Christus birth the five hundredth and
one year. Whereby it may easily be gathered, that those histories of the
Greeks that begin at Cyrus, be not very old.

Of the Jews delivered out of the Babylonycall captivity.
Hitherto have we spoken of the state of the commune wealth and empire of those
times: now rests it that we speak also of the spyritual kingdom of God,
and of the church. After that Cyrus had subdued the Babylonians, he set the
Jews free and at liberty out of all his kingdoms, and restored them into the
kingdom of Iewry. This example How much God cares for his church or
congregation.
witnesses how much God does care for the church or congregation of the
godly, and how little he does forget them. For that the church might be
released from the service and bondage, it was necessary that Babylon the city
should be taken and peryshe (...)For a prince must not be a cowarde, to repress
the force of his enemies. Herodotus writes also that some do suppose otherwise
of Cyrus death: and Xenophon What Xenophon writes of Cyrus.
writes that he dyed in his bed, and that before his death, he exhorts his
childeren to the fear of God, to unity and love to each other, and that with
a great relation and many words he admonished them to remember that men's
souls dye not with the bodies, but that they remain immortal, and that the
godly after this life enjoy (...)
an everlasting rest with God: and that contrary wise the wicked shall be
greueously punished. And to this is it said that he should have added a
substanciall evidence of man's reason, concerning evil doers, the which in this
life have a great inward dread in their mind, for the conscience of their
wicked deeds: and that thereby may be gathered that the soul has a certain
being: and that seeing this fear is beaten in by God, it is euidente that God
will be revenged of all thing that is unjustly committed. Hitherto is there
enough said of this most holy king Cyrus.

In what time the Philosophers were first in Greece.
BEfore have we showed that by the Greeks were the Poets first in high
reputation, by reason of there learning: afterward in The Philosophers were
^p^st ^^ Cyrus time. The Philosophers of Ionia and Italy.
Cyrus time began another kind of learned men, which were called Philosophers,
and of them were two sects at one time: for some were philosophers of Ionia,
and some were called philosophers of Italy. The philosophers Ionici were in
Ionia, they used great diligence in natural things, and searchinge out the
course of stars. The beginner of Thales begynner of philosophers i^ Greece.
them was Thales, which divided first for the Greeks the year in three hundredth
and three score days. For though they had before twelve months, yet were they
constrained to bring the mouynge of the son to the course of the moon.
Thales did also show first of the Eclypse in Greece, and found the point when
the day and night are equal, the which was no small conning. He had learned
these things of the Egiptians, with whom God had kept this science. These
Thales taught also that the souls are ymmortall: and he is the first and true
begynner of the philosophers of Greece.

The other part of the philosophers, which Pythagoras begynner of
philosophers of Italy.
are called the Italians, began by Pythagoras: for the same lived also about
the time of Cyrus, in that uttermost part of Italy, which bends to Sicilia,
and was sometime Greece. In the time of Pythagoras reigned at Rome Seruius
Tullius: his scole was not occupied in Physic and Astronomy, as the other, but
in Arithmetic, Geometry and Music. Pythagoras lived a very solytary life with
his disciples, and used sundry ceremonies, and taught many inconvenient things
of the souls nature, that men's souls remove into beasts to be punyshed. The
Pythagorians taught their doctrines privately among themselves: and it was
commanded among them that noman should publishe them, lest by reason of a
doctrine not accustomed, the commune sort of men might be sturred either to
discord, or to a despisynge of good manners. But such kind of philosophers
dured not long: another is it now necessary to speak more of the beginning of
philosophers. I would only show i^ here, lest any man might be ignorant,
what time the connyng of sciences began and increased: we shall hereafter in
his due place speak of them, which have before all other garnyshed and had in
reverence Philosophye, whereof there is not so great number. For very few are
there that be worthy to be called with so excellent a name Philosopher, and
therefore shall we not rehearse so many of them.

Of Solon.
THough we study to be brefe here, yet will not I passover Solon
vnrehearsed: Solon (...) and beg(...) of the Roman laws Thales and Solon at
one (...).
for of him has the ciuyll law of the Romans, which is yet in use his
oryginall beginning. This Solon lived about this time, and was very familyar
with Thales. But when at Athenes were spronge great debates, because that the
greatest of the city, had made bond men of their creditours, that were not
able to pay them, even of pryuate wylfulnesse, the whole city of Athenes did
agree to Solon, that he should take order and correct this wyllynglye of the
greatestmen, and the other misvses of the commune wealth. Solon took this
wyllynglye upon him, and set forth many excellent constitutions and laws,
the which are yet manifest.

Now was Draco the law geuer by the Athenians, before, Solons laws were not
ordered with any mercy at all, for he ordained that all transgressions and
trespasses should be punished with the swearde: and for this cause said one,
that Dracons laws were written with blood, and Dracons laws.
not with y^^k. So hard and cruel constitucions were in the world at the
beginning. But nothing can be durable, that is to extreme, and is not mitigate
with the temperaunce of mercy or justice. As for Solon made a difference in
these things or degrees, and ordained that some sins should according to
reason be punyshed greueously, and other more mercyfullye ordained also of
geuinge trybute, of weyghtes, and of the seaso^s of the whole year. And
specially is this law praised, in the Solons law concerning vagabondes
which he ordained, that every man should certyfy the higher officers once in
the year how great his substance were, and of what manner craft he were,
where with he gat his living: and if there were any idle fellow or vagabounde,
too drive the same out of the city.

Of Cambyses.
CAmbyses began to raygne when his father Cyrus went to war against the
Cambyses*
Scythians. He joined the kingdom of the Egiptians, to his fathers domynion.
But he was greatly unlike his father in virtues. When Prexaspes one of his
chief counselers Prexaspes.
had admonyshed him somewhat boldelye, and said that the Perses did allow him
greatly, but that the same myslyked them, that he was given to drunkenness. He
caused the Peers of his realm to be called together, and demanded whether he
might worthily be blamed in any thing. But they answered, No, but that he also
surmounted his father Cyrus in virtue: for by his actiuenesse was Egypt also
joined to his kingdom. But Cresus (to whom Cyrus had chefely commended his
son Cambyses to be taught and nortured The (...).
in honesty) said the contrary: Ca^byses (quod he) can not yet be compared to
his father Cyrus, for he has not left such a son of his begettinge, as Cirus
has left Cambyses. This delectable saying pleased Cambises at that time. But
as the counsel departed, when none of the princes had blamed ought in him, he
commanded Prexaspes to be called to him, and bad him bring his youngest son
to him: For he would declare how sobre he might seem to be, even when he
were droncken. For he would shute with a bow at his child, when he was
droncken, and if he could hit his heart with the darte, than he might think
that in drinking he were not beside the capacite of his reason: but if not*
than he might worthily be said to be given to drunkenness.

But what needs many words? When Cambyses The (...) of Cambyses.
had well dronken, he shot at the child as at a mark, and as the darte was
pierced thoroughe, he caused it to be rypt up, and showed to his father
Prexaspes, that the heart was shot thorough a right, saying, that thereby he
might have euydence, that he was not dronken. So barbarous, cruel and
tyrannical manners brings drunkenness into men's minds, though they
Drunkenness brings in most wicked manners.
be well taught before: even as no doubt was that king Cambyses was from his
youth brought up in most honest nourture. And though a dronken man can hytt a
right in shoutinge, yet in the mean while can he not use the right counsels of
reason, and wants those virtues, which communely steare men to modestye and
auancement of glory. Such like examples ought to be showed to young men, which
sometime be enclyned and given to drunkenness: for what end followed of these,
shall we show shortly hereafter. He slew also his own brother Smerdis, whom
he caused privily to be put to death, lest he should raygne at any time. He
married also his own sister, where nevertheless nature does abhor such kind
of marriage.

It fortuned upon a time, that when king Cambyses sat at board with the queen,
at y^ meal time, set he a lions whelpe and a strong dog together to make a
game: and when the lion had the ouerhande by reason of his fearcenesse and
strength, The faythfulnesse of dogs.
another dog of no less fearcenesse brake with great strength the bands y^
he was bound withal, and help his brother the dog, and so was the lion
overcome. The king had great delight at that game, because of the faythfulnesse
of the dogs. But the queen moved with the same deed, began to weep very
bytterly, and when the king took that sorowfully, and asked the cause of her
weping, she answered: To my brother happened nothing less, than such
faythfulnesse, as I have seen in these dogs helping each other. The king
taking this The cruelnesse of Camb^ses toward ^is ^^^ster the (...).
answer wrothfully, caused her straight way t^ be had out of his sight, and
^lew her. But such co^dicions can not long prosper. For God says in the
scryptures: The blood thyrsty and deceatfull shall not live out half their
days upon earth. Wherefore God stroke him not long after with a greueous and
heavy vengeance. For as he should come out of Egypt into Persia, as he sat
upon his horse, his ^wearde fell out of his sheeth, and wounded him so sore in
the one side, that he dyed. This example shows, that God suffers tyrauntes
not (...).
very long. For he lived not much more than one year after Cyrus, another left
he any heir after him: and of this wise is he clean dead. It is truly a
pyteous thing and greatly to be bewailed, that in so little a space the
kingdom of the Perses is taken from the posterity of Cyrus. The rule of the
empire remained nevertheless with Cyrus blood. For Darius had wedded Cyrus
daughter the which nevertheless was also of Cyrus blood.

Of the punishment of a wicked judge.
NO prince is of so desperate hope, which does not at any time some laudable or
honest thing. For God does garnishe the office of a governor or high
officer, and makes that other whiles notable and necessary things are done
necessarely, for the conservation of publyke administration.

Cambyses is allowed in all historyes for this one ^ede, for the which he is
worthy to be praised. He Si^amnes a wicked judge.
had a governor in the fore part of Asia, called Si^amnes: he heard say that
this judge judged vniu^^ly, being corrupt with gifts of money: Wherefore he
caused him to be slain, and the skin ^lain o^ from his body commanded he to
be fastened upon the judges seat, and ordained in stead of the dead judge
his so^^e called Ota^es, and sat him Ota^es.
in the seat ^^diciall upon this manner and condition, that by the beholding of
his fathers skin he should beware, lest he should be punished likewise. This
example warns those that are in authorytye, to remember that God will not
suffer wickedness to be unrevenged.

Of Darius King of the Persians.
When Cambyses was gone into Egypt, the Magi rebelled against him at Susa, An
example of a notable inte^p^^a^ce. Who were called Magi
and one of the Magies took the name of a king upon him by gyle. Magi are
called y^ wise men and priests of those contryes. But when Cambyses made him
now ready to return into the kingdom, that he might punish worthily those
seditious Magies, even in his yourney by a mischaunce (as we have said before)
he dyed. After the death of Cambises the Magies being sla^^e, y^ Peers of the
realm took the kingdom to them: selves after that poyntyng a day of assembly,
they came to treat of restoringe one into the kingedome Persy for a certain
order.

The peers or Princes were seven in number, as in the Germ^ne empire are seven
Electors: those doutlesse were chosen and poynted by great wisdom and
counsel, as the highest counselors of the wh^le empire of Persia. When now
these seven princes were come together, to devise for the commune health of the
realm, there rose controversy in deuisynge, and of three things specially.

One Othan^s counseled to chose no more kings, ^^^ ^^lib^^^^^^ o^ se^^^
^^^^ces ^^ P^r^^ of ^^^ ^^^^(...).
but that the princes bound by an aliaunce, should rule a like, liberty being
retained of ethersyde: for it were evident enough before and proved by example,
that one man lord of so many and great things, becomes lyghtely haut and
presumpteous, and to fall to tyranny, as it was evident that Cambyses had done.

The second Megabysus refusing that counsel said, that such lybertye
should be worsse than tyranny: for the princes and cities, if they want a
Lord, can not but misuse that liberty to private wylfulnesse. But lest any
such do happen, it were good not to choice one only king, but to orde^^e
some princes, by whom should always remain the full power of a king.

The third called Darius refelling the sentence of either of them, counseled
one king to be chosen: for though in this point, as in all other things of men
might befall great and many inconveniences, yet is no royalme or dominion more
surer than ^^^^rchy ^^ ^he bent ^^^^ ^^ of ^^ ^^py^^ ^ ^^^^l^e.
the Monarchy, that is, if one raygne, in whose power and hands the chief
point of the raygne do consist. For though these three counsels be a like honest
and very good: yet if they be conferred, together, it is most evident, there
can no fayrer or more profytabler thing be found, tha^ a Monarchye, namelye,
which goes next to a godly kingdom. Moreover it can not be that concord can
be kept long among fre princes, or if some princes be chosen to govern some
mighty realm in stead of a king: and that for the diuersytye of most
weighty causes, which might some time befall in so large a dominion, in the
which the princes could not allwaye agree together. Besides this that there
should not want amongst the princes the endeavor of souerayntye and
governance above the other, over the which he should procure to rule, as over
subjects or inferiors. These were the causes which Darius alleged: unto whom
agreed the other four princes, and ordained to choice a king after the
costum^ble manner.

But lest any debate might arise among the princes of the royalme they
determined to commit the lot of the kings eleccion to God. They agreed that
the princes should come together very early on horses into a certain place,
and whose horse should neye first, the same should be king. Darius being come
home, showed this counsel to the controller of his court, which said he would
easily bring it to pass. For before the euenyng of the appointed day he did
lead Darius horse and a mare into the place appointed, and there lets he go
the horse to the mare* that in the morning the horse coming to the place,
might neye for the mare being absent.

And as the princes came together in the appointed a place at y^ set hour,
Darius horse neyen first: and lest they might dout whether it were Gods will
that Darius should be their king, suddenly at y^ same very time when the horse
neyed, was there a lightening in an open and clear air with thonderinge.
Forthwith the other princes lyghtynge from their horses, did to Darius dew
reverence. Darius is made king of Persia.
And by this occasion was Darius set up in the high dignity of the Persian
empire, the which he governed after that with great praise. He restored with
great power the countries that were rebelled when Cyrus dyed in Scythia, to the
empire. Babylon the city also, refusing now the dominion of the Perses, he
recovered after longesiege, and that by this means:

One zopyrus the son of Megabysus, one of The notable ^^^thfulnesse ^^
Zopyrus (...) Darius.
the seven lords or princes, caused willinglye his nose, ears and lyppes to
be cut of, makes the king privy of his counsel, and falls to the
Babilonians as one that were fled: he complayneth of the kings cruelnesse,
which caused him to be of this wise dismayde and toren, because he gave him
counsel to forsake the city: another feigned he himself otherwise, than to be
the kings enemy, and that he were fled to the Babilonians for cause of counsel
taking. The Babilonians did freely receive him, and as he was made captain of
them, he slew some of Darius soldiers: for so was he agreed with Darius, that
thereby he might at the first augment the confidence of the Babilonians in him.
Afterward ye Babilonians trusted him with the whole army, the which he betrayed
to Darius: and made also that he recovered the whole city, the which he had
now besieged six months and a whole year. As for Darius gave high thanks
to this zopyrus for his faithfulness, for he set him afterward before all the
princes of his kingdom. And as a pomgranate was given him, he said: He A
grave saying of Darius.
would wysh him no better thing in this life. than that if he might get so
many zopyries, as there are grains in this apple. For thereby would he signify
that a king can have no worthier treasure, nor no stronger fortresses, than
faithful friends and counselors.

Of Darius Wars in Greece.
THE Persians assayed to draw by Empyres have their bounds.
claim to them the kingdoms of Macedony and Greece, because they bordered upon
Persia. But because God has prefixed every royalme as it were certain
bounds, the which it can not pass: therefore could the Persian kings subdue
nor make subjects to their empire, another the Macedonians nor the Greeks.
Wherefore happened about that time in Greece many and great chances: the which
as they are many, even so to rehearse them all ordely, were to long: but I
shall rehearse them all ordely, were to long: but I shall rehearse some of
them, howbeit none save the very best, and that brefely.

The Persians sendinge Ambassadors to Amyntas king of Macedony.
Amyntas king of Macedouy, desired that he would yield himself to them.

Amyntas being afraid because of the Persians, power, granted willingly to do
their request in a manner prostrate, and treated messengers very courteously.
And when a royal banquet was ordained for y^ Ambassadors after their will, they
desired to have brought to them noble women and ladies, for to garnyshe the
banquet. Amyntas which durst deny them nothing, commanded to bring them.

When the Persians were now droncken, they dalyed with the gentle women
discourteously, insomuch that their vnmanerelynesse yrked and displesed king
Amyntas, and his son Alexander the Alexander (...) Amyntas.
young king: and by reason of the shamefulnesse and reverence of age, desired
Alexander his father the king Amyntas, that departing out of the company, he
would go to bed, and he would remain with the gestes. As the father went now
away, Alexander faynyng mirth, he suffered the Persians to daly and play more
frelier with the women: at the last he prayed them all to rise, and suffer the
ladies to go a little apart, for they should straight way (...) of Alexander
return better trymmed. The nobles of the Persians suffered that wyllingly. In
the mean season caused Alexander the fairest yongmen apparelled with women's
garments to return into the banquet, and hyde sweardes under their garments,
wherewyth in daylienge they should slaye the Perses, the which was done. For
the Persyans were killed of every one of these young men, and thus was their
vnshamefulnesse greueouslye punished. This Alexander is rehearsed among the
great grauntfathers of Alexander. After this rebelled the Greeks also, which
were under Darius in the forepart of Asia, and taking the city Sardis, burned
Sardis.
it, and to this did the Athenians aid them. The sutteltye of Histieus in
making an vproure.
For one Histieus a noble prince sent a servant to their captain, and lest
the matter should be disclosed, polyng his servants head, he prynted upon
his head letters containing this sentence, that they should disceuer and
rebel to the king: afterward as the hear was grown again, he sent no
letters, but this servant to the captain with this message only, that he
should klyppe of his hear, and look upon his head: the which when the
captain had done, straight way fell he from Darius. But this traitor was
killed, and Histieus was hanged, and the commotion being swaged with these
remedies, went no farther.

This and other like gave Darius occasion to How great settinge forth to war
upon Greece Darius made.
gather a great host, namely a hundredth thousand footmen, and ten thousand
horsemen, and to send them into Greece to be revenged of the Athenians for the
sedition and vproure. They pytched their tents two mile from Athenes. When
now some counseled not to wythstande the enemies, but if they besieged the
city, to defend it manly, only Miltiades counsellinge the contrary, showed
that the syege should be heavy and very intolerable for the communalty: but
with a sodayn inuasyon might the enemies be lyghtely vanquyshed. They The
counsel of Miltiades.
followed Miltiades counsel, whom also they made captain of the war: the
Athenians made an army against the enemies of ten thousand, another had they
any succourse out of the other cities, save of one thousand men that the city
Platea had made Platea.
out. And with this small army, was that great and chosen company of the
Persyans discomfyted The re^ow(...)d victory ^^ Miltiades
and laid down: and this battayll deserved a very great praise, for it
delivered all Greece from a great and incredible fear, where with she was no
less taken at that time, than if at our time the turk should invade Germany.

We must not ouerpasse here, what recompense the Athenians have made finallye
to Miltiades, and how they have requyted him, for this good deed. For beside
this victory, had he done other great acts for the commune wealth. With
chyualry had he added other cities and yles, wherewyth he augmented the empire
and dominion of the Athenians. But because great virtues can not want the envy
and detractions of evil men, it was procured by the people and brought to
pass, (...) the (...)
that M^ltiades was cast into the commun preson, until he paid to the
communalty three hundredth thousand crowns. But when he was not able to pay
that sum, and began now to be sick of the long presonment and stenche,
his son Cymon (...) son ^^ M^ltiades
went into preson to deliver the father: at the last when the father was dead,
a very rich citysin married Myltiades daughter, and disbursynge out the sum
of money, he delivered Cymon out of preson. Can not good men be duly rewarded
of the communaltye on this wise?

Of King Xerxes.
Darius had two sons: the elder was begotten ear he had the kingdom offered,
but the younger called Xerxes was in y^ Xerxes.
time of the kingdom of his mother Atossa that was Cyrus daughter. The same by
reason he was of both parents of the kings blood* he succeeded his father
being dead in the royalm, that the kingdom might remain by the issue of
Cyrus. The elder brother suffered this with a great modesty of mind, stryuynge
in no manner with his brother Xerxes. As now the host of y^ Persians was over
thrown in Greece, Darius assembled a new army, but in this appoyntynge dyed he.
Wherefore Xerxes straight before his raygne accomplished the preparation that
his father had begone, and entered into Greece with a most puyssaunt army,
insomuch that some have written, that never was so great an How great Xerxes
army was against the Greeks.
army assembled before at one time, as was king Xerxes army. Iustine says,
that of his own kingdoms were seven hundredth thousand men in armoure, and of
the other that were confederat with him, three hundredth thousand men. Though it
seems not well to be believed, that there have been such a multitude, yet bear
histories witness enough, and also sunderye battails that were had at that
time, that Xerxes host was very great. And now at this present time do we
prove sufficiently, with how great an host, howbeit light armoure, the Turks
and other nations of the East do make their war.

Daniel also witnesses, that a king shall come out of Persia against the
Greeks with a very great host of soldiers. It is red also, that when this
great multitude was now gathered in one field, Xerxes weping, said with an h^^y
heart. The cause of man's life is very miserable: for of so many thousand men,
can not one live over The grave ^^yenge of Xerxes.
a hundredth year. It is also said that when Xerxes now ouerlayed the
strayghtes of the sea with brydges, as there rose a tempeste, he commanded to
beat the sea.

To this belongs it also, that it is not unworthily said, that in going
forth, his hooste dried up floudes with drinking.

Wonders were also seen, the which admonished (...).
the king to desyst of his enterprise, because of the myshappe to come. For a
^a^^ brought forth an hare in the host, where by was signified flight. There
appeared also a comet, called Ceratias, the which is bowed like a horn. There
was also an Eclipse of the son. And as hystoryes make mention, such signs
are not seen without some unhappiness or hurt, namely by the which God
threateneth his wrath: and therefore ought they not to be despised, but rather
a pryck or s^ynge for us that we do fear God: for here may be seen what
alteracions of commune welthes and all estates of the world are ensued.

Xerxes would first set upon the Greeks with (...) the Greeks is (...).
battayll by land. As for Greece is closed round about, and there is no entry
into it save by see, or by some strayghtes of the mountains, where certain
thousands of the Greeks were set to keep the enemies from entering in, of the
which the greatest part fled contynently as the Perses would enter: only
four hundredth Lacedaemonians abode which The of the Lacedaemonians.
used great force to resist the enemies: and though they were far less in
nombre and weaker, than that they could drive back so great force of the
enemies, yet declared they such strength in fighting, that they slew about
twenty thousand of the Perses.

For being aided with the oportunite of the strayghtnesse of the mountains,
they were safe of the invasion and oppression of the multitude of the enemies,
another could they be enuyrouned by waytes layenge. In the skyrmisse dyed
Xerxes two brethren, but on the other side died the four hundredth
Lacedemonyans, with their king Leonides. The act is greatly praised by reason
of the courage and strength to defend the country, because that they being so
few in nombre, were not afraid to set them selves against so great a
multitude: and though they had not the victory, yet was the power of the
enemies greatly abated with this ^yght, and their hardenesse mynyshed.

When the Perses had the victory in this battayll, wounder it is, how greatly
all Greece was afraid, and in that part of Greece did some cities yield them
selves freely to Xerxes. At Athenes also one Cyrsylus, or as says Herodotus,
Lycidas Cyrsylus.
counseled, that the Athenians also should give themselves under Xerxes
power: for in no manner are they able to wythstande so mighty an enemy.
Themistocles contrary wise counseled to defend Themistocles a defender of the
liberty of the country.
the lyberty of the contrary. For if the Perses fortune to have dominion in
Greece, all honesty of manners shall be in danger, all law, all good virtues
shall peryshe. The Perses shall use all wyllfulnesse against their wives and
chylderen, as it were euidente they have done against them, which were now
subject to them: therefore were it more honest to dye in the liberty, than
willinglye to admit such lords.

This counsel of Themistocles was accepted of every man with a commune
consent, that they should defend themselves manlye against the enemies. The
Athenians being wroth with Cyrsylus for his wicked counsel, commanded (...)*
to stone him: and the women likewise stoned his wife, because her husband had
put forth such counsel, the which if they had followed, they should have
brought all their chylderen to dishonesty.

This deed is praised for the virtue, and is worthy of remembrance, that they
would rather dye for the lybertye of the contry, than they should yield
themselves to a strange nacyon, to overthrow the state of their city and all
policye and honesty.

As the Athenians asked counsel at the answer (...)*
of Apollo at Delphas, it was answered them: that they should have victory
with walls of wood: the which Themistocles expounded of the defense of
ships, and he exhorted that leaving the city, they should lead their wives
and children into the ships: for their city should at length not be able to
wythstande the power and so great multitude of the Persians, beside that also
be not the Perses very well appointed by see.

This counsel was allowed, and the residue of the cities have followed it.
Sparta and Corinthus, the which with a furnyshed nauye held by force the
straightes of the sea, by the isle Salamina, lest they might be compassed by
the multitude of the ships that Xerxes had.

When Xerxes heard that the Greeks had made a navy, and understood that great
danger should come to him, if the Greeks used the sea freely, and as they had
opportunity, should fall into the kingdom: it was counseled Xerxes, that
contrariwise he should combre the Greeks with war upon the sea. The same was
done. But as the Greeks had the victory, the most part of the Perses was
discomfyted, and many ships were drouned.

This victory restored a courage to all Greece, and made Xerxes feeble. The king
him self was not in the battaill, but remaininge with a few ships upon the
coast, he did only behold it. All the Grecians rendered the renoume of the
battaill to Themistocles only, because that the victory being gotten by his
counsel, all Greece was saved.

Among the rest of the traynes, which Themistocles used in this war, I
thought to Themistocles suttyll deuyse.
rehearse this one suttyll deuyse. When Xerxes was abashed after the battayll,
he thought the king might easelye be brought thereto, that leauinge Greece,
he should return for altogether into Persia with the rest of his army.

Therefore faynynge him self humbly prostrate* as wyllinge to procure favor
by the king, he caused to show him by the messenger, that the Greeks devised
to break the bridge, the which he had caused to be laid before upon the sea:
Wherefore to have him straight way out of Greece, before the occasyon of
flyenge were taken him, without he would cast him self in great danger. As
he heard this tydynge, he made him strayghte way ready to fly. But when in
flyenge he fande the bridge broken by the tempeste, he passed over with a little
boat, even with utter danger of his life, because the sea was troubled with
the vehemence of the floudes. Of this wise did God turn the fortune of the
dice, and punyshed the (...)mple (...)*
pride. Great princes have here an example set before them, whereby they must
learn not to trust in their puyssaunce, but that in the fear of God and
trust to God must great things be taken in hand. That he had this shameful
end, for because this expedicion made every man amassed, and also for because
Xerxes did bring on to Greece such a great multitude and power none otherwise
than in our time the Turk was constrained to forsake the city of Vienne with
great shame, which came into Germany with an host of two hundredth thousand
men.

Howbeit Xerxes departing out of Greece, left Mardonius the capytayne there
with three (...)ni(...)*
thousand souldyours: and that for this cause, because the king persuaded by
Mardonius counsel went into Greece, against the mind and will of the other
Lords.

And because it happened not as Mardonius promised, therefore dredinge lest
being returned home he might lose his head, because of the mischaunce of the
war, he desired that he might be left in Greece with that army, to assaye all
fortunes of war, if by chance he could make feeble the affairs of the
Greeks. Xerxes than suffered that, and betoke him to his fortune.

First began Mardonius frendely to entreat the Greeks, that having laid
before them tolerable conditions of peace, they would willingly yield
themselves. But the Greeks being become more courageous, by reason of the
victory, refused utterly all dominion of the Perses, and denyenge the leage,
asked that he should defend him self with force and fighting hand. Than
took Mardonius and burnt the city of Athenes, and went thorough until Thebe:
for they of Thebe were fallen to the Perses. The Athenians and Lacedaemonians
making than again a fresh army by land of an hundredth thousand men, met at
sundry times with Mardonius in battayll: at the last Mardonius constrained for
faut of vytayls, made an end. Alexander Alexander.
king of Macedony was with the Perses, of whom we made mention before: the same
showed the Greeks before the evening, that they should make them ready in
arms on the next day, for Mardonius was determined to pyche his last field,
and that was so done, but the Perses being overcome, lost the field, Mardonius
being slain also, which thing the other counselors of king Xerxes told him
before the war began. But this was the end of so great a setting forth to
war: and when this war was ended, the cities of Greece began too encreace in
power and enlargynge of their dominion subduyng many yles of the Perses, which
they adjoined to their dominion. Moreover the Greeks being become puyssau^t,
waxed also haut and presumtuous, and for desire of dominion, they procured also
inward sedicion and war with in themselves: and being overcome with mutual
damages that each had done to the other, they were constrained finally to yield
themselves to strange princes, quenchynge and destroyeng all the estate of
their common wealth and the virtues, whereby they floryshed before. But of this
shall we treat a little hereafter.

It is necessary to know Themistocles example Themisto(...)rded for (...).
before any thing, the which for so much as he was the man, by whose prouisse
and counsel whole Greece was saved, for the which thing also his praises are
auaunced, more then of any valeaunt captain, which Greece had: yet was he euel
rewarded of his citesens: for they drove him out of y^ city. This thank
gives the common people for the most worthy virtues: yea the deuell himself
blyndeth men, that they do not acknowledge so high gifts of God. Wherefore it
behooves the best and excellent men to have patience before all things: for it
can not be, but they must have grefes and all unthankfulness in that state of
life. After that fled Themistocles fl^^th too Artaxerxes.
Themistocles to Artaxerxes, by whom he was had in great honor, in all
things equal to the princes and peers of his royalme. It is written also,
that Artaxerxes should have said: he could wyshe his enemies no more evil,
but that they blinded with such madness, did put away wise men from them.

Of Artaxerxes with the long hand.
AS Xerxes was dead, reigned his son Lo^gimanus* that is with the long hand.
Artaxerxes: whose right hand was longer than the left, whereof he gat the
surrname, with the long hand. This king is chefely praised for his syngular
wisdom and gentleness of manners and endeavor of peace. Therefore do I
rehearse his historye here no more at length, that we may finallye return to
the Iewysh hystories, lest we be ignorance what state was in the church and
spyrytuall kingdom.

Of Zorobabel the Iewysh captain.
WE have showed before that in the Bible is one of the Persian kings called
Assuerus: but the same was Assuerus.
Darius Histaspis, and as I suppose, this Darius is Assuerus, which had Hester.
queen Hester. Herodotus does also make mention of Artistona, the which Darius
had beside queen Artistona* Atossa.
Atossa, and says that the same Artistona was very well beloved of Darius:
and it appears that this same was Hester. Philo writes also that the history
of Judith happened in the time of this Darius: and that Arphaxad, whereof the
history of Judith makes mention, was captayn of y^ Assyrians, after that they
were now fallen from Cyrus, wh^ was overcome of the Scythyes. I do not disalow
this meaning of Philo: but verily as I do suppose, the history of Judith was
now already fulfilled, before that Judah was led into bondage: and also before
the Persians monarchy.

For Arbaces king of the Medes was before Arbaces.
the monarchy of the Perses: and Ninius was destroyed in the time of the
Persians kingdom: and when the Perses had the monarchy, nether Ninius, nor the
Medes had their king. Howbeit I grant here every man to defend his meaning.

After Darius Histaspis sets Philo Artaxerxes with the long hand, passing
over king Xerxes, but doutlesse for none other cause, save as is showed before
namely, than wha^ Xerxes was gone into Greece, Darius with the long hand
governed the royalme in the East in the mean season. And this is that Darius
with the long hand, which (...) is, (...) long hand.
gave the Jews leave the second time to build again the temple. For though
Cyrus had permitted the Jews to return to Jerusalem, for to till their land,
and to restore the kingdom and the worship of God: nevertheless in the mean
season after Cyrus death* were they let by the borderers, y^ the building
could not goo forewarde, until the second year of Artaxerxes with the long
hand, who^ Philo calls Darius with the long hand. The Same commanded in the
second year of his king(...) by a commune proclamation and commandment, that
Ieru^al^ and the temple should be repared. This was the occasion, by the which
the Iewysh nations was restored to his liberty, instituted again the
governance of the royalme, with the Gods service, and builded again the
temple and cities. And though Judah had not hitherto his kings, yet had they
princes of David's posterite, until that time, that the Machabees began to
reign. First reigned zorobabel, whose posterity what fortune they had, and
how finally the whole kingdom is translated from David's posterity, shall we
show hereafter. For so was it prophesied before by the prophets, that Christ
should be borne about that Christ's coming.
time of David's blood, that foren princes should usurp to them the kingdom
of the Jews, that was now already alienated.

The reckoning of the seventy wekes out of Daniel.
IT was showed Daniel by heavenly reuelacion of Christus coming, and how
long the Iewysh people should last. There is a notable witness in this
prophecy, to confirm the certaynte of our faith against the Jews, which
strive and contend that Christ is not yet come, and wait yet for another
Messiah.

Verily the rekenyng of the time appointed by Daniel, is easy, and specially it
is pleasant to know thereby, that Christ was surely come about that time, the
which Daniel has prescribed. For though other do count diversely, yet if ye go
not from the order of the histories, there shall be found no great dissension,
wherefore ye could doubt. For the diligent rekening of the time, is requisite to
repete out of Ptolome these Eclipses, that are happened, and to gather out of
them ordely every year: but that were not one man's labor. And diligently
ought Bishops to occupy them in these things, with doing costs, that the
understanding of so notable prophecies, might be clearly had in the church.
I truly will gather here out of the best histories the nombre of the years,
and endeavor to make the rekenyng there of very plain.

Daniel says: Seventy wekes are concluded The place in Daniel of the seventy
wekes.
upon this people, and specially according to the commandment of buyldyng
again Jerusalem, shall be syxty and nine wekes, until Christ's kingdom, and
than shall Christ be put to death.

First must it be known what that the wekes do yearly signifye, so that every
weke make seven years, the which may easily be proved. Wherefore the seventy
wekes make four hundredth and nynety years.

Secondly says Daniel: Christ shall be put to death after three score and nine
wekes: but so that he teach the half weke, and afterward be put to death. The
time and office of Christ is notable expressed of this manner.

Thyrdly must the nine and seventy wekes be rekened from the second year of
Darius Longimanus, that is, with the long hand: For then did God send Zachary
and Aggeus the prophets, that they should comfort and certaynely assure the
people of repairing Jerusalem hereafter without any hynderaunce. And of this
word, that is, of this reuelacion are the angels words to be understand:
Because then was made the sure promise to the people, of the furtheraunce of
the temples repayryng.

Beside that commanded Longimanus that self same year by an open
commandment, that ^he Jews should not be hyndered of their purpo^^d work
of building the city and temple, as it was done before. But all this is to be
red in the bodies of Eldras.

And surely to this same delay of time in repairing of the temple had saint
Ihon respect in the second chapter of his gospel, where the Jews said, that
in buyldyng of the temple, were spent syx and forty years: for that is the
nombre of the years, from the second year of Cyrus, until the syxte year
of Longimanus, wherein the work of the temple was accomplyshed.

But now is it gathered out of the book of the Machabees, and out of Josephus,
that from the beginning of Alexander, after the death of the last Darius until
Christ was borne, to be three hundredth and ten years.

From Christ's birth until his baptyme thyrty years.

Summa, from the beginning of Alexander until the baptyme of Christ, three
hundredth and forty years.

To these put the time from the second year of Longimanus, until Alexander
after the death of the last Darius, and as Metasthenes counts there shall be
a hundredth and five and forty years.

Summa, from the second year of Longimanus until, the baptism of Christ are
four hundredth, four score and five year.

And therefore three score and nine yearly wekes make even four hundredth and
four score and two wekes. Whereby it is manifest, that when Christ was
baptized, were fulfilled three score and nine yearly wekes, and in the weke
following taught Christ, and in the same half weke was he put to death: For
Christ was put to death the fourth year after that he was baptized. Wherefore
when this weke that follows is added to the three score and nine, there shall be
seventy wekes: and this is the manner to count the time appointed by Daniel. For
after Christ's death are the Jews no more Gods people, and their temple was
afterward an abominacion, the which Daniel witnessed plainly.

Beside this are other notable doctrines, and consolations of troubled
consciences in this prophecy, of Christ's office and kingdom, that he came to
preach forgiveness of sins: but to expound all this makes to no purpose
here, another is it here taken in hand.

I have truly sought out with so great dilige^te as I could, the manner of
countyng the seventy wekes of Daniel: another do I find that it can greatly
varye, if ye will follow the form of histories. For though ye will not follow
Metasthenes, yet does the rekenyng of the Greeks agree very well here with. For
after the countyng of the Greeks are between the death of Alexander, and the
beginning of Augustus two hundredth and four score years, the which I can
prove with very strong reasons. If ye do now take the years of the Persians,
after thee second year of Longimanus by the Greeks, ye shall find the same
also.

After Alexander until Christ's birth, are three hundredth and two and twenty
years.

After Christ's birth until his baptysme thyrty years.

Put thereto the number of the Persians from the second year of Longimanus an
hundredth and two and thyrty years after the Greeks.

Summa of this is four hundredth, four score and four years.

So perfectly do the hystories of the Greeks agree with the time that is found
in Josephus and Philo, that ye may openly perceive, the time of Christ's
coming to be most fyttly appointed by Daniel. And truly I doubt not, but
wise and learned men will allow and testifye, that both these rekenynges that
we have set here, may be very well proved by witnesses of hystoryes. And
without it were to long, I could bring yet other more rekenynges, which
should agree with these also: So that it is no doubt, but that Daniel has
most ryghtely hytt thee time of Christ's coming. It has also no small pyth
of consolacion or comfort, (though the manner of the time do not agree so justly
with every minute,) that we may be certyfyed, that the time prophesied of
Daniel be long sense past. Wherefore are the Jews in manifest error, which
can by no reasons prove, that the same time is not yet past, though they will
understand the wekes of days or years. But her of is enough.

The table of the years of the world, which shows the time poynted by
Daniel.
M De. lvi until the floude. C C xciii. until Abraham was borne. C C C C
xxiij. until Moses was borne. L xxx. until the going out of Egypt. C C C C
lxxx. until Salomons temple was builded. C C xxxviii. until king Ioas. C C
xci. until Ieconias was carried into Babylon. Xi. until the wastyng of
Jerusalem by Nabuchodonosor. L xx. dured the captivity of Babylon. C xci. dured
the monarchy of the Perses after the captivity of Babylon. Vii. was Alexander
after Darius. C xlvi. dured the rule of the Greeks until Iuhas Machabeus. C
xxvij. dured the kingdom of the Machabees as writes Josephus. XXX. Herodes. In
the thyrtyeth year of Herod was Christ borne. M. D. xxxii. sense Christ our
lord and Savior was borne. Our of this table is easily gathered the reason
and manner of the years in Daniels writing. But I find by the Greeks the time
after Alexanders death of this wise: In the.cxiiii. Olympias dyed Alexander.
Clxxxiiii. Olympias began the rule of Augustus after the death of Julius. The
xlii. years of Augustus was Christ borne. These years together sense the
death of Alexander make about cccxx. years. This number does not so greatly
disagre with the other above rehearsed, and can easily be made to gre of learned
men.
Of Esdras.
A Certain space after the commandment publyshed did king Artaxerxes let
Esdras the scribe return to Jerusalem. And duly not without a cause ought
mention to be made of this man in the histories: for the Esdras gathered
together the books of the Bible.
books of the holy scripture, that were now scattered and strowed, did he
gather again and set in order. For this work was worthy to be the duty of a
true bishop. Because that without holy scripture, cannot be maynteined the true
religion and worship of God.

In the time of this Artarerxes Longimanus began the great war of
Peloponnesus, which The war of Peloponnesus.
the Greeks had among themselves, in the which the city of Athens at the
last was utterly destroyed. This war lasted near hand until the end of the
Persian monarchy: and therefore I will first brefely rehearse in their order the
Persian king. s. such as are yet behind.

Of Darius the bastard.
Darius the bastard reigned after Longimanus, and of truth he was not the
son of Lo^gimanus, but had his sister to wife and was his brother in law. He
had two sons, At taxerxes whom they call Mnemon, and Cyrus the younger.
Artaxerxes succeeded his father Artaxerxes Mnemon, Cyrus.
in the empire. Cyrus was made most puissaunt in Ionia.

Of Artaxerxes Mnemon.
AS Darius was dead, Cyrus began to take falsely to him the kingdom: for
beside that he ruled in a most puissaunt duchy, he was apt also for all manner
of thing, and delited chefely in war, and therefore armed he himself with
great power against his brother. The war of Cyrus against ^^^ brother.
Beside this had his mother more affection to him, than to his brother, which
had a modest and gentle mother wit. But God did not prosper this wicked
enterprise of Cyrus: for in a battaill, where he tought against his brother,
was he slain. Artaxerxes declared himself not without courage in this
battaill: for he was greueously wonded of Cyrus, and lept upon another horse,
that he should know, that the victory came to him afterward by God only.

Of Ochus.
OChus the son of Artaxerxes was most gredy of man's blood: for beside the
great tyranny that he used, he slew also his own brothern. He builded the city
Sidon, and brought Egypt again to the Persian monarchy: but they kept the
loyalte of their yeldyng not very long. At the last was he slain of one of his
governors.

Of Arsames.
ARsames was the son of Ochus: the same was made king being yet young, by the
capitain of the host, which flew his father Ochus. But when Arsames began now
to wax great, the capitain of the host fearyng, by reason of the wicked deed
that he had done, he slew by a disceat this Arsames also. Afterward making a
league with Codomanus prince of Armenia, he took to him the kingdom also, and
called him, Darius. Thus was the kynred of the noble prince Cyrus kynred was
que^shed.
Cyrus quenshed, and the kingdom of the Persians being translated from Cyrus
posterite, came to a foren prince. Nether is that only to be lamented, that
such power and honor, and so high gifts of God, were deleyed and put out of
remembrance within so few years: but much rather, that Cyrus folowers being
straight way unlike him, did declare their father to have no manner of virtue,
the which appears in Ochus, whose feats of tyranny gave occasion that the
whole kynred of Cyrus was abolyshed.

Of the last Darius.
The same was strange from Cyrus but he Darius the last.
was made prince of Armenia by king Ochus for his noble acts of chyuairy, for
the which acts also he was chosen king by them, that had slain Arsames, left
he should be revenged of Ochus, that had done him good. But An example of
unkindness.
being blinded by this occasion, and with the hope of the kingdom that was
offered him, he forgot all the benefits, that he had received of Ochus, and
having the kingdom, he called himself Darius, that nothing should be wanting
to the royal dignity. But he was grievously punished for his vnkynonesse and
disloyalty. For when he was vanquyshed of Alexander, losing all his lands
and kingdom, he lost also his life and the whole monarchy of Persia. But we
shall treat more largely hereof in the beginning of the third monarchy, and
when we shall speak of Alexander.

The Wars of the cities of Greece.
WE have touched before how the Greeks waxed welthy and presumptuous when the
Perses were driven out of their lands: for pride and presumption do commonly
follow after great prosperity. Wherefore during this monarchy, they had great
and durable wars among themselves, by the which whole Greece went finally to
naught: insomuche, that after ward it was open for every man to break in. And
also for the most honest governance and laws, which they used in their common
wealth, succeeded filthiness and most corrup manner of behaueour. And whom would
it not greatly pity to read, that so many and great commodities or yuels, and
so durable and wicked Most great wars raised very light causes.
wars are raised of so light causes. They be examples herely not only to be
wondered at, but also most worthyest to be marked, for they may admonyshe men,
that they take no war in hand lightely and for every light cause, but only
constrained by great necessity: seeing the war raised among the Greeks for a
small occasion, could be in no manner nor means be swaged and laid down, till
finally strange people falling into Greece, oppressed both parts.

It is not my mind here to describe this whole war: for Theucidides,
Xenophon, and afterward other have written thereof whole books. But I will
rehearse one thing among all other, namely what fall the city of Athens has
had in this war, and what misery she has suffered, when she was taken in.
And again how she was at the last restored again by the virtues, moderation
and patience of some good men. For as hautnesse, hardiness and presumption
brought the state of the city in decay, even so did patience and meekness of
manners restore the same again.

The beginning of the war was aforen cause, The occasions of the ware of
Peloponnesuswere light and how long they lasted.
the which the Athenians might easily have esthued. For the Corinthians were
enemies to the city Corcyra, the which required aid of the Athenians: and
optained it the easier, because that the Athenians, which were already strong
on the sea, hoped that through the league and confederation of the^ of Corcyra,
which had also great puissau^ce upon the sea, they should become lords of
whole Greece. On the other side y^ Corinthia^s required assistau^ce of the
Lacedaemonians, and of this wise was Greece divided. The Lacedaemonians did join
them selfs with the Perses, of whom they were assisted with money and victuals:
howbeit the Perses used in the mean season disloyalte or falshode, lest the
Lacedemonia^s should become to mighty. And this war dured (as says Xenophon)
eight and twenty year, from the time of Longimanus, until Axtarerxes Mnemon,
and many cities peryshed myserably in this war. Also may be seen a wonderful
alteration of fortune in the examples of this war. For when Alcibiades was
captain of the Athenians, were the Lacedaemonians greatly put to the worse and
slain, and that in the four and five and twentieth year: so that they
despayred ever to come to their former ability. Howbeit shortly after, in the
next Alcibiades.
year was the world turned. For when Alcibiades was driven out of the city,
though the en^^e of some malepart or euel men, were the Athenians slayen of
Lysander.
Lysander by the city Egos of Potanus, where had happened a strange wonder in
the beginning A wonder seen in the time of the Grecia^s war.
of this war. For in the air was seen a great fire the space of three score
and fyftene days. Afterward fell a great stone from above into the cicie.
After this battaill was the city of Athens environed with a heavy syege. Many
died of hunger. Being demanded to yield them, upon this condition The obstma^^
and malepartnesse of yt Athenians in time of war confirmed also with a dear.
that they should break down the towers and fortresses of the city: they
refused malepartly the co^dicto^s of peace, and remained by their purpose:
giving also a common commandment, that who so should cou^saill to make a
league of agreement with the enemies, should be put to death. As lately is
happened with y^ Florentines about.ii. years past. But after five months were
the Athenians constrained with hunger to send Ambassadors into the hoostes
tents too demand peace. Whereupon when they had taken deliberacion in the
counsel of thoos that had con^ederated themselves the Corinthians and
Thebanes did constantly counsel, that the city of Athens should be
overthrown even out from the foundation, and that of all their dominion should
be made commune pastures. But the Lacedaemonians reproved that, supposyng to be
not honest to quench and cast it away at once of such wise and to forgett the
remembrance of such benefits, wherewyth this city had helped whole Greek
against the Medes and Perses. Moreover could not also so excellent a state of
this city be overthrown, without the incredible hurt of all the Grecians.
For they said: that Greece seyeth with two eyes, whereof the one Sparta and
Athens are two eyes of Greece.
was Sparta, the other Athenes: Wherefore head must be taken, lest Greece have
but one eye. Whereupon it was concluded finally that Athenes being saved, only
the towers and walls should be cast down, and a certain governance should
be prescribed the Athemans, after the which they should live, and so should
peace be made on both parties. The yeldyng of the Athenians.
The Athenians yielded themselves freely upon these conditions, and the walls
were cast down with great triumph: for with minstrelsy did they dau^se also.
Part of their navy was brent, and part carried they with them. This happened
about the seven and twentyeth year when this war had lasted. Nevertheless
were the Lacedaemonians alrayd of one Alcibiades, which was sled to the Perses
when he was driven out of Athenes. Wherefore the Lacedaemonians required of the
Perses, that they would Alcibiades Ayeng to the Perses is slain. The Perses are
an example of dislopal^^.
slain Alcibiades, which the Perses did by a trap though the Perses had
received Alcibiades according to the office of hospitality, and that he had
put all his trust in the faith of the Perses. But it chau^seth so with men,
that were fortune does incline her self, that way does man's favor love also.
Therefore ought he chefely to be ware, even of the unfaith fullness offrendes,
which is out of prosperity, and he whom men do envy and yrke, for hatred of
his virtues. This Alcibiades was hyghly furnished Alcibiades ^as ^^oble in
^ea^es of war but restless and ^^s^.
with feats of war or chiualry, but of an unquiet mind, and he was cause of
the breche of the peace that was many years before concluded between the
Lacedaemonians and Athenians: He had used in all Greece so many wyles and so
sundry crafts, that it was even commonly said: If there had happened to be
borne two Alcibiades in Greece, it must needs have gone wholly to naught. Howbeit
such endeavor can not prosper, therefore died Alcibiades finally of this
sort. And though the wars of the cities were now synyshed, yet began now
first the destruction of men at Athenes. For seeing the city of Athens was full
of rebellions, there were ordained of the Lacedaemonians thirty men, whom they
(...)yrau^ (...) were ordained at Athens.
called Tyranny, to whom was committed authority, that they should punish
the sedicious rebels without law or judgment: and lest any man should
withstand this authority with any sedicion, they laid a great garnison of
soldiers in the castle.

Of the restoryng of Athens after the destruction of it.

THe Lacedaemonians used this sharpness, to punish the common commotions, and
high necessity constrained them to do that. The thirty men used their
aucthorite at the first against no man, save the sedicious: afterward did the
old hatred of some of them bruste out against ye best of the city, but good
men did they put to death: semblable examples of ye like we have Theramenes is
put to death.
known in our days. And when this displeased one of them, named Theramenes,
a doughty man and just, they slew him also, to cause other to be afraid: and
that more is, they parted the goods of the^ that were put to death, among
their compainions. The best of the citesens fled to Thebe and Argos, where for
pity of so unworthy mysery, the were received, even against the commandment
of the Lacedaemonians, which was that no man should receive the Athenians that
fled or were banyshed. Among these bannyshed men was one that was doughty and
valiant in the common wealth, called Thrasybulus: the same ioynynge with him
the Thrasibulus
residue of the bannyshed men, and a preuy aid or subsydy of them of Thebe,
takes in the castle by Athens, and afterward going to Athens, and pychyng a
field, vanquisheth the thyrty Tyrannos* and recouereth the city. The citesens
that were fled were restored by this Thrasybulus: and as concerning governance
of policy, judgments and laws, the state of the whole common wealth was
changed, after the old custom. Thrasybulus deserved The praise of
Thrasibulus.
chefely a great praise for his moderation of the mind, that after so notable
a victory, wherein he had also taken many of the enemies prisouers, he would
rather spare them, then by good right to slaye them. And when he considered
that there should be no end of puttyng to death, if thee goods of the
citesens that were taken away should be restored to every man again or to the
true heirs, namely, that were already come to the third or ^^orget^ulnesse of
i^^uries is ordained.
fourth possessor: he band them every one with such a band among themselves,
that no man should thenceforth remember any vengeance or injury done, but
that every man should keep that he had, and keeping the common peace, every man
to be content with his portion or lot. By this means and moderation was a
quietness set in the common wealth. And this is a noble example, that with
beneuole^ce A notable example to main^ame v(...)e.
and forgenyng is procured a more durable concord in such cinyll commotion,
then that every man will go forth with rigor and force.

Afterward were the Lacedaemonians become proud and haut also with this lucky
chance: For they would drive Perses out of Asia, which had ^odon capitayn of
the Perses.
succored them. But the Perses for that time made Codon captain of their
host, which was fled from Athens in the civil commotion: of him were the
Lacedaemonians discomfyted. The Lacedaemonians taking greueously their
misfortune, laid all the fault upon them of Thebe, because they had entertained
the bannyshed Athenians: wherefore they The Lacedemonia^s ^ight with ye
Thebanes, and a^^ di^con^^^ed
fell into their contryes of the which rose a new occasion of war, in the
which the Lacedaemonians being overcome, were wholly undone, and the Thebane
power increased.

When this war was finished, the Thebanes The Thebanes destroy the Phocia^s.
took another war against the Phocians, the which were wholye abolyshed,
and the residue were bannished. Finally did Philippe king of Macedony Philippe
destroyed the Thebanes.
discomfite and tame them of Thebe. And thus were first Athens, after that
Sparta, finally Thebe destroyed, and all that power of the Greeks came to
naught. Howbeit when the Athenians and Thebanes did not keep the conditions and
appointementes of peace made with king Philippe, he was constrained to invade
for to take in all Greece.

This is enough spoken in brefe manner of the doleful wars of Greece, the
which were an hundredth and thyrtye years after Xerxes, during which space
was little peace. These wars are at large written by Thucidides and Xenophon,
and some other. We have thought it therefore sufficient, if we had opened and
declared the example of the Athenians, y^ which is the principal in that
history.

Of the Philosophers.
IN the mean time that this befell, did learning also florysh. Hippocrates
the Hippocrates
Physician lived from the time of Longimanus, until Ochus, an hundredth and
four years. And beside that all Greece had him in great estimacion, he was
also much made of by the kings of Macedony, by the which also he spent great
part of his life. Soranus writes that Hippocrates Soranus wrote the life of
Hippocrates.
was sent for by king Perdicas, because many judged that the king was fallen
into a consumption, and was forsaken of other Physicians. But when Hippocrates
was come, he perceived that the king was not sick for feblenesse of bodily
strength, but that he pined for love and inward sorrow. For he loved out of
measure the handemayden of his father, and as often as he saw her, changed both
the mind and color in the king. Of this Perdicas was healed of Hippocrates.
wise perceived Hyppocrates the cause of the sycknesse, and gave remedy to
drive it away. Beside this, when the pestilence reigned, he caused a great
wood to be set on fire against the infect air, whence the infection of the
air came: and of this wise kept he the whole contry Thessalia safe from the
pestilence. He was also renoumed of natural miracles. Upon his grave were bees
a great season, with whose honey were sick chylderen healed, that were
anointed therewyth.

About the time of Artaxerxes Mnemon, was Socrates, which by the envy of his
adversaries Socrates.
was poisoned and dyed in the preson. He was accused to be a brynger up of a
new learning in the city. But by the providence of God, were the adversaries
not long after punished worthelye, for they were put to death also.

Of Plato, Eudoxus, Aristoteles.
AFter these were Plato and Eudoxus a Plato, Eudoxus, Aristoteles.
very conning Astrologian, which also brought this science out of Egypt into
Greece. After this man was Aristoteles, I suppose these to be the chief among
the Philosophers, and after my judgment are the chief of the^ Eudoxus and
Aristoteles, namely because they were not only garnished with pleasant words
or reasons, but studious of the very things. For they accustomed that kind of
learning, as is most profitable, partly to know the property of natural
things, and partly to learn what way men may live honestly. It is a most
pleasant thing to behold, how God has set all kind of virtues in our
own nature. Aristotele was borne of parents Aristotle's elders. Nicomachus*
not of the bafest or lowest condition. His father was Nicomachus, a man of
very great authority by Amyntas king of Macedony: for he was his Physician.
His offspring was of Hippocrates kynred, and for this cause had king Philippe
that was son to Amyntas, Aristotele in suchreputacion, afterward he gave
unto him Alexander his son to be taught of him his discipline: and was taught
of Aristotle the learning of Philosophy, that he might become more ready and
wyser to make a relacion and to give counsel. Hitherto have we spoken enough
of the Greeks affeares, which happened about the time of this monarchy.

Of Rome.
When the kings were driven out of the When the counsels of Rome began
city, the state of the commonwealth was changed. The Counsuls began to
bear rule, and yearly were two chosen, whose authority in that office was one
year.

This change of the commune wealth happened in the time of Cyrus the first
monarche of the Perses, the year after the worlds foundacyon three thousand,
four hundredth and fyftye, and the seventh year after that Babylon was won
by Cyrus.

But beside other great and innumerable affeires, that befell at Rome, were
also horrible sedityons and chaunges in the commune wealth: in the which are
examples given unto us, that great cicyties and commune wealths do endure
seldom without great alterations. Howbeit in this manner, yt two Counsules were
chief rulers, lasted perpetually, until the time of Julius, which usurped the
monarchye. There were between the beginning of the Counsels rulyng until Julius
reign, four hundredth and three score and five years.

It were to long to rehearse here the Roman histories. I will only recite the
time of two notable chances, that were befallen at Rome in the time of this
Monarchye.

In the hundredth and second year after that the city was builded, that is,
not long after Xerxes war, about the beginning of Longimanus reign, rose
controversy and dissension by the Romans. The occasion of the Roman laws.
For seeing they used not yet a certain justice or laws, men were often
unjustly wronged in and out of judgment: for noman knew yet perfectly what
was right. And when the multitude did for this cause murmr, it was ordained,
that a certain law should be written. Wounder it is of what importance be
written laws, to entertayne commune peace and concord in the commun welath,
the which this example does witness manifestly. The Ten me^ were sent into
Greece.
For this thing were ten men chosen, which being sent into Greece searched
out and espied the manners and laws of the greatest cities, and in gathering
together the best laws did use the counsel of Hermodorus of Ephesus and
other Philosophers. Twelve tables were written, the Twelve tables.
which were hanged up openly before the court of Rome. This is the beginning
of the written law of the Romans, the which they have first borrowed of the
Greeks.

The Ten men ruled three year: for it behooved that the laws were every day
declared. But Appius Appius.
one of the Ten men did abuse his power, which caused one Virginius a cite sins
daughter to be demed for another man's bondewoman, that by that cloak of law he
might draw her to him and destore her: The which as the father perceived, and
saw that by reason of Appius power his daughter could not be delivered, he
slew her himself in the judgment, lest his stock should be stained with
such a reproach. Afterward gathering an army, he made ready an aid against
Appius the tyrant. The Ten me^ were deposed. An example of vengeance
Than deposynge the Ten men from their office, a new dignity was ordained.
Appius being taken and cast into prison, slew him self. This example shows
that tyranny and injustice remain not unrevenged.

The three hundredth and three score year after the Rome was brent of the
Frenchemen and Germans. Camillus.
foundation of the city, fell into Italy an army gathered of the Frenchmen and
Germans, which brent Rome. But Camillus, whom the commune people had before
driven out of the city, played y^ part of an honest man: for coloring wholly
the injury, the which he had suffered unworthily, gathering an army out of the
next contryes, he oppressed the French men and Germans within the city,
keeping the castle from besyegynge, and the residue of the citesins that were
escaped. The damage had the city in the time of Artaxerxes Mnemon, and about
that time nearehande was Athenes taken and spoiled.

In this hystory is the first mention made The first (...)ion of the Germans
in historyes.
of the Germans, and this was not wholly four hundredth years before Christ's
birth. Of these Germans was Milane and other cities in Italy builded.

Of the third Monarchye.
THe three thousand, six hundredth and four and thyrtyeth year after the
worlds creation, when the dominion of the Perses had lasted an hundredth and
nynety years, that is three hundredth and twenty years before Christ's The
beginning of the third Monarchye.
birth, began the third Monarchy, the which we call the monarchy of the Greeks:
and now is the dominion of the world translated from the coasts of the East,
into the West: and out of Asia, into Europa.

From that time began Asia by little and little, more and more to dekeye, not
only in those things that were concerning the power of the empire: but also
in those things that concerned modestye of manners, virtues, governance of
common welthes and good learning. And though these things are in a manner
redressed and restored by the Romans, yet at the last came by violence the
Barbarians into Asia, and did spoil it, in so much that the same The decay of
Asia.
part of the world, which was wont to be the most excellentes, by reason
of the pleasantness of situation, wisdom, honestye of men and puyssaunce of
countries, is now turned nearehand altogether into a synke of fylthinesse, and
murthurous den. And contrary wise those highest gifts are now in the Weste,
seeing the world does draw by little and little to the end.

This monarchy began at Alexander king Alexander the great.
of the Macedonians, whom we do worthelye call the Great. For he was so
excellent, not only in power of governance, but also in all other princelye
virtues, that one would suppose he have had but few that were equal to him.
He is praised in Ieremye and Daniel the prophets, because he was a most sharp
and happy gouernoure. Daniel describes a buck, of whom is a ram overcome and
over thrown, and does expound manifestlye, that the buck is the king of the
Greeks, and the ram the Persian king. The virtues and notable victories
Alexander the buck, Darius the ra^me
wherewyth God had garnished king Alexander, gave some men occasyon to fall
and feign much of his ofsprynge, but I pass them over.

But this is certain, that great and fortunable princes are governed and kept
of God, and that they are endued only of God with those* virtues and gifts.
For God will have the majesty of gouernaunces to be kept and maynteyned by
those, which are noble by nobleness of aunceters, and flourishing of kynred:
and it is evident, that Alexander was borne of this sort. His father was king
Philippe, and his mother was Olympias. And that The parents of Alexander.
Philippes (...)e.
night when Alexander was conceived, it is said that Philippe saw in his
sleep, that he had a seal on Olympias belly, wherein was karued the image of a
Lion. It was expounded, that by that dream was signified, that Olympias
having conceived of Philippe should bring forth a most puyssaunt king As
for Philippe and Olimpias both of them were borne of the highest and most
noblest kynred of all Greece at that time. For Philippe (if we may give credet
to the most true wrytynges of hystoryes) came of Hercules, and Olympias of
Achylles, the valiant captayn before Troy. These are the aunceters, of whose
stock the renowned prince Alexander is borne:

The kynred of Alexanders father,
The battle of Troy,
Hercules Hyllus Cleodeus Aristomachus Temenus Perdicas Argeus Philippus Eropus
Alcetas Amyntas Alexander Amyntas Philippus Alexander the great.

This was the first king of Macedony, whose ofspringe does Herodotus describe.

And Alexander the great was borne about eight hundredth years after the Trojan
war.

The kynred of Olympias mother to Alexander.

Achilles Pyrrhus
Molossus king of Epyrus and Pielus: they were both borne of Andromachus.

Of Pielus does Pausanias in the Atticall wrytinges draw the other kings of
Epyrus following.

Tarymbas Alcetas Neoptolemus and Arymbas Olympias Neoptolemus daughter, mother
to to Alexander.
This is the genealogy of Alexander, gathered out of most certain hystoryes,
the which witnesses that the ofsprynge of Alexander was of the posterytye of
very great men.

When Philippe was stayne, because he left the Philippe was stayne because he
left a wicked deed unpunished.
wicked deed of a great man, that had shamfully defloured a noble child
unpunished, straight way after rebelled the Illyrians and Greeks, and fell
from the Macedonians, and the kingdom of the Macedonians stood in great
danger. For when his father Philippe was slain, Alexander was only twenty
year old. This was in the beginning of the hundredth and eleventh Olympias
after The deeds of Alexander ^^e great.
the rekening of the Greeks. But wha^ Alexander had taken to him the
administration of the royalme, he first brought the Illyrians again under the
yock, after that went he to Thebe. For they of Thebe besyeged the garnyson of
men, that his father Philippe had set in there castle, and also made a league
with the Perses, the which invaded the kingdom of Macedony. In the mean
season that Alexander besyeged them of Thebe, did the Athenians send
ambassadors to him, for to obtain peace. Alexander received them favorably.
They of Thebe in the mean season being obstinate, another sought for grace,
nor conditions of peace. And when it was proclaimed by the commandment of
Alexander before the assault, that whosoever of them of Thebe that would yield
them freely, and go out of the city, should save their lives. They of Thebe
caused to be proclaimed contrary wise, that they that would have the liberty
of the Greeks with theirs saved, and the king of the Perses, against the
tyraunte Alexander, should draw to them. Alexanders my^de being chafed with
that reproach, the city was assaulted, and ^h^he (...)o^^e (...), (...)ate
(...) o^ (...)er (...)s.
wholly spoiled, and was never restored afterward. This was the first great
city that Alexander subdued. For we se most communely come to pass, that God
ordeineth puys^aunt monarchs for the destruction of great cities.

When Alexander had now made a peace in Greece, he went into Asia with ^n host
of forty thousand ^oote men, but of horssemen only four thousand. The army
that was in Asia, the which his father had sent before, was but little. With
this small host falls he upon the Perses, and makes very great feldes, and
takes many mighty cities with strong hand, among the which was Sardis,
Miletus and Tyrus. In conquering of the which, Alexander was in many ha^ardes.
Vanquyshyng also in battaill Darius the king, he put him to flighte, and
taking his mother, his wife the queen, his Alexanders gentlynesse.
daughters and son, he entreated them gentely, and as it besemed there royal
kynred. The que^e that was aged, called he mother: he entertained her son
none otherwise, than if it had been his own. Wounder it is what praise
Alexander deserved for these virtues in all Asia, and with Darius himself,
insomuch that freely he offered himself to treat of peace, offering to be
content to deliver unto him even the half of his royalme. To this answered
Alexander. that this world can not be ruled with two sons: but if he were
content to yield freely him self and his royalme, he would gently Darius is
overcome of Alexander.
take him to grace. But Darius renewynge an host, was vanquyshed, and was
thrust through in the flight, by his own servant and guide Bessus. Alexander
coming upon Darius, found him very greueously wounded, and nearehand dead,
and had pitye upon him, and promised him that this unfaithfulness of Bessus
against his own lord, should The disloyal tie of Bessus is an example of
vengeance.
not be unpunished. Wherefore Bessus being taken afterward, he caused him to be
hanged between two trees, that were bowed do^^ward, the which when they were
suffered to dress themselves again, with a great swing, they tare him
paynfully. Of this wise was Alexander become gouernoure of Asia, and took in
farther the residue of the contryes and cities, as Babylon, Susa etc. The
beginnynge The begyn^yng of Ale^anders monarchye.
of this monarchye of Alexander was after the death of this last Darius, that
is, in the beginning of the seventh year after that Alexander began to raygne.

Alexander being become proud by this victory, began to be dissolut in
excess of drunkenness. He caused some of his friends and counselors to be
put to death, which was the most excellent and sage captain, the aged
Parmenion. Beside this Parmenion.
in his wrath he slew his valiant captain Clytus in a banquet, because he
preferred Philip his father (...).
before Alexander his son. But wha^ his manners were changed, fortune
changed also, though the mind was not peasable. Ho warred also upon the
Iudyans and Scythians, but he lived not long after that. For he dyed the two
and thyrtyeth year, and eleventh month of his age. He raygned after his
father Phylyps departure, no longer than twelve year, and seven months: and
wythyn so little space had he dispatched so many and great wars, so that such
a multitude of men could scarce have yournyed through so many contryes and
realms, even when it had been peace and tranquyllyte.

He raygned at Babylon after Daryus, only five year, and eleven months. Such
hystoryes declare that great kings and princes are guyded by a certain
heavenly power or will.

Alexander was endued with many and excellent princely virtues, the examples
whereof to set forth here, by reason of our industrye to be short, has no
place. I will recite only one among so many. As often as the playntyfe in
judgment laid ought against any gylty man, the same being absent, A noble
example of Alexander concerning a good prince or judge.
he gave only the one ear to the plaintyfe, and was wont to shut y^ otherwyth
his hand: that he might signify, he would keep the other for the gylty man,
and that both parts ought to be herd alyke, the which pertains to an
office of a good prince and true judge. Alexander gave here a notable example
for great princes, that not only the one part should be admitted to speak,
and lay for him self, but both parts: even as at Athens they were wont to
swear, the judges that were chosen, that What the judges at Athens did swear.
they should give sentence according to the law written, and that they
should hear both parts alyke.

Of the moderation and godliness that Alexander did use against the Jews.
When Jerusalem was now builded again, the Jews lived in great peace under
those Godly kings of the Perses. But when Alexander besieged the city Tyrus,
he required aid of the Jews, which answered: that they could do it by no
honest mean, because they were subjects to the kings of Persia, which also
had received many and great benefytes of them. When Alexander had heard this
excusation, The setting forth of Alexander against the Jews. Iaddus the high
priest. Alexanders reverence to the high priest.
he was wroth, and when he had won Tyrus, he came with his host toward
Jerusalem. But Iaddus the high priest, puttinge on the prestly apparel, and
other aged men, went out of the city to mete Alexander, for to ask peace.
Wha^ he saw y^ high pressed in that apparel, he lept incontinently from his
horse, and fallinge upon his knees before the priest, he promised him peace
freely. All his princes maruayled that he used so great lowlynesse against a
priest of a straung nation, and also that he had swaged the rage of his mind in
so little space. Parmenio which was entierly beloved of the king, by reason of
his age and wisdom, demanded of him: what reverence moved him, that he fell
so lowly before the pressed. To the which he answered: that in Macedony he saw
a likeness in his sleep, semblable to this pressed, that stood before him, and
admonished him that he should go into Asia, and promised to aid him: and that
he did the honor to the very same God, that than had appeared unto him: At
that time went Alexander peaceably into the city, hearing also reuerentlye
the prestes reasonynge of the doctrine of their religion, the which taught him
also the prophesy of Daniel, that the king of the Greeks should rule in Asia,
and among the Perses: Whereof was Alexander not a little coraged: and geuinge
the Jews great lybertye he enryched the temple also with great and noble
gifts. He returned to Babylon according to the prophecy of Jeremy.

Of this wise saved God his weak church at that time, when for so notable
mutation of dominions, was war nearehande in all countries.

The division of the realms after Alexander.
ALexander had married Roxane the daughter Roxane wife to Alexander
of a prince in Persia, which was great with child when the king dyed. When
the king was dead, and there was none other true heir of the kingdom, than
the kings child, the princes took counsel among them, how to govern the
kingdom a right. First they thought it good to appoint certain governors,
until the queen were delivered: if a man child were borne, the same should be
king by The stryft among the princes after Alexanders death. Perdicas Arideus
brother to Alexander. Perdicas craft.
inheritance and succession. Contrarywyse did some (among whom was Perdicas
one) choice in the kings stead Arideus brother to Alexander, a man fearful,
and syckely: and to this agreed the most part. Nevertheless were the princes
constrained to choice men, by whom the kingdom should be governed: but among
the gouernoures was Perdicas the chief, and that in the name of Alexanders
brother: under which pretense he procured in the mean season, that he might by
little and little optaine the whole kingdom, and than began he to assaye first
with honcste engyns, afterward with open force also.

For he wo^d Cleopatra the sister of Alexander, Cleopatra.
and trusted by that means easelye to obtain the kingdom. But Antipater that
was Antipater.
governor in Macedonia feling this gyle of Perdicas, did hinder this weddinge:
wherefore did Perdicas on the other part his diligence, that Antipater might be
taken and cast into preson. This is to be brefe nearehande the cause of the
war, which was risen among Alexanders princes. For Perdicas had his
rebellions: against him on the other side conspyred Antypater, Antigonus and
Antigonus. Ptolomeus.
Ptolomeus. And Perdicas invaded Ptolome first in Egypt, where he was forth
with slain of his own soldiers. This was a worthy punishment the which he
deserved, that was first begynner of the sedicion among Alexanders princes.
But there could be no end made of this tragedy, another was there any hope of
peace, without the adherentes of Perdicas were first oppressed also: ye there
could no steadfast peace be hoped for in the world, seeing when Alexander was
dead, the world was as headless. Another appeared any thing else in so great a
perturbation of all things, than that al honestye and governance being wholly
overthrown, there should be a continual willfulness o^ murthuringe among
men. So little can lawful^ gouernaunces last in this world, without they be
institute and preserved of God. But it seemed to Of Alexanders kingdom are made
four kingdoms.
God, that out of Alexanders kyngedome should^ spring four mighty princes.
For so was it prophesyed of Daniel to come to pass, namelye, tha^ when the
bucks (which signified Alexander) on^ horn should peryshe, four other
horns should^ grow: the which the angel expounds of the four kingdoms
institute after Alexander. Bu^ it is chefely to be maruayled at, that God
would the realms to come to those princes, which by degree of blood were
near to Philippe and Alexander. Perdicas, which was not of the kings blood,
was in the mean season depryued of this honor. For so does it most commonely
come to pass, that he which coueteth the common governance without Lawful
calling must be ensued.
a lawful calling, and puts himself in great administrations of his own
swing, is rejected of God: as we se what happened to Absalon and some other.
Moreover these kingdoms are divided among those princes, which before were
made debities in the kingdom by Alexander.

Seleucus was made king of Syria. Ptolemeus was made king of Egypt. To
Antigonus befell the kingdom of Asia. Cassander ruled in Macedonia and Greece.
These kings had cruel wars for the monarchye, the which every one coueted.
But in Macedonia was the greatest slaughter. Cassander The tyranny of Cassander
The mother of Alexander a rare example of chastity is put to death.
caused to put to death the most honest queen, mother to Alexander, the which
in dyenge showed a very wounderful token of chastitye and constancy. For meting
the hangeman freely with a coragious contenaunce, above the costume of women,
she took him her head to cut of: and when she fell down, she covered her so
with her raiment, that her body should no where be disclosed dishonestly. As
for Roxane Alexanders wife, caused Cassander to be taken and kept. But this
unfaithfulness has God punyshed right well, wha^ after Cassanders death An
example of vengeance.
his two sons Antipater and Alexander disquieted each other with wars, for
the kingdom of Macedonye. Antipater one of them, drew to him Lysimachus,
which raygned by Hellespontus, whose daughter he had wedded also. But the other
brother Alexander, required aid of Demetrius, the son of Antigonus. But
either of them was slain of his companyon, of whom they trusted to have aid:
Antipater of his father in law, Lysimachus, and Alexander of Demetrius.
Fynallye besell the kingdom of Macedonye to Demetrius son to Antigonus: for
he was an honest and lucky prince in governance. Of this Demetrius have all
the Demetrius king of Macedony
other kings of Macedony their ofspringe, until these times, when the last
of his kynred was taken of the Romans, in whom also ended the kingdom of
Macedony.

I set forth here the history brefely, and as it were eue^ in passing away, out
of the which thesage reder may easily consider, that in Greece, when they
destroyed themselves, and used now the assistaunce of foren princes, peryshed
all honesty of good manners with the dominion and commone wealth. For this
Demetrius (of whom we have now made mention) when he was often conuersaunt with
the Athenians, they The unshamefast sla^^ery of the Athenians.
slattered him so shamefullye, that they called him God, and with prayenge did
him godly worship: yea and in their sacrifice used they a several song of
him, saying: that the other gods were a sleep, only Demetrius was a true
God, which did watch for their health. These ungodly and dreadful voices
testifye that at Athenes was utterly quenched and lost all honesty and
godliness.

Now rests it, that passinge over the kings of Macedony, I rehearse the
names of such kings, as have raygned in Syria and Egypt. For these kingdoms
were the mightiest among those four, and to know the order of these kings,
does greatly avail also in holy scripture, wherein often times is made
mention of them. For the Jews had great conversation and occupyenge with these
two kingdoms.

Of the kings of Syria.
SEleucus was a prince borne in Macedonie, Seleucus.
on whose thingh appeared a natural token, in manner of an anchor, the which had
also all his posterity. He took the city Babylon by strong hand. Afterward
Antigonus Demetrius
were Antigonus and Demetrius his sons kings of Asia, overcome of him.
Antigonus was pearsed through: Demetrius dyed in preson. After this Of whom
Seleucus was slain.
discomfyted Seleuchs Lysimachus. But in the seventh month after this victory,
was Seleucus slain by Ptolome Ceraunus brother to Ptolomeus Philadelphus.
These are dredefull examples An example of the fea^e of God.
of the setting up and fall of so great kings, which worthily ought to
stir us to fear God, lest we think to do great things by man's counsel and
our wisdom. Antiochus Soter. Antiochus Theos. Selencus Callinicus Antiochus
Hierax.


Antiochus Soter the son of Seleucus, reigned in Syria after the death of his
father.

Antiochus Theos his son, had first to wife Laodice, whereof he had two
sons, Seleucus, Callinicus, and Antiochus, which was surnamed Hierax.
Ptolomeus Philadelphus gave to the same Berenice his daughter afterward to
wife. But when Antiochus was dead, Laodice constrained Seleucus her son to
take the kyngedome, and to take his stepmother Berenice. Seleucus followed his
mothers counsel, besieged his stepmother, and finally brought her to yield
willyngly with great promises. But keeping no promise, he caused that the queen
was put to death very cruelly. For Daniel had prophesyed openly, that the
queen of Egypt should suffer such a thing, and that the king of Egypt should
revenge the same. For when this cruel deed was done, Ptolemeus Euergetes
brother Ptolomeus Euergetes.
to Berenice went into Syria, drove Seleucus out of the kingdom, and taking
in many cytyes, returned into Egypt. Afterward when Seleucus had recovered
some heart, he would recover the kingdom again, and required aid of his
brother Antiochus Hierax: he was very young, and trusted by this occasyon to
obtain the whole kingdom. For when peace was made between Ptolomeus and
Seleucus, Hierax invaded his brother Seleucus kingdom, to the which thing he
used the aid of strange souldyours. For the Galathians, The Galathians were
brought by Brennus ^^^ of Germany into Greece.
which Brennus brought out of Germany into Greece, went farther into Asia,
being hired with those kings wages, which had diverse wars against each
other. These Galathians had tha^ given them those lands in Asia, that they
dwelled in. Of whom they be called Galathians, unto whom S. Paul the apostle
preached the Gospel. Nether is it any doubt but that they were Germans. For
the Greeks did call with one word the Germans and Galleys Celte, and by
chaungyng of the word, was the name Galate set for Celte. Finally overcame
Antiochus his brother Seleucus with the aid of the Galathians, but Antiochus
was likewise vanquyshed of the king of Asia, lesyng a great deal of the
kingdom of Syria: than was he constrained to fly to king Ptolomeus Euergetes:
and when he was so received of him, that he should go no where, he would have
fled, but when this counsel was perceived, he was put to death. This end
finally gat Antiochus Hierax. About Notable examples of vengeance.
y^ time nearehand fell Seleucus his brother from a horse, and dyed. This
miserable fortune and end had these two brethren, which had done many wicked
Antiochus magnus. Ptolomeus Philopater.
deeds. Antiochus the great invaded the king of Egypt Ptolome Philopater with
war, but he was driven back. Afterward when Philopater was dead, he
returned into Egypt with an army: but the Romans had taken the child Ptolomeus
Epiphanes into their wardshyp, to whom he was The occasion of the war of
Antiochus with y^ Romans. Hannibal.
committed as a ward. This was an occasion of a great war, which was between
the Romans and Antiochus. Hanniball took part with Antiochus, which was
captain in this war a certain space, and many more contries of Greece did
stycke to Antiochus. But being weakened by reason of some mishappe, he was
driven to demand conditions Antiochus Epiphanes is sent to Ro^^ for a pledge.
of peace. Than left the Romans him only y^ part of the royalme, which lies
beyond the hill Taurus: beside this was he constrained to send his son
Antiochus Epiphanes to Rome in hostage. But at the last when Antiochus spoiled
the rich The temple of Belus in Syria.
temple of Belus in Siria, he was oppressed of the communalty inhabityng there,
which slew him and his company every one. This was the end of Antiochus the
great. Jerusalem had metely good The start of Jerusalem under Antiochus.
rest sense the time of Alexander, until Antiochus the great. But when the
war between these two kings was raised, by reason the Jews lay between them
both, they were a little oppressed and vexed of both parties. And though
Jerusalem did hitherto stycke more to Egypt, yet was it nether subject to
Syria nor Egypt. Howbeit Ptolomeus Scopa a captain of Ptolomeus Epiphanes.
Epiphanes sent a captain, one Scopa against Antiochus, which took in
certain towns of Syria, and part of Iewry. Howbeit when Antiochus had
vanquished the same by ye Iordane, he went farther till he came at Jerusalem.
Than did the Jews kneling, yielded themselves freely to him, making also a
commune league between them and the king: and for this cause did the king
Antiochus suffer them to live in peace, and asysted them in repayryng ye city
Jerusalem. And of this wise, though they seemed to be in danger in the time of
this war, by reason of the neighburhead* yet lived they quietly under this
Antiochus. Antiochus the great left after Seleucus Philopator.
him three sons, Seleucus surnamed Philopator, Antiochus Epiphanes, and
Demetrius. After ye fathers death raygned Seleucus a few years, the other two
brethren were kept in hostage at Rome. When Antiochus Epiphanes knew of his
fathers death, he ^led privily from Rome, and as he was come again into Syria,
he was made king. For Seleucus was unmeet to rule, nether lived he long after
his fathers death. This Antiochus Epiphanes Antiochus Epiphanes, called
Epimanes.
truly was a man of much subtelty and hardiness, and had well learned by the
example of the Romans, to apply himselse to the time and manners of every man.
For he could easily forbear and suffer every man that he was with: he was a
wise man with ye wise* and agaynwyth unbridled youth, he followed such
exercise, as he knew them to delight in. He procured the favor of the common
people with familiaritye and benevolence: and when he made any costly banquet,
he caused great sums of money to be cast among ye people. For his unbridled
manners was he called Epimanes for Epiphanes. For Epimanes signifies mad, but
Epiphanes signifies noble.

His reign began the hundredth and seven and thyrtyeth year after Alexanders
death. And when he possessed now his kingdoms that came to him by heretage, he
went into Egypt. For about ye time dyed Ptolomeus Epiphanes, the same had to
wife Cleopatra the sister of Antiochus Epiphanes, the which under that pretense
began to usurp ye kingdom of Egypt, as if he were tutor of the young king
called Ptolomeus Philometor. Nether showed he Ptolomeus Philometor.
himself otherwise, but with all gentleness and benevolence toward his cousin,
and willed that Memphis and other great cities should yield them to the king, y^
under such a pretense he might by little and little draw to him the whole
realm. When he had now finished all things, he left the kingdom, and went to
Jerusalem, and that at the request of I^^o^, which coueted the dignitye of the
high presthode by the mean of Antiochus.

For so stood the case tha^with the Jews, that they might obtain the high
priesthode by decepte, by conspiracion offoren kings, oppressinge and slayenge
in the mean season those, that were the true successors. For which cause was
this people greueously The yourney of Antiochus to Jerusalem*
punished again of God. This was the first yourney of Antiochus to Jerusalem,
in the which he ordained a high priest, and spoiled the temple* and slew many.
This happened the syxte year of Antiochus, the which was the hundredth and three
and fortyeth year after Alexanders death.

Two year after, which was the hundredth and five and fortieth year after the
death of Alexander, The second yourney of Antiochus into Egypt.
made Antiochus ready his second yourney into Egypt. For the cities had yielded
themselves again to the young king, the which also had sought for aid of the
Romans. Now when Antiochus Popilius an Ambassador of Rome sent to Antiochus.
invaded Egypt, the Romans sent an ambassador Popilius, which should show
Antiochus in the name of the Romans, to avoid out of the coasts of Egypt,
nether to war upon the young king Philometor. For the Romans were minded to
retain him in the kingdom with their aid. Whereupon answered Antiochus, he
would devise with him self, what he would do. But Popilius An example of
Roman seueryte.
would grant him no space to devise, but making a ring with his spear about
Antiochus, commanded him to say straight way, before he went out of the
cyrcle, whether he would avoid out of Egypt, or no. Antiochus being abashed with
this seuerite and constance of Popilius (for he knew and was afeared of the
Roman power,) he promised frelye to go out of Egypt*

Wherefore he was constrained to leave Egypt the second time with great shame.
But inflamed with The second yourney of Antiochus to Jerusalem The tyranny of
Antiochus against them of Jerusalem. The bible is brent.
^re for the impacience of the grefe, he went again to Jerusalem: and this was
his second yourney to Jerusalem: for he was there twice, and than used ^e his
tyranny much more cruelly, than before. For he commanded the Jews to worship
the Idols of the Heythen, he commanded to burn the books of the Bible, and
left a great deal of noughtypackes to possess the city Jerusalem, in stead
of a garnyson: the which tormented then very cruelly that would not fall from
their faith, and to this thing did they assist them, that were deceuered from
the Iewysh religion. The temple also was turned to a profane use, fore an
image was set therein of the Gentiles superstition. But what needs many
words? They busyed to root out the word of God, and the whole law, and in
stead thereof to bring in the manners of the Gentyls, Nether did Antiochus use
that counsel rashly, but with a great wytt and policye. For he perceived that
the Jews wythstode the Heythen kings, because of their religion, and therefore
would he avoid the diuersitye of religion. Of this wise do men's thoughts An
example of man's wisdom in things concerning God Antiochus fygureth
Antichriste.
dalye in matters concerning God, and will set up religion after their will and
judgment. Moreover under ye example and figure of this Antiochus, does Daniel
also describe Antichriste, and that such a kingdom should be, where in Christen
men should be put to distress, and Gods word should be quenched: and likewise
should be set up a religion for a show, which might be contrary to gods word,
by y^ which may be had an occasyon, to obtain power and great riches. Even as
it is evident that Mahomet has Why Mahometes religion is acceptable.
set up a false religion, and under pretense thereof, have ordained a new
kingdom. And this religion seems to be folysh religion, for it does greatly
flatter men's reason. For passing over nearehande all the higher sentences and
articles of the fayeth, it has kept only that doctrine, which teaches
moral virtues. Wonder it is verily how much that same does flatter man's
reason, wherefore also it does use to crepe more easily into men's minds, than
the doctrine of faith.

As for the tyranny of Antiochus, thereof is written in the books of the
Machabees: and Danyel witnesses that the people of the Jews had deserved this
punishment because of their sins. And allthoughe God did punyshe his people,
yet for all that he did not destroy them utterly.

For God raised Judas Machabeus, which gatheryng Judas Machabeus (...).
a small army, invaded Antiochus captains: and by Gods assistaunce,
ouerthrowynge the enemies, he recovered the temple the third year, after that
Antiochus had set an Idol therein.

Daniel has comprehended all this time of the Iewysh affliccion, in two
thousand and three hundredth days, which make six years and six months,
and some days overplus. For the persecution lasted from the third year of
Antiochus, until the eight year and some months. Daniel did use this
division of the time also, that the Idol should stand in the temple a
thousand, two hundredth and nynety days, which make three year, and six
months.

And y^ temple was recovered an hundredth and eight and forty years after
Alexanders death. This was the three hundredth and eight and fortieth year after
that the Jews were delivered out of the Babylonicall bondage, and the
hundredth and two and fyftyeth year before Christ's birth.

But Antiochus deserved with his ungodliness The punishment of Antiochus for
his ungodliness.
and blasphemy against God, not only the utter extinguishment of his kynred,
but also the ouerthrowynge of the whole kingdom of Syria. For after Antiochus
death, there was ever war between one or other, and after many times for the
succession in the kingdom. That it may be plainly seen by this example, ho
we begins matters to spring, for the which kingdoms be overthrown: as we
se now a days to befall in Hungary.

Antiochus Epiphanes dyed in that yourney, which made ready again to come
against the Jews, to revenge the damage done. After his death, his brother
Demetrius fled from Rome, and took in the kingdom, kylling the young Antiochus,
Antiochus Eupator.
surnamed Eupator, son to Antiochus Epiphanes. Alexander the captain
raysyng a sedition against Demetrius slew him. Demetrius Demetrius, Antiochus
Sedetes.
left two sons after him, Demetrius and Antiochus Sedetes. Of this Demetrius
verily was Alexander slain likewise. Afterward was a sedition raised by one
Tryphon against Demetrius, the which drove him out of the kingdom: but
Demetrius came again into the kingdom, and dyed stryken thorough with a
sword. Antiochus Sedetes was slain of the Parthes.

As for this Demetrius had a son Antiochus Gryphus. Antiochus Sedetes left
after him a son Antiochus Cyzicenus. These strove for the kingdom of Syria,
and were both slain. Afterward did their children war one against the other
for y^ kindome with no less strife, than their elders: and had at the last so
febled each other, that Syria was constrained to yield it self to foren kings.
For it joined it self to Tigranes king of Armenia. And of this wise is the
kingdom of Syria transferred from Seleucus posterity, to foren princes. But
finally when Tigranes was slain by Tigranes is slain by Pompepus.
Pompeius, Syria was brought under the Roman power. Hitherto is enough spoken
of the kingdom of Syria.

Of the kings of Egypt after Alexander.
PTolomeus the son of Lagus, whereof Ptolomeus the son of Lagus.
Pausanias writes, which calls him the bastard of Philippe father to
Alexander. ij. Ptolomeus Philadelphus. Great praises are Ptolomeus
Philadelphus an endeavor of peace and sciences.
of this king, by reason of his endeavor of peace, and also because he delyted
in all kind of sciences, and did institute a very good form of the commonwealth. To him drew wise men out of all contryes, the which he maynteyned gently
and liberally. He had a library, as there was none better furnished The library
of Ptolomeus.
in the whole world, and for this cause took he acquaintance of the Jews.
For when he diligently searched for the beginning of all nations, religions
and sciences, he found that the people of the Jews to be the eldest, and that
they only had the surest historyes of the worlds beginning or creation.
Wherefore he required to be sent to him from Jerusalem three score and twelve
men, by whose diligence the wholly Bible might be translated out of the Hebrew
into his language: and by this occasion were the Bibles syrste translated into
strange The Bible translated.
speches. And no doubt it is, but that Ptolome was converted to the true faith
by this same mean. iii. Ptolomeus Euergetes invaded Syria, and did Ptolomeus
Euergetes.
revenge the death of his sister Berenice. iiij. Ptolomeus Philopater, overcame
Antiochus Ptolomeus Philopator.
the great: afterward being become more sensual and dissolute, he began to
be enamoured upon a wenche, insomuch that he caused also his queen to be put to
death, for the love showed to that wench. Ptolomeus Epiphanes.
v. Ptolomeus Epiphanes, whom Antiochus the great did invade: the same
Antiochus gave to him his daughter. vi. Ptolomeus Philometor, the same did his
uncle Ptolomeus Philometor.
Antiochus Epiphanes invade: But the Romans defendyng Ptolome, commanded
Antiochus to avoid out of Egypt, the which we have showed before. vii.
Ptolomeus Euergetes restored Demetrius, Ptolomeus Euergetes.
that was driven out of his realm, into the same again. viii. Ptolomeus
Physco, the same resembled more Ptolomeus Phisco a beast and no man.
a beast than a man, by reason of his vylaynous crueltye. He wedded his sister,
and begatt chylderen of her. Afterward slayenge his son, set him before his
mother to eat, fynallye was he driven out of the realm. The residue ensuynge
were notable of like shameful behaueour, as of beastly medlynge and of far
more cruel tyranny. ix. Ptolomeus Alexander. (...) Alexan. (...) Latyrus (...)
Aulet.
x Ptolomeus Latyrus. xi. Ptolomeus Auletes, whom Gabinius the Roman captain
restored again into his kingdom. xii. Ptolomeus Dionysius, which commanded
Ptolomeus Dionysius.
to slaye Pompeius, and afterward was also unfaithful to Julius: wherefore
Julius drove him out of the kingdom, and gave it to his sister Cleopatra,
Cleopatra sister to Julius Caesar.
the which finally slew herself, when Antonius (whom she entertained) was
overcome of Augustus. After that came Egypt to the Romans, and so was the
most noble kynred of Ptolomeus quenched.
Of the Jews.
WE have said before that the superiorytie of governance remained by the
posterity of David, after the return of the Jews out of Babylon, only that
they wanted the dignity of the kings name, and were only called Princes. And
the same rayned till the time of Antiochus, S. Luke does also make mention of
them in the genealogye of Christ.

i. Zorobabel lviij. years. ii. Resa Miseolam lxvi iii. Iohanna Ben Resa liij
iiii Judas the first Hircanus. xiiij. in the time of Alexander.

After Alexander.
v. Joseph the first vij. vi. Abner Semei xi. vii. Eli Matathia xii. viii. Aser
Maath ix. ix. Nagid Artaxat x. x. Hagai Eli viij. xi. Maslot Naum vii xii. Amos
Syrah xiiij xiij. Matathia Siloa xviij xiiij Joseph the younger l.

The same had great familiarite with Ptolomeus Euergetes, and by Eusebius is
he called Arses.

xv. Iaanna the second Hircanus xvi. Ianna.ij. Hircanus.


He had great wars against the Arabians, and had often victory. But when he
was besieged in a castle by Antiochus Epiphanes, nether could he defend
himself any longer with his garnyson, yet would he not yield him self, but
wythstode his enemies valiauntly fighting in battayl, till he was slain. This
was the last prince among the Jews of king David's blood. After him ruled
the Machabees, which were of the priestly kynred.

But after these was the kingdom of the Jews translated to Herod's kynred,
which was a Gentyle, but he was circumcised. This thing truly had God
prophesied before, that the ceptre and royal majesty should be taken from
Judah, and David's successors before the coming of the promised Christ's
coming.
Christ. Nether was the kingdom altered from David's posteritye above an
hundredth and three score year, before Christ was borne: so that it exceded not
men's memory what kindred had reigned. Of this wise does Lucas rehearse the
princes of the Jews, until the last Ianna Hircanus, and after the same does
he count the residue also, which ruled not, until Christ. Wherefore I will
brefely add of the Machabees and Herodes kynred.

Of the Machabees kynred.
MAtathias exhorted his chylderen, Matathias.
to resist Antiochus, and these raygned in order by succession, as princes.

Judas Machabeus the first, vanquyshed Judas Machabeus.
the capytaynes of Antiochus Epiphanes, and recovered the temple within three
year, and had notable victories. But as soon as he had conspyred with the
Romans, An example that no trust is to be set in man's help.
making a league with them, he was slain, and dyed. For God will not have us to
lean to man's help, but that we should set our trust in him. He raygned v.
years.

Ionathas raygned nyneten year: he took part Ionathas.
with Alexander, which usurped the kingdom in Syria. Afterward was he slain
of Triphon, very unfaithfully. He had an unhappy end, for because he trusted
too the aid of naughty and seditious men.

Simon reigned eight year: he overcame Antiochus Simon.
Gryphus. He was at the last slain by treason, of his own brother in law.

Ioannes Hircanus was Simons son: the same Ioannes Hircanus.
reigned syx and twenty year. In his time besieged Antiochus Gryphus
Jerusalem, but by geuyng of money was he apeased, and breakyng up the syege,
left the city. Afterward gat Hircanus Samaria.

The Machabeis kings.
Aristobulus the son of Hircanus reigned Aristobulus.
one year, and would be crowned with a kyngely crown. He was the first king
in Jerusalem, after that the Jews were returned out of Babylon. He slew his
brother Antigonus, because he feared lest he would covet the kingdom.

Alexander the younger, son of Hircanusreigned Alexander ye younger son of
Hircanus.
seven and twenty year: his wife Alexandra reigned after him nine year.

Alexander left two sons after him, Hircanus and Aristobulus. Though Hircanus
were the elder, yet was he driven out of the kingdom, by his brother
Aristobulus, which by violence caught from his brother the dignity of the
kings name. Antipater prince of Idumea. Areta king of Arabia.
But Antipater prince of Idumea and the father of Herodes, and Areta king of
Arabia aided Hircanus against Aristobulus. Nether was there a less barbarous
state at that time in Iewry, after the Heythen manner, then in the kingdoms of
other nations. Pompeus.
Afterward when Pompeius took in Jerusalem, he made Hircanus high priest, and
taking Aristobulus prisoner with his two sons, Alexander and Antigonus,
brought the^ to Rome. But by the way as they went to Rome, escaped Alexander,
and coming again into Iewry, he became mighty again. But then was he
vanquished by Gabinius y^ Gabinius.
Roman captain in Syria, and afterward by the commandment of Scipio, was
he beheaded at Antiochia. Antigonus was released at Rome by Julius: but long
after was he commanded to be put to death at Antiochia by Antonius, even the
third year when Herod was made king. And if the whole time that Hircanus was
high priest be well rekened, it shall be even four and thirty years: finally
was he put to death by Herod: It is a dredful thing verily, to senerehande in all histories that not only the most renow medest kynreds and families among
men decay, but that also the successors of holy men clean does degenerate
from the honesty of there elders, and fall to all fylthynesse of mische ue and
sin.

What time the Phariseys and the other sects began with the Jews.
WHen now the soueraintie and priesthode by the Jews began to be toren and
pulled asunder by the tyranny and the wars of Antiochus (I pass over that
the Machabees The Machabeys.
joined them with Heythen kings, the which ordained or deposed princes and
high priests at their pleasure, the which cared for nothing less then the
endeavor of the religion): it could not be ^^^t that sects and sundry
dissensions must and yse in the Iewysh religion. For uedes must it happen so,
whe^ether we want a certain head in the religion, or whe^the heads of the
church or congregation do not regard the studies of Godliness, and seek
only outward puyssaunce, as profane nations do.

The sects that were sprung up, were of three sores: The manner of sects risen
in Iewry. The Phariseps.
the first were called Phariseis, that is Severed of the word Phares. These used
(for they were better learned then the other) certain constitutions of men
above the law of Moses, whereby they were severed from the other people.
Howbeit their doctrine was a little better and righter, the^ the other. For they
taught immortality after this life, and that God will punysh sins: they
believed also that Messiah should come a saueour for the faithful, and a judge
for the sins. To the men of this sect also was committed the common wealth
before other, and they we of more authority.

The second sect was of the Sadduceis. These The Sadduceyes.
hid their wickedness with a very noble and not able calling themselves. For
zaddik signifies righteous. Sadducei, they that be righteous or holy. So is it
most commonly received in usage in this world, that those that be most
wicked of all, do cloak their couetousnesses with most honest names. They
taught that after death was no life. That God had only given the law to the
intent we should live honestly and quietly, receiving of God in y^ mean
season in this life the reward of righteousness. They did expound y^
scriptures wholly according to man's judgment, nether would they hear ought
else: and as concerning for the manners that apperta^ned unto man, very Epicures,
(that is to say, su^ as did put the principal goodness in voluptuo^^tie, The
Saduceyes were Epicures.
as Epicurus the Philosopher did.) And tha^ more is when they at the length had
gotten power* they troubled not a little the Phariseis. It is a fearful thing
verily to hear, that among the peculiar and chosen people of God, are crept in
even heythenysh doctrines: insomuche that constantly they were not ashamed,
even openly to teach and say, that after this life, was none other life.

The third were Essey, the which when they Essey. The Anabaptists do r^^^ble
these.
perceived that both the Phariseyes and Sadduceyes followed their appetites
under the color of honest titles, nether did ought in a manner that were
worthy their profession: therefore seemed it them good, to declare the
straitness and severity of life with the deed, and would be called Essey,
that is workers or doers. For Assa, whence the name Essey comes, sygnifieth
to work: as in these times the Anabaptists do reprove both the Lutherians
and papists, and endeavor to seem more holier then either of them. For the
Essey lived in a manner in all things, as the Anabaptists live: they married
not, and would have all things common among them. This was an utter foolysh
and dotish supersticion of monkerye, and which could not last The Note of the
church at this time.
long. Of this wise nerehand is the church divided in three parts also now a
dates: for because y^ second coming of Christ also is hard by. The
Anabaptists resemble the Esseyes, and on the other part, some be Phariseyes,
some are Sadduceyes. For the thniges that happened among the Jews ^^e a figuce
of the Christian religion. These sects rose first among the Jews under Ioannes
Hircamus the son of Simon before the birth of Christ an hundredth and five and
twenty years.

Of Herodes kynred.
WHen Julius Caesar had war in Egypt Antipater is made gonernoure of Iewry by
Julius Caesar.
that was every where full of danger, Antipater prince of Idumea aided him
very faithfully, and for a remembrance of this benefit, made him Julius
gouernoure of Iewry, the which was now constrained to obey foren and strange
princes in her own royalme. The Jews set themselves against it with great
force at the first, sufferyng very disdainfully the rule of the Idumean prince,
insomuche that he was poisoned at the last by a Jew, called Malchus, and dyed.

Herodes revenged the death of his father Antipater, Herodes took in Jerusalem
and demanded the succession of the Iewysh kingdom of Augustus and Antonius
in the hundredth four score and second Olympias: and this was after Alexander
two hundredth, four score and twelve years. This was the occasion whereby Iewry
receuied foren kings out of Idumea and afterlong siege compelled Herod them
of Jerusalem to yield themselves: nether was there little blood shed, before
the Jews yielded themselves freely Christ was borne.
to Herodes dominion. As for Christ was borne in the thirtieth year of Herod.
These are nerehand the greatest and chefest mutations of the kingdom brefly
comprehended, the which happened in Iewry in the time of this monarchy,
until the last monarchy and the time of Christ's birth.

And though it is evident enough, that the Iewysh kings after Christ's birth
were of Herodes kynred, yet will I set them every one orderly, that the reader
may more easily know, how the one is borne of the other, and have ruled the
kingdom lawfully by a certain succession, until the destruction of the city
Jerusalem: though as concerning the just order of the history, I am not come
so far. For I have yet to rehearse these things of the Romans, which
happened in the time of the Grecian monarchy.

Herod the first, which was also called Ascalon, Herodes Ascalon. ^^.
had many children, among the which he himself caused three to be slame,
Aristobulus, Alexander and Antipater, by reason of a conspiracy, that they had
made against their father. But after him remained alive Archelaus, Herodes,
which was surnamed Antipas, and Philippus. These parted the kingdom among
them.

Archelaus was chosen by a testament to succeed Archelaus.
his father Herod in the kingdom: but Augustus the emperor would not
confirm or ratifye this will of the father, but made him prince, howbeit under
this hope, that he should be made king, if he ruled honestly. And so ruled he
nine years, and used great tyranny: he set up and deposed high priests, and
rauyshed his own brothers Alexanders wife Archelaus was exiledly Augustus.
Finally he was accused before Augustus for his wicked deeds, who deprived him
of the dominion, and in stead of a punishment was he bannished into Ga^^le,
that he should lead the rest of his life there in exile: But that part of
Iewry was afterward governed by Roman governors, first by Cyrenius, Herodes
Antipas led away his brothers wife.
afterward by Pilate. Herodes surnamed Antipas, y^ brother of Archelaus, was
made prince of Galile by his father Herod. The same took his brother Philips
lawful wife from him, he being yet alive, the which happened by this occasion:
Herod went to Rome, and by the way he lodged by chance with his brother
Philip, who dwelled in y^ fore part of Iewry. As Herodes and Herodias had now
made acquaintance, which Herodias was the daughter of Aristobulus, and sister
to Herodes Agrippa, they were agreed, that he coming from Rome should lead
her with him, the which was done afterward. Ihon Baptist An example of
vengeance
Ihon Baptist rebukes this wicked deed, who was therefore beheaded. Howbeit
Herodes went not unpunished at the last for it: For by Caius Caligula was he
sent in exile at Leonia in Galile with Herodias, the which constrained him to
go to Rome and require a kingdom: but coming home without doing ought, he
lost that part also of the kingdom, which he possessed before. He reigned
four and twenty year in Galile.

Herodes Agrippa was the son of Aristobulus, Herodes Agrippa.
of whom we have mentioned before: for he was the son of the first Herod,
and was slain by his father. But Herod Agrippa was prisoner at Rome, in the
time of Tiberius, afterward was he in high favor by Caius Caligula the
emperor: For he optayned by request of him first the part of Philippe his
brother, and the name of a king: afterward^ that land also, which Herodes
Antipas had. He optayned of Claudius Samaria and Iewry, and by this occasion
was whole Iewry subject agayn^ to one man's dominion. The Apostle James the
James the ^ore.
greater was put to death by this Herod, the which is me^cioned in the twelfe
chapter of the Acts. He reigned seven years.

Agrippa, the son of Herodes Agrippa was yet very young when the father dyed,
for the which cause the Romans Pretores or debites governed Iewry now again.
But Claudius gave Agrippa afterward that part of Syria, which is called the
kingdom of Chalcis: he gave him that part also which Philip had possessed by
Iewry. Nero the emperor gave him also some cities of Iewry. In the time of
this Agrippa was Jerusalem destroyed, and In Agrippaes time was Jerusalem
destroyed
of him is mention made in the xxi chapter of the Acts. He reigned seven and
twenty years. Philo the history Ographer says, that this Agrippa had a
son, which reigned with Ben Cosban, who usurped Ben Cosban
a kings dominion upon the Jews and raised great vproure in Syria and Iewry
in Hadrian the emperors time.

This is all Herodes kynred, until the over throwyng of Jerusalem: the which
we have brefely gathered therefore, that it may clearly be known in what
order they have succeeded in the kingdom. And to know this, is very necessary in
the Bible. Sense the time of the first Herod, until the destruction of
Jerusalem are an hundredth and three years.

Of Rome.
IN the third Monarchy have we made mention brefely of the decay of the
Perses, the prosperity and fall also of the Greeks, and also the sundry
mutatio^s distur^nces of the Jews. Now remains that with yke brefenesse we
rehearse the times of the most reatest battails that the Romans have had sense
the great Alexander. For it I would rehearse thee Wherefore monarchies are
chefely ordained of God.
whole histories, it would be to great a work. We have noted above, that high
monarchies are sometime ordained to that intent, that great and most mighty
princes may be tamed, and that right should be set against great tyranny. For
this may be seen in all monarchies, which are increased by none other means
in a manner, then that they have subdued most mighty kings. Even so the
Romans, as soon as they began to be very mighty in Italy, they invaded first
the Spanyardes and Carthaginians, and had most cruel and durable wars:
althoug they themselves in the mean time were sometime grievously vanquished.

Of the Carthaginian War.
SIcily was cause of the Carthaginia^ war. Sicilia was cause of the
Carthaginia^ war. Hieron.
For king Hieron required help and aid of the Romans against them of Carthag
the which for as much as they occupied now a great part of Sicily a long
season, they raised many commotions. Wherefore the four hundredth and four
score year sense the foundation of Rome, did the Romans appointe the first
setting forth against the Carthaginians: and this war lasted twenty years
continually. As for the first disconfiture which was very miserable, suffered
Regulus is taken by the carthaginia^s
the Romans, when Regulus was taken. This Regulus truly was sent to Rome by
them of Carthago, to entreat with the senate for the delivery of the
prisoners: for if he could obtain it, he should be set fre at liberty. If
not, according to his promise he should return again to Carthago. As soon as
Regulus came to Rome, it was said that he himself counseled in the senate,
that they would not suffer the exchange of the prisoners to be done for his
sake, but that they would rather consider he were an old man and feeble of
body, which could lyve not much longer. What needs many words? The senate
at the last followed his mind, and he went to Carthago again, where he was
tormented The torments of Regulus
with sundry and new manners of torments. And among the rest of his torments,
is this rehearsed also, that his eye lyddes being cut of, he was trauayled with
continual wakyng. First is the principal The love and faithfulness of
Regulus toward the common wealth
love of this man toward the common wealth allowed, namely whose profit he
regarded more, than the health of him or his. His trust and faithfulness is
praised also, because he went again to Carthago, specially seeing he knew that
most cruel punishme^tes were appointed for him. But at the last were the
Carthaginians constrained to demand conditions The battayll by Egusa.
of peace of the Romans. By the I Will Egusa was a very sore field foughten, and
the Romans slew thirtene thousand Cartaginians, and two and thyrty thousand
taken prisoners. But when the Carthaginians required peace, the prisoners were
freely were dismyssed without money. These things happened after Alexander, when
Ptolomeus Euergetes ruled in Egypt.

Of Haniball.
THe five hundredth and.xxxvi. year sense The second war of Carthago. The
occasion of the second war of Carthago in Spain.
the foundation of the city of Rome, began the second war of Carthago
against the Romans. The occasion of this war was begone by reason of
Spain, the which when the Cartaginians had once lost, Hannibal had now subdued
it again. Nether truly had ye Romans ever any greater discomfiture, then in
this war. For fortune was so contrary to them, that Hannibal being come into
Italy, did three times overthrow them: and though the most part of the Romans
was The discomfiture of the Romans in the second war of Carthago.
slain in the two first battails, yet was it not to be compared to the third
battle, wherein were slain about forty thousand Romans, many also were taken
prisoners. This discomfiture made the Romans so sore afraid, that many nobles
gathered together began to devise to fly into Greece, and leave the city.
Scipio the younger.
But when Scipio the younger hard of that, he went to them, and exhorted the^
to sted fastness in defending the contrary, and said: if he perceived any man
to fly out of the country, he would straightway strike him through with his
sword. Wherefore he compelled the young noble men to bind themselves with an
holy oath, that they should not leave the city, but that they would freely
abide every chance, for love of the country. As for this same Scipio made an
end of this war, when it had lasted syxten years. For he overcame Hanibal in
Aphrica, and compelled the Carthaginia^s to require peace: and peace was
concluded upon this condition, that they of Carthago should yield Hannibal to
the Romans. Hannibal fli^th to Antiochus.
But he being escaped, fled to king Antiochus the great, whom he provoked to
ordeine a great and dredefull war against the Romans. But king Antiochus was
slain, which we have said before. It may easily be gathered out of this,
what time this second war of Carthago was, namely twenty year before Judas
Machabeus.

Of the war of the Romans in Macedonia.
ABout the five hundredth and five and Philippus. The occasion of the war of
Macebo^^^.
fortyeth year rose first the wars in Macedonia. First with Philippe, and
that because of the league made with Hanniball against the Romans. For king
Philippe hated greatly the name of Rome. For he perceived that the same city
crept up to the destruction of all kings and most mighty Monarchs: in so
much also, that he should have said sometime: He feared, lest a tempest
should once come out of Italy into Greece, whose vehemence should be so
great, that all these slaughters and discomfitures which Greece had suffered
of the Perses and othet compared to it, might be called but a triful and toie.
Wherefore Perseus son to king Philippe, the last king of Macedony.
when he was invaded of the Romans with war, he required the co^dicions of
peace not unwittingly, and made a treaty of peace and concord with the Romans But
afterward Perseus his son, as one yt was more coragious, and of a more
vnrestly mind, gathered an army, and made aliaunce with many kings, and
invaded those cities of the Romans, that were in Greece: and the Romans were
also greatly vanquyshed of him at the first. But not long after this battayll,
he required freely the conditions of peace: howbeit the Romans refused to
grant the same, and sent Paulus Aemilius into Macedony, Paulus Aemilius.
of whom Perseus was overcome and taken prisoner, with his mother, wife, and
children. Of this wise were kings tamed by the Romans and subdued. This
Perseus was the last of the Macedonian kings, and with him is that noble
kynred of Demetrius gone to naught, where of we have spoken before. Howbeit the
son of this Perseus became a secretary at Rome: and the kingdom of Macedony,
was afterward always governed by Roman governors. This war with Perseus
began not long before, when Antiochus Epiphanes invaded the Jews.

Of the Spoylyng of Carthago.
THe six hundredth and second year The third Carthaginia^ war.
after the fou^dacion of the city, began the third and last Carthaginian
war, by this occasion: The city Carthago was at variaunce with the countries
adioynynge to it, (as sometime rise debates between cities and princes,) and
these required aid of the Romans, against the Carthaginians. After long
reasonyng, it was disputed Disputation whether Carthago should be wholly
overthrown* Scip^^ Masica.
in the senate, whether Cartago should be wholly spoiled, because that it being
restless, could not live in peace. For Scipio Nasica counseled that Ca^chago
should not be overthrown: first, because it were not honest that the Romans
should use so great tyranny, and should slaye so much people. Beside this
that it were not profitable also: without that city, could not Aphrica be
entertained too do her duty, without it were wholly spoiled. Thyrdly, that it
were most necessary for the Romans, to have such a city contrarieng them,
by the which they should be sturred to lustiness and courage, or else should
they raise war within themselves, if they feared no foren enemy. Contrary
wise did Cato (...)
bring this argument among other, as the chefest: that the Romans did by little
and little become un like their auncetours in virtues and prowes. Wherefore if
the most mighty city Carthago remaining in her estate knew the cowardnesse,
negligence sloughtfulnesse and feblenesse of the Romans, there were nothing
more surer, but that she would strive again for the empire and high
governance, and oppress the Romans, and bring them under her power. Wherefore
lest this should be, it were most profitable and necessary, to destroy
Carthago.

Nether would the senate give any certain sentence or verdice upon this at that
time: but they ordained Cato the aged, and certain other to be sent with him
to Carthago, to try out all the matter, whether any danger were to be feared
of the Carthagineans, that then at the last they might earnestly devise what
were to be done. But what needs much to be said? Cato being returned, showed
that more danger were to be feared of the Carthaginians, than ever was before.
For though they of Carthago were deprived of their dominions, yet could they
easily perceive that the city were both mighty and also cruel, which could
not rest but must by process of time assay some thing to revenge her self.
Beside this brought Cato with him grene fygges of exceadyng bygnesse, the
which he showed openly in the senate. And when he was demanded, whence he had
brought those fygges, he answered: within three days may be sa^^ed thither. He
said moreover: they grow in the land of your enemies. So near dwell your
enemies, and they that covet your empire. The senate being sturred with these
so many persuasions, ordained, that Carthago should be assaulted with war,
and should be roted out by the ground, that there should be no Scipio y^ younger
son to Paulus Aemilius.
hope of restoring it afterward. To accomplish this war, was Scipio the
yo^ger the son of Paulus Aemilius made captain, and in the fourth year,
after the continual assault of syx days, was Carthago taken. And though
Scipio permitted every man a space to fly freely, yet was a miserable slaughter
in the city when it was dispoiled. Afterward by the commandment of Scipio,
was the city set on fire, and burned syxtene days continually. This Carthago
is destroyed.
is that miserable decay of Carthago the most noble city, in the which
near hand always have so many renowned princes governed, of whom to speak
by reason of their worthiness, will not the brefenesse of writtynge suffer at
this time. Carthago stood and continued about seven hundredth years. The godly
reader may above all things behold here a dredeful example of Gods vengeance
in so truly ouerthrowyng of so mighty and very excellent a city. It is said
also that after that it was set on fire. Scipio came rydyng to the place of the
city, and saw the miserable case of Carthago that was spoiled and destroyed,
and being moved with a pitiful affeccion, he did weep very sore, and said at
the last these words: I pity the case of so excellent a city, and I se
before that Rome also shall once be overthrown of this wise: and that more
is, it is plain, that no governance in this world is long lastyng, and no
power can be stable.

Of the war of the Cimbry in Italy.
THis is the second history of the Germans, The second mention of y^ (...)es
in (...).
and of their prosperity, that they have had in Italy. For the Cimbriare
properly Germans, which witnesses the name Cimbrica Cheronesus. For so are
called the countries of Holsatz and Denmarck. Moreover by the witness of
Strabo are Cimmery and Cimbriboth (...) the (...)es of (...).
one thing. The beginning of the names is Go^^e^ the son of Iaphet, who dwelt
in these countries beyond Thracia, that he toward us, wherein dwell the* people
of Littow. And for this cause knew Homer the poet the people Cimery: For the
Grecians knew Thracia and the countries ioynyng to it. Howbeit the name of
Cimbri remains onley by Denmark and Holsatz* But these people that lie
toward Goth^
the East of Thracia, are called Gotthi, of whom we shall speak hereafter, in
the history of the Gothyes. There is also made plain mencyon of the low
duchemen, which went with the Cimbre. It is clear that it was an innumerable
multitude, about three hundredth thousand gathered out of all quarters of
Germany, and such an army, that parted asunder they intended to take in partly
Italy, partly Gallia. But when they invaded the Romans, they were gathered
again, and the Romans were first most greueously slain of the The battayll
of the Cimbri with the Romans.
Cimbri, for they had the worst in four great battayls: and in that one
battayl, wherein Cepio was captain, were slain four score thousand Romans:
which thing made the Romans and all the people of Italy so sore afraid, as
they never were in the time also of Hannibal. At that time was Marius Marius
was made capytaine against the Cimbri.
appointed captain against those Teutones, For he was to be rekened amongst
the most valiant men of arms, that Rome had. He went to this war in the
six hundredth and two and fyftyeth year after the foundation of Rome: and this
war lasted till the third year, so long till the Cimbri were utterly
destroyed and oppressed.

The histories make mention, that in the last fight An example of vehement
wrath of god
the women used such force, that they did no less slaughter, than the men:
and with such a rage, that runninge against the Romans with their chylderen,
cast them into their visages.

This truly is an example of so great crueltye, that worthily may he quake
at the wrath of God, whosoever fyndeth like miseryes in reading of histories. For
it must be a vehement and strong indignacion, which brings to men's wretched
and oppressed cases so great a misery.

Of Sylla and Marius.
THat which Scipio Nasica said in the The consultation of destroyenge
Carthago.
Senate to be true, did the deed prove. For when ye Romans could not be
weakened, with the power of a foren enemy, they were febled with their own
strengthes, within themselves. Marius, of whom we have said before, brought
home notable victories of the foren enemies, but at the last was he cause^ of a
most cruel Marine cause^ o^ ^n vproure* Sylla Mithridates
vproure in the city of Rome. For when Sylla was ordained captain, to war
in Asia against king Mithridates: Marius took it displeasauntly, that the young
Sylla should be set before him, and he brought much to pass by the Tribunes,
that they should set themselves against the Senate, and by the commune voice of
the common people, to choice Marius. By this hatred was the occasyon sprung of
that great war between Sylla and Marius. For when Marius had raised this
rumoure at Rome, Sylla appointed a setting forth of an army into Asia. But
Marius with consent of the people had optayned, that Sylla should not go into
Asia: and some friends of Sylla dyed in this commotion at Rome, among the
which was the son of Pompeius the consul the son in law of Sylla. But when
the Tribunes sent to Sylla them, that should show him, he should not go into
Asia, he appointed his army incontinentlye, and came to Rome, and slew the
tribune and many other. Marius fled into Aphrica. In the mean season set^
Sylla all things in order in the city, and went into Asia, and brought great
things to pass. He overcame Mithridates, and took in with strong hands
Athenes, and whole Greece, and subdued also many other contryes of Asia. When
Sylla The tyranny of Marius.
brought this to pass, in the mean season does Marius return out of Aphrica
into Italy well appointed, and going to Rome, he slew the best and most
excellent princes, and chief of the Romans, and this slaughter at Rome was
very miserable. Than was Sylla constrained haystely to return out of Asia, to
aid them that were of his part: but in the mean time dyed Marius. Howbeit the
son of Marius restored the war against Sylla, Sylla fears the inconstancy
of fortune.
where with Sylla being afraid, he said as it is reported: that when he was
young, he had good fortune against an aged man: but now he feared, lest a
young man should likewise have the same fortune against him.

This example witnesses, that wise men have earnestly ouerlayde, and also
douted the unstableness of fortune, which happens in men's affairs. But
God prospered the enterprise of Sylla, that he triumphed of his enemies: for he
had a most right cause. But yet do historyes Sylla is more cruel than need
is.
make mention that Sylla was afterward more cruel than need required: For he
spared in a manner noman, than favored Marius part, another was there any
measure or end to use tyranny at Rome. Of this wise was the tyranny that
Marius used against the princes revenged by Sylla at the last, who restored
them in the governance. Thou shall chefely perceive gentle reader by this
history, that so great misery and debate in the commune wealth, rose of a small
beginning, and by a certain alteracion or turn crept it first in among
princes, afterward among y^ people. But Sylla used great wisdom, and deserved
great praise, that after this commotion, he set and confirmed the commune wealth
in a certain order, utterly deposynge the authority of the Tribunes: The
Tribunes were deposed by Silla. The Tribunes are restored again by Po^peius.
for they were wont ever to inflame y^ minds of the commune people against the
Senate. But Pompeius changed this same afterward, who restored them, to do
the commune people a pleasure: Howbeit the evil counsel was worst to the
counselor. For the Tribunes were also the doers in sturrynge to the ciuyll
war between Julius Caesar and Pompeius.

Of Pompeius and C. Julius Caesar.
THE most heinous war, that was between Caesar and Pompeius, which caused an
utter destruccyon to the whole commune wealth of Rome, took occasyon of very
light causes: and that even of only envy against Caesar, not so much of
Pompeius, as of private persons, the which coueted those provinces, that Caesar
possessed. The occasion of the war began of this wise: Occasyon of ^ civil
war
When Caesar was in Gallia, he required that regard should be had of him in his
absence, and to be remembered in choysynge of counsuls: for it must be pertayned
to him, that it should be so brought to pass. For if he had returned to Rome
without there should be a consul, his enemies were minded to oppress him, and
to bring to pass, that he should be exiled from Rome. But Caesar brought to
pass with the aid of the Tribunes, that the dignity of Consulshyp was
promised him, the which was done with the consent of Pompeius the consul also.
But when the time came to appoynte the consuls, some have stered the Senate, to
set themselves against him, another suffer Caesar to be made consul, and the same
alured Pompeius to be of their side, and drove out the Tribunes, which fled to
Julius Caesar. But when Julius perceived that they would oppress and betraye
him, he lay sore upon the promise that was made him, and demanded the
consulshyppe: beside this would he have the Tribunes restored into their place.
During this controuersye, there were diverse consultations. Marcus Cicero
brought the most vehementes M. Cicero.
reason, which were to be borne of either part. For he wylled that Caesar and
Pompeius should forsake their hoostes, and that Pompeius should goo into
Spain, as he was also determined, and Caesar, so sone as he had forsaken the
host, should be consul. Julius Caesar agreed to this, but Pompeius refused it.
Wherefore did Caesar come to Rome with an army appointed: Pompeius taking the
flight, does likewise appoint an host with all his power. But Caesar takes in
Italy and Spain, and persued Pompeius until Greece. And though Julius refusyd
not hitherto the conditions of an appointment of peace, but did also offer
Julius a man ad^^ed and souer of peace.
them frelye: yet Pompeius ceased not to make answer, that he would grant nor
admit no conditions of peace, before he saw the head of Julius cut of and
brought to him. But when Caesar heard that, he was greatly moved. Though
Pompeius had a more righteous cause, yet ought he to have used more
gentleness against so noble a prince, that offered conditions of peace, and
sought only that he might have been fre, and without danger of fear.
Therefore when Caesar saw that he must use counsel by constraynt, he invaded
Pompeius, and overcame him. Pompeius fled into Egypt, where he was slain by
an entray of the young king, whose father he him self had set into the
kyngedome. Afterward took Caesar Asia and Aphrica together, insomuche that he
alone had in all the empire of Rome with great puyssaunce. This so great
alteration and misery in the commune wealth of Rome began of a most light
thing: for this war was doleful both to high and low estates of men. For
histories report that there were slain above three hundredth thousand men in this
civil war.

The fourth and last Monarchy, namely of the Roman empire Julius Caesar.
Three thousand years, eight hundredth and four score and seuentene were sense
the creation of the world.

Seven hundredth and six years sense the buyldyng of Rome.

Seven and forty years before The beginning of the Roman monarchy.
Christ was borne, began first the Roman monarchy: when Julius was made
Consul, and the war against Pompeius, whereof we have even now spoken, did
begin. That the war lasted five years. For when Pompeius was dead, Julius
had yet much business to do in Egypt, Asia and Aphrica, where Cato had slain
him self: and in Cato slew himself.
Spain, where he had also slain one of Pompeius sons. But when all contryes
were set in peace, returned Julius to Rome, and that was in the month
October, and after that in the beginning of March, was he stycked through in
the Senate of Cassius and Brutus with their companyons.

Wherefore reigned Julius in peace, no more but five The ordering of the year
was begone by Julius.
months, and in that season caused he the year to be ordered, throughout all
the Roman empire, according to the course of the son. He brought also with
him out of Egypt a notable and most conning man in sciences, which taught by
demonstracyons, called a Mathematicus* and was the first autor^ cause that
those sciences were taught in Italy. And this ordering of the year, which is
handsome and that we use yet now at this time, was begon^ first by Julius. But
how dishonestly and very cruelly those that killed Julius, that is plain ynoug^
by their deeds. For Cassius and Brutus with they companions favored Pompeius.
But by the mercyfulnes of Caesar, were they take in again into the city, and
restored into their former dignitye and possession of goods. For what shall I
be prolixe? The world had never a prince so mighty, that ever The (...)
gentlynesse of Ces^^^
used more gentlynesse toward his enemies, that freely yielded themselves. He
never showed any notable wrath against any man, without it had been in a
battaill, where necessity to fight did require: where nevertheless before
him Marius and Sylla never ceased of murtheringe, even in time of peace. But
Julius did no such things, ye he freely took to mercy even the best of the
common wealth, that were Pompeius adherentes, nether took ought from them. He
brought again also the true manner of governing the commune wealth, which was
decayed by sedition, and restored it with no less wisdom, than he kept it up
with authority. But how great a thing this is, may be gathered thereby, that
in civil commotions we se judgments, laws and all modesty of manners go to
wrack and to naught. Julius truly was one of the most doughtyest princes,
which being garnished of God with most greatest virtues above other men, that
have governed very great dominions.

Beside this was it not possible to retain commune peace long after that
Julius was dead: for there was noman after Julius that had either such
authority or power, that with very force could enterteyn the quietness of the
empire: for to retain the same in great kingdoms, is requisite a great and
syngular puyssaunce. Moreover it is reported that he should have said: That he
feared not for for his life, but that his death should be mischeueous and
deadly to the commone wealth and empire.

But all this refrained not them from the cursed enterprise, of whom by a
co^iuracion he was slain. The first beginner of this wicked deed, was Cassius,
Cassius.
and that only by envy, because for Cesars sake he could not obtain those
provinces, which he coueted. Brutus*
Brutus was a man of great wytt, and therefore suffered he him lightely to be
made a companyon of this wicked deed: cloking it with this color, that it were
not honest for the Senate of Rome, to suffer a lord greater in the empire then
he. Item, that Caesar also was a tyrant, and that it was lawfully permitted to
slaye tyrauntes. With such like inconvenient arguments, which are often wont to
begyle young and unlearned men in like cases, was Brutus inflamed: for without
his help had Cassius brought nothing to pass. This is the sum of this
history. But God suffered so great a mischeuousnesse not long unpunished. For
as many as had conspyred to the death of Julius, were also slain themselves
not long after.

Caesar was old six and fyftye year when he was slain, and ruled five
years: and the beginning of rulynge was in the consulshyppe, in the which he
began the war against Pompeius. This is the beginning of the Roman
monarchye, the which God has painted very horribly in the prophet Daniell: and
witnesses, that the world shall be much more heauely oppressed by the same, than
ever it was before. Item that Christ shall come in the same monarchye, and
therefore shall it be the last. For all these things are prophesyed before by
God, to stablyshe the faith of the godly, concerning the certayntie of
Christ's coming. Besides this also that it might be known that the world
shall not endure forever, but shall once peryshe, and that the ungodly shall be
punyshed, but the Godly shall look at Gods hand for a life everlasting. I
suppose verily that the prophecy of the Heythen prophets, and sayenges of the
Sybilles of the durablenesse of the Roman empire, are pertaining to this, as
is the saying of Virgil: I have given an endless empire, the which seem to be
taken of this, which the scripture says, that The Roman monarchy is the
last on earth.
the empire of Rome shall be the last monarchye on earth. Though the scripture
does in the mean season teach also, that this monarchy shall decay: yet
shall part of the same last ever, wherein shall re remain the name and
hygnesse of an Emperor, until the worlds end.

These things are to be known, that we may be assured that this empire can
not be overthrown, which the examples of histories witness also. For after
that the highness of an Emperor was translated to the Germans, has this
kingdom suffered many assaults, and has often been weakened: but yet could it
not be abolyshed by nomans power, but remained allwaye stable, and restored it
self otherwyles.

For it had now Emperors of small power, than very puyssaunt Emperors. To
consydre these things in historyes makes great matter, chefely to know the
will of God aryghte in such chances.

Augustus.
When Julius was dead, rose great commotions at Rome. Marcus Cicero Marcus
Cicero.
counseled to make a peace on this wise: that thence foreward noman should
lay hands on the favorers of Julius, and that all they likewise, which had
slain Julius should be without danger or fear: but all discord laid down
on both sides, they should provide for common and perpetual peace: none
otherwise than of late did Thrasybulus make a concord at Athenes, the which
they called Amnistia, that is, that* either part should forget the injury
done, and that nether of them should invade the other afterward. This was
very gentely and handsomely counceled and considered of Cicero, but this
contynuall peace could not endure long. For when afterward every man would
rule, it was necessary that factions should rise. The Senate drue Octauius
Augustus to it, against Anthonius.

For Anthonius coueted y^ raygne. But the soldiers Anthonius.
conspyryng against the Senate, slew many of the chief men of the city, among
the which was Anno. ^l. before Christ's (...)
Cicero beheaded also. But the empire remained by Octauius Augustus only, which
was kynsman to Julius: for Iulia sister of Julius had spoused Accius Balbus,
but their daughter was Accia, whose husband was Octauius: of them was borne
(...)
Octanius Augustus, whom Julius had appointed and chosen his heir, whereby he
was surnamed Caesar, and that name remained ever afterward by the successors,
even as though by right of succession, they did enter into Cesars kynred: as it
was wont to be, when successors were first adopted and chosen. Nether was
Julius called Caesar first by (...)
reason of the empire, but many of his kynred were so surnamed before. For the
old and approved Grammarians do write that the name of Caesar comes of the
word or name Cesaries, which signifies goodly hear or a bush of fair
hear: and of that gat the Iulies first that name, because that one or other
happelye had a fair hear in that kynred.

As for the name Augustus did the Senate add to Octauius, for his luckynesse
and prosperitye (...)
in his affairs. Augustus comes of Auguruim, (that is, a diumation or
soythsayenge by the cry or slighte of birds) and betokens fortunate, and he
whom God does prospere by lucky signs or tokens.

This addition, is a right given to a supreme governor of y^ world: for god is
with y^ civil power, and the governance of an empire, is the gift and
ordinance of God.

Augustus raygned six and fyfty years, but he governed not the empire alone
the twelve first years. For being young, not passing nyneten years of age, was
he set in the governance: he was made counsul, because he stack by the Senate,
of of the which he was made consul, in despyte of Antonius. But the soldiers
agreyng within them selves, set them against the Senate and his adherentes. But
for so much as this concord could not be durable, Augustus was feign afterward
to be at variaunce and strive also with his fellows, and so optayned he the
whole empire alone. But when the governance was stablyshed with peace, he used
most high moderation in all things, and confirmed the whole empire with
honest laws and statutes: in so much that it is reported, he should have said:
The kingdom shall last for ever, if these ordinances be not avoided and
disanulled. But what shall I say much? Augustus is scasely counted the first
and chefest among the sage and moderate princes.

The third book of the Cronicles, which conteyneth the time sense Christ's
birth.
BEfore, in the beginning of this work, have we divided this whole Cronicle
and times of the world in three parts, and that according to the saying of
Elias, that both the most alterations of things in the world, and order of
the times might be known more surely. Besides this, that we should also
know, that the worlds end is now not far of. Howbeit we have now
dispatched allmoost four thousand years, and about that time nearehande was
Christ borne, the which Elias had prophesied. Now in this third book, shall we
like wise treat of the third part of Elias meaning, and begin this book
with the same. And how little Elias had failed in the order of the years,
truly it may be perceived very easily: for CHRIST our LORD, very God and
man, Wha^ Christ was borne.
was borne into this life of the virgin Mary even the two and fortyeth year of
Augustus raygne: and this was three thousand, nine hundredth and four and
fortyeth year sense the creation of the world. But to count the years
exactely and narowly, there is somewhat requisite in the nombre of the years.
For the four thousand years are not fulfilled.

But the prophet said moreover: that God would prevent and come spedely before
the time of his coming, because the end of all things might be more near.
Howbeit the things that are concerning the knowledge of Christ's natiuyte,
Passion and Resurrection for every Godly man, the same may all be searched in
the Evangelists. But as concerning the time when Christ suffered, and rose
again from death: also how the Gospel is spread abroad in the world, and by
what means also the holy Gospel began in the world universal, we shall
entreat afterward.

Of the Germans.
IN the time of Augustus were the The Germans were first couquested by war.
Tiberius Drusius.
Germans first attempted of the Romans. Tiberius and his brother Drusius were
with an host in high germany, and invaded those coasts, that are ioyninge to
Rhetia and Vindelicia. But they did not wholly subdue those contryes under their
empire. The Rheti are those Rhetia.
that dwell in the valley of the floude Enus or Ihn, they of Tyrol until
Bregetium or Rab, Kempte and dounwarde until Nordlingen, where yet remains
Vindelicia.
the name Ryes. They of Vindelicia are Augspurg and upper Beyerlande. Drusus
went down until Mentz, and there getting a disease he lost his life.

About that time made the garnyson of the Romans, that was appointed at Colen
an assault upon Westphalen and Saxony. But one called Hermannus was captain
of Saxony, who^ the historyeus do call Arminius lord of Cherusia. Cherusci.
Armnius.
As for the Cherusci are even the Saxons and Thurynges, dwelling by the wood
called Schwartzwalde, of that side, that stretched beneth by the floude
Wesurgus until the city Breme, And by my judgment is that called Cherusci,
which now is communely called Hertzishe. This Arminius oppressed the Romans
vnwarres, and slew about one and twenty thousand of them. Besides also a great
army of the ayders and confederates of the Romans, which warred with them, as
Frenchmen do with the Scotts.

Quintilius Varus the captain of the Roman Quintilius Varus.
host slew him self with his swearde. Tacitus the historyographes shows at
larg of the battayl that was had, namelye between the floudes Lyppia and
Amisia, that is, beneth the town Cassel, not far from the town Padeborne in
Westphalen. For thus says Tacitus: They ployled so much as lies between the
floudes Amisia and Lyppya, not far from the wood of Teutoburgum, where the
residue of Varus hooste and legions is said to lie unburied. As for this
slaughter made the Romans no less afraid, that in times paste when the
Cimbriwaysted Italy. For the Romans were afraid lest Arminius with force of
arms had invaded the Roman empire, and come until Rome. Augustus was in
such distress by reason of the fear of the great danger, that he caused
every man to be every where in arms. It is also said, that he said of weeping
and with great cry: Quintily restore the legions. But when the Romans were
driven out of Saxony, they brought to pass, that Arminius was invaded with war
of his neighbors, there was at that time the Swedes and Belhems, dwelling by
the river Albis: but Arminius overcame them also, and taking in their contreis,
he had Westphalen, Shwartwald, Saxony, Marck, Misen, and Bohemy. He reigned
about twelve year, and finally was he slain by the oppression of his. But
this is enough said of Augustus time.

Tiberius the third Emperor.
The year of the world. iii M. ix. C. lx. The year of Rome.vii. C. lxix. The
year of Christ.xvi.
THough many excellent Emperors have bensence the time of Augustus, (for when
God keeps the common welthes, he gives also such men, that are mete to do
great things.) yet have the in the mean season now and than princes dissolute
and wicked: so that a merry conceated man seems to have said very true: that
the images of al good princes may be graue^ in one ring. It is very profitable
to behold in histories the things that are declared and the examples of
wicked princes, that we may dread y^ wrath of God, by the fear of the
punishment, wherewith they are punyshed.

Tiberius was not the son of Augustus, but for Tiberiu^.
somuche as the true heirs of Augustus were dead, he took in stead and chose
for heir Tiberius the son of Liuia, which was already married to Augustus:
and because Tiberius was a valiant man of arms, Augustus used him always for a
captain. This Tiberius was the first Emperor, to whom the senate of Rome did
yield it self. He reigned three and twenty years.

The fyuetenth year of Tiberius was Christ Wha^ Christ was bapti^ed
our Lord thirty year old, and that year was he baptized of Ihon Baptiste,
and began the preaching of his Gospel, of penance, of remission of sins,
and life everlasting. This was sense the creation of the world the.iiii. M.
ix. C. and lxxv. years. But after the beginning of Alexanders Monarchy
the.CCC. and.xl. year. Add an hundredth and five and forty years until the
second year of Longimanus. Thus have ye the four hundredth and four score and
five years: and these are the three score and nine wekes of the which is
spoken by Daniel: which thing we have treated at length before.

In the eyghtenth year of Tiberius was Christ Wha^ Christ was crucified.
our Savior crucified, dyed, and rose again the third day. But after his
resurrection he commanded his disciples, that they should preach the Gospel
through all the world, the which they began straight way, when they had
received the holy ghost from heaven upon Wytsonday, and after the visible
ascension of Christ into heaven.

Therefore is now the word of God and spiritual Where the Church or spiritual
kingdom is
kingdom, and also the church or congregation of the faithful or christen
people not only in the Jewish kingdom: but in the whole world, where the
Gospel is preached by the Apostles, and where their writings are brought For
God promised to work by preaching of his word. Moreover where Gods word is
taught, there is it necessary to be some that pertain to Gods kingdom, where
Christ is ruling and workyng, according to that saying: I shall be with you
until the worlds end. To this our Lord Christ our savior and true God, be
praise, glory and thankesgeuyng for ever. Amen.

But now it remains that we do show further how great and heavy assaults the
church of christenmen has suffered, both by outward persecutions of enemies,
and also chefely by heretics, which have now and than toren wretchedly the
unity of the church with wicked doctrines: which thing has brought a far
more damage and despysynge to the Church or congregation, than any outward
persecutions.

The nyntenth year of Tiberius after Christ's resurrection was Steven the
first martyr stoned When Steven was stouen.
and the same year was Paul converted to the faith. And this befell. The
year of the world.iii. M. ix. C. lxxviij. The year of Rome.vii. C. xcii. The
year of Christ.xxcix.


Caius Caligula the fourth Emperor reigned Caius Caligula.
three year and ten months: he was of a very dissolute and vmbrideled life,
he defiled all his systers with an unnamed or an unnatural meddling: Finally
was he slain by the chief of his host through a preuy conspiracy. This
Caligula caused his image to be set in the temple at Jerusalem, to be
worshipped, which thing was also prophesied by Daniel, namely: When Israel
shall se an Daniel. ix.
Idol set in the temple, then shall the end be at hand. This happened.

The year of the world. iii. M. ix. C. lxxxvii. The year of Rome. vii. C.
lxix. The year of Christ.xliij.
Claudius the fyft Emperor reigned Claudius.
thyrtene year and nine months: he was poisoned. The second year of
Claudius came Peter the Apostle to Rome, who had preached before certain years
at Antiochia: and here begins the Romyshe church.

The year.xliiij. After Christ's natiuite. The year.iii. M. ix. C. lxxxviij.
after the worlds creation. The year.vii. C. xcvii. after the building of
Rome. The year of the world. iiii M. The year of Rome.viii. C. ix. The year
of Christ.lvi.


NEro the syxt. Emperor reigned fourten Nero.
year. At the beginning lived he honestly five years, afterward was he most
ungracious by reason of his intemperancy of manners and tyranny. He put to death
his own mother and his wife, and also many noble men, among whom was also
Seneca. Finally when his officers was gone from him, when he was sought to be
put to deaht by the Senate of Rome, he fleing slew himself, before he was
found out by the soldiers: and this was done the two and thirtyeth year of
his age. But the kingdom of the Romans is now wholly removed from the
posterity and kynsmen of Augustus and Leuia. When Peter was crucified. Linus
bishop. Paul is beheaded.


In the time of Nero was saint Peter crucified at Rome. After him was Linus
made bishop, and afterward was Paul the Apostle beheaded also. And if ye
count the years of Paul, he preached the Gospel about four and thyrty
years.

In the time of Nero appeared a comete six A comete seen in Nerois time.
months contrary too all cometes, which are not wont to be seen so long.
There was also a comete seen before in the time of Claudius, and three sons,
which sygnyfyeth doutlesse, that three princes should shortly strive for the
empire. In like manner do I suppose, that their great Comete did sygnifye not
only the sedicion and vproure, but also the mutacion and change in the Roman
empire, and specially the lamentable decay of the Iewysh kingdom.

Sergius Galba, Otho, and Vitellius.
AMong these three was a strife for the empire, Sergius Galba, Otho.
after Neroes death. As for Galba was slain in ye marketplace of Rome by y^
layenge wait of Otho. Afterward was Vitellius chosen Emperor in Germany of
the Vitellius.
host, and sent some men of arms into Italy. The which metyng Otho, he
fought four feldes with them: three times did he overcome them, but in the
fourth was his host overthrown. And though the souyldiours drue freely to him,
yet would he war no more. For it is reported that he should have said: that
he set more by the common peace, then by his own life or private glory: and the
fourth month after Galbas death, slew he himself with a daggar.

In the mean season was Vespasianus chosen Vespasianus
Emperor in the East, by the soldiers: the same sent an host into Italy,
the which ouerthrewe Vitellius men of arms. Of that rose vproures at Rome,
and Vitellius was taken his hands bound upon his back, and with a halter cast
about his neck, he was drawn through the myer in the streets, and finally was
he slain as he had deserved. For he was such one, that deserved rather to be
called a cruel beast, than a man. This was the first vproure that was in the
Empire for the election or chosyng, after Augustus. The year of the
world.iiii. M. xvi. The year of Rome.viii. C. xxv. The year of Christ.lxxij.


VEspasianus the Seventh Emperor reigned nine years. It was a man renowned
in wisdom and honesty, and a prince most worthy of the Empire. For where
Caligula, Claudius and Nero did not only suffer all intemperancy out of
measure in other, but did it themselves also: this man contrarywyse restored at
Rome the nourture of modesty and honest laws. He augmented also the Empire
with all manner of victuals, and in the provinces ordained he necessary aids.
Besides this ordained he also at Rome common pensions for professers of phisyck
and other sciences.

Of the last destruction of Jerusalem.
IN the second year of Vespasianus began When Titus the son of Vespasiane
besyeged Jerusalem.
Titus the son of Vespasian to besyege the city Jerusalem, when Easter began
to be kept in the month of Apryll, and afterward in the month September did
he spoil and burn it. But in the mean time was so great mysery in the city
for hunger, vproure and inward manslaughter, as never was red to have been in
any city. The mothers dyghted their own children to satisfye their hunger,
but inuayne: For the souldyours took them away from them par force, and
devoured them, and the mothers dyed with hunger the whiles. Many slew
themselves. Josephus writes that in the cyty Ten hundredth thousand men were in
the city when Jerusalem was besyeged.
were about ten hundredth thousand persons. For because it was Easter, a very
great multitude came together into the city: Besides this, they that dwelt
here and there in villages, in all Iewry, drue all together to Jerusalem, for
none other cause, but that they trusted to be in save guard by the defense of
so well afortified city. In so great number of people, the most part nere
hand dyed with hunger, pestilence and sword. Titus sent syxtene thousand to
Alexandria, to do service, none other wise then slaves. He brought two
thousand with him, which he showed in a triumph, and cast them to wild
beasts in common games to be toren in pieces. But what shall I say much?
nomans oracio^ can be sufficient to express so great a mysery. For God would
propose to men a new and syngular An example of Gods wrath.
example, wherein might be seen the greatness of Gods wrath against despisers
of Godliness. For it must be a very stony and hard heart, which should not
be sore afraid at so dredefull an example. And it is above all things to be
ouerloked in this hystorye, that if God used no mercy toward this people in
punyshynge them for their wickedness, whom he called his peculiar people,
which also was come of so holy fathers: He shall much less spare the
Heythen. And God in threatenynge this, declares also in the same example the
show of mercy and Godly benevolence: namely, that we do not doubt that after
that the Iewysh kingdom is overthrown, we that are Gentyls, are truly the
chosen people and Gods children, if we do truly believe in Christ.

This destruction of Jerusalem befell in the second year of Vespastanus: and
it was the threscore and fortene year after Christ's natiuite, the fortieth
year after that Christ had suffered his passion. But from the creation of the
world the four thousand and eightenth year. And this temple did stand after
the second year of Longunanus five hundredth and syx and twenty years.

Many dredefull tokens signified this destruction Straung things were seen
before the destruction of Jerusalem.
before, which for shortness we can not here rehearse. A burning sword was seen
above the temple nearehande a whole year. I have added this therefore, lest no
man do rashly despise the tokens, which pretend the euide^ces of Gods
indignacion, by the which we are called to repentance, that the wrath of God
may be either avoided, or mitigated: which thing of mercy happened to the
Ninevites.

The year of the world iiii. M. xxv. The year of Rome. viij. C. xxxii. The
year of Christ. lxxxi.
TItus the eight Emperor reigned two The gentleness of Titus Vespasianus.
year. He was the son of Vespasianus, endued with all kind of princely
virtues, wherefore he was praised of every man, and called: The love and delight
of man kind. But when he perceived, that some went about to obtain the
Emperyall dignity against him, he
commanded to admonyshe them friendly, to abstain from such enterpryses: For
all their labor was inuayne in such things, and that the governance is a
gift of God, which befalls to him, whom it pleases him to give: He did
nothing more rygorously to them. Titus (as some suppose) dyed of poison.

After that Linus was dead, was Anacletus made the third bishop of Rome.

The year of the world.iiij. M. xxvij. The year of Rome viii. C. xxxvj. The
year of Christ.lxxxiij.
DOmitianus the nynth Emperor, the brother Domitianus
of Titus reigned fyftene years. He had wars in Germany, and ce^sely against
the Catti, that now a days are called the Hesses. He Catti.
used incredible intemperancy and great tyranny at Rome, wherefore he was
finally slain. He drove The Mathematici are (...)en out of Rome.
out of Rome the Mathematicos, that is, teachers by demonstracion and
Philosophers. He persecuted the Christen, and put them to death, like as Nero
did.

When Anacletus was dead, Clemens the first of that name was made Bishop of
Rome.

The year of the world.iiij. M. xliij. The year of Rome.viij. C. lij. The
year of Christ.xcix.
NErua the tenth Emperor reigned one (...).
year and four months. He adopted and made heir apparent Traianus, who was
as then captain in Germany about Collen. Nerua dyed being old.lxviij. year.

The year of the world.iiij. M. xliiij. The year of Rome.viij. C. liij. The
year of Christ.C.
TRaianus the Emperor reigned nynetene years and six months. This same
was Traianus ^as (...)ho (...).
the first of the strange Emperors: For he was no Italian, but a Spanyarde
by kynred. He was of such notable honesty, that ever afterward, as often as an
Emperor was elect, he did wyshe
with open request, that: he might be like to Traianus in honesty, and
Augustus in happenesse. When he had made the principal officers of his court,
he gave The noble saying of Traianus when he gave his head officer the power
of the sword.
him a sword in his hand, saying these words: Use this sword against mine
enemies in just causes. If I do not justly, then draw it upon myself. The
Roman empire was never so large, as in the time of Traianus: and above the
examples of other Emperors, possessed he the realms of the East most largely.
He had very great wars in Hungary and Germany.

Ihon the evangelist that was driven out by Domitian, Ihon the Apostle
returns out of Pathmos.
returned again to Ephesus out of the isle Pathmos. If ye will reken the no^bre
of the years, it shall be found that Saint Ihon has preached above three score
years. Good Lord how many
myseries has Saint Ihon seen in so long space, among the which was even
the greatest, the destruction of Jerusalem his country: I will pass over how
greueously he has stryuen with many and even peruerset heretics. For we
read that upon a time Saint Ihon came into a bath, and found Cherinthus the
Heretic sittyng with his company, and disputynge earnestly among them, and
the unshamefast blasphemer denied Christ to be man. But Saint Ihon rysynge,
bad his friends that were set with him, to depart with him from thence: For
God would not suffer any longer so unshamefast blasphemies. But strayghtwaye
as he was gone out, the house Cherinthus the heretic was killed (...) the
falling of an house. An example of vengeance
falling down, slew Cherinthus with his company. It is a dredefull example of
Gods wrath against them which blaspheme the name of GOD, with open and
manifest ungodliness, how little he will suffer them to be unpunished at length.

Euaristus the fifth. B. of Rome succeeded Cleme^s

After Euaristus death succeeded the.vi. B. of Rome Alexander the first of that
name.

Under Traianus were many Christen men tormented. ^^e persecu(...) of Christ^^
m^n v^^^r Traianus
But afterward was a sentence ordained, that they should not be brought into
judgment, without they were first openly accused, and then should they be
punyshed: and this was gotten by the benefit of Plinius. Traianus died of a
flyxe in the The years of his age (...).
belly.

The year of the world.iiij. M. lxiiij. The year of Rome.viii. C. lxxiij.
The year of Christ.C. xx.
ADrianus the.xii. Emperor, reigned twenty years: He was adopted of
Traianus. He was a prince of great wisdom, he was not given too war after
the example of Traianus, but was given to common peace by all manner of means:
and of this wise restored he the Empire in most best fashion, wherefore he also
deserved most high praise with every man. There was never a more profitable
Emperor to the Romysh kingdom, sense Augustus, then this Adrianus. He was
excellently learned in astronomy, and Adrianus a (...) learned (...)per^^r
(...) co^^ing (...)tronomy
composed every year a pronostication for himself. Unlearned readers of
sciences put he out of wages, howbeit he provided of his own cost for the^,
that they had no need in the mean season: and set other learned and profitable
me^ to teach in their stead. He furnished also excellent libraries: for he
was reakened to be very well learned in Greek and Latin.

In the time of Adrianus began the Jews to restore The Jews* raise an vproure
through one Messiah.
their kingdom, fyndyng also out one Messiah among the^: But Adrianus overcame
them, though it was not without great business. Afterward commanded he to
repair Jerusalem, and called her Elia, after his name Elius.

At the first was he sore against the Christians, The clemency of Adrianus
toward Christen me^
and commanded to torment them: but afterward, when some learned Christen men
wrote books to the Emperor, the which are yet now adays a broad, he
changed his mind, and commanded that from thence foreward no man should be
attached for his religion.

Xystus the first of that name, and seventh B. of Rome succeeded Alexander.

After Xystus succeeded Thelesphorus the eight Who ord^^ned ^ent.
B. of Rome. He is reported to have been the instituter of Lent.

The year of Christ.i. C. xl. Antonius Pius.

ANtonius the Godly the.xiii. Emperor, was adopted by Adrianus: He reigned
xxiij. years, and that with so great modesty and endeavor of peace, that he
should often have said, that it were more honest to save one citesyn by an
Emperor, than to slaye a thousand enemies.

Hyginius the nyneth B. of Rome succeeded Thelesphorus.

Pius the.x. succeeded Hyginius. Anicetus the xi. B. of Rome succeeded Pius.

The year of Christ.c. lxiij.
MAr^^s Anthonius the philosopher the.xilij. Mar^^s Anthonius.
Emperor reigned.xix. years. The same governed the Empire by good right with
his brother Lucius Verus: and these two were Lucius Verus.
the first that ruled the Empire together. But Verus lived not long in the
governance. Marcus was like excellent, both in virtue and learning. He had
also war in Germany, against them that dwelt in Morauia and Slesia, and also
against the Vandali. He wrote many excellent laws, the which are yet to be
red in the Pandectes of the ciuyll law. He wrote also whole books whereof we
have seen some.

Moreover in his time lived Ptolomeus the Ptolomeus the astrono(...).
astronomian, of whom we do worthily make mention. For it has pleased God,
that so excellent doctrines should be kept and reserved until these our times,
through this man. Nether truly was this Ptolomeus a king, (for at that time
had Egypt cea^sed of having kings,) but was a philosopher Egypt was garn^^hed
^^ mathematical sciences.
at Alexandria in Egypt. For God had garnyshed Egypt with mathematical
sciences, sense the time of Joseph the son of Jacob the patriarch, by whom
Egypt had first received them, and kept them until this Ptolomeus: and that
is about two thousand years. For first Alexander, afterward the Romans
also had Egypt in great estimacion for this cause, and lest so noble sciences
should perish, they bestowed much cost to entertayne the Schole, which then
finally went too The Schole of Alexandria.
naught also, when the kingdom of Egypt was translated from the Romans, and
was myserably spoiled by Mahomet. But that at the least some remnaunt of so
necessary sciences should remain, no doubt but God would them to be set in an
order by this man, that they may be kept of them that come after* for the
which thing God is greatly to The Mahometistes.
be thanked. But how little they of Mahomets sect are worthy to be called men,
ye that they may be rather called beasts than men, does it appear thereby,
that they willed so ancient a scole to peryshe and be lost, which had
nowstande and floryshed above two thousand years, being kept by so noble
princes, in the which were taught all manner of wisdom and learning, not
without the high benefit of God.

Soter the xij. bishop of Rome succeeded Anycetus, who ordained, that they that
were spoused, should be wedded openly before the Church or congregation.

The year of Christ.C. lxxxiij.
COmmodus the.xv. Emperor governed Commodus
xij. year, and was equal even to Nero in cruelnesse.

Eleuterius succeeded Soter in the byshopricke.

The year of Christ.C. xcv.

Aelius Pertinax the.xvi. Emperor reigned Aelius Pertinax.
six months. He was slain of Iulianus, who had bought the name of an
Emperor of the soldiers.

The year of Christ.C. xcvi.
Didius Iulianus the.xvii. Emperor reigned Didius Iulianus.
vii. months. He was very well learned in y^ law. He was slain by Seuerus.

The year of Christ.C. xcvi.
SEuerus the.xviij. Emperor reign eightene years. The same restored
agai(...) (...).
the empire that was decayed with sundry perels.

Victor the.xiiij. bishop of Rome succeeded Ele^therius in the byshopryke.

Zepherinus the.xv. succeeded victor. In his time was Origene, who taught the
holy scripture at Origene^ a trache^ at Ale^a^der.
Alexandria. This man's books were afterward refused, because he brought in
unprofitable disputations and allegoryes. Afterward was it the common fashion
to mengle the philosophy of Plato with holy scripture, whereof the church had
great damage and inconvenience: For the philosophy of Plato is far from the
common trade of living: The philosophy of Plato The philosophy of Aristotel.
and contrary wise the philosophy of Aristotel has a beawtiful and right
order, and if she be well used, exercised and understand, she may verily bring
much profit to Christen men that be learned.

The year of Christ.cc. xiiij.
ANtonius Bassianus Caracalla the.xix. Antonius Bassianus.
Emperor reigned six years. He commanded his brother Germane Geta to be
slain. He was wedded to his stepmother. He required of Papinianus the great
lawier to excuse the manslaughter that he had done with his brother, to the
which Papinian answered: (...)pinianus the lawier.
It were not so easy to defend a manslaughter, as to commit or do it.
Wherefore did Antonius cause to slaye Papinianus also, which was worthy to be
reputed and taken for a lawier: namely because for righteousness and honesties
sake he would rather yeoparde his life, than to allow a dishoneste An example
of vengeance.
deed. Not long after the Emperor Bassianus was duly rewarded for his
tyranny, when he likewise was slain.

Calistus the.xvi. bishop of Rome succeeded Zepherinus. Macrinus.


Macrinus the.xx. Emperor with his son Diad^^menus raygned but one year
and two months. They were both slain.

The year of Christ.CC. xx^
VArus Heliogabalus the.xxi. Emperor reigned Varus Heliogabalus.
four years. He left no remembrance of him, save of a most filthy beast:
at the last was he slain by the souldyours.

The year of Christ, CC. xxv.
ALexander Seuerus the.xxij. Emperor: Alexander Seuerus.
his mother was called Mammea. He reigned xi^^. years. He was made Emperor
being no more than twelve year old, ordained by the soldiers, and that did
the Senate allow. He is greatly praised for his diligence and Godliness.
^lpia(...).
In all things used he the counsel of Vlpianus the lawier only, nether spoke
he with any man alone, save with the same. But the soldiers took that in
evil worth, and specially because that by this man's counsel, they were kept
more straytely in their duty by the Emperor.

And when for this cause upon a time the souldyours rushynge upon him
threatened to slaye him, the Emperor stepped forth, and set his body in the
dangers of Vlpianus, and covered him with his cloak: that the soldiers
might understand, that the Emperor cared for Vlpianus health.

This was a notable example of Emperyall virtue, A notable example of
maintenan^ce of virtue*
whereby is euidentlye declared, that great men ought not to regard their
life and body for the mayntenaunce of justice and ryhteousnesse.

Vrbanus the first of that name, the.xvij. bishop of Rome succeeded Calistus.

Pontianus the.xviij. succeeded Vrbanus.

The year of Christ.CC. xxxviij.
MAximinus the.xxiij. Emperor raygned three years. The same when he was
young, (...)us (...)d (...)y.
was a shepeherde in Thracia: afterward followed he the war: and for the
unaccustomed greatness of his body, with the which he had a syngular
boldness joined, he mounted by process of time so high, that he was chosen
Emperor of the army, without any consent or authority of the Senate.

He subdued Germany until the wood Hercinia, and the upper part of it, until
the Frankes. He used great tyranny, wherefore ordained the Senate other
Emperoures against him: and for that cause were sometime feldes foughten
amongst the Romans, in the which the Gordianus.
younger Gordianus was slain, and the elder Gordianus hanged him self. But
finally was Maximinus slain of the soldiers with his son by Aquileia.

Autherus the xviij. bishop of Rome succeeded Pontianus.

The year of Christ, CC. xli.
GOrdianus the.xxiiij. Emperor raygned Gordianus.
six years. He was ordained Emperor by the Senate with Pupienus and
Bal^^nus against Maximinus.

When Pupienus and Bal^^nus refused to grant ye soldiers all their
requests, they were slain of them at Rome: and by this means optayned the
younger Gordianus the empire alone. He brought home the victory of the Perses in
the East, and restored some cities again to the empire. But when the host
suffered hunger, Philippus was made upper captain, by whose commandment
Gordianus was slain.

When Gordianus was made Emperor, An Eclipse of the Sun
there happened an Eclypse of the Sun so great, that during the same, men
were feign to use candel light. There were also earthquakes, wherewyth some
cities were even destroyed.

The year of Christ.CC. xlvij.
PHilippus the.xxv. Emperor reigned five years. He was an Arabian, and had
been long time captain of the host. This same Philippus was ye first
Christ* Emperor a(...) baptized.
took up his son Philippe also to the governance of the Empire. But they were
both slain by the procurement of Decius, for taking upon them baptyme and
knowledgyng of the name of Christ. For thus raged the Emperors amongst
themselves with manslaughter, by the sufferaunce of God, which thing ought
duly cause us to dread and fear God.

The year of the world* four thousand, one hundredth and two and nynety.

The year of Christ, two hundredth and eighte and forty.

In the time of their governance was it a thousanth year sense Rome was
builded, which was feasted and celebrate with a most renoumed pomp of plays
that were had once man hundredth years, called Ludiseculares.

Fabianus the ninetenth bishop of Rome succeeded (...).
Antherus. It is said that he baptized Philippus the Emperor, and that
Philippus was the first Emperor, that acknowledged the Christen faith.

The year of Christ.CC. L. iij.
DEcius the.xxvi. Emperor raygned two (...).
years. He was no less a wise prince, than a doughty warrior. He set up his
son also in the empire with him. They were both slain of the Gotthies, after
that they had invaded Thracia, The beginning of the G^^thian (...)y.
and after that wended them toward Hungary. And though the Romans had to do
with the Gotthies before also, yet will I begin the Gotthian history here.
For at that time they had an army of three hundredth thousand: and they did a
renoumed act in vanquy shynge Decius, so valiant a prince. But God would at
the last be revenged An example of vengeance.
of that tyranny, wherein he commanded by an open commandment to putt all
them to death, that worshipped Christ. He putt to death Fabianus Fabian ^^^
Cyprian martyrs.
the bishop of Rome, and Cyprian in Aphrica, and many other holy men. As for
the Gotthies and other strange nations, breaking into the Romish dominion
pulled away by violence the same, because of sheddynge of Christen men's
blood. And this same had Sybilla prophesied for to come. Beside that is it
clearly expressed in the Apocalypse.

Cornelius the.xx. bishop of Rome succeeded The heresy of Nouatius is co^de^^e^
Fabianus, who condemned the heresye of Nouatius, concerning the perverse
doctrine of penance. For he taught, that they which had received baptysme,
and fell again into sin* could not come again to salvation: and with this
error brought he many to desperacyon, and spoiled the concord of the
church or congregatyon.

The year of Christ.CC. lv.
VIbius Gallus the.xxvij. Emperor raygned Vibius Gallus, Volusianus.
two year with his son Volusianus. For when Decius was slain, Gallus was
saluted Emperor of the hooste. Afterward were they both slain of the
souldyours.

Lucius the.xxi. bishop of Rome succeeded after Cornelius.

The year of Christ.CC. lv^^.
VAlerianus the.xxviii. Emperor raygned (...)an^^s.
six years. He was chosen Emperor of the host in high Germany, and the
Senate confirmed the same. For he was borne of a most noble kynred at Rome,
and had behaved himself valiauntly in Germany.

At the last was he taken of king Sapores Sapores king of the Perses. An
example of great presumption.
by the Perses, and lived in most vile service For the barbarus king was so
haut and presumptuous, that when he had taken the Emperor, he used him for a
chair: and when he would ride, he trod upon the back of Valerianus lyenge on
hand and fete, and so stepped on his horse back. But Sapores was likewise
punyshed by Odena^us the Roman captain.

GAlienus son to Valerianus the xxix. Emperor, (...)e.
governed ye Empire with his father* and after that the father was taken, he
reigned nine years. He was learned in good sciences, but living in great
excess and drunkenness, he governed but slowly the empire, wherefore it
mynyshed in many contryes. In the mean season was Posthumus made captain of
the hooste in Posthumus.
Germany, whofor the singular endeavor to accomplysh his duty* was made
Emperor of the host. But when Galyenus had sent his army against Posthumus,
he appointed among the rest the Frankes to be in the hooste. And by this
occasyon were the Frankes first steared to war, the which afterward also,
when Posthumus was slain by saying of wait and treason, remained stylle in
harness: the which we will also treat of here after, when we shall treat of
Carolus magnus. But we would lyghtely show this, lest the reader The Frankes
settinge themselves against the Romans.
should be ignorant what was the occasyon why the Frankes did first set them
selves against the Romans: and by the same means became they mighty in
Germany and France. Of this manner than began the Gotthyes first to destroy
the Roman domynyon, afterward the Frankes, and so forth other nacyons, so
that I pass over in the mean season that great slaughter, that the Perses in
the East have done.

The year of Christ.CC. lxxij.
Flauius Claudius the xxx. Emperor reigned Flauius Claudius.
two years. Thyssame deserved most greatest praises. For his notable and
very princely virtues. Wherefore was the empire offered unto him both by Galyenus
before his death* after that of the hooste and senate with one consent of them
all. Against the Gotthyes fought he in Hungary and Macedonya above man's
thynkyng, and ever had the victory. He overcame also the Germans that were
fallen into Italy. He restored Egypt to the Empire. But Claudius desteny
suffered him to live no longer, happily because the Romans were not whorthy of
such a prince. For it behooved the empire of Rome now to begynn to decay, the
which was somewhat repared and restored by Claudius, and three or four of his
successors. Constantinus the great was of this Claudius Constantinus y^ great.
kynred, which we shall show hereafter.

Valerianus a debite put Lucius the bishop of Rome to death by martyrdom,
whom succeeded in the byshoprycke Stephanus the first of that name the xxij.
bishop.

Xystus the second of that name the.xxiij. bishop of Rome, succeeded Stephanus.

Dyonysyus the xxiiij. byshope of To. succeeded Xystus.

The year of Christ.CC. lx^iiij.
AVr^lianus the xxxi. Emperor raygned five ^^^^lianus*
year and ^yxemone these. He was taken up to the governance of the empire by
Claudius for his excellent prowises and feats of chyualry. He overcame the
Frankes in a sore battayll, not far from Mentz, afterward the Gotthyes also
^^e (...) ^^ b^^^ayll.
in Illyrycus. Beside this overcame he in the East the quenezenobya, the which
did great acts above womanly nature, and had great war with the Romans.

He is worthy no small praise also, because that in Au(...) ^^ ^^de^o^^^^ o^
the di(...) of (...)e*
the host and among the souldyours he would always have strayhgtly kept and
maynteyned modesty and discipline of war. For it befell upon a time, that a
soldier forced his hostess and had to do with her: of which thing when
Aurelianus had knowledge, he would have him punyshed with a most greueous kind
of punishment: He commanded two trees to be bowed do^^e to the earth, and to
bind the my^doer to the boughs of either of the trees, and than lettynge the
trees louse, dressynge themselves again, should with a great violence tear
the young man in pieces. This Aurelianus was also a great persecutor of the
Christians.

Of the Manicheis the heretykes.
STrayghte way after the Gospel was preached, rose sects and dissensyous
among Christen men. But I am not minded to rehearse y^ erroneous opinions of
every one in this treatise: I will only recyte the most greatest, which have
infect and troubled many and great cities and contryes with their ven^m: that
the reader may know, nothing to be Heretykes are b^gyn^ers of vproure*
more venomous in this commune life of man, than false doctrine: and that all
heretics are desirous of vproure, nether covet ought else, but that they may
defend and spread abroad their error by vprour and commune riot. For Satan
their chief doer, is both a liar and manslayer. Either of the^ truly is evident
in all scismatickes, which both teach false, and are wont to raise
manslaughter through sedysyon and per^urbatyon of commune welthes. Manichei the
heretics Manes born in Persia.


In the time of Aurelyanus began first the Manycheis, and one Manes borne in
Persya was begynner of them. Thyssame spread his venim abrod largely, first by
y^ Arabians, afterward in Africa: the which went so spedely on, that it could
not The doctrine of the Manicheis*
be swaged the space of two hundredth years afterward* The chief of their
doctrine was: that there were two gods* the one good the other euel, and both
like everlasting. This doctrine seemed unto man's reason alowable. For seeing
God is good by nature, and that in the mean season the evil has such power:
it is necessary there be also a peculiar God* which is author and doer of
euels, equal to the other God with power and euerlastyngnesse. Beside these
had they other opinions that they taught, namely, that Christ was no true God:
nether received they the books of the Apostles, but feigned there several
doctrines, the which they called Christ's Gospel also: they boasted also of
several illuminations of heaven, and said they gave the holy ghost. They
ordained sundry ceremonies: they used also choice of meats: they forbadde
wedlock* saying that thereby is optayned the holy ghost. They taught also to
reject civil power. For matrimony and governance of communwelth they said to
have their ofspringe from the evil God, and not to be ordained of the good
God. Thomas Monetarius or mynter at Thuringen Thomas Monetarius
was plainly fallen into the same heresy in our days.

The year of Christ.CC. lxxx.
TAcitus y^.xxxij. Emperor reigned vi. months. Tacitus. ^^^bus*
Probus y^.xxxiii. Emperor ruled six
years and four months. Thissame is rekened among the most worthiest
princes: he was chosen by the soldiers and confirmed by the Senate. He was
the cause that peace was made both in the lower and higher Germany. He overcame
y^ Frankes and them of Thuringen* and in the histories of this Emperor is the
first mention made of the nacio^ of Thuringen. Felix the.xxv. bysh. of Rome
succeeded Dionis^us. Eutichianus the.xxvi. succeeded Felix.

Caius the.xxvij. succeeded Eutichianus in the byshopryke.

The year of Christ.CC. lxxxvii
LArus the.xxxiiij. Emperor raygned two Larus.
year. He made his sons Carinus and Numerianus emperors with him.
Numerianus was excellent in honestye and learning. But Carinus was equal with
Nero for his wickedness.

The year of Christ.CC. lxxxviij.
DIocletianus the.xxxv. Emperor raygned Diocletianus.
twenty year, He was a prince of ripe wisdom, and garnished with many noble
deeds. He restored Egypt to the Empire. But he was a very fearce enemy to
Christ's religion. For be endeavored to restore the old state of the empire
and old fashyon of the commune wealth: And for as much as he did all things
by the judgment of reason, he would not suffer the opinions of religion that
were disagreynge. And when he perceived that in so great trouble of wars he
could not entertayne alone the largeness of so great an empire: besides that,
that it had often fortuned, other to covet the empire by vproure, and to ben made
Emperors, he willingly willed Maximianus Maximianus.
to raygne with him, and to be of like power, and the same warred in Gallia.

As for these two were a like called Augusti in the empire. These two Augusti
chose other two* which were not egall of power, but were as successors: nether
were they called Augusti, but Cesares. Diocletianus chose Galerius, Maximianus
chose Constantius. But either of them both Diocletianus and Maximianus were
called Augustus. Afterward layenge aparte the governance of the empire, they
returned both to the quietness of a pryuate life. But Maximianus would feign
have returned to the governance, that by the same occasion, he might have
promoted his son Maxentius to the governance: and for that cause Maxentius
Constantius
did Constancius his brother in law cause him to be slain. Communely does it
so befall, that when great empyres shall decay, all shall be first filled with
vproures and inward debates, the which this example does witness.
Diocletianus lived many years private or without rule: at the last did he
slaye him self, when he was afearde for Licinius and Constantinus, which
suspected him that he would take Maxentius their enemies part.

The year of Christ.CCC. viij.
COnstantius the.xxxvi. Emperor with Galerius Maximinus, and was either of
them (...)
Emperor with great praise. After Diocletianus death, raygned Constantius
four years. The contryes of France and Germany were subject to him, and he
set them at quiet. He overcame The (...)n of Germany
the Frankes and Almaynes. For of this wise is Germany divided: The Frankes
took that part of Germany to them, which is about ye Rene: They that be called
Alemanni are ye higher Germans. Constantius dyed in England, in whose stead
was ordained for to rule the empire Constantinus his son.

The year of Christ.iij. C. xij.
COnstantinus the.xxxvij. Emperor reigned thyrty years. He restored the
empire to his Co^stantinus
former rest and tranquillitye. For when Maxentius had cruelly used tyranny at
Rome, being overcome by Constantinus, he was in a flyghte drouned in the river
Tybur, and received worthy punishment for his tyranny, the which he used both
against other men, and specially against Maxentius drowned in the Tybur.
Christen men. And so did Constantinus and Licinius govern the empire together
certain years with great concord, and Constantinus wedded his sister to
Licinius. But we see sometime to befall in a great empire such causes, wherein
two do The cause of disagrement between Constantinus and Licinius.
seldom agree. It is said, that the cause of the disagremente between
Constantinus and Licinius should thence have spronge that Licinius should
have been enemy to the Christians, and to have often required Constantinus to
enterprise such things no more.

Finallye Constantinus being compelled with great necessitye overcame
Licinius: howbeit left him alive, upon this condition, that he layenge away
the rule of the empire, should live pryuately. Wherefore Constantinus governed
the empire afterward alone, and brought all things into peace and honest
laws. The emperor was the first that openly knowledged the name of Christ.
Nether is it to be doubted, but that he was a true The e^de^our of Constantinus
to keep the Gospel* The duty of a Christen prince. The council of Nicea
called (...)i (...) Nice(...)*
godly prince: for he had the holy Gospel in such reverence, that to the open
witness of his fayeth, he caused the book of ye Gospel to be boren always
openly before him. He commanded also books of the Bible to be written at his
own cost, and caused them to be sent into all contryes here and there. He
brought to pass, that the holy and profitable council of Nicene was gathered,
that so in his time, he might set the state of the church in a quietness.
These finally are acts worthy for a good prince, which deserve a far
greater praise, than that it is said he have given to the bishop of Rome many
gifts. Although the good Emperor is worthy to be praised for that, that he
gave almesses and benefyces to mainteyn Euangelycall doctrine and ministers of
the church. But that Constantinus should have be so liberal toward the bishop
of Rome, that he should have given him for his use the city of Rome, and the
half part of the empire, as some do fable: no historyes that be allowed do
witness the same.

The city Constantinopolis was builded by this Constanti(...)
Emperor and has the name of him, when before the city of marchaundise that
was in that place, was called B^zantium. The sea of the empire was (...)
afterward brought to Constantinople, as the histories folowinge do testifye.

Moreover seeing it is* no doubt that this prince is one, and that of the
chefest of those princes, which God has garnished with great virtues, we shall
worthily recyte the ofspringe of his kynrede, that it may be known, those
most great and noble virtues to be syngularly given of God to great and noble
families or houses.

Claudius the Emperor of most commendable name, had two brethren, Quintilius
and Crispus. Claudia the daughter of Crispus was wedded to the noble prince
Eutropius. And these are The aunceters of Constantinus.
the ofspringe of Constantinus kynred. Eutropius a chief governor at Rome.
Claudia the brothers daughter of Claudius


Constantius the Emperor had Helena: her son was Constantinus ye great, his
wife was Fausta the daughter of Maximianus, whose chylderen were Constantius,
Constantinus and Constans. Theodora the stepedoughter of Maximianus: her son
was Constantinus, and the same had sons, Gallus and Iulianus.


Of Arrius the heretyke.
ARrius lived in the time of Constantinus. Arrius an open reader in the scole
of Alexandria. The doctrine of Arrius.
He was an open reader in the scole of Alexandria in Egypt. The churches
concord was miserably spoiled with his error and heresy: For he taught yt
Christ was not truly and naturallye God. But what practyse and vicious
pleasantness of persuasyons he did use to confyrme this error, it were to
long to rehearse. Howb^it it pleased the world so well, that great learned
bishops, and near hand the whole church of the East, with many also in the
Weste did embrace him. Nevertheless in the mean season wythstode heauely this
heresy two bishops of notable godliness. The first was Alexander, who
Alexander and bishop.
optayned of Constantinus to gather the council of Nicene, wherein was
condemned the heresye of Arrius. Wherefore was Arrius forsaken and bannished out
of the dominion. But when Constantinus was dead, a certain priest was in
favor with Constantius, whom also he committed al his counsels: the same
brought to pass with his persuasyon by the Emperor, that Arrius being
called again, was set in his former office. The fire that was metely well
quenched before, began now again to burn more fearcely, insomuche that the
Emperor Constancius began also to embrace Constancius (...) ^^ Arrius.
this error of Arrius. When at the last a day was appointed by Constantius,
wherein Alexander and Arrius should openly reason of the scripture,
concerning this learning, Alexander spent the whole night in prayenge in the
temple, prayenge God, that the sect of Arrius should crepe no farther.
Wherefore in the morninge before the appointed hour of the disputation, when
Arrius went to the place, he began (as he went) to have pain in the bellye,
and went to a preuye to do his The death of Arrius i^ an ^^ample of (...).
easement, where he above all men's estimacion, dyed incontinent. Howbeit when
Arrius was of this wise dead, yet ceased not the sede of his poisoned doctrine
to be sowed larger abroad, because that they that were conspyred together of
this sect, began to sprede it more vehemently. At the last when Alexander
was dead also, Athanasius his successor disputed himself against the
Arryans: but the same being banyshede by Constantius, he Athanasius being
bannished, flies to Triere out of Egypt.
fled from Egypt, until the city Tryere in Germany. And though this was a very
far flyghte, yet was the bannyshed man feign to hyde himself secretly at
Tryere until the eight year. In the mean season was that heresy fearcely
grown thorough out in the East church, even so much, that for a season a
great part of Christen men did lean to the Arrian sect, and out of this
sect sprange by little and little, other sects many. Finally when the name of
Arryans was by the decrees of many councels quenched, yet was it now and than
renewed again in the church under other names. In one city were sundery
opinions, and diverse sects persecuted each other, insomuche that the one
running upon the other in their temples, made ryots and committed man
slaughter. At that time was the state of the church very wretched and pyteous,
the which worthily gave an occasion of slander, not only to the Gentyls, why
they did not embrace the word of God: but did offend other also, that they
went from the Christianity to the Idolatry of the Heythen, among the which was
also Iulianus the Emperor. In the time of this so myscheuous Arrius was yc
forerunner of Mahomet
heresy, came up finally Mahomet, to who^ by Arrius was as it were a window
handsomely opened: and was the forerunner of this most cruel Antichrist. For
when the minds of men went astray in so great dissension of opinions, came
Mahomet, and invented very wisely the third way, wherewith he should heal the
variete and diuersyty of errors. For he took away all disputacions, which
thing men did allow. But hereof shall we speak afterward. And let this
suffice to be rehearsed of the Arryans error and other like heresies: of the
which we have here made mencyon therefore, that it may be seen how great
damages, manslaughters, seditions and ryotous heresies do bring both to the
commune wealth, and to the church.

Marcellynus the.xxviij. bishop of Rome succeeded Cains.

Marcellus the xxix succeeded Marcellinus.
Eusebius the xxx. bysh. succeeded Marcellus.
Melciades the.xxxi. succeeded Eusebius.
Syluester the xxxij. succeeded Melciades.
Marcus the xxxii^. was bysh. after Syluester.
Not long before Constantinus death, was a very ^ comete was ^^ue.
great comete seen certain months, which signified the great war and
commotion, that followed after Constantinus death.

The year of Christ.CCC. xli^.
COnstantynus the.xxxviij. Emperor raygned. Constantinus. Three brether^
reigned together.
xxiiij. years. But the father had so ordained the empire, that the three
brethren should reign together, Constantinus in France, Spain and Germany:
Constantius in the East, Constans in Italy and Illyrieus, But the younger
brother Constantinus, was not content with the dominion of his empire, but
would raygne alone, and went into Italy against his brother Constans,
trusting to his puyssaunce, because he had valiant souldyours. But God
suffered not this rashness long unpunished: for this Constantinus was slain
not long after. An example of vengeance.


And by this occasion optained Constans y^ whole empire of the West, the which
he governed luckely. Moreover had he a captain called Magnentius Magne^tius an
example of an unkind unfaithful and disloyal man.
at Ausburch, whose life he had once saved. The same slew his most gentle
master, and made him self Emperor, and made a setting forth of war upon
Constantius. Constantius made his nepheu Gallus Emperor of the East, and
went with an army against the seditious captain, and overcame him. The
manslaughter in this strife was so great, that as it is read, y^ power of the
empire was so abated, that many years after they could not come to their
former strength: because the best and chosen part of the people was so slain,
that the empire could not a great while resist and withstand the Barbarians.
After that this manslaughter Magnentius slays himself.
was done the most myscheuous man Magnentius slew himself, and so punished
God the death of Constans the good prince.

Julius the first of that name the.xxxiiii. bysh. of Rome came after Marcus.

But when this Julius was dead, was Lyberyus Liberius bishop of Rome Felix
bishop of Rome a dislembler.
the.xxxv. made bishop who (because he wythstode the heresye of Arryus) was
driven away by Constantius, and Felix was ordained in his stead, who for
fear of the Emperor dyssembled the error of the Arryans. At that time was
Conuocatyons had at Mylane and Arimium plain contrary to the decrees of the
council of Nicene: but their minds were nothing set by. These examples
witness y^ the state of the church was piteous and miserable at that time.

The year of Christ.CCC. lxv.
IVlianus the Apostata or forsaker of his profession Iulianus apostata.
the.xxxix. Emperor raygned two years. He was the nephew of Constantius and
brother to Gallus, the which we have spoken of before. He was of so great
learning, that being young, he taught holy scripture openly in the church of
Nicomedia: afterward going to Athenes, he learned philosophy. But when his
brother Gallus was slain, Constantius sent him into France and Germany, and
not far from Strasburch he vanquyshed thyrty thousand Almanes, for which
cause he was suddenly by the favor of the souldyours Iulianus ^^ (...)
Empe(...) at S^ras(...)
made Emperor at Strasburch. Moreover when great dyssensyons were among the
Christyans, by reason of the varyetye of opinyons, for the which some
dispayred, some did wholly decyuer from the Christen faith to the worshyppinge
of Idols, Iulianus became an apostata also: for he was yet young, and used the
company of Rhetoricyans and Philosophers, which disputed of God after the
understanding or meaning of man's reason. Yet did he not persecute Christen
men by open force, but he thought rather to destroy them by suttelltye. For
openly he forbadde them to have scoles, that they might not be taught:
thinking (as it is in deed) that when teachyuge were avoided, the doctrine of
relygyon should easily go to naught. He forbadde also, that Christen men should
have no authority to use warrefaringe with the Iulianus fo(...)badde Christen
men the authority of warrfare.
Romans: that by no occasyon they might come to the governance of the commune
wealth. He took the goods of the churches with laughter, saying he did
Christen men a pleasure, namely that they being become poor, might thesooner
come to heaven, seeing the Gospel promyseth heaven to the poor. He did assault
the Christian fayeth fearcely, even with wrytinges also. Against those has
Cyrillus the bishop of Alexandria written, whose book Cyrillus and Nazanzenu^
have answered Iulianus.
is yet found among the remembraunces or monimentes of Ihon Reuchlin in the
town Pforsa in Germanye: not unprofitable verily to be read. Gregorius
Nazanzenus has answered him also, but very easily: for he was not effectual
enough to put of those reproaches, which Iulianus used in confutinge the
Gospel. For he entreated most chefest upon that: seeing the Gospel teaches
that man ought not to revenge, that thereby is taken away and forbodden civil
vengeance in judgments, and governance of commune welthes: without the
which man's estates can by no means endure. And this same false accusation does
he treat with many words, where as yet every Godly studyant of true
godliness does know that the same How vengeance is forbodden.
vengeance, which every office uses, is not forbidden in the Gospel: but
only the for^yng of pryuate vengeance, which is done without officers
authority. These suttyll forged and slanderous reproaches of Iulianus were
very greueous to Christen men, insomuche that they prayed openly against so
pernisius hostility of the Gospel. And therefore when he was gone into Persya,
he was slain in a wilderness. It is written that The death of Iulianus is an
exampl(...)o^ venge^^nce.
when he was wounded, and lay upon the ground dyenge, he should have taken his
hand fulle of blood, and casting toward heaven, to have said: Thou
Galylean have vanquyshed at the last* Meaning Christ, whom he called a
Galylean. Therefore it is come by Iulyanus ungodliness, that the Empire is
removed and translated from the most noble stock of Constantynus.

The year of Christ.CCC. lxvii
IOuinyanus the *xl. Emperor raygned seven months. It was a noble prince of
godliness. Io(...)nus a godly Emperor.
He called again the bishops that were bannyshed by Constanty^us and Iulyanus:
he commanded also the tithes to be paid to the churches. He was taken wythan
ague gotten by ouermuche weerynesse of trauaylle, whereof he dyed.

The year of Christ.CCC. lxviii
VAlentynianus the.xli. Emperor raygned twelve years. He ordained his
brother Valens a companion in the empire. Valens ruled in the East,
Valentinyanus went into the Weste, Either of them was a Christian. Valentinyanus
had been a captain of the louldyours under Iulianus: but he forsook him,
because he would not Valentinianus ^^^eth a ^^^then pressed a blow.
forsake ye integrity or soundness of Christen religion: beside also because
he had given a Heithen pressed a blow, by whom he was bidde^ to do sacrificy
with reachynge him water of Idolatrye, when he tarried for the coming of
Iulyanus. But God recompensed him afterward with the honor where he came to,
for the iniurye that Iulyanus did him. He had great wars in Germany he
subdued the Saxons and Burgunnyons: For Burgunnions be S^xo^s.
they also are counted among the Saxons, which about that time went by the
floude Rhe^e. And though they were vanquyshed by Valentinian yet afterward
recouerynge strenghte, they passed the Rhene, and took in these contryes, which
yet hitherto are called Burgundy. But of these shall we speak hereafter.

VAlens raygned after his brothers death two Valens ^^ Arria^^.
year. He was a defender of Arria^s heresy. But for this ungodliness was he
punished, when he was ^layne by the Gotthyes by Constantinople. For when Valens
being put to flyghte An example of vengeance.
gat him into a little town, the Gotthyes set it on fire, and burnt him. When
Valens was dead, the Gotthyes did much harm to them of Constantynople: but
the queen Valens wedowe, geuynge them large money refrayned them from the
destructyon of it.

When Liberius was dead, Damasus was made the xxxix. bishop of Rome. By this
man was S. Hierome in his youth like a notarye. S. Jerome was notarye to Damasus


After Damasus was Siricius bysh. the xl.

The year of Christ.CCC. lxxxiii.
GRatyanus the xlii. Emperor raygned Gratianus.
after the death of Valens six years. This same was the eldest son of
Valentynianus, and taken in the felowshype of the empire, by his fathers life.
But when the father was dead, he took for his companyon into the empire his
younger brother Valentinianus. But seeing the empire was here and there troubled
by reason of many vproures, nether couldbe governed without some sage and
fortunable prince, he chose Theodosyus for a companion in the empire, and sent
Theodosius (...)erco^(...)th (...)th^es.
him into the East, where he overcame the Gotthyes by Constantynople, and
drove them out of Thracya. Gratyanus was slain by intrappe in France of his
gouernoure Maximus, who made himself Emperor by tyranny. Gratyanus was a
prince excellent both in honestye and learning, and a true maynteyner of
Christen relygyon: he sent the knowledge of his faith in writing to. S.
Ambrose. Valentinianus his brother was also slain by a train of his
gouernoure Arbogastes: but Theodosyus gatheryng a great army, overthrew (...)
and (...)tes (...)es of (...)y
both Maximus and Arbogastes. Maximus being taken, was put to execucyon.
Arbogastes slew himself. Wherefore Theodosius had the Empire alone.

The year of Christ.CCC. lxxxviij.
THeodosyus the xliij. Emperor raygned after Theodosius
that Gratianus was slain by Maximus xi. years. He was a spanyarde, and set
all the Empire in quiet, from Germany until Egypt. He was first in Germany, but
being called into Thracya by Gracyanus, afterward was Styllico Stillico.
sent in to Germany by Theodosyus, who compelled the Frankes and Saxons to keep
peace.

Besides this restored he peace also to the church: The godliness of
Theodosius toward the church.
He gathered commune conuencyous, and willed the doctrine of relygyon to be
publyshed in all contryes. S. Ambrose bewailed his death, and among other
words he says: I loved the man when he
dyed: for he was more combred for the state of the churches, than for his own
dangers. To be combred so greatly with cares for the relygyon, that be verily
true virtues worthy for good princes.

Anastasius the first of that name the.xli. bysh. of Rome succeeded Syric^us.
Innocentius the first of that name the xlii bysh. of Rome succeeded Anastasius.
Of Pelagius the heretic.
IN the time of this bishop of Rome, one Pelagius an heretyke in Britanne.
Pelagius lived in Britanne. The same taught, that we are not iustyfyed and
saved by the mercy of God for Christ's sake, without our deseruynge: but by
our own works and natural virtues, is true and sound righteousness
purchased by God, and remyssyon ofsynnes optayned not by the faith of Christ,
but by our works and procuracyons. Against S. Augustine has written against
Pelagius*
this man has. S. Augustine written most substancially, and has bickered
fearcely with this sentence, and has defended it against him, that we are
saved by faith without our deseruynge, and that we obtain remyssyon ofsynnes
by the mercy of God only, if we do trust to it. For if remyssyon or
forgiveness of sins came by our works, the conscience should never be in
qu^er and assured, but should always be in doubt: For man's endeavor is to
weak, than that God being displeased, can be apeased therewyth, and the dread
of death taken away. Nevertheless God requires of us obedience and good
worckes and that the conscyences be sure, we do please God, that he will hear
them that call upon him, and save us. Howbeit that this does not stand in the
worthynesse of our worckes: but in the promise and mercy of God. This mind of
S. Augustyne when it is known, does bring great comfort to the consciences
of the godly, and teaches what the true faith is, and that God in the mean
season requires good works of us. The same verily does he require of us: but
by fayeth only will he have us to receive the forgiveness ofsynne, without
regard of our deservings. The doctrine of Pelagius is condemned in some
councels of our time.

The spoylyng of the fourth Monarchy.
The year of Christ, CCC. x^viij.
ARcadius the son of Theodosius reigned Arcadius.
thyrtene year in the East at Constantinople. Honorius his brother raygned in
the Weste with like authority nine and twenty years* Honorius.
both while his brother was alive and when he was dead: for when Arcadius was
dead, Honorius was yet alive.

Of the Gotthies.
The year of Christ CCCC. v. The year of Rome M. C. lvii. The year of the
world MMMM. CCC. xlix.
ABout this time came the Gotthy first into The Gotthies* came first into
Italy.
Italy, with a great and dredeful army. But for as much as every where is
made much mencyon of the Gotthyes* we shall here summarely draw the histories
of their of spryng and acts.

The Gotthi, Vandali, Rugiani and Hunni be not estimed to be one people: but
the Gotthi are Dutchmen out of the I Will Godtlande, which dwelt in a part of
Lislande and Littowe: For either of these contryes lies over against Godtland
by the seasyde. And therefore does Procopius call them aryght Cimme^ij and
Gethe. These than in the time of the Romans were gone into Thracia and
Hungary, and the Romysh Emperors assayed to drive them out again, but all was
in vain. In the rehearsal of Decius, have we touched the beginning of their
history: For the first great battle of the Romans against them was under
Decius, wherein also Decius was slain. But afterward though the Roman
Emperors made the Gotthies have much ado: yet remained they in Thracia and
Hungary, and in, Asia about Constantynople they took in certain contryes. It is
said, that Gotthies in the half I Will Taurica.
yet now adays dwell Gotthy in the half I Will Taurica, which speak Dutche, and
call themselus Gotthi. Howbeit they left Hungarye and also Thracia so at the
last, that of their free will they went first into Italy, and afterward into
Spayn: Afterward were the rest of the Gotthies destroyed by the Vandalyes and
Hunmes coming out of Scythya. The Hunny made their dwellinge place in Hungary.
But the contryes that lie partly under, partly about Hungary, have the Vandaly
taken in.

But in the time of Arcadius and Honorius are the Gotthy come into Italy. The
most noble Emperor Theodosius ordained to his sons Theodosius
two capitaines Rufinus and Stillico, and wylled them to care for the Emperors
young sons: but the one was disloyal to his lord. Rufinus was of Gallia: the
same enticed the Gotthies against Arcadius, and hoped to obtain the kingdom
by that mean: but he was frustrated of his purpose, for he was slain by
Stillico. As for Stillico was a Vandale: Stillico.
and when some of the Gotthi were come against Arcadius, Stillico brought to
pass, that the Gotthi which Theodosius had taken in wages, were letten go.
Beside that did Stillico set the Vandalies against the Gotthies: and so when
the Gotthies were first angered thorough Rufinus, and than chafed by Stillico,
their king Radagasus brought two hundredth thousand Gotthies Radagasus.
into Italy the same year that we have specified a fore. And as histories do
make mention here, that at Rome were great co^plaintes against Christ. because
that so lamentable decay of the empire they supposed to come of the despisynge
of the gods, and small regard of the worship and honor of the former
religion. As for Stillico vanquished and overcame Radagasus and his host in
the straytes coming from the city Florence, going to Apenninum. This is the
first history of the Gotthies in Italy. Alaricus.


After Radagasus came another hooste of Gotthies into Italy, whose captain was
Alaricus. With the same did Honorius agree, that he should depart out of Italy,
and go into Gallia, the which at that time was awaystynge of y^ Frankes,
Burgundions and Vandales: insomuche that Honorius mistrusted he could keep
Gallia no longer: and therefore thought he to bring to pass, that the
Barbarians should strive among themselves for it. But what happened? When
Alaricus takes his yourney upon him, Stillico does fall upon him vnwarres,
upon Easter day, while the truce did yet last. The next day after, does he
likewise with an appointed army overthrow and vanquyshe Stillico, and being
angry upon him, he besyeged Rome. Honorius was at Rauenna, and caused Stillico
to be putt to death, as one y^ had not done faithfully, and willed ye empire to
be taken from Honorius and to be given over to him. Wherefore there was now no
captain mete to deliver the city of Rome from the syege. Therefore Alaricus
wynneth Rome.
did Alaricus take in Rome after two years syege: and that was about the xv.
year of Honorius, the four hundredth and twelft year of Christ, and the
thousand, hundredth and three score and fourth year after the building of Rome.
the.xij. ravens or ravenous beasts which Romulus saw.


That Var to writes of the xij. ravens, which Romulus saw, to signify, that
Rome should last a thousand and two hundredth years, though this nombre of the
years be not far from this rekening: yet I suppose their interpretation
rather to Totilas.
pertayne to Totilas, who afterward in the time of Iustinianus did set Rome in
fire, and wholly spoiled it, and that was an hundredth and six and thyrty years
after Alaricus. For Alaricus did not spoil the city, but rather gave a
commandment that they should be spared, which fled to the temples of the
Christians, Alaricus drue back again out of the city and not long after
dyed. When he Ataulphus.
was dead, Ataulphus was made king of the Gotthies: the same came again to
Rome, and taking to wife Placidia Honorius sister, being pacified by her, he
spared Rome, and went into France, and afterward into Spain: and of this
wise did finally the Gotthies leave Italye, and went into Spain. For Alaricus
had before invaded y^ Spaniardes, and the Gotthies remaining in Spain
afterward, had ye dominion there. The Vandali came into Spain, and after that
the Suein: but the Gotthies remaining there, the Vandali came into Aphrica. Of
these Gotthies are borne the Christian kings The kings of Spain are sprung of
y^ Gotthies.
in Spain, of whom has his of spring the most famous Emperor that now is,
Charles the fyft of y^ name. For though y^ Sarraceni invaded Spain afterward,
and became mighty in it, yet could they not destroy the residue of the other
kings of y^ lineage.

The year of Christ.CCCC. lvi.

The year of Rome. M. CC. vij. came out of Aphrica to Rome Genserichus the
Vandall, and spoiled the city haynously. But what was y^ cause Genserichus
of Genserichus coming, shall we show, when we shall have occasyon to treat
of the Vandalies.

Dietrichus of Berna. Some call him Theodericus, some Titricus of ^erona.
Othacarus.

THe Gotthies came no more into Italy afterward, save in the time of Zeno the
Emperor, when Othacarus was become mighty at Rome. The same was a Barbarian,
borne in Rugia, and was a soldier under Augustulus, and being become
puissaunt by that means he used great tyranny at Rome: insomuch ye the Romans
required aid against him: Than was sent Dietrichus of Berna.
by Leno into Italy Dietrichus surnamed of Berna. The same slayenge Othacarus,
reigned two and thyrty years in Italy: he loved peace out of measure, and had
most deserved to have the favor of Italy, insomuch, that as histories do make
mencio^, Italy never had a foren prince more frendelier and gentlyer. He gave
also much goods to the churches use, to entertayne the ministers of the word,
and to mainteyne the doctrine of religion. But he was infect with the heresy of
Arrius, as also the rest of The Gotthies were Arrians.
y^ Gotthies. For when y^ Gotthies required of Valens ye Emperors prestes, of
whom they might be instructed in yt Christen religion, he sent them Arrian
doctors. Howbeit y^ most noble virtues of this Dietrichus deserved those
praises, which commonly are song in those dityes as are used now adays. In
the^ is made mention of giauntes, which signifies the Barbarous, who^
Dietrichus has vanquished and slain. He is surnamed of Berna, because he was
wont to be much at Verone with the court. Besides this man was also another
Dietrichus a Gotthian likewise, by whose valiantness Attila was slain, but
he dyed in the same field. He Attila.
was so great a man, that beside him, noman could lyghtely have enterprysed
ought against Attila. The same Dietrichus was not surnamed of Berna, but he
was his cosyn. He was five and forty year before the time of Dietrichus of
Berna.

Kings of the Gotthies in the West in Spain.
Alaricus The Weste Gotthies.
Ataulphus Mallia
Kings of the Gotthies in the East in Hungary.
Dietrichus The East Gotth(...).
Hermerichus Ditmarus Dietrichus of Berna Himelsuita. Adelrichus.



HImelsuitha the daughter of Dietrichus of Berna had a son called Adelrichus:
the same raygned eight years at Rome in Italy after the death of Dietrichus of
Berna, and the mother ruled with great praise. When her son was dead, she
delivered the governance to her nephew Theodatus: but the same not remembrynge
the benefyte that he had optayned, caused by a train her to be slain, in the
time of Justinian the Emperor. Dietrichus of Berna had mo daughters An
example of distoyalty.
besides this: he had also given his systers daughter in marriage to the king
of Thuringen: which thing I would not passover here, without the syngular
praise and commendacyon of the princes of Thuringen.

THeodatus reigned ii. years, and was worthily punished. For when the most
honest queen Theodatus.
Himelsuith a had commended herself and her son to. Justinian the Emperor,
Justinian took an occasion to revenge the murder, and sent Bellisarius into
Italy against the Gotthies. Now was Theodatus suspected, because he withstode
not Bellisarius, as though he would betray the Gotthies: the An example of
vengeance Witichus.
which Gotthies made Wittichus king, by whose commandment was Theodatus
slain.

VVitichus reigned three years. Against him warred Bellisarius with great
policy: For Wittichus had an appointed army of more then two hundredth thousand
men. Bellisarius kept himself within the walls of Rome, whom Wittichus
besyeged a whole year, and there was a great derth, not only at Rome, but
also in all Italy. But as the Gotthies fled and strayed here and there without
order, by reason of the great derth. Bellisarius followed upon them and
ouerthrue the^ and enclosyng in Wittichus by an entrap, took him. But in y^
mean season could not the Gotthies be utterly weded out, but Iustinianus
making peace with them, granted them to dwell in the contreis from the Alps,
until the river Padus, nether should pass these bonds. He called
Bellisarius back again: for he feared, lest he being made Emperor, he should
take to him the empire of Italy: though Bellisarius trustyd in his affairs,
went not about such things. Wherefore being returned to Constantinople, he
brought Wittichus and other of the greatest nobility prisoners with him in a
great triumph.

Totilas was made king of the Gotthies after the depar(...)

THus was Rome four times taken of the Gotthies and Vandalies within an
hundredth and nine and thyrty years. First by Alaricus, under the Emperor
Honorius.

The year of Christ.CCCC. xij.

After that by Genserichus the Vandal in the time of Martianus.

The year of Christ.CCCC. lvi.
THyrdly by Totilas king of the Gotthies: and this oppression of the city was
the most heuiest of all. For she was both taken and burnt the.xxi. year of
Iustinianus: the year after the buyldyng of her a thousand, and three hundredth.

The year of Christ.CCCCC. xlviij.

Fourthly, the third year after this destruction.

The year of Christ.CCCCC. li.

After this spoylyng began Totilas to restore again the city of Rome, and
suffered the cytesens to return again into her. But what favor he showed,
and how gently he behaved himself, witness the words that are written
concerning his frendlynesse, that he bare such an affection toward his
subjects, and specially the Romans, as becomes a father to have toward his
children: and it is said that Totilas learned by saint Benets doctrine Totilas
was (...)h^ of S. (...)e^.
and admonition to bear rule of that sort.

Afterward sent Iustinianus a prince of syngulare wysdom, called Narses, into
Italy against Totilas. The same called the Lombardes to aid him. Narses.
The same were Saxons, which with appointed armies had brought themselves to
the coasts of Austria: the same brought Narses into Italy, and by their aid
overcame he Totilas, and after ward Teia, which was the last king of the
Gotthies in Teia.
Italy. And this is the end of the Gotthies kingdom by the Italians, which
had last sense Dietrichus of Berna until Teia three score years. That
Dietrichus, Totila and Teia were both very wise and doughty princes, testifye
their deeds and noble acts, insomuche that if ye will esteem them by their
virtues, they ought not to be called Barbarians. When the Gotthies were
overcome the power and richesse of the Lombardes began to grow, and gatte
one of the kingdoms of Italy: howbeit they possessed not whole Italy, but
only that part of Italy that yet is called Lombardy. The kingdom Lombardy.
of Lombardy lasted until the time of Carolus magnus. Though the Gotthies were
driven out of Italy, yet were they mighty in Spain, and ruled there until
this our time. And of this wise was When Spain and part of France was
translated from the empire.
at the last Spain and part of France translated from the empire of Rome
under Homorius. As for Italy was restored to his tranquillity while Honorius
lived yet. For the Gotthies drue partly into Lombardy, partly into Spain:
beside this were the Frankes mighty in France.

After Innocentius was Sosimus made the xliiij. bishop of Rome.

Bonifacius the first of that name and xlv. bishop of Rome succeeded Sosimus.

After Bonifacius death was Celestinus the first of the name made bishop of
Rome.

The year of Christ.CCCC. xxvij.
THeodosius the younger the son of Arcadius Theodosius the younger.
the.xlv. Emperor reigned at Constantinople seven and twenty years after the
death of Honorius. He made Valentinian the son of Constantius and Placidia,
which was the daughter of Theodosius, fellow in the East empire.

Of the Vandalies.
IN the time of this Theodosius the year When the Vandali ca^^ into Aphrica.
of Christ, CCCC. xxxiij. came the Va^dali into Aphrica by this occasion. Those
two capitaines of the Romans hated each other, and fought other whiles with
plain fielddes. Wherefore the one, called bonifati^s, entyced busely the
Vandalies that were in Spain at that time to come into Aphrica, which thing
they did gladly. For the Gotthi being mighty in Spain, could not suffer the
Va^dalies. For (as we showed before) the Vandalies moved by Stillico against
the Gotthies, took in the contreis that be about Hungary, namely Walachia and
Illyricus, where the Gotthies dwelt before. Beside that were they also in
Germany, from whence as they went into France, they did much hurt: howbeit
they were driven out of France by the Frankes and Gotthies. Afterward being
come into Spain, they vere constrained to fight again with the Gotthies: but
in Aphrica began the power of the Vandalies to grow and increase S.
Augustine also died about that time, when Genserichus ^. Augustine
king of the Vandalies besieged the town Hippo, wherein. S. Augustine was
bishop. Hippo.


When Valentintanus was dead, one Maximus made himself Emperor at Rome of
his own mind. But the queen E^doxia, because she would have the heirs that
were left to succeed in the empire, sought aid by Genserichus against
Maximus, by whose help the city of Rome was taken and spoiled. But the
Vandall used a Vandalians faithfulness A Vandalia^ faythfulnesse
and steadfastness with the queen: for he led her, with her two daughters away
with him into An example of dystopa^te
Aphrica prisoner. For so does it sometime befall, when we call foren aid to
defend our goods. Howbeit afterward under Iustinianus, though the Vandalies
were not utterly roted out in Aphrica: yet were they brought to such
strayghtnesse, that they could never floryshe any more. For Gelimerus the king
was taken by Bellisarius, and Aphrica being subdued, obeyed the Empire again.
But not long after began the Saracens to have dominion in Aphrica. Let this
suffice to speak of the Va^dalies

Of the Boemes.
IT is also to be noted, that about this time When y^ Va^dali came first into
Germany.
came first of all in Germany the Vandali, wherein they have yet a great part
now a days, namely the kingdom of Boeme, which was in times past part of
Germany: which The Boemes are Germans.
the word Boeme, which is a Germane word does testify sufficiently, which
was before the Vandali came into these countries. The word has his
sygnificacion of the Bauaries or Beyers, to who^ it was wont to be subject,
wherefore it is properly called Boienheim. Nether will the Vandali of Boeme be
called Boemes, but zeski, after their captain, by whose guide they were first
brought into Boeme. But these ancient Boemes, the Germans, were in great
admiracion and confederacion with the Romans, and by Cornelius Tacitus the
history writer they are highly praised. By this occasion also is Germany
translated from the Roman empyres Germany is (...)from (...).
monarchy. For in low Germany were the Frankes puyssaunt, in high Germany
Alemanni, and in Boeme the Vandali. But what is happened to Boeme afterward,
and when it was subdued again by the Germane Emperoures, that shall we show in
the histories of the Emperors: for there shall we show some other things of
the change of the things of Germany.

The year of Christ.CCCC. liiij.
When Theodosius the younger was dead, (...).
reigned Valentimanus the.xlvi. Emperor in the Weste, five years, and while
Theodosius lived, reigned he five and twenty years. But after Theodosius death
was the.xlvii. Emperor in the East Martianus. In his time was the horrible
setting forth of Attila.

Of Attila.
FIrst of all came into Hungarye the Gotthies afterward the Vandali, last of all the Hu^ni, and these last kept the land, of who^ it is called Hungary. This
cruel people The calling of Hungary. ^ in deeds of Attila.
did most mischefe nerehand to all Europa. Attila brought an army of three
hundredth thousand into Germany, and took in many mighty cities, among the
which was Basil, Ausborowe, Strasborowe, Worms, Coelen, and many other
cities. Going forth from thence into France, took the king of the
Bourgunyons, he besieged the city Aureola, and intended to usurp the dominion
of whole Europa

At that time was in the hither part of France which the Roman Emperors
kept, a Roman captain, called Aetius: the same made a confederacion Aetius.
with the Frankes and Gotthies, that with like hand they should resist the
most cruel tyrau^t. But Attila, because he was afraid for the power of the
Gotthies he procured by Dietrichus their king, that they should not aid the
Romans: but after their singular constance refused the Gotthies al manner of
frendshyp or allegeaunce with the Barbarous tyrant. Wherefore both hosts met
at Tolouse The battaill with Attila by Tolouse.
in France: on the Roman side Aetius, the Gotthi and Frankes, and of the
other side Attila. And histories make mention, that in the West came never so
great an host and multitude together, as at that time. The battaill lasted
from the Sun rysyng, until night. At the last Attila being driven to the
flight, lost a hundredth and four score thousand men: he himself also was
driven to such straitness, that he had nearehande slain himself. And though
Aetius, the Frankes and the Gotthies had the victory, yet dyed Dietrichus king
of the Gotthies in that battayll. The son would have reue^ged the fathers
death, and intended to gather an army, and pursue Attila, and to destroy the
resydue of his host: and would undoubtedly have done it had he not changed
his mind through the counsel of Aetius. But that counsel of Aetius was
naught, for Attila might at that time have been over come with a small army.
But afterward being returned into Hungary, restoring his host, and recoueryng
strength, he invaded Italy, taking in the cities from the first entry of Italy,
until the mou^tayn Appenninus. Then Leo the bishop of Rome metyng him, knelyng
besought him, that he would go back again. It is reported y^ Attila should have
said, he saw the image of a man standing by the bishop, threatening him with a
drawn sword, and he being afraied, promised to go back again. When he was
come again (...)ath o^ (...) The (...) of Au(...) The ^^^urge of God.
into Hungary, he made a great wedding, and being the first night sore dronken,
dyed a certain death. Of this wise died this tyrant, that was not ashamed to
call himself thescourge of God.

Venice.
AT this time was Venice the city builded in the sea, where the best of Italy
fled for fear of Attila.

After Celestinus was Xystus made the xlvij. bishop of Rome, the third of that
name.

After Xystus succeeded Leo the.xlviij. bishop the first of that name.

When Leo was dead, Hilarious was made the xlix. bishop of Rome.

Valentinianus the Emperor caused Aetius to ^h^ (...).
be put to death, because he suspected him to covet y^ empire. But this is the
worlds reward forsooth, for the great valiauntnesses. Stillico Aetius and
afterward Bellisarius were most excellent captains. Nether were in the empire
any else, which rese^bled the virtues and strength of the ancient Romans so
well, as they: but they were not worthily rewarded for such deserts.
Valentinianus demanded of a Roman prince, whether Aetius were not worthily
punyshed? who said, he could not tell: but this was he sure, that the Emperor
had with his left hand cut of his right hand.

After Vale^tinianus was the empire of Rome nere hand toren in peaces, and many
called the^ Emperors in Italy. Yet in ye mean season remained y^ maistie of
an Emperors name by them of Constantinople, and afterward restored
Iustinianus the West empire by Bellisarius and Narses. But after that
Vale^tinianus was dead, many were called Emperors at once, and within.xx.
years had Italy.ix. Emperors, which reigned by a succession, and the one was
slain of the other by occasion. The last was called Augustulus Augustulus.
(that is, little noble or little full of majesty.) The diminution of the name,
was an evidence that the governance of the Augustus* should fail in Italy:
for with this Augustulus failed finally the empire. Othacarus drove out the
same Augustulus, against whom was Dietrichus of Bernasent into Italy, in the
time of zeno the Emperor. Wherefore was the empire of Italy translated to the
Gotthi, which afterward were suppressed under Iustinianus, as we have said
before.

The year of Christ.CCCC. lx.
LEo the first of that name, the.xlviij. Emperor Leo.
reigned syxten years. The same made his son of like name Emperor, who
because he was to young, fet the emperial crown on zeno his stepfathers head.

The year of Christ.CCCC. lxxvi.
ZEno the.xlix. Emperor reigned.xvii. years. ^en^*
The same sent Dietrichus of Berna into Italy, and made him a Consul. For
Dietrichus for his noble feats was he more renowned, then for his own virtues.
For he ruled not as an Augustus, but like a tyrant.

The year of Christ.CCCC. xcii.
Anastasius the.L. Emperor reigned.xxvi. Anastasius.
years. He died stricken with alyghtenyng.

The year of Christ.CCCCC. xix.
IVstinus the.li. Emperor reigned nine years. Justinius.
In his young age was he a swyneheerde, afterward became he a soldier. But
when Anastasius was dead, a gelded man that was rich, gave Justinius much
money, that with the consent of the soldiers, the same gelded man might be
chosen Emperor. Howbeit Justinius remembryng himself, brought to pass, that
he himself might be made Emperor.

The year of Christ.CCCCC. xxv.
IVustinianus the.lii. Emperor reigned eight (...)
and thirty years. The same set his mind to repair the Empire. He was the
sister son of the former Iustine, and by a syngular gift of God had
(...)arius. (...)r^es.
he two captains or marshals, Bellisarius and Narses by whose aid he has
brought to pass most renowned things. Bellisarius overcame y^ Perses, and
saved Syria, and restored Aphrica to ye empire: beside y^ had he also great
victories in Italy against the Gotthies, whose power was afterward utterly
brought to naught by Narses. Iustinianus made peace and amity with the Frankes
that were in France and granted them freely to have part of France, as
writes Procopius the historyographer. The civil law is rest ored by
iustinianus. The digestes.


When every where was peace made, Iustinianus caused also the ancient laws of
the Romans to be gathered in books called Digesta, that is, books appointed in
order: but the same books were darkened not long after Iustinianus, through
laws of the Lombardes and Frankes: nevertheless after a good season, were
they brought too light again by. Lotharius a Saxon Emperor, of who^ we shall
speak hereafter. Howbeit, it were to long to rehearse here how greatly this
wisdom is to be praised in the Emperor, who wylled that justice and these
laws to be commonly executed, as by the judgment of all sage and good men can
nothing be more honest, holy and more profitable.

Of Bellisarius.
I can not worthily ouerpasse that of Belilsarius, which he has handled most
faithfully in all things: he was a peace and concord maker in all the world.
He did wholly restore the empire of Rome, that was nearehand decayed and
altogether weakened: to be short, he showed his lord and all the world such
pleasure,
that none could be greater nor more praise worthy: and if they were estymed
aryght, they are high and incredible gifts of God. But what thanks the world
gives again for so great virtues, and such g^stes of God, that does the
example of Bellisarius was very
Bellisarius declare sufficiently: whom Iustinianus of a very light suspicion
without cause, caused to put out his eye^^, and drove him away, that he should
be feign to seek his meat with beggyng: at the last dyed he like a most
wretched beggar. Of this wise The end(...)f the (...).
does the deuel at the last set him against the greatest men, which
undoubtedly hates all Gods works, and most high virtues in men.

Beside this did Narses also fall in the Emperors indignacion, but he would
not return to Constantinople: For that he might be more safe for dangers, he
remained all his life long at Naples in Italy.

Simplicius the.l. bysh. of To. succeeded Hilarious.

Felix the second of that name succeeded Simplicius.

After Felix was Gelasius the.lij. bysh. of Rome.

Anastasius the second of that name was after Gelasius.

After Anastasius was Symmachus the.liiij. bishop of Rome.

In his time was the first trouble raised for the (...) per (...) (...)of y^
(...) of R(...)
chosyng of the bishop of Rome. For some would have had one Laurentu^s,
against Symmachus* and this strife was the cause of a great slaughter at Rome.
At the last did Dietrichus of Bernaswag this vproure.

After Symmachus succeeded Hormisda ye lv. bysh.

Ioannes the first succeeded Hormisda.

Felix the third the.lvii. bysh. was after Ioannes.

Bonifacius the second the.lviii. bysh. succeeded Felix

Ioannes the second succeeded Bonifacius.

Agapetus the. l^. bishop succeeded Ioannes. This same optained of the Emperor
Iustinianus that heretics should not be brought to Constantinople.

Syluerius the.lxi. bysh. succeeded Agapetus.

Vigilius was bysh. after Syluerius. Thissame was taken of Iustinianus, and
discourteously entreated, because he would not consent to the restitucion of the
bannyshed heretics.

Pelagius the first succeeded after Vigelius in the time of Totilas.

Ioa^nes the third was ye.lxiiij. bysh. after Pelagius Wonders seen in Italy
before Mahomet.


In these times were seen very dredeful wonders in the sky, by the Italians.
There were seen burning battayls, Cometes. Beside this also was Rome nearehand
drowned with the surroundyng of the Tyber. These tokens signified the decay of
the Roman empire and the Church, the which ensued afterward. For not long
after rose the Mahometicall pestilence.

The year of Christ.CCCCC. lxvi. Justinius. ^^.

Justinius the second of that name, the.liij. Emperor reigned ten years. He
was Iustinianus systers son. In his time took in the Lo^bardes part of Italy
to dwell in, which was the year of Christ.CCCCC. lxxij.

The year of Christ.CCCCC. lxxvi. Tiberius. ^^.

Tiberius the second of this name, the.liiij. Emperor reigned seven years.
He was Justinius marshall, and was taken of him for his son and heir of the
empire. He vanquyshed the Perses: but had no good fortune in Italy against the
Lombardes.

Benedictus the.lxv. bysh. of To. succeeded Pelagius Pelagius the second was
bysh. after Benedictus.(...)

Of Mahomet and of the kingdom of the Sarracens.
The year of Christ vi. C. xxx. The year of Heraclius xv. The year of the
world iiij. M. v. C. lxxiiii The year of Rome M. iii. C. lxxxii
MAhomet auaunted himself a prophet and also a king in Arabia, by the
Agarenies Mahomet (...) (...)phet (...)*
and Saraceus, and that by this occasion: The Agareny dwellinge in the entryng
of Arabia, were always given to robbery and exercise of war.

When they were now enticed with the Persian (...)ro^ of Maho(...) by(...)-(...)
wars, they received wages under Heraclius. And when it was showed them by ye
Emperoures captains, they lokynge for no more wages, raised an vproure against
the Roman captayns. By reason of this commune vproure began Mahomets power
to increase. For seeing the commune people could want no captain, they did
lyghtely stycke to Mahomett, who passed all other for his great riches, and
other syngular virtues. But that he might the more easily bring the peoples
manners into some certain order, he purposed to make laws, not only in civil
matters, but also to bind the minds of the common people to a certain and
new form of religion, that he might the better keep them all in their duty,
another might rise any occasion of disscucion. For he saw that every where were
sundry and disagreing minds of the doctryn of religion. For ye concord of the
Churches was spoiled by sundery heresies, and chefely with the wicked learning
of Arrius. But when the consciences are tangled with error, and the minds
waver, than do they lightely suspect the doctrine of Christ, and be in short
space driven hither and thither. Wherefore as men's minds were thus relyng and
The form of Mahomets religion.
uncertain, Mahomet having gotten opportunity, prescribed such a form of
religion, wherein those head chapters of the fayeth, that spoke of Christ
were past over, and that therefore, lest the doctrine of the faith should more
be brought into doutfull disputatyons: but resting only in the understanding
or capacyte of reason, might command of courtesye of manners, and manner to
live honestlye. This truly is acceptable to men's nature. Therefore embraced
this doctrine the Gentyls, Jews, Arrians and such as were deciuered from the
Christen religion. For this faith seemed to be alowable to every man: Wherefore
men of unlike kynred, unlike language* the one living otherwise than the
other, it is impossible to say how easily they grew and increased in might to
resyst the Romans valiauntly. For first began they to subdue Arabia and
Mahomet subdueth first Arabia.
part of Syria. For Damascus was Mahomets court. Afterward became they mighty
in Egypt also. Let this suffyse brefely spoken of the beginning of ye dredefull
kingdom of Mahomet, wherein raygned first the Arabians and Egypcians, which
called them Sultan or Souldan, that is, prince: Sultan or Souldan.
afterward was the empire brought to ye Turks. As for ye kingdom is ye
greatest part of Antichrist, and in the Prophets are ye most certain
prophecies of it, wherein voe are earnestlye warned of God The place in Daniel
of Maho^et.
to eschew this pestylence. In Danyell is he painted of this wise: In that
terryble beast, which is the figure of the Romyshe empire, does grow a
horn, through whose power are three horns pulled out, and has eyes, and
speaks dredefull blasphemies against God. This horn is Mahomet: the eyes and
dredeful blasphemies against God is the Alco^an and doctrine of Mahomette,
which spread farther, than the dominion was. For near hand all the East
quarter is infect with that de^elyshe doctrine. The three horns ^ignifye the
^hre kingdoms Arabia, Sirya and Egy^t which Mahome^e had taken in. All those
things showed God before, that we being advertised should not be offended at
this time. Also that we should not be ignorant, that it is ^he last kingdom,
and that the day of the last ^^dgement is to be looked for. The posteritye of
Mahomet, not being content with the bounds of his kingdoms, st^oue also with
the Emperors of Constantinople, for the kingdom of A^^a.

This kingdom of Mahomet was first called the kingdom of the Sa^acens. For
though (...) ^^ng^^^^ of ^he (...).
he was an Agarene borne, yet changed he that name not without a great
cause, for the promise made ^o Abraham in s^ript^re was made to the* so^ (...)
of Sara, and not of Agar. Now were the Agare^y of Agar. But forasmuch as
Mahomet vnderne^^ a color pretended that his people were acceptable to God, ye
and to whom perteyned the promise of the blessing, that they should have
dominion of the world, (for he expounded all the promises of y^ scripture
carnally) chaungyng the name of set purpose, he called his people Sa^^acens, as
children of Sara, and not Agarens. These Saracens became The pow^^ of the
Saracens.
mighty, not only in Asia, but also in Aphrica. And from thence went they into
Spain also, and kep^ a great part of it a long season. Into Italy have they
made many inuasyons also.

Of the ^urkes beginning.
THE cause of the coming of the Turks The Turks were Tartares.
out of Tartary into Asia was, that when the Saracens warred against y^ Perses,
the Perses required aid of the Turks. As for these Turks were Tartares by the
^yll Caucasus. This happened not long before Caro^us Caluus, about the year
of Christ eight hundredth three score and ten. After this assistaunce began the
Turks by little and ^y^le to remain in Asia, even as it happens most
commonly when we call for foren help. But forasmuch as the Turks were chefely
given to warrefaring, it came to pass, that the rule of the royalme came to
their hands. And first began Othomannus Othomannus y^ Turk^
the Turk to excelle in power and might, in the time of Albert of Eastenriche
the first, which was son to Rodu^phus the Emperor. This was about the
thousand and three hundredth year after Thristes incarnation. Now sense this
Othomannus When the Turks began to have dominion.
time, was Mahomets kingdom cha^nged into the name of y^ Turkish empire. It is
worthy to be noted here, that this present nation of the Turks began to subdue
contryes, and to bear rule in the ^yme of the first Emperor of the ^astry^h^
house: and it is to be hoped that it shall be lyk^wyse repressed at the ^aste by
an Emperor of the same stock of Eastryche.

The figure of this Turkysh kingdom is d^^^ribed full of dredefulnesse in holy
scripture, that we should not be ignorant that this were the de^els kingdom,
and by whose power and prosperity we might not be with drawn, to de^^^er from
Christ to Mahomets ungodliness. Ezech^e^ and* S. (...)
Ihon call the Turks Gog and Magog.

Gog, is called a ^ent: Magog* is the people with ou^ the tents: for the
Tartaryes ^wel in ^entes. And Ezechiel wr^^eth plainly, that God fuffred the
power of Gog ^o be augmented, because of peoples sins

Mahomet signifies rage or indignation. (...)


^ur^a signi^yeth sound your or wayster. Methodius called this people Read
Jews beca^se ^h^y have borrowed some ceremonies of y^ Jews* Nether were they
the very Jews, but were cal^^d the Re^d Jews, either because they were coue
^ous of man s^aughter and blood, or else because (...) ^(...).
Mahomet was born of Edom in Arab^a: for Edom signifies reed. Methodius says
that Gog and Magog were closed in beyond the hills Caspii: that is Caucasus,
and that a ^oxe shall make them a passage. This ^ox^ is Mah^met: for being
prouok^d by mahomets law, they became mighty and began to bear r^le.

We haued ^^^ared before how the Roman Monarchy came to y^ East* But now are
y^ (...) (...) of Egypt, Syria Asia and Aphrica ^y ^he Mahometystes* until
finally the Turks at ^hys ^yme have taken and waysted Greece, and what more was
resting.

Deus dedit the, ^xxi. ^ish. of Rome succeeded Bo^ifacius* in the time of
Heraclius.

After him was bonifacius the fyft the lxxii. bysh In his time was. S. Gallus.
The same taught What ^^me S. Gallus preached in high Germany.
Christ's doctrine in high Germany.

After him was bishop Honorius the first, and in his time was Mahomet.

After him was Seuerinus y^ lxxiiii. ^ish. of Romans

After him. succe. Ioannes the* iiii. the lxxv. bysh.

After Ioannes was Theodorus a Greek y^ lxxvi

The year of Christ.vi. C. xli
COnstantinus the son of Heraclius the* lviij. Constantinus the son^^ of
Heraclius
Emperor* raygned four months. His step mother Martyna poysonned him, that
she might make her son Emperor.

The year of Christ.vi. C. xli^.
HEracleonas the son of Heraclius the lix. Emperor Herac^eona^
raygned two years after that Constantinus was poisoned. But* when y^ senate
and communalty of Constantinople had knowledge of the mysche^o^s deed, risyng
up against the mother (...) example of vengea^^ce.
and son ^eracleonas, cuttynge of his nose, and her and the ^atryarkes tunges,
who did aid them to do the deed, bannyshed them all three.

The year of Christ.vi. C. xliii
COnsans the son of Constantinus the lx. Constans.
Emperor raygned xxvii. years. He was overcome in the East of y^ Sara^ens in
Italy of the Lombardes. He was a most covetous manne, and at the last was he
slain of his own men in a bath at Syracuse.

Martinus the first succeeded Theodorus in Constans time.

Eugenius the first the lxxviii. bishop succeeded Martinus.

Vitalianus the lxxix. bishop. succeeded Eugenius.

The year of Christ.vi. C. lxx.
COnstantinus y^ son of Constans the lxi. Emperor Constantinus. Pogonatus.
raygned xvii. years. He was called Pogonatus, that is, bearded. He had war
with the Saracens seven years, of the which were slain in one feld thyrty
thousand, insomuche that their power being weakened, they were constrained to
demand peace with Constantyn: the which he granted them, but upon this
condycyon, that they should give to the Emperor yearly tribute.

After Vitalianus was Adrodatus made y^ lxxx bys. of To. in y^ time of
Constantinus Pogonatus.

Donus was the lxxxi. bishop after Adrodatus.

Agatho succeeded Donus.

Leo the ij. succeeded Agatho.

Benedictus y^ second was y^ lxxxiiij bish. after Leo

Ioannes the v. was the lxxxv. bishop after Benedictus.

Conon the lxxxvi. bishop succeeded Ioannes. The year of Christ. vi C. lxxxvii.
IVstinianus the son of Constantinus the lxii. Iustinianus
Emperor raygned xvi. years, but not contynually. For when he had ruled ten
year, he was put down and driven out by Leontius, who reigned three year
after that Iustinianus was chaced out. Leontius was taken prisoner of Tiberius
Leontius. Tiberius Apsimarus.
Apsimarus, who reigned after him seven year. But thenceforth was Iustinianus
restored again, and did tread both upon Leontius and Tiberius that were
prisoners, being cast down before him, and caused openly to be cried out: Thou
shall tread Psalm. xi.
upon the serpent aspis and the coccatryce. Afterward were they beheaded.

Sergius the lxxxvii. bishop of Rome was after Conon, and than was great
dissencion for the election. Beda in England.
In his time lived Beda in England.

Ioannes y^ vi. was after Sergius y^ lxxxviij. bish

Ioannes the vii. was after Ioannes the vi.

Zosimus the xc. bysh. succeeded Ioannes the vii.

Constantinus was bishop after Zosimus.

The year of Christ vij. C. xiii.
PHilippus Bardesanes y^ lxv. Emperor reigned Philippus Bardesanes.
one year and six months: Being taken of his marshall, was deprived of the
Empire, and his eyes put out.

The year of Christ vii C. xv.
ANastasius the lxvi. Emperor raygned one year and three months. The same
was also taken of his captayn Theodosius, and deprived Anastasius was thrust
into a monastery.
of the empire: and that he might live solitarely, was he putt into a
monastery.

The year of Christ vii. C. xvii.
THeodosius the lxvii Emperor reigned only Theodosius
one year. He forsook the empire, when he perceived that he was invaded of
Leo, and mystrusted he could not keep the Empire. He became a monk, and dyed
in a private life.

The year of Christ.vij. C. xviij.
LEo the.iij. the.lxviij. Emperor reigned twenty Leo y^ third surnamed
Iconomachus.
years. He was surnamed Iconomachus, that is, assaulter of images, because he
had commanded to take out of the tempels the images of saynctes, and to burn
them. The city Constan tinopole was besyeged viij. year long of the Saracens
in his time, yt which suffered great misery in that fyege, by reason of the
great hunger and pestilence. Ye and were also slain of the Bulgaries, which
aided the emperor. Besides that also were the Saracens ships burnt, with
fire that was craftily made under the water.

After Constantinus was Gregorius the second made the.xcij. bishop of Rome in
the time of Leo Iconomachus.

Gregorius the.vij. succeeded Gregorius the.ij.

The year of Christ.vii. C. xlii.
COnstantinus the son of Leo, the.lxix. Emperor (...) the (...) was (...)
Copronymus.
raygned thyrty year: he was surnamed Copronymus, because that at his
baptysynge, he did his casement in the founte. He also was a destroyer of
images.

The year of Christ.vii. C. lxxvii.
LEo the.iiij. the son of Copronymus the lxx. Leo y^ fourth
Emperor raygned five year.

The year of Christ.vii. C. lxxxiii.
Constantinus Leo the (...)hs son Irene.
LOnstantinus Leo the fourth son the lxxi. Emperor raygned with his mother
Irene ten years.

She was of Athens, and ruled most sagely, above the understanding of woman
kynne, and with the alowance of every man. After her, raygned her son five
years, she being put from the governance. But they of Constantinople not
sufferyng his wickedness, called the mother again from the aexile, which
raygned after ward three year. Of this wise were Irene and Constantinus
gouernynge the empire together xviij. years, until the year of Christ.viij.
C. and i.

But though the Christen Emperors were allwaye at Constantinople, which
called themselves Emperors of Rome also, until at the last, the city was
taken in of the Turks: yet in ye mean season when the power of the empire
began so to faid, that the Emperors were notable to defend another their
title, nor Italy, the Romans were constrained to seek aid at the Frankes,
whose power was than the greatest. Wherefore came the majesty of the Emperors
name to Carolus. And because our Emperors have always maynteyned and defended
Italy with strong hand, we will aduysedly pass over here the Greek
Emperors, (for some were tangled with want on pleasure, effeminate, and wholly
unapt to have governance,) and recite orderly our Emperors, which are worthy
to be co^me^ded for their notable virtues and prowesses. Zacharias was
the.xciiij. bish. after Gregorius. ye iij.

This same wynkyng at the matter, was the old Hilderichus king of France
pryued of the empire Pipinus.
and put into a monastery, and Pipinus was made king in his stead. For all the
power was come to ye princes, by reason the kings were enpoueryshed. In the
time also of this zachary did. S. Bonifacius What time S. Bonifacius preached
in Germany.
preach in Germany.

Stephanus the ii. succeeded zachary. The same provoked Pipynus into Italy
against the Lombardes, whose king he besyeged, and compelled him to require
peace.

Paulus the first was after Stephanus the xcvi. bishop.

Stephanus the third was after Paulus. In (...)e for the eleccion of the
bishop of Rome.
his time happened great stryfes and rumors at Rome for the choosing of their
bishop. One Constantynus was chosen bishop by force, and again put down,
and all they that he had consecrated, were destitute and forsaken.

Adrianus the first succeeded Stephanus. The same enticed Carolus the great to
come into Italy against Desiderius king of the Lombardes Leo the third
the.xcix. bishop followed after Adrianus. When a seditious vproure was raised
against him at Rome, he fled to Carolus the great or Charlemayne, by whom he
was restored. And the same ordained Charlemayne Emperor, and crowned him.

Of the Germans
Emperors.
Charles the great. The year of Christ viij. C. i. The year of the
world.iiij. M. vii. C. xlv The year of Rome.M. v. C. li.
CArolus magnus was crowned Emperor Carolus magnus. The beginning of the
translatyng the empire to the Germans.
of Leo the iij. the very Christmasse day. This was the beginning of
translatinge the empire to the Germans, and by this translatynge happened unto
Italy and the Best kingdom a most mighty head, and a most sure fortress.
For though the Emperors of Germany were not always of like power, as in no
kingdom the kings were always of like power or like fortunate: yet in
prowess were they such sometime, that they did rydde Italy out of dangers, and
preserved not only in the Weste quietness in the commune wealth: but also kept
the Christen religion sound in the church. And if ye will ponder the feats
deeds, and manners of our Emperors, ye shall judge them to have been excellent
wise princes, and not barbarous, and in nothing to be estimed less, than those
excellentand allowable Emperors Augustus, Traianus, Adrianus and Constantinus:
ye if ye do advisedly ponder all things, ye shall say, that there has been
more honestye and modestye in our Emperors, than in them. This shall ye find
also, that ours have enterprysed no war of any ambicion or private profit:
but only of necessity, to maintain religion, to defend the liberty of the
empire and the sauegarde of the subjects.

As for me, being certain of mine own unableness, though I can not judge
nor speak of the virtues of great men acrording to their worthynesse: yt is
my mind to praise some princes above the other. For I judge it to be
pertaining to the duty of every history writer, that he do now and than
turn aside into the rehearsal of the most best virtues, and show them to the
reader for a show as an example to follow. Now in men's assaires can nothing ^e
more honest nor more pleasant, than the consyderacion and knowledge of
princely virtues in great men. Wherefore I would our Germane Emperors were so
set before the eyes of our Germans, that they might know their virtues, and
wonder at them: wonder it is how greatly the same would help and further to
the amendment, and also raise a flame in the hearts of good men to follow. In
my judgment are these princes doutelesse such, which be worthy far to be
preferred before the ancient Romans, whether ye will regard wisdom, or
strength, or finally the endeavor of honesty and modestye.

The rehearsal of the Germane Emperors.
Carolus magnus. Ludouicus pius the son of Carolus magnus* After the six
Saxons.
Henricus the first. Otho the great. Otho the second. Otho the third.
Henricus y^.ij. which is buried at Bamberch. Lotharius the Saxon.
Item these Frankes.
Cunradus. Henricus the son of Cunradus.
Item these Schwaben.
Fridericus Barbarossa. Fridericus the second. Afterward Rodolphus.
Sigismundus. Maximilianus.



Of Germany, and occasyon of the kingdom of the Frankes.
ALl Germany was not subject to the empire, but had only those contryes, that
are between the Rene and the Danow. And much work had the Emperoures, before
our nation could be subdued and kept.

For in the time of Augustus had Drusus wars By whom Germany was vexed with
wars, sense the time of Augustus.
and Germanicus, afterward Caius, and after him Vitellius, Domitianus.
Traianus had subdued the lower Germany until Moganus. Maximinus was come
until Schwartzwald. Valerianus was with an host in high Germany. After him
under Galienus the Frankes being set in a commotion, began to rise: but by
the Emperoures following, were their violences sometime assuaged. For
Aurelianus vanquyshed them by Mayntz. Probus had many and noble victoryes in
low Germany. Constantinus builded the city Spyre. Iulianus, Valentinianus and
Theodosius did likewise subdue the Alemans and Frankes, and the contries that
lie by the Rhene, and took in Schwaben land also.

But after that the power of the Frankes and Alemans begone to increase, the
Emperors returned The ofspringe of y^ Frankes
not into Germany. Some fable diversely of the first beginning of the Frankes:
but it is certain, that they were high Germans in Augustus time. For we have
no certaynty of the Germans estate out of histories before Augustus. But that
the Frankes were in such estimacion by the high Germans, that it can easily
be proved out of Strabo, who wrote an history in the time of Auguste, and
warrefared with the Romans. As for Strabo says that the Frankes were ioynyng
to the Vindelici, that is, Bayerlanders, upon the which they border partly at
this time also. The The deeds of the Frankes, and by what occasion they
de^^iuered from the empire.
commotion of the Frankes began by this occasyon: In the time of Galianus the
Emperor, was Posthumus captain in Germany: the same was made Emperor by
the people for his syngular honestye, and virtues in gouernynge the empire,
Galienus in the mean season lived in ydelnesse and pleasure at Rome. But when
Galienus heard that Posthumus was made Emperor, he sent against him an
appointed army. Posthumus likewise commanded his men to be in a readiness
among the which were even the Frankes the principal. And though Posthumus was
afterward slain privily by an entrap, yet the Frankes once provoked to
weapons, remained always in the setting forth to war, and came down from
Moganus to the Rene, and over the Rene took they first the city Trier from the
Romans, and afterward went into france. But after that they had foughte^
against Attila with the Romans, they were always in great favor with the
Emperors, in so much* that Iustinianus the Emperor through a conuenaunt
made with the Frankes, suffered them to have and inhabit that part of Gallia,
which at this time Francia or France ^^ part of Gallia.
is yet called Francia or France. Wherefore the Frankes took in both the
contreis of the Ryne, and part of France and both the contreis were
maynteined by one common kyngly governance. The histories make every where
mention of great praises of the Frankes, partly for their goodly polycy and
prosperity in gouernyng their kingdom, but specially because they embraced
the Christen religion in the begynnyg of the kingdom, and wylled it to be
publyshed and spread abroad. In the mean time By what orcasion the Almanes
decyuered from the emppre.
did the Alemans decyuer from the Romyshe empire also. The Alemans were the
high Germans, which now are called Schwaben, Schweitzer and Baier. Therefore
when the Roman Monarchy was sundered, then was Germany first divided in
Germani is divided in Almanes and ^ Frankes.
Alemanes and Frankes. But in the time of Pipine, father to Charles the great,
became the Frankes lords of the Almaines: and therefore as the empire was thus
divided, they called high Germany the East kingdom, and low Germany with
France the West kingdom: And by this partynge of the kingdoms remain the
names yett in Germany.

The elders of Charles the great were princes of Germany and Lords of the
court, and that more is, the chief governors by the kings of the The elders
of (...) y^ great were Grand masters.
Frankes, and by the commission of their office, were called Grande masters.
It is also said, that the same was their duchy and dominion by enheritaunce,
where now is the countyshyp of Palatine about the Rene side. For certain it
is, that the first spring (...) ^t Palatine (...) ^ha^ (...)he great
of the stock of the Palatine, comes of Charles the greates issue. But at
the last, when the kyngly progeny decreassed and failed by process of time
more and more, and that these princes became more myghtyer, it came topasse (by
the consent of the bishop of Rome) that the governance of the kingdom Piping
king of Germany and France.
was brought over to the princes: and Pipinus being made king of this wise
governed both Germany and France. When Pipinus was dead, Charles surnamed the
great was king of the Frankes two and thyrty years before he was Emperor,
and after that he was made Emperor he reigned fourtene years. Of this wise
reigned he both in the kingdom and empire together.xlvi. Charles is borne in
Ingelheim. The deeds of Charles the great.
years, when they be counted together. He was boren in Ingelheim in the county
of Palatine, not far from the city Mentz. In the beginning of his reign
warred he against the Saracens in Gascon: afterward warred he about thirty
years with the Saxons, the which he subdued at the last and made them to
obey the empire, and embrace the Christian faith, beside other many and great
battails, which he had in the mean season also. Desiderius king of the
Lombardes.


Desiderius king of the Lombardes coueted the dominion of whole Italy, and
going to Rome, caused some of the chief cytesens to be put to death. Wherefore
Adrianus the bishop of Rome sendyng ambassadors to Charles, desired he would
come and rydde Italy and Rome out of danger. (For Pipinus the father of
Charles had also before delivered Rome from the tyranny of the Lombardes.)
Charles going into Italy, besyeged Desiderius at Pauye, and constrained him to
yield himself. But when Charles perceived in deed that the vprouryshnacion of
the Lombardes could not rest, (for he had assayed the matter with them before
also, that they being content with their borders, should remain within their
own realm.) and that there might be a sure peace thoroweout Italy. Charles
Charles optayueth Lombardy.
took in whole Lombardy, and in the same as in his own kingdom set he
gouernoures and capitaynes. As for Desidexius with his wife the queen and
children led he with him prisoners, and commanded them to be kept at Ludick or
Liege. This was the end of the kingdom of the Lombardes in Italy, which had
lasted two hundredth and three years, from the year of Christ.CCCCC. lxxij. when
Iastinus reigned, until the year of Christ.vij. C. lxxv. this was the syxte
year before Charles opteined the empire. For though Charles was gone to Rome
in this setting forth, and had set at quiet not only Lombardy, but also that
part of Italy that is beiond Rome: yet would he not usurp The modes^^^ o^
Char^^.
for him the title of Imperial majesty, lest he should rob the Greeks of
their honor and this dignity. He grants the Emperors cities in Italy to
enjoy their former liberty without any hynderaunce: but he kept the kingdom
of the Lombardes as his own: for long ago was it not subject to the Emperors.

Tassilo duke of Baierland raised war against Tassilo duke of Baierland was
overcome of Char^^^.
Charles, but he was overcome of Charles the twe^tieth year of his reign, and
taking in the duchy. Tassilo with his son was put into a monastery. Nether
did Charles use so great rigor against his cosyn rashly: for Tassilo raysyng
an vprour against him before, and taken to mercy, kept no promise.

Charles going to Rome the two and thirtieth year of his reign, restored Leo
the bishop of Rome, against whom the Romans had raised vp^ours, insomuche
that the bishop was compelled to fly. But when now Charles ^erceyued
certeynly, that no peace could be satteled in Italy, until such cities in
Italy as had fraunchyses granted them, did cease to do all things according
to their appetite, he was constrained by necessity to take to him the dominion
of whole Italy. But he betoke to the bishop of Rome some cities and contreis,
for the mayntenaunce of ministers in the church. In the Christmasse night
cried the bishop of Rome: Charles to be Emperor of Romans, and always full
of majesty. And it is said, that Charles should have answered to this: if I
had known that any such thing should have happened to me, I would not have
entered into the temple. Nether would he accept the title of Emperor, without
the consent and alowaunce of them of Constantinople. Wherefore Ire^ne the
mother of Constantinus and Nicephorus consented that Charles should be
Emperor in the Charles was made Empeperoure of the West.
West, to that did they consent freely: for these countries did not obey to the
Emperors of Constantinople, any more.

But as soon as Charles was made Emperor, The Hungarians are assaulted with
war by Charles the great.
and that the state of Italy was now satled with great travail, he determined
to war upon the Hungarians. And this war lasted eight years, wherein the
Hungarians were in a manner rooted out. He set also garnysons of Germans in
Hungary, to keep the realm: by the which occasion do until this time
Germans dwell in the coasts of Hu^gary, which is called Seuenburge. It is
mentioned Tra^s^luania or Sept^ castra called Seuenburg.
in histories, that Charles brought great riches out of Hungary, and that is
like enough: for the Hu^garians had been occupied in warrefarre and robbery
above two hundredth years, they led prays of al nations nerehande, in the
mean season was their realm invaded of no foren nations: whereby no doubt were
great and precious treasures found by them. In the mean time did Charles, the
son of Charles the great, subdue Bohemy, vanquyshyng Lecho Bohemy was
overcome with Lecho their king.
their king: and thus was charles at the last a most mighty prince of all
Italy, France, Germany, Bohemy and Hungary, and brought the whole West empire
in a quiet estate, and kept it in the same. Wherefore for these virtues, and
this strength of courage, which he used in all his enterpryses, is Charles
worthy to be counted among these princes, which God has now and than given to
the world to repair common welthes, justice, equity, shamefastness, ^^ally
to restore among men the bands of modesty and common peace, as were in times
past David, Hercules, Cyrus, Alexander, Julius, Augustus, Constantinus, The
odosi^s. In Charles affairs is chefely worthy to be noted, how kings and
great men make ^umors among them. For God Wh^rfore monarchs and (...) of God
sends sometime the chief monarchs to repress them. Even as in our time
Charles the fyfte has brydeled the excess and want o^nesse of the Romans,
and the Venetian power.

But it is expedient for most high princes to be excellent, not only in
feats of war and handlyng of weapon: but also to inform common welthes with
honest laws and dectrine of religion. And this was Charles chief care. He
caused some counsails ^^^ ded(...)
to be kept at Rome and Franckforde and some time in France. He founded also
three universities to spread abroad and maintain the doctrine of
Christenreligion, namely at Bonony in Italy, Paris in France and at Paduam
Italy. In Germany did he like wise found many monasteries, for to teach youth
in stead of scoles. Beside this did he set the law of the Frankes morder, and
caused the books of the law to be written. For that old law of the Romans
was long before put out of ^re throug the Lombardes and Frankes.

He caused also to gather together the old histories of the Germans and
songs, wherein it is said he had such pleasure, that he learned them by rote.

He was excellently well seen in the Germane Charles the great was learned in
Greek and Latin.
toungue and Latin: he could also speak Greek, for he herd the Greek
messangers, and answered them in Greek: but in along and durable relacio^ did
he speak Latin. There are yet verses that be not greatly unseemly, which is
said he did make at the death of his cousin Roulande. In his old age he gave
himself to Astronomy. At diner and supper at home delyted he in hearing read
the books of saint Augustine.

In the temple did he sing the canonical hours and also lessons with the
pristes, and he would other princes to do likewise after his example, who^ he
prescribed lessons, which seems to pertain to his and their amendeme^t. For he
was an exciding lover of christen doctrine. In all manners of living did be have
him so, as noma^ might pass him in godliness. Beside this sent he succors of
money to the christians in strange contreis, and obtained by the Saracen kings
that the christians should be more easily entreated.

He gave the wyndes and months those names, which remain yet now a days:
so that by these things may easily be gathered, that this prince was garnyshed
of God with great virtues and high happenesse by his studyes, so that he may
worthily be surnamed great. When he was nowrenowmed throughout all the world
of all these virtues, peace stablyshed, y^ laws restored, the state of
religion set in order, because he might avoid the occasion of great euels, he
appointed his son Lewis before his death to be an heir and successor in the
empire, afterward dyed he at Aken the two and seuentyeth year of his age.
Before his death the bridge that was laid over the Rene by Mentz, burnt,
which was made in the space of ten years, at Charles ^he (...) by (...)*
great costs. This burning sygnyfyed, that Germany should not long after be
separated from France.

Lewis the gentle, the second Emperor of the Germans.
THe year of Christ.viij. C. xv. began Lewis the gentle to govern the empire,
he (...) ^he (...)*
reigned syx and twenty years. Charles had many children, which dyed before
the fathers deceasse. Lewis renewed the peace that his father had made with
them of Constantinople in the beginning of his reign, and wylled it to be
stablyshed. After those he his son Lotharius for (...).
a party ruler in the empire, that he should rule in Italy. Being sent to
Rome, he was crowned Emperor of Paschalis bishop of Rome, and was called
Augustus or full of majesty. Sense that time kept Lewis a parliament at Aken,
for the reformation of the state of the Church: and he brought to pas^e with
great diligence, that to the ministers of the Church should be given
necessary relefe to maynteyne their lives. An agreement was also made between
him and the bishop of Rome, that such as came after them might be sure, what
part is pertaynyng to the bishop, and what to the empire.

This Godly or gentle Emperor was taken Lewis the gentle is taken of his
son.
prisoner of his son Lotharius, through the counsayll of the Bishops and some
princes, because he was afraid lest by his stepmothers inspiracion, his father
would remove the empire from him to his younger brother. But Lewis being
delivered returned to thempyres governance, and caused Lotharius his son by
force to go into Italy: but at the last was he reconciled with his father
again.

After Leo was Stephanus the fourth made S^phanus was confirmed of Lewis.
the hundredth bishop of Rome. The same demanded the confirmacion of his
byshopryke of Lewis the Emperor.

Paschalis the hundredth and one bishop of To. succeeded Stephanus. Thyssame sent
also for his confirmacion to Lewis.

Eugenius the.C. i^. bishop. succeeded Pascalis.

Valentinus the.C. iij. bishop succeeded Eugenius.

Gregorius the.iiij. the.C. iiij. bishop succeeded Valentinus. He refused to
take the byshoprycke before he were confirmed of the Emperor Lewis.

Lotharius the first of this name, the third Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.viij. C. xli. after ye death of Lewis the Godly or gentle
reigned Lotharius his son fyften years. But now has the golden world of
this progeny The brethren of Lotharius were th^e, ^^
an end. Lotharius had many brethren, Lewis Germanicu^ and Charles the balde:
among the which was debate for the departing, whereof wis, Germanicus and
Charl^^ the balde.
grew no less great then a doleful war. For in France did the brethren
mete with such a fyghtyng, that, (as histories record) the power of the
Fra^kes was so febled, that afterward they could never wholly recover it. Lewis,
Germanicus and Charles the balde had the ouerhand. After so great manslaughter,
when truce was made among the princes, they fell to an atonement. Lewis had for
his part Germany, Schwaben, Bayerlande, Boheme, Easte^ryche, East France,
Thuring, Saxen, and all that was until y^ river Rene. This Lewis is called the
Germane king, and great praises are spoken of The dukes of the Frankes (...)
of (...)*
him. The residue of the dukes of the Frankes following are his successors in
blood. He brought Bohemy also to receive the Christen faith.

Charles the balde optained by conuenant hereditare the greatest part of
France or Gallia, and the French kings following have their ofspringe of him.

Lotharius kept Italy, and Prouentz, and that part that hitherto is called
Lothring or Lorain: and by (...).
this man remained the highness of the Imperial majesty. By this occasion
thefore was Gallia or (...)
France separated from Germany Lotharius took afterward the governance of
the empire to his second son Lewis, and he being aged, went into a religion
and became a monk.

Not few Cometes were seen this year before this dissencion and war of the
brethren.

After Gregory the.iiij. was Sergius the second made the.cv. bishop of Rome.
The same was the first that changed his name: for it is said he was called
before Swines mouth. Of him was Lewis Swynes mouth was y^ first that changed
his name Castle Angel
the second the son of Lotharius crowned at To.

Leo the.iiij. the.cvi. bishop succeeded Sergius. The same buyldded Castle Angel
at Rome. He was accused by Lotharius that he went about to optain the highness
of the Imperial majesty from the Frankes, to the Greeks. Wherefore when
Lotharius was come to Rome, the bishop did declare himself unguilty.

After Leo was Johannes the.viij. The same is Ioha^nes. vi^^ bishop of Rome a
woman
said to be borne at Mentz, and that she was a woman.

Benedictus the.iij. was made the.cvij. bishop of Rome after Johannes the.viij.
In his time were raised great stryfes and rumors for the election of the
bishop of Rome, but Lotharius swaged them.

Lewis the second, the fourth Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.viij. C. lvi. took Lewis the.ij. the son of Lotharius
the empire: he reigned twenty years. He restrained the Saracens coming into
Italy Lewis the. ^^. is buried at Milane.
with a great violence, and overcame them. When he had restored peace again in
Italy, he died, and is buried at Milane.

Nicolaus the first the.cviij. bishop of Rome succeeded Benedictus the.iij.

Adrianus the.ij. chosen of the priests and common people, succeeded Nicolaus.

Johannes the.ix. was made the.cx. bishop after Idrianus. The same by a
conspiracy made with the The disloyalte of the bishop of To. in transferryng
the empire to Frenchemen.
kings of Gallia or France, endeavored to transfer the majesty of the
empire from the Germans upon Charles the balde, afterward upon Lewis the
stammerer his son: but the Germans kept the empire par force, which thing
we shall say afterward. In the mean season that the bishop goes about
this, was he taken, but being escaped, he fled into France to Lewis the
stammerer.

Charles the bald of France.
THe year of Christ, viij. C. lxxvj. came Charles the balde.
Charles the balde at Rome, and by the aid of the bishop of Rome Johannes
the.ix. was made Emperor. Charles the balde was Lotharius brother, son to
Lewis the gentle, whose part in deuydyng became France or Gallia. Now went the
bishop of Rome about, to transfer the majesty of the Empire from the
Germans, unto the Frenchemen, but that the sons of Lewis would not suff^e
the Germans. Which thing when Charles the balde had herd, he threatened to
bring so many hoostes of enemies over the Rene, that the horses drynkyng up the
Rene, the host should go through it dry shodde. O the ouerfolysh manners of the
The French (...)nings
Frenchemen. But they met him at Colen with fyfty thousand, where he was
overthrown of the two sons of Lewis the Germane, not far from A^b^^^ach.

The next year after went Charles the balde in to Italy, where the two cosins
the sons of Lewis followed him. As he herd this, he was taken with a disease
of a soden fear, and died. Yet in the mean The death of Charles the balde.
season persysted bishop Johannes in transferryng of the empire, and willed the
son of Charles the balde to succeed in his fathers place. Wherefore he was
taken at Rome of the Germane legates, and such as were of their parts: but
escapyng their hands, he fled to the French king, where he made Lewis the
stammerer the son of Charles the balde Emperor. This Lewis lived no more but
two years after his fathers deceasse. And of this wise was this earnest
couetyng come to an evil end at the last for the Frenchemen, and also was the
bishop frustrate of his false engines.

Charles the gross, the fyft Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.viij. C. lxxxi. came the Charles the gross.
empire again to the Germans. For the Saracens coming again into Italy, and
spoylyng all things, did the Romans call their bishop again out of France:
for the Italians had need of succourse against the Saracens. And when the king
of France was dead, seeing the kings heir was not yet of full age, there were
raised every where great dissencions and debates in France, for the
governance of the realm until the kings son were come to age. Wherefore
the bishop of Rome constrained by this necessity required aid of the Germans
to rescue Italy out the brunt of dangers. Then came Charles the gross son
to Lewis the Germane into Italy, and driving out the Saracens, took the
emperial crown the year of Christ.viii. C. lxxxij. Charles reigned after that
he was crowned, ix. years. About this The Norma^des fell into France.
time the Normandes falling into France, did so much harm every where, that
the Frenchmen were compelled to require aid of the Germans: and by consent of
every man, was Charles made king of France, and by this occasion got Charles
the Gross the realm both of Germany and Gallia or France again. But these
kingdoms were separated again not long after. Charles being weary of the
war in Morauia or Meerhen by reason of the great combraunce and trauail,
forsakyng the empire, he made Arnolfus his brothers son Emperor, who pointed
Charles out of the empire so much revenues, so long as he lived, as was
sufficient for a kings state.

Arnolfus the.vi. Germane Emperor.
ARnolfus the son of Carolomanus, duke Arnolphus Emperor.
of Baierlande, Schwaben and of the Fra^kes y^ cousin of Charles the third, was
substitute by him in the empire the year^ of Christ.viij. C. xci. he
reigned.xij. years. First overcame he the Morauians or Meerhlanders, after
that the Normandes, which being now returned out of France, came until the
Rene, and coming to Worms, put the bishop of Mentz to execution. As the
Normandes, were vanquyshed by the The Norma^des are overcome.
Emperors, at the last became they Christen. Afterward when V^ido duke of
Spoleta by a rumor was made Emperor, Arnolfus going into Italy, took in Rome
by great force, and was crowned of Formosus the bishop of Rome. Wherefore when
he had taken in Italy again, V^ido was bannyshed. He restored again also the
duchy of Bourgondie to the Germane dominion.

Marinus the.C. xi. bysh. of To. succeeded Ioa^nes Adrianus the.iij. was bishop
after Marinus.

Stephanus the fifth C. xiij. bysh. succeeded Adrianus Formosus succeeded
Stephanus.

At that time was again a great debate at Rome for the election: For Sergius
was also created bishop: but the favors of Formosus driuynge out Sergius,
Formosus sent for the Emperor into Italy, that he might keep still the
byshopryke by that means. For Sergius was fled into France, and went about to
obtain the byshopryke by the aid of Frenchemen. Howbeit after certain
years, when Formosus was dead, he was made bishop, and used more tyranny and
presumpcion, then he ought to have done, according to byshoply meekness. He An
example of most notable cruelnesse of a Rompsh bishop. Sergius unlearned and a
tyrant.
caused to dig up the dead carcas of Formosus, to degrate it, and beheadyng
it cast it into the floude Tyber with most shame. It is written that this
Sergius was very unlearned and vnmanered, which thing his cruel deeds declare
plain enough.

Bonifacius the.vi. the.C. xv. bishop succeeded Formosus.

Stephanus the.vi. followed Bonifacius. Thissame disanulled and condemned al
Formosus ordinances.

Romanus the.C. xvi. bishop of Rome succeeded Stephanus.

Theodorus the.ij. succeeded Romanus.

Ioa^nes y^.x. the C.xix. bysh. of To. succeeded The^ dorus thissame allowed
again the ordinances of Formosus, which Stephanus the syxte had disanulled.

Benedictus the.iiij. was the.C. xx. bishop after Johannes.

Leo the.v. was after Benedictus the.C. xxi. bishop of Rome. The same was taken
prisoner by Christophorus.

Christophorus was bishop after Leo. Thissame was taken by Sergius.

After Christophorus was Sergius the.iij. made the.C. xxiij. bishop of Rome.
The same caused the dead coarse of Formosus be dygged up again The tyranny of
y^ bishops of Rome.
and beheaded. It is a thing full of dread either to read or to rehearse
bishops of Rome to have used so great tyranny among themselves. And it could
not be that any regard could be had of Christen godliness: let no man then
marueill in the mean season, if any abuses and wicked opinions be broken into
the church in the mean while.

Lewis the.iii. the.vii. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.ix. C. iij. Lewis the Lewis the. iij
son of Arnolphus, being substitute in the empire of his father, reigned ten
years. It is no where read that he was crowned. The Hungarians way^t Germany
and ^^^ly.
For when Arnolphus was dead, the Hungarians invaded Germany with great
violence. Against them did the good prince Lewis the Emperor set himself,
and did grievously disconfite them by the river Lyeus, but he was afterward
overcome of them likewise. Then the Hungarians being vanquishers, did every
where much myschefe and harm to the Schwoben, Frankes, Baierlanders and them
of Ostenryche. Slayeng every one without regard or mercy, burning temples,
cities, tounes, villages, ye every thing.

Afterward entering into Italy, used like crueltye. Berengarius prince of
Foroiulium.
At that time was Berengarius prince of Foroiulium, which gatherynge a great
army aganyst the Hungaryans, although sometime he fought un luckelye: yet gat he
him such a good name by this setting forth, that afterward he wylled to be
called Emperor.

Cunradus the.i. the viij Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.ix. C. xii. was Conradus Conrade the first*
made Emperor, he reigned seven years. But he was not crowned of the Romysh
bishop. He was Lewis the.iii. brothers son: he was duke of the Frankes, and
the last of the most noble posteritye of Charles the great, which ye may
guess by the order of the genealogye written hereafter: the which I have added
therefore, yt it may be known, to how great chances, and how many alteracions
the kingdom of the Germans has been putt, the which thing can not be red
without great wonderynge at. For that may be seen every where that great
kingdoms floryshe a certain space in the world, but at the last they be
weakened, and tossed with troublous commocions: howbeit in the mean season be
they so kept by Gods providence, that they do not wholly perysh. Lewis the
third left no so^^ after him: and therefore strove the Frankes and Sacons
together, to make Otho duke of Saxony Otho duke of Saxony.
Emperor: but the good prince withstode the same not wylling that to the most
noble stock of Charles, should happen such a reproach. Therefore counseled he
to make Conradus duke of the Frankes Emperor. Of this wise succeeded Conradus
in the empire, but Otho was in more greater authority, and while Conradus
lived, he dispatched more busynesses also: yet in the mean time showed he
great loyalty and honestye toward Conradus the Emperor.

But in the mean time usurped Berengarius Berengarius
duke of Foroiulium the name of the Emperor in Italy, and enticed the
Hungarians, that they should spoil Germany again: but Conradus over came those,
by the aid of Otho.

But when Otho was dead; Conradus the Emperor fearyng happily, lest the son
of Otho Henry Henry the Fouler. The occasion of the war between the Frankes
and Saxons.
the Fouler should grow ouermuche in power: therefore wythdrue he part of
those things, which before he had granted his father Otho. And when Henry
took it greueouslye, the Empetoure endeavored to slaye him by an entrap, and to
bring this to pass, was ye bishop of Mentz made out: But the entrap was
disclosed. Than was Henry very grievously moved* and went home, and took from
the bishop of Mentz all that was his dominion in the land of Turyngen and
Hesse. But hereof rose a great war between the Frankes and Saxons.

But when Conradus was a dyenge, calling to him his brother Eberardus, he
commanded him to bring the Emperyall croune to Henry duke of Saxony: for him
he judged best worthy to govern the Empire. He admonyshed prince Eberarde also
with all diligence, to make an end of the war that he had taken in hand with
Henry duke of Saxonye, The empire is translated to the Saxons
lest the Frankes that were yet alive, should utterly he roated out and perysh.
For he marked well that God prospered Henryes affairs. To this counsel did
duke Eberardus agree willyngly, and bringyng the crown to Henry, and making
peace on both sides, he was afterward loyal to Henry. And by this occasyon
came it to pass, that the empire was removed from the successors of Charles
the great to the Saxons.

The genealogye of Charles the great.
Charles the great Emperor. Lewis te Gentle, whose sons were these three.
Lewis the German he had Almany, and subdued y^ Bohemes, his sons were: Lewis,
charles y^ gross, which took y^ empire from Charles the bald and Carolomanus
the son of Carolomanus was Arnolphus, who raygned after Charles the Gross.
Lotharius y^ Emperor. He had Loraine and Italy, his son was Lewis the
second the.iiij. Germane Emperor. He drove y^ Saracens out of Italy. After
him would the bishop of Rome transfer the empire to the Frenchmen upon
Charles y^ balde, but the sons of Lewis y^ Germane restored the empire again
to ye Germans* Charles the balde king of Gallia or France: his son was
Lewis the stammerer king of France.



The sons of Arnolfus were Lewis the.iij. Emperor. Conradus, and his sons
were Eberardus, whose successors are the princes of ye Frankes. Conradus the
last emperor of this lineage



Not long after was the kingdom of France also translated from the
posteritye of Charles the great. So little does any thing remain ever sted
fast in his estate among men, so that the generacions of great princes, do now
flourish in the height, now again laid in the duste to be weakened and
discouraged.

Anastasius the.iij. the.cxxiiij. bishop of Rome, succeeded Sergius.

Lando was made the.xxv. bishop after Anastasius.

Ioannes the.xi. succeeded Lando.

Henry the.i. surnamed the Fouler, the ix. Emperor of Germany.
THe year of Christ.ix. C. xx. was Henry the first, surnamed the Fouler,
(...) the (...).
duke of Saxon made Emperor, he raygned seuenten years. He was not crouned
of the bishop of Rome, nether went into Italy, though twain took upon them the
name of the Emperor, and by vproure raysynge battayll fought now and than a
great field. For Henry had business more than enough in Germany, which the
good prince apeaced with great diligence, according to his syngular policye,
and endeavored to make it more excellent.

Surely the kingdom of Germany did never The kingdom of germany never wanted
vproures.
in a manner want vprourish commotions, there was almost never an Emperor
chosen, without the sedition of some princes, which went about to take upon
them the name of the Emperor. Yet was God always with those Emperors, that
were du^lly called, detended the authority of the lawful empire, and the
sedicious were punished. Arnolde duke of Bayerlande set him self with hurtful
enterprise against Henry, who recountred ye Baiers with appointed armies: but
behauynge himself not as an enemy, he required to speak with duke Arnolde
familiarly. He reasoned with him, and earnestly The reasonyng of Henry the
Emperor with Arnold duke of Bayerland.
admonyshed him, that the majesty of the empire, is given of God: if it were
so, that he were chosen Emperor by the consent of other princes, than would
he freely give place, and be ready y^ first that should submit themselves. Duke
Arnold showed these things to his counsel, which answered: That it were
evident that Salomons saying of wisdom were most true, which is: By me do
kings rule. And for as much as it appears evidently enough that Henry is
endued with wisdom and gentleness, it is no dout, but God does assiste him:
he should therefore thenceforth leave of from his enterprise, nether to go about
any thing against Henry. Wherefore duke Arnolde ceased, and obeyed freely
without ye slaughter of any of his men. Who I pray you would not say, y^ these
Germane princes were no Barbaryans, and that they excelled in pryncely wisdom
and high gentleness? This is also written: that. S. Vdalryck had a visty on of
the duke of Baierland, The vision of S. Vdalr^^ke.
which he observed: For it was showed him by God, that the duke had a swearde
without hyltes or handel: whereby was signified, that the duke should not use
the sweard, that is, that he should not retayn the empire. Wherefore he
admonyshed the duke to do nothing unadvisedly.

After that did Henry take Brandenburge: and The d^^es (...) by Henry the
first.
the Vandales being subdued, they received the Christen faith until the sea.

He besieged the city Praga, and brought the Bohemes to the Empire.

After that vanquyshed he forty thousand Hungaryans by Mersburge, whereby he
gatte him a great renown and dread by the strange nations and gat
tranquillitye to al Germanye: He restored the contry of Lothring or Lorayn to
the kingdom of Germany, and gatt the spear that Christ was pearsed through of
Rudolphe king of Burgundy: the same was Constantinus wont to have.

Henry the Fowler being now near to his death, made his son Oath succeder in
ye empire after him, lest any strife should happen in the empire after his
death, concerning the possession of it.

Leo the.vi. succeeded the.C. xxvii. bishop after Ioannes the.xi.

Stephanus succeeded Leo.

After Stephanus was Ioannes the.xii. the. C xxix. bishop.

Leo the.vii. succeeded Ioannes the. xii

Stephanus the* viij. a Germane the.C. xxxi* bishop succeeded Leo.

Otho the.i. the.x. Germane. Emperor.
OTho the first the son of Henry the Fowler Otho the first.
began his domynyon the year of Christ.ix. C. xxxviii. and reigned.xxxvi.
years. He took the emperyall crown at Aken of the bishop of Mentz. In the
beginning The vpronres raised against Otho Eberardus the Palatine Giselbert
prince of Lotharing or Loraine*
of Oaths governance rose three great and dangerous vproures at one time.

The doers of the first vproure were Eberardus the Palatine, and Giselbert
prince of Lorain. These (because they were of the posterity and lineage of
Charles the great,) affirmed, that the empire came from the Saxons to the
Frankes by right of succession: and that such enterpryses might seem to be more
ryghtfull, they drew on their side Henry the elder brother of Otho, under the
pretense, Henry brother to Otho
that by reason of the age, he ought to govern the empire, and not Otho.

This war with the count Palatine Eberardus and duke Giselbert lasted six
years, and many feldes were foughte^ in the mean season. Herman duke of
Scwaben, and Conradus duke of the Herman prince of Schwaben* Lonradus duke of
the Frankes.
Frankes took the Emperors part. This Conradus of Worms, called the wise, was
cosyn to Eberardus. These fought the last against ye enemies by Andernak, with
a great camp, wherein Eberardus countye Palatine was slain, and duke Giselbert
in the flighte, was drowned in the Rene. It is a dreadful example, wherein we
may be advertised, An example of ^eage(...) also on great (...).
that the endeavor of sedition remains not unrevenged, even in great
princes also. But whether this Eberardus be he, yt we have said of before to
have brought the Emperyall crown to Henry the Fowler, it is not specifyed for
a truth. For the hystorye writers of the Germans, were gross and unlearned
men, ignorant of these things, which are necessary to be observed in
writing of hystoryes.

But after this victory, was not the strife yet The second vp^ouce was with
his brother.
alayed which Otho the emperor had with Henry his brother, and beside that
with the bishop of Mentz: Henry was besyeged at Mersburg: but he seeing that
his interpryses were inuayne, and that his defense began to be feeble, he
himself came knelynge to ye Emperor, desyryng pardon for his offense, was
received to mercy by Otho: and not long after, the duke of Baier deceassynge
without heir male, Otho the Emperor gave his brother Henry the duchy of
Baierland. As for that Henry the Emperor which is buried at Bamberg, was
this Henryes sons son, as we shall show hereafter.

Afterward was Mentz besyeged and taken in by the Emperor, and the bishop
taken also: but shortly after was he letten louse again.

The third rysynge against Otho was many The third (...) was by his own
(...).
years after, by his own son Ludolfe, by this occasion: Otho had first a
queen out of England called Edyth or I Would, which is buried at magdeburg. Of the
same had he his son Ludolphe. After the same was dead took he another queen
of the Burgundyon blood, which thing Ludolphe did not allow. But what happened
farther, that is unknown. For the Germane hystory writers did in manner
express no thing wholye by their occasyons and circumstaunces: nether ruely
could they do it, seeing they were monks, living in private idelnesse* being
sometime far from all things, that be done in gouernynge the commune welthe:
I pass over that they were to s^outhfull also to search and inquire the causes
and occasions of great matters of other men, as ye duty of a true hystory
writer is to do. Yet do they make mention of this Salfelde ^ deadly place for
counsels.
that Ludolfus kept an assemble at Salfelde, and to have conspyred against his
father: and that place Salfeld, is called a deadly place for counsels. Ludolfus
had nevertheless in the mean season most great princes y^ were partakers with
him in this conspiracy and counsel, among the which also was Conradus the wise
duke of the Frankes. But in y^ mean time that this was in bruynge, was the
father in Italy, who besieged his son at Mentz so Regenspurg
sone as he cameinto Germany: Ludolfe escapyng, fled until Regenspurge: but the
father following, besyeged Regenspurg also straytly two months. In that syege
dyed not a few men, among ye which was the chief, Arnolde the younger duke of
Bayer. After his death Ludolfe requyrynge peace frelye, came barefooted
knelynge befoore his father, and lyenge upon the ground, he desired pardon for
his trespass very humblye. Wherefore the father took him to mercy, and a very
strong peace was made.

No Emperor in a manner did dispatche ever any more greater and dangerous
busynesses than the Emperor Otho, so far as I can mark. But in all them was
he in the mean season luckye, not without the incredible favor of God. For
while he had these wars he overcame the Bohemes, the Hungarians, and Frankes,
beside that made he quiet the troublous state of Italy, which thing we shall
brefely show.

He vanquyshed the Hungarians by Augsburge The Hungarians are vanquished.
near the floude Lycus, and weakened he the strenght of them so, that they
durst never after come into Germany. In this battayll dyed Conrade ^. (...)
the Wise, and. S. Udalricke bishop of Auguspurg was with the Emperor in the
hooste.

Moreover when Otho enuironned every wherewith great peryls, the Frenchmen
trusted easily to bring the empire to them again: but here was An example that
(...) God (...).
it found in Otho, that it is inuayne for men to set themselves against him,
whom God favors. Innumerable enemies had compassed Otho about, the Bohemes,
the Frankes, the Hungarians Italyans, the Frenchemen: but the power of all
these, could not break and oppress the virtue of this good prince. The
Frenchemen threatened to bring into Germanye so great an hooste, as never had been seen before. Whereto it is reported The answer of Otho to the Frenche^^s
threaten ^y^ges.
Otho should have answered: That such vayn mynaces became not wise princes,
seeing it is evident, that ye victory and fortun of war is in Gods hand. He
answered this also: that he would bring so Straw hattes.
many covered with straw hattes into France, as they never had seen before:
and therefore had all they that were in the hooste straw hattes, which hooste
he brought until paris. For Hugo prince Hugo prince of France
of France had taken the king his lord prisoner, and intended to take to him
France and the dignyty of the empire. Thyssame Hugo was taken of Lewis is
restored again to the realm of France.
Otho in the city of Paris, and delyuerynge Lewis his brother in Law,
restored him to y^ realm of France again. For Gerberga the sister of Otho
was married to Lewys. Otho restored than to to the Germane empire low Germanye,
Lorain and Burgundye.

The Hungaryans had many skyrmyshes also in Italy, but some Emperoures before
Othoes time were so occupied in Germany, that they could'not aid Italy. When
now the princes of Italy were driven to extreme necessity for to resist the
Hungarians, it happened that Berengarius prince of Foroiulium, gat him a great
wonderyng at his prowess, and afterward coueted the governance of whole
Italy. And though other princes did also strive for the souerayntye of Italye,
yet did Berengaryus, excellynge in power, keep Italye till the third heir.
The same took upon him the title of Emperor, and used great crueltye in
Italye. The Italyans required aid and succoure Berengarius peldeth himself to
Otho.
of Otho against his tyranny. Wherefore Otho going into Italye, he invaded
Lombardye, and gat it. Berengarius with yeldynge himself freely, optained of
Otho that grace, that he should not wholly be driven out of Italy, but should
retain a duchy to possess. After twelve years was Otho called into Italy
again, to defend or claim the Italians with the clergy and bishop of Rome,
from the tyranny of Berengarius, which thing he also did valyauntly. For when
he came Bere^garius with his son are ^a^^^ for their disloyaltye.
again into Italy, he took Berengarius and his son Alberte, and bannished
them for their disloyaltye: the father with his wife to Bamberge in Germany,
where they spent their lives also as outlawes: but the son sent he to
Constantinople.

Otho entering into Rome in this setting forth, Otho y^ first made the (...)
oath to the bishop of Rome.
was crow^ed of Ioannes the.xii. This Otho was the first Emperor that made an
oath to ye bishop of Rome, whereof the manner and tenor is in ye canon laws,
beginning: Tibidomino Ioanni.iii. and ce. After that is Otho come the second
time to Rome to rebuke Ioannes bish. of Rome, because he was accused of many
fautes. Wherefore the bishop knowing himself gyltye, fled for fear of Otho.
And therefore was Leo the.viij. made bishop in his stead The ^^^^es of the
(...)ppes of (...).
But before that Otho went from Rome, Ioannes coming to Rome, thrust Leo out
again: Leo fled to the Emperor. But the most wise Emperor used great
policy, lest he should give an occasion of debate: He suffered Ioannes to use
the bishopryck, so long as he lived. But so sone as he was dead, to take Leo
as lawfully chosen bishop: but the Romans would not allow it, which refusyage
Leo, chose another called Benedictus in spete of the Emperor. Otho than
returning, invaded the possessions of the Romyshe bishops, and did much hurt.
He besyeged also the city of Rome, until the cithesins constrained by famine
and necessity, opened the gates freely to Otho. He than putting to death many
Romans, and banny shinge the Consuls, restored Leo: and when he had apeased al
things, returned into Germany, leadynge with him Benedictus, who was kept at
Hamborowe.

Otho going the third time to Rome, drove the Saracens and Greeks out of the
farther coasts of Italy. Than choosing Otho his son to be partener in the
Empire, bringyng him with him, commanded to crown him, and caused the
Emperor of Constantinoples daughter to be given him in marriage. By all these
things may it easily be gathered, that this Otho was one also of these
princes, which God has now and than given to repair the decayed state of the
world. For he set up again the decayed empire of Rome, and set all Europa in
quiet: by his succor has he defended whole Italy and Germany. He subdued the
Hungarians and Frenchmen. To be short, he has restored the majesty of the
empire to his former bryghtnesse, and set it in order: afterward dyed he at
Quedelnburg in great quietness. It is written Quedelnburg. Who fande first the
silver Mines in Misen.
also, that he found first the silver mines in Misen. He gave also much good
to the church, to maynteine religion, and to promote the doctrine of
godliness, to which intent he made also not a few bishops, as at Magdeburg,
Misen, Brandenburg, Mersburg, and Ceitz.

Martinus the.iij. was the.cxxxij. bishop after Stephanus.

Agapetus the.ii. succeeded Martinus.

Ioannes the.xiii. the C. xxxiiij. bishopp was after Agapetus. The same crowned
Otho the first: afterward fled he from Rome, fearing lest for his
uncleanness of life, he should be cast from the office by Otho.

Leo the.viii. was chosen in Ioannes stead.

But when Ioannes was returned to Rome. Leo fled to the Emperor, but when
Ioa^nes was dead, was Leo restored again.

Ioannes the.xiiii. and.C. xxxvi. bishop succeeded. Leo. Of him was Otho the
second crowned.

Otho the second, the.xi. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.ix. C. lxxiiii. raygned Otho the (...)*
Otho y^.ii. after his fathers deceasse ten years: against him was an vprour
raised Henry du^e of (...).
also. For Henry duke of Baier his cosyn coueted ye empire. This Henry is not
the brother of Otho the first, of whom is spoken before, which conspiringe
rose against his brother Otho, and afterward reconciled again to his brother,
gat the duchy of Baier. This first duke of Baier, that was of the Saxons
blood, dyed.xv. year before Otho. But this first Henryes son is the same
which set himself against Otho the second: but Otho had soon tamed this
new enterpryser.

Afterward did the Frenchemen fall suddenly upon the Emperor at Aken, and he
did searcely escape their entrap. But Otho repayring an army, went into
France, and spoiled every where until Paris, and constrained the Frenchmen to
demand peace: which did than bynd them with an oath, The French men are
subdued of Otho the second
that they would never claim Lorain any more.

When he had set Germany at quiet, he went into Italy. There did he fight with
the Greeks and Saracens in Apulia: but his host being vanquyshed, he was taken
by mariners, as he fled. But because Otho the second was taken by mariners.
he was unknown to the mariners, by reason he could the greek language, nether
was he taken for a Germane prince, he redeemed himself with an easy price, and
coming to Rome, he governed the empire as he did before. It is said that the
Italians poisonned him, for his rigor that he used in the governance.

Benedictus the.v. the.C. xxxvii. bysh of Rome was after Ioannes the.xiiii.

Donus the.ii. succeeded after Benedictus

Bonifacius the.vii. the.C. xxxix. bysh. succeeded Donus.

Benedictus the vi. succeeded Bonifacius. In his time became Otho the third
Emperor.

Otho the.iii. the.xii. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.ix. C. lxxxiiij. raygned Otho the third after his fathers
deceasse.xix. years. He was young, scarcely passed xii. years when his father
dyed: wherefore Henry duke of Bayer, cosyn to this Otho, caused him to be kept
at Rome, and began again to usurp the Empire. Some Italians counseled to
make Crescentyus Emperor, that the emperyall majesty might be brought
again to the Italyans. But the Germane princes being loyal to their The
endeavor and faythfulnesse in keyyng the empire*
lord, called the young Otho again from Henry, and made him Emperor with
commune assent, whereto Benedictus the bishop of Rome gave his consent also.

The first war that he had, was with the Frenchmen, which forgetting
their oath that they had made, invaded Lorayne again, taking in many cities:
but Otho dryuyng out the French men, kept Lotharyng or Lorayn.

In the mean time a Roman prince, called Crescentius, taking upon him the
name of an Emperor, used great crueltye in Italy. Wherefore Otho coming to
Rome, enuyrouned with a great army, and taking Crescentius, cut of his nose
and ears, set him arswarde upon an ass, caused The punishment of Crescentius
a Roman^ Prince for ^^^^^yng y^ Emp^^^
him to be carried about the city Rome to wonder at, and at the last to be
hanged.

Of the beginning and institution of the Electors in Germany.
When Otho was now eyghte and twentye years old he was endued with so ready
wytt, that for his syngular Otho the iij. called the Worlds wonders*
wisdom, he was called the Worlds wonders. Beside that knew the Saxons
ready wytted and valiant men, the deceatfull traynes of the Frenchmen.
Wherefore when they perceived that great and dangerous commotions were raised by
the. To. bishops, both against Emperoures, and also in the commune wealth,
Otho chose Bruno a Saxon his cousin to be bishop of Rome, who was Bruno a Saxon
was made bysh. of To.
called Gregorius the fyft after that he had the byshopryke. Of him was Otho
the third crowned. Beside this when the wise prince considered that the
Frenchemen and Italians raged ever to transfer the imperial majesty from the
Germans, and that among the aunceters of him was now and tha^ strife also for
the election: and that in the mean time is so greatly requisite a mighty
monarche to the Christiantie, for to defend the bishop of Rome, and liberty
of Italy: yea to maynteyne concord of religion in whole Europa. But that the
same monarchy could not last long and be stable evermore, without the aid and
succourse of some peculiar and most mighty nation. Therefore with the
assistence and aid of Gregorius the bishop of Rome (who, because he was a
Germane, did lyghtely consent to so necessary a thing,) did make the ordinance
of the princes Electors for to choice an Emperor. And that concord might be
had in the election because of religion, among the prelates spiritual and
princes temporal the authority to chose an Emperor is committed to seven
Germane princes, To what pr^ces the election is committed.
the Archebyshops of Mentz, Colen and Trier. To these are joined the prince of
Boheme: (for at that time had Bohemy yet no king,) the County Palatine of the
Rene, the duke of Saxony, and the Marquis of Brandenborowe. I maruayll verily
why so high a dignity is not bequyethed to other princes, which at that time
were far more puyssaunt, as namely to the dukes of Baier, of Schwaben and of
the Frankes, and specially the duke of Baier, who was nearer of kynred to Otho,
than the other, and more greater of domynyon. For he had subject to him
Bayerland and Eastenryche, until Aglar or Aquitanya, the which Henry brother
to Otho the first had won. The duke also of Schwaben was near kynsman to
Otho the Emperor. For when Herman duke of Schwaben under Otho the first had
no heir male, He gave his daughter in marriage to Ludolfe son to Otho the
first, against whom his father Otho did war for his rebellyon. Of this
Ludolfe come the dukes of Schwaben. Therefore may it be maruayll, what was the
occasion to orden that institutyon of princes Electors. The Germane history
writers seem to be so void of all judgment, that it may of good Ihon Stabius
an astronomer.
right loathe any man to read them. Ihon Stabius the astronomer of Maximylyan
showed me often, that Maximilian was went to complayn upon the rudeness of the
Germane hystorye writers, that The Germane history writers unlearned.
they did not only write the deeds of so noble and wise princes, that God had
sent without order: but did also corrupt them with evil writing. And he had
commanded to compile in a short Cronycle orderly the most notableste things
out of all hystorye writers: which thing doutlesse had been done, if the most
wise Emperor had either lived longer, or had not left it by reason of the care
of more weyghty matters.

As for me, (though I might seem to be rash, if I allege or show what me
thinks,) yet will I declare what gessynge I have, wherewyth I may show some
certayntye of so great a thing. Bohemy no doubt is come in the election for
his co^modyous Why Bohemy has the authorytye of eleccion. Saxony.
sytuatyon, and because yt is fensed round about.

To the Saxons has Otho that was a prince of the Saxons blood worthily given
that honor: for at that time was the same duchy most puissaunt.

The princes of Saxony kept Brandenburg at Brandenburg.
that time also, the Emperors kinsmen: and it may easily be gathered, that
Otho did fauer those contryes more, than other duchyes.

I suppose that to y^ countyshyp of Palatyn was The countyshyp of Palatyne.
given this prerogative, more than other princes dominions, for none other
cause, than that to Charles the greatest posterity might rebound this honor, so
that it should be not only by the Saxons, but part thereof should also be sent
over to the Frankes: for the countyes of Palatine were at that time of the
kynred of Charles the great.

What praises this ordinance of the princes Electors What profit is by the
princes Electors.
is worthy, that can I not now sufficiently declare according to the
worthynesse of it: the deed proves yt self what profit it has brought. For
by this ordinance has the Empire remained in Germany above five hundredth
years. Besides that is nothing so good nor wholesome in men's estates, than
those counsels and ordinances, whereby is avoided the occasion to alter of
times the governance of Empyres: which thing by the goodness of God is done
by this instytutyon of the Electors. By this means is yt come to pass, that
the Empire is provided, that the traynefull and secret conspiracyons of the
bishop of Rome and French king did not prospere, which endeavored often to
transfer the highness of the Empire from the Germans to the Frenchemen. The
Emperor also has more sauegarde or defense of the princes, when he is chosen
by their consent: and less strife can rise for the election, when the desires
of the chief princes consent to one. Besides this also, forsomuche as the
majesty of the empire is remitted to many princes together, it is to be
trusted that the state of the empire shall be both stronger and more durable,
then if it did stycke by the succession of one blood. All these things make
for that purpose, that no great strife come by reason of the election or
choysyng: and also that the head of the West empire be in some certain place,
and that because the concord and tranquillity of the religion in all this
West kingdom, be maynteined under one certain head. The Athenians in times
past auaunced their ordinance of the Areopagites with great praises: likewise
did the Lacedaemonians their statutes of the Ephories: and that worthily, for by
them remained their common welthes steadfast a great while. But forsooth this in
stitucio^ of Otho made of the Electors, as it is far more profitable, so it
is worthy much more praise and auauncement: as by the which stablenesse of
the empire and constant religion are mainteyned many years, not only in one
or other city or country, but in the whole Weste. And the princes Electors
ought worthily make much of this their prerogative. First because of the whole
Christiantie, that by them is this highness set aparte. For they are as a
steadfast head, wherewith forever all this Weste kingdom is kept and bound
together: for they may be called the very route, out of the which emperoures
must evermore grow. Moreover also can no higher dignity happen them in this
life then that worthynesse is given them lawfully, which passes far the
highness of kings and princes. Then must this ordinance be esteemed a high
gift and an ordinance of God: Wherefore also it must greatly be made of and
kept without blemysh, least any occasion be given to dissolve so Godly and
wholesome, ye and most fair harmony in this life. For by them stands the
sum of the Roman Empire. And therefore when the Electours are severed, it is
necessary that the kingdom or empire fail, and that the last judgment is at
hand. For the world shall end under this empire. It is written that the
institucion of the Electours was. The year of Christ.M. ij. The year of the
world.iiij. M. ix. C. xlvi. The year of Rome.M. vii. C. lij. The year after
Charles the great his coronacion.ij. C. i.


When this ordinance was made, the Italians made diverse vproures against Otho
the.iij. insomuche that he could not be safe at Rome: and when he went toward
Germany, Crescentius wife sending Otho the. i^* was poysosoned.
him poison by an entrap, was killed the thirtyeth year of his age.

Johannes the.xv. the cxli. bishop of Rome succeeded Bonifacius the.vi. He was
taken by Bonifacius father, because he would not consent to Bonifacius election.

Johannes the.xvi. succeeded Johannes the.xv.

Johannes the.xvii. succeeded Johannes.xvi. Being taken and driven out by
Crescentius, he ^ought aid of Otho.

After Johannes the.xvii. was Gregorius the fyft made the.C. xliiij. bishop of
Rome a prince of the Saxons blood, and that for the same cause, as we have
declared a little before. For the Italians devised now and then new things
against the Emperors, nether did they ever want matters of vproures.
Therefore seemed it a necessary thing to maynteyne common quietness that a
Germane should be made bishop of Rome. But yet in the mean season was
Gregorius driven out by the Italians, ordeinyng in his stead one Johannes: but
Otho returning to Rome with a great power, restored Gregorius kynsman again.
Syluester bishop of To a w^other with ^^^ll spectes.


Siluester the.ij. succeeded Gregorius the.v. It is said he was an Inchaunter.

After this sorcerer was Johannes the.xviii. made the.C. xlvi. bishop of Rome.
In his time appeared toward the South a comete of a dredefull sight, the
which followed no less hunger then pestilence.

Hrnry the.ij. surnamed the Haultynge, the. ^iij. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. iij. was Henry Henry the.ij.
the second of that name duke of Bayer chosen Emperor. We have said before
that Otho the first gave his brother Henry the duchy of Baier. But I reken this
Emperor Henry was the brothers son of that Henry. For Henry Otho the first
brother died.xv. years before Otho deceased. The Germane history writers were
so negligent, that out of their writings I can not say for a certain,
whether he were that Henry's son, or his brothers son. Truly that is
wonder that the chanons of Bamberg knew not certainly the genealogy of their
founder.

This Henry was the first that was chosen Emperor by the Electors, and
raygned.xxii. years. He was famous by wisdom and noble victories, he made many
and great wars with maruaylous luckinesse. First making werry y^ Bohemes and
The deeds of Henry the.ij.
Vandalies with war, he subdued and made the^ tributaries to him. He besyeged
Metz and Gaunt: he wanne also Lorain and Flaunders. He ^ought in Italy against
the Saracens, and drove them out of Italy. Then was he crouned victoriously at
Rome by Benedictus the seventh. He brought the Hungaryans to the Christen
faith, and gave Steven king of the Hungarians.
to Steven the Hungarian king his sister in marriage. Before his death optayned
he of the Electors lawfully, that Cunradus the.ij. of that name a Frank,
should succeed him in the empire. He founded the byshopryck of Bamberge, and is
buried there.

Johannes the.xix. the.C.xlvii. bishop succeeded Johannes the.xviii.

Sergius the.C.xlviii. bish. of To. succeeded Ioh.

Benedictus the.vii. followed Sergius. Of him was Henry the Emperor crowned.

Johannes the.xx. the.cl. bishop of Rome succeeded Bedictus. Of him was Cunradus
crowned*

Cunradus the.ij. the.xiiij. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. xxv. was Cunradus Cunradus y^ second.
a Franck chosen Emperor, who dwelt in the Limburg castle by the city
Spire, and governed the empire fyftene years. But in the beginning of his
reign when he perceived all things in a rumor every where, he brought to
pass that his son should be chosen a party ruler with him, lest when he were
gone in to Italy, the subjects in Germany should make a rumor without a
certain head.

Ernestus duke of Schwaben and the Catuli: for Ernestus duke of Schwaben
the Catuly were also lords in Schwaben. These (I say) were rebels to the
Emperor: but he did so assuage them, that they did strayghtwaye obey freely.
From thence went he into Hungary, and redressed that also. He took Bourgundy
and Liege or Ludich, he took the realm of Orleaunce again, and governed it
under his dominion. Afterward going into Italy, he besieged Milan, and coming
to Rome, he was crowned of Johannes the.xx. The Romans about that time rysynge
against Cunradus, were fearcely slayen of the Emperors men: But the Roman
affairs were apeaced. In the mean time whiles this was done in Italy,
Ernestus duke of Schwaben, raised a new commotion wherefore Cunradus in his
return drove him away, and pearsed him through. Cunradus gave the duchy to
Herman his brother. This Cunradus made many laws, which are yet now a days.
Under this Emperor, was a couusaill kept at Tribur by Ment^. He builded with
great costs the Church of Spire, wherein he is buried with his queen Gisela.

Great praises are of this Gisela. She was a Gisela a queen of Bourgundy.
queen of Bourgundy, of Charles the greates post ritie. Her first husband was
Ernestus duke of Schwaben, of whom she had two children: Ernestus that was
driven out, and Herman: afterward was she wedded to Cunradus the Emperor.

Here do the writers make the first mencio^ of the The first mention of y^
marqueshyp in Easteuriche.
marqueshyp in Eastenriche, which at that time possessed Albert duke of
Schwaben, brother to Ernestus the elder. Nether was Eastenryche yet at that
time a duchy, but the Schwaben kept it, which had taken it from the Hungarians
by strong hand. The beginning of the erldome of Thuryngen and whence y^ lords
thereof be. Lewis the Bearded.


The Erldome also of Thuryngen began in the time of this Cunradus: For Lewis
the Bearded of the lynage of Charles the great was cousin to Gisela. The same
because he had long been conuersaunt in the court of the Emperor, and had
been diligent in many things, was made Earl of Thuringen. And by this means
have the Lords of Thuringen their ofsprynge of Charles the greates blood.

Benedictus the.vij. was made the.C.li. bishop of Rome after Johannes the.xx.
who being driven out, one Syluester bought the byshoprycke with money.
Therefore Benedictus being returned, to the intent he might raise factions or
commocions against Syluester, he sold his right of the byshoprycke to one that
was the third, called Gregorius the.vi. And so did Benedictus give place to
him: but Syluester would contrarywyse Three bishops of Rome stronyng for the
(...) deposed
defend his right against Gregorius. This controuersye did compel the
Emperor Henry the black to come to Rome, who did worthily depose those three
monsters from the byshoprycke, and ordained in stead of them one Syndeger
bishop of Bamberg, who was called Clemens the.ii. the.clii bishop, of whom
Henry the black was crowned.

About this time began the name of Cardinals to When ^ Cardinals began (...).
be used: whereby it may be supposed, that this same dignity in the church,
was not elder.

But for somuche as oftymes happened most heavy contencions and stryfes, of the
diversity of wylles in making of the bishop of Rome, Henry the Black made an
ordinance, that thenceforth no bishop of Rome should be chosen, without the
consent of the Emperor and also his confirmacion. This ordinance was
afterward sore foughten against of the bishops of Rome, insomuche also, that
most heinous wars are risen thereof in the times of Henry the fourth and
fyfth Emperors.

Henry the third surnamed the Black, the.xv. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M.xl. began to Henry the.iij
raygne Henry the third, called the Black, and raygned seuentene years. First
invaded he the Bohemes with war, but they being aided of the Hungarians,
overcame him. The year after were the Bohemes so weried with wars of Henry,
that their prince constrained by necessity came to Regenspurg, and made
himself tributary freely to the Emperor. After that going into Hungaty, warred
three years, and taking in certain cities, he compelled the Hungarians to
demand peace. He subdued also the duke of Lorain, that he obeyed the empire.

At Rome put he down three bishops at once, striving for the sea, and made a
Germane bishop to be bishop there, who^ they called Clement the.ii. The^ceforth
overcame he the Sarace^s by Capua. Afterward came he again into Germany and
kept a congregation at Mentz, wherein was Leo the bysh. of To.

Cuno duke of Bayer, which was after. S. Henry, Luno duke of Baier. An euel
counsayll. etc.
trustyng to the aid and conspiracion of the Hu^garians, set him against the
Emperor: for by that means intended he to draw the possession of the
kingdom to him. But the Hungarians were overcome, the duke Cuno was driven
out, and lived all his life a bannyshed man in Hungary. The land of Bayer was
in the mean time without a duke and gouernoure.

Before Henry the Black dyed, he caused his son Henry, five year of age to
be chosen Emperor, and was crowned at Aken, to the intent there should be a
certain head of the empire, nether should any rumor be for the election.
Wherefore the son raygned a certain space under the mothers protection. The
mother of Honry the.iiij. was called Agnes, borne in the county of Pisto in
France.

After Clemens was Damasus the.ij. made the cliij. bishop of Rome, which
optayned the byshopricke by force.

Leo the.ix. succeeded Damasus. The same was in the counsel kept at Mentz and
was conuersaunt with Henry the black a while afterward.

In his time Berengarius a deacon of Angewe Berengarius (...) of (...)true
(...)ar ^i the (...) of Christ's body and blood
in France taught, that the true body and blood of Christ were not in the
bread and wine, according to Christ's institucion. Leo the bishop of Rome
condemned this in the counsel of Vercelli: but the seeds of this doctrine
that were left has caused great persecucion to them that came after.

Victor the.ij. the.clv. bishop of Rome succeeded Leo. The same was before
bishop of Eichstet.

Stephanus the.ix. succeeded Victor.

Benedictus the.ix. the.clvij. bishop of Rome succeeded Stephanus.

Nicolaus the.ij. followed after Benedictus. The same deposed Benedictus, and is
said to have ordained first, that Cardinals shall have authority to chose
the bishop of Rome. Berengarius was also condemned again by him, and was
compelled to revoke that he had taught of the sacrament.

Alexander the.ij. the.clix. bishop of Rome succeeded Nicolaus, then also was
great strife for the delection.

Gregorius the.vij. before called Hiltebrande was the.clx. bishop of Rome after
Alexander. The same did excommunicate and persued Henry the iiij. raisyng also
fearce wars, that he might get and obtain, that a bishop of Rome might be
chosen and confirmed without the Emperoures consent and confirmacion, lest the
Emperors should clame any authority upon the bishops of Rome to rule them,
whereof we shall speak more in Henry the fourth.

Henry the.iiij. the.xvi. Germane Emperor. Henry y^.iiij.

THe year of Christ.M. lvij. began Henry the.iiij. to reign after that his
father was dead, being yet a child, and raygned fyfty years. In this man
did not only the virtue of such kind of Emperors fail, but the empire of
whole Germany began so to decay, that afterward it never could nether be
brought to his old state, nor recover his former strength. Hiltebrand bishop
of Rome was causer of this lamentable Of how great evil Hiltebrand was
occasion.
game, who turned near hand al Germany up and down with wars among the
princes thereof.

In Henry the Emperors chyldhode, did Agnes his mother govern the empire, not
without praise: she set Germany and Italy at peace and tra^quilitie. But the
bishop of Colen did privily lead away the child being now twelve years of
age, and ready to be gyn to bear rule, and in the mean season he himself
ruled afterward the empire. It is said also that he caused the Imperial
child to be brought up unseemly.

It were long to rehearse here all the causes and circumstaunces: I will only
rehearse here brefely the most worthy of remembrance. Henry the Black The
constitution of Henry the black of choysynge the bishop of Rome.
father to this Henry, had made a constitucion of making a bishop of Rome by a
most wise advise, that y^ same should not be done without the knowledge and
consent of the Emperor. But now that Hiltebrand was come into the sea, he
made a decre contrary The tyranny of Hiltebra^d in derogati^^ the auth^ritie of
Emperor.
wise, that the confirmacion of a bishop should not be demanded of the
Emperor. But the Emperor would, that this his fathers constitucion should
bear effect. Besides that also had the Emperor authority to give the
byshoprycks of the empire: but Hiltebrand would not suffer that also. For it
happened often, that when one bishop was dead, another was made in his stead of
the Emperor, and again another of the bishop of Rome, which did then
excommunicate the other. Finally came the game to this end, that the Emperor
was not only excommunicated, but it was also commanded, that other great
Lords of Germany, should make another Emperor. And the master of this game
was the bishop of Halberstat in Saxony, to do the bishop of Rome a pleasure.
Wherefore fell from the Emperor Henry the fourth Otho ^ha^ the^ were that tell
(...) Henry the ^ourth (...) (...) ^ishops pleasure.
duke of Saxony, Rudolfus duke of Schwaben, to whom was married the Emperoures
sister germane, and certain bishops, specially Saxons. On the Emperors side
were the Bohemies, and the lords Catuly, whom the Emperor gave Baierlande,
driuyng out Otho the duke of Saxony, and some bishops also, which disalowed
the bishop of Romes tyranny, in derogatyng and taking away the authority of
Emperors at his pleasure. Wherefore they made congregacions also, and reiectyng
the bishop of Rome excommunicacion, excommunicated him likewise. Now went the
Emperor into Italy to treat and finish this controversy. In the mean season
was Rudolfus duke of Schwaben chosen Emperor of y^ contrary party Rudolfus is
made Emperor of the bishops at Phorcen.
in the town Phorcen, which was about the year of our lord.M. lxxvii. The
bishop of Rome sent Rudolfus a crown, wherein was written this verse. Petra
dedit Petro, Petrus dyadema Rudolfo. That is: Christ the Stone gave the crown
to Peter, Peter gives to Rudolfe both crown and septer.

Whereby he would sygnyfye, that Christ gave the Empire to the bishop of
Rome, and that he likewise gives it to princes. Therefore came Henry haystely
again into Germany. and drove Rudolfus out of Schwaben into Saxonye, and
fought some battayls with him by the river Vnstrote, in the which were slain
the bishops of Worms and Magdeburg.

The year.M. lxxx. was foughten the last field against Rudolfe by Mersburge,
and in the same battayll was Rudolphus right hand stryken of. When every man
now fled into the city Marsburge, the hand was brought to the new Emperor,
lyenge in his bed, where the bishops The complaint of Rudolfus the Emperor
upon the bishops.
stood about. The which as he saw, he said: Lomy Lords ye bishops, this
is the hand, wherewyth I have promised my lord Henrye says and loyaltye:
judge ye your selves now how godly ye have counseled me to decyner from him.
This is a very miserable complaynte, which declares the troubled mind of the
prince to have judged it self gilty of vprour. Of this wise dyed Rudolfus about
the.iiij. year of his election. Whom I pray you would it not move (without he
be of iron) this so dredefull example to obey his magistrate, and to beware of
vproure? Yet were not the bishops in the mean time in rest, and set the son
also against the father. Hiltebrand the bishop boasted to have seen a vision in
his sleep, that an unlawful Emperor should dye that same year. But this was
Caiphas prophecye: for the punishment Hiltebrande the bishop of Rome was
another Cayphas.
fell not upon Henry, but on the bishop of Romes adherentes.

After this victory came Henry to Rome, and taking in the city by force, he
took Hiltebrand the bishop and put him from his office: and in his stead was
chosen the bishop of Rauenna, called Cleme^s, and of him was Henry the fourth
crowned. As for Hiltebrand died not long after in exile.

Sigebertus the history writer does not greatly Sigebertus ^^ history writer.
praise Hiltebrande, and does reprehende the man^ deeds, that he did disquiet
the peaceable state of the church and empire without great cause: and writes
also, that Hiltebrande when he was dyeng should himself have complained it,
and should have required of Henry by embassage forgiveness of his trespass.
Hiltebrande forbade the priests of Hiltebrande did first forbid the Germane
priests to mary.
Germany to mary, and many that were married, caused he to be divorced.

The year of Christ.M. ciij. when Henry had vanquished the Saxons, and the
earl of Misen Erbert was slain, whom the bishops made to trust to be
Emperor after Rudolfus. Besides that when al matters of Germany and Italy were
set at a stay, was Henry the fyft chosen Emperor by Henry the fourth his
father. Wherefore did the bishops procure by this Henry, that he should rise
against his father, and drive him out of the empire. But this grieved the good
prince greatly. Wherefore Henry the.v. set to work by ye bishops besyeged his
father.
Henry the son making a leage the year. M C. v. did first besyege his father
at Mentz: but the princes refusyng to assault it, Henry the son was feign to
depart, and leauyng Mentz went with the host to Norinberg, and gat and
spoiled it in Norinbergh is taken by Henry the, v.
the space of two months. The father persued the son, and on both sides
were they a while in their camps by Regensburg: but they came never to plain
field by reason the princes went always between. But the son warned the
father to beware of his own servants, wherefore he fled privily to Ludich,
and dyed there that same year. But when he had lain unburied five years, by
reason of the excommunicacion or course of the Romyshe bishop he optayned
absolucion, and was buried at Spire. There are yet wrytynges at this hour,
that were sent to the king of France by Henry the father, treatyng of the
injury of the son, and their malice, which set the son against the father.
Read more of this tragedy in the life of Hiltebra^d, prynted severally in
English.

Of the taking in and possessyng the city Jerusalem.
IN the time of this Henry the fourth began the setting forth to war into
Iewry against the Saracens and Turks. The first captain was Godfre of
Bilion, prince of Lothringe or Lorain. Him accompanied Godfre of Bilion.
the best princes and lords of Gallia.

The year.M. xcix. Godfre wan the city Jerusalem, and was straight way made
king. But he refused to be crowned with a golden crown there, where Christ's
was crowned with a crown brayded of thorns. This happened four hundredth three
score and eight years before that Jerusalem was taken out of the Perses power
by Heraclius. But not much above thirtene years after became the Saracens
lords of Jerusalem. Many years after were the Saracens driven out of
Jerusalem by the Turks. About this time gat the Christians Jerusalem again,
and subdued many cities and contreis there about. They had the realm of
Jerusalem. lxxxviij. years, until the year of Christ a thousand, one hundredth
and four score and seven. The Souldane wanne Jerusalem again in the time of
Frederick Barbarossa.

The change of many duchyes in Germany.
HOw many miseries the inward war The (...) raised in Germany ^^ the bishop
^ Rome.
of Germany, which was sturred by the bishop of Rome wylenesse, has brought
with it, may easily be gathered thereby, that when the princes and great men
were slain, the lord ships and dominions were changed. Henry the fourth
gave to the Catuly Lords of Schwaben the land of Baier. After Rudolphus death
gave Henry the fourth the duchy of Schwaben to Frederick of Stauffen his son
in law that had married his daughter. The auncetry or kynred of the Frankes
dyed in a very short space. Ecbertus earl of Misnia was slain. Gebhardus the
father of that Lotharius, which became afterward Emperor, was slain also in
a battaill: and to conclude, the power of Germane is wholly made feeble and
turned vpsyde down by this debate of the princes.

When Hiltebrande was dead, a bishop called Victor the third of that name was
chosen out of the city of Rome by his companions, in spete of Clement. But
when Victor was dead a little after, by them was Vrbanus the, ij. chosen bishop
of Rome The same returned to To. by their aid that were* now appointed to go
to Jerusalem. Being restored in the sea, he drove out Clemens.

Paschalis the, ij. succeeded Vrbanus the.ij. Thissame was first taken by Henry
the fyft. Afterward did he constrayne him to crown him Emperor.

Henry the fyft, the xvij. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. C. vii. began Henry the. ^.
Henry the fyft to reign after his fathers decesse, and reigned.xx. years.
Verily he was well rewarded of the bishops, that following their counsails, he
warred upon his father the good Emperor. Coming to Rome, he could not
obtain the crown of the bishop of Rome, without he did first ordeyne that
thenceforth it should be allowed that both the bishop of Rome and other bishops
should be made without the Emperors approbating and consent. Besides that also
was at that time so great an vproure made in the city of Rome by the bishop of
it, that except the Emperor had defended his life with his own hand, he had
been lost. When the Emperor had the ouerhande, many Romans were put to
(...)mple (...)grau^ce
death and taken prisoners. The bishop was taken also, and led out of the
city: And when communication was had with him of the coronation and right of
making the bishop of Rome and other bishops, Paschalis did freely grant, that
Emperors should take to them that prerogative, that no bishop of Rome nor other
should be chosen, without their grant. From thence are they returned to Rome,
and Henry was crowned Emperor of Paschalis.

But after that the Emperor was departed out of Italy, the bishop turned his
mind, and making an assemble or counsayll did not only revoke the granted
privilege, but did also excommunicate and accurse the Emperor. Which thing
when it was showed Henry the fyfte, retourning straight way to Rome with a
great power, he drove out the bishop, and ordemed another in his place. In the
mean season did not the bishops of Germany sit still, which did again set
the Saxons against the Emperor, so ^ore also, that Germany being eftsoon
styrred with mutual debates, did mete each other with displayde banners, and
in the year M. C. xv. the.xi. day of February was the battle The ba(...) ^^
Mansfeld
by Ma^sfelde, near by the wood Catula^ia, wherein was slain Hoterus Earl of
Mansfelde.

Wherefore the Emperor p^rceauynge, that this play could not be assuaged
without continual battle, nether would the Romish bishops leave of, till they
had oppressed him as they had done his father before: the good prince had
advice to the common peace of the empire, and renounced freely the Henry the.v.
renou^ced his right of the choysynge of bishops.
right of his privilege. Therefore as the peace was made between the bishop of
Rome and Emperor by this occasion, and also between the other lords, and was
proclaimed not far from Worms by the Rhene, where great armies were
together on both parties: great joy was made in all Germany for this accord
of common peace.

This Henry warred also in Hollande and Lorayne. As for Lotharius duke of
Saxony, who was made Emperor after Henry, came to Mentz in along and vile
garment humbly requyryng pardon of the Emperor. The same did Henry grant him
freely of his syngular mercy. This Henry had no manchylde, and therefore came
the duchy of the Frankes to Conrade son to Frederick of Stauffen and Henry's
the fyftes sister.

Gelasius the.ij. succeeded Paschalis the.ij. Thissame was driven out of Rome by
Henry the fyft, and in his stead was Gregorius made bishop. Gelasius died in
France in exile.

When Gelasius the.ij. was dead, was chosen in France bishop of Rome Calistus
the.ij. who coming to Rome, fought some battayls with Gregorius the false
bishop, whom Henry the fyft had made. At the last was Gregorius taken, and set
arswarde upon an ass, was carried about the city. Under Calistus was the peace
made with the Emperor Henry the fyft.

Honorius the.ij. succeeded Calistus the bysh. of To.

Innocentius the.ij. was made bishop after Honorius. In spite of this man was
Petrus Leonis chosen, who called himself Anacletus. Of him was Innocentius
driven out with force. Lotharius assuaged this rumor, who was crowned
Emperor of Innocentius.

Lotharius the Saxon, the xviij. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. cxxvii. was Lotharius (...)s ^ Saxon.
duke of Saxony chosen Emperor by the Electors. whose father Gebhardus was
slain by Henry the fourth. Lotharius reigned thyrtene years.

This Germane empire has often ben shaken with most heavy assaults. For now
again is raised a great and durable vproure against Lotharius also. For the
Schwaben and Frankes, which had long warred with the Saxons took in evil
worth, that the highness of the empire came to the Saxons. Besides that also
were the sons of the dukes of Schwaben borne of Henry the fyftes sister: and
therefore did they pretend, that the empire of right should be belongyng to them.
Henry the.v. (as is said before) gave to Conradus of Schwaben his systers
husband the duchy of Franken. Godfry count of Palatine was with him, who
chofe Conradus Emperor, and to him did lean the cities of the Schwaben and
Franckes.

But Catulus Henry duke of Baierland took Lotharius part, for he was Lotharius
daughters husband, whereby also the possession of Saxony came to the Baiers by
succession hereditare. And those The princes of bruns^ig came of the Ca^^ ^.
also that now a days are called princes of Brunswig, are of the Baiers blood,
of Catulus Henry duke of Baier.

That Conradus might prenent Lotharius he went into Italy, and took in
Lombardy, where he was also crowned with an iron crown. In the mean time
besyeged and wan Lotharius the cities Sprre, Vlme and Nurenberg, and after that
persued he Conradus into Italy. For the Saxon Lotharius being more sage and
wyly, thought well, that without Germany were well assured, Conradus could not
keep Italy. Wherefore when Conradus knew that both the cities of Germany were
lost, and that no hope of succoure was to be looked for out of Germany, to
retain Italy: leauyng Italy, he did make a conuencion of peace with Lotharius
through S. Bernarde made the peace between y^ Emperors Conradus and Lotharius.
the entreatement of saint Bernarde, and left the empire that he had taken
upon him. Lotharius went twyse into Italy. First to assuage the commotions that
were raised at Rome against Innocentius the bishop, for choisyng another
bishop. After that against Roger, which had invaded Campania and Apulia. He
drove him out of Italy: but when Lotharius was dead, Roger returned.

Of the Roman laws repared and restored.
LOtharius is not only praised for his notable valiau^tnesse in wars, where
with he has set both Germany and Italy at a stay and rest: but also for his
endeavor in ye religion and good laws. In his time was in Italy by the queen
Mectildis a man of great learning Wernherus ^restorer of y^ laws.
called Wernherus, whom Accursius the lawer calls often Irnemerius. The same
found the books of the Roman laws in the liberaries dusted and unregarded,
and brought them to light again: Lotharius commanded to use them openly in
scoles, and to give sentence again after them in judgments The p^^yse ^
profitable^^s of the Romans laws.
of the empire. And so by this means was that treasure brought to light again,
which none can be more profitable, nor more costly, namely whereof innumerable
profits are flowen. For first it is a certain law and conformable to man's
reason restored to whole Europa: by reason all nations, and all other laws use
this Roman law in searchynge right as a certain line or carpenters rule: for
it is most nearest applied to common honesty. Secondly do thees restored
Roman laws not a little profit thereto, that they give commandments of the
common behave ours of this life and best manners, which are no where found
better: I pass over that the pureness of the Latin tungue began to florysh
again, by restoryng of this law as borne again. But when this study of the
law was institute, straightwaye were become great and many excellent lawers,
which busied both to interpret the laws, and to set them again in ure.
Truly, I can not marvel enough, that men became so well learned at that
time, wherein the use of the Latin tunge, the histories, finally all the
ancient Roman disciplines were left of for the while: so that it may easily
be supposed, that those first lawers were not only men of great diligence in
studies, but also great and wise men exercysed with much experience of common
matters: For without exercise, had it been impossible to know the Roman laws.
Wherefore are the same doctors of the law to be judged no less, than those
ancient lawiers Vlpianus, Seruius and other.

Azo, which is even the chief of the expounders Azo.
of the law, lived in the time of this Lotharius. After the same lived
Accursius, the same also lived Accursius.
until the time of Frederick the second. In the time of Henry of Lucelborowe
were many and notable doctors, as Bartholus and other. Gratianus, who
Bartholus. Gracianus.
gathered the Decrees of the common law, was also in the time of Lotharius.
But before were such books also. For of this sort was a little book written
by a bishop of Worms, which at that time was used: we also have seen it in
our days. But when the studies of the law floryshed now every where, and that
the best learned embraced them, By what occasion the monks are brought to
write.
(as it happens most commonly in a new thing,) the monks perceauyng that
the knowledge of holy scripture began to coule and be despised, for studieng
the law: they also began a study of Theology or divinity, and ordained
scole disputations in divine matters, as the lawers did in ciuyll matters. Thus
began the divinity scole, whereof we shall say more hereafter.

Cunradus a Schwabe, the.xix. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. cxl. succeeded Conradus Conradus a Schwabe.
borne duke of Schwaben Lotharius the Saxon in the empire, who was made prince
of the Frankes by Henry the fyft. He reigned fourten years. It is no where red
that he was crowned of the Romysh bishop. This Cunradus (as we said before)
rose against Lotharius, but he was constrained to yield himself under the
Emperors power. But when Lotharius was dead, the succession of the empire
fell upon Conradus: though Henry duke of Baier and Saxony that had marted
Lotharius daughter coueted the empire, and besyeged Conradus at Auspurg. But
Conradus the Emperor minished Henry's power, and gave the duchy of Baier to
the Earl of Eastenrich. Howbeit this war was not very long: for not long
after died Henry in Saxony, and was laid in Lotharius his wives fathers grave.
After that did a prince of Catuli war with the duke and Emperor Co^radus for
the duchy of Baier, but inuain. Wherefore he was afterward reconciled again
with the Emperor, through Frederick that became Emperor afterward. Conradus
with many princes Conradus went to Jerusalem against the Saracens
and a great host went to Jerusalem, against the Saracens Christ's enemies,
through the counsel of saint Bernarde, against the which also took wapen
Lewis king of France: but many soldiers Emanuel Emperor of Co^stantinople^s
disloyalty.
dyed thorough the disloyalty of Emanuel Emperor of Constantinople. Yet had
our men many and great battails in Asia and at Jerusalem in the mean season.
Cunradus returned the fourth year after into Germany and died, and was buried
in the town Lorch by Gemund.

In the war that Conradus had with the Catulies, he took the castle and town
Weinsburg, that lies not far from the river Necehar. Then commanded The
virtue of noble dames in the city Weinsburg.
the Emperor to take all the gentlemen: but the gentle women should be letten
go with so great pack of goods as they could carry. The^ the gentlewomen
forsakyng the goods would rather carry away their children. Which thing when
some did blame, which would have the young children be prisoned, saying: the
grant was to carry goods, and not men. The Emperor delited so in the virtue
of the noble women, that he gave them leave not only to carry away their
children, but also al their goods.

Celestinus the.ij. was bishop of Rome after Innocencius the.ij.

Lucius the.ij. was bishop after Celestinus.

Eugenius the third was made bishop after Lucius. Against the same was another
bishop chosen by the Romans, of whom Eugenius was driven out: but gatheryng a
French aid, he returned, over came his adversary, and was restored again.

Anastasius the.iiij. succeeded Eugenius.

Adrianus the.iiij. was bishop after Anastasius. Of him was Frederick
Barbarossa or with the William of Sicily.
read bearde crowned Emperor: but afterward sticked he to William of Sicily,
which kept Naples and made the Lombardes obedient to him, by a most heinous
coniuracion against the empire. He An example of the Romish bysh* disloyalty
and tyranny.
did excommunicate Frederick, and raised most heinous wars in Italy. It is
written yt he should have said not long before he died: there is no more
wretched state in earth then the byshoprick of Rome: and to The complaint of
Adrian bishop of Romans when he should dye.
get that byshopryck by blood, is not to succeed Peter, but Romulus rather,
who flew his own brother, that he might have the monarchy and reign alone.
These words witness sufficiently, that it repented him of the debate that he
had begone against the Emperor.

After Adrianus began a great division. Some Cardinals chose Octauianus, who
was called Victor. Some chose Alexander the.iij. Frederick Barbarossa held
Octauianus for the true bishop of Rome. But yet in the mean season commanded
he by a counsayll to enquire who should abide bishop. But Alexander refusyng
the authority of the counsayll, keeps himself in France, and accurseth
Frederick. At the last gat Alexander the by shopryck by the aid of the
Italians, and returned to Rome, where Frederick came then also. But Alexander
being afraid, fled to Venice, where at the last, peace was made. But hereof
shall we speak more in the history of Frederick.

Frederick the.i. called Barbarossa, or with the red bearde the.xx. Germane
Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. C. lij. was Frederick Frederick y^ first.
chosen Emperor, the first of that name, surnamed Barbarossa. He governed the
Empire.xxxvij. years. He was a borne duke of the noble house of Schwaben,
Conradus ye Emperors brothers son, a most renovmed prince of hardiness,
valiantness and justice. So far as I can perceive by his deeds, it seems
that Frederick, as a gentle Schwabe, could not patiently bear these injuries,
that the bishops of Rome did him: and I think it came by this, that he was
more hard against them.

In the beginning of his empire, set he Baierlande and Eastenriche at one, and
restored to Catulus Henry duke of Saxony, and Henry son too When the duchy of
Easten rich began.
Lotarius daughters husband, Baierlande. He made his Cousin Henry Earl of
Eastenryche duke, and set boundyng borders to either duchy. Then began first the
duchy of Eastenriche. But Catulus Henry kept Baierlande not long: for he
forsook Frederick in Italy, and raised new rebellions Who are the dukes of
Baier and counties of Palatine.
in Germany against him. Wherefore Frederick driuyng away Henry afterward, the
duchy of Baierlande was given to Otho of Witelsbach. And of this Othoes blood
are those princes borne, which now a days have Baierlande, and the counties
Palatine by the Rene. The right of election on the Saxonies behalf, gave he to
Bernarde prince of Anhalt. Henry flyenge, went into England with his wife and
children: but at the last when he returned, composition was made, that Catulus
Henry Lubeck.
should possess the duchy of Brunswich. But the^ did Phillippe bishop of Colen
take the country Westphalen from the duchy of Saxony withforce.

Frederick besyeged Lubeck, and subdued it to Milan^.
the empire. He compelled also the king of Dennemarck to require peace.

They of Milane rebelled, and went about to bring the other cities of Italy
under their subjection. For that manner and wylfulnesse to haued ominion, does
last yet by the Italians: wherefore Frederick going into Italy, apeased all
rumors. But afterward did the bishop of Rome entice the Milaners, and the
other cities to a coniuracion against Frederick, and did excommunicate him.
For which Frederick was excommunicate by the bishop of Rome.
cause he went now the fourth time into Italy, he subdued and spoiled Milane,
and assayed all the means he could to alaye the debate between the bishop of
Rome and him: but it was inuayne. For Alexander the third bishop of Rome could
not be brought to that point, that he should not vex the most gentle
prince: wherefore Frederick went to Rome, but Alexander fled to the Venecians.
Then was Otho Fredericks son sent against the Venecians: who being taken in
a battayll upon the water, conditions of peace were accepted. For Frederick the
Emperor saw that the bishops of Rome could rest by no means. Moreover
considered he also, that beside that his son was taken, what was changed to
the Emperors that were before him. Wherefore Frederick used submission and
most lowly humbleness. For he came The humilite or lowlynesse of Frederick
to Venice, and laid himself down before the Church door before the Romyshe
bishop, and suffered himself to be trodden with his fete: who commanded also to
be cried out: Thou shall tread upon the adder and coceatrice, and then did he
absolve him at the last. Frederick said contrariwyse, that he did not show
that lowlynesse to Alexander, but to Peter. Whereto answered Alexander: both
to me and to Peter. But what is to be thought of this deed of the bishop of
Rome, that do I committee the reader to judge. The bishops of Rome raise wars
without any lawful cause. For Alexander strives for his private election,
nether would he ever admit any counsel, nor any other conditions. And
beside this injury, did he use also extreme The extreme tyranny of Alexander
the third bysh. of To. against y^ Emperor Frederick.
wylfulnesse and pride against the highest power of Christianity, when he did
tread upon the Emperor with his fete, whom God commands even to honor.

But when this agreement was made, he chose Henry his son to be party ruler
with him, the year of Christ.M. C. lxxxvj. lest the empire should be with out a
gouernoure, when he took his yourney into Asia. He married his son to
Co^stantia the daughter to Rogerius, by which means the kingdom Sicily and
Naples came to the empire and Germans, and made the young king gouernoure of
Italy. Not long after went he into Asia with a great preparacion of war and
company of many princes, to recover again the city Jerusalem, that was lost
Frederick the first going into Asia what wars he had.
not long before. He took in many and mighty cities in Cilicia, and vanquyshed
the Saracens and Turks. He made the Souldane so afraid for him, that he
caused many of his great cities to cast down their walls in Syria, when he
did mistrust to keep them, and he himself fled into Egypt. For the kings of
England and France were already arrived into Asia with a great army. But what
fortuned when they had gathered a great host? Fortune which is not always
good, began to turn. Frederick when he had now taken the country Armenia, by
reason of ye heat, went into a swyft water with his horse, and the doughty
prince was drowned the year.M.C lxxxix. Nether ought it to be maruayll, that
Frederick peryshed of this wise in a river: for histories Frederick went often
into waters.
do make mention, that he otherwhyles also went into waters. In the second
setting forth upon Milane, the Italians pitched their tents on the other side
of the river Abdua, which is no less then is the Tems about Sion, and mocked
Frederick the Emperor, who was of this side the river with his host:
thynkyng, that by reason the river was between them both, they might mock the
Emperor without danger. Then did the Emperor step into the river without
fear, and commanded the horsemen to follow him. Which thing seeing the,
Italians thought should never come to pass, (for either they lay here and
there, or unadvisedly went up and down without order,) they took the flight,
and were overcome of a small company of horsemen. This feate witnesses that
Frederick was a prince of excellent hardiness* and also one that doubted not
to put himself lyghtely into waters.

The prince of Boheme was made a king by Frederick, The prince of Bohem^ is
made a king
for his sundry and excellent faithfulness, that he used toward Frederick at
Milane.

Lucius the.iij. was made bishop of Rome after Alexander.

Vrbanus the.iij. succeeded Lucius.
Gregorius the.viij. succeeded Vrbanus.
Clemens the.iij. followed after Gregorius.
Celestinus the.iij. was after Clemens.
Henry the.vi. was crowned of him.

Henry the.vi. the xxi. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M.C.xC. began Henry Henrye the syxte.
the vi. of that name to reign after his fathers deceasse, and raygned seven
years. He had great wars in Apulia, and finally subdued the whole realm. In
Germany had he enemies the bishop of Colen and Lutich or Liege, besyd them also
the Burgundions. In this vproure was the bishop of Lutich slain, and the other
being abashed by this myshappe, left of from their enterprise, and obeyed
frelye. He made his son Frederick yet a child Emperor with the consent of
y^ electors. The election was confirmed with sealed letters of the princes
electors. the same was afterward called Frederick the.ii. But when Frederick
the second.
Henry was now dyenge* he committed the wardeshyppe of the child, and empyres
governance to his brother Philippe, who had the governance of the empire,
when Henry was yet alive.

Innocentius the.iii. was bishop of Rome after Celestinus.

The same persued Philippe the Emperor, and it is reported he should have
said: He would take The Romish bishops crake.
away from Philippe the Emperors crown, or his three crowned miter should be
taken from him. He made Emperor Otho the Saxon. But this frendeshyp was not
steadfast nether: for Otho was excommunicated of the Romyshe bishop not long
after.

Philippe son to Barbarossa, the.xxii. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M.C.xcviii. was chosen Philippe Emperor.
Emperor Philippe the son of Barbarossa, duke of Schwaben, and governor of
Italy on y^ Emperors behalf, he raygned ten years. In his time rose great
vproures in Germanye. For when Henrye was dead, haystynge out of Italy,
Philippe did admonysh the princes electors of the election had of his young
cosyn made Emperor. And that the empire should have no alteracyon, either they
should commit to him the admynistracyon, or make him Emperor, and none
other prince. But when Innocentius the Bysh. of Rome smelled that, he did
earnestly procure by the princes electors that another Emperor should be
chosen, showing openly: he could not brouke Philippe: for he was displeased
with him, because that when he was gouernoure in Italye, he had done I wot not
what against the Bishop of Rome wherefore also he was excommunicated of
Innocentius. But now had alegat absolved Philippe of the excommunication, woe
also was punyshed therefore of the Bishop of Rome. But what need many words?
The bishop of To. hated all Fredericks kindred, and intended* to rout it out.
Wherefore was chosen by the electors Emperor Bertholdus duke of zarynge^, who
beside yt he was rich, was worthy noprayse in a manner. Bertholdus duke of
Ze^ingen.
Philipp was in the town Mulhausen, where were come also many princes, as of
Bohemy, Saxony, Baier and Schwaben, of whom he was made Emperor. But when the
duke of zerynge^ knew that he was weaker than Phlippe of pussaunce and power,
he came freely to him, and yielded himself as to his lyege lord, refusing to
take upon him the naming of the Imperial majesty. But the bishop of To.
ceased nothing the more of his forepryse: but brought to pass that the
prince of Brunswich Otho, Otho the fourth.
the fourth of that name, son to Henrye that fled, was made Emperor of the
bysh. of Colen, and county af Palatine. The same did Innocentius confirm and
crown, cursynge and excommunicating Philippe. Wherefore went from him to Otho
not a few princes, the prince of Bohemye, the earl of Thuringen Herman and the
bishop of Argentine or Strasburg. But yet did God in the God prospered the
businesses of the^ that are lawfully called.
mean season prosper Philips affairs, insomuche that he governed the empire
all the time of his life. First going in Alsace, he took in Strasburg and
compelled the bishop of Strasburge to yield himself. In the mean time was
Otho come till Spyre: but he also was driven back by Philippe into Saxony, and
as Philippe followed now upon him into Thuryngen, thither came the king of
Bohemy, and ye earl of Thuryngen. But they refusyng to give battayl, yielded
themselves to Philppe. Afterward besyegynge the city Colen also, he compelled
the bysh. to yield himself: who though he had crowned Otho before, yet crowned
he Philyppe also at Achen with the Emperyall crown. Not long after Otho
strengthened with the succourse of some bishops, he forsook the bishop of
Colen, because he was fallen to Philippe: but than returned Philippe to Colen,
and fought some feldes with Otho, and gat the victory: but Otho fled into
England.

At the last when the princes saw that Othoes part was weakened, and that
Phylippe kept the empire, who also made him self familiar with the princes. He
had to wife Irene, daughter to the Irene daughter to the Emperor of
Constantinople.
Emperor of Constantinople: of the which he had four daughters, whereof he
married the one to the king of Bohemes son, another gave he to the prince of
Brabant. Than I say, when the princes saw all these things, they devised to
make an accord. To the bishop of Rome were Legates sent to make an atonement
between him and Philippe, and also that Otho should be taken in favor.
Wherefore the Bysh. of Rome sendyng embassiadours into Germany, Phylippe the
Emperor was absolved of the excommunicatyon. The agreement was made also, that
Otho should marye one of the dougdters, to the intent the band of the concord
and familiaritye made, might the better be kept between both partees. All this
was done.

But when this agreement and leage was made, Philip dwelt afterward at Bamberg.
And upon a day when he was lette^ blood, and the good prince suspected now no
harm, and had in his chamber no more with him, than the Chaunceler and his
karuer of Walpurch, there came in to him Otho of Witelspache, whose kynred
Friderick the first had made honorable and famous, by geuynge him the duchy of
Baier. The same when he saw that the Emperor was alone without any company or
aid, he fell suddenly upon him not thinkyng any thing, Philippe the Emperor
was slain of Otho of Witelspach
and stroke a great wound in the Emperoures neck. The Karuer came runnynge,
to help his prince, but the murderer by reason of his swyftnesse escaped.
This wou^d was deadly to Philipp: and as he was dead, he was buried, at
Bamberg. But afterward was the body dygged up, and brought to Spyre by
Fridericke the.ii. Upon the stone that lies on the grave, is written Philipp
of Bamberg. Nether wanted Otho of Wytelspache An example of vengeance.
the murderer finally his worthy punishment: for he him self was slain also
not long after.

Of the institution of the freres beggynge ordres.
IN the time of Philippe founded Dominicus Dominicus. Franciscus.
and Franciscus the Orders of beggynge Freres. For the monks or chanons that
were rich the same being now become mighty lords, despising the service of
teaching in the Church or congregacyon, went to war with ye Emperoures and
princes. Therefore began these two men than to preach, and took to their
companions sobre and peaceable men, as men given to learning and thus began
that thing. After that began more orders after the example of these, as it
comes most communely to pass, as often as new things begin to be wondered
at. But as nothing remains steadfast always, and durable in his degree, in men's
affairs: even so do we se the orders of Freres and monks to lose their state
and doctrines.

Otho the fourth, the.xxiii. Germane Emperor.
THE year of Christ, M.CC.ix. after Otho the fourth.
that Philippe was dead, fell the majesty of the empire to Otho prince of
Brunswich, who was chosen Emperor before also against Philipp. He raygned
after Philips decease four years. But within these four years went he first
to Rome, and received the Imperial crown of Innocentius. In Italy used he a
very kynglye and most costly apparelynge, and showed a notable grauitye
toward all princes and cities, insomuch, that they all did humbly worship him.
After his coronacion took he some imperyall cities, which the Romysh bysh. did
possede: but this was an occasyon of the breche of frendeshyp with the bysh. of
Rome. Wherefore Innocentius did accurse Otho, even when he was yet present in
Italy: and before Otho came again into Germany, he sent ambassadors to the
princes, that they should choice another Emperor, namely Frederick the
second, son to Henry the vi.

It was very proudly and cruellye done of the The pride and cruellye of the
bishops of Rome.
Bysh. of Rome, so to excommunicate and accurse the Emperoures, nether to
excommunicate them only, but also to put them from the empire, so that one can
think no honestye in these deeds of the Romysh bishops, specially if ye
ponder and way all the causes and reasons. All these were excommunicated in a
row, and yet were they mighty and wise Emperoures, that have brought to pass
great and notable things.

Henry the fourth a Frank. The Emperors that were excommunicated by the
bishops of Rome.

Henry the fyfth a Frank.
Friderick the first a Schwabe.
Philippe son to Frederick the first.
Otho the iiii. duke of Brunswig.
Friderick the.ii. Henry the.vi. son.
Conradus Fridericks son.
The year of Christ.M.CC.xii. Otho being come again into Germany, though he
knew that the princes minds were set against him, yet poynted he a day of
parliament at Norinberg, and admonyshed the princes, that they should not grant
the bishops of To. that authority, that they should put down Emperoures at
their pleasure: for the empire pertayneth not to Romysh bishops, but to the
Germane princes. He brought some princes to his mind with this admonition, and
fell upon Herman Herman county of Thuringen. S. Elizabeth
earl of Thuryngen the father of earl Lewys, to whom. S. Elysabeth was
spoused. For earl Herman, to do the Bishop of Rome pleasure, set himself
against the Emperor, as a man condemned with bishop of Romes
excommunicatyons and curses. But afterward was Otho forsaken of all the
princes, except one earl of March in Misen. For Fryderycke the younger, enemy to
Otho, was already come into Germany: beside that by the bishop of Romes
procuring, was the French king in arms against Otho. But when tidings
came to Otho of Frideryckes coming he prepared him to go against him into
Alsasse, and was with his hooste at Brysacke: how beyte being destytute of
all the aid of his, he was constrained to fly into Saxony. But than repayring
an hooste, and being helped of the king of England, he went into low Germany,
against the French king, of whom he was overcome, and dyed afterward, the
year.M. CC. xviij. He lived without the tytles of thempyre.v. years.

Friderick the.ij. the.xxiiij. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. CC. xiij. was chosen Friderick the second.
Emperor Friderick the.ii. of that name, the son of Barbarossa, king of
Naples and Cicily, and duke of Schwaben, when Otho was put down, and was
crowned Emperor at Achen. He raygned seven and twenty years. Yet before he
dyed, was he depryued five years of the Empire, by Innocentius the Bysh. of
Rome. Noman can pitye enough the case of this laudable Emperor, that he was
endued with many and noble virtues: and yet in the mean season suffered he most
extreme and heavy persuinges of Roman bishops. He was very well learned in
many languages. For he knew perfectly the Latin, Greek, Germane and Saracens
languages. Besides this set he forth also the disciplines of good sciences. He
brought to pass that the book The science of Astronomye was brought to light
again by Friderik the.ij.
of Ptolome, called Almagestu^ was translated out of the Saracens language into
Latin, and by that means the doctrine of Astronomye, which noman had taught
many years before in Europa, was brought to light.

His first war had he in Germanye against Otho the.iiii. by the bishop of
Romes counsel: but he had the same reward for it, that other Emperors before
him have had.

The second war had he in Brabant, against the duke of Brabant and Othoes
adherentes, and restored Lorain again to the Germane empire.

The year of our lord.M. CC. xx. was Fridericke crowned of Honorius the.iii.
Emperor. Two earls in Tuscia had taken in some cities that belonged to the
empire, the which when Friderick had taken again, the earls that were driven
out, fled to Honorius bysh. of To. who took them in his defense and commanded
Friderick, to restore the^ into the possession of the cities, that he had taken
from them. But when Friderick refused that, Honorius excommunicated him,
setting aside all the former love.

The year.M. CC. xxii. came Friderick again into Germany, and holding a
parlame^t at Wyrtzpurg, he made Henry his younger son felowgouernoure of the
empire, and was crowned at Achen. Henry the son was taken by Frideryke his
father.
But afterward was the same Henry taken by his father, because he had made a
leage with certain cities of Lombardy against the father: and while the father
lived yet, died he of ye filthiness of the prison.

Though the city Jerusalem, was now lost, yet possessed the Christians other
great and mighty cytyes in Siria. But when the power of the Turks grew daily
more and more, and the fortune of ye Ioannes king of Hie-rusalem.
Christians went back: Ioannes came to Rome, who had yet the title of ye king
of Jerusalem, and desired aid of Honorius the bishop of Rome, and optayned by
Honorius, that Friderick who was accursed, was absolved. Wherefore Fridericke
and the Germane princes consented frelye to make an army for the delyueraunce
of the city Jerusalem: and the king of Jerusalem gave Iole his daughter in
marriage to Friderick the Emperor. Whereby Why the kings of Sicyly claim the
^^tle of Jerusalem.
it comes, that yet at this hour the kings of Sicily ascrybe to them the
title of the realm of Jerusalem. Fridericke the Emperor than went with a
great army, well furnyshed to Jerusalem and with him many princes of Germany,
among the which was also Lewis y^ landtgraue, to whom Lewis the Landtgraue
S. Elisabeth was married, and the same dyed in that setting forth at
Brundusium.

The year.M. CC. xxviij. went Fridericke to Jerusalem, and did his business
so, that the Souldane gave him freely again not only Jerusalem, but many other
cytyes there about. Friderick was crowned at Jerusalem the year.M. C C. xxix.
He caused the city Jerusalem to be made sure against the power of the
enemies. He made treuce with the Souldane for ten years. All this showed he by
a letter to the bishop of To. and required absolucion of the curse: for by this
Gregorye was he accursed also. I wot not for what title in the kingdom of
Sicily. But it was a small matter for the bishop of Rome to deny to the
Emperor the absolution: for this gyle also or rather injury had he done to
Frederick being absent. For he set y^ Italian cities against him, and took in
by force some cities in his patrimonial realm Naples. By this constraynt was
Friderick driven to come back again into Sicilye, and to rescue his realm come
by inheritance, from fear of danger. Although the bysh. of To. had been sore
dissoial against the Emperor in his absence, yet required he absolution so
lowly, that he promised he would hold the king dome of Sicily of him by
fealtye. Besides this also caused he the princes of Germanye to come into
Italy, that at the least by them might the debate between him and the Emperor
be alayed. Therefore did Gregorius absolve the Emperor again the year of
Christ.M. CC. xxx.

After yc came the Emperor Friderick the third time into Italy, and warred in
Eastenrich against the Hungarians, and took the eyty Vienne the which that she
should be and remain an emperial city, he would have it confirmed with letters
given there upon.

The year.M. CC. xxxviij. When Fridericke went again into Italy, they of Milan
rose against him, and many other strong cities. To Milan did Friderick great
harm: for the which cause the city es making an aliance with the bishop. of
To. con Friderick y^ ij. is excom-municated y^ third time.
spired against Friderick the Emperor whom for this cause Gregorius the
Romysh bishop does excommunicate the third time, and condemns him for an
heretic, stearing also the Venecians to war upon him. Friderick with open
writings did complain of the injury done to him, and in the mean time did he
also humbly require absolution of the bishop of To. There were many of the
Cardynals, which allowed not the bysh. of Romes counsels. But when Frederick
could by no means obtain pardon of Gregorius, necessitye compelled Frederyck
to defend himself: he had also his faction or division. For at that time was
Italy diuyded in Guelphies and Gibelines, the Gibelini were for the Emperor,
and the Guelphi were with the Bishop of To. Either name being brought up in
Germany, was translated and brought over into Guelphi.
Italy. For the kynred of the Guelphi, had continual hatred against Fredericks
blood. Whereof also they were called Guelphi, as always hateful Guelphi.
enemies of Frederick. As for the spring of Fredericks kynred was of the
Weiblings, whereof they are called Guiblings, which the Italians (chaunginge
the name) do call Gibelini.

The bysh. of To. constrained by great necessity did proclayme the cross and
pardon against Friderick the Emperor, as though he were manyfestly ungodly,
and destroyer of the religion. Friderick took that very evil: he besyeged
Rome, but drue back again without taking it, and took the city Rauennas.

The year of Christ M. CC. xlv. Innocentius the iiij. holding a council at
Lions in France, deposed Frideryk y^ Emperor ^^ deposed of y^ empire by the
byth. of (...).
Friderick of the empire, using thereto the Frenchmens aid: and by letters he
showed the princes Electors, to choice another Emperor. But they made
Emperor Henry the Landtgraue of Thuringen. The same was slain before the
city Vlme with an instrument of war.

Friderick builded a new city in Italy, which was called Victoria. When he
wanted silver, he Victoria ^^yty^.
caused to make a coin of lether, y^ he might have where with to pay his men
of war: but so soon Fridericke coynet ^ether in time of need.
as he had gotten silver, he should give them good and lawful money for the
lether coin, which thing he did liberally. But now wha^ he could look for no
more aid out of Germany: and that besides this his son Encius was taken, who
also dyed in the preson, he was sore distressed, and went into Apulia were he
also dyed the year.M. CC. l. Some wryt that he was poisonned. Ye surely, the
most holy fathers could not rest, without they saw the good prince clean
rydde out of the way. The kingdom of Naples left he to his son and heir
Cunradus. As for Italy remained always after diuyded. For one part held with
the empire, another with the bishop of Rome, until the powers of the Venecians
and of them of Mylane began after to grow and increase.

Honorius the.iij. succeeded Innocentius the.iij. of whom Friderick the.ii. was
crouned, and after ward excommunicated.

Gregorius y^.ix. was after Honorius, of whom was Friderick likewise accursed.

After Gregorius was Celestinus the.iiij. bysh. of Rome.

After Celestinus was Innocentius the.iiij. The Same deposed Friderick from the
empire, and accursed his son Cunradus.

Cunradus the.iiij. the xxv Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. CC. l. reigned C^nradus the fourth.
Conradus the son of Fridericke after his fathers deceasse, but he was
excommunicated by Inocentius the.iiij. Henry the Landtgraue of Thuryngen
overcame him by Francoforde, while his father Frederick was yet alive. Some
write that this war was after his fathers death, by Wyllyam the Landtgraue.
But when Conradus perceived that he was destitute of the Germane princes aid
he gat him into his hereditary kingdom Naples, and there he dyed the year.M.
CC. liij.

The end of the dukes of Schwaben.
CVnradus, of whom we have now spoken, had a wife of the Baiers blood, of the
which he had a son Conradinus who was nouryshed and brought up in his
hereditary duchy of Schwaben, and after his fathers deceasse would go to Naples
his heredytary kingdom. But Clemens the bishop of Rome called Charles the
French kings brother into the realm of Naples against him. Conradynus for so
much as he was duke of Schwaben, had a great bend and hooste of Germans
about him, and at the beginning had he great vyctoryes. But at the last were
Conradinus the son of Conradus, and Fryderyck duke of Eastenriche taken by a
train. Besides this were they entreated more unseemly than was pertaining
and put to shame. At the last were they beheaded through the counsel of the
Romyshe bishop. O notable crueltye. He must be even as hard as a The notable
cruelty of Clemens bishop of To. against Cu^radinus.
stone verily, whom the examples of so great cruelty did not move, namelye so
noble a king, borne ofso many Emperoures, to be so shamefullye put to death by
Clemens the Romysh bishop, without any right or reason. There are yet even at
this hour writings, which were written at that time, in the which the good
prince complayneth of the injury, and rehearses at length the whole matter
orderly: so that it is no doubt, the bishops of Rome have used plain tyranny
against Conradinus.

Wiliam, the, xxvi. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ M. C. C. liiij. was William Emperor.
chosen Emperor Wylyam count of Holland. It is said he was an honest
manered prince, and of notable innocence of life: but he was slain by the
Friselanders the yerre. 1256.

Vacation of the Empire.
When this Wiliam was dead, the empire stood with out a certain emperor
seuentene years, and that not without great destruction of the Germane nation.
This mischaunge grew by the cyuyl wars, that were raised in the empire by
the bysh. of To. Now when the debate was risen among the Electors Alfonsus
king of Spain and astronomia^.
for the choice, some chose Alfonsus king of Spain Emperor, because he was a
very wise man, and endued with notable virtues. As for this Alfonsus is he, who
not only had his pleasure in the science of Astronomye, but also augmented and
amended the study thereof with many books written. Though Alfonsus was
admonyshed by the bishop of Rome to take upon him the Emperyall majesty: yet
refused he it earnestly, because of the uncertain faythfulnesse and unstable
concord of the Romysh Bishops with the Emperors. The other part of the
Electors chose Richard, the king of Englandes brother, and brought him until
Basyll: but he was not accepted of the Empire.

Alexander the.iiij. succeeded after Innocentius. At this time lived Albertus
the great. and Thomas Aquinas.

Vrbanus the.iiij. was after Alexander.

Clemens the.iiij. succeeded Vrbanus. Thyssame caused Conradynus Conradus son
to be beheaded.

When Clemens was dead, was the sea void two years through the dissension of
choysynge a Bishop at the last was Gregorius the.x. chosen. The same admonyshed
the Electors in the beginning of his byshopryck, to choice again an Emperor
with egall consent, lest the state of the empire did wholly decay.

Rudolfe the.xxvij. Germane Rudolf earl ^^ Habysburge.
Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. CC. lxxiij. was Rudolfe chosen Emperor the earl of
Habisburge, and count prouincial of Alsace. He raygned.xix. years. He was
confirmed of the Bishop of To. For the Emperor and bishop of Rome came
together at Lausana even according to the saying of these two verses of
ancient men.

Twelve hundredth three score and thertene year, did stand.

Lausana, till the pope and the king came thither into that land.

Howbeit Rudolfe went not into Italy, nether received he the Imperial crown.
He was wont to rehearse Esops fable of the Fox, which said to the Lion sick in
his den: she were afraid to come in therefore, because she saw the
footsteppes of beasts that were gone in, but not of beasts that were come
out. That likewise he did consider, how his aunceters went often into Italy with
great hoostes: but most commonly returned home evil entreated. Yet in the
mean season sent he a Lieutenaunt into Italy, who was received of the bestpart
of the Italian cities.

The Bohemies and Baier withstode Rudolfe at the first, but he subdued
Baierlande forth with. Othacarus king of the Bohemies would not obey, and
besides that held Eastenriche, (that was now without heir, and belongyng to
the empire) against right and reason. Wherefore Rudolphe sent the Burggraue of
Norenberg into Bohemy, to show the king on the Emperors behalf, to obey,
and Othacarus hy^g of the Bohemes.
to void out of Eastenryche: but Othacarus refused both. Wherefore after much
reasonynge upon the matter, brought Rudolphe armed hosts into Eastenryche, and
took it in. He besieged the city Vienne, and fought a great battaill by
Nidersbrug* in the year.M. cclxxviij. In that battayll was Othacarus slain.
Of this wise was Eastenriche at the last brought under Rudolphes dominion, and
after that made he Albert his son duke there: so that henceforth Eastenriche
by this means is holden Albert duke ^^ Easte^rich
of the empire by fealty or benefit. Moreover the princes of Eastenriche have
their offpringe of this Alberte, until the most praise worthy Charles the
Emperor that now is, and his brother king Ferdinande.

Rudolphe the Emperor showed high favor and gentleness toward Wenceslaus
Othacarus son: for he left him the kingdom of Bohemy, and gave him his
daughter in marriage. This Wen^^slaus (...)g of Bo(...) ma(...).
Wenceslaus is canonisated for a saint, and is worshypped. Rudolphe subdued the
Bourgundians also. In Alsace did he take by violence those cities that rebelled
and conspyred against him, and punyshed them worthily: among those were
Hageno^, Colmar, Tzurig and Berne.

The year.M. cclxxxvi. did he invade the Earl of Wirtenberg, and besyeged the
city Studtgard: at the last was an accord made by the bishop of Mentz.

The year.M. ccxc. had Rudolphe a great parliament at Erfurde* and by the aid
of the city Erfurde Erfurde.
did he spoil and cast down about.iij. score holds in Thuringe. O^ this wise
finally did Rudolfe bring the troubled and full of sedicion estate of Germany,
while it had no certain Emperors to a peaceablenesse, and did in a manner set
up the decayed empire. He dyed the year of Christ M. ccxcii.

Innocencius the.v. succeeded Gregorius the.x.

Adrianus the.v. succeeded Innocencius.

Johannes the.xxi. a physician succeeded Adrianus

When Johannes was dead, Nicolaus the.iij. was made bishop of Rome. He went
about to give his two cosins the two kingdoms of Italy, that the one should be
king of Hetruria, the other king of Lombardy: For the Romysh bishop saw that
Rudolphe had more then enough to do in Germany, and thought he could not
therefore come into Italy. But the imperial cities wythstode the bishop of
Romes enterpryses, that they could not prosper, and Rudolphe sent a Lieutenaunt
into Italy also.

Honorius the.iiij. was bishop after Nicolaus.
Nicolaus the.iiij. was bishop after Honorius.
Adolfe the.xxviii. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. ccxcij. was Adolfe Adolfe count of Nassau Emperor.
count of Nassau chosen Emperor. The same was before in great estimacion by
Rudolphe. Besides that was his brother bishop of Mentz, and by his voice in the
election was he helped to be made Emperor. He raygned six years, and was
deposed from the empire by the Electours: For his substance was not sufficient
to sustain the costs of the Emperyall highness: Besides that was he very in
fortunable in dispatchynge great things. The war, worthy of remembrance
that he has had, was that he brought an army into Thuryngen. For Albert
Landtgraue of Thuringen had a strife with his son Dieterus, and Frederick
surnamed Gnawed cheke. And the same sold to Adolfe the Emperor the
provincial Erldome of Thuringen. He also endeavored to make his kynreds
nobility more renowned, and went into Thurinvan, and did much harm to it. He
besyeged Crutzberg, Frankenstein and Friburg: But Frederick drove him back
again. Howbeit to apeace sundry and many perturbacions that were at that time
in the empire, it was requisite to have a more puyssaunter head in Germane.
And therefore the princes Electors making an assembly at Mentz, they chose
Albert duke of Eastenrich, son to the Emperor (...) du^e ^f ^^ste^rich
Rudolphe. But for as much as Adolfe would keep the empire by force, duke
Albert went against him with an army, and they fought fearcely together by
Worms. In that battayll was Adolfe slain the year.M. ccxcviij. as these
verses following do witness.

The year thousand, three hundredth two less.
Was through the swearde king Adolfes deceasse.
After Nicolans the.iiij. was Celestinus the.v. made bishop of Rome. The same
leaving the byshoprycke became an heremite.

After Celestinus became Bonifacius the.viij. Bishop of Rome. It is said that
Celestinus was begyled by this man with a voice spoken to him through a read or
pype, as though it were come out of heaven, that he should forsake the
byshopricke, and ordeyne Bonifacius. He raised great wars in Italy. He did
excommunicate the French king, and gave the title of the French kingdom to
Alberte the Emperor, that by this means at the last the Garmanes and
frenchemen might come to strokes. At the last was Bonifacius taken, and dyed in
the prison. And hereby comes that it is A feate saying by Bonifaci^ the.viij.
said of him: He entered as a Fox, he reigned as a Wolf or Lion, he died as a
Dog.

Albert the.i. xxix. Germane Emperor.
the.M.cc. xcviij. year of Christ began Alberte Albert Emperor duke of
Estenriche.
duke of Eastenriche, son to Rudolphe the Emperor to raygne. He ruled the
empire ten years: he overcame in battaill Adolfe the Emperor. At the first
would not bonifacius confirm Albertus empire: afterward did he freely confirm
it, to do the French king a spite, and geuyng Albert the title of the kingdom
of France, he set him against the French king. But the king of France
geuyng his daughter to Alberts son, he appeased him, that he should
enterprise no enimitie against him. He made a setting forth against Bohemy,
and made his son king of Bohemy. He did so tame Bohemy and Mentz, which made
fyndely confederacions together that they obeyed the empire.

At the last was he slain of his brothers son and some earls of Eastenryche.
It was happily Gods pleasure so, lest the manslaughter that he had done against
Adolfe the Emperor should be unpunished. For though he was not of like power:
yet in the mean season ought he to have worshipped him as his lord, ordained
of God. The kyllers of him were punyshed also. For God lets not manquellers
^n example of vengeance
unpunished.

Benedictus the.x. was bishop of Rome after Bonifacius the.viij.

The removing of the Romysh bishops se from Rome into France.
WHen Benedictus the.x. was dead, Clemens the.v. was made bishop of Rome. The
same dwelt at Lions in France, and absolved the French king of the
excommunication. Wherefore sense that time, which was the year.M. cccv. was the
bishop of Romes see translated from the city Rome, to Auinion in Prouence a
contry of France.xvii. years.

At this time were the Fratri^elli, which were (...)ricelli.
even of like opinion with the Anabaptists, that in our days go astraye:
their opinion was, that noman should have ought propre or of his own, that
Christen men should not govern common welthes, and such like mad opinions
had they.

Of the Turks.
IN the time of Albert of Eastenriche, began the kynred of Othomanus to grow
Othoma^nus
among the Turks in power and estimacion: of whose blood are spronge those
kings of the Turks that raygne at this time.

Henry the.vij. called of Lucelburg, the.xxx. Germane Emperor.

THhe year of Christ.M. cccix was chosen Henry the vi^
Emperor Henry the prince of Lucelburg. He reigned.vi. years. For in the
mean time that the Romish bishop was in France, the French king desired
inordinatly the dignity of the empire, and trusted to obteayne his request.
througe the consent of the Romish bishop. But the co^corde was not long durable
between the bishop and the French king. Wherefore the bishop advertised the
princes Electours, which had now long disagreed for the election, to hayste to
choice an Emperor with one consent the prince of Lucelburg, who at that time
was demed a most renowned prince, for his wisdom joined with high gravity. As
he was chosen, straight way did the bishop of Rome confirm him. And thus was
the French king disapointed of his request and endeavor* to remove the
dignity of the Romish empire to him.

First took he from the duke of Wirtenberg al his goods, because he was a
rebel to the empire. To his son John gave he the king of Bohemies daughter in
marriage: and by this means became John prince of Lucelburg, the father of
Charles the iiij. king of Bohemy.

Afterward went he into Italy with a great army, and made Italy so afraid of
him, as no Emperor had done a great while before him. Some cities would not
yield them to him, without they were compelled by force, namely Cremona and
Brixia: the residue obeyed freely. At Rome Henry the vij was poisoned of a black
friar in the Sacrament.
was he crowned Emperor. He besyeged Florence with a heavy and straight syege,
at the which time (as it is reported) a friar of y^ preachers order or Black
freres, that was made out of the Florentines, destroyed Henry with venim,
which he struck upon the singing bread, yea and the bishop of Rome himself
also, being now armed with his weapons, threatened Henry with the dart of
excommunicacion, as he perceived that he began to be set by in Italy.

Ludouicus or Lewis the Baier, the.xxxi. Germane emperor. And against him was
chosen Emperor Frederick Duke of Eastenriche.
THe year of Christ M. cccxiiij. were assembled together at Franckforde the
princes Electors the bysh. of Mentz* Trier and Colen, Ihon king of Bohe my,
Rudolphe count Palatine of the Rene, Rudolphe duke of Saxony and Volcmarus
marquis of Brandenburg. On saynct Lucies day was chosen Emperor Lewis the
Lewi^ the Ba^er
Baier by the bishops of Mentz and Trier, the king of Bohemy and Marquis of
Brandenborowe. And against him was chosen Friderick duke of Frederick duke of
Easten^^che*
Eastenriche be the bishop of Colen, the cunte Palatine and duke of Saxony.
Lewis was crowned Emperor at Aken, and Frederick at Bonne. This controuersye
in choosing, brought an occasion of great inward or ciuyll war in Germany.
The duke of Eastenriche had favorers the bishop of Rome the kings of France
and Bohemy, the Schwabes, the count of Palatine, them of Strasborow and other
cities many. But God prospered Lewis, who was less of power, and destitute of
man's aid. He raygned.xxxiij. years.

The year.M. cccxxiij. did they stryke a field by the floude Nechare, whereof
both sides many were slain.

The year.M. cccxxv. on saint Michaels even gave Lewis a great battaill to
Frederick. Frederick did aid Lupoldus his brother, joined with Lupoldus.
him the Schwaben and Switcers, and a great part of the Hungarians. As for
Lewis did follow the king of Bohemy, and the earl of Norenberg, and some other
princes. Now when Lupoldes tarried so long, that he could not pass the water,
y^ host of Eastenriche was slain, and Friderick was taken Friderick duke of
Eastenriche was taken by a Ebrarde Mosbach.
by a Frank, whose name was Ebrarde Mosbach: the same led him to the earl of
Norenberg, who sent him to Lewis. But when Lupoldus saw he could not help
his brother, he was so angry and ragious, that he had in a manner undone
himself, had not his men refrayned him: which also consayled him to
withdraw, nether did rashly cast himself into the danger. Afterward assayed
Lupoldus many things inuayne both by the bishop of Rome, and also the French
king, that he might take his brother away by force: for the French king made
no great force of a strange matter Friderick was a prisoner the space of three
years in a castle in Baierlande: at the last when the controversy was brought
to a point, he was let louse upon this condition, that he should renounce the
empire: which thing when he had freely promised he was restored into
Eastenriche by Lewis. Of this wise behaved Lewis himself very gently toward
his enemy: Lupoldus yet in the mean time not ceassynge of raysynge commocions,
even after that Frederick was delivered.

Afterward did Johannes the.xxij. cast his Lewis is excommunicated
thonder boltes of coursyng against Lewis the Emperor, because he used the
Imperyall authority and empyres governance in Italy, before his coronacion.
Thereof rose an occasion of a great division in Germany, and that lasted
about.xxiiij. A division in Germany.
years. In the mean time rose here and there great sedicions in the empire
and cities, and one part busyed to drive out and oppress the other by
conspiracion. And though Lewis desired absolution not once, but often of the
bishop of Rome, yet could he not obtain it with any prayers, so that both
Benedictus that was after Johannes, and other many and honest men did refuse
the process. There are yet now a days wrytynges of the controversy, wherein
the Romyshe bishop. Johannes the.xxii. is not ashamed to boaste, that The
boasti^g of Johannes ^he.xxij. bysh.
he has the full power and authority to make and depose, not only kings,
but also all Emperoures at his pleasure. By this it may be gathered easily,
that the Romyshe bishop used so great hatred against the Emperor, for no
very weyghty cause. There were also about that time some learned men, which
openly blamed the Romyshe bishops writings, among these was Occam one* Ocam
a re^ouer of the ^om^^h bish.
the princes of Germany every one, as well ecclesiastical, as of the nobility
held with the Emperor: at the last were some compelled by the bishop of Rome
to fall back, and also to choice another Emperor.

Lewis had very great vproures in Italy. Galeacius Galeacius of Milan.
of Milan, and the counsayll of Rome longed for Lewis coming into Italy.
Wherefore he went thither with the Emperesse, which also was delivered of a
child at Rome, that was called Lewis the Roman, and was afterward by the
Emperor made marquis of Brandenborowe. At Milan was Lewis crowned of the
bysh. there, and at Rome of the Cardinal de Columna. He made also Peter of
Corbaria bishop of Rome, who was not long after carried bound to Auinion in
France, to Johannes the.xxii. who cast him into prison, wherein he dyed.

But while allthys was adoynge, Lewis by no Lewis the Roman.
requests could obtain to be released of the exco^municacion by the bishop
of Rome. But forsoeth the Romysh bishop brought that to pass with his busy
labor at length, that in an assembly or day holden at Lucelburg, the bishops
of Mentz, Trier and Colen, the king of Bohemy and duke of Saxon, did choice
another Emperor. There was chosen Charles the fourth earl prouincial of
Morauia, the son of the king of Bohemy. The same was then confirmed by
Clemens the.vi. bishop of To. But for as much as the cities of Aken and Colen
would not know him for an Emperor, he was crowned at Bon.

Of Nicolaus Augustus, that is, Nicolas the noble, that was at Rome.
ABout this time happened at Rome an Nicolas the noble or full of majesty, an
example of notable folly.
example of a notable folly: There was at Rome one Nicolas, a town clarke or
recorder of Rome, of such power and authority, that one would have said he
had the rule of the whole city: for at that time were the Romysh Bishops yet
in France. This Nicolas called himself Tribunus Augustus, that is, the noble
high officer: and with open scriptures wytnessed, that Rome is yet the true
head of the empire: and therefore by ye city of Romes authority, had he the
highest power to handle matters of the empire. And by reason of this authority
called he Lewis and Charles to appear before him, and to commit their matter
to his arbitreme^t or judgment. Like folyshnesse used he often against other
cities and kings ye space of two years. At the last this pore Augustus being
driven out by the bishop of Romes party, fled to Charles the fourth. But
Charles sent the rash man to the bishop of Rome at Auinio^, of whom he was kept
in prison.

The year of Christ.M. cccxlv. died Lewis the Bayer. And then came Charles
with a great host out of Bohemy to Regenspurg, where he was known for an
Emperor. From thence was he also received at Norenberg: for Charles made the^
believe, he had gotten a favorable absolution of the bishop of Rome to put out
the great offenses, wherewith they had offended, in that they were adherent to
Lewis. When they of Basyl sent out their Burgemaisters to Charles, that he in
the name of the city should ask absolution, he answered: he thought they had
not done amiss, in that they had Lewis for an Emperor, nether thought he
that Lewis was an heritike: yet in the mean time if they could be absolved of
their trespasses, he would be content. And thus were they absolved.

The year of Christ.M. cccxlviij. when Lewis was now dead, there rose yet a
greater discord: the bishop of Mentz, the count Palatine, the marquis of
Bra^denburg, and the duke of Saxony, his son that has chosen Charles
Emperor, assembled and refusyng the election of Charles, they chose Edward
the iij. king of England, and Fredrick earl of Misen refuse the dignity
Emperial^
Edward the third, king England to take upon him the majesty Imperial: but
he refused it, as a thing full of cumbraunce. After that chose they Frederick
Earl provincial of Misen. But he also forsook that title of the empire: for he
would not fight and war with his neighbors the Bohemies to undo his
country.

Guntherus Earl of Swartzburg is chosen Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. cccl. was chosen Emperor at Franckforde Gunterus
Earl of Schwatzburg, yet not with consent of all the Electors. The Same accepted
the governance of the empire, and garnyshed with all defense to retain the
empire, he was armed enough against the force of Charles, who then abode at
Mentz. But shortly after died Gunterus at Fra^ckforde suddenly poisoned.
Wherefore Charles was Emperor alone. He came to Franckforde, and was received
for an Emperor.

After Clemens the.v. became Johannes the xxii. bishop of Rome who without a
just cause did excommunicate the good Emperor Lewis.

Benedictus the.xi. was made bishop of Rome Benedictus the. ^i.
after Johannes. The same never allowed the action of Johannes against the
Emperor Lewis, and when he was made bishop of Rome he had freely absolved him,
had not the kings of France and Naples with their threatenynges withstand
him. When in the relacion the orators or ambassadors of the kings alleged,
that Lewis had enterprysed many heinous things against the bishop of Rome.
Benedictus answered: yea, we have done against him. He lived not long in the
byshopricke, and therefore did all the causes hang vndispatched.

Clemens the.vi. was made bishop after Benedictus. The same renewined the
thonder boltes cast against Lewis, and persued him most fearcely: though in
the counsayll of Vienne in France were treated in the mean time of the
conditions of peace, and that Lewis declared himself humble. This Clemens
bought the city Auenion of Ioanna Auenion a city p^pall.
queen of Sicily, and so has the bishop of To. authority upon this city.

Moreover at this time went about here and therein The ^^^de^^r^ in ^^^many and
France (...)g themsel^^s.
in Germany and France, a great number of men, which did beat themselves
with rods. Many of them came to Spire, when the day or parliament was holden
there pretending great holiness. For their holiness sake were they bidden to
the meals of the citesens. And as the deceate of the error did not differ
from the Anabaptists supersticious opinion: even so was that sect no less
dangerous in those days. But at the last it was condemned.

Innocentius the.vi. succeeded Clemens. In his time was Charles the.iiij.
crowned at Rome.

Charles the.iiij. the.xxxij. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. cccl. began Charles y^ Charles y^ iiij
iiij. to reign, after ye death of Guntherus of Schwartzburg. He was a prince
of ye blood of Lucelburg, the son of Ihon king of Bohemy: for John was ye
son of Henry of Lucelburg. From this year of.M. cccl. reigned Charles.
xxvii^. years

The year.M. ccclv. went Charles down into Italy, and was gently received of
the cities. At To. the senate and all the best metyng Charles, did receive him
with all reverence. He likewise, to declare to the Romans his gentleness,
lyghted from his horse, and received on foot the yelding of the city.
Afterward was he crowned of the cardinal of Hostia. The cities of the bysh. of
Rome in Italy, that were rebels, subdued he to do the Romysh bishop a pleasure,
so that they repyned no more. I find none other things that he did in this
journey.

They year.M. ccclx. he overcame and sp^yled Ebrardus earl of Wirtenberg with
a great army. But at the last was the debate laid down, by the bishop of
Ausburg, Strasburg and Spire.

The year.M. ccclxvi. went Charles again in to Italy, in the which journey
he assuaged and subdued some cities, desirous of vproure.

Charles besyeged also y^ city Vlme, but I read no where for what cause. For
our Germans not knowing the property of histories, have not taken head to
the circumstaunces and causes of things. Charles the ^^ maker of ye gold^ buile


Charles has deserved great thanks for the golden bulle that he made,
wherein he has handsomely comprised many things, that make to entertayne
common peace. He did chefely endeavor and procure the affairs of Bohemy. He
ordained the: The viuersitie of Praga in Bohempe.
university of Praga. Some there are that disalowe, that he gave the French
king ryghtes in the kingdom of Orleaunce.

The year.M. ccclxx. caused Charles his son Wenceslaus to be made Emperor.
To his other son Sigismundus gave he the Erldome of the marquis of
Bra^denburg, the which he had bought of Lewis the Roman.

The year.M. ccclxxvii. fought Vdalricus Earl of Wirtenberg mishappely, before
the city Rutlingen. The battayll by Rutlinge^
In that battaill dyed many and noble men.

Switzer league.
ABout this time began the Switzer league, The Switzers league.
and first the city Lucerna, then Berna, at the last Tzurich did join
themselves to the Switzers: and the noble prince Lupoldus duke of Eastenriche,
was overcome Lupoldus duke of Eastenriche was slam by the Switzers.
and slain by the Switzers the year.M. ccclxxxv.

But for as much as there are in man's hands every where histories of the
Switzers deeds. I reken it neoelesse to make long rehersall of their acts in
this little book.

Vrbanus the v. succeeded Innocentius the v^.

Gregorius the x^. was bishop of Rome after Vrbanus. The same removed y^ see
out of France to Rome again, the year MCCCLXXVI.

A division
AFter Gregorius the xi. rose a great division A division after Gregory us
the.xi.
in the spiritualtye. The Italians made an Italian Byshoyp of Rome called
Vrbanus the vi. and the same remained at Rome. The Frenchmen also chose a
Bishop of Romans in Italy, whom they called Clemens the vii. The same gat him to
Auinion. Thus was Rome divided, and there were two bishops of Rome: the one
did accurse the other. Truly Italy, Germany and Hungary did hang to Vrbanus
the bishops of the Romans. This division lasted until the council of
Constance.xxxix. years.

Wenceslaus the.xxxiii. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. ccc. lxxviij. after We^ceslaus Emperor.
Charles deceasse, began Wenceslaus his son to raygne, and raygned after his
fathers death.xxii. years.

At this time began Ihon Husse openly to teach Ihon Husse teaches ope^lye
against pardons.
at Praga against the bishop of Romes pardones: and by this occasion rose
hurteful insurrections in Bohemy against prestes and religious men.

Wenceslaus was at the last taken by his brother Sigismundus, and kept at
Vienne in preson. Other things do I not find of this Wenceslaus that I judge
worthy to be put in writings.

Rupertus the xxxiiij. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. CCCC. was Rupertus the count Palatine made Rupertus
Emperor.
Emperor. He reigned ten years. But seeing the Emperors had now ben long
from Italy, the power of the kynred of Galeacyus was waxen great at Milan and
the Florentins were become rich also, and warred against them of Milane. The
Florentins asked aid of Rupertus the Emperor, to repress the power of the
Galacians. Wherefore Rupertus went up into Italy to help the Florentius. and
took Galeacins. Howbeit Rupertus being destitute of the assistaunce of the duke
of Eastenriche, and bishop of Colen, was to weak, than that he could have
brought so great things to pass: and though he had assayed many things, yet
was he constrained to return again into Germanye his bussinesse being not
dis^p^rched.

Bonifacius the.ix. was made bishop at Rome after Vrbanus.

And against him was made bish. after Clemens ye.vii. Petrus de Luna called
Benedictus the.xii.

After Bonifacius was Innocentius y^. vii made bishop at Rome.

After Innoce^tius was Gregorius the xii. made bishop at Rome. The same
promised y^ he would renounce the byshoprycke, if Benedictus likewise did not
refuse to renounce also. But wha^ Benedictus fled into Spain, leauyng Auinion,
Gregorius revoked his promise concerning to resign the byshoprycke. Wherefore
was a council gathered at Pysis, whereyn both Gregorius and Benedictus were
deposed of the byshoprycke, and in their stead was the third Romysh bishop
chosen Alexander the.v. Gregorius fled to Ariminum, where he remained until
the counsel of Constance was. Alexander the.v. dwelt at Bonony, for the
Hungarians having than taken in Rome, used incredible tira^ny, and warred with
the Frenchmen for Naples.

After Alexander the.v. was Ioannes the.xxiii. The division of three Romans vysh.
made bishop of Rome at Bonony. And of this wise were a live, until the general
council of Constance this Ioannes the.xxiii. at Bonony, Gregorius at Ariminum
and Benedictus in Spain. But they were all three set beside y^ Romyshe
byshopryck in that council.

Of Tamerlanes the tyrant of Tartaria.
IN the time of Rupertus the Emperor Tamerlanes a tyrant.
lived the passing cruel tyraunte Tamerlanes the Tartarian, who by great
spoylynge, went about nearehande al y^ East and Asia, with an army of ten
hundredth thousand men. He spoiled the Perseans, Armenians and Syrians. He
invaded also the less Asia and took Paiasetus the Turkysh Emperor, and
carried him in a cage as a bird about with him for a wonder and mockage.

Sigismundus the.xxxv. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M.CCCC. after Sigismundus Emperor.
Rupertus the Emperors deceasse was Sigysmundus made Emperor. He was the
son of Charles the fourth, marquis of Brandenburg, king of Hungary and
Bohemye. He was Emperor seven and twentye years. He was a most famous prince
in wisdom, learning and honestye: such one of stature, as was semynge a like
prince. His countrefaytoure very connyngly made, is to be seen yet this day,
by the earl Hoier of Mansfelde. He had great wars in Hungary against the
Hungaryans of the which he was taken. He fought often against the Turks. But
when he was made Emperor, he made a great setting forth against the Turks
with the aid of all nations, whereof we shall speak hereafter

Of the council of Constance.
IN the beginnynge of Sigismundus raygne he went up into Italye, and took
counsel with Ioannes the bysh of To. of calling a general council for to
avoid the division. He went also to the French king, and compelled him to
agree to the calling a general council. Wherefore by the consent of the bishop
of To. Ioannes, the Emperor, and also the kings of France, Spain and
England, was the council of Constance begone the year.M. C C C C. xiiii. to
the which came Ioannes the Bishop of Rome himself.

The Emperor Sigismundus came to Constance before Christmasse, and at mass
song he the gospel as Deacon: There went out a commandment from Augustus
the Emperor etc.

Afterward was there treated of Ihon Husse, He that will know the whole
history of Ihon Husse and Hiero^ of Pragga yt were burnt in ye council at
Co^sta^ce, let him read Eneas siluius i^ his book of yE beginning and deeds of
ye Bohemies ye.xxxv. and xxxv. chapy.
and his doctrine being condemns, he was burns with Hieronimus of Praga.
After that treated they to a peace the diuisyon, and deposyng the bishops of
Rome. Ioannes the.xxiij. Gregorius and Benedictus, was chosen in the sea Othode
Columna, who was called Martynus the fyfte.

But when it repented Ioannes the.xxiii. that he had consented frelye to the
renouncing of the Byshoprycke of Rome, he went about to fly pryuelye, with
the aid of Frederyck duke of Eastenryche. But in the flyghte Ioannes was had
back again, by the Emperoures men. And the duke of Eastenryche was bannyshed
by the Emperor, and some of his towns taken in his duchye. At the last was
the debate laid down of this wise: It was cou^selled Frederyck, that he freely
yeldyng to the Emperor all his lands, should humblye require forgiveness of
his offense. Wherefore by the Emperoures gentleness and favor he was
restored in the duchy of Eastenryche.

But Ioannes the bishop of Rome, was delivered to the count Palatyne to be
kept. The Same carried him int ye castle Ma^heym, not far from the city
Heidelberg: there was he kept the space of three year. After yt was he
received to grace by Martinus the Romish bish. and made a Cardinal. When of
this wise that hurteful division that was between the bishops of Rome was
anoyded, peace and rest was restored to the church, and that by the endeavor
and procurement of Sigismundus the Emperor, who therefore deserved great
praises.

The residue that were done in that assemble or council, is no need to
rehearse: for whole books are written thereof.

Of the prouincial earls of the marqueship of Brandenburg.
THe year of Christ.M. C C C C. xvii. the first sunday after Easter, did
Sigysmundus the Emperor in the council give to the most praise worthy
prince Fridericke Burgraue of Norinberg, the right of Imperyall election, and
the prouincyall marqueshyp of Branbenburge: and that for his excellent virtues,
and great trust, that he had showed in dispatchinge great causes of the
empire. But truly it were long to rechearse here how noble princes have been
both before this dignitye was gotten, and also afterward in this progeny of
Burgraues: ye and before has often ben made mention of them. But after that
they were made Electors, they were diligente ever in treating the greateste
and most weightyest matters of the empire, for the which things sake shall be
often made mention of the^ hereafter. Wherefore in the histories of our time, is
Albertus the Marquis praised before al other, who for his virtues sake is
surnamed y^ germane Achilles.

It is also not unknown in our days, y^ Marquis Ioachim of Brandenburg
Elector, my most gentle lord, and his brother Albert Cardinal and Elector,
Archebyshoppe of Mentz and Magdenburge etc. are garnyshed with high wisdom,
and all princely virtues: and that therefore their counsel and aid is required
before other in high and hard matters, not only concerning the empire, but
also to y^ whole Christiantie. Another ca^ it other wise be in gouernaunces and
dominions, y^ which so long as they have their being, must be deserved and
maynteyned by the wisdom of men of great authority, which thing the
Wisdom her self witnesses in holy scriptures, saying: By me kings do
raygne.

When the council was broke up, many setting forth were appointed against the
seditions and evil disposed men, which spoiled and robbed both churches and
monasteryes after Ihon Husses death Zischa captayn of the Hussites sect.
Their captayn was called zyscha. Great manslaughter was of both sides, of the
Bohemes and Germans, which went against them: yet was not The settyn ^ forth
of Sygismundus against the Turks.
that brunt of vproure so quenched. Sigismundus (as we said before) had
prepared and brought until Adrianopolis a very great army of Germans,
Frenchmen, Italians and Hungarians against y^ Turks. In this setting forth
were most greatest princes y^ Emperor Sigismundus and Philippe duke of
Burgundion. But by reason the Frenchemen strove, saying they must have the
foreward in the army, y^ orders were broken, not without an incredible loss of
Christen men: for their enemies vanquyshed them, and the duke of Burgundy was
taken. Sigismundus the Emperor fled to Constan tinople. After long season
after, was the duke of Burgundy delivered.

A merry story is recited of Sigismundus. He The history of Sigisinu^dus with
his servant.
had a servant y^ was many years familiar with him, whom he had not greatly
rewarded, (though in the mean season he was a liberal and free prince,) which
thing Leonardus Aretinus also does write who saw Sigisinu^dus the Emperor,
and had done many messages to him, on the bysh. of To. behalf. It fortuned
that wha^ he was ridden into a water, his horse did stalle. Which thing when
the servant, that went straight before the Emperor did see, he said in
sport: The horse was of like nature that his lord was. The Emperor hearing
it by chance, maruayled, and commanded to show him what he said. The
servant answered. The horse pourech out water into the river, where as is
water enough already. Even so is the Emperor lyberall to those, which have
riches plenty, and need them not greatly. Sigismundus the Emperor perceived
that he was advisedly touched or taunted, that he had not rewarded his old
servant with some peculyar or great reward, and said: He never wanted the
will to recompense, but that princes gifts are not properlye theyrs, that
deserve them: but theyrs that they are appointed by Gods prouydence and
dysposycyon. The same said he that he would prove with the deed, so soon as
he should be at leisure and rest. Afterward when the Emperor had gotten
leisure he caused to make two boxes of one bygnesse and fashion. In the one he
put gold, in the other lead of like weight, and calling the servant, he bad
him take one of the boxes. The servant being abashed weyed now the one box,
than the other douting y^ which he might rather take: at the last he took y^
box, wherein the lead was. Which when he had opened, the Emperor said: It
may be seen openly, that his wyli was not in the fault, why he was not rewarded
hitherto, but his misfortune. This deed wythnesseth verily, that the Emperor
did wisely consider, that the fortunable prosperity of The prosperity comes
of God. Albert duke of Easte^rich.
things comes of God.

Sigismu^dus the Emperor had no heir mankynne, he gave his only daughter to
Albert duke of Eastenryche, who became king of Hungary and Bohemy by that
means.

The year.M. CCCC. xxxiiii. while Sigismundus was yet alive, began the council
of Basil. For The cosicel Basil.
it was ordained in y^ council of Constance, that of a new counsel should be
gathered after twelve years. But after that Sigismundus was dead, the bysh.
of To. holdinge a council first at Ferraria, and from thence at Florence,
let y^ furtherau^ce of the council of Basil: and that had he so much the
more easy a do, because there was no monarche or noble prince that defended the
decree: of y^ council of Basil.

After that Martinus was dead, Eugenius the iiii. was made bysh. of To. The
same crowned Sigismundus Emperor at Rome.

Albert the.ii. of that name, the.xxxvi. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. cccc. xxxviii. after Albert the.ii.
the death of Sigismundus, was Alberte, a prince of the blood of Eastenryche,
king of Hungarye and Bohemye, made Emperor. He dyed in the second year of
his raygne.

Part of Bohemy did cleue to the king of Polen, and endeavored to draw y^
kingdom of Bohemy to Polony. The Poles brought a great army into Bohemy, and
drew into their faction the vprourysh kind of men called Thaborites. Against
the^ sent Albert y^ Emperor Albert marquis of Bran denburg. The same brought
to pass with many battayls, that the matter was agreed between the Emperor
and the Poles.

Albert the Emperor came with a great army into Hungary, against Amurates
the Turk, who at that time was fallen into Hungary. When Albert the Emperor
came he fled back, and besye gynge the city Sinderouien, he returned into
Greece, and wann the city Thessalonica. In this setting forth fell Albert into
a sycknesse, and being brought again to Uyenna, dyed wythyn few days.

Friderick the.iii. the.xxxviij. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. CCCC. xl. after Frederick y^ third.
Albertus death, was Fridericke the third duke of Estenrich, made Emperor.
He raygned.liii. years. The daughter of Sigismundus, wife to Albert the
Emperor was now bygge with child: but some of the Hungaryans despayrynge of
an heir Ioannes Huniades.
of the realm, chose Vladislaus the younger king of Polen for a king. The
kings governor in Hungary was Ioa^nes Huniades, father to Mathias. The same
had weakened the power of the Turks with a great battle, and compelled
Amurates to Vladislaus.
demand peace. But so soon as Vladislaus was come into the realm, the
Hungaria^s trusted, that if they and the Poles powers were joined together,
they should easily get great praise if they invaded the Turk. And happily had
the young king Vladislaus pleasure in this praise. Wherefore Iulianus Iulianus
the Cardinal.
the Cardinal brake the treuce made with the Turk, under this pretense and
color: that it were not lawful to make peace with the Turks, without the
Bish. of Romes consent, seeing y^ case is belonging to whole Christendom. Thus
Vladislaus gathering an host went against Amurates until Varnam, which is not
far from Constantinople: though Ioannes Humades in y^ mean season dissuaded to
take war, because that he knew well the weakness of his men, and the power
of the Turks, and also had he made peace with the Turk, not without
necessity. It is also said that Vladislaus desired aid of Dracoles y^
Malache, but he Dracoles y^ Wlache
also did counsel to leave y^ setting forth to war. Yet did he send his son
with him to aid king Vladislaus with two thousand horsemen, to whom he should
have said: He gave him a courageous and Dracoles gave Vladislaus a horse.
swyft horse, such one as he would give to his son also for his mind gave that
they should lose the feld, and therefore should they have these horses at hand
that as need should require, the might troughe their swyftnesse escape the
danger. As for the Turks did forse themselves with nolesse carfulnesse, than
wisdom, and were every where appointed in a readynesse, before the Hungaryans
were set in an order. Wherefore though the Hungaria^s The battayl by Wardam.
fought fearcely for ye glory of Christ's name and ouerthrwe very great
hoostes of the enemies: yet did the Turks at the last overcome with the
multitude, stayeng Vladislaus the young king, and afterward was Iulianus the
Cardinal slayen also in the flight. Humades as he was a ware soul dioure, took
head to himself by times, and escaped. This field was the year.M. CCCC.
xliiii. Amurates be ^^me ^ monk (...)rp man.
the tenth day of November. Amurates became a Mahometyshe monk after this
vyctorye, supposing to have accomplyshed his duetye in the empire, after so
great prosperitye in vanquyshynge his enemies, lest he rashely trusting
smiling fortune farther, did stayne his glory with some evil. But Hunyades
did invade and fell upon Huniades hurts the Turks greueously.
the Turks again, and did hurt them so sore, that they called Amurates again
to the realm, to resist Hunyades their enemy, and should drive him out of
Hu^gary. Afterward wha^ Constantinople was lost, Huniades overcame Mahomet ye
Turkishe Emperor bringing into Hu^gari an hurtful army with a great
disco^fitur, and delivered whole Europa from ye fear of danger. For if that
setting forth had lucked Mahomet ye Turkish Emperor, he had now taken in not
only Italy, but other contryes also.

When Vladislaus was dead, the Hungarians received the child Ladislaus, the
heir of the realm, borne of Sigismundus daughter, for their king. This
Ladislaus when he was full grown, dyed at Praga the haed city of Bohemy.

The year.M. CCCC. xliiij. brought the Dolphin The Dolphin and Armeniakes go
into Germany.
with the Armeniakes an army into Elsace, until Basil, not without a great
and horible manslaughter of the Germans. Some think that Eugenius the bysh.
of To. sent him into Germany to trouble the council of Basil. The Dolphyn had
about five and twenty thousand men. The Switzers The power of the Switzers
against the Dolphin.
sent four thousand men against them, to rescue the city Basel out of their
hands. They set upon the enemies with so great strength and courage, that
none of them gave back: and though they could not overcome them, by reason
of the multitude of the^, yet left they their enemies a bloody and doleful
victory. For the Dolphin lost in that battayl about ten thousand men, and was
feign to fly out of Germany, with the residue y^ remained

The year.M. CCCC. xlix. did Albert marquis af Brandenburg war against
imperial cities Norinberg and some other. This was called War of ye cities.
the war of the cities. Many princes did join themselves to either side, and
this war lasted. ii. years. Albert the marquis ouerthrue them of Norinberg
with.viii. battayls.

The year.M. cccc. lii. went Friderick into Italy, and was received of every
man with seastly honor. In the city Sena did he acomplyshe his wedding with
Leonora his spouse, daughter to the king of Portingale. Coming to Rome he
was crowned of Nicolaus the fyfte with his queen the.xviij. day of March.
Returnyng from Rome at Ferraria made he Borsius of Esta duke. From thence
shipped he over to Venice, and abode there ten days. I have herd of a man of
great renown, that it was told him of the prince of Venice, who being
Senator, served the Emperor Fridericke and the prince of Venice at the table,
that Frederick should have said at the meal: that he truly would be a friend
to the Venecians continually, but they should have much trouble and damage of
his successors.

Of Constantinople Won by the Turks.
THe year of Christ.M. CCCC. liiii ye xxix day of May after long syeggat
Mahometes the Turkysh Emperor the city Constantinople at ye last with a
very strong assault: and used thereyn so much cruelnesse, that it can not be
expressed with no words. Constantinus Consta^tinus Emperor of Constantinople.
the Emperor was slain by the gate of the city, in the flyghte, whose head
caused the Turk to be smytten of, and stycked upon a pole to be carried through
out the city. He commanded also (...)table (...)of ye (...)wha^ (...)nn
(...)ino pl^.
to set up an image of the crucyfyed Christ in the city, and towrytte upon
it: The same is the God of the Christians. But he commanded to moke it, and
cast fylthe upon it, and all to defyle it. The Emperors wife and daughters
with other honest matrones were drawn to a banquet, and there were they first
misused, after that hewed to pieces These examples, and other most cruel deeds
of ye Turks, ought duly to raise and stir our minds, that we should
earnestly fight against those enemies, The Turks are beasts and not tirauntes
which one need not to call tyrauntes, but rather cruel beasts.

The year.M. CCCC. lxi. did the bysh. of To. depose Dietericke of Isenburge
from his byshoprycke, and in his stead was made Adolphe of Nassau. This
chance gave an occasion of great wars in the Empire. Friderick the count
Palatyne took upon him to defend and retayn bishop Dieterych. Against the
same did the Emperor stir the earls of Wyrtenberg and Baden, and the bysh.
of Mentz. When these spoiled ye contry of ye count Palatine, they were taken by
Frideryck count Palatine about the year.M. CCCC. lxii.

The same year did contrary wise Adolfe the bishop take in the city Mentz.

The year.M. CCCC. lxiij. was Friderick the Emperor strongly besieged in the
castle at Vienna, by his cityesins, and the doer of this was Albert, the
Emperors brother: but George king of the Bohemes delivered the Emperor,
driving away the cityesins.

The year.M. CCCC. lxxiiii. did Charles prince of the Burgundyons besyege the
town Nuce a whole year, and that because the chapter chano^s of Colen had
dryeuen out Rupert bishop of Colen, whom Charles would have restored again.
But when he went about to, turn the byshopryck of Colen from the empire and,
have gotten it to him, the Emperor appoynteth an army against him.

The captain of the host was Albert marquis of Brandenburg, and the empyres
standardebearer Albert duke of Saxony. At the last when diversely was treated of
alayenge the debate, Charles gave place: and it is said, that at y^ time was
first treated of geuyng Maximilian the daughter of Charles of Burgundy.

The year.M. CCCC. lxxvii. was the duke of Burgundy vanquished by Nansen, by
them of Lotayn and the Switzers, and slain. For Charles had taken from them of
Lorain Nansen: and in Switzerland Nansen* Gransen.
had he taken in Gransen, and other small towns: besides that also, caused he
in the town of Gransen, to be hanged.v. C. and.xii. Germans.

When Charles was dead, the Frenchemen enterprised to join Flaunders and
Brabant to their kingdom, and this desire of the Frenchmen brought the cause of
great wars. But when the Burgundions would not that their duchies should be
straunged or alienated from Charles daughter, they delivered to wedde Charles
daughter to Maximilian Maximiliane.
son to Friderick the Emperor. Wherefore Maximiliane went well appointed into
Braba^t, the year M. cccc. lxxvii. and wedded Mary Charles daughter: whereby
it came to pass, that he augme^ted not a little the glory of the Eastenrychs
name, and that Maximilia^ did many renowned prowesses, to defend those
countries against the assault of the Frenchemen.

The year.M. cccclxxxvi. was Maximilian made Emperor: at Aken he was crowned
the tenth day of Apryll. When he was chosen Emperor at Franckforde, Albert
marquis of Brandenburg dyed there, whom the Italian history writers also do
give the praise of a sage and wise prince, and also a doughty man of arms.

The year.M. cccclxxxvii. was Maximiliane Maximilian istake^ at Brudgis.
taken of his subjects at Brudgis in Flanders, by a preuy train of the
Frenchemen. But when Frede rick came down into low Germany, furnyshed with
the aid of the whole empire, Maximilian was letten fre of them of Brudgis.

The year.M. ccccxc. he asked again and took Frederick dies.
possession of his hereditary lands of the duchy of Eastenriche, the which
Mathy king of Hungary had taken in.

The year M. ccccxciii. dyed Frederick the third Emperonre in the town Lyntz,
and was buried at Vienne. The same year did the Turks fall in to Croacia: but
they were driven back again by Maximiliane, that then was in Eastenriche,
surnyshed with an army of fyftenth ou saude men.

When Eugenius the.iiij. was dead, Nicolaus Nicolaus the v. a favorer of
learnedine^
the.v. was made by shop of Rome. Friderick the Emperor was crowned of him,
and he entertained with most high liberality not only learned men of Italy:
but also such as were fled from Con stantinople to Rome, namely Gaza,
Trapezontius, Argyropylos, by whose procurement al good sciences are renewed
and amended.

Calistus the.iij. was bysh. of To. after Nicolaus.

Pius the.ij. before called Eneas Syluius succeeded Eneas Siluius.
Calistus. He was Frederick the Emperoures Chaunceller. He had gathered a
great army of all nations against the Turks: but while the army is demissed
without doing any thing.

Paulus the.ij. was after Pius.

Xystus the.iiii. was by shop of Rome after Paulus. In his time the year.M.
cccclxxx. did Mahometes Mahometes besyeged Hydruntum.
the Turkysh Emperor besyege Hydruntum in Italy, and wanne it, vsyng therein
incredible tyranny. Italy was so asrayed, that Xystus the Romysh bishop made
hrm read to fly into France. But Mahometes died the same time when Hydruntum
was a taking, and that by some destiny, lest he should straie farther into
Italy. Moreover Alfons^ king of Naples.
while this was dayng, Alfonsus king of Naples, warred with them of Sena: but
when he hard the tydyngs of Hydruntum, he haisted to return into his
kingdom, and gets the besyeged city Hydruntu^ out of the Turks hands.
For while Mahometes was dead, and that the Turks haysted now to return home,
lest any variaunce might rise in their kingdom, Alfonsus obtained the city
easily, driuyng the Turks out of Italy.

After Xystus was Innoce^tius the.viii. by. of To.

Alexander the the.vi. was made bishop of To. The prince of ^rbinas saying.
after Innocentius. The same had a son duke of Valencia, whom he made prince
of Vrbinas. His saying it was: O Caesar, o nullo. that is: Either Emperor, or
nothing. At the last was he nothing. For he was slain for his sundry crafts,
that were mengled with gite and deceate.

The beginning of the science of printyng, is said The science o^ printyng.
to have been under Frederick the third: and this science of book printing they
say to have been found first at Mentz, the year.M. cccc. xl.

The craft of the gonnes is much elder, and it is supposed The craft of gonnes.
that the same was also found in Germany, by a frear the year.M. ccc. lxxx.

Maxi milianus the.xxxviii. Germane Emperor.
THe year of Christ.M. ccccxciiii. began Maximilianus the Emperor.
Maximilianus his raygne, when his father was dead, with whom he governed the
empire his life time.viii. years. But after his fathers deceasse raygned
he.xxv. years. Though the begynnynges of the empire were low and weak: yet
at the last turned they to high auauncement and increase of the Germane
kingdom.

In the beginning of Maximilanus raygne, Charles with the bunched back the
French king.
brought Charles with the crooked back an army into Italy, and took Naples.
But a year after, when he was returned into France, gat Ferdina^dus the
younger Naples again with aid of Maximilian dryuynge the Frenchemen out of
Italy, which the French king had left at Naples, for a garryson.

Maximilian had many and great battails. First in low Germany. Flaunders and
Brabant, in the which it is said he did many noble acts with his own hand,
where of I have herd some, but I know not the very truth thereof. And would
God there would once come one that is sure of such things, who would writh all
those histories in a co^plet book to the praise of so great a prince, and
might auaunce worthily, before the world the puyssaunce and virtues of so
doughty an Emperor. I myself Pyrcamer.
have herd of Pyrcamer of Norenberg, that Maximiliane himself had written
some of his deeds for certain years. For he said: He sailed from Lynda to
Constance with Maximilian the Emperor: and when Maximilian was now at
leisure in saylyng, he called his Scribe to him, and rehearsed to him in Latin
his deeds of one year, in a most feate order, with the declaracion of all the
circunstaunces and occasions. But when Pyrcamer thought the Scribe should note
some secret thing, and therefore would avoid, the Emperor commanded him
to remain and lysten. Yea and at evening he took it to Pyrcamer that he had
rehearsed to read, and asked: whether that soldiers Latin did like him? and
should have said moreover: He were minded to comprehend those things so
brefely and clearly, that afterward learned men might declare them so much
the more diligently by their causes and circumstaunces. And Pyrcamer said:
that no Germane history writer had used so pure a style, as was that of
Maximilian: And that after maximilianus death he had asked after this writynge,
but he could not obtain it. But let this suffyse to be spoken of low Germany.

The year.M. ccccxcv. was in the parliament When the duchy of Wirte^berg began.
holden at Worms of the earldome of Wirtenberg made a duchy, and earl Ebrarde
was made the first duke.

The year.Mccccxcix. took the Switzers war The switzers war against their
neighbors them of Eastenriche.
against their neighbors them of Eastenrich, the which to rescue, Maximiliane
came haystely out of Gelderlande, where at that time he had to do al so.
Wherefore having many skyrmyshes of both sides, it is certain that.xx. thousand
me^ were slain: at the last was an agreement made.

The year.MDi. were every where figures of Figures of a cross seen upon
garments.
crosses seen upon men's garments. But such like was often happened before also.

The year.MDiiij. was the war of Baierlande, The war of Baier.
wherein the Emperor Maximilianus defended the princes of Baier, against
Philip count Palatine of the Rene, and duke Ruperte son to Philippe the
Palatine. For the same maryeng the daughter of George duke of Baier, would
have Landshut and thatsame part of Baier to be given over to him by a title of
inheritance. But Rupertus dyed with his spouse, while this war was in hand,
and the count Palatine was put beside a great part of his lordeshyppe by the
Emperoures men and them of Wirtenberg. Yea and a great army of the Bohemyes
that came to help the count Palatine, were overthrown of the Emperor. At
the last nevertheless Maximilian vsyng no less wysdo^ than favor, took the
count Palatine to mercy, lest any perturbacion might be raised in the right of
the election in the empire, that long sense was allowed and approved.

The year.MDv. besyeged the army of the Emperor the duke of Gelders in the
city Arnheym, and constrained him to yield himself.

The year.MDvi. died Philippe son to Maximilian, Philip son to Maximilian
d(...)th Maximilian warreth against the Venecians. Lewis king of France.
king of Spain and duke of bourgundy, being of age.xxviii. years.

The year.MDvii. began Maximiliane the war against the Venecians, no
less great then durable: in the which befell both many bloody battails, and
wonderful mutacions. Lewis king of France was first with the Venecians,
afterward fell he from them to the Emperor. Contrary wise the bishop of Rome
Julius, was first of the Emperoures side, afterward took he part with the
Venecians. The Venecians lost in this warretheir best cities. Verona, Pauy,
Teruas and other many. Howbeit when the Romysh bishop deciuered and fell to the
Venecians, the French king began to war upon him also, seeing he had yet the
Emperors soldiers in Italy. Now feared the Emperor, lest if he had the
victory, he should fall into Naples also, and do also some evil at Rome, to the
empyres destruction. Wherefore he sent the Cardinal Matheus Langius bishop of
Saltzburg one of his counsel to Julius the bishop of To. to demand peace,
before the To. bishop and the French king Julius the by shop of Romans was
discomfited in a battaill by the city Rauennas upon Easter day.
had foughten a field. Julius, for as much as he was very well appointed with
the aid of Spaniardes and Italians, he thought to be sure of the victory, and
therefore refused he the peace. The battle was upon Easter day the
year.MDxii. by Rauennas. The bishop of Romes host lay under, and there were
slain in that battaill syxtene thousand. Nether is there red of a more grievous
field to have been about this time, wherein men have fought so fearcely. But
after this victory lost, did Julius freely demand peace. Howbeit lest the
French king enterprisedought farther in Italy, did Maximilian and the bysh. of
Rome set the king of England, Germany and the Switzers against him: and of
this wise was the French king at the last constrained to leave Italy. The
Venecians were afterward reconciled to to the Emperor also.

The year.MDxix. dyed Maximilian the Emperor, and thatsame year the princes
Electors What Electors chose Charles that now is Emperor.
Albert Cardinal bishop of Mentz. Herman bishop of Colen earl of Wida.
Richard bishop of Trierlorde of Grieffenklau, the deputy of Lewis king of
Bohemy. Lewis count Palatine of the Rene. Frederick duke of Saxony. Ioachim
marquis of Brandenburg, did chose lawful and with great wisdom at Fra^ckford
Charles duke of Easte^ rich and Bourgundy, and king of Spain, the xxviii.
day of June.

Pius the iij. was bysh. of To. after alexander the vi. The same died shortly
after.

Julius the.ij. succeeded Pius. Against him wrote Bernardinus the Cardinal in
the time of the Venecian war of keeping a counsel. The matter should have
given an occasion of a division, had not Maximilian prevented it by his
syngulare wisdom.

Leo the.x. son to Laurence Medices was made bishop of Rome. after Julius.

In the time of this Leo y^ year.MDxvii. wrote Martine Luther*
Martin Luther first against the Romysh bishops pardons, and from thence rose
many disputacio^s after ward, which thing caused no small alteracionin the
church by the Germans.

Charles the.v. the.xxxix. Germane Emperor.
^He year.MD. xix. was Charles the.v. Charles y^.
chosen Emperor the nepheu to Maximilians, king of Spain, prince of
Eastenryche and Burgundy. The Electors sent into Spain to show Charles of
this election Friderick count Palatine. Wherefore the next year after he came
into Germany, and was crowned Emperor at Aken.

The year.MDxxv. was Frances the French Frances the French king taken.
king taken by Pauy in Lombardy, by the Emperoures soldiers in a field, and
afterward brought into Spain. Charles used a very incredible gentleness and
moderacion of mind in so great prosperity of victory. For he did not only
let fre the French king, restoryng him to his kingdom: but also bound him
with affinity to him, giving him his sister Leonora to wife. The capitaines of
the battle, whereof we said even now, were Nicolas count of Salma, George of
Fru^sberg knight, Mark Sittich, duke Burbon, and the marquis Piskerame.

The same year were raised in Germany horrible The commotion of vplan^y^h m^n.
and never before herd comotions, by vplandishe men in Elsace, Schwaben,
Frankenla^d, Thuringe^, and in those contreis that lie by the Rhene. This
commotion was alayed by the great force and arms of the princes, so that
within the space of three months nere hand, were slame in battaill above
hundredth thousand vpla^dysh men, none other wise the^ as beasts. Moreover one
called Schapler, wrote Schapler. Twelve articles of the sedicious rustikes.
xii. artickes of the Christian liberty, among the which this was even the
chefest: Tribute ought not to be given to the magistrate or superiority. By
this doctrine, upon hope to get liberty, the gretest part of the rustikes
being enflamed, it is said to have taken weapons against their lawful
magistrate. In the town of Thuringen, called Mulhausen, was a Thomas Mynter.
preacher, called Thomas Mynter. The same preached openly, that he should
restore the decayed state of the church: and did boiste, that reuelacions were
privily showed him: and that Gedeons sword was given him, to root out the
tyranny of the ungodly. He led forth by heaps the vplandish men, and
commanded the houses of gentlemen to be spoiled, and the goods of
monasteries to be polled and waisted. But when the rustical armies spoiled
every where without order, the prince of Saxony and Landgraue of Hesse
destroyed them. Thomas Mynter and some of his fellows were taken and beheaded,
and were punyshed for their enterprise. This Mynter was the first begynner of
the mad error of the Anabaptists, which yet causes much ado in Germany.

The year.MDxxv. did John Oecolampadius John Ocal^padius and Huldrich Zwinglius
renew the doctrine of Berengarius ^ndreas ^arolestadius.
at Basel, and Huldrich zwinglius in zwizerlande first of all with there
writing renewed the doctrine of Berengarius that in the bread and wine was not
really present the body and blood of Christ, though the year before the
learned man Andrew Carolostadius had proposed the same argument.

The year.MDxxvi. was Lewis king of Hu^gary (...)ayne by Solomon the Turkysh
Emperor.

The year.MDxxvij. did duke Burbon bring Rome taken by Burbon.
the Emperoures host to Rome, the city was besieged and taken, and also
spoiled. The bishop of To. constrained by necessity into the Castle angel,
yielded himself to the Emperoures men: but the Emperor of his gentleness let
him fre again, and restored him to his former dignity, that the common peace
of Christendom were nothyndered.

The year.MDxxix. went Charles into Italy, and was received of all princes and
cities, with most high honors.

The same year in the month of October the With what an ^^ost Sol(...)yd
be(...)ge ^ie^n^.
Turkysh Emperor Solomon brought about a hundredth and forty thousand men
into Germany which number they should afterward have boasted themselves in
the city Cracowe in Polen: and besieged the city Vienne certain wekes and
assaulted it greueously. But Friderick count Palatine, appointed by the empire
captain of the soldiers, gatheryng an army with all speed, sent it to
Vie^ne, three days before the Turk besieged it. Philippe count Palatine was
with them in the city Vie^ne. Wherefore by the gracious favor of God was the
city Vienne so strongly defended, that the Turkish tyrau^t was feign to turn
back again with great shame, and loss of his host. The messaunger of the
Poles is reported to have said: that in the assault of Vienne, were slain
about four score Turks, and partly to have dyed by the way, for lack of
^itayls, and fearcenesse of the cold.

The year.MDxxx. the.xxij. day of February, was Charles crowned Emperor at
Bonony by Charles is crowned Emperor at Bonony by the bysh. of To.
Clemens the bishop of Rome with a great solemnity and cost.

After that went he again into Germany, and came on Corpus Chist even at
Ausborow, wherthe parliament was adiourned. The chief princes of Germany came
thither, of whom Charles the Emperor was received with high honor. Though
The parliament of ^usborow.
the Emperor assaied many ways to appeace y^ debates in the religion, and to
restore them into a quietness, yet could no certain thing be brought to
pass or ordained, in so great diversity of minds. At the last commanded he
by an open commandment to retain and keep the accostumed manners of
ceremonies, and the doctrine before used.

The same year. the eight day of October, was An ouerflowyng at To.
an ouerflowynge at Rome so great, as no man could remember to have been
seen, and the same lasted about four and twenty hours: and when this
ouerflowynge stood still in the place called Campo Flore, the hight of a long
moryshpycke, many buildings, walls, houses and goods were destroyed.

When Leo was dead, Adrianus allow Germane, borne at Vtrecht was made bishop
of Rome.

After Adrianus was Clemens the.vij. chosen Clemens the vij. is taken.
by. of To. The same was taken by the Emperors host at Rome, for making a
confederacy with the French king, whom also he sent aid against the
Emperor. But the same injury did y^ very good Emperor dissemble with high
softness: and lest any occasion might rise of a greueous debate in
Christendom, he set the bishop of Rome Cleme^s the.vij. at liberty, of whom
he was afterward crowned at Bonony.

Ferdinande the.xl. Germane Emperor.
THe year.MDxxx. was Ferdina^de king Ferdinande king of Hungary.
of Hungary and Bohemy, Archeduke of Eastenriche etc. brother to Charles the
Emperor, made king of the Romans: and that after the example of the ancient
Emperors, which were wont to take to them other, that the empire might have a
successor, and that when the other were dead, no debate or occasion of war
might rise among the princes of the empire. This election was at Colen the
year.MDxxx.

The year.MDxxxi. was Ferdinande after the election crowned at Aken in January.

The same year was a Comete seen in Germany, A Comete seen.
Italy France and England, about the syxte day of Auguste, and first
appeared it certain days in the morning before Sun rising, after that
followed it the Sun, and was seen the space of. iij wekes about the euenyng,
after Sun set, until the third day of September. His course was through
the celestial or heavenly signs Cancer. Leo, Virgo and Libra, where it was
seen no more nether appeared any more after that.

Not long after in October rose a war in Switzer The Switzer war within
themselves.
land. For to they of Tzurich stopped the passages, that to their neghburs of
zugia, Vria. Suicia. Siluia and Lucerne, noman could bring corn, salt and
other victuals. Wherefore they armed the^ against those of Tzurich. They met
each other with displaied banners, and they of Tzurich being vanquished with three
fields, had the worst. In the first battayll was slain the preacher of
Tzurich, Huldrich zwinglius. In the mean time endeavored they of Stralborow
and Constance their neighbors, to make an accord among the co^federated. And
thus after.viij. months and.vi. wekes was the vproure alayed. Of the^ of
Tzurich died about five thousand, of the other side a few.

The year M D. xxxii. came Charles the Emperor again out of Brabant into
Germany, and came in March with his brother king Ferdinand to Regenspurg to
keep a parliament. Thithercame The parliament holden at Rege^spurg
the deputies sent from the Imperial cities. There came also many princes, or
at the least, their Ambassadors.

Not very long before that Constantinople was taken by the Turks, I read
there was a solitary man, not far from the city Constantinople, and he should
have prophesied: that the Turks in deed Prophecies of recovering
Constantinople, and of roting the Turks out of Europa.
should win Constantinople, and should root out the kingdom of the Greeks:
but anon after four score years, should they lose Constantinople again, and
that the Turks should be rooted out of Europa. But that time sense
Constantinople was won, is expired the last year.

A most connyng Astronomer also at Naples, called Laurentius Miniatensis an
Astronomer.
Laure^tius Miniatensis, scholemaister to Pontanus, wrote these verses in his
book.lx. years ago, concerning the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturnus in the
sign Cancer, the which he says shall be, and was in the year thousand,
five hundredth and four last past.

That age succedyng ours upon the heles.
Shall Be better, and more praise worthy,
Little of our law shall it disanull scarcely:
But the greueous and hard to suffer things.
In holy matters, shall it avoid doubtless.
All kind of wickedness, and also holy pride.
A king also shall it give us harmless,
Who shall the world end, and peoples repress:
Rebellyng nations shall he subdue to the empire.
And the whole worlds dominion shall he possess.
These verses are most worthy to be marked: and I would not pass them over,
because of the renown of the most famous Emperor. For what higher praise can
be in the Emperor, then that he calls him a Harmless king, even as John
Lichteberg said of him: The shamefast of visage shall raygne every where.

At Magdeburg is found.C. year ago a Latin cronicle, wherein are these words:
Of the blood of Charles the Emperor, and the kings of France, shall be borne
an Emperor, called Charles: the same shall have dominion in all Europa, by whom
also the decayed estate of the church, shall be repared, and the ancient glory
of the empire shall be restored. For there shall come a people, that shall be
called: people without head, and than we to the priests: Peter's little ship
shall suffer great force, but the waves shall crasse at the last, and it shall
have victory. Great and dredefull mutacions of al kingdoms, are at hand, and
the setting store by monks, shall peryshe. The Beast of the West, and the
Lion of the East shall have dominion of the whole world, and the Christians
shallwander through Asia in sauegarde fyftene years: but after that shall
dredeful things be herd of Antichriste.

Abbas Ioachim says in the end of Ieremye: A great Egle shall come, which
shall overcome every man save one, who at the last being despised, shall be for
saken of the people.

I find also another prophecy, which is renowned: The Emperor shall be
awaked, as a man fallen into a sweet sleep. The same shall be counted of men as
dead, and shall go up upon the great sea, and invade the Turks, and shall
overcome them: he shall lead their wives and Children captives. Great fear
and dread shall ouerwhelme the Turks, their wives and children shall weep and
lamente: all the Turks lands shall be given over in to the Emperors hands of
Rome.

I have herd a Portingale say, that an Astronomer should have said to
Ferdinandus our Emperoures great graundefather: that the Turkysh empire
should be subdued and overthrown by a king of Spain, and that the same
should have interpretated the king to be Ferdinande. But Ferdinande should have
answered: That he should not do it, but his heirs that should succeed him.

Other emdences more that are yet restyng, will I at this time pass over. God
the father of mercy, give and grant Christendom victory and grace, for the
glories sake of his godly name. Amen.

Moreover the things that shall yet happen, shall doutlesse mark great and
wise men, which are now in this setting forth of war. As for me, I have
only rehearsed such things of this preparacion of the setting forth to
war, as I was sure of, and therefore do I now make an end of writing.

In the month of September this year, was A Comete seen.
a Comete seen again certain wekes, two hours before Sun rysyng, and toward
the East. When I saw it, it was in Virgo to my iudgemen, and stretched his
brandyshynge tayll between the South and West. But by reason of the gloumynge
and cloudy air in these contreis, could it not be seen here. Howbeit, who will
not judge it to be a fearfullthing, that two Cometes have been seen in the
space nerehande of twelve months? and seeing the Comete of the last year,
namely of the year M D. xxxi. did not appear without the hurt of East and
North: for it seemed to threaten those parts. For the tyrannyshe Turk fell
into Hungary and Eastenryche king Christiernus going into Dennemarck with a
great navy, to demand again his kingdom, yielded himself into Frederick
his fathers brothers the king of Denmarck hands. Christiernus also his son,
that was brought up in the Emperors court, dyed. Verily it is to be feared
also, that the Comete of this year of. M D. xxxij. do signifye great evil to
the parts of Italy and the Rene.

The end of the Cronicle.

The conclusion of this Cronicle of John Carrion.

A book of Chronicles ought to co^prehende most greatest things in a feate
order, so that the rekenyng of the years, and the chief alteracions, that
befall into the religion and other great things may be right observed and
known. For it can not be that all things that are done in one realm, can be
written in one book, though it were great, by reason of the sundry
circumstaunces and occasions of y^ businesses, the which must chefely be
considered. Of this wise truly wrote Herodotus, Theucydi des, Xenophon and
Titus Liuius histories. The other Writers of Histories. Cronicles.
are only to be called Cronicle writers, which also ought not to take upon
them the name of History writers: For they do brefely show things done, and
setting the order of the time before, seem only to aduertyse the wise reader,
to mark some of the notablest things. Which thing we have done also in this
Cronicle: we have only drawn those things as it were in a pathwaye, which
seemed most best, and have other whiles showed their occasions, to the intent
we may learn to mark and forse so much thenarower such like things, in
like chau^ces, Howbeit what profits otherwise besides this do Cronicles bring,
that same have we declared before in the preface.

Truly I must before the end of this writing put the reader again in
remembrance of the saying of Elias, the which we have set in the beginning of
this treatise, that he may so much the more easyer mark both the order of the
time, and also the deeds of the histories. Item that he think that also, that
the end of men's affairs is at hand, according to the saying of Elias, that
the worlds age conteyneth.vi. M. years, and that the same space shall not he
fully expyred: for God shall prevent it because of the worlds corrupt manners.
Now seyeng there are expyred.v. M. and.v. C. years sense the world began,
as may clearly be gathered out of the table following: it is no doubt but that
the worlds age is nerehand come to the end, that Christ our lord do raise
up the death by his coming, and judge the whole world, and that more is also
appoint the deuels and wicked men everlasting fire, but take the very godly
out of al sorrow, and set them into the everlasting fruition of God and bless.
Besides this do the wonderful mutacions and chaunges of all kingdoms
nearehande witness that the worlds end is not far of. For with What the
mutacions of kingdoms de signifye.
in few years even by our remembrance we have perceived the highness of the
Romish bishop, France, Hungary and Dennemarckes kingdoms to have greucously
fallen, and like chance are shortly to be looked for in other kingdoms also.
Daniel witnesses that shortly after that the Turks powers be minyshed, shall
the end of all things of the world be at hand. But the Turkysh kyngdo^s
decay shall doutlesse be seen within few years (if Gods will be so,) and
after that our Emperor Charles shall be deceassed, it can not be, but that the
empire also shall be miserably toren of the Germans themselves. For I fear me
two will then greatly strive for the monarchye. Almighty God of his infinity
mercy, swage so horrible commotions and turn the princes hearts, to concord
and peace.

The toren tranquillity and spoiled peace in the church, may also be a sign
and token, and it is to be feared, lest the same do also grow and sprede
farther by wars and negligence of Romish by shops.

But seyeng Christ himself aduertiseth us in the Gospel of the perils, that
shall be at hand in the latter days, not only in those things that pertayn to
the body, but also those that belong to the sprete, yea the heaven itself also
threateneth with horrible darkeninges and conjunctions: I will pass over to
speak of those tokens, that be rehearsed in the scripture concerning the latter
days, so that at the last we may learn to beware and take heed to our selves
and doubt not to demand and look for aid and comfort of God only in so
great misere of al things. Wherefore I willed the reader to be admonyshed in
this place, to call to remembrance, that those times full of peryls and
wretchedness, are at hand, and that the same peryls ought not to be despised
with a rechelesse mind. For it is no light thing, and such one as all manner
of men do prove with their harm and damage, that realms are changed, empires
pulled out of their frames, and concord of religion is spoiled. The building
or fabrike of the world seems to represente a great and most old
building, which oftentimes is more and more ready to fall, when now does one
wall fall down, then the other. Likewise does the world seem to be ready to
fall at this time, and does by little and little bring a more grievous fall with it,
one and other kingdoms falling down and decayeng. Nether let any man think
that so great a buyldyng shall fall without a most exceeding commotion. God
lyghten our minds, that we being admonyshed with the earnest threatenynges of
the Gospel, may seek at only Christ consolation and refreshynge: and that
great princes may use no less wisdom in the fear of God, then meekness,
to assuage the occasions of all euels. For thereto are they ordained of God,
that with their care and wisdom, they may govern and defend mankind that is
weak and wretched. And if they do their duetye in the fear of God. God shall
likewise be with them, and prosper their enterpryses.

Amen.
A Table of the worlds years, out of the Bible and Philo.
M. vi. C. lvi. until the floude. CC. xcij. until Abraham was borne. CCCC.
xxv. until Moses was borne. Lxxx. until the going out of Egypt CCCC. lxxx.
until Salomons tempel. C. xxxviij. until Ioas the king. CC. xci. until
Ieconias was removed into Babylon. xi. until Jerusalem was waysted by
Nabuchodonosor. Lxx lasted the captivity of Babilo^. C. xci. lasted y^
monarchy of the Perses after that the captivity of Babylon was finyshed. vij.
was Alexander after Darius death. C. xlvi. lasted the kingdom of the Greeks
until Judas Machabeus C. xxxvij. dured the kingdom of the Machabeis. until
Herodes the first time after Josephus. xxx. reigned Herodes: for Christ was
borne the thirtieth year of Herodes. MD. xxxij. sense Christ our saueour was
borne. The year of the was Christ borne. world. iii M. ix. C. lxxiiij.
This present year.MDxxxii. are accomplished sense the world was made.v. M.
CCCC. lxxvi. years.

The city Rome (as witnesses Eutropius) stood before Christ was borne.vij.
C. liij. years: and if the years should be counted a right, it can in a
manner be no better rekened by true histories.

This present year of our lord.MDxxxij. are past sense the city Rome was
builded. ii M. CClxx xv. years. Babylon was not so old before Alexander. For
from Abraham until Alexanders time are.M. vi. C. lxxxvi. years. But now
seyeng Rome is elder then Babylon, it is no doubt but that her end shall be
shortly also, after the two Monarchies.

Nether does the number of the years that is in the Bible greatly disagre
from the order of the Monarchies that is in the chief aucthors of the Greek
histories. Herodotus writes that the Assyrians kept the Monarchy.Dxx. years,
and sense that time to have been no certain Monarchye, until the time of the
Medes. He rekeneth the Medes to have ruled until Cyrus time C. xxx. years.
And the same, as it can not seem false, even so do I greatly allow it: for if
any man do way it aryght, the same shall easily perceive that it does not
disagre with the Bible. That he says the monarchy of the Assyrians to have
stand.Dxx. years, that will he doubtless have referred to that time, when the
kingdom of Babylon and Niniue the city were not yet divided, even when the
Assyrians reigned only at Babylon.

Agathias writes in the second book of the Agathias.
Gothian war, that Ctesias set the number of the years, and the order of the
Monarchies of this wise. As for Ctesias was a Grecian, who when Ctesias.
Artaxerxes Mnemon and Cyrus the younger warred with each other, he was also in
the army, and was a Phisician. Being taken in war, he was at the last carried
to Babylon, where he was honestly entreated, and then reading the hystoryes of
Babylon, he set the number of that kingdom in an order of this wise.

From Ninus until the beginning of the Medes kingdom, wiche did deciuer from
the Assyryans the first, are.M. CCC. lx. years, and this order do all those
observe, that wrote afterward, Diodorus Siculus and Justinius. Diodorus Siculus
wrote of this wise in his third book: Like wise also the resydue of the
kings thyrty in number, held the kingdom, until Sardanapulus, by whose
time, the kingdom of the Assyrians, which had lasted.M. CCC. lx. years, (as
writes Ctesias in the second book,) fell to the Medes. Justinius says of
this wise: The assyrians, who afterward were called Syria, had the governance
M. CCC. years. Herodotus does pass over somthynge, in the mean time that the
decayeng king dome of the Assyrians came to the Medes. I think this also, that
these years of Ctesias concerning the beginning of Babylon, to be understand
from the time of Nembroth, not Ninus.

The Medes reigned after the falling from the Assyrians until Cyrus, about three
hundredth years, as Agathias gathers out of Ctesias.

The kingdom of the Perses until Alexander, did last.CCxxviij. years, as
witnesses Agathias and some Grecian writers.

Alexander and his posterity kept Babylon until the time, that the power of
the Parthians began to grow: and Agathias sets CCC. years seven less, and
that is from Alexander until Augustus time.

Afterward reigned the Parthians in the East hundredth years, until the time
of Alexander Seuerus the Emperoures, and then did Artaxerxes the Persian stick
through and slaye Artabanus the last king of the Parthians. And of this wise
came the East kingdom again to the Perses, which were mighty until Mahomets
time. For the successors of Mahomet invaded the Perses, and teke in the empire
of whole Arabia. But the Turks took from them afterward Syria and Asia the
less. And thus were the kingdoms of the East tossed finally with diverse
mutacio^s, the one people was oftymes removed to the other. It is greatly
necessary to ouerlaye all these things, and often to consider them, that the
order of all times and histories may be known aryght.

An addition unto the Cronicle of John Carrion contaygnyng the acts and
histories come to pass in diverse and sundry parts of the world from the year
of our lord.MDxxxij. unto the year of our lord.MD. L. excerpted and gathered
out of the best historiographers by John Funke of Nourenborough. And caused to
be translated by Gwalter Lynne.
AT the entrance or beginning of the convocation The convocation or counsel
holden at Ramsburgh.
holden at Ratisbone or Raynesborough in the year of our lord.MD. xxxij. in
lent, there lay at Nurrenborough certain princes electours, with many other
nobles of the empire, among whom were as principal Albert Archebyshop of
Mogunce or Mence, Lodowike Palatine of the Rhyne, John Frederike duke of Saxon
and electour imperial, which princes and nobles did there treat and consulte
upon matters The duke of Saxon agrees not to the election of ye king of the
Romans.
of religion, and about the establishing of king Ferdinandus (to whose election
as to be king of the Romans, the said John duke of Saxo^ and electour
imperial would not accord nor consent) and after much intreataunce they
obtained of themperours majesty a grant and promise of a sure and steadfast
peace until the next general cou^sail that was to come, yea and is to come yet,
even at this day. Other notable acts concerning matters of religion was there
none concluded in that convocation. For Soliman Emperor The second breakyng
in of Soliman into Germany.
of the Turks was up with all his power and invaded the land of Hungary,
wherefore the Christian princes were constrained with all speed and strenght
possible to prepare themselves to resist the said adversary. Insomuche that
there was prepared such an army and host of men of diverse nations as never
was seen before in all Germany, y^ beginning whereof was about the feast of S.
John the baptist, the warriors of the town of Nurenburgh being the first
that arrived at Ween in Austriche, for there was all the whole host appointed
to assemble and come together: and the same assembling continued until the
feast of saint Bartholome we next ensuyng. The nombere of Duche pietons or
footmen was about four score thousand stout and valiant fyghting men. And
of the horse men there was about.xxiiij. thousand. The Bohemes were in the
number above twenty thousand. All these lay about Wyene by the river called
the Danube a lycle mile from the town, Their chief captain was the right
noble and mighty prince, lord Frederick Palatine of the Rene etc. now being
electour imperial. About the said town lay also upon a fifty thousand
Spanyardes, which in these affairs used but small kyndnesse toward the
germaynes. For in their passage from the County of Tyroll over the Eye and the
Danube into Austrich they burned certain strong holds and towns well
inhabited, and some they pylled, and with women and maidens they wrought such
vylanye and enormitie (which is horrible to be spoken) that many of them dyed
thorough their said outtragiousnes. The goodly and plesau^t City of Krembes
was utterly by the^ subverted and brent up except fourtenne houses with
certain walls. After this when they lacked vitualles in their camp for the
space of one day, they russhed with violence before the City of Wyene,
wherein the Emperor and the king had their being, with a great nombre of
other great men of arms and warriors which were come thither with them, and
would have assaulted and ouerrunne the same town if the Germaynes had not the
sooner resysted them, and let their enterprise.

In the mean season the Turk laid syege to a Guns assaulted of the Turk by
the space of.xij. days
certain little Town called Guns, which lies about twelve or thirtene miles
from Wyene, in the coasts of Hungary, and assaulted the same most fiercely by
the space of twelve days, during the which time he sought all means possible
to subuerte and overthrow the same. But the right noble and worshypfull Sir
Nicolas Iuristhi knight and Ruler of the said town did so manfully and
valiauntly behave himself in those affairs with his cytesens or bourgeouses
being in nombre about eight hundredth men, and one hundred soldiers which
were laid there in garnison for the sauegarde of the same town that the Turk
maruayled not a little of it. Wherefore he promised unto the said Ruler fre
passage and saulf conduct, and having personally himself talked with him, did
highly praise him for his constauncy and faithfulness which he had used toward
his prince, in y^ he had so constantly resisted and repelled his adversary: and
after that he had endued him with great gifts, he sent him again to his own.

As Soon now as the Turk with his army was departed from the said town, and
had given over the said syege, the wall of the said Town fell The wall of
(...) falls (...)e by it self.
down to the ground by it self. whereby it may appear that the same was
before preserved and defended from that violent power of the Turk by the mighty
hand and assistence of God.

Now when the Turk perceived such a great power of the germayne nation
coming against him* he retired backwarde again with his power which all
ready entered into Stewermarke as far forth as Graytes, and made his arryr to
march and pass alonge by the said Town of Graytes even from the dawnyng in
the morning until the next morrow following, whereof it may easily be gathered
with what power he was come thither. But yet to thyntent he might not seem to
have bestowed all his labor in vain, and to have ^led without any harm done
to the Germayne nation he left behind him not far from the new town in
Austriche, about. xi^. thousand* some say xvi. thousand men, to destroy the
borders of Steyerm^^^^^ and Austrych as soon as the Germayne warriors should
have removed. Howbeit after much searchyng thesaied number of men was espied
and their* enterprise brought to light. For this cause Duke Frederike chief
Captain took unto him a certain number of lance knights or Pietons, and a
certain number of heavy horsemen with whom he undertook and attempted to smite
the said multitude of Turks, and compassed them on every side, besides the
montaynes by a great cawssy and caused certain dubble soldiers well armed to
follow them at their hyles and to bar them in, for turnyng backwarde again
of the which dubble soldiers was Captain one Sebastiane Skartell of
Ausborongh, insomuch that the said Turks were first assailed with two heaps,
against whom they defended them selves stoutely, but yet they lost there about a
thousand of their own men, whereupon eftsoon they took their flight, but as
they would have fled out of the mountains the other heaps of our men were in
their necks, by whom also they were all discomfited and slain, so that no
Turk might escape. Some of them they found afterward on the mountains and
in wodes, and some upon trees, where they were fled to save their lives, among
whom some were shotdown with gonnes like birds or wyldefoule, and some were
taken and delivered to the Trosse to cut and mangle them at their pleasures,
which were very pyteously chopped and carved of the younger sort of people.

After that this alarm was ceased and qualified the Emperor and the king
road forth into the camp of the Germans, and the Emperoures majesty
beholding the people as they stood in array maruayled excidyngly concerning the
nombre and multitude of them, insomuche it was reported that he should ask of
duke Frederick the upper capitain whether such an other multititude of men
might be found and assembled thoroughout all Duchelande, whereunto thesaide
Duke made answer, that it was scant perceived in the towns of Ducheland that
any man there was missing or lackyng after this (as some do affirm) there
should be taken a certain truce and agreement with the Turk for a certain
time, but how, after what sort and manner, or on what condition, this hangs
yet within the pen* and is like also there to remain yet a while. Some are
of this opinion, that the cause why the Emperoures majesty made no haste to
pursue after the Turk was this, that winter was at hand, and that therefore
the warriors were dismissed and sent away, so that with the said innumerable
multitude of warriors littel good was donesauig that much money was
vnprofytably wasted and expended. Wherefore I suppose after mine own judgment
that in case the Emperors and the kings majesty had proceeded and gone
forward with that army or multitude which was there at that time assembled
and gathered together and had made sure certain towns in Hungary which would
gladly have rendered and yielded themselves again, while the Turks fled, and had
at the going out of winter be gonne again to seek the Turk at home in his
own land, the Turkysh tyrant would no more so spitefully plage us in our
co^treis. But thus would God punysh us yet longer for our wickedness, for the
which cause also God did suffer the best cou^ sail to be hindered by one man
only: for it is thought, that the Emperors majesty was by the only coun sayll
of Anthony de Leua turned from thesaid pur Anthony de Leua.
sewte, so that the Turk had a free and sure passage home again into his own
dominions, and remained unharmed in Hungary for somuche as he was not there put
to any loss or hynderaunce by our men, or on our behalf.

While these things were a doing in Austriche Andrewe de Aurea.
and Steirmarke, Andrew de Aurea chief capitain of themperours majesty's navy
upon the seas, went at themperours commandment, with an exceeding great Armade
or navy, unto the city of Corona, The city of Corona taken
which lies in the Ilonde of the Greeks sometime called Poloponesus, and now
Morea, which city he did overcome, and expelled from thence all the Turks.
But the Christians did not long enjoy the same, for within two years after
the Turks obtained the possession of the said town again, small to our
rejoicing.

When the matter was now in Austriche qualified The Emperourre turned into
Italy to the Pope.
and all things quiet, the Emperor Charles the fifth returned thorough the
mountains of Stiermarke namely thorough kerint and Frioulesonttyme called
Forum July, and so through Mantua The Pope meteth the emperor at Bononia.
into Italy again to the Pope, Clement by name, who came to mete him at
Bononia with great pomp and solempnitie, in so much that he continued in
Italy all the winter of this year, stablishing the same in order peace and
tranquillity.

In England was also in this year moved a battle. Battle moved in England
against the Scotts.
For king Henry the eight sent men into Scotland against James the fifth, king
of the Scotts where in conclusion they slew a great number and took many
prisoners, and so returned.

Also in the same year dyed the right high and The death of John duke of Saxon.
mighty prince* John duke of Saxon, and electour imperial etc. and was
honorably buried at Wittenborough in the Castle church: whose son and heir
is the right noble and christen Prince John Frederick, which after the
deceasse of his said father John Frederick duke of Saxon.
succeeded in the governance of the said dukedom of Saxon as electour
imperial, rulynge the same most honorably in the fear of God much to his
praise and commendacion.

There was also a Comete or blasyng star seen A Comete or blasing star ^^^^.
this year in the month of September, which appeared early in the morning two
hours before the risyng of the Sun, by the space of certain wekes, in the
sign of Virgo, Libra, and Scorpius, at the oriental corner stretchyng her
blasyng tail toward the southwest. A great in^^^cion of wat^^ in Holla^d
Seeland etc.


The second day of November was there a great inundacion of water broken in,
into Freeseland, Holland. Seeland, and Flaunders, which was very damageable to
the said countries and to thinhabiters thereof.

Also Christerne king of Norway being returned Christerne k^n^ of D^^(...)ke
after h^^ retur^^ta (...)our (...)e (...)l.
into his said kingdom the year before, from the parties of low Ducheland,
where he had kept him self by the space of ten years, was required, by the
counsayll of Denmark to come to Copmanhauen, otherwise called Coppenhagen,
against king Frederick, which was put in there by the help of the town of
Lubeke, when the said Christerne fled out of the Realm, that he might there
receive and take in possession the kingdom of Denmark, but when he suspected
no guyle, relented and put away his soldiers, and came into Denmark, the
Counsayll of the Land took him prisoner, not regardinge the promises and saulf
conduit by them made unto him: And so they kept him in the castle of
Sunderborough, out of the which he came never as yet. So that after this
king Frederick did peaceably enjoy his kingdom until he dyed.

At Lindowe by the sea coaste was in A mo^struous Calfe borne by ye sea cost
about Lindowe. The Emperor Charles retourneth from Genua into Spain.
this year borne a dubble calfe, with two heads, four ears, and eighte
feet, hanginge altogether.

In the year of our Lord.M. ccccc. xxxiij. when ye Emperor, namely Charles the
fifth had stablyshed unity and concord among the Princes and Cities of Italy and
Lumbardy, he departed with a competent and well appointed Armada or Nauye from
Genua, and having a prosperous passage, arrived within few days after in
Spain where he was received of his subjects with great joy.

After this by the counsayll and instigation of New Indes or Islands
plentyfull of gold and silver found out by the Spa^yardes.
themperours Majesty, the Shypmaiesters and maryners of Spain found out
certain Indes or Islands in the sea, being unknown before, which do so
excedynglye abound in riches of gold and silver, that it is unspeakable.
These took they in by force of arms and subdued them under the subjection of
the emperors Majesty.

In this year the Pope and Frauncys A sole^pne co^munycacyon holde^ at
Massilia between ye Pope and the French king.
the French king held a solemn communycatyon together at Massylya which
lies in the Prouynce of France, where after many and diverse consultacyons it
was concluded that Henry Duke of Orleans, son to the said French king
shuolde marye Pope Clementes The duke of Orleans marieth the Popes cosyn.
cosyne, the daughter of Laurence Medyce Duke of Vrbyne, with whom the Pope
had promised a rich dowrye.

Thus has this Pope Clemente always endeavored him self to allure and draw
unto him the high Potentates and Rulers of the world, by the help of whom
he might extyrpate and root out the pore Chrystyans, whom they call
Lutheryans and Heretykes: But God would not suffer it long: as it is written,
There is no device nor counsayll against the Lord but it shall come to
naught.

In the same year the mighty bond and The Euangelycal bo^d is opened by ye
french king.
confederatyon of the Germayne Natyon, which was called the Euangelycall
confederacyon, or the bond of the Gospel, being kept secret of many was
at the prouocatyon of the French king opened and disclosed.

There apeared also another Comete or Another Comete or blasing star apeared.
blasynge star from the end of the month of June, unto the beginning of
Auguste, in the North, and in the signs of Gemyny, Taurus and Aryes,
thoroughe the which signs she made her course in her going backewarde,
having her tail extended toward the South. And this was the third Comete or
blasynge star that had appeared wethyn those two years. What they portended
or sygnyfyed, or what alteracyon of Estates and other things they brought
with them, may a dyscreete reader gather and perceive by the Stories herafter
following. For such wonderful works of God (although they come by the course
of nature) yet are they not without their special workynge.

It is said also that in this year of.M. Shiltagh burned down to ye ground.
CCCCC. xxxiii. the Devil burned a little Town in Germanye called Shyltagh
down to the ground, by the means of a certain wythche, on maundy thursdaie.

The fyfte day of October in the night burned at Andwarpe the Church called
our lady Church being suddenly set on fire.

At Nurrenboroughe and in many other A great Pestilence in Germany.
places of thempyre lyenge there about reigned this year a great Pestylence,
in so much that at Nurrenboroughe only from. S. Margretes day, until. S.
Martins day folowinge dyed ten thousand persons.

The sixtene day of November was a great earthquake, and an horrible tempeste
of wind, A great earthquake and tempest of wind.
which plaged and troubled the Towns in high Germany very sore, namely, Cu^
Feldechurche. S. Gall, with other towns and vyllages lyenge nyghe unto them,
by the River called the Rhene.

This year Henrye the eighte, king of King henry the.viii was d^uorsed from
his first wife married to an other.
England. etc. for certain consyderacyons him thereunto mouynge was dyuorced
from his wife which had been first married to his brother prince Arthur, and
married another, on wytsonday.

In the year of our Lord.M. CCCCC. 1534. The Anabaptystes t^ke the City of
Mynster in Westphale.
xxxiii. in the month of January, The Anabaptists, which had gathered them
selves together out of Hollande and Freselande, by preuy subteltyes and
conspyracyes which they had made with certain burgeouses of the City of
Mynster in Westphale, invaded the same City. took possessyon of it, and
expelled from thence all the Burgeoules and inhabytauntes thereof, that would
not take part with them and follow their facultye. The Anabaptystes make them
a king.
They chose them also a king, that was a Taylloure, named Ihon of Leyden,
which ordained for him self two special Counsayllours, the one called
Knypperdullynge, and the other kreghtynge Knypperdullynge etc. kregh tynge.
and in conclusyon they made such a dysorder and confusyon whytin the said
City, that not without a cause all the people of Westephale did rise against
them.

But when the right noble Prince Philyppe Landgraue of Hessen took in hand to
accord Philip Landgraue of Hessen.
the matter between the said Anabaptystes and the Bishop, whom they had
expelled, he could nothing prevail, so sore had the Devil blinded that
Anabaptystycall generatyon. Wherefore the said Bishop compassed the said
City with a great power on every syede to thyntent he might overcome and
The City of Minster besieged by y^ bi^hop. Scarcitye of victualles in Mynster.
The Anabaptists eat lether and couerynges of books.
subdue them either with the sword or else by famyne.

And although there was great scarcyte and lack of vyctualles wythyn the
said Cyrye in so much that at the last they were said to eat lether and
couerynges of books yet did they sustain, bearcoute, prolonge and hold out
the said syege until the next year following, whereof we shall speak more in
place conuement.

In the mean season did Philip Landgraue Philip landgraue of Hessen goes
about to set his uncle into his own land again.
of Hessen prepare himself after the best manner, to restore his Uncle Duke
Hulderyke of Wyrtenbergh again to his Dukedom, from whence he was expelled
fyftene years before during the which time king Ferdynando had the
governance and use thereof.

But first because the said prince of Hessen would do nothing
presumptuously nor temeraryouslye, he sent word to themperoures Mayestye in
Spain, and to the king in Austryche, desiring them to restore his said Uncle
Duke Hulderyke to his Lands again for so much as he had now suffered
sufficient punyshemente for his offense, and presumptyon by him committed
against the Empire (for he had taken a certain town pertaining to
thempyre called Rutlynge, which was the cause of his expulsyon) in that he
had lacked and forborne the use and profytes of his Lands all that space and
season.

Which thing if they were not willing to do he was in a readynes him self
to set him in again parforce, Although he would be loath to use any carneste
and rigourous fashions.

But while he was not answered according to his expectatyon and request, he
went furthe with his power into the land of Wyrtenbergh that where both
Princes met together sloutelye, but Philippe the Palatyne Philip y^ palatine
put to flight and wounded. Hulderike duke of wi^te^berg restored to his o^ ^^
d(...)o^.
with his men was put to flyghte, and he him self wounded in his hele with a
shot, wherefore the said Landgraue was very sorye.

After this battle the towns yielded them selves one after another, so that
within few days the said Duke Hulderyk brought all his Lands again under his
power and subjection.

But while the said Landgraue by reason of this act had need to fear
themperoures and the kings Majesty, least they might work ought against
him, he went with his army toward Vlmes besides the River of Danube, where
he tarried either for an agremente and a peaceable return, or else for
another answer.

In so much that a sure peace on the Emperoures and kings Mayestyes behalf,
A peace granted unto y^ ^an^g^a ^e on them perours behalf.
with sure appendycles and circumstances, was there promised him by Albert
Archebyshoppe of Mence, Ihon Frederyke Duke of Saxon, both Electours
imperial, and George, Duke of Saxon After the obtaynyng whereof he dispersed
his army without delay, and returned home again into his own land. Here
The la^dgraue retourneth into his own land. A co^me^datio^ of liberalyty and
boldenes in ye landgraue.
might I take occasyon to extol and hyghly to praise not only the bold and
reasonable dead or act of the Landgraue, in that he did so truly and
faythefullye help his Uncle into his own domynyon again, without any
respect had to the power of them that had the same lands of his Uncle, in
possessyon more by sufferaunce, then by any right tytell.

But also the patience and mekenes both of the Emperoures and the kings
Majesty, in that a co^me^datio^ of patience and mekenes in the emperor and ye
king of Hungary.
they did so gentlye and wyllyngly renounce the said Dukedom, Which they might
very easily, according to their power among men, have subdued and brought
again under their subjection and dominatiion.

But forasmuch as I am not minded here to describe hole stories with all their
circumstances, but only to touch brefely the principal acts and doings, I
will commet the same to another, or peradventure entreat of it my self
herafter to my power. The death of Frederike king of De^marke.


The same year of. 1534. died Frederick king of Denmark, about whose corse
happened a wonderful and straung thing, which doubteles did signify the
sheding of blood that followed afterward in the same kingdom. For when the
dead corpse of ye said king (according to the custom and manner) was enbawmed or
anointed with bawme and other spyces and wrapped in clean seryng clothes, and
was enclosed in a shrine piched and prepared accordinglye the same dead corpse
(contrary to nature) began A strange thing or toke^ happened about y^ dead
corpse of the king. The earl of Olde^boroughe ^ y^ Lubekes invade y^ dukedom of
h^lsa^es. The death of George weuer and marks mayer.
to blede in such sort, that the blood was received and taken up in
vessels, and immedyatelye after the people of the land were vysyted with wars
and battayles. For Chrystophore Count of Oldenboroughe, accompanied with them
of Lubeke, whose Capytaynes were George weuer, and Marks Mayer (which
afterward according to their deservings were condemned and put to death)
invaded the land of Christyans Duke of holstone, and took certain towns and
Castles, which not longeafter the said Duke recovered again, putting them
of Lubeke to great loss both by water and by land, until such time as the
other Sea Towns with Henrye Duke of Mekelboroughe took the matter in hand,
and concluded a peace and vnyty between A peace concluded between the town of
Lubeke and the dukedom of ho sure. The captains of Lubeke desirous to invade
de^marcke.
the Town of Lubeke, and the Dukedom of holstone which peace was registered
and proclaimed the eyghtene day of November.

After this were the Capytaynes of Lubeke moved toward Denmarcke, and
consulted with the said Count of Oldenborough how they might conuenyently
invade and enter the said kingdom of Denmark and Norwaye, whereof did ensue a
new war, as A new war ^^.
shall be declared in the next year.

This year was also seen a wonderful apparition in Denmark besides the town
of Sleswyghe lyenge not far from Lubeke, which (as a certain Secretarye of
the said place A wonderful apparitio^ in De^marke.
by an oath affyrmeth in his wrytynges to the Queen dyaected) apeared in the
air the third day of June at after noone, and was seen of a thousand persons
or more, as hereafter follows.

First there apeared a great multitude of Lions fighting one with another.

Secondlye there apeared a man armed on horseback with a iustynge spear under
his arm as though he would have iusted with an other, having a long
bearde, and many busshes of feathers.

Thyrdelye, there appeared a man with a crown imperyall, as like unto
themperours Mayestie, that the said Secretary and many of his servants,
thought none other but that it had been themperoures own living person,
wherefore some of them took of their cappes and were ready to do reverence
unto him.

Fourthelye there apeared the symylytude or Lykenes of a great Regyon or
Country, replenyshed with Cytyes, Castles and Vyllages, well distinct and set
in order, which were all consumed thoroughe a swyft fire which went up in the
same.

Fyftly, there apeared an other Regyon not unlike to the first garnyshed with
Cytyes Castles and vyllages and specially with one great and mighty City,
wych City was myghtelye assaulted by a great multitude of warryours with
gonnes and all manner of artyllerye both by land and by water with migh tie
ships under sail. There appeared also among the said warryours certain
Capytaynes, which in swyftnes or agylyty and in length of body exceded the
other.

Syxtelye, there apeared half a black Egle, which lepte out of the said
horse, out of whose claws or talentes fell small Snakes, among the which was
one great Dragon.

Seuentlye, there apeared afterward in the place where the great Cyty had been, a Camel, which drank out of a tempestuous water, as though it had been the ragynge sea, by the waves whereof the said beast was covered.

Eyghtlye, there appeared after this a certain horse, whereon noman did ride,
but a lion which lay upon his back, having a crown hanging on his head,
and upon the said lion sat a Cock, which by continual pickynge and bytynge
consumed the hole head of the Lion, but the skull remained a great while
hanging upon the horse.

Nyntly, there appeared also a great Cross of a bloody color, which
immediately diuyded it selse into many small and black Crosses.

Tentlye and last of all there apeared a fyery man with a crown imperial, all
armed, which held on either side of him a horse, and under this was the for
said Cross.

But under al these were many sorts of Dragons and unknown beasts, As
Lions, bears, and of other kinds which were never seen before for some of
them had heads of wild swyne with great tethe, and yet resembled not the
swynes in any other part. But the most part of them were Lions.

The Cross, the Camel, and the Lion whose head the Cock did eat were seen
last of all.

Henrye the eyghte often hat name king of Henry king of Ingland excommunicated
by the pope.
England, when he was by the Pope exco^munycated for making dyuorse with his
wife (which was his brothers wife before) called the nobylytye and best
learned of his Realm together, and consulted with them, In the which
consultatyon or parlyamente it was concluded, that The Pope has ^^ authority
over Ingland.
the Pope had none authorytye nor power over him, nor yet over the Church of
his Realm: but that the king him self was both king of his Royalme, and
also supre me head and defender king He^nry forsakes yt Pope. A bokt set
forth up king henry against the primacpe of ye Pope. King Henry joined in
co^federatin^ with yt Princes and mayntainers of ^ gospel.
of the same Church. Werefore he did vttterlye forsake the Pope and fell from
him. He did also set furthe a book of the authority and power of Christen
Princes over their Churches against the usurped authorytye of the Pope and his
detestable abhomynatyon, and procured afterward to be joined in confederatyon
with the Euangelycall Princes and towns, against the Pope and specially with
the town of Lubeke.

Whithin a littel while after this, his deputye in Irelande fell from him, and
caused the whole Island Ireland rebe^^eth against their prince. Pope Clement
dies.
to rebel against their Prince.

In thesayed year the five and twentiest day of September dyed Pope Clement
the seventh of that name, being old six and fyftye years and four months.

After him was elected and chosen, the twelft day of October, Paul the
third, a very Paul y^* iii. chosen to be Pope.
old man, which before was called Alexander Farnesius, a Romayne borne, and
had been bishop of Ostia. What Romysh touches the same has wrought and used,
shall be mentioned hereafter in place convenient.

While this was a doing in the Weste, the bloudthurstye Mars was busy in the
East: For the most mighty Sophy king of the Persyans, invaded the Land of
Armenia against Sophi p^in^^ of y^ Persians ^^^^^beth y^ Turk. Imbrai bassa.
the Turk with a mighty army. Wherefore the Turk sent his chyefe Capytayne
(called Imbrai Bassa) with a strong host, to defend Armenia from and against
the Persyans.

But when they met by the River of Eufrates, Imbrai Bassa with the most part
of his Imbray bassa with his host slain.
host was slain. Then Soliman the Turkey she Emperor intendyng to revenge
the said loss received at the hands of the Persyans, went out of the city
of Epiphania (which lies in the end of the land of Cilicia, and abutteth
upon The Turk comes against y^ said Sophy.
Syria) with a great nombre of men well appointed, and had a prosperons journey
and a lucky paspassage until he approached nygh unto the costs of Armenia. But
as soon as he had attained unto it he The turk compassed about of the
Periyans. The Turk escapes ^a ro^e^^ with a lewe.
was vnwarres enuyronned, compassed and besyeged round about of the Persyans
in the mountains on every side, in such wife, that thesayd Soliman had much
to do to save his life, and to escape with a few of his men into Syria.

Whylest Solomon was thus pestered and busyed with the Persyans, a certain
Pyrate or Sea roauer, whom the Lombardes and the Barbarossa inuabeth the
kingdom of Tunyse.
people of Mauritania do call Barbarossa, rose up in Greece, and gate unto him a
Turkyshe Armad a well appointed, intending to invade and ouertunne the
kyngedome of Tunise, lyenge in Africa, where sometime Carthago was builded,
and at his arryuynge he pilfered and spoiled syrste the City of Ostia, lyenge
not far from Room.

After that he kept the sea about Genua a Barbarossa suodueth Affryca the less
good while, and when they of Africa suspected least of all, they were of him
invaded. In so much that he subdued unto him self all the lesser Africa, and
expelled king Altzachenus from Tunise. King Altzachenus expelled from Tunyse.


Thus has this Tyrant overcome Africa, wherein he reigned and tryumpheth yet
at this day with great pride and arrogance.

The fyfte day of Iulye in the said year The (...) of Breda burned.
of.M. CCCCC. xxxiiii. were burned at Breda in the land of Brabant, nine
hundredth and three score houses by a sudden fire.

In the beginning of the Winter arose many Great tempests of wind.
horrible and tempestuous Westerly and also Southerly wyndes, whereby certain
quarters in low Duchelande and thinhabitauntes of Sealande dwelling nygh the
sea side sustained notable losses and damages.

In the land of Pole were all waters and Waters and ryuers excedingly
increassed ^^ y^ ^ande of Pole.
ryuers so excedingly increassed, that they brook down at Crakowe and at
Casymyre mighty stonebridges and walls, with many other strong buyldynges,
notwythstandynge that in a manner thoroughoute all Europa besides all waters
were very small, and partly dried up thorough the great heat of the same
Summer.

This year the Duke of Millan married The duke of Milla^ marieth y^ dough^^r
(...) y^ king Denmark.
the daughter of Cristerne captyue king of Denmark, which was borne unto him
of Izabell sister to the Emperor Charles.

IN the year of our Lord, 1535. The Emperor prepares an armada toward
Africa.
the Emperor Charles prepared him self with great power, and made out a
mighty Armada or navy, furnyshed with all manner of necessaries, and thoroughlye
manned with Duche, French and Spanyshe warriors, The kingdom of Tunise
rec^^^red b^ the pe^our. Barbarossa ex^^lled from Tunise.
wherewyth he sailed first out of Spain into the I Will of Sardinia. From
thence into Sicilia, and from thence he sailed into Africa in the month of
June, and recovered the city and kyngedome of Thunise again, which
Barbarossa had taken before, whom the Emperor expelled again from those
quarters, and restored King Altzachenus restored to his kingdom of Tunise. The
castle of Golleta reserved for the emperor.
the old king Altzachenus again to his kingedome on this condytyon that he
should yearelye pay a certain trybute to the Emperor. But the Castle of
Golleta did themperoures Mayeste reserve to his own use, which he furnyshed
also with men, retaynynge the same only from the kingdom of Tunyse, All the
residue of the said kingdom did he delyuerer to the said king.

This battayll and affairs being ended The Emperor returns from Africa.
themperoures Majesty returned again with his Navy into Sicylya, and arrived
with a prosperous course at Palerrno, (which sometime was called Panormus.

While the Emperor was busy to set Barbarossa inuadeth the I Will of Minorca.
all things in order in the kingdom of Tunise, Barbarossa invaded the I Will
called Mynorca, which is the least among the Isles of balearis, destroyenge
the same by spoylynge and burning very piteously.

Also the Affrycanes in the kingdom The Affricanes attempt rebellion.
of Thunyse did not behave themselves very faithefullye toward themperoures
Mayesty. For when they would save them selves from his power and some of them
went about to make an insurrectyon.

The Emperoures Majesty sent his Andrewe ^e Aurea appointed to keep ye
Affricanes in awe.
chief Capytayne Andrewe de Aurea upon the sea toward Affryca to punyshe and
correct the rebels, for the better establyshemente of all things in the
kingdom of Tunyse.

In the lowest parts of Ducheland did the The sect of the Anabaptists in
creas^eth. The Anabaptists ^^kem^ ^^w(...) ^ go naked.
Sect of the Anabaptists myghtelye increase, Wherefore the towns by the sea
side feared a great destruction on there behalf. Among the which Sect some
were so deuelysh and shameless, that they did not only without any
conscience and shame take many wives, but also went altogether naked even as
they were borne in this world. Such is the order where the Deuell is
Capytayne, that neither nurtour, honestye nor yet the fear of God is regarded.

But they that were within the Town The Anabaptists within (...)e ^pp^^lled.
of Mynster, and had been now more then a year therein besyeged, were not very
well at ease, allthough by the reason of their foolyshe Phantasyes and hardened
hearts they could not nor yet would not perceive it, until they were
utterly destroyed.

For notwythstandyng that the said syege pressed them, and an horrible and
importunate famine (as was mentioned before in the last year) reigned among
them, Yet were they by the comfortable persuasyons of their false Prophets so
hardened, that they minded nothing less then to yield by the Town and save
their lives, notwythstandynge that thereunto they were often times required
with lyberall and gracyous promyses.

But contrary wise they defended themselves the longer the fearcer, and shot
out of the Town with ordinance as though the deuell had been among them, to
the great auoyaunce of their adversaries, in so much that not a few valiant
warriors in the Camp were slain with their ordinance. And to declare the
madness of the said Anabaptists The madness of the Anabaptists.
I have thought it mete not to omit a folysh act done by a certain woman
among them. Forasmuch therefore as they within the town had this opinion of
the said town of Mynster, that it The Anabaptists believed that Minster was
new Jerusalem.
was that new Jerusalem mentioned in the Apocalipse, thorough the which all
the heathen should be destroyed, so that the christians should reign in peace
a thousand years (which saying although they must be understand spiritually
were they expounded by them carnally) the said folysh woman would A woman would
conterfet Judith.
counterfette the act of Judith which slew holofernes, and delivered her
City. Wherefore she made her boaste that if she might be costely arrayed and
decked, she would go forth (if she were permitted) into the hooste of her
adversaries, and easily overcome the bishop. While now the king and the other
in the town were so foolysh and made not only to believe her, but also to
further her in the said affairs, trustyng that their deliverance was at hand,
she went out, and behaved her self in all points as though she had been
escaped and fled out of the city. But her dissimulacion being espied and
perceived, she was taken and brought before the Bishop, and after her
confession, rewarded wit death, according to her deseruyng.

For as much now as the said craft and practice bad no good success the
Anabaptists within the city ought to have considered that there was no
fortune in their doing, seeing they were yet oppressed to the uttermost. But
they did herein resemble the Jews in their last destructio^at Jerusalem, for
the more God plaged them with famine and dissension among them selves, the more
hard hearted and stifnecked they were, until at the last one escaped privily
out of the said city, and brought in certain of the bishops soldiers at
the gate called the holy cross gate, which soldiers after they had slain the
watchemen opened the gate and so made away into the city for the other. Thus
was the city of Mynster taken in again and delivered from the powere of the
Anabaptists at the feast of S. John the baptiste in the night. And the next
day following whatsoever would make any resistau^ce being slain with the sword,
the king with his chief counsayllours craftyng and knipperdulling were taken
prisoners. The king (...)ing and knipperdulling taken. The king of the
^^baptistes with his co^sellers put to death.
These three were aftewarders for the space of certain months carried about
in the country from place to place for a spectacle and example to all men. And
at the last on S. Vincentes day in the year of our lord.MDxxxvi. they were put
to death with fyry tongues, and their dead bodies hanged up in iron baskettes or
grates, out of the steple of S. Lamberts Church, within the said city of
Mynster, the king in the mids somewhat hyer then his said two cou^sailers,
for a perpetual memorial and warning to all commocioner raysers of tumulte and
rebels against ye lauful magistrates ordained of God. Thus took this kingdom
of the Anaba pristes a shameful end, according to their deserts.

In Denmark raged the duke of Oldenborough with the capitaines of Lubeke (as
he had begone the year before) but the most part of the germayne counsayll
chose Christian Duke of Holston to be Christian duke of Holston chosen to be
king in Denmark.
king in Denmark, desyring him to assiste them against the said duke of
Oldenborough and them of Lubeke. While now the said request was easy to be
granted, and the said duke of Holston had taken Iudland in possession all
ready (which is no small portion of the kingdom of Denmark, abutting upon
the land of Holstone) he passed with his army into the I Will of Funa* otherwise
called Fion, and overcame the city of Asnites. But when the duke of
Olde^borough with them of Lubeke assaulted him with an host of men well
appointed both on horseback and on foot, the said Christian obtained the
victory, so that the duke of Olde^borough lost much people where among other
was slain John count The count of Hoya, and the Earl of Teckelborough slain.
of Hoya, and an Earl of Teckelburgh in Westphale, and even the same day
(which was the.xi. day of June) they of Holstone took from them of Lubeke an
Armada of ships, and put the men of Lubeke which they found in the same, in
captivity. In somuche that the said Christian had the ouerhande on every
side, which was unto him a witness from God that he should be king in Denmark.

In Hungary and Austrich were diverse louedayes Louedayes kept in Hungary.
kept between Ferdinando and John Weyda kings of Hungary, and the Turks
imbassadour, to wete if Hu^gary might be brought to apeaceable estate never
theles there was nothing concluded that was notable and profitable.

Also in this year. 1535. there was a marriage concluded The king of Poles
married the daughter of ^erd^^anto king of Bohemy.
between ye king of Poles and the king of Boheme. For Sigismonde king of Poles
married Sigismu^de his son to Elisabeth the daughter of Ferdinando king of
Bohemy, which in the year of our Lord.MDxliij. following was celebrated with
great solempnitie, as shall be mentioned hereafter in place convenient.

In the month of November the second day the The death of the Duke of Mylan.
duke of Mylan departed out of this world. And immediately, after Frauncis the
French king prepared him self with all his power to recover the dukedom of
Mylan, and entered into the land of Sauoy, whereof ensued great wars the year
next following, in those quarters.

Frederike Duke of Baier, Palatine by the Rene The duke of ^a^er marieth the
daughter of Denmark.
(now electour imperial) took to wife the right excellent princesses Dorothee,
daughter to Christierne late king of Denmark, which he had begotten of Izabel
sister to Charles the emperor, the solempnitie whereof was kept at Bruxelles in
Brabant. ^ir Thomas more Chauncelour of England and y^ bishop of Rochester
beheaded.


In England, in the month of June the bishop of Rochester, and Sir Thomas More
(which had been lord chancellor of England, and in great authority under
the king) was beheaded for denieng the king to be supreme head of the church
of England.

And in this year were there three monks of the The monks of the charter
house.
Charter house executed in England for the same offense.

In the parts of Shlesy about and within the A wonderful tempest.
the town of Olse arose the same year on Saint Gyles day an horrible
tempest, in such sort, that the books which were newely prynted, were taken
out of the Jews houses and found in a great corn field hard packed in
belles as though they had been stamped and beaten into them with pestelles,
which belles were conveyed thither out of the church steples by the violence
and outragiousnes ^o the said tempest. Besides this there were men and women
taken up in the streets, and carried a great way of into y^ feldes. In the
houses were in diverse Never such a tempest seen.
places the doors and wyndowes lifted of from the hynges, the tables subverted,
and great holes made and beaten in the walls: So that there was never such a
tempest seen before.

Besides this there was the same year in the parties of Duchela^d in Summer
very many sudden and fearful tempests, with hayle, lightenyng and tho^der,
more then ever was hard of before, with great cold and much rain, which also
was an occasion that the wines in many places had no good success

This year the.viij. day of January. died in England the lady Katherine
Dowager which had been Queen Katherine dow^ger dies.
divorced from the king, by due process of the law two years before.

This year in England was Anne bulleyne queen of England, the lord Rochiford,
Nores, Weston, Queen Anne Bullyn be headed. Que. Jane Semour married to the king
of Enland.
Bruto^, and Marks beheaded. And the king married lady Jane Seimour.

This year also in October began in England a foolysh commotion in
Lincolinshyre and in york shyre, which by the kings wisdom and his prudent
cou^saill were appesed without blood sheding.

I In the year of our lord. 1536. The bishop The city of Geneue besieged.
of Geneue and the duke of Sauoy besieged the city of Geneffe, because
thinhabiters of the same had received the Gospel. And when they of Genneffe
admonished thinhabitantes of the town of Berne of their co^federacio^, they of
Berne sent their imbassadours to the Duke, exhorting and admony shyng him to
remember al loves, faithfulnesses and confederations that had been between them
of a long time, and requiring him to depart from the city of Genneffe. But in
as much as their request did not only take no place, but also the said duke
main tayned and defended their open enemy and adversary called Mussy
Castellanus, and in all this noge^tyll exhortacion could serve nor prevail,
they of Berne advertised him that they would visitie him with wars, and
renounced the bond of co^federation which had been made between them before,
in so much that they sent their captain called John Frauncis Clauicula with
an host of men well appointed into the land of Sauoy, which overcame all the
land within few days, which the said Duke Preachers of the Gospel ordained
^^ Sa^^^.
had inpossession, even from the mountains of Switzerland, unto the fortress
of Rodani, with the two bis^oprikes of Genneffe and Lausan^a: Wherein they
co^stituted and established ministers to preach the gospel, and ordained
rulers and magistrates according^y. So that now the Switzers reposed again
their old coasts which they had in their power many years before. But there
were within the space of a month very many Castelles and strongholdes
destroyed by the Switzers, among the wi^h Julius Lesar builded Clausa Rodani.
also the old and strong clausa Rodani, builded by the Emperor Julius,
otherwise called Julius Caesar* to stop up and bar the way of the Switzers
for coming into France, and had been hitherto invincible, was quite
overthrown and destroyed. Of this battaill of y^ citesens of Berren apeared a
good sign a little before, where about.iiij. hundredth men of Berne Newebourgh
and other quarters of Switzerlande preuely being called together were sent
thorough by paths to aid and strengthen the city of Geneue, which held a
notable battaill and conflict with the men of Sauoy. For when they were for
lack of victuals constrained to come forth out of the mountains, they were
assaulted by their adversaries being strong about.xv. hundredth men, which moved
the said.iiij. hundredth men to battaill and constrained them to fight.
Insomuche that they, as hu^gry and faint as they were laid so about them and
defended themselves in such sort, as they slew about iiij. hundredth of their
enemies, and put the rest to flight, with the host which was not far of
being in nombre about.v. hundredth men: so that they obtained a fre and a sure
passage to accomplish their journey: having lost on their side, ten me^, and
one woman which was slain with her son as she was fighting be sides her
husband. Here must I make mention al so of the constancy that was in the
people of Berne* in that they could neither by power be feared, nor yet by
prayers and great gifts be provoked to leave the defense of their
confederates. For when the Emperor very earnestly offered them peace, and
attempted diverse and sundry ways to bring them to an unity, and by
threatenynges and minaces to mollyfie them, they proceeded nevertheless to
assiste their friends and to set them at liberty. But when Fraunces the
French king studied by many gifts to allure them and by great promyses to
provoke them, to assiste him in his wars be gonne against themperoure and the
Dukedom of Mylan, they caused his imbassadours and messengers to avoid out of
their city, declaring unto the^ that the king ought to content himself with
the covenant and confederation which he had with them already, that is, that
they should not endamage him. These things passed in Swicherlande and Sauoy in
the beginning of the said year.

But the French king proceeded with his army, The French king claymeth the
succession of Mila^e.
to recover the land of Sauoy, and to take possession of all that he came
nygh, for he pretended to claim the heritage of the same Dukedom by his
mothers side. Then fled the duke to the Emperor, who at that season intended
to keep his Easter at Room with the Pope, as he did. For upon maundy thursday
he washed the fete of twelve pore me^, (as their costume is yet at this day)
fed them, and served the^ It is the condition of an ap^ to countr^faite all y^
is done in his ^^ght.
at the boorde in his own person, and in fine gave them the vessels and
disshes, (being of silver) wherewith they were served. Thus do such Lords and
potentates counterfaith the outward acts and deeds of our savior Christ,
after thexample of Apes: But in their hearts where Gods word ought to be
earnestly embraced, learned and folowrd (and not the precepts and tradicions
of men) they are utterly against Christ, and clean contrary Aprai^^ of the
author.
to his doctrine: God grant them ones to be illumined with the light of his
Gospel, that the poor flock and congregation of Christ may be brought to a
perfect unity. Amen.

Now when the feast of Easter was past the Emperors The Emporoures complaynt
to the Pope against the French king.
majesty made his complaint before the Pope and his Cardinals, concerning
the great injuries which the French king had inferred and committed against
him all ready and yet pretended to do, by the reason whereof he was utterly
constrained against his will to defend his quarrel and to war against him:
And to move the Popes most holy fatherhoode (God forgive me that I do him
wrong) to hold on his side, and to take his part he rehearsed unto him all
the euilles and wicked feats which France had perpetrated and wrought
against him, namely how that always when the Emperors majesty was about to
mete and resist the infideles, the said French king had stirred up one
mischief or other whereby his godly enterprises and purposes were either
let and hyndered altogether, or else begone with small profit, and ended or
brought to pass to small effect. Ite^ how that he had made co^federatio^ now
with the turk, and then with Barbarossa, and had also him self stirred up all
the ungracious wars, which had so many years continued in the borders of his
majesty's dominions. In consideracion where The Empeperoures request.
of themperours majesty besought the Popes holiness, that he would take his
part, and help him to resyst the ungodly enterprise of the French king, that
a general peace might be establyshed, whereby the Turk might be repelled and
overcome. When the Popes holiness had heard the Eemperours oration, according
to his kind (which they The Popes answer.
have always used sense the time of Adriane the third toward the emperor) he
made answer openly to themperours request, that he would neither take part
with themperours, nor yet with them of France, but that he would sytte still
as neuther, and se to whom fortune would lean most and him that should
overcome his adversary and get the ouerhande would he mete with all his power,
and succor him that should have the worst. Here might Emperors learn, what
goodness is to be looked for at the hands of such beasts, if they were not
altogether blind. Upon this answer of The Emperoures return from Rome.
the Pope, the emperor took his journey the.xviij. day of April (for Easter
day was the.xvi. day of April) from Rome toward Mylan. In the mean season
did the Emperors Capitaines assemble a great multitude of warriors both on
horseback and on foot, of the Germayne, Welche, and Spanysh nations, whom
they brought with great fear thorough Piemont, and many small battayles,
which consumed no small number of men, before Marsilia, which is an old
city lyeng in France by the sea side, and is enuironned with the sea in three
parts or ends, which City themperoures company besyeged with all their power
both by water, and by land, but there happened such a contagious disease and
mortallitie in the Emperoures host, that within few days there dyed above
twelve thousand persons. So that the Emperor by the means of this
necessite was constrained to dysperse his army.

But the French king was at that season mightyer a great deall, both of
Money, and of People, and lay with a great power of his own men, with a
great company of Swytzers and with six thousand duche launceknyghtes, whose
Capitain was William Count of Furstenborough besides auinion, about a fyftene
duche miles from Marsilia, from thence to occur and mete themperoure, and to
rescue Marsilia, if the Emperor had not been caused to retire by the means
of the said great death and mortality. Neither remained he in this case
harmeles, for there dyed in his host above two thousand Swytzers. And his
eldest Son Fraunces the Dolphyne was poisoned, which thing also should
have lyghted upon the king himself if god had not specially preserved him. A
trap^one put to death at ^po^s.


The traitor which was an Earl of Montecuculo (as Anselmus Rid does call him)
was at Lions by the kings commandment miserably put to death, being drawn
and plucked in sunder with four horses tied severally to his hands and
legs: His head was set upon the Bridge which goes over the water of Rodani,
and his four quarters were hanged before the four principal gathes of the
Cictie. While these things were in The Count of Nassowe.
doing. The Count of Nassowe marched through Pycardy into France, and took
certain small towns lyeng on this side, and also on the farther side of the
water of Some, by force of arms, And Perone besyeged.
besieged the city of Perone, which he pressed very sore by spoilyng and
burning round about it, by the means whereof he made many poor folks in
that country, nevertheless he could not win the city, but was feign to
leave it as he found it, and so retired from thence the.xi. day of September,
after that he had besyeged it by the space of a month. Thus much of
the emperor and the French king concerning their acts and the things done
between them for this present year.

In Germany assembled the princes and nobles of the Empire, which as then had
received the Gospel, at Smalkalde, which lies besides the wood of Duringe,
and thither came also thambassadours of the kings of Denmark Fraunche and
England: Where the nobles and princes of the The Euangelical bond
Gospel made a bond and confederacion together, wherein also Christian king
of Denmark was bound, that they should truly and faithfully hold together
and take one an others part, if they should at any time be assaulted by an
enemy of Gods word. And this bond or confederation is called the bond of
Smalkalde, which yearly increases more and more: And many Potentates are
daily added to the congregation of Christ, in so much that great Monarchies
may stand in awe of them, and fear them. And if they do truly cleave to
Gods word, and be thankful unto him that gave them that great benefyte,
no doubt there shall be no power so mighty that shall be able to prevail against
this bond, and to suppress it. For if GOD be on their side and they put their
trust and confidence in him unfeignedly, they shall be stronger and myghtyer then
all worldely power which they have now in a manner throughout all Germany, God
grant them to consydre it, and to be thankeful unto God for it, and for all
other benefits which they have received at his hand hitherto.

There was also a Synod and co^uocation kept The Synod or conuocatio^ of
Wittenborough.
at Wittenbourgh in Germanye in the month of May between them that cleaued
unto the doctrine of Huldrike zwynglius, concerning the Sacrament of Christ's
body and blood, on the one party, and them that followed the mind of Martine
Luter on the other party, where after long disputacion had between thesayed
parties, there was a certain determinacion and agreement taken between them as
touching the controversy of the Sacrament, albeit that the most part of the
Preachers Swinglius co^senteth not with Luter in the opinion of the Sacrament
on zwinglius side would not consent thereunto. But what controversy there was
between the said parties as touching the Sacrament, may be gathered ease out of
the books of both parties, for the rehearsal thereof here in order would be to
long.

Between the sea Towns, Homborough, Lubeke, A new peace concluded between the
sea towns of Eastlande and Denmark.
Suno, and Christian chosen king of Denmark, was this year a new peace
concluded, whereunto they of Rostocke and of Wismare would not agree. For their
Duke Albert of Mekelborough, at Coppenhaghe (which is the chief city of al
Denmark, and of the Island called Seeland. Then the towns which were accorded
and agreed upon the said peace sent their imbassadours to Coppenhaghe,
aduertysyng the said Duke Albert, and count Christopher of their agreement,
requiring them to yield up the city to the chosen king Christian. But when
the said two lords and thinhabitances of thesayd contry of Coppenhagen denied
them The city of Copenhage beseged by y^ king.
their requsst: king Christian beseged the said city with such power, and
troubled them so sore on every side, that no victualles might come at them by
no manner of means. In so much that within short space victualles waxed so
scant and famme so increa^led within the cyty, that they were glad to use
dogs flesh for their meat, and also cattes. D^g^es and (...).
And when this prouisyon did also fail them, and no deliverance eppeared of
no part (for they hoped that Frederike the Palatine, who had taken to wife the
daughter of king Christierne, as before is mentioned, should have moved
battayll against the Duke of Holstone, which came not to pass) they yielded up
the cyty to the chosen king Coppenhagh yielded up to^ king. Warborough taken
Marks mayer taken and quartered.
Christian above mencyoned. During thesayed siege the kings soldiers
overcame Warborough, and took that false Capytayne of the Lubekes, called
Marks Mayer prisoner who with his brother Gerard Mayer and a Danysh pryeste
was quartered shortly after.

After that thesayd Christian had overcome and subdued the hole kingdom of
Denmark (according Ag^^ly e^^ple for all kings and conquerours.
to the duty of all godly kings and princes) he directed all his doings and
procedynges to this end, that the word of God might be purely and syncerely
preached and taught to his pore subjects in all parts of his dominions. The
practice of papists.
But when he perceived the preuy practices, which the Bishops of that land
(for they were in a manner the mightyest of both the kingdoms of Denmark and
Norway) imagined and purposed to work against him, to hyndre his godly
enterprise, and to maintain their Idolary, he took them All the byshoys of
De^marck deposed.
all seven (for so many were they in nombre) and deposed them from their power
and dignity, so that they were not able any more to make division, sedicion or
commotion within his kingdom, as they were wont to do.

When this was done, he sent messengers to Wit John Bugen hagh.
tenbourgh, and called for the right honorable and well learned doctor John
Bugenhaghe, borne in the dominion of Pomerlande, who is yet at this day
preacher of Gods word and minister or curate at the parysh Church at
Wittenbourgh, as he was then. This godly man came at the kings Thepreachig of
the gospel instituted in Denmark. xxiiij thousand parishes in Denmarch and
Norway furnyshed with preachers.
request and by the help of God establyshed in both the kingdoms the
preaching of the Gospel and the true ministracion of the Sacraments very
frutefully, so that within the space of three years (for so long was he by and
about the king) all the paryshes of the land (which were above.xxiiii.
thonsande in nombre) were provided and furnyshed with preachers and ministers,
having Super attendenres ordained and appointed over them to have the ouersyght
of them and to have an earnest respect and a watchefull eye to their doctrine
and conversation The coronation of Lhristiane siyng of Denmarck. The
vntuersitie of Luppenhaghe furnyshed with me^learned in y^ scripturs.
of living. He crowned also king Christian at Coppenhaghe in the presence of
all his nobles with the kyngly crown of the land, and of both the kingdoms.
And after this at the kings request he provided and furnyshed the high Scole
or university of Coppenhaghe with Lecures and Reders of holy scripture, and of
all other laudable sciences. For the better increase and furnyshyng whereof he
called for certain learned men from Wittenbourgh although the land was not
all void of such men before. To the mayntenaunce of which Godly order and
institucion of doctrine, as well in the Church Liuinges appointed for preachers
and ^^d^^s in De^(...)
as in the vniuersytie, the king gave large gifts, and appointed great
livings. And he set such an order in both the kingdoms, that his subjects
may be glad, and give God high thanks, that of his goodness he would send
them such a king, God send him long to reign among them, and stir up the
like in many other regions, to the praise and sanctifycacion of his most holy
name. Amen.

Henry the eight king of England had his imbassadours Thimbassadours of
England at Wittenbourgh.
certain months at Wittenbourgh, which according to the kings request,
carried with them in England certain well learned doctors, to preach the
Gospel of Christ within his Realm and dominions, whereof the hole
congregation of Christ thoroughout all Germany conceived Doctor ^^n^^.
a special reioysynge, and comfort: But alas their joy was not long
permanent, for the said king within two years after repelled them and caused
some of them to be put to death, as here tikes: And English men have had a
certain prophecy An old prophecy of Enland.
of great antiquity, that when saint Georges day should fall on good frydaye
(which is in the year of our lord.MD. xlvi.) the word of God should
myghtely increasse and taken place among them, which I pray God grant unto
the^, to his praise and glory.

This year in England also the lord Darcy, sir The Lord Darcy with other.
Fraunces Bygot, Sir Robert Constable and other began a new conspyracy, which
were attaynted and put to death in June.

This year in October in England also on saint Edward the sy^t borne.
Edowardes even was Prince Edowarde borne at Hampton Court, which was
proclaimed and anointed king of England the.ix. year of his age as shall be
declared hereafter in due place.

This year the.xiiij. day of October also dyed The death of Queen Jane
Queen Jane mother to the said Prince Edward, and was buried at Winsor.

This year did James the king of Scotland The king of Scotts, marieth the
daughter of France. The conquest of the king of Portingals Indes.
puyssaunt king John of Portingale, Son to the excellent king Emanuell had a
great conflicte and victory against the infideles in the Realm of Cambaia or
Guzuratum, lyeng in the Indes. For after that he had by his capitaines, and
specially by Nonne a Cugria, who was ruler and governor of the kings army, in
the Indes, destroyed the coasts lieng toward the Indysh sea, subject to the
king of Cambaia, and when the same king was not able to resyste him, although
he was of power to bring four hundred thousand men in Camp, he made a gentle
agreement with the Portyngalles, and delivered them two mighty cities with all
their abilyties, privileges, liberties and dominions, whereof the one is
called Bazaim, and the other Dium, this the stronger and the other the rycher.
Which have both under them about a syx hundredth Villages with certain small
towns and srutesul lands containing in length about a.lxxx. miles or leaques.
whereof the king has yearly an.C. thousand crewnes at the least in bare
tribute, besides the wood whence for the most part all the provision is
taken that is occupied for the ships in the Indes, with other aduauntages. In
those parts caused the king of Portingall the Christian faith to be planted,
The Christian faith planted in the kingdom of Ca^baia.
and at the last king Badur of Cambaia (for so was he called) when he was
invaded by king Dey (who was king of the Scythians and of the Tartares) fled
with all his treasure, mother, wife and children into the City of Dyum, which
he had given up before, desiring succor and defense against his enemy. So
that by this means the king of Portyngall had obtained the most part of all
the land of the Indes under his tuition and defense without any notable
shedyng of blood. These acts are described at large by the said king in a
certain letter by him to Pope Paul directed.

Also this year in the Month of July dyed at The heath of Erasmus.
Basil that excellent Clarke Erasmus of Roterdame being about the age of.lxx.
years who was a special instrument of God, to restore the Greek and Latin
tongues again to their purity: Which also has done no small service with his
writings toward the setting forth of the Gospel, the true light of our
souls, as every wise man may right well perceive and gather by his wrytynges,
whereof he has left behind him a great sort, and in a manner innumerable
books.

IN the year of our lord.MDxxxvij. even in A preuy conspiracy in Germany
against the Gospel.
the beginning of the year began certain preuy practyses and conspiracies to
be wrought against the Evangelical Princes and their confederates. For the
Pope sought all the means possible to stir up some commotion and dissension
in Germany, and had procured all ready, by the means of the Duke of Brounswike
called Henry the younger, and brought to pass by certain bishops, namely the
byshippe of Mence with other that the Duke George of Saxon should assiste the
Duke of Brunswyke with money, to invade John Frederike Henry the younger duke
of Brunswyke.
Duke of Saxon and electour imperial, and Philippe Land grave of Hessene:
which Practice and conspiracy was begone so preuely, and kept so close, that
if God had not specially preserved the favors of his word, it might have
turned them to much woe and trouble. For the Duke of Brunswyke had all ready
assembled a competent nombre of men within his land, and that so preuely, that
many did afterward wonder at it. But when he thought with his adherentes that
the matter had been sure, almighty God red their treasurer Duke The death of
George duke of Saxon.
George out of the way by death, sodaynely or ever any man suspected his
infirmity. And so succeeded Duke Henry into his brothers heritage, which had
kept his Court poorly many years at Fryburgh in the land of Myssene, being a
good laudable and Evangelical Prince. And albeit that Duke George brother to
the said Duke Henry, was also in his acts and governance a very wise and
circumspecte Prince, and expert in cyuyle policies, as his buyldynges and
towns which he has left behind him bear wytnes, yet had he this fault,
that he (as it happens commonly to such as are worldly wise) had his
prudence and hipocriticall conuayaunce so blinded* that he would not cleave
unto the Gospel, where of nevertheless he was not ignorant, for none other
cause then that some Pope or some Cardinal had not set it forth and brought it
to light, but apore friar (as was doctor Luther) yea he was such an enemy to
the Gospel that he did not only persecute and banyshe his subjects that
embraced and favored the same, but also would deprive his said brother Henry
of his heritage, while he cleaued sted fastly to Gods word. But God tourneth
all things to the prophite of his b^leuers. For when Duke George was in this
mind, and had sought al means possible to disherite and dispossess his
brother, all was sodaynely turned vpsyde down. For after that John his son
was departed out of this world leauyng no bodily heir behind him (in as
much as it was not well possible for him to procreate children, being
continually given to superfluity and dronkennes) he had yet an other son
(not being endued with to much wit) called Henry, unto whom, not
withstanding that by the reason of his ^oolysh behaueour he was unmeet to have
the rule and governance of the land, he gave him a wife of a basse stock and
low degree, to the end that by this means he might (if it were possible)
obtain an heir for the land, and defraude his brother of his heritage,
commaundyng his Phisicians to give his said Son good provisions whereby his
lust might be the better stirred and provoked toward his wife. But what was
the end? This hope and expectation continued but a small time, for within the
space of two months thesaed young married man died. Many will say and affirm
that the Phisicians killed him with their confortatiues: But it was the work
of God, who would have the Gospel to reign in the said Duchye by the
administracion of the said Duke Henry: For the said Duke George dyed also
shortly after the deceasse of his said son as before is mentioned. When
now the Papists were thus destitute of their comfort, having lost all their
hope and expectacio^, in that the land and the treasures wherewith they intended
and trusted to have resysted the Gospel, was now fallen into the hands of
him that would therewith auaunce and promote the same, their captain Duke
Henry of Brunswycke was feign to give over and disperse his army for the money
wherewith the soldiers should have been paid was now withdrawn. Wherefore (as
it was reported) the said Duke should say, that he had rather lost God in
heaven, then this man: Whereby every Christen man may easily perceive, whereon
the hope of the Papists is grounded. But let us learn here that a Christian
may not trust in any man, nor fear any man's threatenyng nor yet dyspayre in
poverty and tribulation, but must only put al his trust and confidence in
God, who is able to break and overthrow the imaginacions of the proud, and
to exalte the pore, according to the song of Mary, he trusts down the proud
from their seats, and lifts up the lowely.

When God had on this wise delivered his littel flock in the land of Saxon
and of Hessen, from the crafts and enterpryses of their enemy, the said duke
Henry succeding in the rowme of his brother deceassed, abolyshed the
abhominacion of Popysh Pop^r^ abolyssed in the ^^nde of (...).
Idolatry thoroughout all his jurisdiction and dominion, and commanded Gods
word to be preached in all places sincerely and purely, for the maintenance
whereof he sought all about for learned men to give dilygent attendaunce to the
setting forth of the same. After this he did also erecte and The ^^oole
(...)gh rest^^^d.
restore the Scoole of Lipsigh which was sore decayed before, to the
mayntenaunce whereof he did institute and appointe special privileges and new
stipendes, and ordained the excellently learned man Ioachim Camerary of
Bambery, reder in liberal sciences, and provided for other faculties also sage
men and well learned, so that both gods word and also learning did myghtely
increase and florysh again in this land, God grant it may long continue to
the praise of his most holy name.

In France was not the wars yet ceased which was begone the year before.
For the king was yet mightily armed, and came forth in the month of March
toward the west into the Duchye of Artois, which is called Picardy, where he
did great harm^, and about the.xviij. day of the same month he beseged y^
town of Hedin, which was Heding beseged and taken.
yielded up unto him the.xiij. day of April next following. When he had overcome
the said town, he furnyshed it, and other places lyeng there about with me^
and so returned home again. In the mean The lady rege^t inuadeth Picardy.
season Mary queen of Hungary, sister unto the Emperors majesty, and lady
Rege^t of the lower parts of his dominions prepared her self, and when she
had assembled a mighty company of pietons or footmen, as well of the parts of
high Germany, as of the lower parts of Duchelande, with an army of horsemen
well appointed, she marched with power into Picardy, and having destroyed that
which was left in the land, she went and beseged the town called S. Paul,
which lies in the S. Paul beseged and destroyed.
borders, and was also furnyshed by the king at his departing from thence, with
four thousand soldiers, and certain hundredes of horsemen. And when they
that were within ye town made resistau^ce against her, she overcame it with a
strong assault, and caused to be destroyed whatsoever was a live within the
town, except two of the chief Capitaines, which were carried away captives. But
as touching the town after it was spoiled by the soldiers it was set on
fire, and burned down to the ground. The seven and twenty day of June they
Turwyne beseged.
went to the city of Turwyne, and beseged the same. But when the French men
did pryuely bring into the Town certain Soldiers for the sanegarde of the
same Town, and the Captain of the same returned again (by like to fetch
more help) they were taken by y^ lady Mary's warrious. Anon(...) violently
destroyenge all that made resistaunce against them, murtheryng the men, and
viciatyng the women and the virgins, whom also they carried away captives with
them. After that, they (...) John Crisp^
came also to the Island called Naxus, wherein dwelled a Prince called John
Crispus, who also wrote the said affairs to our Potentates in Europa, with a
certain exhortacion and warning there unto annexed, whenche I also have taken
this story. But when the Turk offered peace unto the said Prince, promisyng
not to hurt nor trouble his subjects, in case he would gentely and wyllyngly
yield him self under the obedience of the Turk, the said Prince considering
that he was to weak and notable to resyste such great power, not knowing any
help or assistaunce to be looked for, yielded himself and his subjects to the
(...)
Turk the eleventh day of November, on this condition that he should yearly
pay unto the Turk a tribute of five thousand guldens of gold. When this was
done, the Turkyshe Armada returned homewarde with a great spoil and
abreption of Gold, Silver, and many poor imprisoned Christians. A^ ho^^^ble
(...).


There was also the said year of our lord God a thousand five hundredth thyrty
and seven an horrible and fearful tempest, at Heydelbery on the Necker lyeng
in the Lower parts of the Palatines jurisdiction, where the Electour by the
Rhene kept his Court. For on Saint Marks day when euensonge was done, rose
a sudden darkenyng of clouds with an horrible noise of wind, and immediately
followed a wether of Thonder and Lyghtenyng, which lyghted within a Tower lyeng
by the old Castle of Heydelbergh, wherein was much gone poulder kept,
insomuche that the said poulder being set on fire by the power of the said
Thonder and Lyghtening, the said Tower and Castle brast in sunder in ye
twinkling of an eye, and made such an earthquake, that within the Town the
doors and wyndowes were moved and flewe from the hinges, so that the people
thought none other, but that the day of dome had been come. And the stones of
the walls were thrown here and there in the Town by the reason whereof
diverse persons runnynge out into the streets and forsakynge their houses for
fear, least they should fall down on their heads, were sore hurt and
harmed. There dwelled also in the old Castle a couple of folks, with seven
children, Misfortunes happened and harms done by the means of the tempest.
whereof five were hurt and two slain out of hand. And not far from the
new Castle came a stone of the wall flyeng and slew a man, and cut away a
foot of another man that was by him.

In England was this year begone a collection A collection for the pore.
for the poor, and a great nombre cured of many grievous diseases thorough the
charity thereof.

There was also in England a certain friar Friar Forest
called friar forest hanged and burned for treason and heresy.

IN the year of ourelorde.MDxxxviij. The A cousi^lta^^on holden at Rome
against the Turk.
eight day of February, assembled at Rome Pope Paul, with certain
Cardinals, Sir John Mantry Marquys of Angilaria Orator of themperous
majesty, and atturnay for the same, and the kings majesty of the Romans,
Sir Marks Anthomus Contarenus knight, the imbassadours and attournays of the
Duke and rulers of Venice, in the name and power of their superiors, which
there co^sulted together, how and by what means the Turk who did mightily
enlarge his empire by his power might be resisted. Whereit was agreed and
concluded, that they would altogether prepare a great power both by land and
by water out of Italy, whereof the Pope should main tayne and lay the syxt
part, the Emperors majesty the ene half, the Venetians the other third part
and that there should by water be armed four hundredth ships and gallees. And
to the intent that the Turk might be so much the easier overcome, king
Ferdinando should with a strong army invade him in Hungary. Besides this should
the Pope move and exhort Sigismonde king of the Poles, to do his part
likewise. But as thesayde contracte and agreement was made with great pretense
^o proceeded it to small effect, for it went forward very slenderly and slowely
as ye shall hear herafter.

The same year when the Counsails between the Emperors majesty and the French
king departed The Emperors ^^^raun^^ ^^to ^ic^.
and could not agree of any durable and steadfast peace, the Pope himself took
ye matter in hand, and appointed both parties to mete in ye coasts of Italy
orlo^bardy at the City of Nice. Into the which themperours majesty made his
entrance with great triumph the.xv. day o^ May. The next day entered the Pope
into the said city also, whose entrance I do here The entrance of the Pope
into Nice described.
gladly descrybe, that al men may see and know, how that holy father followed
the steps of his predecessor Peter, and of his master Christ. First there
rode before him two hundred men upon the goodliest mules that migt be found,
very gorgiously apparelled. Then followed.lx. Trompetters in yackettes of
veluette costly sylkes and scarlette. After them followed his guard and footmen
with pertisanes, apparailled in yelowe, having on their heads black veluer
cappes with goodly Eastryche feathers. After this followed the Lord great
Master of the Popes most holy household, very costely apparelled. Then came
the right swarm and the religious rabl^.
rabble in a long procession, that is to say, a great nombre of Monks, Freres
and priests, with many relyques of dead saints. And the last of them bare a
lx. burning candels of white wax, to light before the blind Idol of Rome,
the Pope, which was borne of many men, in a Chair garnyshed with fine gold,
and the Sacrament (as they call it in their abuse) was borne before him. On both
sides of the borne Pope were seven Cardinals with.xlij. Prelates. Then
followed an hundred valiant launceknyghtes for his defense. With this army
entered the shepehearde of Christ's sheep (if I do him no wrong) at that time
into Nice, after thexample of Christ on Palmesondaye, and according to his
commandment in the twenty Chapter of Matthew. After this ^ode the Pope in the
same order to the chief Minister of the city, to make his prayer which being
ended, he caused himself to be borne in to his Palice: where themperoures
majesty came unto him, and kissed his fete: whom the Pope lifted The
Emperor kisseth the Popes (...)e.
up, embraced him, and kyssyng him on the top of his head (by like for a
witness that he is lord over the Emperors head) And after they had been a good
while together, themperoure returned again to his lodgyng. Not long after
this arrived the French king at Villa Noua, which is a place of his own
dominion lyeng not far from Nice, and shortly after repaired toward the
Pope, A peace concluded between the Emperor and France*
where in fine a sted fast peace was concluded between both the parties, that
is to say between themperours majesty and the French king, to continue for
the space of ten years, according to the promise made between them, (although
it lasted scant two years as shall be said hereafter) which peace was restored
the.xviij. day of the month of June, and afterward at the commandment of
both thesaide heads, all the points and articles of the same were described
and published, as yet apeareth by the copies thereof remainyng in printe.

In the mean season Leonora the French queen* Leonora.
Sister to themperours majesty prepared her self very sumpteously to come
toward Nice* where she commoned many words with her brother themperours
majesty, abidyng there certain days. But when the peace was made and
concluded, she came the there again, and was received bery honorable of the
Emperors majesty: And afterward on Corpus Christ day she returned again,
with great solace. The same day at night the Pope and the Emperoures majesty
took shippynge toward Genua: Where the Emperoures Counsayls remained with the
king, and the kings with the Emperor, entreating of matters concerning the
said peace. But when the Emperor could not tarry long in Italy by the means
of his ha^t which he made to return into Spain, it came to pass, that both
the high Potentates, the Emperor and the French king did lonyngly agree and
come together. For when the Emperor arrived at the Port and City called,
the dead waters, lyeng not far from Marsilia, which was the fourtenne day of
July, the French king came thither also with his wife and with his sons. And
when the Emperonr abode in his Gallee, the king went unto him in his own
person, and after they had embraced and kissed each other (according to the
manner and custom of noble men) they talked louyngly together. The next day
following the Emperor went a land, and rode into the said City, where he
was received of the king, the Queen and the kings Sons very joyfully. And
when much honor and great triumph was declared and showed toward him, he
abode there until the tewesdaye at night, and then takynghys leave of the
king and his affinity, he commended them to God and returned to his ship,
wherewith he sailed luckely toward Spain, trusting assuredly that thesaied
peace should be firm and stable, and also durable to the profit and
furtheraunce of the Christen commonwealth.

After this also the lady Mary regent of the lower parts of themperoures
majesty's dominions accompanied with the king came into Camerike the viij. day
of October. And the next day following they went to the City of S. Quintine,
where the said Queen Mary was received with great pomp, and entreated very
honorably. But when she had remained there.vi. days she returned again to her
own dominion. So that this year there was three honorable assembles of the
mightiest in Europa: But what followed thereof shall be me^cioned her after, in
place conuement.

While these things were in doing the above named Estates of confederation
prepared their naures against the Turk, and first invaded Castle (...) N^
(...)ded.
Nouo, (which is a Castle lyeng in the Duchye of Sabe* sometime pertaynyng to
the crown of Hu^gary) and overcame it by violent assault, destroyeng
above.iiij. hundred, and about.viij. hundred on horseback, which were come to
rescue them. But when Barbarossa heard of this, he sailed out Barbarossa.
of the sea Ambra^ike, where he had kept himself a long time, intendyng to
preserve the Cities and Towns of the Turk lyeng in the Coasts of Sla uony
and Macedony from the assaults and invasions of the Christianes. For he feared
least they should be served as Castle Noua was served. In the mean season was
also the City of Bisana overcome Bisana ta^en
of our men in like manner. But when they lacked and prouander, they were
constreined of necessitey to separate them selves, In such sort, as ye Prince
of Aurea with the ships pertaining to themperoures Majesty was constrained
to run into Brundysh, which is a port and City in Apulia, Lyeng over against
Greece, and the Popes Legate into Ancona (which is a port and City lyeng over
against the coasts of Slauony) So that only the Venetianes remained and
kept ye Seas. And as touching Castello Nouo they did fortifye it with. four
thusande. spanyardes and. six hundredth light horsemen, which dailye put the
Turk to much loss in the Land of Bosen. When Barbarossa had knoweledge of
his seperatyon and division of our ships, he took his way toward Duracho
(sometime called Durachium, and lyeng in Albany which was sometime called Epyrus)
to encourage thinhabitau^tes of the same City, and to make them hearty, that he
might the better overcome the Venetianes in the sea of Risana. But when he
sailed toward Duracho with a Southeast wind The shipwrach of Barbarossa.
(which blows from the rysynge of the Sun in winter) the same wind
(according to his nature and property) changed sodaynely into a full easterly
wind, and blewe so outragiously, ye Barbarossa lost above fyftye ships and
about a two.c. thousand men, with his best mariners. After the which naufrage
and shipwreck when he sailed back again eastwarde with the remnaunt of his
ships which for the most part were lecke and wether^ea ten, there came such
a mortalitye and pestilence among them that were remaining and left in the
ships that even in the greateste ships, were scant left, ten men able to
rule the helm, and as many apt for the voarres: So ye God did specially
declare his help to our men.

While these things passed between the emperor, the Pope, France, Venice, and
Barbarossa (as is before mencyoned) they of Nurremborough The Castle N(...)urg
^^ylord.
began their strong hold or Castle wyche lies in the upper part of the
Town upon a mighty rock, and is a lodging for the emperor and the king of the
Romans defenced with a strong Bull warke, and amyghty wide dyche: which
buylding as concerning the walls was finished in the year of our Lord.M. D.
xlv. next following. When George Marquys of Brandenburghe perceyned The
Marquea of Bra^denburg.
their said enterprise and intent, he thought that they did him great injury,
for he asscribed unto himself certain ground* and laud without the town of
Nurremborough (which is never theles pertaining to the Empire) and claymed it
as his own heritage, wherefore he marched sometime by* day as far as the
Landmark, and by night unto the town, even hard by the foresaid buylding. But
when they of the town feared some great malice and mischief, they fenced their
building with much ordenaunce and artillery, and kept great watch upon the
walls and in their turrettes.

When this hyndered the people of the Marquys of their purpose, some of them
went and took certain inhabytauntes of Nurremborough as they went a fowlynge
or byrdyng in the wood and stopped certain of their wagens or carts coming
from Lipswyke and other places, laden with goods and marchaundyses, and
brought them to the Castle of Bayerthorp: Wherefore they of Nurremburgh, being
occasyoned and moved to displeasure* and indignatyon by the reason of the said
cruelues, assembled a certain nombre of ^oul dyours, and laid them in the
country round about the town, and furnished the small towns and vyllages
about them after the best mauer, purposyng, in case the said Marquys or his men
would persiste in theyrfrowardenes (as they had begone) to be in a readynes to
defend themselves from such iniuris, But yet thorough intreataunce of certain
Potentates and Princes of the Empire the matter was qualified, and put in
arbitrament, so ye in conclusion the said Marquys suffered them of
Nurrenburgh, without contradiction and molestation according to the tenoureof
their lybertyes and priuyledges (to build on the ground of the Empyree.

This year dyed Charles Duke of Geldres The death of ye duke of Gelders.
and in his place succeeded William Duke of Cleue, although he did not long
enjoy it, as shall be declared in place convenient.

This year did Godde so punyshe the auaryce Avarice punyshed.
of merchants which occupye by the scasyede, while they do so enhaunce the
good creatures of God in pryces that the poor are not able to bye them, that
thoroughe out all the coasts of Denmarcke, in harueste (which is the best
time of the year, no hering could be taken. In the kingdom of Naples
ye.xxviii. day of September. The Sea decreassed and fell away about the space of
eight Italyan miles, so that all the ground was dry, which afterward did cast
certain holes, out of the which for the space of many days continually
ascended fire with ashes, which did great hurt in many places there about at
the falling do wne thereof. For the said ashes fell down like snow round
about Naples for the space of then Itali an miles, until they lay on the
ground the thickenes of three fingers. Which is a fearful argument of Gods
wrath toward us, whereby we ought al to be warned, and specially Italy, to
forsake our sinful living, if any warning would help. But it is not
regarded, until Gods wrath lights upon us by heaps, and then men would
feign repent, but it is to late: Wherefore let us repent in time, and live
according to our professyon.

In Inglande, this year in December was The lord marquish of ex^ter ^ the
^^rd mo^tacute beheaded.
the Lord Marquis of exceter, the Lord Montacute, and Sir Edward Neuell
beheaded for high treason duly proved.

IN ye year of our lord. 1539. Theco^fede rat of ye Roman league prepared
the^sel ues with all their power to war against the Turcke by water, but they
profyted not much. For there was great lack of vyctual, and a great dearth in
Italy and at Venice* Barbarossa robs ye ^e ^e^^a^s and Italians goods upon
ye see.
For Barbarossa came with a great army and robbed upon the sca and took all
that he might lay hand on, so that there might no coarne be shypped unto
Venyce, nether out of Cypers nor out of Can dye, And there was also no more
prouisyon in Italy. That done, he shipped with a great power unto the strong
new Castle (which our Christen men Barbarossa b(...)th C^* stel^ou^.
had won in the year before, fortified it after the best facyon (there unto
he laid seage in three places, and shot day and night there at without
ceassynge and yet wanne nothing, till certain of the dal The dalmacians fly to
ye Turckes, and betrai their fellow soudiars and ye Castle. Barbarossa wynneth
Castle nouo.
macyans fell to fliyng away and ran out unto the Turks, and told them
where they might best and ^onest hurt our Christen men. Then the enemy did
according to their council, and shot both for tresses and walls down, so
that the could assault them on even ground. And although the spanyardes and
the Italyans that were in the Castle defended themselves manfullye and couragy
ously, and slew at the least syxtene thousand of the enemies, yet at the last,
because they werewery, and The spaniat des and Italyans feight ma^fully.
the enemies gat ever fresch men, they forsook the Castle, and lost both the
Castle and the assault: and although they were over manned, yet they fought
and defended them selves so long till they were all most all slayene. This
was done in August.

In the mean while Isabel the Emperoures Thee^peroures wi^dieth.
Mayestyes wife, the king of Portugalles daughter, dyed of child, the first
day of may, the child was a son which lived not long. She leaft behind
her living a son called Philyppe, and two daughters, which she had by the
Emperor.

A none after there was an insurreccyon ray An insurreccio^at Gent*
sed at Gent among the commens of the City, so that it apeared that the city
should have been destroyed. By occasion whereof the Emperoures Mayestye was
compelled to come out of Spayn into Flaunders, to appease that dissencion. And
as he was minded to take his journey toward Italy, Embassadoures out of France
into Spain.
the French king Fraunches sent an embassage to him, desiring him amyably to
come thoroughe France, promysing that all that was in his kingdom should be
at his pleasure. But the cause was for that they had concluded a peace to
gethers, as is above remembered, the one should have suspected the other, if
they had not kept frendshippe to gether. And for as much as the French king
had often broken the leaghe, his myssedoyng might thesoner be for gotten, if
the Emperoures mayesty would seek frendshyp at his hand. This thing could by
nomeanes be better or easelier done, than that his majesty for this once should
journey through his land. By this mocyon was the Emperors majesty wyllyng to
journey thoroue France, and sent his chief Counselor Granduel in Nouembre out
of Spain into France to signyfye his coming, and followed shortly after.

And when he came to. S. Sebastians, there The ^perour comes into Flau^derstho
^ou France
the Duke of Orliens the kings youngest Son reaceaued him. And not far
from the city of. S. John was also the dolphyn with the chief of y^ nobles of
France, which received the Emperoures majesty with al due reverence, and did
leadde him through the land, till he came to Lochias the tenneth day of
December. There was the king in his own person, and Helenour his wife,
tarynge for the Emperor, and received him (as it appeared, for it was not all
gold that glyttered clear, as here after will appear) with all joy and
reverence, and were to gether till the end of the xxxix year.

The inhabytoures of the nether part of An a^bassage out of oste^ricke into
beam.
Austeryche of the erldome of Goertz, had sent forth their ambassadors the
last day of December from Vyenne with a pityfull and humble request and
petycyon to the states and degrees of the kingdom of Behame which were at that
time assembled at Preslowe, that they would vouchesafe Latin Wr^tislauya.
to help them against the turcke, which had two year before taken in the
marqueship of Woendon. and that present year manned it, and carried The Turcke
carries away lxxx thousand christian me^ into turckye.
from thence foureskore thousand christen men in to his land, and lay at
that time hard upon their necks, the chief ambassadors of this embassage
were.M. Vlryche of boskawyts and. M Tscher nafor, which were of the king of
the Romans council. But what they obtained with their peticion, I can not
tell (at this time) but I suppose that they obtained an honest promise and
help. For so pytyfullye as they made their petycyon it would have made a
stonye heart to meltte: specially if men consider that if they be suffered to be
destroyed without help, that then their adversity will be at the next time
our own.

In the somer, in July, there was a blasing A blasynge sterre.
ster in the eauening in y^ Northwest in the sign of the virgin. It was else
a metely good year as touching wether and other things y^ happened therein: but
in the winter every full moan there was much rain specially about the elue
and other waters that run therinto.

Here I must set to, new tidings that are counted true of many, which I take
to be a speeyall miracle (if it be so). It is said, and it is openly putt out
in prynte, That the Emperor of Turckye in June caused all his chief and best
learned priests to come before him, and commanded them upon a great pain, to
tell him, which is the right true and best belefe upon earth. And when they
had for fear excused themselves, they had a time appointed to remember them,
and after were called before hymagayne. Now when they were again monished to
say the truth, of The laerned in Turcky acknowledge our Christen relligio^ to
be y^ best.
their conscience, and heard the commandment of the Tyrant, they answered one
after another with one assent that the Christen belief is the best, and that
it is a right and a true belefe, albeit it is very much misused of the
Christen. For it teaches the best points that can be, as to wit, love
toward God and man, which is not so well taught in any other belefe. And
forther that they have witness in their law and alkorane, that Mahomet must
go to Christ for grace, etc. And that Christ is therefore better than Mahomet.
When they now had thus answered without fear, The ^urch headeth* priests.
the Tyrant waxed angrye, and caused them all (which were above fyfiye) to
beheaded. And in the same place was there a sight seen, as though all the
headed priests had been together, and lighted clearer than many candellyghtes
in the A miracle.
night: through which miracle many of the other priests of Mahomet followed
their confession and belefe, and also many of y^ Lay people, which acknowledged
openly and without fear, that those priests were unjustly killed for the
truethes sake. All things are possible to God, so that it may well be. For God
ca^ raise up a Daniel or an Ezechiel among the Babilonians. Howbeit no man
shall be compelled to believe this, but at his pleasure.

IN the year of our lord.M. D. XL. in the beginning of the year did the
Emperoures Majesty ride to Paris, and The Emperor at paris
as he rode in, was excedyng royally conducted and received, and afterward
great and pryncely Banckettes made, with great momeryes and daunces. And the
second day after, there were great Iustynges and fyghtynges made `to do him
pleasure and honor, with all. There his Majesty abode till the second day
after the twelueth day. Then he departs into Flaunders with al his company
and was conducted unto Camerick of both the kings sons: and there with
great royalty received of the Bishop of Camerick From thens they iorneyed to
Valencyne, there tarried the lady Marye Queen of hungarye for them. There also
took the kings sons their leave of the Emperoures mayestye and turned home
again.

But as the Emperoures Mayestye was The french king craftily seeks ye e^perour
d^^t * or be rowed.
in all places royallye received, so was there wait laid falslye pryuelye and
craftelye to kill him. For as the Emperor should sayell from corbe to Paryse,
and had with him a Cardynall the Duke of Albuge and the kings Marschalle to
bear him company the water men rowed or boot
the ship upon a pyele, so that the ship turned round about, and he stp^^an.
that hylde the rother fell out of the or ship. The ^p r^rs complaint to y^
^i^h. of To.
boot (what that meant it is easy to guess) whereof the Emperor complayneth in
a letter written to Paul the third bishop of Rome (whereyn he shows the
cause why he could not come to the council appointed to be holden at Trente)
that he had perfect knowledge that the king of France was minded at that time
to take him presoner and keep him in hold, as it also afterward sufficyently
appeared by the affairs of the said king.

But after the Emperors mayestye was comen The Emperor comes to Gent.
in to his own land he went streyghtwayes unto Gent, and after he was
suffered to come in to the city, he first earnestlye punyshed the insurrecty
on raysers, and caused a great part of the city to be broken down, and a
strong Castle to be builded ^ castle builded in Gent. Ferdina^dus comes to
y^ Emperor in to flanders (...).
in the same place.

A none after came Ferdina^dus in to Flanders to y^ Emperors majesty to
consult with him after whatt manner they might wythstande the turcke and how
his great tyranny against us poor Chrystyans might be resysted and avoided.

Even while these things were done in A co^municacion at Worcester
Flaunders, there was a communycacyon holden at Worms at the Emperors
commandment, concerning Relygyon, and the speakers of both sides were,
master Philip Melanthon mine enterelye Phil. Mela^.
beloved master of the Gospellers side, and Doctor John Ecke of Ingolstadt
which would Ioh. Ecke.
have defended the Bishop of Romes part, This communycacion began the
fourtenne day of Ianuarye, there the Article of orygynall sin Wheter there
remain sines in yt saints and Christians after baptism.
was specyallye entreated of, whether the same syn abide and remain in
Christen and holy men after baptyme. And was concluded that there yet abyede
remnauntes of sin in the saynctes, although they raygne not or have the
ouerhande (As. S. Paul says, let not sin raygne in your Romans viii.
mortal bodies) But such sins are not imputed to the saynctes for Christ's
merytes sake, as the Apostle forther says, there is now no condemnacyon to
them that are in Christ Jesus. etc.

After this treatye was that communycacyon so ended, and dyffered till the
Emperoures and the kings mayestyes of the Romans were personallye present.
But what sutteltye and craft Eccyus used in dysputacyon, to adourne and garnysh
his cause, may every wyttye manse by the treaty it self, which is whollye
written and put out in prynte

Now when that communicacion was ended, there was another appointed by the
Emperoures and the kings majesty at Spiers. But in as much as there was at that
time a great pestylence there, that day was appointed to be holde^ at Haganouw
A day at haganouwe.
to entreat of matters of relligyon, whether those might be ended and
utterly finyshedde and concluded or not* And though many great lords out
of all the coostes of dutchelande were come in with the king Ferdynandus,
partly in their own persons, partelye through their ambassadors, yet there
was no special thing concluded, but that there should a another assembly
beholden the next year at Regensburg, at which the Emperoures majesty him
self should be, where all matters, concerning Rellygyon and also concerning
war against the Turcke should be agreed of.

Afterward upon the.xx. day of Septembre The Emperour^ (...)ly forbedeth good
books to be readde.
the Emperor caused a commaundemence to be putt out where in beside other
statutes concerning his inheretable lands in the netherlande, he forbodde all
his subjects upon pain of great punyshemente, that they should not read their
books that have now in these last days brought unto light the truethe of
the Gospel. But what is wo^ne ^^ persecutyon.


But what he wanne with his commandment, daily experience teaches, as to
wit, that there be many good Christen men found, that rather lose their lives
than to forsake the word of God, that the persecutoures of Christ, pryestes
and monckes, might still betray and shed Christen blood, which thing God
will find a time horrybly to puysh.

But in asmoche as Gods word was so The marque s(...) ^^a^da^(...) recea(...)
y^ word ^^ God.
ouerpressed in netherland God raised it up so much the moar in another place.
For Ioachim the Marquess of Brandenburge elector after his father was ded,
which cared not much for any relligion, and he knew that it was neadefull to
lead his subjects the right way to salvation, and also to keep them
thereyne, received the doctrine of the Gospel: had ordained in all Cytyes and
parishes good preachers, to preach the word of God with diligence unto the
sympel people. He also redressed the university of Franckford upon the Odder,
and sent for learned Men in all Sciences which when they came he augmented and
amended their wages. He also ordained New stipendes for poare Scolers of the
lyuings of the unprofitable Massynge priests to the intent that such lyuinges
might from hence forth be bestowed to y^ true service of God.

But in what an horrible blindness that Land was before, and how euel it was
provided for with the word and doctryn of God, witnesses an history, which I
(although it appear but simple) will therefore tell, that it may be so known
what manner of teachers the popedom could suffer, and what they yet have.

As I at that time came by chance with the visiters to Ste^del in y^ old
marquiship, to enquere after a service for me, it chaunsed that the admission
into all the offices of the Church was differred the space of six wekes. In the
mean while were the parsons and the paryshenars enquired after what facyon
they had taught and had been taught.

Then came there forth a Parson with his Congregation, which being demanded
of my good Frynde Thomas Mathyas the Mayeres son of Brandenburge, to whom
that office was committed by the Vysytours, what he had preached to his
Parishners, He answered, y^ belefe And being asked again, what y^ belefe is,
began to rehearce (...)This I could not chose but tell, to the counfort of the
Christen, that they should learn, that God defends God befenheth his flock
and preserves his, thorough his holy angels, and that although the deuell
and his soart be never so wood, that they yet be able to do nothing if we but
abide in the confession and acknowledging of Christ, and in the obedience of
his word.

These burning mortherers that were taken in The (...): of y^ burning
mortherers.
the Electours dukedom of Saxon and in other places suffered an horrible death.
For there was a thing made much like a cross, thereupon was the gyltye fastened
about the neck with an iron collar or ring, and about the body with iron
Chains, and then a fire made with straw and other glowing matter, a far of,
and so the Gylty roasted till he dyed.

In this fourtyest year also upon the vii. day of April there was an horrible
Eclipse of (...) clipse (...).
the son, in the morning at the son rysynge, which endured two good
hours long. After this Eclypse, and the blasynge sterre that appeared in the
year before, followed there an excydyng dry and a hoate somer, wherein corn was
yet meately well taken, but hey and fother for beasts was clean burnt up.
Wine was so well taken y^ Wine both (...) and good cheap.
year and so good in all places, y^ many dronck them selves to deeth therewith,
and was thereto very good cheap. This year in June the Turcke Understand The
true king of Hungary, king John.
sygnyfyed unto the king of Hungarye, that he should pay him tribute for y^
kingdom, or else look for war. The Emperouer therefore sent Cornelius sceperus
and consailed the^ to pay no tribut, promesing that he would shortly bring an
army against the Turk wherewith he would defend the Hungars and the other
princes their neighbors.

But the king of Hungary being vnpacie^t, could not tarry so long, but required
a tribute of his subjects, by the means whereof many of the chief of the
nobility fell from him, whom he persequited with war. At the last when he
had given the tribute to a tertayne Moncke to bear it to the Turk, he suddenly
dyed. But the Moncke returned quickly The king of Hungary dyed.
again as which being a loyterer was not far proceaded in his journey,
sending the Chaunselour and a certain bishop on the forward Embassage a
foresaid to the Turk, where they dyed.

The Monck dissemblyng the deeth of the king made a leaghe with those princes
that had risen against the king, and when they had al sworn to be true to the
Queen and her Son went and took Latin. B^da.
Offen, and lay there.

When Ferdinandus the king of the Romans Ferdinandus would take in the
kingdom of Hu^gary.
heard, that he set all other things aside and got him into Ostenrike to take
in the kingdom of Hu^gary. He took in Weissenburg, Pest, and other cities of
Hungary, and afterward beseaged Offen. At the last when help came out of
dutcheland against the Turck to help the king of Hungaries son, he was
compelled to return home again into Ostenrick, not without the great loss
and damage of his subjects.

IN the year.MDxli. came the Emperoures The Emperor comith to Norenberg.
majesty first to Norenberg, and was received with great honor, and leadde
into the city and into the Castle rydyng under a high cannape of Velvet,
which four of the Alder men bare. In all the streates where through he road,
were his cognisaunces and badges set up and other goodly triumphant things,
and on both sides of the streates the Cytesens standing one by another, all
Iolyly arrayed in their harness from the Spitell Gate unto the Castle: between
them rode the Emperor. And above by the Castle there was a Gate of triumph
set full of goodly sayenges and Latyne verses, made for the Emperoures
pleasure, and to his honor. And above upon the top of the Gatether was
asplayed Eegell made, which a man governed, and when the Emperoures majesty
came to the Gate, the Egell plucked in his Whynges, and bowed himself to the
Emperor reverently with his body. And did likewise on the other side, when
the Emperor was ridden through the Gate. The day following did the Emperor
ride to the counsel house. There was a royal seat and cloth of estate set up
in the streate over against the showing place, whereu^to the Emperor was
leadde by certain of the Aldermen. Thither came the comens of the city before
the council house, which after the priueledges and liberties of the city
were confirmed and made better, did there swear unto ye Emperor. After that
y^ Emperors majesty. took his journey to Regensburg, where the parliament was
appointed. Thither came many dukes and The parliament holden at Regensburg.
lords both spiritual and temporal, and the king Ferdinandus. And when the
most part was come together, the Emperors majesty delivered unto the states
and degrees of thempire a book, wherein ye articles of our christen believe were
contained, willing the^ to show it to their learned me^, that they might agree
in all these Articles, but with this condition, that all that was said and done
on both sides should again be delivered unto the Emperor in writing. And
after the states and degrees of the Empire had willingli agreed thereu^to,
werther learned me^ chosen to common together and to agree therein. On our
side were chosen Phillipe Melanthon, Marten, Bucer, Johan Baker superintendent
of Nidda.

And on the other side Doctor Eckius. Doctor Julius p^^ng, and Johan Groepper.

These after much and long disputacion agreed concerning the most part and
chief of the Articles of the Book, as of these following.

The first, of the power of the fre will of man, both before and after the
regeneration and new birth.

The second, of the birth sin or Original sin.

The third, of Iustificacion and righteous making before God, which is the
sum and the chief and principal point.

The fourth, of the new birth and of the working of the holy ghost, in them
that be new borne.

The fyfth, of belefe, of the grace of God, and of the merytes of Christ.

The syxth, of good works, and their merits.

The seventh, of the church of Christ, and of the tookens thereof, and also of
the falsse members of the church.

The eigth, of the Cannonical scripture, and their authority.

The nyneth, of the authority of the church, and of the counsayls, that is
to say, that they must always agree with the holy scripture.

The tenth, of the power and use of the Sacraments.

The leuenth, of Repentance.

The twelueth of the ministers of the church and their authority.

The thirte^neth, of the Ceremonies of y^ church.

The fourtenneth, of the commemoracio^ and remembrance of the Saints.

The fyftenneth, of Images.

The syxtenneth, of the Mass.

The seue^tenneth, that the Sacrament of the supper ought to be delivered under
both the kinds to the lay people.

The eighte^neth, of the discipline and Nourtour of the church, both of the
spirituail and temporal.

the.xix. Of the visitacion of the Christen.

The twe^tyeth, that every nation should hold a counsayll among them selves
every year to the co^seruacton of relligion, and condempnacion of Errowers.

Of all these Articles they agreed on both parties, as appears by the ^reatie
thereof, which is put out in prynte. And when the treaty and consul tacion of
both parts was desiuered to the Empetours majesty, he she wed it to Gaspar
Contarenus Cardinal S. Apolinaris the bishop of Romes Ambassador, and desired
him to consent thereunto. (...) D^^^s i^^ter (...) The Pope (...)hall


But forasmuch as it is not the bishop of Romes incanyng, to have any agreement
made according to the scripture, the Cardinal would no another One of his crooked
pi^pes hyndereth all that thegodly had go^e about ^ great while before, and
those me^ of great nobility besides the excelent learned.
wise consent* but so that the Articles should be sent unto the Bishop of Rome,
that he might conclude therein what should please him at the next general
Counsel that should be holden.

And in as much as many of the States and de grees of the Empire were
discontent there with (for they knew that the Pope would never be contented
with that Agreement, seeing it would do no small barme and damage too his
kingdom) they desired the Emperoures Majesty to give them leave that they
might have those Articles that were agreed of, to be openly taught in their
Churches, which thing also was graciously granted them, to do, as the
dissolycyon of the same Parliament declared.

Whereupon also the Princes hereafter named The prince^ that receive the word
of God after ye parliament holden at Regensburg.
caused the said Articles to be preached in their lands and dominions.

First Duke Otho Henrick of Bayer, County Palatine on the Rene.

Phillip his brother.

The City of Regensburg.

The City of Swyneforth.

Whom the City of Rottenburg on the Tawber followed in the year of our lord
a thousand five hundredth forty and four. And there would Doctor Eckius use*
h^he ^cuel his masters conning that is, lying*
undoubtedly moa have followed, if the deuell had not hyndered them thorou his
membre Doctor Eckius. For he, after he had, all the while the disputacion
lasted) done all his diligence to disanulle the whole book that the Emperor
gave them to agree of as Erroneouse, but could not bring his purpose about:
and yet must be affraied of the Emperoures Majesty, which had caused the
Book to be diligently written through the counsall of his learned men, or
must else hane been proved a liar with the plain truth thoroughe the
witness of the disputers of our side, and of his own fellows: wrote unto
those states and degrees that leyned to the Bishop of Rome after this soarte.

That unmeet Book never lyked me, ner yet does, nor ever shall, wherein I
have found so many The beu^ls (...) ^^ ^al (...), ^owes (...)es (...)
errors and fawtes. Wherefore I will give this sentence, that it shall not be
received of the Catholics, as which dispyseth the vein of the old fathers,
and smells utterly of Melancthon. And I Eccius have not agreed thereunto, nor
have also seen the Book that was delivered to the Emperors majesty, but
that certer: of the Lutherians Articles were read unto me, much less have I
agreed unto the writing that was (as I hear say) delivered to the Emperoures
Majesty with the Book, which I never saw.

This wrote Eccius, as is mentioned, but how ^^^^^ is pro^^d^ ^^r*
untruly, his own companions in a supplication written unto the Vmpeeres and
presidentes of the disputacion, wit nesse: wherein they complain of Eccius,
and of hy sfalsheede, excusing them selves: besides that the presydentes also,
as the Lord Frederick County Palatyne Electour on the Rhene, and the Lord
Granuell one of the Emperoures Majesty's counsayll, and the Emperoures Majesty
him self, excused Eccius companyons and praised them: that they had done
truly and honestly, and confessed that Eccius had agreed and consented to that
that they did, as then all these things may suffyciently be seen in the
treatye it self.

Now the while the matter stood thus as touching Rellygion, and by the
hynderaunce of the Popes Ambassadoure and Eccius could proceade no forther,
was the Turks matter taken in hand to send an Army against him, and to
withstand him, and to be short all the States and degrees of the Empire
agreed and consented to help against the Turk with men and money, and there
was a tax leuyed the wholle Empire through, in all the Lordeshyppes thereof,
both spyrituall and temporal, that every man should give according to his
substance of an hundredth Money is given to se^d an army against the Turk.
guldens one gulden. And he that was but a poor man and not worth and hundredth
guldens, should pay syxtene pence for his Body.

This tax was counted to be of such valor, that it was able to keep an
hundredth thousand men, both footmen* and horssemen three years long. And
the Marquis of Bra^deburg Electour was chosen to be the high and chief
Captain over all that wholl multitude in the fyelde: And this Army should
goo forward in the Somer following in the two and forty year. These things
being ended and concluded, the states and degrees of the Empire departed and
went home, and began to make preparacion for the money and Army above
mentioned.

As the Emperoures Majesty and the states and degrees of the Empire were
assembled and consulted together at Regensburg, the Turk also in the mean
while considered what was meetest for him to do. For when king John Weyda of
Hungary was deed, and left a Son after him, John Weyda king of Hungary dy^^^.
a Monk, called Brother George Ordinis paulinor at Offen, behaved himself so
that he was chosen of the Hungars to be the tutor of the Iunge king and
admitted to be Regent. He being promoted to such an hygth, and being affeared
of the Turk, which came with a great power toward Offen, sought all the
ways that he could, to keep Offen and to abide in the governance whereunto
he was chosen, and that on this wise, He made as though he would have helped
the The Turke^ Bassa ^esegeth Pest.
Turcke, And when the Turks Bassa, called Mahometwerck, Lieutenaunt of ^^^.
Alb^* greca*
Grekeweissenbourg, came before Pest with a great Army of the Turks to win
it, the Moncke sent him a great soorte of Sowdiars out of Offen to help him
to take in Pest, which full shrewdly heard the confession of those sely
Sowdiars that were laid in Pest by Ferdinandus. For it was done in the Lent,
between the twenty day of Martche and the fourth of April.

But after the Turks Bassa was compelled to depart from thence, the Moncke so
fenced and fortifyed his Governance and the City, that he trusted to (...)
the same against all the power of the Turk.

Shortly after, at the Emperoures and the kings Majesty's request, there was
a meetely good Army sent into Hungary by the Empire, to thyntent to have
brought Offen out of the Monckes power again under Ferdinandus. But as soon as
those Sowdiars were come together, there began an horrible Sycknesse among
them, so that there died many of them every day, and all that were sent
thither to strengthen them and to fulfill their nombre was in vain. For they
dyed more daily than could be sent unto them. And thereto the Turk himself
came down with a great and a myghtie power to take in Offen, and to drive
our Company back again: Which seeing that they were to weak to fight
against so great a multitude, and were also plaged with the pestylence, went
up a little above Offen and pytched their tents and made them a Trenche by
Saint Gertrudes hill. But for as much as there dyed every day many of them,
and the Turks increased daily more and more: They fell upon our men the twenty
day of August in the morning with an horrible shoute and out cry, but our
men defended them selves manfully, and compelled the Turckes to fly back
again into their their Tents. The day after our men seeing themselves to
weak, began to consult that it was best to fly, and in the night after the
horsemen went over the Tonaw. And thereuppon the Capitaynes that kept the
watch the same night* took with the^ the other watchemen before the time that
they should have left the watch, and gat over the water in Ships. When the
Commen soarte of the sowdiars perceived that they were forsaken of the
horsemen, they fled in all the have, and as many as could obtain the Ships
eskaped, many were drouned that would have Swymmed over the water, all the
reaste, which were well eight thousand A notable (...) ordi(...) lost (...)
Hungary.
were pitifully killed of the Turks. And the Turks obtained such a notable
soorte of Gonnes and Instruments of war, as had not been before seen in
Hungary. And it was the Commen saying of all the Soudiars, that that miserable
work was begone by the treason of Willyam Willyam of Rogendorpe (...)*
of Rogendorpe, which at that time was chief captain of the Army.
Whereupon they also have made a Ballett, which they openly sing, wherein
they exhort all other Capitaynes to be war that they do no such shameful
dead. And let no Sowdiar whether he be of high or low degree, that has a
mind to honestye, set so much either by money or rewards, that he would
therefore be a shamed to all the world, so that shame should be spoken and
songen of him for ever of all them that shall live after him all christendom
over.

But we will come again to the Turks matters. That Tyrrant caused four score
prisoners of the Christen to be brought starck naked before The Turk* ^eweth.
lxxx Christians in pieces for a pastyme.
his Son, and for his pleasure and pastyme hewed them into small pieces.
Certenne of the nobilitye that were taken prisoners, were carried into Turkye
and there compelled with great and paynefull mysery to be slaves.

After this victory, he Imagyned how he might take Offen in. And therefore
called unto him the chief Lords of Hungary, as Valentyne Tereck, Peter
Petroreyck, Urban Vath^niani, and other that followed his ordinance and stuff,
thoroughe whose counsayll he brought his Army in to Hungarye: and said unto
them, that if they could find the means to deliver Offen into his hands, he
would make them the Rulers over Hungarye. Upon this promise they allured the
Monck, and the Queen and her Son and the other lords that were within Offen
to agree to their request saying the best that they could of the Turk, that
he would be good and graciouse unto them, if they would yield up the City
into his hands, and ^^^re unto him in to his tents, showing them on the
other side that they were not able to resyste and wythstande his power.

Now when they upon this coumfort came out^ of the City, to receive and take
the Turk for the The Turk breaks his promise, and excercyseth tyranny.
ruler and father of their Country, was that promise not kept unto them, but
they were straight ways taken prisoners, and Offen was taken inn by force.
And there was such a surie and woodnesse excercised out of hand against y^
indwellers both citizens and soudiars, and against wives and maidens, that a
stony heart would have pytyed it. For after they had most shamefully misused
them, they were either killed, or carried away into a strange country into
extreme mysery and wretchedness.

After this the Turk caused the Queen and her Son, and the Moncke, and many
other of the Courtyers to be sent unto Lyppa, which is a strong Castle. And
then sent out three Companies into three coasts of Hungerlande to rob and
steal, in every company twelve thousand men of which the first could do
no great harm, for they could not come into Mehrer land by the means of the
Water, where their purpose was to have made hauock. The second Company came all
most as far as Vienne. The third made hauock in the lands of the lords of
Balassa, and killed many poor men, and carried many away for prisoners.

In the mean while sent king Ferdina^dus his Ambassadors the Lord Nicolas
the Earl of Salme, and the lord Sigismundt of Harmonstone to Offen to the
Turk, to Take a Truce. And (...)an (...)l year.
when they had obtained the same for an half year* and made it sure on both
the sides, the Ambassadors took their way home again to the king.

And the Turk when he had furnyshed Offen The turcke ^^^eth* ^xx. thousand
me^(...)
with twenty thousand men, took his Journey to Constantinople. But the Turks
that were left in the City of Offen kept not the Truce long, but fell often
out, and took the Christen prisoners at Unawares, which thing caused our men
also to do the same with them, whereupon there followed a continual Robbing and
Roauing on both the sides, the whole winter over, so that some time the Turks
sometime our men had the victory. The Turk gives ^ale^ tyne Te^eck his reward.


The Turk, as he departed, took vale^tyne Tereck, thorou whose help he gatt
Offen, and caused an yeron chain to be put about his neck, and cast him in to
the Tonaw by Greeks weissenburg, and so rewarded him for his true service. The
Turk takes certain Castles in* The Turk assaulteth the city of fyuechurches.


He also suddenly fell upon these Castles and took them in, zeckzaart, zeckehen,
Baranianara, and other that lay by them. He also took his pleasure upon the
city of Fyuechurches, and assaulted it, but found little pleasure there. For
the Indwellers de fended themselves well.

But they that were left within Offen fell twyse out at unawares upon Grane, and
the town Kakat that lies over against Grane, on this side the Tonaw they
pitifully clean robbed and pulled down: so that there was an excidyng
miserable work in Hungary this year.

Beside this Army in Hungary had the Turck The Turck hatha^arm^ in Pelopo^e so.
an other myghtie army at this time both by water and by land in the I Will
Peloponesus, now called Morea, wherewith he drove the Venecians from all the
Cities that they had there, and took them in. The while the Turck was thus
wood did the Emperor Charles prepare him self in Italy, Spain, Sycyll and
other of his lands and Isles with a notable great Nauye, wherein he had a good
army, well four and twenty thousand men, of which six thousand were
dutchemen, whose chief Captain was Master George of Regensburg, and sailed
into Africa unto the City of Algier, which Barbarossa had in. And although
the Poape dissuaded the Emperor that he should not take such an untimely
shyppyng, as to wytt, in Winter, at Luke, where they were both together* The
Emperor and the Pope to gether at Luke.
yet must the Emperoures purpose forward. For he hoped to have driven
Barbarossa out of that haven, and so to have had none Enemy whom he should
have neaded to fear the somer following, by the means whereof he could the
better have withstandeth the Turk by Sea. Now when he having a prosperouse
wind, was come with the aforesaid Army to Algier, and brought his Sowdiars
The Emperoures passage to Algier.
out of the Ships, and gotten them on land, than began suddenly such an
horrible tempest to arise upon Sea, with wind and rainne, and lasted three
days long without ceassyng: that not only the Sowdiars wacksed doussye in
the heed and syck, but also through the violence of the Storm there were more
than an hundredth and thyrtye Spyppes beaten shaken to geather, and peryshed,
wherein many men, and specially all their packes and baggage, and all their
vyttalles, and the ordinance to beseaghe the City wythall was lost, of which
things our men had no great Joy.

Now when they of Algier saw that our men were in such great necessity,
they fell out of the City, and killed them that kept the watch, and fell
upon them that were in the Tents with sha^tes and hagbushes, but were yet
driven back again into the City of the Spanyardes. Afterward they lay in
the way to hinder certain knights of the Rodes in a strayte way (of whom
and hundredth followed the Emperor agaynsie the unfaithful) till the Emperor
came and helped them with the doutch Sowdiars. But when the Enemies had shot
seven thousand of the Itatalians thorou with hagbushes, and the reast were
driven to fly, than the Emperor exhorted the dutchemen to withstand, and
said, ye beloved dutchemen help your Emperor this day, or else never, And
even as he spoke those words, were they that stood next by him in order
killed with a gonne which thing yet nether feared nor Amassed him any thing
at all. When the dutche sowdiars perceived that, they gat a Courage, and
although they could not shote for the greatness of the raynue, yet they drove
the Enemies back again into the City with Spear and sword.

But for as much as all their victualles were spente, and (as is before said)
destroyed with the violence of the Storm, the Emperoures Majesty made
provision to depart, and to the intent that the sowdiars might have some what
to eat, the while they should sail, they took the horses out of the
Ships, killed them and ate them, and afterward brought the sowdiars into the
ships that were left, and sailed from thence. And in the saylyng homewarde
they were also in great. Ieopardy and perel upon the sea, and many of the
ships and men were drowned. Let this much be enough of this viage. He that
will know further thereof, may read the whole history, which Nicolas
Villagagnome a knight of the Rhodes has diligently written, which also was
present thereby himself.

In the mean while dyed the Godly Christen Duke Henry of Saxon dies.
prince Duke Henry of Saxon, Duke Georges brother, and his son Maurice,
which after married the Landgraue of Hesses daughter, succeeded in the
governance.

The pestilence reigned grievously in many places this.xli. year, and specially
at Vien in Ostenrick. there dyed well.xviij. thousand the whole somer all
most was weete and rain. by the means whereof also the wine could not come
at his due sea son, and was very sower. And yet was this year (...)s (...)r
(...)
more wine wacksen, then in the three years following: Wherein the grapes were
all dried up and wythered, undoubtedly for our vnthanckfulnesse sake, and for
the mysuse thereof.

THe year.MDxlij. in the beginning of the year there came certain soldiers,
Italians borne into a town in Histria called Maran, not far from Tryest,
belonging (...) in Histr^^ is taken in.
to Ferdinandus. There were about three hundredth of them, and the second morning
after they came into the town, they cried Frantza, Frantza and kept them
together with their words and other weapons.

Now in the town was very few people, and vnape to war, by the means
whereof they yielded them selves. This town (as men suppose) did the French
king therefore cause to be taken in, to let the turck in there in to styrmarcke,
kernton and the other lands nyghe: there unto, for it was a good haven, and
meat for that purpose: which thing yet God has thus long graciously
preserved us from.

In the mean while there was preparacion made An army against the Turck.
the whole Empire through, and a mighty great army gathered to send in to
vngary (as was concluded at Regensburge) against the turcke: and there were men
sent out of all the coasts of Dutche land, which came to geather hard by
Vyenne. Now even when they should goforwarde with the wholl multitude
together, which were above an hundredth thousand, yet was thereby the means
of hyndraunce, no great thing brought to pass for it was in the later end
of harueste, so that it would be shortly time to prepare for their winter
Camp. Yet the chief and high captayn for that he would not be counted to
have gone forth in vain, went forward and beseged Peste, Pest is beseaged of
our men.
which the turcke had won the year before in winter, and assaulted it
with the greatlosse of our men.

And as they in the city fell often out to feyght Duke Maurice in Ieoperdy of
taking.
with our men, duke Mauryce of Saxon played the man, and followed after the
enemies so far from his own company that he was compassed round about of
the turckes and taken, But because they could get nothing of him in his
complete harness, they would lever have taken ^^e of Duke Maurice Ie(...)en
(...)eth ma^fully to deliver his master.
him therout alive, the while the Turckes were about him to have shyfted him
out of his harness, one of his Ientellmen sought so manfully to deliver his
master, till the reaste of the horse men myssed their master and came to help
him, and utterly delivered him from the Enemies. But the Ientylman that fought
so manfullye for him was killed of the turckes.

In the mean ceason there came a great horrible A sickness in the Camp
sycknesse among the soudyars, which wacksed greater and greater, by the
means whereof they were compelled to brekeup the Camp and give the soudyars
leave to depart. So that happily thorou the handyworck of God, which will moare
punyshe us with the Turcke, as we then daly well deserve with vnthanckfulnesse
and with the persequntynge of his word, there was no moare done, but that we
lost both our men and monye and all our labor, and made our selves mockyng
stocks to the Turcke.

At the departing from thence they so dyed of The grenous^ie^ of ye sickness
in. Duga ^^.
the afforsayde sycknesse, that skant the tenth man came home again. This
sycknesse was so contagyouse, that if one butt blewe upon a another he must
dye, and the while they lay, they were full of fantesyes as though they had
been mad, and as ^on^ as that madness was gonne from them, they dyed by and
by. Very few recovered that had this syckenesse, but they that dyed not of it,
lay wounderouse long syck.

While the Marquess of Brandenburge, as is ^for said, lay wych this
multitude in Vngary, War between ye Duke of Saxon and Brunswick
in the mean while the famous prince Ihon Fryderycke Duke of Saxon. Electour.
etc. and Philyppe Landgraue of Hesse and they that were in leaghe with them
took in to waghes a reasonable good sort of horse men and footmen, against
Duke Henrye of Brunswycke. The occasyon of this war was, that the Duke of
Brunswycke, after he had of shamefully and hyghly slaundred both the
Electoure and the Landgraue with openly prynted books, did them of Goslar and
Brunswycke which both wear in leaghe with the afforsayd princes, many and
great iniuryes, as that he belayed the ways to these two cytyes, took their
cytezens presoners, took ransom for them, and yet killed them. And although
he were often commanded to leave those proud points, by the Emperor and
the king of the Romans, yet would he not leave his evil purpose: and said,
that it should cost him his wholle Dukedom, yet he would leave it.

Nouwe in as much as there could no mean, be found to help the matter, the
above mencyoned Noble Princes and they that were in leaghe with them, were
driven to defend there fellows, members of the same leaghe.

Therefore went they forward in July with their soudyars (which were about
two and twenty thousand) in to the land of Brunswick. There the cities and
castelles were yield up one after a another, and were with frenshyppe
gracyouslye received and defended, and every man suffered to keep his own
goods with out any loss or hynderaunce. But such as would with stand, were
compelled to be obedyente.

When he of Brunswyke saw that, he manned The duke of Brunswyke flies.
his best and strongeste house, called Woluenbutell, which lies in a flat
euenfelde with strong walls and water ditches, with his own subjects, and
went his way, as though he would fetchemo men and shortly come again and
help them, command ynge them to play the men, and keep the house till he
came again. They had also all things enough in the Castle that was
neadefull there to, if they should have been long beseaged. Woluenbutel is
beseged


Now when the princes came before the Castle, they sent word thither that they
should have peace and a safe conduyte to come out with all that they had, if
they would yield up the Castle. There unto answered the captains that were
with in the Castle, that they should come again three Woluenbutel is vntapled
for.iii. pears.
year after, and then would they give them an Answer to that question. For
they trusted to keep that Castle so long, they thought that it was not
possible to win it, if it were not hungered out, and they had made
provision for three years, wherefore they would not yield it up.

Upon this proud Answer, the princes and the city of Brunswyke treuched in
three places, and pytched their tents. And the Land grave came so nyghe with
his ordinance, that a man might cast a stoane in to the Castle dytche out
of his trenche.

And when they had begone to shote the ordinance, the trompettoure of the
Castle sitting above in the tower, began to play this ballatte to anger
the Princes with all.

If thy pastime repent ye, than get ye home again. etc. The mening was, y^ they
should at the length repent them of their ioznep, and go hom, and winue no thing.
Therwyth all was the Land grave so angrye, that he leuelled al his ordinance
against the tower, and so shot there at, that the tower, and the trompetter
with all his pypynge fell down.

This falling down of the tower made them that were in the Castle so
affearde, that they that dwellte in the countreye hard by the Castle began
straight ways to come out one They fly out of the Castle over the walls and
ditches
after a another swymmynge over the dytche by a duffhouse. And when ye other
mercked that many of their men were gonne, and were to week to wythstande the
great power that was there against: them, they yielded up both them selves
and the Castle unto the Princes.

Afterward was the Castle and the wholle The Gospel is preached in the land of
Brunswick.
land set in an order, and the Gospel (which before was kept from it
through that tyranne the Duke of Brunswycke) ordained to be preached therinne.
And when they had ordained all things after the best facyon, and the Duke
of Brunswycke appeared no where with any sowdyars and the Empire required. But
the Emperor could smell what the Pope meante. Wherefore he utterly refused
that council, and exhorted him by writing, that he would rather see thatt the
Frentch king kept peace, to thynthent that the Turcke might be wythstanded:
than to call a council at such an Unmeet time, which might be an hynderaunce
to the other purpoose to make peace.

Afterward the Emperoures Mayestye prepared himself after the best facyon to
with stand the Frentche king and his partetakers.

About this time did the a boue mencyoned Princes, Duke Otho Henrycke, and
Phylyppe (...) pr^nces and (...) (...) the Gospel
his brother both countye palatynes on the rhyne, and the cytyes Regensburgh
and Swyneforthe, receive the Gospel: for which thing they were compelled to
take much harm, and specyallye they of Regensburge, to whom Duke Wyllyam of
Bayer did all the hurt that the could: Duke William ^^ Baier (...)th to v(...).
and forbadde all his suby^ctes, that none of them should carye any thing to
Regensburge or by or sell with them, or if any man did, he must not come
again in to his land, and must leese all his goods.

This was a great hyndraunce to the city, of Regensburge. For it lies in the
mids of the land of Bayer, Yeth has God gracyously preserved it.

In the beginning of the herueste there Grassehoppers.
came out of Ly^towe, thorou the land of pole and through schlesye and unto
the land of myssen great multytudes of Grassehoppers flyinge, and laid them
down in the above mencyoned lands by great multytudes, an hundredth dutch
mile long and a^e up all that was grene in the field and lo we meadows. They
were as great as a man's finger, and some of them greater, they had scales
as it had been harness upon them, and as it were an hatte upon their heads
like an old rowstye year on sallet, and were hard like an horn, so that a
man could skante tread them in sonder. They had four wings as it were, which
wereread speckelde, some of them were yellowe and gray and of other speckelde
colors.

And where so ever they laid them down in the field, there they lay well a
foate thycke from the ground. And specyallye in the land of Pole they say
that they lay an half elne thick from the ground.

When the sun began to schyne then they flewe up by great heaps, in
battle order so thycke to gether, that they shadowed the son like a cloud.
They flewe also as swystlye as other birds, a wholl dutche myl before they
reasted. In the land of myssen they came as far as to the water Mylda, for
there they came not. Every man thought that then should a great death have
followed in the same lands, where as yet hither to there has none been heard
of.

Haplye it was a warning (as certain learned men write) that we should take
hiede that we might be able to withstand, if the Turck came in with such a
multitude of people, from which thing God gracyously defend us.

In Italye upon the.xiii. day of June there A earth^^a^e in (...).
was a fearful and an horrible Earthquake by Florence, which threw down
many Chymneyes in Florence, and almooste a wholle little town lyinge not
far from it called Scharbarya, and destroyed many men.

They write also that in Turckye a little An earthqua^e in (...)ye
town lyinge not far from Solonychyo, from whence the Saffren comes, was
destroyed with men and women and all that was there in with an Earthquake.

They say also that there stood over Constantynople ^^ (...) ^^ (...) (...)ple
an horrible blasynge sterre.xl. days long, and that in the same days, in
June and Iulye, there was there an horrible weether, and an Earthquake. They
say also that a Dragon burnt the Turckes Castle and treasure, and that there
came a great multitude of wolves rennynge into the cyty, which did men much
harm. And many such wounders done at that time were written out of
Constantynople, whereof, as me seems some be but lies. How beit I let every
man thynck there in as shall please him, and believe what he will. Let this be
enough of this year.

The Brabanters being provoked of Marten van Rosheyme rusch et in to the land
of Gulyck* The Bra(...) (...)ll ^^to the land of Gulick.
and burn certain Castles and little towns, or rob and make havoc of them.
They manne Duren, Gulycke, ^yttard, Sustern and Hynsberg, which were yielded up
unto them. On the other side the Duke of Cleue, after he has gathered an army
round about our all places wythstandeth the power of the Brabanders: Which
after they had made Hensburg strong and intended also to Fence Duren, entered
into fight with his Enemies, Wherein when there were many killed on both
parties the fight was ended.

Syttard and Gulyck, because the walls were overthrown of the Brabanders, the
Duke of Cleue causes to be strongly walled again, and beseaged Duren and
compels them to yield up the town in the end of December.

This year James the fyft king of Scottland, The king of Scotland dies.
being.xxxiij. year of age dyed in December, leauyng but one only daughter
alive of two year of age, borne of his second wife, over whom he ordained
tutors and gouerners of the Realm the Cardynall of S. Andrews, and the lord
Hamelton.

IN the year of our Lord, 1543. even A Council kept at Nure^burg.
in the beginning of the year was a convocation or Counsel kept at
Nuremburgh, at the which convocation was present king Ferdinandus with his two
eldest sons, and besides them the most part of the Ambassadors and
deputies of the other princes Another counsel appointed at Spyer.
of the Empire. And when all their acts and doings were prolonged until
after Easter, there was another day appointed to be kept at Spyer, where the
Emperors Mayestye should personally appear him self.

In the month of January the Emperors majesty An army sent by them p(...)
(...) land.
sent out of spain a mighty army both on horsback and on foot whereof the earl
of Aultete was captain, into ye land of the Mores called Mauritania, ^^enge
in the coasts and borders of Afryca, over against Spain, to invade the king
of the city of tremetz, whereof also the kingdom has his name: because that
by the help of the Moors he had proflygated and expelled his brother, unto
whom the governance of the kingdom by right did appertain which sought
redress and succor at the hands of themperours majesty. This army arrived
the.xxvii. day of January at the city of Tybyda lyenge by the sea side, where
(...)
they found a great multitude of Mores, which soon avoided, and left ye
cyty unto the Spanyardes. After this they marched from Tybyda toward tremetz,
and endamaged the Mores by the way which were departed from Tybyda: until at
the last they turned them selves again and made a conflycte and skyrmyssynge
with the Spanyardes, which did soon beat them of and putt them to flight
again.

In the mean season departed the king (...)of (...).
out of the city of tremetz with his fighting men, and the best treasures
that was with in the cyty, and camped on a hill next unto the cyty.

And when he perceived the Mores to be smytten and putt to flyghte, he hasted
incontinently to succor the^: but he wa^^e even as much as they whom he came
to succor had wanne before. Now when the king was departed out of the city,
The city of Tremetz taken.
the Spanyardes went and took it with all their army, whereupon the chyef Ruler
that was yet left in the city caused themperoure to be acceptet and proclaimed
for their souereygne. Which city was won on tewesdaye the.vi. day of
February.

The French king proceeded in the land of Luxeeburghe The French king and the
Duke of (...)le^e pro(...) their marshial affairs.
as he had begone the year before, to waste to destroy to overthrow, and
to take in possessyon all that ever he might overcome, neither was their any to
resist him, saving that ye towns which were able to abide a blow, were
furnyshed with soldiers. In like manner did also william duke of Cleue in the
land lieng by the Maze, against The Lady Mary sends an army against the
Duke of Cleue.
whom the Lady Mary sister unto themperoures majesty, and regent of the Lower
parts of Ducheland, prepared and assembled an host of Lance knights being in
nombre about ten thousand, and above a thousand horses, by the which she caused
ye town of Sytterd pertaining to the duke of Cleue and lieng about three miles
from Masetright, to be beseged. But when the said army had martched in haste
until the third day, and came to the said town on easter even which was
the.xxiiii. day of March, pytchynge there their Camp, and intending to
refreshe them selves with food and The Cleueuers approach toward* the
Brabanders.
rest after their hungre, and paynfull iourneye sustained: The Duke of Cleue
approached with his army, which by estymacyon exceded not the nombre of them
that were sent by the said lady Marye (as I am infourmed of waryours that
had been in and among the said company) which nombre being espied a far
of, caused the Brabanders to make an alarm, thinking none other but that the
Prince of Orange, Renatus count of Nassowe, who had the year before for the
most part hyndered the enterprise of Martyne van Rossem against Brabante,
was come to aid them. Wherefore many of them ran out before the Camp not
half being armed. Nevertheless they brought them selves in battayl array at all
adventures, to provide in case the said company were their friends, that they
might honorablye and tryumphauntly receive them: if not, that they might
take the less hurt. But when the host of Cleue approached near in his battle
raye, the Brabanders espied the white Crosses in their banners, whereby they
knew assuredlye that they were enemies. Wherefore they did also march
forward in their order and array against their enemies. And when they had
well vewed and beholden one another on both syedes, the horsemen of both
parties caused their trompettes (...)nflict (...)e the C^eue^ers and (...)ders
to blow, and their company to stand by valyauntly.

Upon this did also the pyetons invade one another, with these words. Whatt
country man, do we find one another here? and forth with rushed to gether like
valyaunte souldyours: I^ so much thatt the horsemen of the Cleueners. after
hard byckerynge were soon put to flyghte by the Brabanders.

Butt their pyetons defended them selves so much the more manfullye, and
pressed upon the Brabanders after such sort as they were constrayened to flee
backwarde. And when they that were formoost began to draw backwardes, the
hole host, fled to gether in such wise as they The victory of the Cleueners.
could not be stopped: Whereupon the Cleueners hasted after them, and smote
down all that ever they might overtake. And if the horsemen of the Brabanders
had not smytten the horsemen of the Cleueners, and turned them from the
said pursuete, of all the pyetons of the Brabanders should not one have
escaped on live: Butt by the means of the said horsemen there were not myssed
many more then two thousand and three hundredth at the next musterynge after.

In this conflycte gate the Duke of Cleue besides the boutye of them that were
slayene about six ten or seven ten peaces of ordinance, with their
munycyons and appurtenaunces.

Wherefore he became so hyghemynded that he assured him self to be able to
resyste all the power of themperoure, but how this matter succeeded with him
shall be said hereafter in the next year.

During these affairs, there was no The sleep of the emperor.
cettayntye known, concerning the Emperors Mayestye thoroughout all
Dutchlande, where or in what condytyon he was. Many said he was dead*
whereupon there was much money and great waghers laid between merchant and
merchant. Some said he warred before Argyeres, and in sum, all men's
sayenges were uncertain, in so much that the practyses of certain Astronomers
were partelye veryfyed upon him. For they had prophesied, that themperoure
should sleep this year, in such sort as thoroughout al Ducheland but few
men should know how or where he was, or whatt he took in hand. But the
next year following it was perceived that he had prepared himself in spayn
against France and the duke of Cleue, with a great power. And least Spain
should be left without a head and Governor, he had made and establyshed his
son Philip king thereof.

After that the conuocacion or Council of No^^nburgh The s(...) (...)f the
(...)e(...)he (...)e (...)nd (...)th(...) (...)d^ (...)de.
was dispersed king Ferdinandus prepared himself with his affynytye, toward
the solemnysatyon of the marriage of his daughter which was betroughted to
Sygysmunde the young king of Poles. Which feast was kept and celebrated
with great pomp and solemnytye in the city of Cracowe, which is the chyefe
city of the Land of Poles, called Polonya* beginning the.iiii. day of may,
and contynuyng many days after.

But when the time was come wherein they had appointed to show pastymes and
to use iustynges, there chanced such a could and raynye whether contynuynge
many days that many became vnlustye, and had no delight in pastymys and mirth.

While there was such mirth and pastime used Hungary invaded by the Turk.
in the Land of Poles, the Turk prepared him self in Hungary, to bring a
present unto king Ferdinando at that feast, in so much that the.xxiiij. day
of July next following he beseged the strong Castle of Grane, with a great
power, and brought with him about a fyfty great pieces of ordinance, all wall
breakers, wherewith he shot both night and day very ^uttragiously, and cast
down the walls in many places so that they of our side within the Castle
could not occupy their great ordinance by the space of two days. And when
this shutyng of the Turk had continued until the eight day of August he
caused thesayd Castle the next morrow after to be assaulted with an excedyng
great power: And when the same assault had continued about five hours, the
Turks were feign to draw backwardes again with great loss. But whatsoever
God by the administracion of the Germaynes had preserved in Ferdinandus
kingdom, the same was by his own Capitaynes and servants betrayed and
delivered. For many Launceknyghtes of the Germayne nation saw with their eyes,
that the chief Captain of the Castle called Salamancko delivered letters to
the Turk with his own hands over the walls, at the time of the said
assault. Whereupon the Turks came by heaps the.xix. day of August next
following, to take the Castle in possession, according to the promise which
the upper Captain had made them: which notwithstanding were put of again by
the violence and power of the Germans that knew not of the said conspiracy
commanded the same sincerely and purely to be preached thoroughout all his
diocese and jurisdiction. But this grieved the Chapter and the City of Collyn
very sore, wherefore they have also hither to endeavored them selves to work
unto him much woe, sorrow and persecution, here and there by the hier powers.
God vouchsafe to preuente their bloody counsels and devices, and grant them
to be taken in their own snares, that his name in them may be sanctified. Amen.

This year also dyed at Ingolstade doctor John The death of doctor (...).
Eckius a faithful servant and cha^pion of the Pope, and a defender of the
abominable Papacy. But as his life was full of all ungodliness, uncleanness and
blasphemy, so was his end miserable hard and pitiful: insomuche that his
last word (as it is noted of many credible persons) was this, in case the
four thousand guldens were ready the matter were dispatched. Some say that the
Pope had granted him a certain Deanerych, which he should have redeemed from
the court of Rome with the said sum. And although some of his adherentes
would feign have extolled him into heaven, wherefore also the said rumor was
myghtely resisted with vain excuses, yet have they not prevailed, but opened
his shame so much the more.

the.xxvi. day of November a certain woman A wonderful birth besides Basell*
besides Basell in a village called Renach, brought forth a wonderful burden
namely two children fast together and double from the navel upward, so that
both their bellyes and breasts were grown together unto their necks, their
heads being parted lokinge one upon an other, and embrasing each other with
their arms. From the nauel downward it was but one child with one arse,
members of a manchilde* two legs and two fete, and the one was alive when it
came into the world, but it lived not past an hour.

Also the fourth day of June were seen at White^ Wonderful visions sen^.
dall not far from S. Ioachinis valley many and sundry visions. As.ii. cities,
against who^ (...) many Lyo^s with gonnes, and the reapeared many visages and
figures of men with wonderful beardes, one prayeng after the shape of Christ, an
other striking of a ma^s head, and an other sitting upon a Camel was destroyed
of a lion. There apeared also.ij. maidens, the one of the^ playeng on a lute,
with other like wonderful fantasies: which altogether (after my judgment)
may represent unto us the pore flock of Christ scattered The interpretacion o^
the vision.
through out Germany and Duchla^d, which is assaulted and persecuted of many
lions, that shede much in noce^t blood, and yet is always preserved and
enlarged through the earnest prayer of faithful Christians, according to the
significacion of the lesser city of the^ both, which increassed and became
larger and larger the more she was assaulted of the lions.

IN the year of our lord. 1544. the Emperor The council of ^p^re.
Charles came again into Germany, and helo^ a council at Spier, as it was
appointed at Nurrenburg the year before: but what was there done and concluded,
may all men perceive by the breakyng up of the same council. In the mean
season dyed y^ right and peaceable prince Lodowike Palatine by y^ Rene,
electour imperial etc. who as touchi^g his peaceable behaueours, might be
called the father of the Empire: For the celebration of whose burial
the emperor and the king went to Heidelbergh. And after this was the election by
the Rene granted by the (...)
Emperors may. to duke Frederike palati^e, which had the daughter of
Christierne king of De^mark, and had hitherto kept his court at Newemarke. This
^andable prince after y^ he had aspired to this digni^^^, endeavored himself
to y^ vtermost of his power to solowe the steps of his brother of laudable
memory. Almighty God vouchsaue of his grace to preserve and increase him and
all like peaceable princes to the welfare of the christen commonwealth.

While this passed about the Rene, themperoure (...)
caused his capitaines to take up a great multitude of me^ in the co^treis of
Germany, Burgu^dy, and Spain, a sent first. 7600. Germayns. 4800. Spanyardes.
12800. Italians, with. 1500. horses of who^ was chief capitain marks de quass^
to invaded the French king through Piemont. And where the said army came
within a duche mile of Carniol (for so it is called of the warriors) they were
assaulted of the kings host, which was but litell stronger then themperours
host. Wherefore they brought themselves both at once in battellraye, and stood
on two hills, whence the one might well behold the other, and between them
beneth was a deep muddy valley, with dyches full of foul water. Now when
neither part would give over his hold, and aue^ture through the mudde, and the
dyches, there was many a shot made between them, until at the last the said
Marks put furward the Spanyardes, promising them comfortably to assiste them,
with the Italians and with the horsemen, insomuch that they attempted with
their armures and artillery to wade thorough the mudde and mire against their
enemies, whereupon the said enemies stood still until they saw the
Emperors hooste troubled and pestered in the mire, in such sort as they
could keep none order, for every man had enough to do to save himself out of
the mudde. Then went they With their ordinance.
down easily with their ordinance and fell upon the^ that were entangled, and
took certain horsemen which had broken the array that was made again. And upon
this they russhed among them without violence. Now when the Duchemen and the
Spanyardes trusted that their superiors would succor them with the Italians
and the horsemen, the said bold and stout champion turned his back with them
and fled, sufferyng thesayde poor men to perysh without any succor. So that
in this battayll were slain about.viij. M. Dutchemen and Spanyardes, among
whom were many old and expert warriors, and.ij. M. of them were taken
prisoners, The kyndnes of Switchers.
which were well entreated of the Swychers, as prisoners, and by them
co^ducted out of the kings dominions, until they came within a littell days
yourney of Geneue. And if the Swychers had not showed them such kyndnes they
had been all killed of the Frenchemen, besides that they were so taken and
spoiled of all things even to their shertes. Wherefore they be herein much
bound to thank the Swytchers. After this, when the conuocatio^ or counsel
was concluded at Spyers, and A counse^lour o^ Nurrenburgh taken.
every prince departed homeward to his own, sir Jerome Bomegardener, a learned
man y^ feared god being sent to the said cou^sail from the town of Nurre^
might have overcome and subdued all France with out any notable loss of his
men. For the warriors of the French king were become so faintharted yt they
durst in no place resist their enemies. To the which act the emperor might have been greatly advanced, by the means that the king of England say also in
France with a great power. Howbeit through great intreataunce and mediation of
ye chief lords of the parliamen at Paris, and the duke of Orleans, the kings
son, who did specially favor ye Emperor, the matter was brought to a
stay, but on what condition I have no certainty of knowledge as yet, for
so much as some say one thing and some another. Wherefore I will rather write
nothing, the^ I should thereof affirm any thing uncertain.

In this year chanced four horrible Eclpses or (...)
darkenings. The first of the Moon. the.x. day of January about.vi. of the
clock in ye morning, which lasted.iii. hours and.xxviii. minutes, and the
Moon was hidden.xii. points, and.xlvi. minutes. The second of the Su^ne
the.xxiiii. day of January, about ix. of the clock before noone, lasting.ii.
hours, and.vi. minutes* and the Su^ne was darkened about.xi. points and.xvii.
minutes, and when this darkness was at the hiest, it was so dark euerywhere,
as it is commonly at night when the Sun is newely set, insomuch that all
fowls and cattaile which were merry before, became still and sad, as though
they had mourned and had compassion with the Sun being darkened. The third
Eclipse was of the Moon, the.xiiii. day of July about half an hour after
eight, which lasted.iii. hours and.xlii. minutes, and the Moon was darkened*
xvii* points and.xxv. minutes.

The fourth was of the Moon the.xxix. day of december in the morning about
half an hour before seven, and lasted.iii. hours and.xxxvi. minutes, the moon
being deprived of her light by the shadow of ye earth about.xiiii. points
and.xviii. minutes.

But what effect and operation the said Eclipses and darkenynges brought with
them, may every wise man partly perceive by the contents of the Story of the
year next following, and partly by the daily discourse, and exercise both of
magistrates and of subjects. For without special alteration of earthely
creatures, such constellacions are not wont to pass, as experience does
sufficiently teach and declare.

This year henry the eight, king of England sent Scotland ^^uaded by ^^g^^thmen.
an army into Scotland in the month of May, which landed at Lyth in
Scotland, and so went burning and destroyeng the country about, sparyng
nether castle, town, pyle nor vyllage, until they had overthrown and
destroyed many of the^, as the borough and town of Edenborough with the Abbey
called Holy Rodehouse, and the kings Palice adjoined to the same. The town of
Lyth also with the haven and peyre. The castle and vyllage of Cragmyller, the
Abbay of Newbottell, and part of Muskelborowe town, the Chapel of our lady
of Lawret. Preston town, and the castle Harintowne with the Freres and
Nunery, and castle of Oliver Sancklers, the town of Dunbar, Laurestone with
the Graunge, with many other towns castles, vyllages and pyles.

Also this year thesayd kings majesty prepared an army into France, and
thither he went his own person Bullyn beseged
and beseged the strong town of Bullen in France, and there wanne the watch
toure otherwise called the old man the.xxviij. day of July. And the.xxix. day
of the same month Basse Bullyn was won.

the.xiij. day of September the town of high (...).
Bullyn was victoriously conquered by the said king of England, which after
the entreaty and humble peticion made of the French men gave them license to
take bag and bagage with them and so depart.

the.xiiij. day of September at.iii. of the clock at (...)
after none, ye town gate was opened, and the people began to come out, and
they held on until.vij. of the clock at night. And there were in nombre of
men, women and children. iii^. M. and of them.xv. C. able me^ of war, and
they had with them as much as they could carry, both men women and children,
that was able to bear any thing: and their horses and kine were loded with as
much stuff as they could bear away And they had.lxxv. wagens laden with them.

IN the year of our lord. 1545. was another counsel (...).
kept at Worms, where many things were discussed and entreated, as the
breakyng up of the same publyshed makes mention. There was also concluded as
touching matters of religion, that a communication and disputacion should be
kept at Rainsburgh the next year, whereunto ye estates of the Gospel, or
Euangelical princes should appointe. vii^. learned men on their party, and
likewise the Papists eight men on their side, whose mutual agreementes and
conclusyons should be propounded and declared unto the Emperor: That
afterward he might co^sulte upon such things as should seem to make for an
unity and concord.

While these and such other matters were debated and determined at Worms, in
the presence of the Emperor and the king of the Romans, the right high and
mighty Prince, and lord Frederike The Palatine a fauorer of Gods word.
Palatine and Electour Imperial by the Rene, co^sideryng and pondring the
necessity of his princely graces poor subjects, wherein they lay miserably
captiuated and clogged under the yoke of that wicked and detestable Papacy: and
how many souls might be lost and brought to dampnacion or ever such unity as
should be made at Raynsburgh could be brought to pass: And also how many
consultacions and disputacions had been kept before this time, wherein always
the papisticall sect had been convinced and overcome* and yet nevertheless had
always persisted in their Idolatry, and defended it the longer the more
violently, whereby it might be easily perceived and concluded, what hope of
amendment or agreement there was to be looked for: He determined and concluded
with himself forth with to forsake all popysh abomination, and not to tarry
the issue or end of the said conuocacion and disputacion, but in as much as
thorough the grace and mercy of God he had obtained knowledge Popery pa^^ down
and the Gospel preached in the palatines jurisdiction.
of the truth and light of the Gospel, to canse the same without delay to be
ministered and declared to his poor subjects. Wherefore he ordained and
constituted in all his jurisdictions, that the Popish abhominacion should be
put down, and that instead of the same the Gospel of Christ should be freely
preached, that his pore commons might be taught and brought into the right and
true way of salvation. Our Lord and savior Jesus Christ preser^e him and all
the favorers of his word to proceed and go forward in the setting forth of
his will to the glory of his blessed name. Amen.

This year also died the daughter of king Ferdinando, (...)g (...) Poles (...).
which was married to Sigismunde the young king of Pooles, which was no small
grefe to the king her father. But of what death she dyed I could never hear no
certayntie as yet, only this is manifest that she was not very well entertained
of the king her husband, although it was a synguler grefe to the old king his
father.

When the Emperor (the convocation at Worms (...)p (...)o (...).
being expired) came down into the lower parts of Duchlande, he proved the
good bishop of Collyn diverse manner of ways, if he might by any means have
caused him to forsake and renounce the Gospel, and have brought him again to
the obedience of the Pope. But the good christian father remained immovable
hitherto as a rock surely couched upon Christ the true fundacion. God preserve
him to the end, and vouch save also to illuminate the Emperors majesty, that
he may know the truth and be delivered from the snares of Antichrist.

After this the emperor took in hand to make peace (...)pro(...) (...)d and
(...)e.
between the king of England and the French king. For the king of England
lay yet strongly in camp against the French king, but to what effect the said
matter was brought shall appear in time convenient.

In the mean season Henry of Brunswike which Henry duke of Brunswike goes
about to recover his land
before three years had been expelled out of the land, gathered an host of men,
as preuely as he could. And when he had assembled a competent nombre of men in
the bishopriche of Werden, he marched with xv.C. horses or more, and.viij. M.
Lau^ceknightes toward Rottenburgh into the byshoprike of Breme, trustyng
there to obtain the bishops great ordinance. But when they of the city of
Breme had knowledge of his coming they sent a certain no^bre of soldiers
for the defense of Rotte^burgh, which hindered the duke of bru^swike of his
purpose. When he perceived that his enterprise took no better success, he went
with all his power into the la^d of Lune^bourgh, where he did sore endamage the
poor people, and so proceeded to recover his land from whence he was expelled.
First he recovered Stonebridge, which yielded unto him without any great need.
From thence he took his way toward Woluesbutell, and in his going he wrought
much woe to the city of Brunswike roauing and burning in her suburbs, villages
land marks and inrisdictions, whereupon he wrote to diverse towns, to make an
agreement with him: he did also require money of one of Electours, and of
certain bishops, attempting partly as it were by threatenings and minaces to
compel the^ to do him this pleasure. And while the duke The ^ount^ of
Deckelenbourgh inu^ded for the Golpell.
raged thus about Bru^swike, his ministers Otho count of Rithberg, Alhard of
Hoord with other brought at their Lords commandment, into the County of
Deckelenburg about.viij. C. some say M. horses, and about.iii. M.
launceknightes which invaded the said count in his dominions, because he
favored the Gospel, troublyng and spoylyng the poor people with burning and
raunsaking to piteously. After this the said host marched toward the water
called the Weser, where they endamaged certain gentelme^ and fermers of the
La^dgraue: And after that they had constrained a certain officer belonging to
the Bishop of Minster and of Minden, which dwelled in the place upon the hill,
to disburse unto them a certain sum of money, they departed from thence to
Duke Henry before Woluesbutell. In the mean season had the said Duke Henry
caused the country (...) ^^ll beseged.
to receive him again as their Lord, with due solempnities according to the
custom and manner in that behalf done accordingly, the town of Shennigen
which was garnysshed with soldiers by the confederates of Smalcalde only
except. After this he beseged the town of Woluesbutell with both the said
armies, and caused the water to be conuayed out of the diche that compasses
the Castle, which little prevailed him. For they that kept the Castle
defended them selves manfully, and with skyrmysshing and shutyng they vexed and
harmed their enemies very sore, stoppyng also and fyllyng the diches and
sluses, which their adversary had dug to let out the water. Besides this
God sent a rain whereby their for said dyche was soon filled with water
again.

While now Duke Henry was troubled in his Philip Landgraue of Hessen Captain
of the Evangelical confederation.
affairs, Philip La^dgraue of Hessen as a Capitain of the Evangelical
confederacion establyshed at Smalcalde, prepared himself, having also men sent
him from the Electour of Saxo^, whose Captain was Duke Ernest of Brunswike,
Duke Philippes Son, and also from all the Estates of the said confederacion.
To him came also duke Maurice Duke Maurice of Saxo^.
of Saxon with a 1000 horses, and. 4000. and. 500. lau^ceknightes, and a
competent tire of ordinance, at his own charges to help the said Electour
and the Landgraue. When the said Landgraue therefore had a competent nombre of
warriors in a readynes, he went forth and pytched his Camp by the town of
Northeim, where both the above named princes came unto him. But when the said
Duke of Brunswyke had knowledge of this coming of the Landgraue, he left
Woluesbutell and went to mete the Landgraue, pitching his Camp besides
Bierbergh, in a vyllage called Calfelde, a good duche mile from the Landgraues
Camp. And on Saturdaye the.xvij. day of October, certain horsemen with
certain launceknyghtes of the Brunswykers showed them selves upon the hill of
Northeim, and schirmysshed with the Landgraues men, which were soon repelled
with the small ordinance, and turned back again to their Camp. Duke Maurice
seeks ^* means to make a peace.
In the mean season Duke Maurice at the request of Marquis John, who had a
daughter of Brunswyke to wife, and of certain other Princecely persons sought
means to make a peace and agreement between the Duke of Brunswyke and the
Landgraue. But while the Landgraue durst conclude nothing without the counsayll
and consent of the other confederates, the matter was delayed. upon this the
sunday next following which was the.xviij. day of October, Duke Henry brake up
with his army to take and recover a certain hill, and a Cloister, from whence
he might have done notable hurt to the Landgraue with his ordinance. But when
the Landgraue perceived this, he caused that hole to be stopped. For the three
princes with all their power (except a small quantity of horsemen and a
certain nombre of lance knights which were left in the Camp to keep the
ordinance) took in the said hill before him. In so much that there was much
shutyng on both parties, in which conflycte many good men and horses were
endamaged and hurted on both sides. And while this skyrmyshing and shutyng
endured duke Maurice proceeded (to avoid much sheding of blood if it were
possible) to set a stay in the matter, by the which his earnest labor he
brought to pass, that (...)
a truce was taken from that ho^re until the monday at night. In the mean
while did Maurice common with the duke of Brunswike howbeit there could no
certainte be gotten at his hand, but he went without any respect of the said
truce, and caused his horsemen to (...) (...) by (...)i (...).
spoil and take. x^iij. wagens sent for prouand^r with horses and all their
appurtenaunces belongyng to the Landgraue, which also killed certain
husbandmen at the taking of them. But the Landgraue and his men were quiet and
peaceable until the tewesday the.xx. day of October within night. And then
about midnight the watch word was given that every man should be ready with
his weapon, and so the hole host, which after the common saying of warriors
contained an hundredth thousand men (a great no^bre to be assembled within the
space of one month) marched over a certain water called the Rume, which the
Landgraue had caused to be furnished over with brydges accordingly. (For what
Henry of Brunswike had caused to be concluded and determined in the mean
season, was refused for diverse good causes) and early in the morning they came
to an hill not far from the Brunswykers Camp by a landmarke, which the
Landgraue caused hastily to be dygged up and cast down in many places, that he
might bring thorough his army without stop or let. For the Brunswykers
intended there to stop the^ of their passage whom the Landgraue at the last
was feign to beat away with his ordinance. Now when the armis of ye
Landgraue and of the other were both brought through ye La^dmarkes upon the
plain of ye hill, there were also brought through into ye field three great
slings, and certain Canons, which, as soon as the enemies were espied, were
discharged and shot among the thickest of them. But as soon as the Brunswykers
saw this they did furthe withseke means to flee and turned the^ selves
toward an hill lyeng by a wood, whom the horsemen followed without delay.
When duke Henry saw this, that there was such shuting toward his hooste,
and that they were put to flight* all his bold courage was done, and his
proud heart fainted, wherefore he sent incontinently to Duke Maurice, desyryng
to impetrate some grace and favor for him at ye hands of the Landgraue. And
although the La^d grave showed himself gentle and ready, yet would he not
trust him (for he suspected y^ Duke Henry and his Son sought ways to escape)
but marched strayghtwayes with his hooste and artyllery toward his enemies,
and shot among them fearcely, until such time as Duke Henry and his sun
(...).
Charles victor thorough the Counsayll of Duke Maurice, yielded and submitted
them selves into the hands of the Landgraue. At which time the Landgraue made
unto Duke Henry this sharp oration. If thou myghtest have somuche power (...).
over me, as I have now over the, surely thou would not save my life. But I
will use my self better toward the then thou have deserved at my hand. Why
have thou presumed to disobeythe Emperoures majesty, and to refuse
seques^racion? For if thou had obeyed, thou should not have brought thy
self into this trouble, neither should so many poor men have been endamaged,
undone and destroyed. And forth with he committed him and his Son to the
keeping of certain of his chyef ge^tylmen, which took them both into their
custody. While these things were a doing between these two princes, the
Landgraues company both on horseback and on foot pressed in among the company
of Duke Henry in such sort that but few of them should have been left on
live, if Duke Maurice had not the sooner aduertysed the Landgraue thereof, who
as then rode hastily among them, and with much a do stylled and pacifyed his
men, and turned them back from fyghtyng The Landgraue (...)qui^eth an oath of
duke Hen(...) company.
and shutyng.

Now when the people was qualifyed and pacified the Landgraue called Duke
Henryes company before him, and required the^ to swear, that within the space
of three months next ensuing they should work nor pretend nothing against the
Evangelical confederation. Which some of them promised without delay, but the
horsemen departed by heaps with open banners without any oath or promise made:
whom the Landgraue pursued in haste, and ouertoke the next day, wherefore they
attempted to make resistaunce, but when they saw that they were ouermached,
they laid down their banners, and made an oath not to enterprise ought
against the said confederacion within the space of six months. When this
was done both the father and the son of Brunswyke was with a strong guard
carried to Cassell, and the father from thence into the Castle of Zigenheim.
After this did the Landgraue take in again the land of the said Duke Henry,
and caused thinhabitauntes of The land of Brunswike taken in again and sworn
of new to ye confederatio^
the same to swear again of new to the confederation of the Gospel, and
consequently turned him self against the Earls, Ihon of Shauenburgh, and Otto
of Rithbergh which are both lonemen to the Landgraue, and yet had succored
them of Brunswyke with men, artillery, and other necessaryes, insomuche that
John Earl of Shauenburgh was The Earl of Shaue^burgh deposed.
deposed from his stronghold Bucke^bourgh, which was given to his brother and
other of the stock, to enjoy, on this condition that they should not suffer
him to come in again oneles he were before sufficiently agreed with the said
confederation for all his offenses committed against them. But Ritbergh
Rithbergh given up.
was given up to the Landgraue by the possessours thereof. When all this was
done, and by Gods grace finysshed without great bloudshedyng, the warriors
being honestly contented and paid, were licensed to depart every man home to
his own. All these acts have I drawn and extracted out of the Copy of the
Land grave, and therefore described them so much the more at large while such
writings, which are called news are commonly soon dilated. Nevertheless
considering that thereby the common sort of people and our posterity may have
a short and sure information and declaration of these marciall affairs, I
trust that no wise man will mislyke this my labor and diligence.

About Migh^lmas dyed Albert Archebyshop (...)th of (...)che (...)of (...)
of Mentz, which was Marquis of the Mark, brother to the old Marquis
Ioachim. In whose rowme was elected by the chapter sir Sebastiane of
Housenstone, a Doctor of a notable stock, whose dwelling and mansion was
between Aschaburgh and Franckeforde.

Also not long after this Albert the son of Casimire The Ruler of (...)har^
(...)ed by ye Marquis of Brandenburgh
lord Marquis of Brandenburgh assaulted Onoldesback which is commonly called
Onesback with 600. horses in the name of one of knobelsthorp who was the chief
among the rulers of the land, which ye lord Marquis George (deaceassed a
littell before) had left to his young son, whom he had by the daughter of
Duke Henry, sister to Duke Maurice of Saron, and required the same to be
delivered unto him. But the Ruler of Knobelsthorpe being warned of this, gate
him out of the way. So that thesayd Lord Marquis was feign to depart not
having his purpose.

In Hungary raged the Turk with roauyng and The fury o the Turk.
spoylyng of the pore subjects of Ferdinando, who^ he put to much loss and
hynderaunce.

This year also dyed the young Duke of Orleans The death of the Duke of
Orleans.
the French kings Son.

Of wondres and signs happened this year, one in especial to be noted is come
to my knowledge, which chanced in the land of Poles, and might be seen of
all thinhabitauntes of the same on sunday the.xxix. day of March which was on
Palmesonday Wonderful apparitions and visions.
about.viii. of the clock in the morning. At what time there was heard such a
fearful thonderclappe, that the hole land trembled. After that, there
apeared in the east three red crosses, two of them above, and the third under
them both. In the mids whereof apeared a man armed, with a fyry sword.
against whom came a great multitude of warriors on horseback and on foot,
which fought with him until one of the clock at after none, and were in fine
overcome of him that they al peryshed and vanyshed away, he remaining alone
in the field between the crosses. Immediately after this came a terrible
Dragon behind the man, and devoured hymwith the sword. When this visio^was
past, the sky waxed all red and of a fyry color, which lasted about an
hour, even until two of the clock or there about, then arose there such
black clouds under the sky, that it was as dark as though it had been
night, which continued so until the next day, the thyrty day of March in
the morning about.ix. of the clock. And then the sky with the day appear
dagayne. There appeared also three goodly and well favored Raynebowes one above
another whereon sat an holy Angel, which appeared by the space of an hour
and a half. And after this it was fair wether for the space of certain days.
These things were written out of the Land of Pooles, and afterward set forth
in printe openly, but the interpretacion thereof will I commit to the
judgment of other.

The rest of the Summer of this year was very propice and warm, the fruits of
the earth were competent, and the wynes had good success and chanced very
good, so that they caused much dissentio^ and debate, and also manslaughter
between such as abused them.

This year in the land of Bullenois there camped in Iannuary on the West side
of Bullyn beyond the haven an army of Frenchemen to the nombre of. 18000. and
lay there the space of.x. days, and the.vi. day of Febru. they were all put to
flight by the earl of Harforde and the lord Admiral, with a small company of
men and without any bloudshedyng on the English side, but diverse of the other
were slain, they left al their ordinance with bag and baggage behind them.

This year about the.xx. day of July the Frenchmen with a great navy of
ships muaded the I Will of wight in England, where as they were driven back and
a great number slain.

In the year of our Lord. 1546. even in the beginning of the year was a
convocation of the Evangelical A conuocatio^ at Frank forth.
confederation kept at Francke sorde on the main, and the disputacion to be
kept at Raynsburgh was also begone. etc.

This year was doctor Martyn Luter and doctor The death of Ma^ten Luter.
Iustus Jonas called too Isleven of the Earl of Mansfelde, to cast of and
accord certain debates and dissentions that were happened between them. Where
doctor Martyn Luter was overcome with the old impedimentes and diseases of his
body, which renewed upon him whereby he felt and perceived his end to be at
hand. Wherefore he called heartily upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
with open confession commended his soul into the hands of God our heavenly
father. In so much that the eighten day of February he departed out of this
miserable world into the hands of God with Christ whom he had boldly
confessed before the world all most thyrty years as well by his paynfull
preaching and teaching as by continual writing.

His body was at the commandment of the Princely Electour carried from
Isleven, by the Earl of Mansfelde accompanied with fyfty horses to Wittenburgh,
and of all estates of the Princely Electours Court both of high and low
degrees, and The burial of doctor Martine Luter.
of the university of the city he was sorowfully but yet honorably brought
into the Castle, and reverently buried besides the burials of the Electours of
Saxon the.xxii. day of February. the.lxij. year of his age.

This man so highly endued with knowledge from God, was appointed and ordained
of our heavenly father to be a minister and teacher of his church and a
preacher of his Gospel, even as in all ages he has raised and ordained some to
be Prophets, some to be Apostles, and some to be teachers of his congregation.
For he opened and declared unto the world (by Gods grace) the necessary and
wholesome doctrine of the Gospel, and taught the true repentance and comfort of
the heart, which is feared with the knowledge of Gods wrath. He has godly
set forth the doctrine of Paul, which says: That a man is justified and made
ryghteous by the faith in Christ. He has also declared the difference between
the Law and the Gospel, between the rightousnes of y^ spirit, and of the
outward works. He brought to light again the true worshypping of God, which
had been unknown to the most part of the world by the space of a thousand
years. And brought the universal Church from that fond opinion, which
imagines, that God is worshypped although y^ mind of man being suppressed
with perpetual doubting, abhors to come to god

He taught also how we ought to pray in faith and with a good concience, and
ledevs to the only mediator Christ the son of God* which sytteth at the
right hand of the father everlasting, and makes intercession for us: And not
to the souls of dead men as the ungodly Papists have taught with fire and
faggot. He declared also what good works were acceptable to God. He has so
garnisshed and establyshed the temporal laws and governance, that sense the
Apostles time it was never so confirmed by Scriptures. He did also abolysh the
chyldysh custom and ceremonies of man's tradicion, which hyndered true prayer,
and separated them from the necessary works. To thyntent also that the
heavenly doctrine should extend to his posterity, and that the people which
shall come after might have knowledge, he translated the Prophetical and
Apostolical Scriptures into Dutch with such light and clarite, that the reder
may have more knowledge thereby, then by some men's expositions.

He made also many expositions, which do far excel many other, as Erasmus
of Roterdame witnesses in his writings. And as it is written of them which
repaired Jerusalem, that they builded with one hand and held the swoorde in
the other: Even so warred Doctor Martine Luter with the enemies of the true
doctrine and builded nevertheless the heavenly doctrine. Besides this he did
help many men's conciences, with good cou^sayll. And whylest a great part of
his doctrine is above man's reason, (as the doctrine of remission of sins, and
of faith) it must needs be granted that he was taught of God. In prayer for
the universal Church of Christ was he very earnest and dilygent. He did also
eueryday chose a certain hour to recite certain Psalms, wherein also he
mixed his prayer with great devotion. He taught also that it is not enough to
pray only with the mind and with sighing, but that the manner and form of
prayeng is prescribed unto us by the Counsel of God, that the hearts by the
reding may be stirred, and moved, yea that the voice also may knowledge and
confess what God we worship.

He was also in the assault and resistau^ce of the enemies of Gods truth of a
constant mind and of a bold courage, neither was he abashed for their
threatenynges. He was also in difycult matters of a sharp and high wit, and
well spoken, as his famous do sufficiently declare.

For as much therefore as this man was garnyshed with such a great wit and
other godly virtues, and was specially ordained of God to repair his temple
again, wherein he has not been negligent, we ought not to suffer his virtues
and benefits to peryshe among us, and whylest he was an instrument of God, we
ought gladly to follow his Doctrine, and therein to learn the virtues
necessary for us, as the fear of God, faith and feruentnes in prayer,
diligence in the office of the word, Chastity, abstinence and abhorryng from
sedition or tumulte, diligence and desirous to study. etc. which God grant
unto us all. Amen.

In the month of March anon after that the conuocatio^ at Raynesburgh was
ended, there was an horrible act committed at Neweburgh besides the Danube, in
the jurisdiction of the Palatine, between two brethren being Spanyardes, of
whom the one was called John Diasy, well learned in the Lar^e, Greek and Hebrew
tongues, a man that feared God, and loved the sincere doctrine of Christ and
his holy Gospel, and was at that season sent from Raynesbourgh by the
Dysputers of the Gospel, with whom he had great acquayntaunce, toward
Newburgh, to correct and fynyshe certain books to be imprinted.

But when his brother Alphonse Diasy, a Doctor Alphonse dia si a
trayterousmurther
of the law and at Rome in high office, a servant of the Pope, and an enemy
to the Gospel of Christ, was come from Rome to Raynesburgh, and there had
knowledge, that his brother John was at Newburgh, he hasted him self thither
with all speed, to see his brother, where he attempted in certain days with
many disputacions to draw and turn his brother from the pure doctrine of the
Gospel to the wicked doctrine of the Pope with many checkes.

But John remained constaunt in the doctrine which he had learned and searched
to the bottom, and instructed his brother with invincible arguments and
testymonyes of the doctrine out of the Prophets and Apostles, in all the
Articles of the Christen faith, endeuouryng him self with all diligence to
convert his brother to the sincere doctrine of Christ.

When Alphonse saw the constauncy and perseueraunce of his brother, and that
he could not resist nor confute his doctrine, nor yet bring him to the Popes
way, he dissembled and behaved him self as thoug he had gladly and earnestly
embraced the Evangelical doctrine, and gentely suffered his brothers
charitable and Godly instructions and exhortacions, abiding with him almost
three days. In so much that he said unto him: while he saw and perceived that
his doctrine of the Gospel was the very sound and true doctrine of God, and
knew that there were many honest men at Rome, and also in other cities and
towns of those parties which were very dysyrous to be instructed in the true
and sincere doctrine of Christ so that they lacked nothing but men of good
learning, that were expert in setting forth of the same doctrine accordyngly:
wherefore he besought him of Brotherly love, to goo with him to Rome, where he
might by his godly doctrine do much good, and a deed acceptable to Christ.

But what happened? This good man John Diasy, being simple and suspecting no
gyle, suffered his brothers persuasion to take place, and granted him his
request, howbeit he wrote back unto the Disputers and Auditors of the
Evangelical doctrine, desiring to have their counsayll in this matter: who
perceyuyng the craft and papisticall murderysh heart of his brother, gave him
counsayl not to go to Rome with his brother.

Now when John Diasius folewed their counsayll, and gave his brother an
answer that he could not at that time go with him to Rome, the said Alphonse
behaved himself frendely toward him, and gave him certain crowns and
ducates for his farewell, taking his leave and departure of his brother very
louyngly and frendely, as though he would have gone strayghtwaye toward Rome.

But within few days after, he came to New burgh again from Ausburgh, where
he had prepared good post horses to be in a readynes to flee when he should se
cause. And when he came to the said town of Newburgh early in the morning at
the openyng of the gates, he tarried himself before the gate with the horses,
and sent his servant (being a murderer, whom he had hired at Rome for such
affairs, and brought him forth with him) into the town with a lettre, who
when he came to the said John, delivered him the said lettre, and while he
red the same, the Murderer The good doctor John Diasy murdered.
smote him with a great sharp halbarde and cleft his head in twain, that he
fell down dead, but the Murderer ran out of the town, to his Master, so
that both the Murderers gate themselves away.

When this horrible act was known in the town, soldiers were prepared and
appointed out of hand to pursue them, which at last caught and apprehended
both the said Murderers at Isebredge, where they were brought to prison.

And although there was much suet made to the Judges ordained and appointed by
king Ferdinando and the officers there, for due punishment, by the subjects of
the Palatine, which had spent about the same above four hundredth guidens, yet
could they obtain no justice against the said Murderers. But many
exceptions were made and propounded, namely that while the Brother was a
Spanyarde, the matter ought not too be pleated in Dutche language, but in
Spanysh, and before Spanyshe Judges. Yea when the Emperor came to Raynesburgh
he was also most humbly desired and besought to se justice ministered
concerning the said matter. But answer was made, that while the offenders
were taken within the Jurisdiction of the kings majesty the Emperors
majesty had nothing to do with the matter.

But in conclusion this was the last sentence and Judgment given, that for so
much as the said John was an heretic, he had deserved death: And forsomuche
as his brother Alphonsus was consecrated, and a spiritual person, the
temporal law had nothing to do with him, wherefore they were letten go free,
and set at liberty.

This horrible murder of Cayn was doubteles a forgaine of the detestable
wars which the Pope and his Church of Cayn has moved against Abell and the
favorers and teachers of the holy Gospel in Germany, where so much innocent
and Christen blood has beneshed, all the which things the Lord God will
punysh in time convenient, seeing there is no more judgment in earth. The
Emp(...) com(...) Rai(...)sburgh.


In the month of April came the Emperoures majesty to Raynesburgh on
Saturday after mydlent Sunday: where he found but few princes of the Empire,
besides a small nombre of certain bishops.

Consequentely after Easter when certain princes, The (...)ion beg(...) at
Rainsburgh.
and Ambassadors, or Legates of other were come thither, the convocation was
begone, and the propositions were of the agreement of the Articles in
controversy in religion, of the order and establyshment of the chamber court
and of the Coin, Item how the Turk might be resisted.

But in the mean season, when there was great provision and preparation made
to take up men and The beginning of the emperors wars against the Germans.
warriors in the name of themperours Majesty thoroughout all Duchelande, the
Electours princes and estates of the confession of Ausbourgh desired most
humbly at Whitsontyde to know of the Emperors Majesty, against whom such
preparation of war was intended, whereupon they received this dark answer,
that the Emperoures Majesty would punish certain rebels of the Empire.

After this dark answer when many things were feared, and the said
warriors were in a redynes, the conuocacion took an end, and another was
instituted and appointed against the next year to begin the first day of
February.

Forasmuch therefore as Duke John Frederike Electour in Saxon, and Lord
Phylyppe Landgraue of Hessen with the other Princes, Lords, estates and towns
of the confession and confederation of Ausburgh perceived that the said great
preparacion of wars was enterprised and intended against no man, but against
them, they prepared also an host of men for their necessary defense, for the
mayntenaunce and preseruacion of the pure and sincere doctrine of the Gospel,
for the defense also of their Lands, dominions and subjects, and for the
continuacion of the liberties and privileges of the German nation, and went
forth in the month of June (...)overthrown and destroyed.

Fyftely, the Postmaysters house, where the emperor was wont to have his
posthorses, when he had need of them, with the stables and the horses in the
same at that time, was quyte stryken away by the thonder, and burned up.

Syxtely, Saint Barnardes place, wherein the Abbot of S. Barnarde had his
lodgyng when he came to Meghlyne, was utterly destroyed by the thonder, and the
cloister of the Augustyne freers was a great part overthrown and destroyed.

Seuently, The Voogstrete, which was a fair large street was also in like
manner overthrown, that there remained never a house standing, nor yet, as they
said, block nor stone.

Eightely, The Palace of Hyghstrete, which was an excedyng fair and strong
building, belongyng to a certain great lord, was quyte and clean overthrown
and destroyed: And as the inhabitauntes of the said town of Meghlyne do
affirm, if the said Palayce of Hyghstrete with other places and great
buyldynges had not been there standynd, The hole town of Meghlyn must needs
have been utterly overthrown and destroyed, so that nether house, stycke nor
stone should have remained in the same: For the said high and strong buyldynges
were a great defense to the town: Besides this there were also other places
and great buyldinges, whose names (to avoid prolyxite) are not here rehearsed,
which were in like manner overthrown and destroyed of the thonder as the other
together with seven hundred houses. Insumme, almoost all the houses of the
town were endamaged, few or none except that had not some hurt done by
the thonder.

Nyntly, the next day after, when the said piteous calamite was done, which
was the. 8. day of August, when they began to make rowme, there were found
about three hundred persons men, women, and children which were slain by the
means of the thondre, whom they loded in wagens and carts and buried them in
great holes that were dug for the same purpose. There were also found
above, 150. persons sore wounded and harmed.

And there happened one thing in the said town specially to be meruayled at,
which is, that certain gestes sat in their hosts house drinking to gether and
plaieng at the cards, and while they called for drink, and their hostess
went down into the seller to draw them a pot of byre, in the mean season was
the house stryken away by the thonder, and the players found dead with the
cards in their hands, as though they had been still playeng, but the hostess
saved her life by the means, y^ she was in the seller when the said hurt was
done.

Tenthly, There was also a man found in a corner the third day after that the
said hurt was done, having no harm which asked whether the world were yet
standing or not.

There was also a woman found dead, being great with child, which was
afterward cut open and the child taken out of her belly, was baptized

Much harm was there done besides, not only within the town of Meghline,
but also without the town, as in the towns, villages, castles, and boroughes
lyeng there about, where thesaide wether has done much harm, and there were
many, innumerable, fearful and wonderful signs and to kens seen, so that
both the Emperor and the lady Mary had need to remember them selves, for it
is to be feared that God will begin to revenge the innocent blood, which is
very piteously shed in the lower parts of Duchelande, for the Gospels sake,
for it cries into heaven and so fylleth the boso me of Gods high matestie that
he can suffer it no longer, yea he will lay on yet greater loades, oneles they
repent and amend in time, for he has suffered them long enough.

When this war between the emperor, and the electour of Saxon, and the
Landgraue of Hessen had continued into the first month, and the emperor had
declared himself an open enemy both to the forsaid princes, only of his own
mind, without either right, reason, or warnyng, and without the knowledge and
consent of the estates and members of thempire: Duke Maurice prepares (...) to
(...).
In the mean season did Maurice duke of Sax on with great feruentnes prepare a
great no^bre of horsemen and pietons, wherefore al men stood in great fear,
not knowing against whom he made the same preparation.

And forasmuch as the electour of Saxon was out of his land, and duke Maurice
was next of his blood, and his nere kisman both on the fathers and the
mothers side, and was also by bym brought up, and had received many benefits
at his hand, many were of this hope and judgment, that thesaid preparation was
made for the defense and succor of the lands and subjects of the electour,
so that few or none suspected any gyle in duke Maurice.

In the mean season did king Ferdinando also endenour himself to stir up
the Lusenitianes and Bohemianes against the land of the Electour of Saxon, but
with honest and virtuous men could he little prevail, notwithstanding by the
means of his importunate labor and instaunt intreatau^ce he assembled a sort
of Pietons in Boheme being in no^bre about eight thousand men, and in Hungary
above a thousand husbandmen, a wicked and rauenish generation, to destory and
waste the lands and dominions of thesaid Electour, which me^ did first invade
Voyt land, and there took the towns vilages and liberties pertaining tothe
Electour, piteously spoiling, roauingburning and destroieng many men young and
old. A cruel murder.
And specially therwas an execrable madness and murder committed upon an honest
Curate and minister that feared God at Newechurche, whom when thesaid husband
me^ had mostcruelly martyred and murdered and saw that he was fat, they cut
him in pieces after the manner of a fat Swyne, casting the pieces from one to
another and saying, Lo brother, there have thou a good roastyng piece of an
hog.

Of which innocent blood are gilty all they that do help or consent to the
said murtheryshe and intestine wars, whereof doutles God will take
vengeance in time convenient.

Now when the matter as it was first begone and purposed against the Electour
and his dominions (for Duke Maurice had been first with the king in. Bohemy)
took effect, and apeared evidently as though the king would overcome and take
in, all the Lands and dominions of the Electour, Duke Duke Maurice ^^gm^^^^ to
(...)
Maurice exalted himself with his army, and first took the towns lyeng to
ward the mountains, and then he went with thesayde Bohemians and husband men
to besege the town of Zwickowe.

But least I be demed to stand to much in mine own conceit, and to take
upon me to Judge other wise than it becomes me in this matter. I will set
hereafter the true Copye of his lettres whereby he required and admonyshed the
town of the Electour to yield them selves unto him, by the co^sentes whereof
men of honesty and understanding may easily perceive what good ground and
sure foundation he pretended in these affairs. (...) of (...).


By the grace of God we Maurice duke of Saxo^ Land grave of During, and Marquis
of Myssene, aduertyse you our well-beloved and trusty counsayl and commons of
Saron. etc. That forasmuch as the mighty Prince our Cosyn Duke John Frederike
the Elder, has been found negligent in doing of his duty and it is manifest
that men are about to bring you from the house of Saxon, into the power of
strangers, and we being a borne prince of Saxon having also part in the land
with our for said Cosyn, and be charged by earnest commandment of the
Emperoures Majesty our most gracious lord, for the auoydyng of grievous
penalties and corrections, and also by the loss of our Regaltie and
preemine^ce, our seiues to take the same land in possession, or else to
permit and suffer other to do the same, whereby our own Lands and
dominions must needs come in danger and destruction. Wherefore we require you
to sutmitte your selves unto us as Prince of Saxon, and to receive us
accordingly with due solempuisation.

And we are prone and graciously inclined to desen de you in the Christen
religion wherein ye be, and like mayer your bodies, goods and possessions,
and to leave you by your old liberties and privileges. And when the matter
or controversy between the Emperoures Majesty, the Romyshe kings Majesty,
and our forsayde Cosyn shall come to an agreement, we shall be ready, as
touching the lands which we shall have taken in possession of his, by the
knowledge and will of their Majesty's, and as much as may be done without
their prejudice, thorough our own dominions to be entreated and ordered
according to right and reason.

But if ye should refuse so to do, it should apeare unto us, as though ye would
wylfully be put from the house of Saxon, which may not be suffered of us.
Wherefore we require herein your direct answer by the bearer of the letter
in have, while our enemy is at hand, that we may avoid the danger. Given in
our Town of zwickowe the syxt day of Noue^ber. Anno a thousand five hundredth
forty and six. Duke Maurice, of Saxon. Manu propria.

When zwickowe had yielded unto him, the syxt day of November, he took also the
towns lyeng there about, and consequently, Aldenbourgh, Ilenbourgh, Grymme,
Torgawe. etc.

the.xvi. day of November duke Maurice sent a Trompetter with two lettres, the
one to the Deputy, and the other to the Communaltie of Witten bourgh directed,
between three and four of the clock at after none, before the Elue gate, but
before the lettres were received, the suburbs were set on fire whereby was
sygnifyed that they intended to stand to their defense.

The same day did he also advertise thinhabitauntes of Torgawe which lay in
gareson for the defense of Wittenburgh, that oneles they would come home by
the next day before Sun set, he would send their wives and children after
them, and besides that deprive them of all their goods.

The end of the Appendix or addition compyled by Master John Funke.
Brefe Annotations added unto the premises gathered out of diverse
historiographers.
IN the said year of our lord.MD. xlvi. apeace was concluded between England A
peace between England and France.
and France, which on Whitsondaye was proclaimed. For conclusion whereof the
Viscount Lisse high Admiral of England with the Bishop of Duresine and a goodly
company of Gentylmen went out of England into France, after whose return
Monsure Denball high Admiral of France, the Bishop of Eureux and two Earls
came into England with the Sacre of Deep, and.xij. galleyes, and were
honorably received.

The said year also in lent before, was the Stews The stews put down in
London. Anne Askewe John Lassels burned.
at London put down and abolysshed by the kings commandment.

the.ix. day of July was burned at London in smithfielde. Anne Askew a gentill
woman, John lassels, of the kings preuy chamber, John Adlam tailor of
Suffolk, and Nicolas Belenyam priest, for opinions consonaunt to the truth,
and contrary to the act of the syx Articles: At which time al Shaxton
recanted.
so Doctor Nicolas Schaxton sometime Bishop of Salisbury recanted and denied
the truth which before he had professed. Which thing also one Doctor Crome
(which had been a great and famous preacher) had done at Paul's Cross the
xxvij. day of June before, affirming openly that he had been seduced by
noughty books. etc.

In England, also in November was the duke of Thomas duke of Northfolke and
Henry his sodne attainted.
Northfolke and his son the Earl of Surrey, attaincted of treason, for the
which his son was put to execution in January after, and him self committed
to the Tower, where he does yet remain.

IN the year of our lord God.MD. xlvij. there were in Germany diverse and
wonderful innouacions of things chau^ces of wars chau^ges of fortune,
yeldynges of Princes, ouerthrowinges and subuersions of towns and castelles,
fallinges of great men, and conuocatio^s of Synodes, and counsayles, which I do
here omit partly to avoid prolixite, and partly for that the certainty of
such things taken by hear say only is oftentimes deceiuable. Trusting to
have occcasion and opportunity hereafter to declare and set forth the same
matter at large.

The inhabitauntes of the county of Tiroll and Isebredge were this year sore
plaghed with wonderful A plague of locustes and grasshoppers
locustes and grasshoppers both creping and flyeng, which were there in such
abundance that the creping sort covered all their land, and the flyeng
sort covered that light of the Sune, in so much that thinhabiters of the
land were commanded to go forth and to take and gather the^ that crept on the
ground which they did continually during the space of three wekes, gatheringe
every day about. 2400. quarters, in a quarter of a mile, for in every quarter
of a mile were appointed three hundredth persons, men and women, and every
hundredth persons gathered every day 800 quarters. during the space of. 3.
wekes. And they came into Isebredge over the bridge with such a power as though
they had been an host of warriors that would have entered into the town In so
much that the Magestrates commanded the inhabitauntes of the same town to make
resistaunce against them before the gate with besomes and bromes and to swype
them into the water as they came which they ded in such sort as they covered
all the water with grasherppers that no water could be seen: Thus did they
resist them and kept them also from the bridge by the space of.iii. wekes
after this the said locustes or grasshoppers turned into. the fields and there
destroyed and wasted the corn and the grass, undoing in a manner all the
people of the land: so that after this the peopel resysted them no moore, butt
only trusted to the mercy of god with instaunt and fervent prayer. The said
Locustes or grasshoppers were littell at the beginning and krepyng, but
afterward they grew and began to fly, doing great hurt throughout the said
land.

In the mean season the Emperoures majesty, A godly commandment
and the king of the Romans set forth a commandment that noman should be
found in dronkenes, horedome, aduoutery, usury, and blasphemy but he should be
punyshed by death, and forfayte all his goods.

In a littell town called Albers lyeng besides Lyndawe in the Dukedom of
Zweyburgh was A prodigious grape.
this year found two clusters of grapes growing upon one braunce having a
long read bearde, which was a wonderful sight.

The same year in flaunders and the countrees A wonderful miracle.
there about was a great scacitie of corn, so that there was a great dearth in
the land. And there dwelled besides Beke above Gand a certain farmer well
provided and stored with corn, unto whom his neighbors came lamentyng and
intreatyng him to sell them some of his corn, who refused so to do, nevertheless
he sent none away comfortles that had need: for he lent and delivered unto
every man according to their necessite on this condition that they should
render and repaye him again at the next harvest, on this condition did he
lend corn to diverse nedy persons. After which time it chanced that his
corned fyelde being sowed was by Gods grace so multiplied and increassed that
on every stalk grew an exceeding nombre of ears laden with corn, so that
thorough the blessyng of God he was well rewarded. By this may we see that the
saying of Solomon is an undoubted verite, namely, he that takes pity on the
pore lends unto the Lord upon usury, and look whatsoever he lays out it
shall be paid him again.

There was also this year a wonderful vision seen A wonderful ^ision.
and heard of many within the town of Wittenbourgh, in the Land of Saron
the.xviii. day of September early in the morning between four and five of y^
clock. For there appears in the air a figure and lykenes of a dead corse or
beer covered over with black cloth, and a read ribband aver the same, and
there went before the coarse six men with trompettes, and a great multitude of
people followed with crooked instruments and trompettes blowyng, which made a
great noise in the air, insomuche that many in the town which lay yet in
their beds were thereby awaked out of their sleep, thynkyng that the said
trimblyng had been in the town. After this the black cloth vanyshed away from
the boere, which then was covered over with awhyte cloth, then appeared
besides the bear a man armed in harnas showing him self very angry, and
pullyng the white clothe from the beer, he rent it in twain, wynding the one
half about his arm and so pressyng it hard to his body: With this the coarse
vanyshed away. The man armed did also apeare a little while after and so in
like manner banished away. After this were althynges quiet as before. God
grant every Christen man to remember this wonderful sign with fear, for it
is to be feared that it is a fearful warnyng sent us of God.

In England the nyntene day of January was The Earl of Surrey beheaded.
the Earl of Surrey beheaded, as was mentioned the year before.

The seven and twenty day of the same month The death of king Henry the eight
of England* etc. Edward the syxt byng of England.
Henry the eight king of England etc. ended his life, and was buried at
Windsore.

Edward the syxt king of England etc. succeeded his father in the governance
of his royalmes and dominions, and was crowned the nintene day of February, in
the nyneth year of his age.

Under the said king in the time of his minorite his uncle Edward Duke of
Somerset was made lord Protector of all his Royaulmes dominions and
subjects, and Governor of his majesty's person, who with the residue of his
majesty's Counsayll governed the realm with great mercy and gentilnesse, by
whom to the surtheraunce of gods word and true religion, commisioners were
sent into al parts of the Realm, with commandment Images and beads put
down and abolysshed in England.
to cause all Images to be taken out of churches, for auoydyng of Idolatry, and
to will men and women to leave the use of beads, having with the^ also godly
and learned preachers assigned, which do exorted them to give them self to
true and unfeigned worshippyng of God in the heart and mind, with due obedience
to their prince.

Richard Smith a doctor of divinity reca^ted openly A recantacio^ of Doctor
Smith.
at Paul's cross within ye city of London diverse articles contained in two
books which he had made, one for the defense of the sacrifice of the Mass: an
other to prove unwritten verities to be believed under pain of damnacion.

This year also in Enland commandment was Processions l^^t in England. An
host of men sent out of England into Scotland
given that processions should be no more used.

This year also in England the duke of Somerset then Lord Protector and the
Earl of Warwyke went into Scotland with a strong army, requiring the Scotts
to fulfill their promise, made before to king Henry, concerning the marriage of
their young Queen with the young king of England, but the Scotts
stubbournely came against them, with great puissaunce. And not long after the
two armies encountered in the fields of Muscleborough, at a place called Pinker
slough. The English part not thynkyng as than to have battle, at which time
because the front of the Scottyshe army was so terrybly set with pykes, the
English horsemen (which gave the first onset) were feign to recule back, with
loss of certain ge^tylmen: which reculing much abashed the English footmen:
but yet by the great wisdom and dilygence of the Lord Protectours grace, and
the valiant heart and courage of the Earl of Warwike they gave a new onset,
and without any notable fight discomfited the Scotts, and obtained the
victory. At this time were slain of the Scotts between thirtene and fourtene
thousand, and not passing an hundred Englyshemen. Chaunteries given to the ^^ng
of England.


After Mich^lmas a Parliament was holden in England wherein chaunteries were
given into the kings hands, to be altered and disposed at his pleasure.

It was also ordained that the sacrament or communion The Co^mumo^ ordained to
be received in both kinds. Latimer set at liberty.
should be received of all men under both kinds of bread and wine.

This year also anon after the kings coronatio^ Master Hughe Latimer a
famous preacher, who had been long detayned in miserable captivity for ye
Gospels sake by the procurement of the Popish by shoppes, was delivered and
set at liberty.

In this year the last day of March Frau^cis the The death of the ^renche King.
French king ended his life in the.xxxiii. year of his reign, after that he
had admonyshed his only son Henry of the things pertaining to his kingdom
and commended him to true officers and servants. After whom succeeded the
same Henry being the second of that name. His body was carried after.x. days
to the bridge of S. Clodoalde, and from thence to the suburbs of Paris, into
the Church called the virgin of the fields: where by the commandment of
the king were brough the bodies, of Frauncis the Dolphyne Duke of Britaigne,
who dyed in the year of. 1536. before, in the month of August: And of Charles
his brother, Duke of Orleans, which dyed in the year of our lord. 15 45. in
the month of September, that they might accompany the body of their father to
his burial: And so were the said three bodies brought with great pomp and
solempnitie into the Church of the blessed virgin at Paris, and from thence to
S. Denis, where they were buried, the body of the father being laid between
his sons.

This Frauncis the French king was hyghly commended for diverse singular gifts
both of the mind and of the body wherewith he was endued, but chiefly for his
humanite and clemency which he used toward all men. He was beneficial to
me^ endued with virtue, and liberal to men of lernyng. For by his benefit
were the Latin, Greek and He brue tongues restored again to their purity in
France, whereof he entertained and norished public professors, ordeining for
them most ample stipendes* his other acts are here omitted to avoid prolix^^e

In the month of December at Paris was S. Michaels bridge broken by the great
power and violence of the waters so that the East part thereof fell down quite,
and the houses which were built thereon were over thrown with a great part of
them that were annexed unto them.

IN the year of our Lord. 1548. in the month (...)*
of July the emperor sent an army of Spanyardes privily to invade the city of
Conitaunce* while the legates of Constaunce that were sent to August unto
the emperor to entreat for peace were not yet returned homewarde. For he
intended quite to extinguish the city because they professed y^ Gospel.
Wherefore the sixth day of August early in y^ morning the said army invaded y^
city, and overcame the basse town which joins to y^ great bredge commonly
called Peter housen. When this was obtained, and overcome at their first
assault, some fell to spoiling and rouing, some to deflouring of virgin^s and
honest matrones, and some gat the^ to the bridge, and there made a bartaill
with the citesens, which were constrained to re^ule back into the city being
ouerpressed with the multitude of their enemies unto who^ they barred y^ gates
of the bredge. The bridge was full of Spanish warriors, against who^ the
citesens could nothing prevail until many pieces of artillery which kept the
bridge being losed by chance, but yet not without the will of God per sed the
gate and ouerthrewe the enemies, and put the^ in such fear yt they fled
euerychone, setting the bridge on fire and also Peterhousen, least the citesens
should have followed and pursued after them. So that Constaunce saw in one day
y^ just punishment of pride, and the singular benefit of God toward his
elect, would to God they had not unthankfully forgotten this great benefit.

The Emperor after that he had in Germany set The Emperor retourneth out of
Germany into Flanders The Duke of Saxon captive. Leonora returned to
themperoure The son of Ferdinando marieth them perours daughter.
all things in order, and propounded a certain form in religion after the
prescripte whereof they should live while a counsaille were decreed, and having
committed the Landgraue of Hessen in safe custody, re returned into Flaunders
bringing with him the Duke of Saxon captive.

Thither came Leonora Themperours sister and late Queen to the French king
departed.

This year Maximiliane the first son of Ferdinandus king of the Romans took
to wife themperours daughter. This year also y^ king of Spain leaving his
brother Maximiliane as governor in his absence, departed out of Spayn into
Italy, and went from thence to Trident and into Germany, and so The eldest
son of the Turk (...)keth insurr^^tion ag^ynst his father.
at y^ last came into Flanders to his father the emperor

The same year toward the spring time the first begotten son of y^ Turk,
which was gone over to y^ king of y^ Persia^s, because he thought his brother
should be by his father promoted before him to the Empire, assembled an army of
Persianes, and made insurrection against his father, and invaded the borders of
Turkey nere unto the land of Persia, and had overcome many places, until his
father being armed with five hundred thousand soldiers came thither and
caused the Persianes, being stricken with fear, to recule. But they having set
on fire all the towns and villages by the which they fled the space of five
days, brought their enemy which followed and pursued after them, too great
pennury, in so much that an hundred thousand of his men being dead thorough
poverty famine and pestilence, he was constrained of necessity to return
thither again from whence he came*

A certain king in Aphrica took Argieres and Argiers taken (...)
the other places there about, with certain castles and strong holds which
themperoure used for the defense of Spain: and also certain strong holds in
the coasts of Portingall toward the sea occeane.

In England at Easter was there a great conjunction A ^^m^^ocio^ ^^ cor^^^all.
The mass and Images put down in England.
of rustikes in Cornuall, by p^pysh priests.

There was also great disputation in the Parliament that year for putting down
of the mass. And Images were put down in all churches thorough out England to
avoid Idolatry.

This year the last day of July Stephen Gardener The bishop of Winchester
committed to they our of ^o(...).
bishop of Winchester in England, was committed to the Tower of London for
papisme, and this sedicious opinion, that the kings majesty in his minority
or none age could not make or ordeine any laws in his Realm, as did Josias
and other godly and virtues princes, and governors in their dominions.

This year the marriage of priests was granted The marriage of priests
granted lawful. An insurrection at Norwiche.
lawful in England by the Laws of God, to the utter abolyshement of all
Papisticall sodomitry.

This year in august was a great insurrection of rustikes at Norwiche, one kite
(a rustike) being their Captain* and the.xxvij. day of August it was ended,
four thousand being slain, the victory given (through gods grace) by the
hands of John the noble Earl of Warwyke.

At the same time the Cornysh and Deuonshyre The rebels in Cornwall (...)
Deuonshere subdued. The bishop of London deposed and committed to prison. The
duke of Somerset committed to the tour of London. The death of the Pope. A
wonderful vision seen besides Brunswyke.
men were overcome, and very many of them slain, besides many of their
gentilmen taken.

This year also Bonner bishop of London was put from his byshoprike for his
stubborn Popyshnes the first day of October, and for certainte obstinate
articles committed to the Marshalsee, the people much reioysyng at it.

In this month the Duke of Somerset was committed to the toure, to the great
lamentacion of very many.

In this month also died the Pope of Rome called Paul the third.

This year the weke before Whitsontide, three honest merchants and a young
lad, being honest men's sons of Brunswyke yourneyed from Andwarpe to
Brunswyke, there to hear at that feast gods word preached. And as they rode
on Whitson even after midnight halfway between Celle and Brunswyke on a heath
over against a certain farm, they(...) nor yet Christ himself did know,
namely, how a man can serve two masters at ones, God and the wicked world.
Item how we can be good Christianes and yet knowledge not Christ, nor help
him to bear his cross, yea rather persecute his poor members, God give us
grace to knowledge his son ne a right, suffer patiently all miuries and endure
to the end, that he may also at the great and fearful day of the lord
knowledge us before his heavenly father, and his universal church, and before
all his angels. Amen.

IN the year of our Lord. 1550. the xix. day Captain Gambold slain.
of January Captain Gambolde, who was Captain of the Spanyardes that served
the king of England in his wars, and an other Captain was slain without
New gate in an euenyng, by a Spanyarde, which was taken and hanged the.
xxiii^. day of January, and three more with him. (...) in (...).


the.xxviij. day of the same month was Humfrey arundell and Bury with two
other mo drawn hanged and quartered, for because they were the these
capitaynes and mayntayners of the rebellion among the Cornyshe and Deuonshyre
men. The duke of Somerset delivered out of (...) A general p(...) ^etmene
England ^ Frannce.


The sixth day of February came the Duke of Somerset out of the Tower, with
great reioyiyng of much people.

In the same month went out of England certain lords of the counsel to
Buileine, where certain of the French counsayll met with them and after long
consultacion had and diverse metynges between them, there was a general peace
conciuded, which peace was proclaimed the.xxix. day of March following.

Also about the.xxv. day of Apryll following the Bullayne delivered.
town of Bullayne with the fortresses thereto belongyng was delivered by the
Englyshemen, into the Frenchemens hands.

The second day of May was brent at London 30 one Boocher
in smythfielde a certain woman called Ione Boocher otherwise called Ione of
Barkyng for the horrible heresy of the Apellites, Cerdonians, proclianites,
Valentinians, Manichees, Timotheans, Apolinarianes, Nestorianes, and sedicious
Anabaptists of our time, which she health commen with all them, of a set
wilfulness, for all those heretical patriarchs was she sure to have as
masters and doctors of her pernicious error, that Christ took no flesh of
the virgin, as largely apeareth in the cronicles.

About this time there were certain light persons pretending a new commotion
in Kent, but they were apprehended and diverse of them for that trespass hanged.

It is said that this year the.xxi. day of March A wonderful miracle oftor
ue falling down from the element.
in the county of Carinte besides the Land of Bauariam Austryche by and
about a lyttel town called Claghenforth, it rayned corn out of the element
by the space of two hours, which rain stretched in lenght.vi. Germayn miles,
and in breedth half a Germayne mile in some places: so that the said corn
being some white and some brown lay in some places the thickenes of an hand
broad upon the ground. Whereupon the people of the land came and gathered of
the said corn, and brought it to the mylles, and baked thereof good and
sauery bread. the significacion of which mystery is reserved to God alone, to
whom be honor glory and praise in all things for ever and ever. Amen.

This year the king of Spain went home again out of Flaunders.

This year also there was a cruel proclamation set A most ^^^nnicall
persecution.
forth by the university of Louayne in the name of the Emperoures Majesty,
for the persecution of the faithful Christianes, condempning al manner of
scripture books as well Bibles as other in what tongue so ever they were
written or translated that had been printed within the space of.xxx. years
before, with most extreme death prosecutinge all the fauourours of the
doctrine set forth by Martine Luther. John Ecolampadius, Hulderike zwinglius,
John Calvin, or their ad herentes and condempning them for heretics and their
doctrine for most pernicious and pestilent heresy without any probable
arguments or good reasons.

After this themperoure went up again into Germany.

The end of this cronicle.
The conclusion,
THus have I, Christen reader, brefe^^ comprehended the principal Story ^
which I have found and thought necessary, as they have been done here and
there thoroughout Christendom these. xviij years last past. How be it if ought
seem to be omitted and left out (which is a thing that may lyghtely chance to
any man) I beseech you that it be not interpretated in the worst part,
co^sideryng that I have done my diligence to set forth y^ truth. Wherefore if I
have been truly infourmed it is well. Also if it fortuned y^ in the said Story
were made mention of any man, unto who^ it might apeare, that injury were done
unto him, in that he is not so much commended as some other, and would
therefore be angry, let him remember i^, at the fault is not in me but in
himself. For it becomes an historiographer or Story writer to declare the
truth in all things. Wherefore if men use honesty, their praise shall be the
more, but if they walk inordinately, they deserve no praise at all. For the
acts and histories that are written ought to edifye and profit them that come
after, that they may thereby learn what ought to be eschued, and what to be
followed, which thing without sure and certain declaracion of the truth can
not be done. Therefore let such men be angry with them selves, if they be
grieved at the matter, considering that they have done nothing and ^thy of
commendacion: And let them from henthe ^rth endeavor them selves by honest
conuersathe si^ and Christen behaueour to cover their shame. God^ then shall
all things be counted unto them co^u^^endable, for somuche as every thing
that is past, is rather imputed to the time and to fortune, then to the will of
the person, when the same is perceived and known to have forsaken the evil
which he A most T^annicall persecution.
used in times past and to follow honesty and goodness. And although I have
abstayned from all that might be tedious and bitter, as much as the truth
might suffer, yet has the common course of the world moved me to make he re
this exception: For y^ Devil always will be praised in his wicked deeds, but
the discrete Christianes need no such commendations. Wherefore also I commend
me self next under God to the defense and prayer of all the favorers of the
truth byndyng me self to do the like for them to my power. Dated the twenty
day of August. 1550.

BReuely to close up this present chronicle. This year is the full.xxxi. Jubilee
from christ's incarnacion, declaring unto us christianes here in England, by
many most graciouse and godly arguments, the glad jubilee of the lord, what
though not to the pagane Papists, arrogau^t Ana baptistes, licenciouse
lybertines, cruel coueters, excedyng extorcioners, fre will men, new
Iusticiaries, and sprete speakers, with other sediciouse sectaries, all sekyng
to take the glory from Christ and to deminysh the fruits of his helthful
sufferinges. To make this to you more familiar, the kings most excellent
majesty, by assent of his noble counsel, and fre vtteraunce of faithful
ministers by them appointed, have this year proclaimed a godly christen fredome
to the long captiued consciences of his natural and obedient subjects (I
speak nothing of the forenamed obstinates) none otherwise than did Moses to
the children of Israel, Leuit. 25. and noble king Josias to their posterity
under him. 2. Paralip. 34. the temples and aulters in sundry places destroyed,
and the true christiante in many points restored. Considre the lent
preachynges that were this year before the king, the delyueraunce of the duke
of Somerset, the change in London dyocese, the necessary sequestracion of
Gardyner, Bonner, Hethe, and other proud popish Babylonians, the godly
discourse of Peter Martyr the inexpugnable defense of the Archebyshop of
Caunterbury for ye full overthrow of Idolatry, with other good chances more
which are apparaunt though they be not named, are manifest tokens of the
premysses, and special good arguments of this Iubylie of grace. Let us
therefore with our noble young Josias be thankful unto God in the latter
part of this year holdyng holy in soul the perfyght passover of the lord.
And let us still valiauntly fight with the two edged sword against the
maliciouse king of Egypt or blasphemouse Bishop of Rome and all his
trayterouse train, after the Godly example of the first Josias. 2. Paralip.
35. So be it.

A table of those things that be contained in this book worthy of memory.
A
ABbas Ioachyms prophecy, cxci Abel killed for the true worship of God, fol.
ij Abia fo. xiiij. Abraham was in Ninus time, ix. the time of ye promise made
to him until the going out of Egypt. xij. the renuyng of the promise to him,
fo. ix Absalon the wicked. fo. xiiii Achas fo. xvi Achilles fo. xxi Accursius
the man of law. clvij Adam and Eve, fo. i. He and Seth the setters forth of
Astrology Fo. ij Adelricus fo. cxij Adoulfus County of Nassau is made Emperor
fo. clxx Adrianus a well learned Emperor, was connyng in Astronomy, fo.
xciiij. and merciful toward Christian men, fo. xcv Adrianus bishop of Rome
complayneth when he should dye, fo. clviij Adultery punyshed, xxi. xxvij. c the
occasyon of the battle of Troy. fo. xxi Aetius fo. cxvij Afflictyon temporal
and the beginning thereof.i. the cause of them fo. xi Agar fo. x Agarenes, cxxi.
why Mahomet did channge the name to Saracens fo. cxxij Aggeus fo. xlix Agrippa
under whom Jerusalem was spoiled fo. lxxvi Alaricus xi. wynneth Rome. cxi
Albany was overthrown, fo. xxvij Alberte duke of Eastenryche, clxix. cxcix.
clxxx. Is Empeperoure, clxx. called Marquis Achylles, clxxix. the second fo.
clxxx Alcibiades, liiij. is driven from the Athenians. liiij. is slain against
all right, lv. was noble in feats of war. fo. lv Alexander son to Amyntas
xlii. xlvij. The great, lx. the beginning of his monarchy. lxij. his elders,
lx. his deeds, lxi. Aristoteles Scoler lviij. he makes great battles in Asia
with small power. lx. his gentellues. lxij. lyttel set by for syghte matters.
lxi. he keeps an ear for the gyltye. lxiij. his setting forth against ye
Jews. lxiij. how great his host was. lxi. his reverence toward the high
priests of the Jews. lxiij. his kingdom is made four kingdoms. liiiij the
younger son of Hircanus. lxxiij. he is called the Goote. lx. Seuerus. xcvij. a
bishop of Rome. ciii^. his extreme tyranny against the emperor Frederycke.
clx Altonsus king of Spain, and an Astronomer. clxviij. king of Naples. fo.
clxxxiiij Alphonse diasye a traitors ^^^rtherer. fo. cclxij. Allegories of
Origene nothing set by. fo. xcvi Alzachenus king fo ccvi. A^^asyas king given
to Godlynes. fo. xv. Ambision punyshed. xxi. xxxix. lxiiij. cxxiiij. cxxxv.
cxlv Ambrose sprakyng of Theodosius fo cxc Amon the wicked. fo. xvij Am^s fo.
xvi Amu^us fo* xxv A^astasius. cxviij. was put into a monastery. fo. cxxv.
Amurates became a mouche, fo. clxxxi Amyntas king of Macedony fo. xlii. Ancus
Marlius. fo. xxvij Anabaptists do resemble the Ess^is. lxxiiij. They take the
city of Mynster in Westphalen, and they make themself a king. fo. cci. ccvij
ccviij Andrewe Carolostade. clxxxviij Andrew de Aurea. cxcix. ccvij. Anthony de
Lena. fo. cxcix Anthony. fo. lxxxvi. Pi^s. xcv. Bassianua. fo. xcvi Anne Bollen
behedded. fo. ccx Anne Askew burned fo. cclxx AntiChriste.lxix. Mahomet a a
part of him. fo. cxxij Antigonus lxiiii. lxvi Antiochus the great. lxvi. lxvij.
the occasyon of the war with the Romans. lxvij. Epiphanes is lent to Rome
for a pledge. lxvij. Wherefore called Epiphanes. ibidem. his journey into Egypt.
lxviij. to Jerusalem. ibidem. his second journey to Jerusalem. lxix. the
tyranny of him in the city, ibid Danyel resembles him to Antichrist. ibid.
his vnpunyshemente for his ungodliness. lxx. Hierax. lxvi. Eupater. lxxvi.
Sedetes. lxx. Soter. lxvi. Theos. lxvi. Epimates. fo. lxvij Antipater. lxix.
prince of Ioumea. lxxiii. Is made gouerner of Iurp by Julius. Caesar. fo. lxxv*
Answer at Delphis. fo. xxiiij. Appius unshamefast and a Tyrant folix. An
apparition wounderfull in Denmark fo. cciiij Apsymarus ^o. cxxv Arboces fo.
xlviij Arbogastes fo. cviij Arcadins fo. cix Archelaus was exyled of Augustus
fo. lxxv Areta king of Arabia. lxxiij Argires fo. cclxxviij Arideus brother to
Alexander. fo. lxiiij Aristobulus fo. lxxiij Aristoteles. lvij. his elders,
lviij his philosophi. fo. xcvi Arminius fo. lxxxviij. Arsames fo. liij
Arnoldus, Duke of Banary fo. cxxxix Arnolfus Emperor. cxxxv Arrius an open
reader in the schole of Alexandria. ciiij. his death. ibid. he was the
forerunner of Mahomet. cv. his doctrine. fo. ciiij Artaxarxses with the long
hand mnemon. lij. wherefore he was called with the long hand. xxx Artycles of
the seditious Rustikes fo. clxxxviij. Aristona fo. xlviij. Assuerus fo. xxx.
xlviij. Asatoke away y^ wicked service of god. fo. xiiij. Ascanius Julius fo.
xxi Asia decayed fo. lx Astronomy was renewed by Frederyke the second.
clxiiij. Astyages dream. xxxi. his crueltye fo. xxxij. Ataulphus king of the
Gooths fo. cxi. Athalia. fo. xv Athanasius being banyshed out of Egypt flies
to Tryer fo. cv. Athens burned, xlvij. the unshamefast flattery of them. lxv.
the obstynacy and malipartnesse of them in time of war confirmed also with a
decre, liiij. The yeldynge of them. fo. lv. Atossa. fo. xlviij. Attila. cxij.
the death of him, cxvij. his battle at Toulhouse ibidem. he called him self
the scourge of God, ibidem. his deeds fo. cxvi Auenion a city papal.
clxxiiij August an parliament lxxxvi S. Augustine of hippo. cxv. his writing
against Pelagius. fo. cix Augustulus. lxxxvi* fo. cxviij. Augustus. ibid.
Whence comes the calling of Augustus fo. lxxxvi Aurelianus. c. studious in
the discipline of war. ibidem Ausborough parlyame^t. clxxxix Azo a lawer. fo.
clvij
B
Babylon the head city of the Monarchy fo. xxxiiij Bayre who are the Dukes
clix. the war of Baperland fo. clxxxvi Balthazar king of Babylon. fo. xix
Bartholdus Gracianus, clvij. Duke of Re^y^ge^. fo. clxi Barbarossa in^adeth the
kingdom of T^nesse. ccvi. ccxxiij. shypwrake. ccxxiiij. he beseged castle
no^a, ccxxvi. He wynneth it fo. ccxxvi D. Barnes burned, fo. ccxv Battle by
r^ttlyng. fo. clxiv Beggyng orders, fo. clxiij Bellisari^s very evil rewarded
of Iust^^us. fo. cxviij. cxix Benedictus the xi. fo. clxxiiij S. Barnard made
the peace between the Emperor Lo^radus and Lotharius. fo. clvi Beringar^^s
prince of Foroi^i^lium. cxxxvn. he yeldeth himself to Otho, fo. cxlij.
Beringar^^s of the sacrament fo. cl. Bedam England. fo. cxxv Ben Lo^ ^an. fo.
lxxvi Bes^us distoyaltye is an example of vengeance. fo. lxij Besus temple in
Syria, fo. lxvij Bible burnt, lxix is translated, lxxi. sent into all
countries, fo. ciij Bishop, his crack. clxi. the paid and crueltye of the
bishop of Rome, clxiij. an example of the Romans bishops disloyaltye and tyranny,
clviij. Example of most notable cruelnesse, of a Romans bysh. cxxxvi the civil
war raised in Germany by the B. of Romans cliij. Three bishops of Rome strynyng
for the Byshoprpcke were put done, cxlij. cxlix. the disloyaltye of the bishop
of Rome, in transferrynge the empire to Frenchmen, cxxxiiij the tyranny of the
bishop of Rom, cxxxvi. St^y^e for the election of the bish. of Rome cxix. the
first perturbatyon for the choosing of the bishop of Rome. cxix. Whether an
universal bishop ought to be, cxx. all the bishops of Denmark deposed, ccxv.
the division of the Romans bishops, fo. clxxvij Bizantium, fo. ciij Blasphemies
never unpunished fo. xix Bohemes the prince is made a king, clx. they were
vanq^yshed with there king Lecho, cxxxi. they are Germanies, cxvi. the rysynge
against the priests and monckes, clxvi. Why it has the an^thoritye of the
election, fo. cxlvi Bolen won fo. cliij. Bole^ given up to the Englyshmen.
cliij. delivered. cclxxvij. Bonesacius, cxxi. What time he preached in
Germanye, cxxvi. the feat saying of Bone facius the eight fo. clxx Bouer bysh.
of London, deposed. fo. cclxx^ Brabanders fo. cxliiij. Brandenborow. cxxxix.
Lxliij Breda town, burnt, ccxv Brethren three in nombre raygned together, fo.
cxv Bridge burning by Mentz, what it signifies. fo. cxxxij. Bruno a Saxon was
made B. of Rome, fo. cxlv Brutus fo. lxxxv Burgundyons were Saxons, fo. cviij
C
CAin fo. ij Caius caligula, fo. xc Calfe monstreous borne by the sea coast
about Lindow fo. cc. Callinicus fo. lxvi Christen faith planted in the kingdom
of Cambia. ccxvi. Cambises. xxx. xxxvii^. his cruel deed, his cruel^es
toward his sister the queen xxxix. an example in him of vengeance. fo. xxxix
Camillus fo. lix Captain Gambolde slain. fo. cclxxvi Cardinals began.
cxlix. why they had aucthoritye given unto them to choice the Popes. fo. clij
Carinus fo. cij Catholykes fo. ccxxxiiij Charles the great. cxxvij. his elders
were graunde masters. cxxix. is borne in Ingelheim, ibidem. his deeds ibidem.
He optayneth Lombardy. cxxx. His modestye ibidem. he was made Emperor over
the Weste. cxxxi. his diligence in the time of peace, ibidem. he founded three
vniuersytyes. ibidem. he was learned in Greek and Latin. cxxxij. his genealogy
he reads Saint Augustyn. ibidem. the gross. cxxxv. the balde. cxxxiiij. the
death. cxxxv the fourth. clv. made the golden boul^e. clxxv. with the bunched
back. clxxxij. what Electors choose Charles the fyft, that now is Emperor
clxxxvij. he is crowned Emperor. fo. clxxxix Carthago, the second ware of
Carthago. lxxviij. the occasion of it in Spain, ibidem. the third war of
it. lxxix. Disputatyon whether it should be wholly spoiled and overthrown*
ibidem* it is destroyed. lxxx. the consultatyon of destroyeng it. lxxxi. Cato.
lxxix. he slew him self fo. lxxxiiij Cassius fo. lxxxv Cassanders tyranny.
fo. lxv Castle Angel. fo. cxxxiiij Catti. fo. xciij. Caldees vr fo. ix. Caesar
being full of Clemency and gentelnesse lxxxiii^. Cham fo. iiij. Chaunteres
given to the king ^o. CCixxij. Cherusa. fo. lxxxviij Ch^^^^^^s the heretycke
was killed with the falling of an house. fo. x^iiij. C^risten men were
persecuted under ^r^^anus. x^v. under ^iberius. xc. under Do^i^ia^. xciij.
xciiij. under Adria^. xcv. under Decian. xc^x. under A^relia^, C. under
Diocl^ti^n. fo. Cij Christ^s kyngedome allwaye troubled *v. Meruelouslye
pres^rued. ** ibid^m. his coming. xlix. when he was borne. lx^v. lxxxvij.
baptized lxxxix. crucysy^d. ibidem. Ch^rche begynn^th* i. from ^oe till
Abraham. vi. the ^^ate of it in this time. ^xxi^^j. how much God cares for his
church and congregation. xxv. where it is* lxxxix. ^^^o was be^^^ycyall to it.
fo. Cxliij. Christ^r^e king of Denmark after his return taken prisoner of his
own council. CCx^ix. CCix Cicero fo. lxxxiij Cy^^o^ son to Mil^^ad^s. fo*
x^iij C^^bri the Germans of Go^^er. v. the bat^^ll o^ ^^^^ri with the
Romans. lxxxi. Cir^umcision is the token of promise. ix. when the circumcision
was given ^o* x Clause Roda^i was builded of Julius Caesar. fo. C^x. Cland^^s.
fo. xc Clemens the seventh is taken C^xxxix. the notable cru^ltye of Clewence
wy^h. of Rome against ^ouradus. Clxviij. ^^^^^^t dy^th. CCv Clemency after
victory. Cxiij Cleopatra. lxiiij* sy^^er to Julius. fo. lxxi. Cle^e. CCxlvi.
CC^ij. C^^^s fo. ^xij Collection for the poor. CCxxi lv^. Co^^etes se^e. Cv*
Cxci clxxxix in the time of Nero. x^i* before pestylence and fa^yn, (...) John
Frederikes ty^e duke of Saxony Cxc^^ Comod^s fo. xcvi Co^^^otious of vpla^dy^^e
^^en fo. Clxxxvij Commotion in Cornwall. fo. CC^xxviij. Council of Nice. C^^.
Basell Cixxx. Raiuesborough. Cxcvi. Ma^^^^a. CC. Witteborough CCxiiij. Rome.
CCxxi. lviij. Co^cyra the Turk ^^^adeth, fo. CCxc fo. Cx^iiij. Const^ns
pry^ely inuadeth. CClxxiij. Con(...)s. Ci^. Cv. he becomes an A^^^an. fo
Ciii^. Co^^^^^t^^^s. ^. Ciij. his dilig^nce to hepe the Gospel. Ciij. the
aunceters of him, Ciii^* the so^^e of Hera^lius, Cxxiiij. Pogonatus ^^^. y^
^o^^^ of Leo was ^urnamed Copro^ius. Cxxv. Leo the fourth so^^e. ibidem.
Emperor of Constantinople. fo. Clxxxij. Constantinople. Ciij. a notable
crueltye of the Turk, when he had won it. Clxxxij. Prophesyes of recoueryng
of it. fo. Cxc. Conrad the first. Cxxxvij. duke of Frankes. C^l. the second
vproure was with his brother. ibidem. the third was his own son. ibidem.
the second. cxlviij. a Swabe^. cl^ij he went to Jerusalem against the Sarace^s.
ibidem. The fourth. fo. Clxvij Cop^nhagen besyeged by the king. ccxiiij. the
vniuersyte furnyshed. fo. ccxiij. Corona taken. Cxcix. Cosdroa king of the
Persyans fo Cxxi. Crescenti^s a Romayne punyshed for couetyng the empire fo.
Cxliiij. Cresus king of Asia. xxxiij. his saying. ibidem. a ^ery saying fo.
xxx^iij Cruelltye. xxxij. xxxiij xxxvi C^^o duke of Bayre. fo. Cl Cyprianus the
marter. xcix Cyrillus made answer to Iulia^us Apostata cvij Cyrus. xxxi. lij.
his kindred extinguished. liij. his father xxxi. what is to be considered in
him. xxxiiij. how he gatt Babylon. ibidem. he was taught of Da^iell. xxxv. his
saying, ibid. the battle of the S^^thia^s against him. xxxvi. Cyrsylus* xlv. he
and his ^yfe are stoned. fo. xlv
D
Dalmacyans fly to the Turks. CCxxvi. Damas^us the kingdom of Mahomet. fo.
Cxxij. Danyell a youngman. xviij. xc. a councelar of king Cyrus. xxxvi. of y^
Pe^seis. xxxvi his place of the vij weeks. xli^. a place of Mahomet is
expounded. fo. cxiij. Darius raygneth with Cyrus xxx. how great a setting forth
he made into Greece. xlii^. the last. lii^. is overcome of Alexander. lxij. is
made king of Persia. xli. his grave saying. fo. xlij David fo. xiiij. Decius
Caesar fo. xcviij De^etrius king of Macedonia. lxv. lxvi. lxx. Desiderius king
of ^ombardy. Cxxx. Diethricus of Ber^a. some call him Theodorus. cxiij Cxiij.
Didius Julius. fo. xcvi. Digestes. fo. cxix. Diocletianus. fo. Cij. Division
after Gregorius the eleventh. fo. clxxvi Doctrine before the worlds ^^de. fo.
xvij. Dogs and cattes eaten. ccxiiij. Dogs being f^^thfull. xxxix Dolphyn
and Armeniackes go into Germany. fo. clxxxij Domiti^n. fo. xciij Dominick and
Francis. clxiij ^^^col^^ the wal^che. clxxx. he gave Dladistaus an horse,
ibidem Dronkennes ^ringeth in most wy^ked ma^ers. fo. xxxix Dr^s^^s. fo.
lxxxviij
E
Earthquake. fo. ccxliiij Ebr^rous duke, cxxxviij. the Palat^^e fo. cxl.
E^ki^s. ccxxxiiij. his death fo. ccxlix Eclips of the so^^e. xcviij Eclips. fo.
cclij Edo^ fo. cxxiij Edo^^tes fo. x Edward du^e of Some^s^t and lord
protector, committ^d to the Tower. ccl^xv. delivered out again. cclx^vi Edward
the third king of England and Frederyke ea^le of Mis^n refuses the dignitye
Imperial. fo. clxxiiij Egypt was garnyshed with Mathematycall scyences, x^v.
from whence they come and there kingdom. viij. Egusa the battle there. lxxvij
Elyas was in the myddell part of the world fo. xv Elye has divided the world
i^ three ages, * xij. he was taken up in to heaven in the myddel age of the
world. fo. xv Elizens ibidem S. Elizabeth. fo. clxiiij. Emanuel Emperor of
Constantynople fo. clvij Emperor, he must be saved and kept by all means, *
xv Emperor have there bounds. x^ij. the empire is translated to the Saxons,
cxxxviij. the endeavor and faythfulnes in keeping of the empire, cxliiij. a
rehearsal of the Emperoures o^ Rome that was excommunicated. clxiiij. the
Emperor turns into Italy. cxcix. cc. ccx^. ccxxij. by what occasion the
All^ain^s deceyuer from the empire. cxxi^ he comes into Flaunders thorough
France. ccxxvi. to Paris. ccxxviij* he forbyddeth good books to be read.
ccxxx. ccxxxij. ccxxxviij. ccxlviij. ccxlv ccl. ccliij. cclxiiij. cclxxiiij
E^^as. xxi. Sil^^^s. clxxviij. Enoch is an example of everlasting life. ij. his
cite. ij. Eloes fo. v. Erasmus death. fo. ccxvi. Erforde fo. clxi^ Ernestus
duke of Swaben fo. cxlviij Esaias. xvi. his death. xvij. Esau. ^. wherefore he was
called Edome. fo. x Esdras was learned in the parsian tongue. xxi^. he gathered
together the books of the bible. fo l^j Esseis. fo. lxxiiij Easten rich the
first mention cxlix. when there dukedom began fo. clix E^il^erodach fo. xix.
Euphrates xxxiiij. Euangelycall bound is opened by the French king. fo. cc
ccxiij. Example for all kings. ccxiiij Examples of ^engeau^ce. iij. xi. xv.
xxvi. xxvij. lix. lxv. lxvij. lxxvi. xcvij. xcix. cvi. cviij. cxiij cxxi.
cxxiiij. cxl. cliiij. clxx Example of grace and good^esse fo. x. clxiij Example
of the fear of God. fo. xvi. lxvi Example of pytie. xxxiij. Example of great
crueltye fo. xxxvi. Example of notable intemperaunce fo. xl. Example of
unkindness. liij. Example ^o maynteyne unity fo. ^vi Example of man's wisdom,
fo. lxix Example of the vehement wrath of god. fo. lxxxi. xcij Example of
disloyaltye. cxij. cxvi Example of maintenance of virtue fo. xcvij. Example of
great presumption fo. xcix Example that noman can hurt him whom God wylleth
good. fo. cxlv Ezechias. xvi. a godly king. i^i.
F
Fabian and Cyprian martyrs fo. xcix. xcviij. Felix bishop of Rome, a
dissembler fo. cvi Ferdynand king of Hungary fo. clcxxix. ccxxxij. Figures of
crosses seen upon garments. fo. clxxxvi. Flauius Claudius fo. c Flesh eaten
and first permitted fo. iij Focas did grant the first prymacy to the bishop
of To. fo. cxxi. Forgettfulnes of iniu^yes is ordained. fo. lvi. Frankes are
overcome in battayll. c. they set them selves against the Romans, ibid.
there of spring. cxxviij. there deeds and by what occasion they deceyuered
from the empire. ibidem. the dukes of Frankes come of ^ewes the gentell.
cxxxiij. the occasion of battle between the Frankes and Saxons. fo. ^xx^^ij.
Francia or France is part of Gallia, cxxix. by what occasion Gallia or France
was dyuyded from Germanye. cxxxiij. French threatenynges fo. cxxxiiij Fraunces
the french king taken* fo. clxxxvij (...) holy and profane *x What they do
teach* x. the Germans hystorye writers were unlearned. cxlv. the histories of
the Jews are elder then the Greeks. fo. xx. the historyes of the greeks
begyune at the Persians. fo. xxviij Himelsuita. fo. cxij. Hipocrates fo. lvij
Histius subteltye in making an vproure. fo. xliij Hollande and Sealande, there
was a great inundatyon of water. cxcix Homerus when he lived. xxiiij his books
are a mirror. xxv Honorius fo. cix Hungaryans are called. cxvi they are
assalted with war by Charles the great, cxxxi. they spoil Germany and
Italy. cxxxvi. they be vanquished. cxli. they becoome contrybutaryes to the
Turk CCxxxi. CCxxxij Hungarye a great example. xviij Hugo: prince of France,
cxlij Hulderych Zuinglius* fo. Clxxxviij. CCxiiij Huldryke duke of Wyrtenberg
restored to his d^my^yon. ccij Hunyades hurts the Turks greueously. clxxxi.
Husse in Bohem ryseth against the pope. Clxxvi. Clxxviij
I
Jacob. x. he was called Israel. x Iaddus the high priest* lxiij. Wherefore
Ianus has two visages fo. iiij Ianna the second Hyrcanus. lxxij James the moor
lxxvi James the king of Scotts ma ryeth the Freinch kings daughter. ccxvi
Iaphet iiij Jason monynge Antiochus to take Jerusalem lxviij Idolatry the
first occasyon, ix. the hedde thereof.xxiij. the kinds of it by the Greeks.
xxiij. the punishment of idolaters. xvi. how much it differs from
Christianyte xxiij. and Idol in the temple of God fo. lxix. xc Ieconias
having a trust to gods promyses is kept, xviij. The Jews are eldar. xv. the
raise an vproure thorough one Messiah. xcv. are most ancient. xx. Jerusalem
the state of it under Antiochus. lxvij. the destruction. xix. xcij. strange
things seen before the destruction of her. xciij Jesus the high priest, fo.
xxxv. Ioachas. xviij. Ioachim or Ieconias. ibid. Ioakim. ibidem. Ioachim the
young marquis of Branden borough. CCxxix Ioiada. xv. Ioachim. xv. Ioas. xv.
Ioathain. xvi. Ihon Hercanus. lxxiij. John Baptist. lxxvi John the Apostle
returns out of Pathmos fo. xciiij Ihon Stabius an Astronomer fo. cxlv Ihon
the eight bishop of To. a woman fo. cxxxiiij Ihon Chrispus fo. ccxx Ihon the
twelfth bishop of To me bostede fo. clxxiij Ihon king of Jerusalem. clxv.
Ihon Husse teaches openly agayust pardons, fo. clxxvi clxxviij Ihon Cassels
burned cclxx. Ihon Humyades fo. clxxxi Ihon Oecola^padius. clxxxviij The death
of John duke of Saxon. fo. cxcix Ihon Wida king of Hungary fo. ccxxxij Ihon
Diasy fo. cclxiij Ihon Ecke fo. ccxxviij Iohaune bocher fo. cclxxvij Ihon
Frederike duke of Saxon taken captyue, fo. cclxxiiij Images and beads put
down in England fo. cclxxij Iusurrectiou at Gent, ccxxvi Jonas fo. xvi Iona
has fo. lxxij Ioram a setter up of new idolatry fo. xv. Iosaphat studiose in
religion fo. xv Joseph a man sage and holy. x. Josias fo. xvij Jones are the
first Greeks. iiij Ioui^ianus a godly Emperor fo. cvij Irene daughter to the
Emperor of Constahtynople. clxij Iren cxxv Irnerius the restorar of the laws
clvi Isake a figur of Christ fo. x Ismael fo. x Judah a kingdom fo. xix Judges
at Athens did swear fo. lxiij Judas Machabeus power. lxix lxxij Iudyth xlviij
Iulianus Apostata. cvi* he is made Emperor, ibidem* at Strasborough. cvi. he
forbad Christen men the authorytye of warrfare. cvij. his death is an example
of veugeauuce. cvij Iulyau the Cardynal. fo. clxxxi Julius a man aduysed, and a
lover of peace. lxxxiij. he is called Caesar, lxxxvi The orderyng of the year
was begoen lxxxiiij Julius bishop of Rome was discomfyted in a battayl by the
cite Raueunas upon Easter day fo. clxxxvi Jupiter called vpou agayust tempests.
xxiij Iustmus, cxviij. the second. cxx. Iustinianus, cxviij. cxxiiij. he
restored the laws. fo. cxix
K
The kingdom of the world and Christ's kingdom * xvi Que^ Katheryn dowager
dies, fo. ccx The institution of kingdoms and of kings is of God. xiij The
chaunsyng and re^^ynge of kyngedomes displeases God. riiij. What the mutations
of them do signify. cxcij King of Anabaptilles Knypperdullynge and Crafting
fo. CCviij
L
Lacedaemonians valiauntnes, xlv. they fight with the Thebaus: and are
disco^syted. lvi Landersey Landtgraue fo. CClvij. Lati^er at liberty fo.
cclxxiij Latium fo. Cxxi The institution of cyup^ power and of all laws i.
clvi Laws civil restored by Iustinianus fo. Cxix Law was given fo. xi Laws
of Solou concerning vagabounds. fo. xxxviij Laws of the Romans. lviij the
occasion of them. lviij Laws of Draco. xxxviij Lawful calling must be ensued
fo. lxv Le^t fo. xcv Leo the third named Leouomachus fo. Cxxv Leo the fourth
Cxxv. Leo^t^^s ibidem Jews the gentle. cxxxij. he is taken by his son.
Cxxxiij Jews the second buried at Mylan. Cxxxiiij Jews the third. Cxxxvi. he
is restored to ye realm of france Cxlij. Jews the berdyd. Cxli^ Jews the
Landtgraue. Clxv Jews the Bayer. fo. Clxxi Jews is excommunicated. clxxij
Jews the Romayn. Clxxiij Jews king of France. clxxxvi Liberius bysh* of Romans
cvi. Linus bysh* of Romans xci Lombardy. fo. Cxv Longimanus, with the long haud
fo. xlviij Lotho^ius. Cxxxij. the Saxon, Cxv. the brethren of him were these:
Jews, Germanicus, and Charles the bold. Cxxxiij. Lothring. ibidem Laurentius
Miniatensis, an astronomer fo. Cxc Lub^cke fo. Clix Lucius Warrus. fo. xcv
Lucrece xxvij. Lupoldus* Clxxij. duke of Eastenryche. Clxxv. was slain by the
Swytzers. ibid* Luxsborough parliamente. for fo. CCxlij. Lysander fo. liiij
M
The Macedonians. iiij. the occasyon of the war of Macedonia. lxxviij
Machabees. lxxiij. the power of them. lxix. there kings. lxxiij Macrinus fo.
xcvij Magi fo. iiij Magog fo. Cxxiij Magnentius an example of un kyndnes. Cvi.
he slays him self fo. cvi. Mahomete. xcvi. wounders seen in Italy before his
coming. Cxx. the occasions of his kingdom. Cxxi. why his religion is
accepted. lxix. the form of his relygio^. Cxxij. an Arabia^ prophet. Cxxi. he
subdued Arabia. Cxxij. Why he would be called a Sara^en for an Agaren, ibidem.
they besieged Hadriantum. Clxxxiiij. the place of Danyel, of Mahomet. Cxxij.
what he sygnifyeth. fo. Cxxiij Manfyld battayll C^^iij Manasse a wicked king.
xvij. an example of repentance, fo. xv^^. Manes begynner of the Manache^s sect
borne in Persia, Ci. his doctrine. ibidem Manichei ibidem Mantua fo. cxcix
Marcus Cicero fo. lxxxvi Marcus Antonius fo. xcv Mardonius a captain. xlvij
Marriages of priests. CClxxv Maran. fo. CCxxxix Mary lady Regent. fo. Cxivi
Marquis of Brandenborough receaueth the gospel. CCxxx Marius was made captayn
against the Cimbry. lxxxi. he was causser of an vproure lxxxi his tyranny.
lxxxij. Martyn Luther. Clxxxvij. dies. fo. CCix. Marten of Rosheim. CCxliij
Mary Lady Regent enuadeth Picardy. fo. CCxix Mathath^^s fo. ^xx^j Mathematica
ars driven out of Rome. fo. xciij Maurice duke. fo. CCxl. cclvi. cclxviij.
Mauritius Emperor. Cxx. Maximianus fo. Cii Maxentius. ibid. he was drowued in
the Tybur fo. Ciij Maximilian. Clxxxiij. is taken at Brudges. Clxxxiiij. he war
r^eth against the Venetians, fo. Clxxxvi Maximinus subdued Germany. fo. xcvij
Maximinus and Arbogastes are examples of dis^oyalte, Cviij. he warreth against
the Venetians fo. cviij Meghlyne burned. fo. cclxv Mo^ta^^te behedded. ccxxv.
Melanthon and Eckius. ccxxxiij the reason concerning religion. ccxxviij Men
ten in number were sent to Greece. lviij. they were deposed fo. lix
Metasthenes fo. xxix Mesius suffesius death. xxvij Micheas fo. xvi. Melciades
counsel. xliij. He was ill entreated of the Athenians. xliij. his renowned
victory ibidem Mylane. Clix. ccxi. the duke maryeth y^ king of Denmarkes
daughter. CCvi. ccxi. Minia. fo. xxij Myns of silver in Misia, who found them
first. cxliij Mithridates. fo. lxxxi. Monarchies what they are and of what
puissance* xiiij. there be only four Monarchies, xiiij. they are propoued to
Dauyell. v. the end of the first Monarchy. xx. a monarchye is the best form
of an empire or realm. xl. the beginning of the third Monarchy. lix.
Wherefore Monarchies are chefly ordained of God. cxx^i Wherefore Monarchies and
princes are sent of God. lxxvij Monasteryes were schools in time past fo. cxxxi
Sir Thomas Moore Chauncelor of England: and the bishop of Rochester, behedded
fo. ccix The b^^es of Moses are found fo. xvij Moonkes are brought to write
clvij Maurus duke. fo. ccxl. cclvi. cclxviij.
N
Nabuchodonesor. xviij. He was converted by Danyell, fo. xix Narses, fo.
cxiiij. cxviij Nathan David son* fo. xv. Nau^^u fo. clxxxiij The Count of
Nasowe ccxiii Naxus ccxx (...)oath gods hoo^ter. vi. Nero fo. xc (...) fo. xciij
Nyce Counsel fo. ciij The Emperor enterteyned at Nyce. fo. ccxxij Nicolaus
the noble. fo. clxxiij Nicolaus the fyft a favorer of learning fo. clxxxiiij
Nichomachus fo. lviij Ninine fo. vi Ninus king of Spria fo. vij. Norynbergh is
taken by Henry the fyft. cliij. ccxxxv. the Castle builded. fo. ccxxiiij.
Normandys fell into Frannce cxxxv. they are overcome, fo. cxxxv Norwych
insurrectyon. cclxxv Nouacyaus heresy is condemned fo. xcix Castle nona
cunaded. fo. ccxxiij Numitor fo. xxv Nuce clxxxiii
O
Occan a reprouer of the bysh. of Romans fo. clxxij Ochosias fo. xv Octanius
Augustus. fo. lxxxvi Oecolampadius l^xxxviij Olympians began. fo. xx.
Oldenborough Earl, and the Lubycks innaded the Dukedom of Holsats fo. cciij.
Onedeluburgh Orchomenus. fo. xxij Origin a reacher of Alexandri fo. xcvi.
Oseas. fo. xvi. Otanes fo. xl. Othacarus. cxij. king of the Bohems. fo. clxix
Othomannus. Cxxiij. Clxx. Otho the tyr^t. xci. Cxl. the vpcoures raised against
him, cxl. the answer of him to the Fre^chmens threatenyngs cxli. duke of
Saxon. cxxxvij. he made the first an oath to to the bishop of Rome. cxliij.
the second. cxliij. he was taken by Maryners. cxliiij. The French men are
subdued of him. ibidem. the third, called the wounders of the world. ibid. he
was poisoned. cxlvi. the fourth. clxij. clxiij. of Wytelspach. clxiij. Ochyas
which is called ^^aries. fo. xvi.
P
Padua an vninersyte cxxxi. Paiasetus a Turkyshe Emperor was subdued and
brought low clxxvij. Palatyne the Countyes. cxlvi. cl^^. ye annceters of
Palatyne came of Charles the great. fo. cxxix. ccliiij Papinianus a lawyar.
xcvi. Peafable studyes. lxx. xciiij Parmenian fo. lcij The Persyans invade
Mesopotamia fo. ccxix Paul the third chosen to be pope. fo. ccv Paul is
behedded fo. xci Paulus Eemilius lxxix S. Paul besyeged fo ccxix Peace
granted. ccij. cciij. ccxiiij fo. ccxxij Peace procured between England and
France. ccliiij. cclxix Pelagius an heretic. cix. was bishop of Rome.
cxiiij. Peron beseged. ccxiij. Perdicus was healed of Hypocrates. lvij. lxiiij.
his art. lxiiij Persys are example of dislopalte, lv. when the monarchye of the
Persyans begaun. xxvij the delyberation of them xl. of Persia of the kingdom
fo. xl. Persequntion for the true service of God. fo. ij Persecutyon most
tyrannycall, fo. lxxvij. Perseus the last king of Mace donia, son to Philip.
lxxviij Pestes fo. ccxl Philip. lxxviij. Philip destroys the Thebans. lvij.
his dreams. lx. he was slain because he left a wicked deed unpunished. fo.
lxi. Philip Bardesanes. cxxv. son to Maximiliane clxxxvi Peter was crucified
xci. Pharisees fo. lxxiiij. Philip was the first Christen Emperor and
baptized. xcviij Philip Emperor. clxi. he was slain of Otho at Wytelspach by
entrape. clxiij. Philip son to Maximilian, dies fo. clxxxvi Philip
Landtgraue cci. Phylyp ye Palatyn put to flight and wounded. CCij Philip
Melanthon. ccxxviij Philosophy with the Greeks. fo. xxxvi Philosophers of Ionia
and Italy. ibidem Pipinus. Cxxvi. king of Germany and Gallia. fo. Cxxix Platea
fo. xliij. Plato: Endoxus: Aristo. lvij the philosophy of Plato. xcvi Ply^y
benefycyall to the Christians. fo. xciiij Poets first of great renoumes, fo.
xxiiij Polmices fo. xxii. The pope meteth the Emperor at Bonony, fo. cxcix
Popery abolyshed in the land of Saxon. fo. CCxviij Pope fo. CCxxxiij. Clxiiij.
Poperye put done. CCliiij. Popilius an Ambassadoure of Rome sent to Antiochus.
lxviij The conquest of the king of Portugals Iudes. CCxvi Posthumus xcix.
Praga^an vninersytye in Bohemy fo. Clxxii Preraspis fo. xxxviij Prince, an
example that princes do often war not constrained by necessyte. xxxiiij.
princes were called judges. xi^i. what must be marked in the examples of
princes *. vi. to what princes the electyon is committed. Cxlv. what profet is
by the princes electors. Cxlvi The princes of Brunswycke came of Catnly. Clvl.
Pryntyng fo. Clxxxv. Preaching first of the Gospel fo. i. Preachars of the
Gospel. i. ordained in Sauoy. CCix. ccxv. Probus fo. Ci Proca fo. xxv
Prosperytye comes of God clxxx Prolemeus. lxiiij. Euergetes. lxvi. lxxi.
Philometor. lxviij. lxxi. the son of Lagus. lxx. Philadelphus. lxx. both
loving peace and seyence. ibid. his lybrary. ibid. Anletes. lxxi Astronomer.
xcv. Phisopater. lxvij. lxxi. Epiphanes. fo. lxxi Phisco. lxxi. Alexander. ibi.
Latyrus. ibi. Diomsius. ibidem Puissance of men ought not to be trust in. fo.
xl Pyrcamer. fo. clxxxv Pythagoras begynnar of Philosophars in Italy. xxxvij.
Q
Quedeluburgh Cxliij Quintilius Varus. lxxxviij.
R
Radagasus fo. Cx Rainsborough. CCxxxij. cclxxij Ravens or Ranenose beasts. xij
in nombre that Romulus saw fo. Cxi Rea Siluia xxv Recantation of Doctor Smyth
fo. CClxxij Regenspurg. Cxli. parliament fo. Cxc. Reckoning of the Greeks and
Philo xxviij. Regulus is taken by the Carthagmians. lxxvij. His torments.
ibidem. his lone and faythfullnes toward the common wealth ibidem Rhecia
lxxxviij Remus xxvi. Rigor in gouerna^ce is allowed of God. * Risaua taken fo.
CCxxiij. Roboam fo. xiiij Romulus. xxvi. the strife of Romulus and Remus. xxvi.
wha^ Rome was builded. ibidem. It was burned of the French men. lix. The
discomfytynge of the Romans in the second war of Carthago. lxxviij. The
Romayn Monarchy is the last on the earth fo. lxxxv. Rome taken by duke
Burbon. clxxxviij. an ouerflowenge at Rome. Clxxxix. An example of Romayn
seneryte. lxviij The beginning of the Monarchy. lxxxiiij. Rome is wasted by
Totylas. Cxiiij. The praises and profy tablenes of the Romayn laws. fo. Cliii
Roxan wise to Alexander. lxiiij Rudolphus is made emperor of the bishops at
Phorcen ch^ The complaynt of the Emperor upon the bishops ibid. Rudolfe of
Habisburge. clxviij Rupertus fo. clxxvi
S
Saducees. lxxiiij. they were epicures. ibidem Salfelde a dead place for
council. fo. Cxli. Solomon. fo. xiiij. Samaria is a figure of the east church.
xvii. the occasion of the kingdom of it. xiiij. The waistyng of Samaria. xvi.
Saraceus kingdom. there power. Cxxij. Cxxi^j Sapores king of the Persyans
xcix. Sardanapalus fo. viij Sardes fo. xliij Saul fo. xiiij Saxon CCxl. Saronye
the duke of Saxon, wherefore he was made woun of ye electors. Cxlvi. Schapler a
seditions man. clxxxviij Scotland invaded. fo. CClij. Scipio ye younger.
lxxviij. Nausica. lxxix. son to Paulus Aemilius. lxxx. Sicilia was ye cause
of the war of Carthago. lxxvij. Why the kings of it do claim the tytel of
Jerusalem. Clcv. The battle of the Scythians against Cyra, xxxvi. Scopa a
captain of Ptolomens by the schole of Alexandry. xcv. Se^ts risen in Jury.
lxxiiij Sedechias deceived by ye high priests. xviij. his death. ibid.
Sedicious punished. l^iiij. xci. cxxxix c^l. xiiij xliij. clv. Sel^n^ns lxvi.
of w^o^ he was stayn. lxvi. Philopater. lxvij. Sem. fo. iiij S^miramis did were
men's garments fo. vij. Se^eca. fo. xc. Sergius Galba. xci. vul^arned and a
tyrant fo. cxxxvi Ser^^^s T^llius. xxvij. S^th^ ij Shaue^burgh cclviij
Shyltage ^^^ned down to the ground. cci. Shartou recauted cclxx S^^^r^s fo.
x^vi Sigebertus an history writer. fo. clij. Sigis^^u^^us emperor. cixxvij his
^rp^d^^ you against the Tu^k^. clxxix. the histor^e of him, with his
ser^auntes, fo. clxxix. Simon. fo. lxxiij. Sisannes a wicked i^dge. xl.
Socrates fo. lvij So dome is become a marysh, x. Thr^e s^^ns seen together,
x^^. Solon the gra^e and wryghte se^^^nce of him to Cresus. ^o. xxxii^. the
author and begy^^ar of common laws, fo. xxxvij Solituan with his great host
be seged Uir^^a. clxxxviij. the ^econd breakyng of him into Germany fo. cx^vi
Sophi prince of the Perspa^^s, ^^adeth the Turk. ccv. Sora^^s wrote the life
of Hypocrates. fo. ivij Soter. fo. lxvi. Sparta and Athens two ^yes of Greece iv
Spa^yards found new I^des pl^^ty^ull of gold and silver CC. When Spayn and part
of Gallia was translated ^ro^ the empire. cxv. the ^ynges of Spayn ^o come of
the Goths fo. cxi Sp^ches fo. iiij Spyre fo. ccxxxv. ccl Stephen Gardener
bishop of Winchester cclxxviij Stews put done at London. fo. lxx Stephan was
confirmed of Jews fo. c^^xiij. S^^phan was stoned. xc. king of the
Hungaayans. cxlviij Still^^o fo. cviij. cx Straw ha^s. cxlij Sultan or Sultan
cxxij Swedeners rebel against there king c^xlix Swines mo^th was the first
^yshop of Rome, that changed his ^^me. cxxxiiij. The Swytzers and there league
clxxv. the power of them agay^^t the Dolphin. clxxxij. the war against there
neighbors: them of Eastenriche. clxxxvi. the war within themselves, clxxxix
Sibilla is not the proper name of a woman. xxiiij. they were worshyppars of
Idols. ibid. Silla. lxxxi. he fears the inconstancye of fortu^e. lxxxij. he
was more cruel, than need re^uyred ibidem. Spluester Bishop of Rome a worker
with evil spirits, fo. cxlix
T
Twelf tables of the law. lix. a table of the worlds end. cxciiij Tacitus fo. x
Tamerlanes a tyrant of Tartary fo. clxxvij. Tarquinius Priscus. xxvij Superbus
ibid. Tassilo duke of Bayerlande, was overcome of Charles, fo. cxxx. Teia the
last king of the Goths. fo. xv. Thelesporus xcv An example of temperance xl.
An horrible tempest CCxx Thales a begynner of philosophi in Greece. xxxvij. he
and Solon were both at one time xxxvij Their. fo. ix. Thebes the occasion of
the battayll. xxi. the Thebanes destroy the Phocyans. lvij. the The war
overcome and spoiled nether were restored agay^ fo. l vij. Thief taken. ccxxxi.
Themis^ocles a defendor of the liberte of the country* xlv. his subtyl denyce.
xlvi. he flies t^ Artaxerxes. xlvij. he is evil rewarded. xlvij. Theodotius
ouercometh the Gothyans. cviij. cx. cxxv. his godlynes toward the church cix.
the younger. cxv. Theodatus fo. cxij Theramenes is putt to death, fo. lvi. Theos
fo. lxvi Thomas Aqiunas. clxviij. Mi^ter. ci. clxxxviij. moor. ccix. author of
Anabaptists. clxxxviij Thomas duke of Norfolk, committed to the Tower. cclxx
Thrasibulus and his prayre, fo. lvi. Thuryngen the beginning of the Erldome:
and whence the lords thereof fo. cxlix. Th^^ydydes. xxix. his sage ^ayenges
con^ernyng hystoryes * iiij. Tyberius Arimarus. lxxxviij. lxxxix. cxx. cxxv
Tigranes is slain by Pompeius. fo. lxx. Titus son to Vespasian befeged
Jerusalem. xcij. ten hundredth thousand persons were in the city, when
Jerusalem was besyeged. xcij. his gentelnes. fo. xciij Tyraunts are to be
marked * vi Thyrty ty rannts were ordained at A^h^us. lv. Totilas. cxi. he was
taught by Be^et called the Saint. cxiiij. he fyghteth ^^ckely. cxiij Traianus
was of great honesty. xciij. his sage sayng: when he gave his head offycer the
power of the sword. xciiij. Persequ^tion of Christen men underneath him.
xciiij. his age. xciiij. Transiluania called Seuenburgh fo. Cxxxi. Trem^tes fo.
CCxlvi Tribunes were deposed by Sylla. lxxxij. they are restored again by
Pompeius. lxxxij. Truce taken. CCxcvi. Tullus Hostilius fo. xxvi. Th^^esse
CCvi. CCvij Turck what it sygnyfyed. cxxiij the Turks were Cartarians Cxxiij.
when they began to have dominion. ibid. he prepares an ar^^ye to in^ade the
the Christians. CCxix. they are beasts and not tyrauntes Clxxxiij. Turk
car^eth away eight thousand Christians, in to Turkey. CCxxvij. Turks past^^^e
with Christians. ccxxxvij. they in Turkey acknowledge our Christian religion to
be the best. CCxxvij. CCxxxv. CCxl. CCxlviij. CClix. the Turks eld^st son
makes insurrection against his father. CClxxiiij. Trust is not to be put in
the h^lp of man. fo. lxxij. Tyri^th^s xxi. Twelve artycles of sedicions
r^stickes. Clxxxviij
V
Valens an Arr^an. Cviij Val^otinian^s. Cvij. Cxvi. Val^r^a^^s xcix Vandall^s
came into Africa. Cxv th^re fayth^ullu^s. Cxvi wh^ they came ^yrst into
Germany fo. Cxvi. Varius Hehiogabalus. xcvij. Vardam battle. Clxxxi. Vision of
S. Vdalryke. Cxxxix Venece builded fo. Cxvij Vengeance how it is forbidden.
fo. Cvij Virtue of noble Dames in the city of Wenisburg. clviij. Vespasianus
fo. xci. Vibius Gallus Cxcix Victoria a cite. Clxvi Vindelicia fo. lxxxviij.
Vitellius fo. xcvi. Ungodliness. xxiij. how much an ungodly does differ from a
Christian. ibid. Unkindness toward God and doughty persons Clxxvij Vladislaus
king of Poole, xcvij. Vlpianus ibidem V^l^sia^^s fo. x^^x Vrof the Caldeis. fo.
ix. Vrbinas saying. Clxxxiiij.
W
Wanderers in Germany and Gallia scourgyng themselves fo. clxxiiij. Waalles of
wood answer. xlv War of the Peloponneses. lij the occasion of it was light
and how long it lasted. ^^^. of Cyr^s agay^st his grandsather. xxx^^. of the
^y^pes. Clxxxij of light matters. liij. the occasion of cyuyl warr^s. lxxxij.
Willya^ of Rogendorp. ccxxxvi William duke of Bayre. ccxliij Wencelaus king of
Bohemies made a saint. Clxix. Emperor. Clxxvi We^uherus, a restorer of the
laws fo. Clvi Wertenberge Duchy when it began. Clxxxv Willyam of Sicilie.
Clviij. Emperor fo. Clxviij. Wittichus fo. Cxiij. Wonders seen in the time of
ye Germans war. liiij. Wolfenb^tel. CCxli. CClv Wonderful vicious. CCl.
CClxxi. CClxxv. Worms CClxxiij Writers of Histories. and Cronicles cxcij
Seek peace and ensue it. Psalm. xxxiij. i. Pet. iij.

WL
printer's device of Walter Lynne

The fear of the lord is the beginning of Wisdom. Psalm. cxi. b. Prou. ix.
b. Job. xxviij. c Eccle. i. c

Imprynted at London for Gwalter Lynne, dwelling on Summers Keye, by Byllinges
gate.

In the year of our Lord M. D. L.

And they are to be sold in Paul's church yard, next the great Schole, at
the sign of the sprede Egle.

Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


