A Prognostication made for the year of our Lord God, 1572. wherein at large
is set forth the description of the four quarters of the year, with the
prediction of the weather for every day, exactly calculated for Oxenforde.

By Thomas Hill, of London Student.



Imprinted at London by Richard Watkins, and James Roberts.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

The nature and quality of the.xij. signs, after the principles of Phisik.


(...) moist than hot. Taurus, ^^^erate and moystest. Gemini, more (...) than
moist. Cancer, more hot than dry. Leo, ^^^est and driest. Virgo, more dry
than hot. Libra, more dry than cold. Scorpio, coldest and driest.
Sagittarius, more cold than dry. Capricorn, more cold than moist. Aquarius,
most cold and moist. Pisces, more moist than cold.
Of the Eclipse of the Moon, which shall appear to us, this year of our
redemption. 1572.


THis present year of our Lord God. 1572. being the.xxv. of June, at.viij. of
the clock, and.lvi. min. in the night shall appear and be seen above our
Horizon, a particular Eclipse of the Moon, she then being at her full, and
right against the Sun: Into the shadow of the earth she shall come to be
Eclypsed, about.xvi. mi. before.ix. a clock, and to be parfitly seen, both of
Canterbury and London, about.x. min. after.ix. and end this Eclipse about.x.
a clock at Oxford: so that in this darkness she shall tarry about one hour,
and a quarter, and be shadowed of the earth only v. points and.iiij. mi.
Southerly, nere to that section, named the Dragons tail, being then in
the.xiij. degree, and.xxiiij. minutes of Capricorn: Certain special effects of
this Moons Eclipse, are uttered in the Harvest quarter: in that these shall
begin to work and show their harms to the earth, about the.xiiij. of October,
in the year. 1572. and end the xxij. of December following.

A Description, of the four quarters of the year, beginning the twelth day of
December, in the year. 1571.
Of the Winter.
THe later Astronomers instruct, that the winter quarter Astronomicall of this
present year of our Lord. 1572. is already begun, and began with us
the.xij. day of December, at.vi. of the clock at night, in the year. 1571. at
which time the Sun entered into the first min. of Capricorn. This winter
quarter and season, reported (of the wise and learned) to be of the own
natural disposition and quality, cold and moist, contrary to the condition
of Summer, whose enemy he is found to be, (for that in all respects, it
destroys those crescent things, which Summer has brought forth, and
nourished by his kindly heat) will this year answer, to the natural kind.
For in the beginning of this quarter, it appears to be inclined to bitter
cold, and unconstant weather, with sudden showers and southerly winds, toward
the midst more bent to stormy weather, as hail, blustering winds, great
showers of rain, snow, clowdie, and dark weather, with Landfloudes after
rain, more ryfe in this season: whose violence, when these shall be of force,
are like to cause Eruptions or brastinges forth of the Earth in low places,
and that Springes of water to break up, in such abundaunce: that both Men, and
Cattle shall be greatly annoyed therewith: Further, cold mistes, and dark
fogges, with horie frostes, and bitter cold weather, enduring harm to
Cattle, as Horse, Oxen, Kyen, Sheep, and such like: yea to fowls of the
winter, and fishes of that season: to Fruytes, and Gardine herbs, and to
Corn of all likelihode: but these (thanked be God) not so harmefull, to be
looked for of us: in that past a third part, and somewhat more, of the Moonee
body enters then into shadow: which the learned also report, to threaten less
harm to the earth. As touching the sicknesses and diseases, that are like to
happen in this quarter: be those proceeding of cold and to much moisture, and
Melancholy humors, agreeing to the quality of Harvest, and sundry of the
Summer diseases repeated, and happening in this season. As all the kinds of
fevers, with the pestilent Ague, straightness in the breast, plurisies,
weakness of the Liver, and stomach, opilation or stopping of the Spleen,
grievous pains of the head, the falling sickness, rewmes, Opthalmies, running
of the eyes, long lasting sicknesses, the quartayne Ague, of Melancholy,
black Iaundise, dropsies, swellings and ache in the legs, knees, and feet,
suffocations and obstructions of the Matrice, the perilous cough, waterie
laxes, the pyles, Gonorrhea weakness of the back, the Letharge, the Gowte,
and such like: which the Lord for a due punishment of Sin, works by his
instruments the stars: Yet God of his great mercy, does give to us means
many times, to be delivered and helped, by seeking in time to the learned and
well practiced Physician: a commended and worthy instrument of his on earth,
for that purpose. To whom in such times of peril, I would wish (all persons
of ability) to resort unto, for advise and counsel: God the true and
principallest Physician be our comforter, and deliver our bodies from the
contageon and infections threatened us by the stars, in this distemperate time
of Harvest. Amen.

The predictions of the daily state and condition of the weather every day in
the week, throughout the.xii. months of this present year of our redemption.
1572.
Of January.
THe first day clowdie, raw cold with some moisture and wind in the morning,
after fair. The second, fair, cold, and windy: the third cold and dry,
with some wind: the fourth clowdie, cold, with some snow and wind: the fifth
raw cold, and disposed to wind and rain: the sixth dark clouds, wind south,
and rain: the.vii. dark, and mistie air, with some rain, and wind.

Last quarter the.viij. day at.xi. of the clock, and three min. before noone,
cold, clowdie, small rain or snow, and windy. The.ix. clowdie, raw cold,
and enclyned to snow, wind foutherly: the.x. raw cold, enclyned to moisture:
the.xi some rain, clowdie, and big wind: the.xij. rain in the morning,
after dry and cold, at night frost: the.xiij. clowdie, raw cold, with rain
in the forenoone, after dry and windy: the.xiiii. clowdie, and enclyned to
moisture, about noone and toward night, dry and cold.

^ New Moon the.xv. day, at vij. of the clock, and vi. min. in the morning,
raw cold, dark clouds, windy, with some snow or rain toward the evening.
The.xvi. cold, and dark weather, with small rain and wind, but at night
dry, and a frost: the.xvii. windy, and cold: the.xviii. clowdy with a little
wind and small rain, after fair: the.xix. enclyned to snow, or sharp
weather, and dark clouds: the xx. some small rain, and wind.

First quarter the.xxi. day, at.xij. of the clock, and.xlviij. min. in the
night, moist, clowdie, and dark weather, about noone, and afterward, more
temperate, and dry: the xxii. clowdie, cold, and wind about midnight:
the.xxiii. cold, clowdie and wind, but at evening a frost: the.xxiiii. dry,
with wind at night: the.xxv. cold, and fair weather: the.xxvi. clowdie,
cold, with some rain, about noone fair, and frost at night: the.xxvii.
sharp air, clowdie or mistie, after noone fair weather: the.xxviii. clowdie,
with some wind, and disposed to rain, but at after noone, dry weather and a
frost at night: the.xxix. a fair morning and cold, toward night ouercast
with black clouds.

Full Moon the.xxx. day, at two of the clock, and xxviij. min. in the
morning, raw cold and dark with rain, and wind: the.xxxi. clowdie and
cold weather, toward night a big wind or rain.

February.
THe first day clowdie, and enclining to snow or rain, toward night a frost:
the second cold, windy, and dark in the morning, after fair, and a frost
at night: the third indifferent fair, with clouds, and some wind at night:
the fourth dry and fair weather, and a big wind in the night: the fifth
clowdie, cold, with wind: the sixth windy, black clouds, and some rain or
snow.

Last quarter the.vij. day at one of the clock.xxij. min. in the morning, raw
cold, dark weather, some rain or snow, and windy: the.viii. clowdie,
cold, with rain and wind, toward night, dry: the.ix. raw cold, clowdie,
and small rain with wind: the.x. clowdie, dark weather, and stormy, and
sudden cold showers or snow: the.xi. dark, and cold, with some rain
toward noone: the.xii. clowdie, rapping cold, and windy.

^ New Moon the xiij. day, at.iiij. of the clock.lviij. mi. in the after
noone, cold and raynie, or some showers, with wind, Westerly. The.xiiii.
clowdie, temperate, with some mild rain and wind: the.xv. dark and clowdie
with small rain, in the after noone fair with wind: the.xvi. dry and fair,
at night windy, and clowdie: the.xvii. fair and warm all the day, unto
night: the.xviii. cold, with dark clouds, and some wind or rain about
noone, or at night: the.xix. temperate weather, with clouds, and some wind in
ye after noone.

First quarter the.xx. day at.iiij. of the clock, and.xij. min. in the after
noone, fair and cold, with wind northerly: the.xxi. variable, clowdie. with
wind or rain: the xxii. cold, clowdie, with rain: the.xxiii. fair, cold,
with small wind, and frost at night: the.xxiiii. sharper weather with black
cowdes, and enclyned to rain or snow: the xxv. fair and warm, with frost at
night: the.xxvi. sharper weather, with black clouds. and wind: and enclyned
to snow or cold rain: the.xxvii. clowdie, cold, and dark, with wind.

Full Moon the.xxviij. day, at.viij. of the clock, and xxxv. mi. in the
night, dark air, rain and windy, with some storm: the.xxix. clowdie, raw
cold, with some mutation, as to wind, cold rain or snow.

March.
THe first day fair and warm, with clouds in the after noone, and some
wind: the second, great wind or a tempest, with rain in the morning: the
third clowdie, cold, and some rain in the morning: the fourth, darker air,
raw cold, and enclyning to moisture: the fifth clowdie, cold with some rain
toward the after noone: The.vi. clowdie, cold, with big wind or rain
toward midnight, after fair.

noone: the.vii. windy, and clowdie in the forenone, after temperate and mild
air: the.viii. fair and warm all the day, but at night rain, and wind:
the.ix. a fair and hot day, unto night.

^ New Moon the.x. day, at.xx. min. after high noone, hot, after clowdie,
with big wind, and sudden showers. The.xi. clowdie, with some rain, and big
wind: the.xii. clowdie and inclined to rain, with some small wind in the
after noone: the.xiii. fair and hot, all the day: the.xiiii. like fair and
hot, unto night: the.xv. a fair and very hot day, without wind in effect:
the.xvi. clowdie, and temperate in the forenoone, after hot unto night:
the.xvii. a hot and fair day, with some wind about noone.

First quarter the.xviij. day, at two of the clock, and.xx. min. in the after
noone, enclyned to thunder, big wind and showers, with thick clouds, and
sulthie hot or, unseasonable air. The.xix. windy, and temperate in the after
noone: the.xx. temperate, with some wind, and black clouds about noone:
the.xxi. clowdie, and sulthie hot, and either thunder, or hayle: the.xxii.
temperate, and enclyned to fair weather, in the after noone: the.xxiii. fair
and hot, all the day: the.xxiiii. fair and temperate, in the after noone.

Full Moon eclipsed on the.xxv. day, at.viij. of the clock and.lvi. mi. in the
night, sulthie hot, and clowdie, with some small wind. The.xxvi. clowdie,
temperate, and enclyning to rain at night: the.xxvii. fair and warm, with
black clouds gathering toward rain, in the after noone: the.xxviii. fair
and hot all the day, but at night rain with some wind: the.xxix. clowdie,
and temperate, with some rain, and wind toward night: the.xxx. fair, and
hot with some wind.

Iulie.
THe first day, a tempest, or thunder and lightning, with some wind in the
night.

Last quarter the second day at.xi. of the clock, and.xv. minutes before noone,
heat, after clowdye, with unstable weather, and a big wind or tempest, with
wind to the southeast. The third temperate, and dry, put in the after noone
clowdie, with some wind and rain: the fourth clowdie and dark, with rain
and wind: the fifth variable, with rain about midnight: the sixth inconstant
weather, with black clouds enclyning to rain, in the after noone: the.vii.
temperate, with wind and black clouds, enclyning to rain: the.viii.
clowdie, temperate, with big wind in the after noone: the.ix. temperate and
dry, with wind in the after noone.

^ New Moon the.x. day, at two of the clock, and four minutes in the
morning, clowdie, hot, with some small rain, and windy to the northest in the
after noone. The xi. fair and hot, with a tempest, or big wind in the
after noone: the.xii. a fair and hot day, with some wind in the forenoone:
the.xiii. clowdie, temperate and dry, with wind toward night: the.xiiii.
clowdie toward rain in the forenoone, after a fair and hot day: the.xv.
some wind and clouds, in the forenoone, after fair and hot unto night:
the.xvi. white clouds, with some wind, and fair all the day: the.xvii. a
hot and fair day, with wind in the after noone.

First quarter the.xviij. day at.v. of the clock, and.xxx. mi. in the morning,
fair and hot weather, toward noone clowdie, and enclyned to rain, with
thunder, and lightning in the after noone. The.xix. temperate and clowdie,
toward rain, in the forenoone: the.xx. fair, and hot, with some wind:
the.xxi. fair, and hot, with clouds toward rain in the night: the.xxii.
clowdie and temperate in the fore noone with some wind, but in the after noone
black clouds, enclining to a tempest or thunder: the.xxiii. clowdie and
dark, with big wind about noone, and unto night continuyng: the.xxiii
clowdie, and inclined to rain in the fore noone.

Full Moon the.xxv. day, at four of the clock, and xivij. min. in the
morning, intemperate heat, with dark clouds toward rain, and wind from
the southeast. The.xxvi. clowdie, toward rain in the morning, after
indifferent fair and temperate: the.xxvii. clowdie in the morning, and
temperate all the day: the.xxviii. variable, with clouds gathered toward
rain in the forenoone, but in the night big wind: the.xxix. great wind,
with clouds gathered toward rain in the forenoone, after fair and hot
unto night: the.xxx. fair and hot in the forenoone, about noone, many white
clouds gathered, and big wind in the after noone.

Last quarter the.xxxi. day, at seven of the clock and.xi. minutes in the after
noone, clowdie, temperate, with some rain in the night, and wind to the
southwest.

August.
THe first day fair, and hot unto night, about midnight clowdie, with some
wind: the second variable weather, dry and windy: the third windy, sayre,
and warm weather all the day: the fourth clowdie, and enclyned to rain in the
forenoone, with wind in the after noone: the fifth temperate and dry, with
white clouds toward moisture, sparsed in the air: the.vi. temperate, with
white clouds, and wind in the after noone: the.vii. dark clouds, and
enclyning to rain in the forenoone: but after midnight hayle, or thunder and
great showers of rain.

^ New Moon the viij. day at.v. of the clock, and.xxiij. minutes in the
after noone, dark air, and either hayle, or thunder and lightning, with a
big wind from the southwest: the, ix. clowdie in the morning, with some
rain, and big wind: in the after noone temperate unto night: the x.
clowdie, toward rain and some wind: the.xi. fair and hot all the day,
without wind: the.xii. hot and fair, with clouds gathered in the after
noone, but a fair night: the xiii. fair and hot, about noone clouds, with
some wind at night: the.xiiii. clowdie, with some wind in the forenoone, and
hot unto night: the.xv. dark or black clouds, and big wind in the
forenoone.

First quarter the.xvi. day, at.vi. of the clock, and.xliiij. minurs in the
after noone, clowdie, and inclined to rain, winte and stormy weather.
The.xvii. clowdie in the after noone, and fulthie hot all the day: the.xviii.
fair and hot, with white clouds, and some wind in the after noone: the xix.
clowdie, and dark about noone: and enclyned to rain, in the after noone:
the.xx. clowdie, and disposed to rain in the forenoone, with white clouds,
and rain or wind in the after noone: the.xxi. temperate, and clowdie in the
after noone, with wind and rain: the.xxii. windy, with clouds and rain or
wind at night.

Full Moon the.xxiij. day, at.xvi. mi. after high noone, fair, after enclyned
to moisture, with black clouds, and big wind. The.xxiiii. clowdie, and
temperate about midnight, more bent to hayle or showers: the.xxv. fair, and
hot all the day: the.xxvi. hot, and fair with white clouds gathered in the
forenoone: the.xxvij. temperate, and clowdie in the after noone: after midnight
a big wind or storm, with some rain: the.xxviij. temperate and dry with
big wind, and clouds in the after noone: the.xxix. fair with

boisterous wind, about that time: the.xvi. windy, cold, and a storm, or
rain in the morning, after fair and a frost at night: the.xvii. cold with
wind, and dry unto night: the xviii. clowdie, and enclyning to rain in the
forenoone: and in the after noone black clouds, and bitter cold wind unto
night.

Full Moon the.xix, day, at vi. of the clock, and.liii. mi. in the after
noone, cold and unconstant weather, with some wind. The.xx. windy, variable,
and dry, with clouds toward rain, after midnight: the.xxi. cold, and dry,
about noone enclining to rain: the.xxii. frost in the morning, and fair unto
night: the.xxiii. nipping cold, with wind in the morning, in the after noone
big wind, and some rain: the.xxiiii. frost, and a fair warm day unto
night: the.xxv. frost, and fair in the morning: but at noone ouercast, with
white and black clouds, and nipping cold toward night: the.xxvi. clowdie,
cold, and enclyning to rain in the morning, after fair and dry unto night.

Last quarter the.xxvii. day, at two of the clock, and four min. in the after
noone, cold and clowdie, with some cold missing rain or snow, and wind:
the.xxviii. raw cold, with black clouds to moisture in the forenoone, and
at night wind. The.xxix. fair, with some wind in the morning, and dry unto
night: the.xxx. cold with white clouds, and wind in the forenoone, and
fair, unto night.

December.
THe first day cold, clowdie, with wind in the morning, and rain in the
after noone: the second fair, and a hory frost in the morning, with sharp
air, and dry unto night, and about midnight snow or cold rain: the third
cold, and dry with some mist or darkness in the morning, and wind in the
night: the fourth fair, and warm all the day, with some small wind in the
after noone.

^ New Moon, the fifth day, at ix. of the clock, and.xvii. minutes in the
morning, clowdie, cold, and a frost, or cold sleete. The.vi. raw cold, and
black clouds, with some rain in the after noone: the.vii. cold, with white
clouds and wind in the forenoone, but in the after noone, raw cold, and
dark or mistie weather unto night: the.viii. a horie frost in the morning,
with wind in the after noone, and in the night rain, with a big wind
toward midnight: the.ix. cold, and white clouds with wind in the morning,
and a small wind in the after noone, with dark nippyng weather, or a raw cold
mist at night: the.x. fair and warm, with some wynd in the morning: the.xi.
temperate and fair, with frost, or a dark mist, and wind in the night.

First quarter the.xii. day at.v. of the clock, and.lv. mi. in the morning,
raw cold, and clowdie with frost or dark mystes. The.xiii. frost, and fair,
with white clouds, and wind in the after noone: the.xiiii. cold, myth a
small wind in the morning, and fair unto night: the.xv. clowdye, cold, and
big wind in the morning, with rain in the after noone: the.xvi. a
horyefrost, or sharp mist in the morning, and wind toward midnight:
the.xvii. cold, and varyable weather, with wind in the after noone: the
xviii. a frost, with white clouds, and wind in the morning, and fair unto
night.

Full Moon the.xix. day at.ix. of the clock, and. xxxii. minutes in the
forenoone, cold and close weather, with snow or cold sleete: the.xx. fair,
and cold, with white clouds and wind, in the forenoone, and mystie or raw
dark we other at night: the.xxi. a sharp cold morning, and fair warm
weather unto night, but after mydnight, snow or hayle, or other cold showers
of rain: the.xxii. a ^^^^ing frost in the morning, and hot (for the time) all
the day, with a big cold wind, in the night: the.xxiii. bitter cold, or a
horye frost in the morning, with clouds enclyning to rain or snow in the
forenoone, and sharp weather unto night: the.xxiiii. cold in the morning,
with fair weather all the day, and a horie frost, at night: the.xxv. frost, or
a cold mist, and small wind in the morning, with fair weather unto night:
the.xxvi. clowdie, cold, with some wind, and enclyning to moisture in the
forenoone.

Last quarter, the.xxvii. day, at ten of the clock. and.liiii. minutes in the
forenoone, moist, raw cold, and clowdie weather, with wind at night.
The.xxviii. wind, with clouds causing a cold air in the morning, and
indifferent fair all the day, but at night, disposed to snow, or a dark mist
very cold, with some wind: the.xxix, a horye frost, or dark cold mist in
the morning, with black clouds or dark, unto night: the.xxx. clowdie, cold,
and dark, or a mist in the morning, with black clouds toward snow, and
big wind in the after noone, but in the night a storm of hayle, or snow
with blustering wind: the.xxxi. cold, and clouds toward snow in the
forenoone, and sharp or cold mystye weather unto night.

FINIS.
Lauds Deo.
Qui fecit luminaria magna, solemn in potestatem diei, lunam in potestatem
noctis.
Of the nature and quality of the seven Planets, their magnitude, with the
sicknesses and parts, that they severally govern in man.
Of Saturn.


Saturn, highest of the Planets, being ninety times with an eight part
greater than the earth, pale (to a leady color) of most stowe progression, in
that he performmeth not the whole course before.xxx. years: and reported (to
be an infortime) does of his nature procure earthquakes, snow and hayle, the
pestilence and dearth of victuals. As touching the highest ascension or point
of Saturnes Orb, from the earth, the same is at this day known to be in
the.xxix. dogree of Sagittarius. This Saturn by iudgenent of the skillful,
has of Elements, the earth, in that he works his proper influence on the
same. Of complexions or qualities in persons, this governs melancholic. Of
humors in man, the melancholy. Of the proper conditions, heaviness,
covetousness, pensive thoughts, suspicion, long silence, deception,
fearfulness. etc. Of sickenesses, this has the Quartayne fever, the black
iaundyse, the dangerous Catharre or rewme, the Palsy, the Leprosy, the
black Morphew, the Dropsy, the Iliacke passion, the flure of the belly of
cold humors, the cold Gowte, and ache of the joints, the Canker, hard
swellings, and kimels (rising in sundry parts of the body) and all sicknesses
in a manner, being of a cold and due quality. To conclude if man, this
governs the milt, the right ear, the teeth and bones. Lord also of the
first hour on Saturday.


