POEMS.

By THOMAS CAREVV Esquire. One of the Gentlemen of the Privie-Chamber, and
Sewer in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at the sign
of the flying Horse, between Britains Burse, and York-House. 1640.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. Line 4. for their, read your. p. 1^. l. 3. for sent, r. lent. p. 43.
l 11. for it, read not. p. 77. l. 3. for danke, r. dampe. p. 85. l. 7. for
Soldiers, r. Lovers. p. 11. l. 15. r. I straight might feel. p. 113. l. 17.
for the, r. that. p. 1^2. l. 2. for where, r. what. p. 138. l. 3 for pastime,
r. passion. p. 148. for circle, r. sickle. p. 168. l. 18. for frisketh in, r.
Iris. struts in.

Imprimatur,

MATTHEW CLAY.
April. 29. 1640.
POEMS.
The Spring.
NOW that the winter's gone, the earth has lost
Her snow-white robes, and now no more the frost
Candies the grass, or castes an ycie cream:
Upon the silver Lake, or Crystal stream:
But the warm Sun thawes the benumbed Earth.
And makes it tender, gives a sacred birth
To the dead Swallow; wakes in hollow tree
The drowzie Cuckoo, and the Humble-Bee.
Now do a quire of chirping Minstrels bring
In triumph to the world, the youthful Spring.
The Valleys, hills, and woods, in rich array,
Welcome the coming of the longed for May.
Now all things smile; only my Love does lowre:
Nor has the scalding Noon-day-sunne the power,
To melt that marble ice, which still does hold
Her heart congeald, and makes her pity cold.
The Ox which lately did for shelter fly
Into the stall, does now securely lie
Jn open fields; and love no more is made
By the fire side; but in the cooler shade.
Amynt as now does with his Cloris sleep
Under a Sycamoure, and all things keep
Time with the season, only she does carry
June in her eyes, in her heart January.
To A. L. Persuasions to love.
Think not cause men flattering say,
You Are fresh as April sweet as May,
Bright as is the morning star,
That you are so, or though you are
Be not therefore proud, and deem
All men unworthy your esteem.
For being so, you loose the pleasure
Of being fair, since that rich treasure
Of rare beauty, and sweet feature
Was bestowed on you by nature
To be enjoyed, and 'twere a sin,
There to be scarce, where she has bin
So prodigal of her best graces;
Thus common beauties, and mean faces
Shall have more pastime, and enjoy
The sport you loose by being coy.
Did the thing for which I sue
Only concern my self not you,
Were men so framed as they alone
Reaped all the pleasure, women none,
Then had you reason to be scant;
But 'twere a madness not to grant
That which affords (if you consent)
To you the giver, more content
Then me the beggar; Oh then be
Kind to your self if not to me;
Starve not your self, because you may
Thereby make me pine away;
Nor let brittle beauty make
You your wiser thoughts forsake:
For that lovely face will fail,
Beautie's sweet, but beautie's frail;
It Is sooner past, it is sooner done
Then Summers rain, or winters Sun:
Most fleeting when it is most dear,
It Is gone while we but say it is here.
These curious locks so aptly twind,
Whose every hair a soul does bind,
Will change their abroun hue, and grow
White, and cold as winters snow.
That eye which now is Cupids nest
Will prove his grave, and all the rest
Will follow; in the cheek, chin, nose
Nor lilly shall be found nor rose.
And what will then become of all
Those, whom now you servants call?
Like swallows when their summers done,
They Will fly and seek some warmer Sun.
Then wisely choose one to your friend,
Whose love may, when your beauties end,
Remain still fi^ me: be provident
And think before the summers spent
Of following winter; like the Ant
In plenty hoord for time of scant.
Cull out amongst the multitude
Of lovers, that seek to intrude
Into your favor, one that may
Love for an age, not for a day.
One that will quench your youthful fires,
And feed in age your hot desires.
For when the storms of time have moved,
Waves on that cheek which was beloved,
When a fair Ladies face is pined
And yellow spread, where red once shined,
When beauty youth, and all sweets leave her,
Love may return, but lover never.
And old folks say there are no pains
Like itch of love in aged veins.
Oh love me then, and now begin it,
Let us not loose this present minute:
For time and age will work that wrack
Which time or age shall never call back.
The snake each year fresh skin resumes,
And Eagles change their aged plumes;
The faded Rose each spring, receives
A fresh red tincture on her leaves:
But if your beauties once decay,
You never know a second May.
Oh, then be wise, and whilst your season
Affords you days for sport do reason;
Spend not in vain your lives short hour,
But crop in time your beauties flower:
Which will away, and does together
Both bud, and fade, both blow and wither.
Lips and Eyes.
IN Celia's face a question did arise
Which were more beautiful, her lips or eyes:
We (said the eyes,) send forth those poynted darts
Which pierce the hard est adamantine hearts.
From us (replied the lips,) proceed those blisses
Which lovers re^pe by kind words and sweet kisses.
Then wept the eyes, and from their springs did power
Of liquid oriental pearl a shower.
Where at the lips moved with delight and pleasure,
Through a sweet smile unlocked their pearlie treasure.
And bad love judge, whether did add more grace;
Weeping or smiling pearls to Celia's face.
A divine Mistress.
IN natures pieces still I see
Some error, that might mended be;
Something my wish could still remove,
Alter or add; but my fair love
Was framed by hands far more divine;
For she has every beauteous line:
Yet I had been far happier,
Had Nature that made me, made her;
Then likeness, might (that love creates)
Have made her love what now she hates:
Yet I confess I cannot spare,
From her just shape the smallest hair;
Nor need I beg from all the store
Of heaven, for her one beauty more:
She has too much divinity for me,
You Gods teach her some more humanity.
SONG. A beautiful Mistress.
IF when the Sun at noone displayes
His brighter rays,
Thou but appear,
He then all pale with shame and fear,
Quenches his light,
Hides his dark brow, flies from thy sight,
And grows more dim
Compared to thee, then stars to him.
If thou but show thy face again,
When darkness does at midnight reign,
The darkness flies, and light is hurled,
Round about the silent world:
So as alike thou driu'st away,
Both light and darkness, night and day.
A cruel Mistress.
WE read of Kings and Gods that kindly took,
A pitcher filled with water from the brook;
But I have daily tendered without thanks
Rivers of tears that overflow their banks.
A slaughtered bull will appease angry love
A horse the Sun, a Lamb the God of love,
But she disdaines the spotless sacrifice
Of a pure heart that at her altar lies.
Vesta is not displeased if her chaste vrne
Do with repaired fuel ever burn;
But my Saint frowns though to her honored name.
I consecrate a never dying flame.
The Assyrian King did none in the furnace throw,
But those that to his Image did not bow;
With bended knees J daily worship her,
Yet she consumes her own Idolater.
Of such a Goddess no times leave record,
That burnt the temple where she was adored.
SONG. Murdring beauty.
I Will gaze no more on her bewitching face,
Since ruin harbors there in every place*
For my enchanted soul alike she drownes
With calmes and tempests of her smiles and frowres,
I Will love no more those cruel eyes of hers,
Which pleased or angered still are derers:
For if she dart (like lightning) through the air
Her beams of wrath, she kills me with despair.
If she behold me with a pleasing eye.
I surfeit with excess of joy, and dye.
My mistress commanding me to return her letters.
SO grieves the adventrous Merchant, when he thrower
All the long toyld for treasure his ship stowes,
Into the angry maine, to save from wrack
Himself and men, as I grieve to give back
These letters, yet so powerful is your sway,
As if you bid me die I must obey.
Go then blessed papers, you shall kiss those hand*
That gave you freedom, but hold me in bands,
Which with a touch did give you life, but I
Because I may not touch those hands, must die.
Me thinks, as if they knew they should be sent
Home to their native soil from banishment,
I see them smile, like dying Saints, that know
They are to leave the earth, and towered heaven go.
When you return, pray tell your Sovereign
And mine, I gave you courteous entertain;
Each line received a tear, and then a kiss,
First bathed in that, it escaped vnscorcht from this:
I kissed it because your hand had been there
But 'cause it was not now, I shed a tear.
Tell her no length of time nor change of air,
No cruelty, disdain, absence, despair;
No nor her steadfast constancy can deter,
My vassal heart from ever hon'ring her.
Though these be powerful arguments to prove
I love in vain; yet I must ever love;
Say, if she frown when you that word rehearse,
Service in prose, is often called love in verse:
Then pray her, since I send back on my part
Her papers, she will send me back my heart.
If she refuse, warn her to come before
The God of Love, whom thus I will implore.
Trav'ling thy Countries road (great God) I spide
By chance this Lady, and walked by her side
From place, to place, fearing no violence,
For I was well armed, and had made defense
In former fights, against fiercer foes, then she
Did at our first encounter seem to^ be.
But going farther, every step revealed
Some hidden weapon, till that time concealed.
Seeing those outward arms, I did begin
To fear, some greater strength was lodged within,
Looking into her mind, I might survay
An host of beauties that in ambush lay;
And won the day before they fought the field;
For I unable to resist, did yield.
But the insulting tyrant so destroys
My conquered mind, my ease, my peace, my joys,
Breaks my sweet sleeps, invades my harmless rest,
Robs me of all the treasure of my breast,
Spares not my heart, nor yet a greater wrong;
For having stolen my heart, she binds my tongue.
But at the last her melting eyes vnseal'd,
My lips, enlarged, my tongue, then I revealed
To her own ears the story of my harms
Wrought by her virtues, and her beauties charms;
Now hear (Just judge) an act of savagenesse,
When I complain in hope to find redress,
She bends her angry brow, and from her eye,
Shootes thousand darts, I then well hoped to die,
But in such sovereign balm, love dips his shot
That though they wound a heart, they kill it not;
She saw the blood gush forth from many a wound,
Yet fled, and left me bleeding on the ground,
Nor sought my cure, nor saw me since: it is true
Absence, and time, (two cunning Leaches) drew
The flesh together, yet sure though the skin
Be closed without, the wound sesters within.
Thus has this cruel Lady, used a true
Servant, and subject to her self, and you,
Nor know I (great Love,) if my life be sen^
To show thy mercy or my punishment;
Since by the only Magic of thy Art
A lover still may live that wants his heart.
If this enditement fright her, so as she
Seem willing to return my heart to me,
But cannot find it, (for perhaps it may;
Mong'st other trifeling hearts be out oth'way.)
If she repent and would make me amends
Bid her but send me hers, and we are friends.
Secrecy protested.
Fear not (dear Love) that I Will reveal
Those hours of pleasure we two steal;
No eye shall see, nor yet the Sun
Descry, what thou and I have done;
No ear shall he are our love, but we
Silent as the night will be.
The God of love himself (whose dart
Did first wound mine, and then thy heart)
Shall never know, that we can tell
What sweets in stolen embraces dwell.
This only means may find it out,
If when I dye, Physicians doubt
What caused my death, and there to view
Of all their judgments which was true,
Rip up my heart, Oh then I fear
The world will see thy picture there.
A prayer to the Wind.
Go thou gentle whispering wind,
Bear this sigh; and if thou find
Where my cruel fair does rest,
Cast it in her snowie breast,
So, enflamed by my desire,
It may set her heart a-fire.
Those sweet kisses thou shall gain,
Will reward thee for thy pain:
Boldly light upon herlip,
There suck odours, and thence skip
To her bosom; lastly fall
Down, and wander over all:
Range about those Ivorie hills,
From whose every part distills
Amber deaw; there spices grow,
There pure streams of Nectar flow;
There perfume thy self, and bring
All those sweets upon thy wing:
As thou return'st, change by thy power,
Every weed into a flower;
Turn each Thistle to a Vine,
Make the Bramble Eglantine.
For so rich a booty made,
Do but this, and I am paid.
Thou can with thy powerful blast.
Heat apace, and cool as fast:
Thou can kindle hidden flame,
And ag'en destroy the same;
Then for pity, either stir
Up the fire of love in her,
That alike both flames may shine,
Or else quite extinguish mine.
Mediocritie in love rejected. SONG.
GIve me more love, or more disdain;
The Torrid, or the frozen Zone,
Bring equal ease unto my pain;
The temperate affords me none:
Either extreme, of love, or hate,
Is sweeter than a calm estate.
Give me a storm; if it be love,
Like Danae in that golden shower
I swim in pleasure; if it prove
Disdain, that torrent will devour
My Vulture-hopes; and he is possessed
Of Heaven, that is but from Hell releast;
Then crown my joys, or cure my pain;
Give me more love, or more disdain.
Good counsel to a young Maid. SONG.
GAze not on thy beauties pride,
Tender Maid, in the false tide,
That from Lovers eyes does slide.
Let thy faithful Crystal show,
How thy colors come, and go,
Beauty takes a soil from woe.
Love, that in those smooth streams lies,
Under pitties fair disguise,
Will thy melting heart surprise.
Netts, of passion finest thread,
Snaring Poems, will be spread,
All, to catch thy maidenhead.
Then beware, for those that cure
Loves disease, themselves endure
For reward, a Calenture.
Rather let the Lover pine,
Then his pale cheek, should assign^
A perpetual blush to thine.
To my Mistress sitting by a Rivers side. AN EDDY.
Mark how yond Eddy steals away,
From the rude stream into the Bay,
There locked up safe, she does divorce
Her waters from the channels course,
And scorns the Torrent, that did bring
Her headlong from her native spring.
Now does she with her new love play,
Whilst he runs murmuring away.
Mark how she courts the banks, whilst they
As amorously their arms display,
To Embrace, and clip her silver waves:
See how she strokes their sides, and craves
An entrance there, which they deny;
Whereat she frowns, threatening to fly
Home to her stream, and 'gins to swim
Backward, but from the channels brim,
Smiling, returns into the crecke,
With thousand dimples on her cheek.
Be thou this Eddy, and I Will make
My breast thy shore, where thou shall ta^.
Secure repose, and never dream
Of the quite forsaken stream:
Let him to the wide Ocean have,
There lose his color, name, and taste;
Thou shall save all, and safe from him,
Within these arms for ever swim.
SONG. Conquest by flight.
Ladies, fly from Love's smooth tale,
Oaths sleep'd in tears do often prevail;
Grief is infectious, and the air
Enflamed with sighs, will blast the fair:
Then stop your ea^es, when lovers cry,
Lest your self weep, when no soft eye,
Shall with a sorrowing tear repay
That pity which you cast away.
Young men fly, when beauty darts,
Amorous glances at your hearts:
The sixth mark gives the shooter aim;
And Ladies looks have power to may me;
Now 'twixt their lips, now in their eyes,
Wrapped in a smile, or kiss, Love lies;
Then fly betimes, for only they
Conquer love that run away.
SONG. To my inconstant Mistress.
WHen thou, poor excommunicate
From all the joys of love, shall see
The full reward, and glorious fate,
Which my strong faith shall purchase me,
Then curse thine own inconstancy.
A fayrer hand then thine, shall cure
That heart, which thy false oaths did wound;
And to my soul, a soul more pure
Than thine, shall by Loves band be bound,
And both with equal glory crowned.
Then shall thou weep, entreat, complain
To Love, as I did once to thee;
When all thy tears shall be as vain
As mine were then, for thou shall be
Damned for thy false Apostasy.
SONG. Persuasions to enjoy.
IF the quick spirits in your eye
Now languish, and anon must dye*
If every sweet, and every grace,
Must fly from that forsaken face:
Then (Celia) let us reap our joys,
E're time such goodly fruit destroys.
Or, if that golden fleece must grow
For ever, free from aged snow:
If those bright Suns must know no shade,
Nor your fresh beauties ever fade;
Then fear not (Celia) to bestow,
What still beirg gathered, still must grow.
Thus, either Time his Sickle brings
In vain, or else in vain his wings.
A deposition from Love.
I Was foretold, your rebel sex,
Nor love, nor pity knew;
And with what scorn, you use to vex
Poor he arts, that humbly suc;
Yet I believed, to crown our pain,
Could we the sortresse win,
The happy lover sure should gain,
A Paradise within:
I thought loves plagues, like Dragons sat,
Only to fright us at the gate.
But I did enter, and enjoy,
What happy lovers prove;
For I could kiss, and sport, and toy,
And taste those sweets of love;
Which had they but a lasting state,
Or if in Celia's breast,
The force of love might nor abate;
Jove were too mean a guest.
But now her breach of faith, far more
Afflicts, then did her scorn before,
Hard fate! to have been once possess
As victor, of a heart,
Achieved with labor, and unrest,
And then forced to depart.
If the stout Foe will not resign,
When I besiege a Town,
I lose, but what was never mine;
But he that is cast down
From enjoyed beauty, feels a woe,
Only deposed Kings can know.
Ungrateful beauty threatened.
KNow Celia, (since thou art so proud,)
'Twas I that gave thee thy renown:
Thou had, in the forgotten crowd
Of common beauties, lived unknown,
Had not my verse exhaled thy name,
And with it, ympt the wings of fame.
That killing power is none of thine,
I gave it to thy voice, and eyes:
Thy sweets, thy graces, all are mine;
Thou art my star, shin'st in my skies;
Then dart not from thy borrowed sphere
Lightning on him, that sixth thee there.
Temptme with such affrights no more,
Lest what I made, I uncreate;
Let fools thy mystique forms adore,
I Will know thee in thy mortal state:
Wise Poets that wrapped Truth in tales,
Knew her themselves through all her vailes.
Disdain returned.
HE that loves a Rosy cheek,
Or a coral lip admires,
Or from star-like eyes does seek,
Fuel to maintain his fires;
As old Time makes these decay,
So his flames must waste away.
But a smooth, and steadfast mind,
Gentle thoughts, and calm desires,
Hearts, with equal love combind,
Kindle never dying fires.
Where these are not, I despise
Lovely cheeks, orlips, or eyes.
No tears, Celia, now shall win,
My resolved heart, to return;
I have searched thy soul within,
And find naught, but pride, and scorn;
I have learned thy arts, and now
Can disdain as much as thou.
Some power, in my revenge convay,
That love to her, I cast away.
A Looking-glass.
THat flattring Glass, whose smooth face wears
Your shadow, which a Sun appears,
Was once a river of my tears.
About your cold heart, they did make
A circle, where the brinie lake
Congealed, into a crystal cake.
Gaze no more on that killing eye,
For fear the native cruelty
Doom you, as it does all, to dye.
For fear lest the fair object move,
Your froward heart to fall in love,
Then you yourselfe my rival prove.
Look rather on my pale cheeks pin'de,
There view your beauties, there you will find
A fair face, but a cruel mind.
Be not for ever frozen, coy;
One beam of love, will soon destroy,
And melt that ice, to floods of joy.
An Elegy on the La: PEN: sent to my Mistress out of France.
LEt him, who from his tyrant Mistress, did
This day receive his cruel doom, forbid
His eyes to weep that loss, and let him here
Open those floud-gates, to bedeaw this beer;
So shall those drops, which else would be but brine,
Be turned to Manna, falling on her shrine.
Let him, who banished far from her dear sight
Whom his soul loves, does in that absence write.
Or lines of passion, or some powerful charms,
To vent his own grief, or unlock her arms;
Take off his pen, and in sad verse bemone
This general sorrow, and forget his own;
So may those Verseslive, which else must dye;
For though the Muses give eternity
When they embalme with verse, yet she could give
Life unto that Muse, by which others live.
Oh pardon me (fair soul) that boldly have
Dropped, though but one tear, on thy silent grave.
And writ on that earth, which such honor had.
To cloth that flesh, wherein thy self was clad.
And pardon me (sweet Saint) whom I adore,
That I this tribute pay, out of the store
Of lines, and tears, that is only due to thee;
Oh, do not think it new Idolatry;
Though you are only sovereign of this Land,
Yet universal losses may command
A subsidy from every private eye,
And press each pen to write; so to supply,
And seed the common grief; if this excuse
Prevail not, take these tears to your own use,
As shed for you; for when I saw her dye,
I then did think on your mortality;
For since nor virtue, will, nor beauty, could
Preserve from Death's hand, this their heavenly mould.
Where they were framed all, and where they dwelt,
I then knew you must dye too, and did melt
Into these tears: but thinking on that day,
And when the gods resolved to take away
A Saint from us; I that did know what dearth
There was of such good souls upon the earth,
Began to fear lest Death, their Officer
Might have mistook, and taken thee for her;
So had thou robbed us of that happiness
Which she in heaven, and I in thee possess.
But what can heaven to her glory add?
The praises she has dead, living she had,
To say she is now an Angel, is no more
Praise then she had, for she was one before;
Which of the Saints can show more votaries
Then she had here? even those that did despise
The Angels, and may her now she is one,
Did whilst she lived with pure devotion
Adore, and worship her; her virtues had
All honor here, for this world was too bad
To hate, or envy her, these cannot rise
So high, as to repine at Deities:
But now she is amongst her fellow Saints, they may
Be good enough to envy her, this way
There Is loss in the change 'twixt heaven and earth, if she
Should leave her servants here below, to be
Hated of her competitors above;
But sure her matchless goodness needs must move
Those blessed souls to admire her excellence;
By this means only can her journey hence
To heaven prove gain, if as she was but here
Worshipped by men, she be by Angels there
But I must weep no more over this urne,
My tears to their own channel must return;
And having ended these sad obsequies,
My Muse must back to her old exercise,
To tell the story of my martyrdom:
But, oh thou Idol of my soul, become
Once pitiful, that she may change her style,
Dry up her blubbred eyes, and learn to smile.
Rest then blessed soul, for as ghosts fly away,
When the shrill Cock proclaims the infant-day,
So must I hence, for lo I see from far,
The minions of the Muses coming are,
Each of them bringing to thy sacred Hearse,
In either eye a tear, each hand a Verse.
To my Mistress in absence.
THough I must live here, and by force
Of your command suffer divorce;
Though I am parted, yet my mind,
(That Is more my self) still stays behind;
I breath in you, you keep my heart;
'Twas but a carcass that did part.
Then though our bodies are dis-joynd,
As things that are to place confined;
Yet let our boundless spirits meet,
And in loves sphere each other greet;
There let us work a mystique wreath,
Unknown unto the world beneath;
There let our claspt loves sweetly twin;
There let our secret thoughts unseen,
Like nets be wear'd, and inter-twin'd,
Wherewith we will catch each others mind*
There whilst our souls do sit and kiss,
Tasting a sweet, and subtle bliss,
(Such as gross lovers cannot know,
Whose hands, and lips, meet here below;)
Let us look down, and mark what pain
Our absent bodies here sustain,
And smile to see how far away
The one, does from the other stray;
Yet burn, and languish with desire
To join, and quench their mutual fire.
There let us joy to see from far,
Our emulous flames at loving war,
Whilst both with equal luster shine,
Mine bright as yours, yours bright as mine.
There seated in those heavenly bowers,
We Will cheat the lag, and lingering hours,
Making our bitter absence sweet,
Till souls, and bodies both, may meet.
To her in absence. A SHIP.
Tossed in a troubledsea of griefs, I floate
Far from the shore, in a storme-beaten boat,
Where my sad thoughts do (like the compass) show
The several points from which cross winds do blow.
My heart does like the needle touched with love
Still sixth on you, point which way I would move.
You are the bright Pole-staire, which in the dark
Of this long absence, guides my wandering bark.
Love is the Pilot, but o're-come with fear
Of your displeasure, dares not homewards steare;
My fearful hope hangs on my trembling sail;
Nothing is wanting but a gentle gale,
Which pleasant breath must blow from your sweet lip,
Bid it but move, and quick as thought this Ship
Into your arms, which are my port, will fly
Where it for ever shall at Anchor lie.
SONG. Eternity of love protested.
HOw ill does he deserve a lovers name,
Whose pale weak flame,
Cannot retain
His heat in spite of absence or disdain;
But does at once, like paper set on fire,
Burn, and expire?
True love can never change his seat.
Nor did he ever love, that could retreat.
That noble flame, which my breast kee^es alive, shall still survive,
When my soul's fled;
Nor shall my love dye, when my bodye's dead,
That shall wait on me to the lower shade,
And never fade:
My very ashes in their urne,
Shall like a hallowed Lamp, for ever burn.
Upon some alterations in my Mistress, after my departure into France.
OH gentle Love, do not forsake the guide
Of my frail Bark, on which the swelling tide
Of ruthlesse pride
Does beat, and threaten wrack from every side.
Gulfes of disdain, do gape to overwhelme
This boat, nigh sunk with grief, whilst at the helm
Despair commands;
And round about, the shifting sands
Of faithless love, and false inconstancy,
With rocks of cruelty,
Stop up my passage to the neighbor Lands.
My sighs have raised those winds, whose sury bears
My sails over board, and in their place spreads tears*
And from my tears
This sea is spr^ng, where naught but Death appears*
A mystie cloud of anger, hides the light
Of my fair star, and every where black night
Usurps the place
Of those bright rays, which once did grace
My forth-bound Ship, but when it could no more
Behold the vanished shore,
In the deep flood she drowned her beamie face.
Good counsel to a young Maid.
WHen you the Sunburned Pilgrim see
fainting with thirst, have to the springs;
Mark how at first with bended knee
He courts the crystal Nimphs, and flings
His body to the earth, where He
Prostrate adores the flowing Deity.
But when his sweaty face is drencht
In her cool waves, when from her sweet
Bosom, his burning thirst is quenched;
Then mark^ how with disdainful feet
He kicks her banks, and from the place
That thus fresht him, moves with sullen pace.
So shall thou be despised, fair Maid,
When by the sated lover tasted;
What first he did with tears invade,
Shall afterward with scorn be wasted;
When all thy Virgin-springs grow dry,
When no streams shall be left, but in thine eye,
Celia bleeding, to the Surgeon.
FOnd man, that can believe her blood
Will from those purple channels flow;
Or that the pure untainted flood,
Can any foul distemper know;
Or that thy weak steel can incize
The Crystal case, wherein it lies.
Know; her quick blood, proud of his seat,
Runs dancing through her azure veins;
Whose harmony no cold, nor heat
Disturbs, whose hue no tincture stains;
And the hard roc^ wherein it dwells.
The keenest dar^s of Love repels.
But thou reply'st, behold she bleeds;
Fool, you are deceivd; and do not know
The mystique knot whence this proceeds,
How Lovers in each other grow;
Thou struckst her arm, but 'twas my heart
Shed all the blood, felt all the smart.
To T. H. a Lady resembling my Mistress.
Fair copy of my Celia's face,
Twin of my soul, thy perfect grace
Claymes in my love an equal place.
Disdain not a divided heart,
Though all be hers, you shall have part;
Love is not tide to rules of art.
For as my soul first to her flew,
Yet stayed with me; so now it is true
It dwells with her, though fled to you.
Then entertain this wandering guest,
And if it love, allow it rest;
It left not, but ^ooke the nest.
Nor think my love, or your fair eyes
Cheaper 'cause from the sympathise
You hold with her, these flames arise,
To Lead, or Brass, or some such bad
Metal, a Princes stamp may add
That value, which it never had,
But to the pure refined Ore;
The stamp of Kings imparts no more
Worth, then the metal held before,
Only the Image gives the rate
To Subjects, in a foreign State
It Is prized as much for its own weight.
So though all other hearts resign
To your pure worth, yet you have mine
Only because you are her coin.
To Saxham.
THough frost, and snow, locked from mine eyes,
That beauty which without door lies;
Thy gardens, orchards, walks, that so
I might not all thy pleasures know;
Yet (Saxham) thou within thy gate,
Art of thy self so delicate;
So full of native sweets, that bless
Thy roof with inward happiness;
As neither from, nor to thy store
Winter takes ought, or Spring adds more.
The cold and frozen air had sterv'd
Much poor, if not by thee preserved;
Whose prayers have made thy Tableblest
With plenty, far above the rest.
The season hardly did afford
Course cates unto thy neighbors bond,
Yet thou had daintyes, as the sky
Had only been thy Volarie;
Or else the birds, fearing the snow
Might to another deluge grow:
The Pheasant, Partiridge, and the Large.
Flew to thy house, as to the Arc.
The willing Ox, of himself came
Home to the slaughter, with the Lamb,
And every beast did thither bring
Himself, to be an offering.
The scaly herd, more pleasure took,
Bath'din thy dish, then in the brook*
Water, Earth, Air, did all conspire,
To pay their tributes to thy site,
Whose cherishing flames themselves divide
Through every room, where they deride
The night, and cold abroad; whilst they
Like suns within, keep endless day.
Those cheerful beams send forth their light,
To all that wander in the night,
And seem to becken from aloof,
The weary Pilgrim to thy roof;
Where if refresh't, he will away,
He Is fairly welcome, or if stay
Far more, which he shall hearty find,
Both from the Master, and the Hind.
The strangers welcome, each man there
Stamped on his cheerful brow, does we are;
Nor does this welcome, or his cheer
Grow less, 'cause he stays longer here*
There Is none observes (much less repines)
How often this man sups or dines.
Thou have no Porter at the door
T'examine, or keep back the poor;
Nor locks, nor bolts; thy gates have bin
Made only to let strangers in;
Untaught to shut, they do not fear
To stand wide open all the year;
Careless who enters, for they know*
Thou never did deserve a so;
And as for thieves, thy bountie's such;
They cannot steal, thou giv'st so much*
Upon a Ribband.
THis silken wreath which circles in mine arm,
Is but an Emblem of that mystique charm,
Wherewith the magique of your beauties binds
My captive soul, and round about it winds
Fetters of lasting love; This has entwind
My flesh alone, That has empalde my mind:
Time may wear out These soft weak bands; but Those
Strong chains of brass, Fate shall not discompose.
This* holy relic may preserve my wrist,
But my whole frame does by That power subsist:
To That my prayers and sacrifice, to This
I only pay a superstitious kiss:
This but the Idol, That Is the Deity,
Religion there is due; Here ceremony.
That I receive by faith, This but in trust;
Here I may tender duty, There I must.
This order as a Layman I may bear,
But I become Loves Priest when That I wear.
This moves like air; That as the Center stands:
That knot your virtue tide; This but your hands:
That Nature sram'd, but This was made by Art;
This makes my arm your prisoner, That my heart.
To the King at his entrance into Saxham, by Master Io. Crofts.
SIR,
Ere you pass this threshold, stay,
And give your creature leave to pay
Those pious rites, which unto you,
As to our household Gods, are due.
In stead of sacrifice, each breast
Is like a flaming Altar, dressed
With zealous fires, which from pure hearts
Love mixed with loyalty imparts.
Incense, nor gold have we, yet bring
As rich, and sweet an offering;
And such as does both these express,
Which is our humble thankfulness.
By which is paid the All we owe
To gods above, or men below.
The slaughtered beast, whose flesh should feed
The hungry flames, we, for pure need
Dress for your supper, and the gore
Which should be dashed on every door,
We change into the lusty blood
Of youthful Vines, of which a flood
Shall sprightly run through all your veins,
First to your health, then your fair trains.
We shall want nothing but good fare,
To show your welcome, and our care;
Such rarities that come from far,
From poor men's houses banished are;
Yet we will express in homely cheer,
How glad we are to see you here.
We Will have what e're the season yields,
Out of the neighboring woods, and fields;
For all the dainties of your board,
Will only be what those afford;
And having supt, we may perchance
Present you with a country dance.
Thus much your servants, that bear sway
Here in your absence, bade me say,
And beg besides, you would hither bring,
Only the mercy of a King;
And not the greatness, since they have
A thousand faults must pardon crave;
But nothing that is fit to wait
Upon the glory of your state.
Yet your gracious favor will,
They hope, as heretofore, shine still
On their endeavors, for they swore
Should Jove descend, they could no more*
Upon the sickness of (E. S.)
MVst she then languish, and we sorrow thus,
And no kind god help her, nor pity us?
Is justice fled from heaven? can that permit
A soul deformed ravisher to sit
Upon her Virgin cheek, and pull from thence
The Rose-buds in their maiden excellence?
To spread cold palenesse on her lips, and chase
The srighted Rubies from their native place?
To lick up with his searching flames, a flood
Of dissoly'd Coral, flowing in her blood;
And with the dampes of his infectious breath,
Print on her brow moist characters of death?
Must the clear light, against course of nature cease
In her fair eyes, and yet the fl^mes increase?
Must fevers shake this goodly tree, and all
That ripened fruit from the fair branches fall,
Which Princes have desired to taste? must she
Who has preserved her spotless chasi^ie
From all solicitation, now at last
By Agues, and diseases be embrast?
Forbid it holy Dian; else who shall
Pay vows, or ^et one grain of Incense fall
On thy neglected Altars, if thou bless
No better this thy zealous Votaresse?
Haste then, O maiden Goddess, to her aid,
Let on thy quiver her pale cheek be laid;
And rock her fainting body in thine arms;
Then let the God of Music, with still charms,
Her restless eyes in peaceful slumbers close,
And with soft strains sweeten her calm repose.
Cupid descend; and whilst Apollo sings,
Fanning the cool air with thy panting wings,
Ever supply her with refreshing wind;
Let thy fair mother, with her tresses bind
Her laboring temples, with whose balmie sweat,
She shall perfume her hairie Coronet,
Whose precious drops, shall upon every fold
Hang, like rich Pearls about a wreath of gold:
Her looser locks, as they unbraded lie,
Shall spread themselves into a Canopie:
Under whose shadow let her rest secure
From chilling cold, o^ burning Calenture;
Unless she freeze with ye of chaste desires,
Or holy Hymen kindle nuptial fires.
And when at last Death comes to pierce her heart,
Convey into his hand thy golden dart.
A New-yeares Sacrifice. To Lucinda.
THose that can give, open their hands this day,
Those that cannot, yet hold them up to pray;
That health may crown the seasons of this year.
And mirth dance round the circle, that no tear
(Unless of joy) may with its brinie dew,
Discolor on your cheek the rosy hue;
That no access of years presume to abate,
Your beauties ever-flourishing estate:
Such cheap, and vulgar wishes, I could lay
As trivial offerings at your seet this day;
But that it were Apostasy in me,
To send a prayer to any Deity
But your divine self, who have power to give
Those blessings unto others, such as live
Like me, by the sole influence of your eyes,
Whose fair aspects govern our destinies.
Such Incense, vows, and holy rites, as were
To the involved Serpent of the year,
Paid by Egyptian Priests, lay I before
Lucinda's sacred shrine, whilst I adore
Her beauteous eyes, and her pure Altars dress
With gums and spice of humble Thankfulness;
So may my Goddess from her heaven, inspire
My frozen bosom with a Delphique fire,
And then the world shall by that glorious flame,
Behold the blaze of thy immortal name.
SONG. To one who when I praised my Mistress beauty, said I was blind.
Wonder not though I am blind,
For you must be
Dark in your eyes, or in your mind,
If when you see
Her face, you prove not blind like me.
If the powerful beams that fly
From her eye,
And those amorous sweets that lie
Scattered, in each neighboring part,
Find a passage to your heart;
Then you will confess your mortal sight
Too weak, for such a glorious light;
For if her graces you discover,
You grow like me a daze^'d lover;
But if those beauties you not spy,
Then are you blinder far then I.
SONG. To my Mistress, I burning in love.
I Burn, and cruel you, in vain
Hope to quench me with disdain;
If from your eyes, those sparkles came,
That have kindled all this flame,
What boots it me, though now you shrowde
Those fierce Comets in a cloud?
Since all the flames that I have selt,
Could your snow yet rever melt,
Nor, can your snow (though you should taks
Alp^s into your bosom) slake
The heat of my enamored heart;
But with wonder le^ne Loves art*
No seaes of ye can ^oole desire.
Equal flames must quench Loves f^re:
Then think not that my heat can dye,
Till you burn as well as I.
SONG. To her again, she burning in a Fever.
NOw she burns as well as I,
Yet my heat can never dye;
She burns that never knew desire,
She that was ice, she that was fire.
She whose cold heart, chaste thoughts did ar me
So, as Loves flames could never warm
The frozen bosom whereit dwelt,
She burns, and all her beauties melt;
She burns, and cries, Loves fires are mild;
Fevers are Gods, He Is a child.
Love; let her know the difference
Twixt the heat of soul, and sense*
Touch her with thy flames divine,
So shall thou quench her fire, and mine.
Upon the Kings sickness.
Sickness, the minister of death, does lay
So strong a seige against our brittle clay,
As whilst it does our weak sorts singly win,
It hopes at length to take all mankind in:
First, it begins upon the womb to wait,
And does the unborne child there uncreate;
Then rocks the cradle where the infant lies,
Where, e're it fully be alive, it dies.
It never leaves fond youth, until it have
Found, or an early, or a later grave.
By thousand subtle sleights from heedlesse man,
It cuts the short allowance of a span.
And where both sober life, and Art combine
To keep it out, Age makes them both resign.
Thus by degrees it only gained of late,
The weak, the aged, or intemperate;
But now the Tyrant has found out a way
By which the sober, strong, and young, decay*
Entering his royal limbs that is our head,
Through us his mystique limbs the pain is spread,
That man that does not feel his part, has none
In any part of his dominion;
If he hold land, that earth is forfeited,
And he unfit on any ground to tread.
This grief is felt at Court, where it does move
Through every joint, like the true soul of love.
All those fair stars that do attend on Him,
Whence they derived their light, wax pale and dim.
That ruddie morning beam of Majesty,
Which should the Suns ecclipsed light supply,
Is overcast with mists, and in the liew
Of cherefull rays, sends us down drops of dew:
That curious form made of an earth resin'd,
At whose blessed birth, the gentle Planets shined
With fair aspects, and sent a glorious flame
To animate so beautiful a frame;
That Darling of the Gods and men, does wear
A cloud on's brow, and in his eye a tear:
And all the rest, (save when his dread command
Does bid them move,) like livelesse statues stand;
So full a grief, so generally worn
Shows a good King is sick, and good men mourn.
SONG. To a Lady not yet enjoyed by her Husband.
COme Celia, fix thine eyes on mine,
And through those Crystalls our souls slitting,
Shall a pure wreathe of eye-beautes twine,
Our loving hearts together knitting;
Let Eaglets the bright Sun survey,
Though the blind Mole discern not day:
When clear Aurora leaves her mate,
The light of her gray eyes dispising,
Tot all the world does celebrate
With sacrifice, her fair up-rising.
Let Eaglets, etc.
A Dragon kept the golden fruit,
Tet he those dainties never tasted;
As others pined in the pursuit,
So he himself with plenty wasted:
Let Eaglets, etc.
SONG. The willing Prisoner to his Mistress.
LEt fools great Cupids yoke disdain,
Loving their own wild freedom better;
Whilst proud of my triumphant chain
I sit, and court my beauteous fetter.
Her murdring glances, snaring hairs,
And her bewitching smiles, so please me,
As he brings ruin, that repaires
The sweet afflictions that disease me.
Hide not those panting balls of snow,
With envious vayles, from my beholding;
Unlock those lips, their pearly row,
In a sweet smile of love unfolding.
And let those eyes, whose motion wheels
The restless Fate of every lover,
Survey the pains, my sick heart feels,
And wounds themselves, have made discover.
A fly that flew into my Mistress her eye.
WHen this Fly lived, she used to play
In the Sunshine all the day;
Till coming near my Celia's sight,
She found a new, and unknown light
So full of glory, as it made
The noone day Sun a gloomy shade*
Then this amorous Fly became
My rival, and did court my flame.
She did from hand to bosom skip,
And from her breath, her cheek, and lip,
Sucked all the incense, and the spice,
And grew a bird of Paradise:
At last into her eye she flew,
There scorcht in flames, and drowned in dew*
^ke Phaeton from the Suns sphere
She fell, and with her dropped a tear:
Of which a pearl was straight composed,
Wherein her ashes lie enclosed.
Thus she received from Celia's eye,
Funeral flame, tomb Obsequie.
SONG. Celia singing.
Hark how my Celia, with the choice
Music of her hand and voice
Stills the loud wind; and makes the wild
Incensed Bore, and Panther mild!
Mark how those statues like men move,
Whilst men with wonder statues prove!
This stiff rock bends to worship her,
That Idol turns Idolater.
Now see how all the new inspired
Images, with love are sir'd!
Hark how the tender Marble groans,
And all the late transformed stones,
Court the fair Nymph with many a tears,
Which she (more stony then they were)
Beholds with unrelenting mind;
Whilst they amazed to see combined
Such matchless beauty, with disdain,
Are all turned into stones again.
SONG. Celia singing.
YOu that think Love can convey,
No other way,
But through the eyes, into the heart,
His fatal Dart:
Closeup those casements, and but hear
This Siren sing*
And on the wing
Of her sweet voice, it shall appear
That Love can enter at the ear:
Then unvaile your eyes, behold
The curious mould
Where that voice dwells, and as we know,
When the Cocks crow*
We freely may
Gaze on the day;
So may you, when the Musique's done
Awake and see the rising Sun.
SONG. To one that desired to know my Mistress.
Seek not to know my love, for she
Has vowed her constant faith to me;
Her mild aspects are mine, and thou
Shall only find a stormy brow:
For if her beauty stir desire
In me, her kisses quench the fire.
Or, I can to Love's fountain go,
Or dwell upon her hills of snow.
But when thou burn'st, she shall not spare
One gentle breath to cool the air.
Thou shall not climb those Alps, nor spy
Where the sweet springs of Venus lie;
Search hidden Nature, and there find
A treasure to enrich thy mind;
Discover Arts not yet revealed,
But let my Mistress live concealed;
Though men by knowledge wiser grow,
Yet here it is wisdom not to know.
In the person of a Lady to her inconstant servant.
WHen on the Altar of my hand,
(Bedeaw'd with many a kiss, and tear;)
Thy now revolted heart, did stand
An humble Martyr, thou did swear
Thus; (and the God of love did hear,)
By those bright glances of thine eye,
Unless thou pity me, I dye.
When first those perjurd lips of thine,
Bepal'd with blasting sighs, did seal^.
Their violated faith on mine,
From the soft bosom that did heal
Thee, thou my melting heart did steal;
My soul enflamed with thy false breath,
Poisoned with kisses, sucked in death.
Yet I nor hand, not lip will move,
Revenge, or mercy, to procure
From the offended God of love;
My curse is fatal, and my pure
Love, shall beyond thy scorn endure:
If I implore the Gods, they will find
Thee too ungrateful, me too kind.
Truce in Love entreated.
NO more, blind God, for see my heart
Is made thy Quiver, where remains
No void place for another Dart;
And alas! that conquest gains
Small praise, that only brings away
A tame and unresisting prey.
Behold a nobler foe, all armed,
Defies thy weak Artillery,
That has thy Bow and Quiver charmed;
A rebel beauty, conquering Thee!
If thou dare equal combat try,
Wound her, for it is for her I dye.
To my Rival.
HEnce vain intruder, have away,
Wash not with thy unhallowed brine
The foot steps of my Celia's shrine;
Nor on her purer Altars lay
Thy empty words, accents that may
Some looser Dame to love incline;
She must have offerings more divine;
Such pearlie drops, as youthful May,
Scatters before the rising day;
Such smooth soft language, as each line
Might stroke an angry God, or stay
Joves thunder, make the hearers pine
With envy; do this, thou shall be
Servant to her, Rival with me.
Boldness in love.
Mark how the bashful morn, in vain
Courts the amorous Marigold,
With sighing blasts, and weeping rain;
Yet she refuses to unsold.
But when the Planet of the day,
Approaches with his powerful ray*
Then she spreads, then she receives
His warmer beams into her virgin leaves,
So shall thou thrive in love, fond Boy;
If thy tears, and sighs discover
Thy grief, thou never shall enjoy
The just reward of a bold lover:
But when with moving accents, thou
Shall constant says, and service vow,
Thy Celia shall receive those charms
With open ears, and with unfolded arms.
A Pastoral Dialogue.
Celia. Cleon. AS Celia rested in the shade
With Cleon by her side;
The swain thus courted the young Maid,
And thus the Nymph replide.
C L. Sweet I let thy captive, fetters wear
Made of thine arms, and hands;
Till such as thraldom scorn, or fear, envy those happy bands.

C E. Then thus my willing arms I wind
About thee, and am so
Thy prisoner; for my self I bind,
Until I let thee go.

C L. Happy that slave, whom the fair foe
Ties in so soft a chain.

C E. Far happier I, but that I know
Thou will break loose again.

C L. By thy immortal beauties never.

C E. Frail as thy love's thine oath.

C L. Though beauty fade, my faith lasts ever.

C E. Time will destroy them both.

C L. I dote not on thy snow-white skin.

C E. What then?

C L. Thy purer mind.

C E. It loved too soon.

C L Thou had not bin
So fair, if not so kind.

C E. Oh strange vain fancy!

C L. But yet true.

C E. Prove it

C L. ^hen make a brade
Of those loose flames, that circle you,
My suns, and yet your shade.

C E. It Is done.

C L. Now give it me.

C E. Thus thou
Shall thine own error find,
If these were beauties, I am now
Less fair, because more kind.

C L. You shall confess you err; that hair shall it not change the hue,
Or leave the golden mountain bare?

C E. Aye me! it is too true.

C L. But this small wreathe, shall ever stay
In its first native prime,
And smiling when the rest decay,
The triumphs sing of time.

C E. Then let me cut from thy fair grove,
One branch, and let that be
An emblem of eternal love,
For such is mine to thee.

C L. Thus are we both redeemed from time,
I by thy grace. G L. And I
Shall live in thy immortal rhyme,
Until the Muses dye.

C L. By heaven! C E. Swear not; if I must weep,
Jove shall not smile at me;
This kiss, my heart, and thy faith keep.

C L. This breathes my soul to thee.
Then forth the thicket Thirsis rusht,
Where he saw all their play:
The swain stood still, and smiled, and blushed,
The Nymph fled fast away.

Grief ingrost.
WHerefore do thy sad numbers flow
So full of woe?
Why do thou melt in such soft strains,
Whilst she disdaines?
If she must still deny,
Weep not, but dye:
And in thy Funeral fire,
Shall all her fame expire.
Thus both shall perish, and as thou on thy Hearse
Shall want her tears, so she shall want thy Verse;
Repine not then at thy blessed state:
Thou art above thy fate;
But my fair Celia will nor give
Love enough to make me live;
Nor yet dart from her eye
Scorn enough to make me dye.
Then let me weep alone, till her kind breath,
Or blow my tears away, or speak my death.
A Pastoral Dialogue.
Shepherd. Nymph. Chorus. SHep. This mossie bank they pre^st.

Ny. That aged Oak
Did canopie the happy pair
All night from the danke air.

Cho. Here let us sit and sing the words they spoke,
Till the day breaking, their embraces broke.

Shep. See love, the blushes of the morn appear,
And now she hangs her pearlie store
(Robbed from the Eastern shore)
In The Couslips bell, and Roses rare:
Sweet, I must stay no longer here.

Nymph. Those streakes of doubtful light, usher not day,
But show my sun must set; no Morn
Shall shine till thou return,
The yellow Planets, and the gray
Dawne, shall attend thee on thy way:

Shep. If thine eyes guild my paths, they may forbear
Their useless shine.

Nymph. My tears will quite
Extinguish their faint light.

She* Those drops will make their beams more clear,
Loves flames will shine in every tear.

Cho. They kissed, and wept, and from their lips, and eyes,
In a mixed dew, of brinie sweet,
Their joys, and sorrows meet,
But she cries out.

Nymp. Shepherd arise,
The Sun betrays us else to spies.

Shep. The winged hours fly fast, whilst we embrace*
But when we want their help to meet,
They move with leaden feet.

Nym. Then let us pinion Time, and chase
The day for ever from this place.

Shep. Harke^!

Ny. Aye me stay!

She. For ever.

Ny. No, arise,
We must be gone.

Shep. My nest of spice.

Nymph. My soul.

Shep. my Paradise.

Cho. Neither could say farewell, but through their eyes
Grief, interrupted speech with tears supplies.

Red, and white Roses.
Read in these Roses, the sad story
Of my hard fate, and your own glory:
In the White you may discover
The palenesse of a fainting lover:
In the Red, the flames still feeding
On my heart with fresh wounds bleeding.
The White will tell you how I languish,
And the Red express my anguish.
The white my innocence displaying,
The Red my martyrdom betraying.
The frowns that on your brow resided.
Have those Roses thus divided.
Oh let your smiles but clear the weather,
And then they both shall grow together.
To my Cousin (C. R.) marrying my Lady (A.)
HAppy Youth, that shall possess
Such a spring-tyde of delight,
As the sated Appetite
Shall enjoying such excess,
With the flood of pleasure less:
When the Hymeneall Rite
Is performed, invoke the night,
That it may in shadows dress
Thy too real happiness;
Else (as Semele) the bright
Deity in her full might,
May thy feeble soul oppress.
Strong perfumes, and glaring light,
Often destroy both smell, and sight.
A Lover upon an Accident necessitating his departure, consults with Reason.
LOVER. Weep not* nor backward turn your beams
Fond eyes, sad sighs lock in your breath,
Lest on this wind, or in those streams
My grieved soul fly, or sail to death.
Fortune destroys me if I stay,
Love kills me if I go away:
Since Love, and Fortune, both are blind,
Come Reason, and resolve my doubtful mind.

REASON. Fly, and blind Fortune be thy guide,
And against the blinder God rebel,
Thy lovesick heart shall not reside
Where scorn, and selfe-will'd error dwell*
Where entrance, unto Truth is barred;
Where Love and Faith find no reward;
For, my just hand may sometime move
The wheel of Fortune, not the sphere of Love,

Parting, Celia weeps.
Weep not (my dear) for I shall go
Laden enough with mine own woe;
Add not thy heaviness to mine,
Since Fate our pleasures must dis-joyne.
Why should our sorrows meet? if I
Must go, and lose thy company,
I wish not theirs; it shall relieve
My grief, to think thou do not grieve.
Yet grieve, and weep, that I may bear
Every sigh, and every tear.
Away with me, so shall thy breast
And eyes discharged, enjoy their rest.
And it will glad my heart to see,
Thou were thus loath to part with me^.
A Rapture.
I Will enjoy thee now my Celia, come
And fly with me to Loves Elysium:
The Giant, Honor, that keeps cowards ^ut,
Is but a Masquer, and the servile rout
Of baser subjects only, bend in vain
To the vast Idol, whilst the nobler train
Of valiant soldiers, daily sail between
The huge Collosses legs, and pass unseene
Unto the blissfull shore; be bold, and wise,
And we shall enter, the grim* Swisse denies
Only to tame fools a passage, that not know
He is but form, and only frights in show
The duller eyes that look from far; draw near,
And thou shall scorn, what we were wont to fear.
We shall see how the stalking Pageant goes
With borrowed legs, a heavy load to those
That made, and bear him; not as we once thought
The seed of Gods, but a weak model wrought
By greedy men, that seek to enclose the common,
And within private arms empale free woman.
Come then, and mounted on the wings of love
We Will cut the flitting air, and sore above
The Monsters head, and in the noblest seats
Of those blessed shades, quench, and renew our heates.
There, shall the Queens of Love, and Innocence,
Beauty and Nature, banish all offense
From our close Ivy twines, there I Will behold
Thy bared snow, and thy unbraded gold.
There, my enfranchiz'd hand, on every side
Shall over thy naked polished Ivory slide.
No curtain there, though of transparant lawne,
Shall be before thy virgin-treasure drawn;
But the rich Mine, to the enquiring eye
Exposed, shall ready still for mintage lie,
And we will coin young Cupids. There, a bed
Of Roses, and fresh Myrtles, shall be spread
Under the cooler shade of Cypress groves:
Our pillowes, of the down of Venus Doves,
Whereon our panting lims we will gently lay
In the faint respites of our active play;
That so our slumbers, may in dreams have leisure,
To tell the nimble fancy our past pleasure;
And so our souls that cannot be embraced,
Shall the embraces of our bodies taste.
Mean while the bubbling stream shall court the shore,
Th'enamoured chirping Wood-quire shall adore
In varied tunes the Deity of Love;
The gentle blastsof Western winds, shall move
The trembling leaves, and through their close bows breath
Still Music, whilst we rest our selves beneath
Their dancing shade; till a soft murmr, sent
From souls entranced in amorous languishment
Rowze us, and shoot into our veins fresh fire,
Till we, in their sweet ecstasy expire.
Then, as the empty Be, that lately bore,
Into the common treasure, all her store,
Flies 'bout the painted field with nimble wing,
Deflowring the fresh virgins of the Spring.
So will I rifle all the sweets, that dwell
In my delicious Paradise, and swell
My bag with honey, drawn forth by the power
Of servent kisses, from each spicie flower.
I Will seize the Rose-buds in their perfumed bed,
The Violet knots, like curious Mazes spread
Over all the Garden, taste the ripned Cherry,
The warm, firm Apple, tipped with coral berry:
Then will I visit, with a wandering kiss,
The vale of Lillies, and the Bower of bliss:
And where the beauteous Region does divide
Into two milkie ways, my lips shall slide
Down those smooth Allies, wearing as I go
A tract for lovers on the printed snow;
Thence climbing over the swelling Appenine,
Retire into thy grove of Eglantine;
Where I will all those ravished sweets distill
Through Loves Alimbique, and with Chimmique skill
From the mixed mass, one sovereign Balm derive,
Then bring that great Elixar to thy hive.
Now in more subtle wreathes I will entwine*
My sinowie thighs, my legs and arms with thine;
Thou like a sea of milk shall lie displayed,
Whilst I the smooth, calm Ocean, invade
With such a tempest, as when Jove of old
Fell down on Danae in a storm of gold:
Yet my tall Pine, shall in the Cyprian straight
Ride safe at Anchor, and unlade her freight:
My Rudder, with thy bold hand, like a tryde,
And skillful Pilot, thou shall steer, and guide
My Bark into Loves channel, where it shall
Dance, as the bounding waves do rise or fall:
Then shall thy circling arms, embrace and clip
My willing body, and thy balmie lip
Bathe me in juice of kisses, whose perfume
Like a religious incense shall consume,
And send up holy vapors, to those powers
That bless our loves, and crown our sportfull hours,
That with such Halcion calmness, fix our souls
In stead fast peace, as no affright controules.
There, no rude sounds shake us with sudden starts,
No jealous ears, when we unrip our hearts
Suck our discourse in, no observing spies
This blush, that glance traduce; no envious eyes
Watch our close meetings, nor are we betrayed
To Rivals, by the bribed chambermaid.
No wedlock bonds unwreathe our twisted loves;
We seek no midnight Arbor, no dark groves
To hide our kisses, there, the hated name
Of husband, wife, lust, modest, chaste, or shame,
Are vain and empty words, whose very sound
Was never heard in the Elizian ground.
All things are lawful there, that may delight
Nature, or unrestrained Appetite;
Like, and enjoy, to will, and act, is one,
We only sin when Loves rites are not done.
The Roman Lucrece there, reads the divine
Lectures of Loves great master, Aretine,
And knows as well as Lais, how to move
Her plyant body in the act of love.
To quench the burning Ravisher, she hurles
Her limbs into a thousand winding curles,
And studies artfull postures, such as be
Carved on the bark of every neighboring tree
By learned hands, that so adorned the rind,
Of those fair Plants, which as they lay entwinde,
Have fanned their glowing fires. The Grecian Dame,
That in her endless webb, toiled for a name
As fruitless as her work, does there display
Her self before the Youth of Ithaca,
And th'amorous sport of gamesome nights prefer,
Before dull dreams of the lost Traveller.
Daphne has broke her bark, and that swift foot,
Which the angry Gods had fastened with a root
To the fixed earth, does now unfettered run,
To meet th'embraces of the youthful Sun:
She hangs upon him, like his Delphique Lyre,
Her kisses blow the old, and breath new fire:
Full of her God, she sings inspired Lays,
Sweet Odes of love, such as deserve the Bays,
Which she herself was. Next her, Laura lies
In Petrarchs learned arms, drying those eyes
That did in such sweet smooth-pac'd numbers flow
As made the world enamored of his woe.
These, and ten thousand Beauties more, that died
Slave to the Tyrant, now enlarged, deride
His cancelled laws, and for their time misspent.
Pay into Loves Exchequer double rent.
Come then my Celia, we will no more forbear
To taste our joys, struck with a Pannique fear,
But will depose from his imperious sway
This proud Usurper and walk free, as they
With necks unyoak'd; nor is it just that He
Should fetter your soft sex with Chastity,
Which Nature made unapt for abstinence;
When yet this false Impostor can dispense
With humane Justice, and with sacred right,
And maugre both their laws command me sight
With Rivals, or with emulous Loves, that dare
Equal with thine, their Mistress eyes, or hair:
If thou complain of wrong, and call my sword
To carve out thy revenge, upon that word
He bids me fight and kill, or else he brands
With marks of infamy my coward hands,
And yet religion bids from bloodshed fly,
And damns me for that Act. Then tell me why
This Goblin Honor which the world adores,
Should make men Atheists, and not women Whores.
Epitaph on the Lady Mary Villers.
THe Lady Mary Villers lies
Under this stone; with weeping eyes
The Parents that first gave her birth,
And their sad Friends, laid her in earth:
If any of them (Reader) were
Known unto thee, shed a tear,
Or if thyselfe possess a gemme,
As dear to thee, as this to them;
Though a stranger to this place,
Bewail in theirs, thine own hard case;
For thou perhaps at thy return
May est find thy Darling in an Vrne.
An other.
THe purest Soul that e're was sent
Into a clayie tenement
Informed this dust, but the weak mold
Could the great guest no longer hold,
The substance was too pure, the flame
Too glorious that thither came,
Ten thousand Cupids brought along
A Grace on each wing, that did throng
For place there, till they all oppressed
The seat in which they sought to rest;
So the fair Model broke, for want
Of room to lodge th'Inhabitant.
An other.
THis little Vault, this narrow room,
Of Love, and Beauty is the tomb,
The dawning beam that 'gan to clear
Our clouded sky, lies darkened here,
For ever set to us, by death
Sent to inflame the world beneath;
'Twas but a bud, yet did contain
More sweetness then shall spring again,
A budding star that might have grown
Into a Sun, when it had blown.
This hopeful beauty, did create
New life in Loves declining state;
But now his Empire ends, and we
From fire, and wounding darts are free:
His brand, his bow, let no man fear,
The flames, the arrows, all lie here.
Epitaph on the Lady S. Wife to Sir W. S.
THe harmony of colors, features, grace,
Resulting Airs (the magique of a face)
Of musical sweet tunes, all which combind
To this dark Vault. She was a Cabinet
Where all the choysest stones of price were set;
Whose native colors, and purest luster, lent
Her eye, cheek, lip, a dazzling ornament,
Whose rare and hidden virtues, did express
Her inward beauties, and minds fairer dress;
The constant Diamond, the wise Chrysolite,
The devout Saphyre, Emrauld apt to write
Records of Memory, cherefull Agar, grave
And serious Onix, Topaze that does save
The brains calm temper, witty Amathist.
This precious Quartie, or what else the list
On Aarons Ephod planted, had, she wore*
One only Pearl was wanting to her store;
Which in her Saviors book she found expressed*
To purchase that, she sold Death all the rest.
Maria Wentworth. Thomae Comitis Cleveland, filia praemortuae prima Virginiam
animam exhaluit. An. Dom. Aet. suae.
ANd here the precious dust is laid;
Whose purely-tempered Clay was made
So fine, that it the guest betrayed.
Else the soul grew so fast within,
It broke the outward shell of sin,
And so was hatched a Cherubin.
In height, it soared to God above;
In depth, it did to knowledge move,
And spread in breadth to general love.
Before, a pious duty shind
To Parents, courtesy behind,
On either side an equal mind,
Good to the Poor, to kindred dear,
To servants kind, to friendship clear,
To nothing but her self, severe.
So though a Virgin, yet a Bride
To every Grace, she justified
A chaste Poligamie, and died.
Learn from hence (Reader) what small trust
We owe this world, where virtue must
Frail as our flesh, crumble to dust.
On the Duke of Buckingham. Beatissimis Manibus charissimi viri Illma Conjunx
sic Parentavit.
WHen in the brazen leaves of Fame,
The life, the death, of Buckingham
Shall be recorded, if Truth's hand
Incize the story of our Land,
Posterity shall see a fair
Structure, by the studious care
Of two Kings raised, that no less
Their wisdom, than their Power express;
By blinded zeal (whose doubtful light
Made murders scarlet robe seem white,
Whose vain-deluding phantosmes charmed
A clouded sullen soul, and armed
A desperate hand, thirsty of blood)
Torn from the fair earth where it stood;
So the majestique fabrique fell.
His Actions let our Annals tell:
We write no Chronicle; This Pile
Wears only sorrows face and style.
Which, even the envy that did wait
Upon his flourishing estate,
Turned to soft pity of his death,
Now pays his Hearse; but that cheap breath
Shall not blow here, nor th'unpure brine
Puddle those streams that bathe this shrine.
These are the pious Obsequies.
Dropped from his chaste Wifes pregnant eyes
In frequent showers, and were alone
By her congealing sighs made stone,
On which the Carver did bestow
These forms and Characters of woe;
So he the fashion only lent,
Whilst she wept all this Monument.
An other. Siste Hospes sive Indigena sive Advena vicissitudinis rerum memor
pauca pellege.
REader, when these dumb stones have told
In borrowed speech, what Guest they hold;
Thou shall confess, the vain pursuit
Of humane Glory yields no fruit,
But an untimely Grave. If Fate
Could constant happiness create,
Her Ministers, Fortune and Worth,
Had here that miracle brought forth;
They fixed this child of Honor, where
No room was left for Hope, or Fear,
Of more, or less: so high, so great
His growth was, yet so safe his seat.
Safe in the circle of his Friends:
Safe in his Loyal heart, and ends:
Safe in his native valiant spirit:
By favor safe, and safe by merit;
Safe by the stamp of Nature, which
Did strength, with shape and Grace enrich:
Safein the checrefull Courtesies
Of flowing gestures, speech, and eyes:
Safe in his Bounties, which were more
Proportioned to his mind then store;
Yet, though for virtue he becomes
Involved Himself in borrowed sums;
Safe in his care, he leaves betrayed
No friend engaged, no debt unpay'd.
But though the startes conspire to shower
Upon one Head the united power
Of all their Graces, if their dire
Aspects, must other breasts inspire
With vicious thoughts, a Murderers knife
May cut (as here) their Darlings life.
Who can be happy then, if Nature must
To make one Happy man, make all men just:
Four Songs by way of Chorus to a play, at an entertainment of the King and
Queen, by my Lord Chamberlain;
The first of Jealousy. Dialogue.
Question FRom whence was first this fury burid,
This Jealousy into the world?
Came she from Hell?

Ans. No there does reign
Eternal hatred, with disdain,
But she the Daughter is of Love,
Sister of Beauty

Reply. Then above
She must derive from the third spears
Her heavenly Offspring.

Ans. Neither there
From those immortal flames, could she
Draw her cold frozen Pedigree.

Quest. If nor from heaven nor hell, where then
Had she her birth?

An. I'th'bearts of men,
Beauty, and Fear did her create,
Younger then Love, Elder then Hate,
Sister to both, by Beauties side
To love, by Fear to Hate ally'de:
Despoyreherissue is, whose race
Of fruitful mischiefs drownes the space
Of the wide earth in a swollen flood
Of wrath, revenge, spite, rage, and blood.

Quest. Oh how can such a spurious line
Proceed from Parents so divine?

Ans. As streams, which from their Crystal spring
Do sweet and clear their waters bring,
Yet mingling with the brackish maine,
Nor taste, nor color they retain.

Qu. Yet Rivers 'twixt their own banks flow
Still flesh, can jealousy do so?

An. Yes, whilst she keeps the steadfast ground
Of Hope, and Fear, her equal bound;
Hope, spru^g from favor, worth, or chance,
Towar'ds the fair object does advance;
Whilst Fear, as watchful Sentinel,
Does the invading Foe repel;
And Jealousy thus mixed, does prove
The season, and the ^lt of love:
But when Fear takes a larger scope,
Stifling the child of Reason, Hope,
Then sitting on th'usurped throne,
She like a Tyrant rules alone,
As the wild Ocean unconfin'de,
And raging as the Northern-minde;

2. Feminine Honor.
IN what esteem did the Gods hold
Fair Innocence, and the chaste bed,
When scandall'd virtue might be bold
Barefoot, upon sharp Cultures, spread
Over burning coals to march, yet feel
Nor scor^ing fire, nor piercing sleele?
Why, when the hard edged Iron did turn
Soft as a bed of Roses blown,
When cruel flames forgot to burn
Their chaste pure limbs, should man alone
Against female Innocence conspire,
Harder then steel, fiercer then fire?
Oh hapless sex! Unequal sway
Of partial Honor! Who may know;
Rebels from subjects that obey,
When malice oan on vestal^ throw
Disgrace, and Fame fix high repute
On the close shameless Prostitute?
Vain Honor! thou art but disguise
A cheating voice, a juggling art,
No judge of virtue, whose pure eyes
Court her own Image in the heart,
More pleased with her true figure there,
Then her false Echo in the ear.
3. Separation of Lovers.
STop the chased Bore, or play
With the Lions paw, yet fear
From the Lovers side to tear
Th'I doll of his soul away.
Though Love enter by the sight
To the heart, it does not fly
From the mind, when from the eye
The fair objects take their flight.
But since want provokes desire,
When we lose what we before
Have enjoyed, as we want more,
So is Love more se^ on fire,
Love does with an hungry eye
Glut on Beauty, and you may
Safer snatch the Tigers prey
Then his vital food deny.
Yet though absence for a space,
Sharpen the keen Appetite,
Long continuance, does quit.
All Loves characters efface;
For the sense not fed, denies
Nourishment unto the mind,
Which with expectation pinde,
Love of a consumption dies.
4. Incommunicabilitie of Love.
QVest. By what power was Love confinde
To one object? who can bind,
Or fix a limit to the freeborn mind?

An. Nature; for as bodies may
Move at once but in one way,
So nor can minds to more then one love stray.

Reply. Yet I feel a double smart
Loves twinn'd-flame, his forked dart.

An. Then has wild lust, not love possessed thy hear.

Qu. Whence springs love?

An. From beauty.

Qu. Why
Should the effect not multiply
As fast i'th'heart, as death the cause i'th'eye?

An. When two Beauties equal are,
Sense preferring neither fair,
Desire stands still, distracted 'twixt the pair.
So in equal distance lay
Two fair Lambs in the Wolfe's way;
The hungry beast will sterve e're choose his prey.
But where one is chief, the rest
Cease, and that is alone possessed
Without a Rival Monarch of the breast.

Songs in the Play. A Lover in the disguise of an Amazon, is dearly beloved of
his Mistress.
CEase thou afflicted soul to mourn,
Whose love and faith are paid with scorn;
For I am starved that feel the blisses
Of dear embraces, smiles, and kisses
From my souls Jdoll, yet complain
Of equal love more then disdain.
Cease, Beauties exile to lament
The frozen shades of banishment,
For I in that fair bosom dwell
That is my Paradise, and Hell;
Banished at home, at once at ease
In the safe Port, and tossed on Seas.
Cease in cold jealous seares to pine
Sad wretch, whom Rivals undermine;
For though I hold locked in mine arms
My life's sole joy, a Traitors charms
Prevail, whilst I may only blame
My self, that mine own Rival am,
Another. A Lady rescued from death by a Knight, who in the instant leaves her,
complains thus.
OH whither is my fair Sun fled,
Bearing his light, not heat away?
If thou repose in the moist bed
Of the Sea-Queene, bring back the day
To our dark clime, and thou shall lie
Bathed in the sea flows from mine eye.
Upon what whirlewind did thou ride
Hence, yet remain sixth in my heart,
From me, and to me; fled, and ty'de?
Dark riddles of the amorous art;
Love lent thee wings to fly, so He
Vnfeather'd, now must rest with me.
Help, help, brave Youth, I burn, I bleed,
The cruel God with Bow and Brand
Pursues the life thy valor freed,
Disarme him with thy conquering hand;
And that thou may the wild boy tame
Give me his dart, keep Thou his flame.
TO BEN. JOHNSON. Upon occasion of his Ode of defiance annexed to his Play of
the new Inn.
It Is true (dear Ben:) thy just chastizing hand
Has fixed upon the sotted Age a brand
To their swollen pride, and empty scribbling due,
It can nor judge, nor write, and yet it is true
Thy commique Muse from the exalted line
Touched by thy Alchymist, does since decline
From that her Zenith, and foretells a red
And blushing evening, when she goes to bed,
Yet such, as shall outshine the glimmering light
With which all stars shall guild the following night,
Nor think it much (since all thy Eaglets may
Endure the Sunnie trial) if we say
This has the stronger wing, or that does shine
Trickt up in fairer plumes, since all are thine;
Who has his flock of cackling Geese compared
With thy tuned quire of Swans? or else who dared
To call thy births deformed? but if thou bind
By Citie-custome, or by Gavell-kind,
In equal shares thy love on all thy race,
We may distinguish of their sex, and place;
Though one hand form them, and though one brain strike
Souls into all, they are not all alike,
Why should the follies then of this dull age
Draw from thy Pen such an immodest rage
As seems to blast thy (else-immortall) Bays,
When thine own tongue proclaims thy ytch of praise?
Such thirst will argue drouth. No, let be hurld
Upon thy works, by the detracting world,
What malice can suggest; let the Rowre say,
The running sands, that (ere thou make a play)
Count the slow minutes, might a Goodwin frame
To swallow when the have done thy ship-wrackt name.
Let them the dear expense of oil upbraid
Sucked by thy watchful Lamp, that has betrayed
To thest the blood of martyred Authors, spilt
Into thy ink, whilst thou growest pale with guilt,
Repine not at the Tapers thristie waste,
That sleekes thy terser Poems, nor is haste
Praise, but excuse; and if thou overcome
A knottie writer, bring the booty home;
Nor think it thest, if the rich spoils so torn
From conguered Authors, be as Trophies worn.
Let others glut on the extorted praise
Of vulgar breath, trust thou to after days:
Thy labored works shall live, when Time devoures
The abortive off spring of their hasty hours.
Thou art not of their rank, the quarrel lies
Within thine own Virge, then let this suffice,
The wiser world does greater Thee confess
Then all men else, then Thy self only less;
An Hymeneall Dialogue
Bride and Groom. Groom. Tell me (my love) since Hymen ty'de
The holy knot, have thou not felt
A new infused spirit slide
Into thy breast, whilst thine did melt?

Bride. First tell me (sweet) whose words were those?
For though the voice your air did break,
Yet did my soul the sense compose,
And through your lips my heart did speak.

Groo, Then I perceive, when from the flame
Of love, my scorched soul did retire;
Your frozen heart in her place came,
And sweetly melted in that fire,

Bride. It Is true, for when that mutual change
Of souls, was made with equal gain;
I straight feel diffused a strange,
But gentle heat through every vein:

Chorus. Oh blessed disunion, that does so
Our bodies from our souls divide,
As two do one, and one four grow,
Each by contraction multiply'de.

Bride. Thy bosom then I Will make my nest,
Since there my willing soul does perch.

Groom. And for my heart in thy chaste breast,
I Will make an everlasting search.

Chorus. Oh blessed disunion, etc.

Obsequies to the Lady ANNE HAY.
I Heard the Virgins sigh, I saw the sleeke
And polisht Courtier, channel his fresh cheek
With real tears; the new-betrothed Maid
Smild not that day; the graver Senate laid
Their business by; of all the Courtly throng,
Grief sealed the heart, and silence bound the tongue,
I that never more of private sorrow knew
Then from my Pen some froward Mistress drew,
And for the public woe, had my dull sense
So seared with ever adverse influence,
As the invaders sword might have, unfelt,
Pierced my dead bosom, yet began to melt:
Griefe's strong instinct, did to my blood suggest!
In the unknown loss peculiarinterest.
But when I heard, the noble Carlil's Gemme,
The fairest branch of Dennye's ancient stem
Was from the Casket stolen, from this Trunk torn;
I found just cause, why they, why I should mourn.
But who shall guide my artlesse Pen, to draw
Those blooming beauties, which I never saw?
How shall posterity believe my story,
If I, her crowded graces, and the glory
Due to her riper virtues, shall relate
Without the knowledge of her mortal state?
Shall I, as once Apelles, here a feature,
There steal a Grace, and rifling so whole Nature
Of all the sweets a learned eye can see,
Figure one Venus, and say, such was she?
Shall I her legend fill, with what of old
Has of the Worthies of her sex been told,
And what all pens, and times to all dispense,
Restrain to her, by a prophetique sense?
Or shall I, to the Moral, and Divine
Exactest laws, shape by an even line,
A life so straight, as it should shame the square
Left in the rules of Katherine, or Clare,
And call it hers, say, so did she begin,
And had she lived, such had her progress been?
These are dull ways, by which base pens, for hire,
Dawbe glorious vice, and from Apollo's quire
Steal holy Dittyes, which profanely they
Upon the hearse of every strumpet lay,
We will not bathe thy corpse with a forced tear,
Nor shall thy train borrow the blacks they wear;
Such vulgar spice andgums, embalme not thee,
Thou art the Theme of Truth, not Poetry.
Thou shall endure a trial by thy Peers,
Virgins of equal birth, of equal years,
Whose virtues, held with thine an emulous strise,
Shall draw thy picture, and record thy life.
One shall enspheare thine eyes, another shall
Impearle thy teeth; a third, thy white and small
Hand, shall besnow; a fourth, incarnadine
Thy rosy cheek, until each beauteous line,
Drawn by her hand, in whom that part excells,
Meet in one Center, where all beauty dwells.
Others, in task shall thy choice virtues share,
Some shall their birth, some their ripe growth declare,
Though niggard Time left much unhach'd by deeds,
They shall relate how thou had all the seeds
Of every Virtue, which in the pursuit
Of time, must have brought forth admired fruit.
Thus shall thou, from the mouth of envy, raise
A glorious journall of thy thrifty days,
Like a bright star, shot from his sphere, whose race
In a continued line of flames, we trace.
This, if survay'd, shall to thy view impart
How little more then late, thou were, thou are,
This shall gain credit with succeeding times,
When nor by bribed pens, nor partial times
Of engaged kindred, but the sacred truth
Is storied by the partners of thy youth;
Their breath shall Saint thee, and be this thy pride,
Thus even by Rivals to be Deifide.
To the Countess of Anglesie upon the immoderatly-by-herlamented death of her
Husband.
MAdam, men say you keep with dropping eyes
Your sorrows fresh, wat'ring the Rose that lies
Fallen from your cheeks upon your dear Lords Hearse:
Alas! those odors now no more can pierce
His cold pale nosthrill, nor the crymson dye
Present a graceful blush to his dark eye.
Think you that flood of pearly moisture has
The virtue fabled of old Aesons bath.
You may your beauties, and your youth consume
Over his Vine, and with your sighs perfume
The solitary Vault, which as you groan
In hollow Echoes shall repeat your moan.
There you may wither, and an Autumn bring
Upon your self, but not call back his spring.
Forbear your fruitless grief then, and let those
Whose love was doubted, gain belief with shows
To their suspected faith; you, whose whole life
In every act crowned you a constant Wife,
May spare the practice of that vulgar trade,
Which superstitious custom only made;
Rather a Widow now of wisdom prove
The pattern, as a Wife you were of love:
Yet since you sur^ on your grief, it is sit
I tell the world, upon what cates you sit
Glutting your sorrows; and at once include
History, your excuse, my gratitude.
You, that behold how yond' sad Lady blends
Those ashes with her tears, lest, as she spends
Her tributarie sighs, the frequent gust
Might scatter up and down the noble dust,
Know when that heap of Atoms, was with blood
Kneaded to solid flesh, and firmly stood
On stately Pillars, the rare form might move
'The froward Juno's, or chaste Cinthia's love.
In motion, active grace, in rest, a calm
Attractive sweetness, brought both wound and balm
To every heart. He was composed of all
The wishes of ripe Virgins, when they call
For Hymen's rites, and in their fancies wed
A shape of studied beauties to their bed.
Within this curious Palace dwelt a soul
Gave Iustre to each part, and to the whole.
This dressed his face in courteous smiles; and so
From comely gestures, sweeter manners slow.
This courage joined to strength, so the hand, bent,
Was valors, opened, Bounties instrument
Which did the scale, and sword, of Justice hold,
Knew how to brandish steel, and scatter gold.
This taught him, not to engage his modest tongue
In suites of private gain, though public wrong:
Nor mis-employ (As is the Great-mans use.)
His credit with his Master, to traduce,
Deprave, malign, and ruin Innocence
In proud prevenge of some mis-judg'd offense.
But all his actions had the noble end
To Advance desert, or grace some worthy friend.
He chose not in the active stream to swim,
Nor hunted Honor; which, yet hunted him.
But like a quiet Eddie, that has found
Some hollow creek, there turns his waters round,
And in continual circles, dances free
From the impetuous Torrent; so did he
Give others leave to turn the wheel of State,
(Whose restless motions spins the subjects fate)
Whilst he retired from the tumultuous noise
Of Court, and suitors press; apart, enjoyee
Freedom, and mirth, himself, his time, and friends,
And with sweet relish tastes each hour he spends.
I could remember how his noble heart
First kindled at your beauties; with what Art
He chased his game through all opposing fears,
When I his sighs to you, and back your tears
Convay'd to him, how loyal then, and how
Constant he proved since to his marriage vow.
So as his wandering eyes never drew in
One lustful thought to tempt his soul to sin,
But that I fear such mention rather may
Kindle new grief, than blow the old away.
Then let him rest joined to great Buckingham,
And with his brothers, mingle his bright flame,
Look up, and meet their beams, and you from thence
May chance derive a cheerful influence,
Seek him no more in dust, but call again
Your scatterd beauties home, and so the pen
Which now I take from this sad Elegy
Shall sing the Trophies of your conquering eye.
An Elegy upon the death of Doctor Done, Deane of Paul's.
CAn we not force from widowed Poetry
Now thou art dead (Great Done) one Elegy,
To crown thy Hearse? Why yet did we not trust,
Though with unkneaded dow-bak'd prose, thy dust,
Such as th'uncizard Lect'rer from the flower
Of fading Rhet'rique, short-lived as his hour,
Dry as the sand that measures it, might lay
Upon the ashes, on the Funeral day?
Have we nor tune, nor voice? did thou dispense
Through all our languge both the words and sense?
It Is a sad truth The Pulpit may her plain,
And sober Christian precepts still retain,
Doctrines it may, and wholesome uses, frame,
Grave Homilies, and Lectures, but the flame
Of thy brave soul, that shot such heat, and light,
As burnt our Earth, and made our darkness brighs,
Committed holy rapes upon the will,
Did through the eye the melting heart distill.
And the deep knowledge, of dark truths, so teach
As sense might judge where fancy could not reach,
Must be desired for ever. So the fire
That fills with spirit and heat the Delphique Quire,
Which kindled first by thy Promethean breath
Glowed here a while, lies quenched now in thy death.
The Moses garden, with Pedantique weeds
O're-spread, was purged by thee, the lazy seeds
Of servile imitation thrown away,
And fresh invention planted; thou did pay
The debts of our penurious banquerout Age:
Licentious thefts, that make poetique rage
A mimique fury, when our souls must be
Possessed, or with Anacrcons ecstasy,
Or Pindars, not their own, the subtle cheat
Of fly exchanges, and the juggling seat
Of two-edged words, or whatsoever wrong
By ours was done the Greek or Latin tongue,
Thouhast redeemed, and Opened us a Mine
Of rich and pregnant fancy, drawn a line
Of Masculine expression, which had good
Old Orpheus seen, or all the ancient brood
Our superstitious fools admire, and hold
Their Lead more precious then thy burnisht gold,
Thou had been their Exchequer, and no more,
They each in others dung had searched for Ore.
Thou shall yield no precedence, but of Time,
And the blind fate of Language, whose tuned chime
More charms the outward sense; yet thou may claim
From so great disadvantage, greater fame,
Since to the awe of thy imperious wit
Our troublesome language bends, made only fit
With her tough thick-rib'd hoopes, to gird about
Thy Giant fancy, which had proved too stout
For their soft melting phrases. As in time
They had the start, so did they cull the prime
Buds of invention many a hundred year,
And left the rifled fields, besides the seat
To touch their harvest, yet from those bare lands
Of what was only thine, thy only hands
(And that their smallest work) have gleaned more
Then all those times, and Tongues, could reap before.
But thou art gone, and thy strickt laws will be
Too hard for Libertines in Poetry,
They will recall the goodly exiled ttaine
Of Gods, and Goddesses, which in thy just reign
Was banished nobler Poems; now, with these,
The silenced tales in the Metamorphoses
Shall stuff their lines, and swell the windy page
Till verse resin'd by thee, in this last Age
Turn Ballad-rime, or those old Idols be
Adored again with new Apostasy.
Oh! pardon me that break with untuned Verse
The reverend silence, that attends thy Hearse,
Whose solemn, awful Murmurs, were to thee
More then these rude lines, a loud Elegy,
That did proclaim in a dumb Eloquence
The death of all the Arts, whose influence
Grown feeble, in these panting numbers lies
Gasping short-winded accents, and so dies.
So does the swiftly-tuning wheel, not stand
In the instant we withdraw the moving hand,
But some short time retain a saint weak course,
By virtue of the first impulsive force;
And so, whilst I cast on thy funeral style,
Thy crown of Bays, oh let it crack awhile
And spit disdain, till the devouring flashes
Suck all the moisture up, then turn to ashes,
I will not draw the envy, to engrosse
All thy perfections, or weep all the loss,
Those are too numerous for one Elegy,
And this too great to be expressed by me.
Let others carve the rest; it shall suffize,
I on thy Grave this Epitaph incize.
Here lies a King, that ruled as he thought fit
The Universal Monarchy of wit,
Here lies two Flamens, and both those the best.
Apollo's first, at last the true God's Priest.
In answer of an Elegiacall Letter upon the death of the King of Sweden from
Aurelian Townsend, inviting me to write on that subject.
WHy do thou sound, my dear Aurelian,
In so shrill accents, from thy Barbican.
A loud allarum to my drowsy eyes,
Bidding them wake in tears and Elegies
For mighty Swedens fall? Alas! how may
My Lyrique feet, that of the smooth soft way
Of Love, and Beauty, only know the tread,
In dancing paces celebrate the dead
Victorious King, or his Majesticke Hearse
Profane with the humble touch of their low verse?
Virgil, nor Lucan, no, nor Tasso more
Then both, not Done, worth all that went before,
With the united labor of their wit
Could a just Poem to this subject fit,
His actions were too mighty to be raised
Higher by Verse, let him in prose be praised,
In modest faithful story, which his deeds
Shall turn to Poems: when the next Age reads
Of Frankfort, Leipsigh, Worsburgh, of the Rhyne;
The Leck, the Danube, Tilly, Wallestein,
Bavaria, Bapenheim, Lutzenfield, where He
Gained after death a posthume Victory,
They Will think his Acts things rather feigned then done
Like our Romances of the Knight of the Sun.
Leave we him then to the grave Chronicler,
Who though to Annals he can not refer
His too-briefe story, yet his Journals may
Stand by the Caesar's years, and every day
Cut into minutes, each, shall more contain
Of great designement then an Emperors reign;
And (since 'twas but his Churchyard) let him have
For his own ashes now no narrower Grave
Then the whole German Continents vast womb,
Whilst all her Cities do but make his Tomb:
Letus to supreme providence commit
The fate of Monarchs, which first thought it fit
To rend the Empire from the Austrian graspe,
And next from Swedens, even when he did claspe
Within his dying arms the Soveraigntie
Of all those Provinces, that men might see
The Divine wisdom would not leave that Land
Subject to any one Kings sole command.
Then let the Germans fear if Caesar shall,
Or the United Princes, rise, and fall,
But let us that in myrtle bowers sit
Under secure shades, use the benefit
Of peace and plenty, which the blessed hand
Of our good King gives this obdurate Land,
Let us of Revels sing, and let thy breath
(Which filled Fames trumpet with Gustavus death,
Blowing his name to heaven) gently inspire
Thy past'r all pipe, till all our swains admire
Thy song and subject, whilst they both comprise
The beauties of the SHEPHERDS PARADISE;
For who like thee (whose loose discourse is far
More neat and polisht then our Poems are,
Whose very gate's more graceful then our dance)
In sweetly flowing numbers may advance
The glorious night? When, not to act foul rapes,
Like birds, or beasts, but in their Angel-shapes
A troop of Deities came down to guide
Our steerelesse barks in passions swelling tide
By virtues Card, and brought us from above
A pattern of their own celestial love.
Nor lay it in dark sullen precepts drowned
But with rich fancy, and clear Action crowned
Through a misterious fable (that was drawn
Like a transparant veyle of purest Lawne
Before their dazelling beauties) the divine
Venus, did with her heavenly Cupid shine.
The stories curious web, the Masculine style;
The subtle sense, did Time and sleep beguile,
Pinnion'd and charmed they stood to gaze upon
The Angellike forms, gestures, and motion.
To hear those ravishing sounds that did dispense
Knowledge and pleasure, to the soul, and sense.
It filled us with amazement to behold
Love made all spirit, his corporeal mold
Dissected into Atoms melt away
To empty air, and from the gross allay
Of mixtures, and compounding Accidents
Resin'd to immateriall Elements,
But when the Queen of Beauty did inspire
The air with perfumes, and our hearts with fire,
Breathing from her celestial Otgan sweet
Harmonious notes, our souls fell at her feet,
And did with humble reverend duty, more
Her rare perfections, then high state adore,
These harmless pastimes let my Townsend sing
To rural tunes; not that thy Muse wants wing
To soar a loftier pitch, for she has made
A noble flight, and placed th'Heroique shade
Above the reach of our faint flagging ryme;
But these are subjects proper to our clyme.
Tourneyes, Masks, Theaters, better become
Our Halcyon days; what though the German Drum
Bellow for freedom and revenge, the noise
Concerns not us, nor should divert our joys;
Nor ought the thunder of their Carabins
Drown the sweet Airs of our tuned Violins;
Believe me friend, if their prevailing powers
Gain them a calm security like ours,
They Will hang their Arms up on the Olive bough,
And dance, and revell then, as we do now.
Upon Master W. Mountague his return from travel.
Lead the black Bull to slaughter, with the Bore
And Lamb, then purple with their mingled gore
The Oceans curled brow, that so we may
The Sea-Gods for their caresull wastage pay:
Send grateful Incense up in pious smoke
To those mild spirits, that cast a curbing yoke
Upon the stubborn winds, that calmely blew
To the wished shore, our longed for Mountague,
Then whilst the Aromatique odours burn,
In honor of their Darling's safe return;
The Muses Quire shall thus with voice and hand,
Bless the sayre Gale that drove his ship to land,
Sweetly breathing Ver^all Air,
That with kind warmth do repair
Winters ruins, from whose breast
All the gums, and spice of the East
Borrow their perfumes, whose eye
Guilds the morn, and cleares the sky,
Whose disheveld tresses shed
Pearls upon the Violet bed,
On whose brow with calm smiles dressed
The Halcions sits and builds her nest.
Beauty, Youth, and endless spring,
Dwell upon thy rosy wing.
Thou, if stormy Boreas throws
Down whole Forest when be blows,
With a pregnant flowery birth
Can refresh the teeming Earth;
If he nip the early bud,
If he blast what is fair or good;
If he scatter our choice flowers,
If she shake our hills or bowers,
If his rude breath threaten us,
Thou can stroke great Aeolus,
And from him the grace obtain
To bind him in an Iron chain.
Thus, whilst you deal your body amongst your friends,
And fill their circling arms, my glad soul sends
This her embrace: Thus we of Delphos greet
As Laymen claspe their hands, we join our feet.
To Master W. Mountague.
SIR, I arest you at your Countries suit,
Who as a debt to her, requires the fruit
Of that rich stock; which she by Natures hand
Gave you in trust, to the use of this whole Land.
Next, she endites you of a Felony,
For stealing, what was her Propriety.
Your self from hence, so seeking to convey
The public treasure of the state away.
More, you are accused of Ostracisme, the Fate
Imposed of old by the Athenian state
On eminent virtue, but that curse which they
Cast on their men, You on your Country lay.
For, thus divided from your noble parts
This Kingdom lives in exile, and all hearts
That relish worth, or honout, being rent
From your perfections, suffer banishment:
These are your public injuries; but I
Have a just private quarrel to defy
And call you Coward, thus to run away
When you had pierced my heart, not daring stay
Till I redeemed my honor; but I swear
By Celia's eyes, by the same force to tear
Your heart from you, or not to end this strife
Till I or find revenge, or lose my life.
But as in single fights it often has been
In that unequal equal trial seen,
That he who had received the wrong at first,
Came from the Combat ost too with the worst;
So if you foil me when we meet, I Will then
Give you fair leave to wound me so age^n.
On the Marriage of T. K. and C. C. the morning stormy.
SVch should this day be, so the Sun should hide
His bash full face, and let the conquering Bride
Without a Rival shine, whilst He sorbeares
To mingle his unequal beams with hers;
Or if sometimes he glance his squinting eye
Between the parting clouds, it is but to spy,
Not emulate her glories, so comes dressed
In vayles, but as a Masquer to the feast.
Thus heaven should lower, such stormy gusts should blow
Not to denounce ungentle Fates, but show
The cheerful Bridegroom to the clouds and wind
Has all his tears, and all his sighs assigned.
Let Tempests struggle in the Air, but rest
Eternal calmes within thy peaceful breast.
Thrice happy Youth; but ever sacrifice
To that fair hand that dry'de thy blubbred eyes,
That cround thy head with Roses, and turned all
The plagues of love into a cordial,
When first it joined her Virgin snow to thine,
Which when to day the Priest shall recombine,
From the misterious holy touch such charms
Will flow, as shall unlock her wreathed arms,
And open a free passage to that fruit
Which thou have toiled for with a long pursuie.
But ere thou feed, that thou may better taste
Thy present joys, think on thy torments past.
Think on the mercy freed thee, think upon
Her virtues, graces, beauties, one by one,
So shall thou relish all, enjoy the whole
Delights of her fair body, and pure soul.
Then boldly to the fight of Love proceed,
It Is mercy not to pity though she bleed,
We Will strew no nuts, but change that ancient form,
For till to morrow we will prorogue this storm.
Which shall confound with its loud whistling noise
Her pleasing shreekes, and fan thy panting joys.
For a Picture where a Queen Laments over the Tomb of a slain Knight.
BRave Youth; to whom Fate in one hour
Grave death, and Conquest, by whose power
Those chains about my heart are wound,
With which the Foe my Kingdom bound,
Freed, and captived by thee, I bring
For either Act an offering;
For victory, this wreathe of Bay:
In sign of Thraldom, down I lay
Scepter and Crown: Take from my sight
Those Royal Robes; since fortunes spite
Forbids me live thy Virtues prize,
I Will dye thy Valors sacrifice.
To a Lady that desired I would love her.
1.
NOw you have freely given me leave to love,
What will you do?
Shall I your mirth, or pastime move
When I begin 'to woo;
Will you torment, or scorn, or love me too?
2.
Each petty beauty can disdain, and I
Spite of your hate
Without your leave can see, and dye;
Dispense a nobler Fate,
It Is easy to destroy, you may create.
3.
Then give me leave to love, and love me too
Not with design
To raise, as Loves cursed Rebels do;
When puling Poets whine,
Fame to their beauty, from their blubbt'd eyne.
4.
Grief is a puddle, and reflects not clear
Your beauties rays,
Joys are pure streams, your eyes appear
Sullen in sadder lays,
In cheerful numbers they shine bright with praise.
5.
Which shall not mention to express you fair
Wounds, flames, and darts,
Storms in your brow, nets in your hair,
Suborning all your parts,
Or to betray, or torture captive hearts.
6.
I Will make your eyes like morning Suns appear,
As mild, and fair
Your brow as Crystal smooth, and clear,
And your dishevelled hair
Shall flow like a calm Region of the Air.
7.
Rich Natures store, (which is the Poets Treasure)
I Will spend, to dress
Your beauties, if your mine of Pleasure
In equal thankfulness
You but unlocke, so we each otherblesse.
Upon my Lord Chief Justice his election of my Lady A. W. for his Mistress.
1.
Hear this, and tremble all
Usurping Beauties, that create
A government Tyrannical
In Loves free state,
Justice, has to the sword of your edged eyes
His equal balance joined, his sage head lies
In Loves soft lap, which must be just and wise.
2.
Hark how the stern Law breathes
Forth amorous sighs, and now prepares
No fetters, but of silken wreathes,
And, braded hayres;
His dreadful Rods and Axes are exiled
Whilst he sits crowned with Roses, Love has fil'de
His native roughness, Justice is grown mild.
3.
The golden Age returns,
Loves bow, and quiver, useless lie,
His shaft, his brand, nor wounds, nor burns,
And cruelty
Is sunk to Hell, the fair shall all be kind,
Who loves, shall be beloved, the froward mind
To a deformed shape shall be confined.
4.
Astraea has possessed
An earthly seat, and now remains
In Finthes heart, but Wentworths breast
That Guest contains;
With her she dwells, yet has not left the skies,
Nor lost her Sphere, for, new-enthron'd she cries
I know no Heaven but fair Wentworths eyes,
To A. D. unreasonable distrustful of her own beauty.
Fair Doris break thy Glass, it has perplexed
With a dark Comment, beauties clearest Text,
It has not told thy faces story true,
But brought false Copies to thy jealous view.
No color, feature, lovely air, or grace,
That ever yet adorned a beauteous face,
But thou may read in thine, or justly doubt;
Thy Glass has been suborned to leave it out,
But if it offer to thy nice survey
A spot, a stain, a blemish, or decay,
It not belongs to thee, the treacherous light
Or faithless stone abuse thy credulous sight.
Perhaps the magique of thy face, has wrought
Upon th'enchanted Crystal, and so brought
Fantastic shadows to delude thine eyes
With ayrie repercussive sorceries.
Or else the enamoured Image pines away
For love of the fair Object, and so may
Wax pale and wan, and though the substance grow
Lively and fresh, that may consume with woe;
Give then no faith to the false specular stone,
But let thy beauties by the effects be known:
Look (sweetest Doris) on my lovesick heart,
In that true mirror see how fair thou art.
There, by Loves never-erring Pensill drawn
Shall thou behold thy face, like the early dawne
Shoot through the shadie covert of thy hair,
Enameling, and perfuming the calm Air
With Pearls, and Roses, till thy Suns display
Their lids, and let out the imprisoned day.
Whilst Delfique Priests, (enlightened by their Theme)
In amorous numbers count thy golden beam,
And from Loves Altars clouds of sighs arise
In smoking Incence to adore thine eyes.
If then Love flow from Beauty as the effect
How can thou the resistlesse cause suspect?
Who would not brand that Fool, that should conten^
There were no fire, where smoke and flames ascend?
Distrust is worse then scorn, not to believe
My harms, is greater wrong then not to grieve;
What cure can sor my festring sore be found,
Whilst thou beleev'st thy beauty cannot wound?
Such humble thoughts more cruel Tyrants prove
Then all the pride that e're usurped in Love.
For Beauties Herald, here denounces war,
There her false spies betray me to a snare.
If fire disguised in balls of snow were hurled
It unsuspected might consume the world;
Where our prevention ends, danger begins,
So Wolves in Sheep, Lions in Asses skins,
Might far more mischief work, because less feared,
Those, the whole flock, these, might kill all the herd,
Appear then as thou art, break through this cloud
Confess thy beauty, though thou thence grow proud,
Be fair though scornful, rather let me find
Thee cruel, then thus mild, and more unkind;
Thy cruelty does only me defy,
But these dull thoughts thee to thy self deny,
Whether thou mean to bartar, or bestow
Thy self; it is fit thou thine own value know,
I will not cheat thee of thy self, nor pay
Less for thee then thou art worth, thou shall not say
That is but brittle glass, which I have sound
By strict inquiry a firm Diamond.
I Will trade with no such Indian fool as sells
Gold, Pearls, and precious stones, for Beads and Beils;
Nor will I take a present from your hand,
Which you or prize not, or not understand:
It not endeares your bounty that I do
Esteem your gift, unless you do so too;
You undervalew me, when you bestow
On me, what you nor care for, nor yet know.
No (Lovely Doris) change thy thoughts, and be
In love first with thy self, and then with me.
You are afflicted that you are not fair,
And I as much tormented that you are,
What I admire, you scorn; what I love, hate,
Through different faiths, both share an equal Fate,
Fast to the truth, which you renounce, I stick,
I dye a Martyr, you an Heretic.
To my friend G. N. from Wrest.
I Breathe (sweet Ghib:) the temperate air of Wrest
Where I no more with raging storms oppressed,
Wear the cold nights out by the banks of Tweed,
On the bleake Mountains, where fierce tempests breed,
And everlasting Winter dwells; where mild
Favonius, and the Vetnall winds exilde,
Did never spread their wings: but the wild North
Brings sterill Fearne, Thistles, and Brambles forth.
Here steeped in balmie dew, the pregnant Earth,
Sends from her teeming womb a flowrie birth,
And cherisht with the warm Suns quickening heat,
Her porous bosom does rich odours sweat;
Whose perfumes through the Ambient air diffuse
Such native Aromatiques, as we use
No foreign Gums, nor essence fetched from far,
Vo Volatile spirits, nor compounds that are
Adulterate, but at Natures cheap expense
With far more genuine sweetes refresh the sense.
Such pure and uncompounded beauties, bless
This Mansion with an useful comeliness.
Devoide of Art, for here the Architect
Did not with curious skill a Pile erect
Of carved Marble, Touch, or Porpherie,
But built a house for hospitality;
No sumptuous Chimney-peece of shining stone
Invites the strangers eye to gaze upon,
And coldly entertaines his sight, but clear
And cheerful flames, cherish and warm him here:
No Dorique, nor Corinthian Pillars grace
With Imagery this structures naked face,
The Lord and Lady of this place delight
Rather to be in act, then seem in sight;
In stead of Statues to adorn their wall
They throng with living men, their merry Hall,
Where at large Tables filled with wholesome meats
The servant, Tennant, and kind neighbor eats.
Some of that rank, spun of a finer thread*
Are with the Women, Steward, and Chaplain fed
With daintier cates; Others of better note
Whom wealth, parts, office, or the Heralds coats
Have severed from the common, freely sic
At the Lords Table, whose spread sides admit
A large access of friends to fill those seats
Of his capacious circle, filled with meats
Of choycest relish, till his Oaken back
Under the load of pil'd-up dishes crack
Nor think, because our Piramids, and high
Exalted Turrets threaten not the sky,
That therefore Wrest of narrowness complains
Or straightened Walls, for she more numerous trains
Of Noble guests daily receives, and those
Can with far more conveniencie dispose
Then prouder Piles, where the vain builder spent
More cost in outward gay Embellishment
Then real use: which was the sole design
Of our contriver, who made things not fine,
But fit for service. Amalthea's Horn
Of plenty is not in Effigy worn
Without the gate, but she within the door
Empties her free and unexhausted store.
Nor, croun'd with wheaten wreathes, does Ceres stand
In stone, with a crook'd circle in her hand:
Nor, on a Marble Tun, his face besmeat'd
With grapes, is curled uncizard Bacchus reared.
We offer not in Emblemes to the eyes,
But to the taste those useful Deities.
We press the juycie God, and quasse his blood,
And grind the Yeallow Goddess into food.
Yet we decline not, all the work of Art,
But where more bount eous Nature bears a part
And guides her Handmaid, if the but dispense
Fitmatter, she with care and diligence
Employes her skill, for where the neighbor sourse
Powers forth her waters she directs their course,
And entertaines the slowing streams in deep
And spacious channells, where they slowly creep
In snakie windings, as the shelving ground
Leads them in circles, till they twice surround
This Island Mansion, which in the center placed,
Is with a double Crystal heaven embraced,
In which our watery constellations floate,
Out Fishes, Swans, our Water-man and Boat,
Envied by those above, which wish to slake
Their starre-burnt limbs, in our refreshing lake,
But they stick fast nayl'd to the barren Sphere,
Whilst our increase in fertile waters here
Disport, and wander freely where they please
Within the circuit of our narrow Seas.
With various Trees we fringe the waters brinke,
Whose thirsty roots the soaking moisture drink.
And whose extended boughs in equal ranks
Yield fruit, and shade, and beauty to the banks.
On this side young Vertumnus sits, and courts
His ruddie cheek'd Pomona. Zephyre sports
On the other, with loved Flora, yielding thete
Sweetes for the smell, sweetes for the palate here.
But did you taste the high and mighty drink
Which from that Fountain slowes, you would clearly think
The God of Wine did his plumpe clusters bring,
And crush the Falerne grape into our spring;
Or else disguised in watery Robes did swim
To Ceres bed, and make her big of Him,
Bege^ng so himself on Her: for know
Our Vintage here in March does nothing owe
To theirs in Autumn, but our fire boyles here
As lusty liquour as the Sun makes there.
Thus I enjoy my self, and taste the fruit
Of this blessed Peace, whilst toiled in the pursuit
Of Bucks, and Stags, th'embleme of war you strive
To keep the memory of our Arms alive.
A New years gift. To the King.
Look back old Janus, and survey
From Times birth, till this newborn day,
All the successful season bound
With Laurel wreathes, and Trophics crowned;
Turn over the Annals past, and where;
Happy auspitious days appear,
Marked with the whiter stone, that cast
On the dark brow of th'Ages past
A dazeling luster, let them shine
In this succeeding circles twine,
Till it be round with glories spread,
Then with it crown our Charles his head,
That we the ensuing year may call
One great continued festival.
Fresh joys in varied forms apply,
To each distinct captivity.
Season his cares by day with nights
Crowned with all conjugall delights,
May the choice beauties that inflame
His Royal breast be still the same,
And he still think them such, since more
Thoucanst not give from Natures store.
Then as a Father let him be
With numerous issue blessed, and see
The fair and God-like offspring grown
From budding stars to Suns full blown.
Circle with peaceful Olive bows,
And conquering Bays, his Regal brows.
Let his strong virtues overcome,
And bring him bloodlesse Trophies home:
Strew all the pavements, where he treads
With loyal hearts, or Rebels heads;
But Byfront, open thou no more,
In his blessed reign the Temple door.
To the Queen.
THou great Commandresse, that do move
Thy Scepter over the Crown of Love,
And through his Empire with the Awe
Of Thy chaste beams, do give the Law.
From his prophaner Altars, we
Turn to adore Thy Deity:
He, only can wild lust provoke,
Thou, those impurer slames can choke;
And where he scatters looser f^es,
Thou turn'st them into chaste desires:
His Kingdom knows no rule but this,
What ever pleases lawful is;
Thy sacred Lore shows us the path
Of Modesty, and constant faith,
Which makes the rude Male satisfied
With one fair Female by his side;
Does either sex to each unite,
And form loves pure Hermophradite.
To this Thy faith behold the wild
Satyr already reconciled.
Who from the influence of Thine eye
Has sucked the deep Divinity;
O free them then, that they may teach,
The Centaur, and the Horsman preach
To Beasts and Birds, sweetly to rest
Each in his proper Lare and nest:
They shall convey it to the flood,
Till there Thy law be understood.
So shall thou with thy pregnant fire,
The water, earth, and air, inspire.
To the New-yeare for the Countess of Carlisle.
GIve Lucinda Pearl, nor Stone,
Lend them light who else have none,
Let Her beautis shine alone.
Gums not spice bring from the East,
For the Phoenix in Her breast
Builds his funeral pile, and nest.
No tire thou can invent,
Shall to grace her form be s^nt,
She adornes all ornament.
Give Hernothing, but restore
These sweet smiles which heretofore,
In Her cheerful eyes she wore.
Drive those envious clouds away,
Vailes that have o're-cast my day,
And eclipsed Her brighter ray.
Le^ the royal Goth mow down
This years harvest with his own
Sword, and spare Lucinda's frown,
Janus, if when next I trace
Those sweet lines, I in her face
Read the Charter of my grace,
Then from bright Apollo's tree,
Such a Garland wreathed shall be,
As shall Crown both Her and thee.
To my Honored friend, Master Thomas May, upon his Comedy, The Heir.
THe Heir being borne, was in his tender age
Rockt in the Cradle of a private Stage,
Where lifted up by many a willing hand,
The child did from the first day fairly stand.
Since having gathered strength, he dares prefer
His steps into the public Theater
The World: where he dispaires not but to find
A doom from men more able, not less kind;
I but his Usher am, yet if my word
May pass, I dare be bound he will afford
Things must deserve a welcome, if well known
Such as best writers would have wished their own.
You shall observe his words in order meet,
And softly stealing on with equal feet
Slide into even numbers, with such grace
As each word had been molded for that place,
You shall perceive an amorous passion, sp^ne
Into so smooth a web, as had the Sun
When he pursued the swiftly flying Maid,
Courted her in such language, she had staid,
A love so well expressed, must be the same
The Author felt himself from his fair flame:
The whole plot does alike it self disclose
Through the five Acts, as does the Lock that goes
With letters, for till every one be known,
The Lock's as fast as if you had found none.
And where his sportive Muse does draw a thread
Of mirth, chaste Matrons may not blush to read.
Thus have I thought it fitter to reveal
My want of art (dear friend) then to conceal
My love. It did appear I did not mean
So to commend thy well-wrought Gomick-scene,
As men might judge my aim rather to be,
To gain praise to my self, then give it thee;
Though I can give thee none, but what thou have
Deserved, and what must my faint breath out-last.
Yet was this garment (though I skillesse be
To take thy measure) only made for thee,
And if it prove to scant, it is cause the stuff
Nature allowed me was not large enough.
To my worthy friend Master Geo. Sands, on his translation of the Psalms.
I Press not to the Quire, nor dare I greet
The holy place with my unhallowed feet;
My unwasht Muse, polutes not things Divine,
Nor mingles her prophaner notes with thine;
Here, humbly at the porch she stays,
And with glad ears sucks in thy sacred lays.
So, devout penitents of Old were wont,
Some without door, and some beneath the Font,
To stand and hear the Churches Liturgies,
Yet not assist the solemn exercise:
Suffices her, that she a lay-place gain,
To trim thy Vestments, or but bear thy train;
Though not in tune, not wing, she reach thy Lark,
Her Lyrick feet may dance before the Arc.
Who knows, but that her wandering eyes that run,
Now hunting Glow-wormes, may adore the Sun.
A pure flame may, shot by Almighty power
Into her breast, the earthy flame devour.
My eyes, in penitential dew may steep*
That brine, which they for sensual love did weep.
So (though against Natures course) fire may be quench:
With fire, and water be with water drencht;
Perhaps my restless soul, tyr'de with persuit
Of mortal beauty, seeking without fruit
Contentment there, which has not, when enjoyed,
Quenched all her thirst, nor satisfied, though ^oy'd;
Weary of her vain search below, Above
In the first fair may find the immortal Love.
Prompted by thy example then, no more
In moulds of clay will I my God adore;
But tear those Idols from my heart, and write
What his blessed Sprit, not fond Love shall indite;
Then, I no more shall court the verdant Bay,
But the dry leavelesse Trunk on Golgotha;
And rather strive to gain from thence one Thorn,
Then all the flourishing wreathes by Laureats worn.
To my much honored friend, HENRY: Lord CARRY of Lepington, upon his
translation of MALVEZZI.
My Lord,
IN every trivial work it is known
Translators must be masters of their own,
And of their Authors language, but your task.
A greater latitude of skill did ask.
For your Malvezzi first required a man
To teach him speak vulgar Italian:
His matter's so sublime, so now his phrase,
So far above the style of Bemboe's days;
Old Varchies rules, or what the Grusca yet
For current T^uscan mintage will admit,
As I believe your Marquess, by a good
Part of his Natives hardly understood.
You must expect no happier fate, it is true
He is of noble birth, of nobler you:
So not your thoughts, nor words ^it common ears*
He writes, and you translate, both to your Peers.
To my worthy Friend, M. D'AVENANT, Upon his Excellent Play, The Just Italian.
I Will not mispend in praise, the narrow room
I borrow in this leaf; the Garlands bloome
From thine own seeds, that crown each glorious page
Of thy triumphant work; the sullen Age
Requires a Satyr. What star guides the soul
Of these our froward times, that dare control,
Yet dare not learn to judge? When did thou fly
From hence, clear, candid Ingenuitie?
I have beheld, when pearch'd on the smooth brow
Of a fair modest troop, thou did allow
Applause to slighter works; but then the weak
Spectator, gave the knowing leave to speak.
Now noise prevails, and he is taxed for drowth
Of wit, that with the cry, spends not his mouth*
Yet ask him, reason why he did not like;
Him, why he did; their ignorance will strike
Thy soul with scorn, and Pity: mark the places
Provoke their smiles, frowns, or distorted faces,
When, they admire, nod, shake the head: they will be
A seen of mirth, a double Comedy.
But thy strong fancies (raptures of the brain,
Dressed in Poetique flames) they entertain
As a bold, impious reach; for they will still slight
All that exceeds Red Bull, and Cockpit flight:
These are the men in crowded heap that throng
To that adulterate stage, where not a tongue
Of th'untun'd Kennell, can a line repeat
Of serious sense: but like lips, meet like meat;
Whilst the true brood of Actors, that alone
Keep natural unstrain'd Action in her throne
Behold their Benches bare, though they rehearse
The terser Beaumonts or great Johnsons verse.
Repine not Thou then, since this churlish fate
Rules not the stage alone; perhaps the State
Has felt this rancour, where men great and good;
Have by the Rabble been misunderstood.
So was thy Play; whose clear, yet lofty strain*
Wisemen, that govern Fate, shall entertain.
To the Reader of Master William Davenant's Play.
IT has been said of old, that Plays are Feast^,
Poets the Cooks, and the Spectators Guests,
The Actors Waitors: From this Similie,
Some have derived an unsafe liberty
To use their Judgments as their T astes, which choose
Without control, this Dish, and that refuse:
But Wit allows not this large Privilege,
Either you must confess, or feel it is edge;
Nor shall you make a current inference
If you trans-fer your reason to your sense*
Things are distinct, and must the same appear
To every piercing Eye, or well-tuned Ear.
Though sweets with yours, sharps best with my taste meet
Both must agree, this meat's, or sharp or sweet:
But if I sent a stench, or a perfume,
Whilst you smell naught at all, I, may presume
You have that sense imperfect: So you may
Affect a sad, merry, or humerous Play,
If, though the kind distaste or please, the Good
And Bad, be by your Judgment understood;
But if, as in this Play, where with delight
I feast my Epicure an appetite
With rellishes so curious, as dispense
The utmost pleasure to the ravished sense,
You should prosesse that you can nothing meet
That hits your taste, either with sharp or sweet,
But cry out, it is insipid; your bold Tongue
May do it is Master, not the Author wrong;
For Men of better Pallat will by it
Take the just elevation of your Wit.
TO MY FRIEND, WILL. D'AVENANT.
I Crowded amongst the first, to see the Stage
(Inspired by thee) strike wonder in our age,
By thy bright fancy dazzled Where each Scene
Wrought like a charm, and forced the audience Ieane
To th'passion of thy Pen, thence Ladies went
(Whose absence Lovers sighed for) to repent
Their unkind scorn; And Courtiers, who by are
Made love before with a converted heart,
To wed those Virgins, whom they wooed to abuse;
Both rendered Hymen's pros'lits by thy Muse.
But others who were proof against Love, did sit
To learn the subtle Dictats of thy Wit;
And as each profited, took his degree,
Master, or Bachelor, in Comedy.
We, of th'adult'rate mixture not complain,
But thence more Characters of Virtue gain;
More pregnant Patterns, of transcendent Worth,
Than barren and insipid Truth brings forth:
So, often the Bastard nobler fortune meets,
Than the dull Issus of the lawful sheets.
The Comparison.
DEarest thy tresses are not threads of gold,
Thy eyes of Diamonds, nor do I hold
Thy lips for Rubies: Thy fair cheeks to be
Fresh Roses; or thy teeth of Ivorie:
Thy skin that does thy dainty body sheath
Not Alablaster is, nor do thou breath
Arabian odours, those the earth brings forth
Compared with which would but impair thy worth.
Such may be others Mistresses, but mine
Holds nothing earthly, but is all divine.
Thy tresses are those rays that do arise
Not from one Sun, but two; Such are thy eyes:
Thy lips congealed Nectar are, and such
As but a Deity, there is none dare touch.
The perfect crimson that thy cheek does cloth
(But only that it far exceeds them both)
Aurora's blush resembles, or that redd
That frisketh in when her mantl's spread.
Thy teeth in white do Leda's Swan exceed,
Thy skin's a heavenly and immortal weed
And thou when breathe, the winds are ready strait
To filch it from thee, and do therefore wait
Close at thy lips, and snatching it from thence
Bear it to Heaven, where it is Joves frankincense,
Fair Goddess since thy feature makes thee one
Yet be not such for these respects alone.
But as you are divine in outward view
So be within as fair, as good, as true.
The Enquiry.
AMongst the myrtles as I walk'e,
Love and my sighs thus intertalk't,
Tell me (said I in deep distress)
Where may I find my shepherdess?
Thou fool (said love) know thou not the
In every thing that is good she is;
In yonder tulip go and seek,
There thou may find her lip, her cheek.
In you ennammel'd pausie by,
There thou shall have her curious eye;
In bloome of peach, in rosy bud,
There wave the streamers of her blood,
In brightest lillios that there stands,
The emblems of her whiter hands,
In yonder rising hill there smells
Such sweetsas in her bosom dwells.
It Is true (said I) and thereupon
I went to pluck them one by one
To make of parts a union
But on a sudden all was gone.
With that I stopped said love these be,
(Fond man) resemblances of thee,
And as these flowers, thy joys shall die
Even in the twinkling of an eye.
And all thy hopes of her shall wither,
Like these short sweets, thus knit together.
The Spark.
MY first love whom all beauties did adorn?
Firing my heart suppressed it with her scorn,
Sun-like to tinder in my breast it lies,
By every sparkle made a sacrifice,
Each wanton eye now kindles my desire,
And that is free to all that was entire:
Desiring more, by thee (desire) I lost,
As those that in consumptions hunger most,
And now my wandering thoughts are not confind,
Unto one woman, but to woman kind.
This for her shape of love, that for her face,
This for her gesture, or some other grace,
And where I none of these do use to find,
I choose thereby the kernel not the rynd:
And so I hope since my first hopes are gone,
To find in many what I lost in one,
And like to Merchants after some great loss,
Trade by retaile, that cannot now ingrosse,
The fault is hers that made me go astray,
He needs must wander that has lost his way*
Guiltless I am she did this change provoke,
And made that charcoale which to her was oak.
And as a looking glass from the aspect,
Whilst it is whole, does but one face reflect,
But being cracked, or broken there are shown,
Many half face^, which at first were one.
So love unto my heart did first proffer
Her image, and there planted none but her,
But since it was broke and martird by her scorn,
Many less faces in her face are borne,
Thus like to tynder am I prone to catch
Each falling sparkle, fit for any match.
The Complement.
O My dearest I shall grieve thee
When I swear, yet sweet believe me,
By thine eyes the tempting book
On which even crabbed old men look
I swear to thee, (though none abhor them)
Yet I do not love thee for them.
I do not love thee for that fair,
Rich fan of thy most curious hair;
Though the wires thereof be drawn
Finer then the threeds of lawne,
And are softer then the leaves
On which the subtle spinner weaues
I do not love thee for those flowers,
Growing on thy cheeks (loves bowers)
Though such cunning them has spread
None can paint them whit and red:
Loves golden arrows thence are shot,
Yet for them I love thee not
I do not love thee for those soft,
Red co^rall lips I Have kissed so often;
Nor teeth of pearl, the double guard
To speech, whence musick^ still is heard:
Though from those lips a kiss being taken,
Might tyrants melt and death awaken.
I do not love thee (o my fairest)
For that richest, for that rarest
Silver pillar which stands under
Thy sound head, that globe of wonder;
Though that neeke be whiter far,
Then towers of pollisht Ivory are.
I do not love thee for those mountaine^
Hill'd with snow, whence milkey fountains,
(Suger'd sweets, as sirropt berries)
Must one day run through pipes of cherries;
o how much those breasts do move me,
Yet for them I do not love thee.
I do not love thee for that belly,
Sleeke as satin, soft as jelly,
Though within that Crystal round
Heaps of treasure might be found,
So rich that for the best of them,
A King might leave his Diadem.
I doenot love thee for those thighs,
Whose Alablaster rocks do ^ise
So high and even that they stand
Like Sea-markes to some happy land.
Happy are those eyes have seen them,
More happy they that sail between them.
I love thee not for thy moist palm,
Though the dew there of be balm:
Nor for thy pretty leg and foot,
Although it be the precious root,
On which this goodly cedar grows,
(Sweet) I love thee not for those.
Nor for thy wit though pure and quick,
Whose substance no arithmeticke
Can number down: nor for those charms
Mask't in thy embracing arms.
Though in them one night to lie,
Dearest I would gladly die.
I love not for those eyes, nor hair,
Nor cheeks, nor lips, nor teeth so rare.
Nor for thy speech, thy neck, nor breast,
Nor for thy belly, nor the rest:
Nor for thy hand, nor foot so small,
But would thou know (dear sweet) for all.
On sight of a Gentlewomans face in the water.
STand still you floods do not desa^e,
That Image which you bear:
So Votaries from every place,
To you shall Alters rear.
No winds but Lovers sighs blow here,
To trouble these glad streams,
On which no star from any Sphere,
Did ever dart such beams.
To Crystal then in have cougeale,
Least you should loose your bliss:
And to my cruel fair reveal,
How cold, how hard she is.
But if the envious Nymphs shall fear,
Their beauties will be scorned,
And hire the ruder winds to tear,
That face which you adorned.
Then rage and foame amain that we,
Their malice may despise:
When from your froath we soon shall see,
A second Venus ^ise.
A Song.
Ask me no more where Jove bestows,
When June is past the fading rose:
For in your beauties orient deep,
These flowers as in their causes, sleep.
Ask me no more whether does stray,
The golden Atoms of the day:
For in pure love heaven did prepare,
Those powders to enrich your hair.
Ask me no more whether does have*
The Nightingale when May is past:
For in your sweet dividing throat,
She winters and keeps warm her note,
Ask me no more where those stars light,
That downwards fall in dead of night:
For in your eyes they sit and there,
Fixed become as in their sphere.
Ask me no more if East or West,
The Phoenix builds her spicy nest:
For unto you at last she flies,
And in your fragrant bosom dies.
Song.
WOuld you know what is soft? I dare,
Not bring you to the down, or air:
Nor to stars to show what is bright,
Nor to snow to teach you white.
Nor if you would Music hear,
Call the orbs to take your ear*
Nor to please your sense bring forth,
Bruised N^d or what is more worth.
Or on food were your thoughts placed,
Bring you Nectar, for a taste:
Would you have all these in one,
Name my mistress, and it is done.
The second Rapture.
NO worldling, no, it is not thy gold,
Which thou do use but to behold,
Nor fortune, honor, nor long life,
Children, or friends, nor a good wife,
That makes thee haypy; these things be
But shadows of felicity.
Give me a wench about thirteen,
Already voted to the Queen
Of lust and lovers, whose soft hair,
Fanned with the breath of gentle air
Over spreads her shoulders like a tent,
And is her veil and ornament:
Whose tender touch, will make the blood
Wild in the aged, and the good.
Whose kisses fastened to the mouth,
Of threescore years and longer sloth,
Renew the age, and whose bright eye,
Obscure those lesser lights of sky,
Whose snowy breasts (if we may call
That snow, that never melts at all)
Makes Jove invent a new disguise,
In spite of Iunoes jealousies:
Whose every part does re-invite*
The old decayed appetite:
And in whose sweet embraces I,
May melt myself to lust, and die.
This is true bliss, and I confess,
There it no other happiness,
The Hue and Cry.
IN Jove's name you are charged hereby,
To make a speedy Hue and Cry,
After a face which the other day,
Stole my wandering heart away.
To direct you these (in brief,)
Are ready marks to know the theife.
Her hair a net of beams would prove,
Strong enough to captive Jove
In his Eagles shape; Her brow,
Is a comely field of snow.
Her eye so rich, so pure a gray.
Every beam creates a day.
And if she but sleep (not when
The sun sets) it is night again.
In her cheeks are to be seen,
Of flowers both the King and Queen,
Thither by the graces led,
And freshly laid in nuptial bed.
On whom lips like Nymphs do wait,
Who deplore their virgin state,
Often they blush, and blush for this,
That they one another kiss,
But observe besides the rest,
You shall know this Fell on best,
By her tongue, for if your ear
Once a heavenly music hear,
Such as neither Gods nor Men,
But from that voice, shall hear age^
That that i^ she* O strait surprise,
And bring her unto loves Assize*
If you let her go she may,
Antedate the latter day,
Fate and Philosophy control,
And leavethe world without a soul.
To his Mistress confined. Song.
O Think not Phoebe 'cause a cloud,
Does now thy silver brightness shroud,
My wandering eye
Can stoop to common beauties of the Sky.
Rather be kind, and this Ecclips,
Shall neither binder eye nor lips,
For we shall meet,
Within our hearts and kiss, and none shall see it.
Nor can thou in thy prison be;
Without some living sign of me;
When thou do spy,
A Sun beam peep into the room, it is J.
For I am hid within a flame,
And thus into thy chamber came,
To let thee see,
In what a mart tyredome I burn for thee.
When thou do touch thy Lute thou may,
Think on my heart, on which thou plaiest;
When each sad tone,
Upon the strings does show my deeper groan.
When thou do please, they shall rebound,
With nimble airs struck to the sound,
Of thy own voice;
O think how much I tremble and rejoice.
There Is no sad picture that does dwell,
Upon thy Arras wall, but well
Resembles me,
No matter though our age do not agree.
Love can make old, as well as time,
And he that does but twenty clime,
If he dare prove,
As true as I, shows fourscore years in love.
The Primrose.
Ask me why I send you here,
This firs^ling of the infant year:
Ask me why I send to you,
This Primrose all bepearl'd with dew.
I strait will whisper in your ears,
The sweets of love are washed with tears.
Ask me why this flower does show,
So yellow green and sickly too:
Ask me why the stalk is weak,
And bending yet it does not break:
I must tell you these discover,
What doubts and fears are in a loves.
The tinder.
OF what mould did nature frame me
Or was it her intent to shame me,
That no woman can come near me
Fair, but her I court to hear me?
Sure that mistress to whose beauty.
First I paid a lovers duty.
Burnt in rage my heart to tinder.
That nor prayers, nor tears can hinder.
But where ever I do turn me,
Every spark let fall does burn me.
Women since you thus inflame me,
Flint and steel I Will ever name ye.
A Song.
IN her fair cheeks two pits do lie,
To bury those slain by her eye,
So spite of death this comforts me,
That fairly buried I shall be.
My grave with rose and lilly spread,
O it is a life to be so dead.
Come then and kill me with thy eye,
For if thou let me live, I die.
When I behold those lips again,
Reviving what those eyes have slain,
With kisses sweet, whose balsome pure,
Loves wounds as soon as made, can cure.
Me thinks it is sickness to be sound,
And there is no health to such a wound.
Come then etc.
When in her chaste breast I behold,
Those downy mounts of snow never cold,
And those blessed hearts her beauty kills,
Revived by climing those fair hills.
Me thinks there is life in such a death,
And so i expire, inspires new breath.
Come then, etc.
Nympbe since no death is deadly where,
Such choice of Antidotes are near,
And your keen eyes but kill in vain,
Those that are sound, as soon as slain,
That I no longer d^d survive,
Your way's to bury me alive
In Cupids cave, where happy (...)
May dying live, and living die.
Come then and kill me with thy eye,
For if thou let me live, I die.
The Carver. To his Mistress.
A Carver having loved too long in vain,
Hewd out the portraiture of Venus Sun
In marble rock upon the which did rain
Small dris^ing drops that from a fount did run,
Imagining the drops would either wear
His fury out, or quench his living flame:
But when he saw it bootlesse did appear,
He swore the water did augment the same.
So I that seek in verse to carve^thee out,
Hoping thy beauty will my flame allay.
Veiwing my lines impolish't all throughout,
Find my will rather to my love obey:
That with the Carver I my work do blame,
Finding it still th'augmenter of my flame,
To the Painter.
FOnd man that hop'st to catch that face,
With those false colors, whose short grace
Serves but to show the lookers on,
The faults of thy presumption.
Or at the least to let us see,
That is divine, but yet not shee^
Say you could imitate the rays,
Of those eyes that outshine the days,
Or counterseite in red and white,
That most vncounterfeited light
Osher complexion; yet can thou,
(Great Master though thou be) tell ho^
To paint a virtue? Then desist,
This saire, your Artifice has mist:
You should have marked how she begins,
To grow in virtue, not in sins:
In stead of that same rosy die,
You should have drawn out modesty.
Whose beauty sits enthroned there,
And learn to look and blush at ^er.
Or can you color just the same,
When virtue blushes or when shame:
When sickness, and when innocence,
Shows pale or white unto the sense?
Can such course varnish ere be sed,
To imitate her white and red?
This may do well else-wherein Spain,
Among those faces died in grain,
So you may thrive and what you do,
Prove the best picture of the two.
Besides (if all I hear be true,)
It Is taken ill by some that you
Should be so insolently vain,
As to contrive all that rich gain
Into one tablet, which alone
May teach us superstition;
Instructing our amazed eyes,
To admire and worship Imag'^ies,
Such as quickly might out shine
Some new Saint, were allowed a shrine,
And turn each wandering looker on,
Into a new Pigmaleon.
Yet your Art cannot equalize,
This Picture in her lovers eyes.
His eyes the pencills are which limb*
Her truly, as here is copy him,
His heart the Tablet which alone,
I^ for that porctraite the tru'st stone*
If you would a truer see,
Mark it in their posterity:
And you shall read it truly there,
When the glad world shall see their Heir.
Loves Courtship.
Kiss lovely Celia and be kind,
Let my desires freedom find,
Sit thee down,
And we will make the Gods confess,
Mortals enjoy some happiness.
Mars would disdain his Mistress charms,
If he beheld thee in my arms,
And descend:
Thee his mortal Queen to make,
Or live as mortal for thy sake.
Venus must loose her title now,
And leave to brag of Cupid's bow,
Silly Queen.
She has but one, but I can spy,
^en (...) Cupids in thy eye.
Nor may the sun behold our bliss,
For sure thy eyes do dazzle his
If thou fear.
That he will betray thee with his light,
Let me eclipse thee from his sight.
And while I shade thee from his eye,
Oh let me hear thee gently cry,
Celia yields.
Maids often loose their Maidenhead,
Ere they set soote in Nuptial bed.
On a Damask rose sticking upon a Ladies breast.
LEt pride grow big my rose, and let the clear
And dam ask color of thy leaves appear.
Let scent and looks be sweet and bless that hand.
That did transplant thee to that sacred land.
O happy thou that in that garden rest's,
That Paradise between that Ladies breasts.
There Is an eternal spring; there shall thou lie,
Betwixt two lilly mounts, and never die.
There shall thou spring amongst the fertile valleys,
By budds like thee that grow in midst of Allies.
There none date pluck thee, for that place is such
That but a good devine, there is none dare touch,
If any but approach, strait does arise
A blushing lightning flash, and blasts his eyes.
There stead of rain shall living fountains flow,
For wind her fragrant breath for ever blow.
Nor now, as erst, one Sun shall on thee shine,
But those two glorious suns, her eyes devine.
O then what Monarch would not think it a grace,
To leave his Regal throne to have thy place.
My self to gain thy blessed seat do vow.
Would be transformd into a rose as thou.
The protestation a Sonnet.
NO more shall meads be decked with flowers,
Nor sweetness dwell in rosy bowers:
Nor greenest buds on branches spring,
Nor warbling birds delight to sing,
Nor April violets paint the grove,
If I forsake my Celias love.
The fish shall in the Ocean burn,
And fountains sweet shall bitter turn,
The humble oak no flood shall know,
When floods shall highest hills ore-flow.
Black Laethe shall oblivion leave,
If ere my Celia I deceive.
Love shall his bow and shaft lay by,
And Venus doves want wings to fly:
The Sun refuse to show his light,
And day shall then be turned to night,
And in that night no star appear,
If once I leave my Celia de^.
Love shall no more inhabit earth,
Nor lovers more shall love for worth,
Nor joy above in heaven dwell,
Nor pain torment poor souls in hell,
Grim death no more shall horrid prove,
If ere I leave bright Celias love.
The toothache cured by a kiss.
FAte's now grown merciful to men,
Turning disease to bliss:
For had not kind Rheum vexed me then,
I might not Celia kiss.
Physicians you are now my scorn:
For I have found a way:
To cure diseases (when forlorn
By your dull art) which may
Patch up a body for a time,
But can restore to health,
No more then Chimists can sublime
True Gold, the Indies wealth.
That Angel sure that used to move
The poole, men so admired,
Has to her lip the seat of love,
As to his heaven retired.
To his jealous Mistress.
ADmit (thou darling of mine eyes)
I have some Idol lately framed:
That under such a false disguise,
Our true loves might the less be famed.
Can thou that know my heart suppose,
'Ile fall from thee, and worship those.
Remember (dear) how loath and slow,
I was to cast a look or smile,
Or one love-line to mis-bestow,
Till thou had changed both face and style.
And art thou grow no afraid to see,
That mask put on thou made for me.
I dare not call those childish fears,
Coming from love, much less from thee,
But wash away with frequent tears,
This counterfeit Idolatry.
And henceforth kneel at never a shrine,
To blind the world, but only thine.
The Dart.
Often when I look I may desery.
A little face peep through that eye,
Sure that is the boy which wisely chose,
His throne among such beams as those,
Which if his quiver chance to fall:
May serve for darts to kill withal.
The mistake.
WHen on fairo Celia I did spy,
A wounded he^art of stone,
The wound had almost made me cry,
Sure this heart was my own.
But when I saw it was enthroned,
In her celestial breast:
O then I it no longer owned,
For mine was never so blessed.
Yet if in highest heavens do shine,
Each constant Martyrs heart:
Then she may well give rest to mint,
That for her sake does smart.
Where seated in so high a bliss,
Though wounded it shall live:
Death enters not in Paradise,
The place free life does give.
Or if the place less sacred were,
Did but her saving eye*
Bath my sick heart in one kind tear*
Then should I never dye.
Slight balmes may heal a slighter sore,
No medicine less divine,
Can ever hope for to restore,
A wounded heart like mine.
Coelum Brittanicum. A MASQVE AT WHITE HALL IN the Banqueting house, on
Shrove-Tuesday-night, the 18. of February, 1633.

The Inventors. Tho: Carew, Inigo Jones.

Non habet ingenium; Caesar sed jussit: habebo.
Cur me posse negem, posse quod ille putat.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Walkley. 1640.

THE DESCRIPTION OF THE SCAENE.
THe first thing that presented it self to the sight, was a rich Ornament,
that enclosed the Scaene; in the upper part of which, were great branches of
Foliage growing out of leaves and husks, with a Coronice at the top; and in
the midst was placed a large Compartiment composed of Groteske work, wherein
were Harpies with wings and Lions claws, and their hinder parts converted into
leaves and branches: over all was a broken Frontispice, wrought with scrowles
and masque heads of Children; and within this a Table adorned with a lesser
Compartiment, with this Inscription, COELVM BRITANNICVM. The two sides of this
Ornament were thus ordered: First from the ground arose a square Basement, and
on the Plinth stood a great vaze of gold, richly enchased, and beautified with
Sculptures of great Releine, with frutages hanging from the upper part: At the
foot of this sat two youths naked, in their natural colors; each of these
with one arm supported the Vaze; on the cover of which stood two young women
in Draperies, arm in arm; the one figuring the glory of Princes, and the
other Mansuetude: their other arms bore up an Ovall, in which, to the Kings
Majesty was this Imprese, A Lion with an Imperial Crown on his head; the
word, Animum sub pectore forti: On the other side was the like Composition, but
the design of the Figures varied; and in the Oval on the top, being borne up
by Nobility and Fecundity, was this Imprese to the Queens Majesty, A Lilly
growing with branches and leaves, and three lesser Lillies springing out of the
Stem; the Word, Semper inclita Virtus: All this Ornament was heightened with
Gold, and for the Invention, and various composition was the newest and most
gracious that has been done in this place.

The Curtain was watchet, and a pale yellow in pains, which flying up on the
sudden, discovered the Scaene, representing old Arches, old Palaces, decayed
walls, parts of Temples, Theaters, Basilita's and Therme, with confused heaps of
broken Columns, Bases, Coronices and Statues, lying as underground, and
altogether resembling the ruins of some great City of the ancient Romans, or
civilized Britains. This strange prospect detayn'd the eyes of the Spectators
sometime, when to a loud Music Mercury descends; on the upper part of his
Chariot stands a Cock in action of crowing: his habit was a Coat of flame
color girt to him, and a white Mantle trimmed with gold and silver; upon his
head a wreath with small falls of white Feathers, a Caduseus in his hand, and
wings at his heels: being come to the ground he dismounts, and goes up to the
State.

Mercury. FRom the high Senate of the gods, to You
Bright glorious Twins of Love and Majesty,
Before whole Throne three wat^ke Nations bend
Their willing knees, on whose Imperial brows*
The Regal Circle prints no awful frowns
To fright your Subjects, but whose calmer eyes
Shed joy and safety on their melting hearts
That flow with cheerful loyal reverence.
Come my Cyllenius, Jove's Ambassador:
Not, as of gold, to whisper amorous tales
Of wanton love, into the glowing ear
Of some choice beauty in this numerons trains
Those days are fled, the rebel slameis quenched
In heavenly breasts, the gods have sworn by Styx*
Never to tempt yielding mortality
To loose embraces Your exemplar life
Has not alone transfused a zealous heat
Of imitation through your virtuous Court,
By whose bright blaze your Palace is become
The ^vy'd pattern of this under-world,
But the aspiring flame has kindled heaven;
The immortal bosoms butne with emulous fires,
Jove rivals your great virtues, Royal Sir,
And Juno, Madam, your attractive graces*
He his wild lusts, her raging jealousies
She lays aside, and through the Olympique hall,
As yours does here, their great Example spreads,
And though of old, when youthful blood conspi^'d
With his new Empire, prone to heats of lust,
He actedincests, rapes, adulteries
On earthly beauties, which his raging Queen,
Swollen with revengefull fury, turned to beasts,
And in despite he transformed to Stars,
Till he had filled the crowded Firmament
With his loose Strumpets, and their sputious race,
Where the eternal records of his shame
Shine to the world in flaming Characters;
When in the Crystal myrrour of your reign
He viewed himself, he found his loathsome stains;
And now, to expiate the infectious guilt
Of those detested luxuries, he will chase
The infamous lights from their usurped Sheare,
And drown in the Lethae an flood, their cursed
Both names and memories. In whose vacant rooms
First you succeed, and of the wheeling Orb
In the most eminent and conspicuous point,
With dazeling beams, and spreading magnitude,
Shine the bright Pole-starre of this Hemispheare,
Next, by your side, in a triumphant Chair,
And crowned with Ariadnes Diadem,
Sits the fair Consort of your heart, and Throne;
Diffused about you, with that share of light
As they of virtue have derived from you,
He Will fix this Noble train, of either sex;
So to the British stars this lower Globe
Shall owe its light, and they alone dispense
To' th world a pure refined influence.

Enter Momns attired in a long darkish Robe, all wrought over with ponyards,
Serpents tongues, eyes and ears, his beard and hair party colored, and upon
his head a wreath stuck with Feathers, and a Porcupine in the forepart. Mom^.
BY your leave, Mortals. Gooden Cozen Hermes, your pardon good my Lord
Ambassador: I found the tables of your Arms and Titles, in every Inn betwixt
this and Olympus, where your present expedition is registered, your nine
thousandth nine hundred ninety ninth Legation. I cannot reach the policy why
your Master breeds so few Statesmen, it suits not with his dignity that in the
whole Empyraeum there should not be a god fit to send on these honorable
errands but your self, who are not yet so careful of his honor as your own,
as might become your quality, when you are itinerant: the Hosts upon the
highway cry out with open mouth upon you for supporting pilfery in your
train; which, though as you are the god of petty Larcinry, you might protect,
yet you know it is directly against the new orders, and opposes the Reformation
in Diameter.


Merc. Peace Rayler, bridle your licentious tongue.

And let this Presence teach you modesty.


Mom. Let it if it can; in the mean time I will acquaint it with my condition.
Know, (gay people) that though your Poets who enjoy by Patent a particular
privilege to draw down any of the Deities from Twelf-night till Shrove-tuesday,
at what time there is annually a most familiar enter-course between the two
Courts, have as yet never invited me to these Solemnities, yet it shall appear
by my intrusion this night, that I am a very considerable Person upon these
occasions, and may most properly assist at such entertainements. My name is
Momus. ap-Somnus-ap-Erebus-aep-Chaos-ap-Demorgorgon-ap-Eternity. My Offices and
Titles are, The Supreme Theomastix, Hupercrittique of manners, Protonotarie of
abuses, Arch-Informer, Dilator General, Universal Calumniator, Eternal
Plaintiff, and perpetual Foreman of the Grand Inquest. My privileges are an
ubiquitary, circumambulatory, speculatory, interrogatory, redargutory immunity
over all the privy lodgings, behind hangings, doors, curtains, through
key-holes, chinkes, windows, about all Veneriall Lobbies, Skon^es or Redoubts,
though it be to the surprise of a perdu Page or Chambermaid, in, and at all
Courts of civil and criminal judicature, all Counsels, Consultations, and
Parlamentary Assemblies, where though I am but a Woolsacke god, and have no
vote in the sanction of new laws, I have yet a Praerogative of wresting the
old to any whatsoever interpretation, whether it be to the behoof, or
prejudice, of Jupiter his Crown and Dignity, for, or against the Rights of
either house of Patrician or Plebeian gods. My natural qualities are to make
Jove frown, Juno powt, Mars chafe, Venus blush, Vulcan glow, Saturn quake;
Cynthia pale, Phoebus hide his face, and Mercury here take his heels. My
recreations are witty mischiefs, as when Saturn guelt his father; the Smith
caught his wife and her Bravo in a net of Cobweb-Iron; and Hebe, through the
lubricity of the pavement tumbling over the Halfpace, presented the Emblem of
the forked tree. and discovered to the tanned Ethiops the snowie cliffs of
Culabria with the Grotta of Puteolum. But that you may arrive at the perfect
knowledge of me, by the familiar illustration of a Bird of mine own feather,
old Peter Aretine, who reduced all the Scepters and Myters of that Age
tributary to his wit, was my Parallel; and Frank Rublais sucked much of my
milk too; but your modern French Hospital of Oratory, is mere counterfeit,
an arrant Mountebanke, for though fearing no other fortunes than his Sciatica,
he discourse of Kings and Queens with as little Reverence as of Grooms and
Chamber-maids, yet he wants their fangteeth, and Scorpions tail; I mean that
fellow, who to add to his stature thinks it a greater grace to dance on his
tiptoes like a Dog in a doublet, than to walk like other men on the soles of
his feet.


Merc. No more impertinent Trifeler, you disturb
The great Affair with your rude scurrilous chat:
What does the knowledge of your abject state
Concern Jove's solemn Message?

Mom. Sir, by your favor, though you have a more especial Commission of
employment from Jupiter, and a larger entertainment from his Exchequer, yet as
a freeborne god I have the liberty to travel at mine own charges, without
your pass or countenance Legacine; and that it may appear a sedulous acute
observer, may know as much as a dull flegmatique Ambassador, and wears a
treble key to unlocke the mysterious Ciphers of your dark secrecies, I will
discourse the politic state of Heaven to this trim Audience --

At this the Scaene changes, and in the heaven is discovered a Sphere, with
Stars placed in their several Images; borne up by a huge naked Figure (only a
piece of Drapery hanging over his thigh) kneeling and bowing forwards, as if
the great weight lying on his shoulders oppressed him, upon his head a Crown, by
all which he might easily be known to be Atlas.

-- You shall understand, that Jupiter upon the inspection of I know not what
virtuous Presidents extant (as they say) here in this Court, but as I more
probably guess out of the consideration of the decay of his natural
abilities, has before a frequent convocation of the Superlunary Peers in a
solemn Oration recanted, disclaymed, and utterly renounced all the lascivious
extravagancies, and riotous enormities of his forepast licentious life, and
taken his oath on Iunos Breviary, religiously kissing the two-leav'd Book,
never to stretch his limbs more betwixt adulterous sheets, and has with
patheticall remonstrances exhorted, and under strict penalties enjoined a
respective conformity in the several subordinate Deities; and because the
Libertines of Antiquity, the Ribald Poets, to perpetuate the memory and example
of their tryumphs over chastity, to all future imitation, have in their
immortal songs celebrated the martyrdom of those Strumpets under the
persecution of the wives, and devolved to Posterity the Pedigrees of their
whores bawds, and bastards; it is therefore by the authority aforesaid enacted,
that this whole Army of Constellations be immediately disbanded and casheerd,
so to remove all imputation of impiety from the Celestial Spirits, and all
lustful influences upon terrestrial bodies; and consequently that there be an
Inquisition erected to exspunge in the Ancient, and suppress in the modern
and succeeding Poems and Pamphlets, all past, present, and future mention of
those abjured heresies, and to take particular notice of all ensuing
incontinences, and punish them in their high Commission Court. Am not I in
election to be a tal Statesman think you, that can repeat a passage at a
Counsell-table thus punctually?


Merc. I shun in vain the importunity With which this Snarler vexes all the
gods, Jove cannot escape him: well, what else from heaven?


Mom. Heaven! Heaven is no more the place it was; a Cloister of Carthusians, a
Monastery of converted gods, Jove is grown old and fearful, apprehends a
subversion of his Empire, and doubts lest Fate should introduce a legal
succession in the legetimate heir, by repossessing the Titanian line, and
hence springs all this innovation. We have had new orders read in the Presence
Chamber, by the Vi-President of Parnassus, too strict to be observed long,
Monopolies are called in, sophistication of wares punished, and rates imposed
on commodities. Injunctions are gone out to the Nectar Brewers, for the purging
of the heavenly Beverage of a narcotique weed which has rendered the Idaeaes
confused in the Divine intellects, and reducing it to the composition used in
Saturnes Reign. Edicts are made for the restoring of decayed housekeeping,
prohibiting the repair of Families to the Metropolis, but this did endanger an
Amazonian mutiny, till the females put on a more masculine resolution of
soliciting businesses in their own persons, and leaving their husbands at
home for stallions of hospitality. Bacchus has commanded all Tavernes to be
shut, and no liquor drawn after ten at night. Cupid must go no more so
scandalously naked, but is enjoined to make him breeches, though of his mothers
petticotes. Ganimede is forbidden the Bedchamber, and must only minister in
public. The gods must keep no Pages, nor Grooms of their Chamber under the
age of 25. and those provided of a competent stock of beard. Pan may not pipe,
nor Proteus juggle, but by especial permission. Vulcan was brought to an
Orotenus and fined, for driving in a plate of Iron into one of the Suns
Chariot-wheeles, and frost-nailing his horses upon the fifth of November last,
for breach of a penal Statute prohibiting work upon Holi-dayes, that being
the annual celebration of the Gygantomachy. In brief, the whole state of the
Hierarchy suffers a total reformation, especially in the point of
reciprocation of conjugall affection. Venus has confessed all her adulteries,
and is received to grace by her husband, who conscious of the great disparity
betwixt her perfections and his deformities, allows those levities as an
equal counterpoize; but it is the prettiest spectacle to see her stroaking
with her Ivory hand his collied cheeks, and with her snowie fingers combing his
sooty beard. Jupiter too begins to learn to lead his own wife, I left him
practicing in the milky way; and there is no doubt of an universal obedience,
where the Lawgiver himself in his own person observes his degrees so
punctually; who besides to eternize the memory of that great example of
Matrimonial union which he derives from hence, has on his Bedchamber door,
and seeling, fretted with stars in capital Letters, engraven the Inscription
of CARLOMARIA. This is as much I am sure as either your knowledge or
Instructions can direct you to, which I having in a blunt round tale, without
Stateformality, politic inferences, or suspected Rhetorical elegancies,
already delivered, you may now dexteriously proceed to the second part of your
charge, which is the raking of your heavenly sparks up in the Embers, or
reducing the Etheriall lights to their primitive opacity, and gross dark
subsistence; they are all unrivited from the Sphere, and hang loose in their
sockets, where they but attend the waving of your Caduce, and immediately they
reinvest their pristine shapes, and appear before you in their own natural
deformities.


Merc. Momus thou shall prevail, for since thy bol^
Intrusion has inverted my resolves,
I must obey necessity, and thus turn
My face, to breath the Thunders just decree
Against this adulterate sphere, which first I purge
Of loathsome Monsters, and misshapen forms*
Down from her azure concave, thus I charm
The Lyrnean Hydra, the rough unlick'd Bear,
The watchful Dragon, the storme-boading Whale*
The Centaure, the horned Goatfish Capricorn,
The Snake-head Gorgon, and fierce Sagitta;
Divested of your gorgeous starry robes,
Fall from the circling Orb, and e're you suck
Fresh venom in, measure this happy earth,
Then to the Fens, Caves, Forests, Deserts, Seas,
Fly, and resume your native qualities.
They dance in those menstrous shapes the first Antimaske of natural
deformity.
Mom. Are not these fine companions, trim play fellows for the Deities? yet
these and their fellows have made up all our conversation for some thousands
of years. Do not you fair Ladies acknowledge your selves deeply engaged now
to those Poets your servants, that in the height of commendation have raised
your beauties to a parallel with such exact proportions, or at least ranked
you in their spruce society. Has not the consideration of these Inhabitants
rather frighted your thoughts utterly from the contemplation of the place? but
now that these heavenly Mansions are to be void, you that shall hereafter be
found unlodged will become inexcusable; especially since Virtue alone shall be
sufficient title, fine, and rent: yet if there be a Lady not competently
stocked that way, she shall not on the instant utterly despair, if she carry
a sufficient pawn of handsomeness; for however the letter of the Law runs,
Jupiter notwithstanding his Age and present austerity, will never resuse to
stamp beauty, and make it current with his own Impression; but to such as are
destitute of both, I can afford but small encouragement. Proceed Cozen Mercury,
what follows?


Merc. Look up, and mark where the bright Zodiac
Hang^ like a Belt about the breast of heaven;
On the right shoulder, like a flaming Jewel,
His shell, with nine rich Topazes adorned,
Lord of this Tropique, sits the skalding Crab*
He, when the Sun gallops in full careere
His annual race; his ghastly claws uprear'd,
Frights at the confines of the torrid Zone,
The fiery teame, and proudly stops their course,
Making a solstice, till the fierce Steeds learn
His backward paces, and so retrograde
Post downe-hill to th'opposed Capricorn.
Thus I depose him from his laughty Throne*
Drop from the Sky, into the briny flood,
There teach thy motion to the ebbing Sea,
But let those fires that beautified thy shell
Take humane shapes, and the disorder show
Of thy regressive paces here below.
The second Antimasque is danced in retrograde paces, expressing obliquity in
motion.
Mom. This Crab, I confess, did ill become the heavens; but there is another
that more infests the Earth, and makes such a solstice in the politer Arts and
Sciences, as they have not been observed for many Ages to have made any
sensible advance: could you but l^ad the learned squadrons with a masculine
resolution past this point of retrogradation, it were a benefit to mankind,
worthy the power of a god, and to be paid with Altars; but that not being the
work of this night, you may pursue your purposes: what now succeeds?


Merc. Vice, that unbodied, in the Appetite
Erects his Throne, has yet, in bestiall shapes,
Branded, by Nature, with the Character
And distinct stamp of some peculiar Ill,
Mounted the Sky, and fiz'd his Trophies there:
As fawning flattery in the little Dog;
In The bigger, churlish Murmur; Cowardice
In The timorous Hare; Ambition in the Eagle;
Rapine and Avarice in th'adventurous Ship
That sailed to Col^hos for the golden fleece;
Drunken distemper in the Goblet flows;
In The Dart and Scorpion, bit ing Calumny;
In Hercules and the Lion, furious rage;
Vain Ostentation in C^ssiope*
All these I to eternal exile doom,
But to this place their Emblem'd Vices summon,
Clad in those proper Figures, by which best
Their incorpore all nature is expressed.
The third Antimasque is danced of these several vices, expressing the
deviation from Virtue.
Mom. From hence forth it shall be no more ^id in the Proverb, when you would
express a riotous Assembly, That hell, but Heaven is broke loose: this was an
arrant Goale-delivery, all the Prisons of your great Cities could not have
vomited more corrupt matter: but Cozen Cylleneus, in my judgment it is not
safe that these infectious persons should wander here to the hazard of this
Island, they threatened less danger when they were nayl'd to the Firmament: I
should conceive it a very discree^ course, since they are provided of a tall
vessel of their own ready rigged, to embarque them all together in that good
Ship called the Argo, and send them to the plantation in New England, which
has purged more virulent humors from the politic body, then Guacum and all
the West-Indian drugs have from the natural bodies of this Kingdom: Can you
devise how to dispose them better?


Merc. They cannot breath this pure and temperats Air
Where Virtue lives, but will with hasty flight,
Amongst fogs and vapors, seek unsound abodes.
^y after them, srom your usurped seats,
You foul remainders of that viporous brood:
Let not a Star of luxurious race
With his loose blaze stain the skies crystal sace.
All the Stars are quenched, and the Sphere darkened. Before the entry of
every Antimasque, the Stars in those figures in the Sphere which they were
to represent, were extinct; so as, by the end of the Antimasques in the Sphere
no more Stars were seen.


Mom. Here is a total Eclipse of the eighth Sphere, which neither Booker,
Allestre, nor any of your Prognosticators, no nor their great Master Tico were
aware of; but yet in my opinion there were some innocent, and some generous
Constellations, that might have been reserved for Noble uses: as the Skales
and Sword to adorn the statue of Justice, since she resides here on Earth
only in Picture and Effigy. The Eagle had been a fit present for the
Germans, in regard their Bird has mewed most of her feathers lately. The
Dolphin too had been most welcome to the French, and then had you but clapped
Perseus on his Pegasus, brandishing his Sword, the Dragon yawning on his back
under the horses feet, with Python's dart through his throat, there had been a
Divine St. George for this Nation: but since you have improvidently shuffled
them altogether, it now rests only that we provide an immediate succession,
and to that purpose I will instantly proclaim a free Election. O yes, O yes, O
yes,
By the Father of the gods, and the King of men.


Whereas we having observed a very commendable practice taken into frequent
use by the Princes of these latter Ages, of perpetuating the memory of their
famous enterprises, sieges, battles, victories, in Picture, Sculpture,
Tapistry, Embroyderies, and other manifactures, where with they have
embellished their public Palaces, and taken into Our more distinct and
serious consideration, the particular Christmas, hanging of the Guard-Chamber
of this Court, wherein the Navall Victory of 88. is to the eternal glory of
this Nation exactly delineated; and whereas We likewise out of a prophetical
imitation of this so laudable custom, did for many thousand years before,
adorn and beautify the eighth room of Our caelestiall Mansion, commonly
called the Star Chamber, with the military adventures, stratagems,
achievements, feats and defeats, performed in Our Own person, whilst yet Our
Standard was erected, and We a Combattant in the Amorous Warfare. It has
notwithstanding* after mature deliberation, and long debate, held first in our
own inscrutable bosom, and afterward communicated with Our Privy Council,
seemed meet to Our Omnipotency, (...) causes to Our self best known, to (...)
and dis-array Our foresaid Star Chamber (...) all those Ancient
Constellations which have for so many Ages been sufficiently no^rious, (...)
(...) admit into their vacant places, such (...) only as shall be qualified
with exemplar Virtue and eminent Desert, there to shine in d^ble Characters of
glory to all Posterity. It is therefore Our divine will and pleasure,
voluntarily, and out of Our own free and proper motion, mere grace and
special favor, by these presents to specify and declare to all Our loving
People, that it shall be lawful for any Person whatsoever, that conceives him
or her self to be really endued with any Heroical Virtue or transcendent
Merit, worthy so high a calling and dignity, to bring their several pleas and
pretenses before Our Right trusty and and Welbeloved Cozen, and Councellor, Don
Mercury, and god Momus, etc. Our peculiar Deligates for that affair, upon whom
We have transferred an absolute power to conclude, and determine without
Appeal or Revocation, accordingly as to their wisdoms it shall in such cases
appear behovefull and expedient. Given at Our Palace in Olympus the first day
of the first month, in the first year of the Reformation.

Plutus enters, an old man full of wrinkles, a bald head, a thin white beard,
spectacles on his nose, with a ^uncht back, and attired in a Robe of Cloth of
gold.
Plutus appears. Merc. Who Is this appears?


Mom. This is a subterranean Fiend, Plutus in this Dialect termed Riches, or
the god of Gold; a Poison hid by Providence in the botome of the Seas, and
Navill of the Earth, from man's discovery, where if the seeds begun to sprout
above-ground, the excrescence was carefully guarded by Dragons; yet at last by
humane curiosity brought to light, to their own destruction; this being the
true Pandora's box, whence issued all those mischiefs that now fill the
Universe.


Plut. That I prevent the message of the gods
Thus with my haste, and not attend their summous;
Which ought in Justice call me to the place
I now require of Right, is not alone
To show the just precedence that I hold
Before all earthly, next the immortal Powers;
But to exclude the hope of partial Grace
In all Pretenders, who, since I descend
To equal trial, must by my example,
Waving your favor, claim by sole Desert.
If Virtue must inherit, she is my slave;
I lead her captive in a golden chain,
About the world: She takes her Form and Being
From my creation; and those barren seeds
That drop from Heaven, if I not cherish them
With my distilling dewes, and sotive hear,
They know no vegetation; but exposed
To blasting winds of freezing Poverty,
Or not shoot forth at all, or budding, wither:
Should I proclaim the daily sacrifice
Brought to my Temples by the toyling rout,
Not of the fat and gore of abject Beasts,
But humane sweat, and blood powered on my Altars,
I might provoke the envy of the gods.
Turn but your eyes and mark the busy world,
Climbing steep Mountains for the sparkling stone,
Piercing the Center for the shining Ore,
And The Oceans bosom to rake pearly sands,
Crossing the torrid and the frozen Zones,
Midst Rocks and swallowing Gulfes, for gainful trade,
And through opposing swords, fire, murdering Cano^*
Skaling the walled Towns for precious spoils.
Plant in the passage to your heavenly seats,
These horrid dangers, and then see who dares
Advance his desperate foot; yet am I sought,
And often in vain, through these, and greater hazards;
I could discover how your Deitie^
Are for my sake slighted, despised, abused,
Your Temples, Shrines, Altars, and Images
Vncover'd, rifled, robbed, and disarray'd
By sacrilegious hands: yet is this treasure
To the golden Mountain, where I sit adored
With superstitious solemn rights convay'd,
And becomes sacred there, the sordid wretch
Not daring touch the consecrated Ore,
Or with profane hands lessen the bright heap;
But this might draw your anger down on mortals
For rendering me the homage due to you:
Yet what is said may well express my power
Too great for Earth, and only fit sor Heaven.
Now, for your pastime, view the naked root,
Which in the dirty earth, and base mould drowned.
Sends forth this precious Plant, and golden fruit.
You lusty Swains, that to your grazing flocks
Pi^e amorous Roundelayes; you toyling Hinds,
That barbe the fields, and to your merry Teames
Whistle your passions; and you mining Moles,
That in the bowels of your mother-Earth
Dwell the eternal burden of her womb,
Cease from your labors, when Wealth bids you play,
Sing, dance, and keep a cheerful holy day.
They dance the fourth Antimasque, consisting of Country people, music and
measures.
Merc. Plutus, the gods know and confess your power,
Which feeble Virtue seldom can resist;
Stronger then Towers of brass, or Chastity;
Jove knew you when he courted Danae,
And Cupid wears you on that Arrows head
That still prevails, But the gods keep their Throne:
To enstall Virtue, not her Enemies,
They dread thy force, which even themselves have felt,
Witness Mount-Ida, where the Martial Maid,
And frowning Juno, did to mortal eyes
Naked, for gold, their sacred bodies show,
Therefore for ever be from heaven banished.
But since with toil srom undiscovered Worlds
Thou art brought hither, where thou first did breath
The thirst of Empire, into Regal breasts,
And frightedst quiet Peace from her meek Throne,
Filling the World with tumult, blood, and war,
Follow the Camps of the contentious earth,
And be the Conqu'rers slave, but he that can
Or conquer thee, or give thee Virtuous stamp,
Shall shine in heaven a pure immortal Lamp,

Mom. Nay stay, and take my benediction along with you. I could, being here a
Co-Iudge, like others in my place, now that you are condemned, either rail at
you, or break jests upon you, but I rather choose to loose a word of good
counsel, and entreat you to be more careful in your choice of company, for
you are always found either with Misers, that not use you at all; or with
fools, that know not how to use you well: Be not hereafter so reserved and coy
to men of worth and parts, and so you shall gain such credit, as at the next
Sessions you may be heard with better success. But till you are thus
reformed, I pronounce this positive sentence, That wheresoever you shall choose
to abide, your society shall add no credit or reputation to the party, nor
your discontinuance, or total absence, be matter of disparagement to any man;
and whosoever shall hold a contrary estimation of you, shall be condemned to
wear perpetual Motley, unless he recant his opinion. Now you may void the
Court.

^ Paenia enters, a woman of a pale color, large brims of a hat upon her head,
through which her hair started up like a fury, her Robe was of a dark color
full of patches, about one of her hands was tide a chain of Iron, to which was
fastened a weighty stone, which she bore up under her arm.
Paenia enters. Merc. What Creature's this?

Mom. The Antipodes to the other, they move like
Two Buckets, or as two nails drive out one another;
If Riches depart, Poverty will enter.

P^v. I nothing doubt (Great and Immortal Powers)
But that the place, your wisdom has denied
My foe, your Justice will confer on me;
Since that which renders him incapable,
Proves a strong plea for me. I could pretend,
Even in these rags, a larger Sovereignty
Then gaudy Wealth in all his pomp can boast;
For mark how few they are that share the World;
The numerous Armies, and the swarming Ants
That sight and toil for them, are all my Subjects,
They take my wages, we are my Livery:
Invention too and Wit, are both my creatures,
And the whole race of Virtue is my Offspring;
As many mischiefs issue from my womb,
And those as mighty, as proceed from gold.
Often over his Throne I wave my awful Scepter,
And in the bowels of his state command,
When 'midst his heaps of coin, and hills of gold,
I pine, and starve the avaritious Fool.
But I decline those titles, and lay claim
To heaven, by right of Divine contemplation;
She is my Darling, I, in my sost lap,
Free from disturbing cares, bargains, accounts,
Leases, Rents, Stewards, and the fear of thieves,
That vex the rich, nurse her in calm repose,
And with her, all the Virtues speculative,
Which, but with me, find no secure retreat.
For entertainment of this hour, I Will call
A race of people to this place, that live
At Natures charge, and not importune heaven
To chain the winds up, or keep back the storms,
To stay the thunder, or forbid the hayle
To thresh the unreap'd ear; but to all weathers,
Both chilling srost, and scalding Sun, expose
Their equal face. Come forth, my swarthy train,
In this fair circle dance, and as you move.
Mark, and foretell happy events of Love.
They dance the fifth Antimasque of Gypsies.
Mom. I cannot but wonder that your perpetual conversation with Poets and
Philosophers has furnished you with no more Logic, or that you should think
to impose upon us so gross an inference, as because Plutus and you are
contrary, therefore whatsoever is denied of the one, must be true of the
other; as if it should follow of necessity, because he is not Jupiter, you
are. No, I give you to know, I am better versed in cavils with the gods, then
to swallow such a fallacy, for though you two cannot be together in one place,
yet there are many places that may be without you both, and such is heaven,
where neither of you are likely to arrive: therefore let me advise you to marry
your self to Content, and beget sage Apothegmes, and goodly moral Sentences
in disprayse of Riches, and contempt of the world.


Merc. Thou do pres^ me too much, poor n^dy wretch,
To claim a station in the Firmament,
Because thy humble Cottage, or thy Tub
N^ses some lazy or Pedantique virtue
In the cheap Sunshine, or by shady springs
With roots and pot-he^rbs; where thy right hand,
T^ing those humane passions from the mind,
Upon whose stocks fair blooming virtues flourish,
Deg^deth Nature, and ^ummeth sense,
And Gorgon-like, turns active men to stone.
We not require the dull society
Of your necessitated Tempe^,
Or that unnatural stupidity
That knows nor joy nor sorrow; nor you^ forc'^
Falsely exalted passive Fortitude
Above the active: This low abject brood,
That fix their seats in mediocrity,
Become your servile minds; but we advance
Such virtues only as admit excess,
Brave bounte^us Acts, Regal (...)
All-seeing Prudence, Mag^nimity
That knows no bound, and that Heroic virtue
For which Antiquity has left no name,
But patterns only, such as Hercules,
Achilles, Thes^us. Back to thy loathed cell,
And when thou see the new enlightened Sphere,
Study to know but what those Worthies were.
Tiche, enters, her head bald behind, and one great lock before, wings at her
shoulders, and in her hand a wheel, her upper parts naked, and the skirt of
her Garment wrought all over with Crowns, Scepters, Books, and such other
things as express both her greatest and and smallest gifts.
Mom. See where Dame Fortune comes, you may know her by her wheel, and that
veil over her eyes, with which she hopes like a seel'd Pigeon to mount above
the Clouds, and perch in the eighth Sphere: listen, she begins.


Fort. I come not here (you gods) to plead the Right,
By which Antiquity assigned my Deity,
Though no peculiar station amongst the Stars,
Yet general power to rule their influence,
Or boast the Title of Omnipotent,
Ascribed me then, by which I rivaled Jove,
Since you have cancelled all those old records*
But confident in my good cause and merit,
Claim a succession in the vacant Orb,
For since Astraea fled to heaven, I sit
Her Deputy on Earth, I hold her skales
And weigh men's Fates out, who have made me blind,
Because themselves want eyes to see my causes,
Call me inconstant, 'cause my works surpass
The shallow fathom of their human reason;
Yet here, like blinded Justice, I dispense
With my impartial hands, their constant lots,
And if desertlesse, impious men engrosse
My best rewards, the fault is yours, you gods,
That scant your graces to mortality,
And niggards of your good, scarce spare the world
One virtuous, for a thousand wicked men.
It is no error to confer dignity,
But to bestow it on a vicious man;
I gave the dignity, but you made the vice,
Make you men good, and I Will make good men happy*
That Plutus is refused, dismayes me not,
He is my Drudge, and the external pomp,
In which he decks the World, proceeds from me,
Not him; like Harmony, that not resides
In strings, or notes, but in the hand and voice.
The revolutions of Empires, States,
Scepters, and Crowns, are but my game and sport,
Which as they hang on the events of War,
So those depend upon my ^ning wheel.
You wa^like Squadrons, who in (...),
Dispute the Right of Kings, which I (...),
Present the model of that martial (...),
By which, when Grownes are staked, I rule the game.
They dance the sixth Antimasque, being (...) representation of a Battle.
Mom. Madam, I should censure you, pro salso clam^re, for preferring a
scandalous crosbill of recrimination against the gods, but your blindness
shall excuse you. Alas! what would it advantage you, if virtue were as
universal as vice is? it would only follow, that as the world now exclaimes
upon you for exalting the vicious, it would then rail as fast at you sor
depressing the virtuous; so they would still keep their tune, though you
changed their Ditty.


Merc. The mists, in which future (...) (...) wrapped,
That often succeed beside the purposes
Of him that works, his dull eyes not discerning
The first great cause, offered thy clouded shape
To his enquiring search; so in the dark
The groping world (...) ^ound thy Deity,
And gave thee rule over contingencies,
Which, to the piercing eye of Providence,
Being fixed and certain, where past and to come,
Are always present, thou do disappeare,
Losest thy being, and art not all.
Be thou then only a deluding Phantome,
At best a blind guide, leading blinder fools;
Who, would they but survay their mutual wants,
And help each other, there were left no room
For thy vain aid* Wisdom, whose strong-built plots
Leave naught to hazard, mocks thy futile power.
Industrious labor drags thee by the locks,
Bound to his toyling Car, and not attending
Till thou dispense, reaches his own reward.
Only the lazy sluggard yawning lies
Before thy threshold, gaping for thy dole,
And licks the easy hand that feeds his sloth.
The shallow, rash, and unadvised man
Makes thee his stale, disburdens all the follies
Of his mis-guided actions, on thy shoulders.
Vanish from hence, and seek those Ide^ts out
That thy santasticke god head has allowed,
And rule that giddy superstitious crowd,

Hedone. Pleasure, a young woman with a smiling face, in a light lascivious
habit, adorned with silver and gold, her Temples crowned with a Garland of
Roses, and over that a Rainbow circling her head down to her shoulders.

Hedone enters.
Merc. What wanton's this?


Mom. This is the sprightly Lady Hedone, (...) merry Gamester, this people call
her Pleasure.


Plea. The reasons (equal Judges) here alleag'd
By the dismissed Pretenders, all concur
To strengthen my just title to the Sphere.
Honor, or Wealth, or the contempt of both,
Have in themselves no simple real good,
But as they are the means to purchase pleasure;
The paths that lead to my delicious Palace;
They for my sake, I for mine own am prized.
Beyond me nothing is, I am the Goal.
The Iourneyes end, to which the sweating world,
And wearied Nature travels. For this, the best
And wisest sect of all Philosophers,
Made me the seat of supreme happiness.
And though some, more austere, upon my ruins
Did to the prejudice of Nature, raise
Some petty low-built virtues, 'twas because
They wanted wings to reach my soaring pitch.
Had they been Princes borne, themselves had proved
Of all mankind the most luxurious.
For those delights, which to their low condition
Were obvious, they with greedy appetite
Sucked and devoured: from offices of State,
From cares of family, children, wife, hopes, fears
Retired, the churlish (...) in his Tub
Enjoyed those pleasures which his tongue defamed.
Nor am I ranked amongst the supersluous goods;
My necessary offices preserve
Each single man, and propogate the kind.
Then am I universal as the light,
Or common Air we breath; and since I am
The general desire of all mankind,
Civil Felicity must reside in me.
Tell me what rate my choycest pleasures beat,
When for the short delight of a poor draught
Of cheap cold water, great Lysimachus
Rendered himself slave to the Scythians.
Should I the curious structure of my seats,
The art and beauty of my several objects,
Rehearse at large, your bounties would reserve
For every sense a proper cons^ellation;
But I present their Persons to your eyes.
Come forth my subtle Organs of delight,
With changing figures please the curiouss eye,
And charm the care with moving Harmony.
They dance the seventh Antimasque of the five senses.
Merc: Bewitching Siren, gilded (...),
Thou have with cunning artifice displayed
The enameled outside, and the honied verge
Of the sai^e cup, where deadly poison lurks.
Within, a thousand sorrows dance the round;
And like a shell, Pain circles thee without,
Grief is the shadow waiting on thy steps,
Which, as thy joyes' ginne toward their West decline,
Does to a Giants spreading sorme extend
Thy Dwarfish stature. Thou thy selse art Pain,
Greedy, intense Desire, and the keen edge
Of thy fierce Appetite, often strangles thee,
And cuts thy slender thread; but still the terror
And apprehension of thy hasty end,
Mingles with Gall thy most refined sweets;
Yet thy Cyrc^an charms transform the world.
Captains, that have resisted war and death,
Nations, that over Fortune have triumphed,
Are by thy Magic made effeminate.
Empires, that knew no limits but the Poles,
Have in thy wanton lap melted away.
Thou were the Author of the first excess
That drew this reformation on the gods. (have
Can thou then dream, those Powers, that from heaven
Banished the effect, will there enthrone the cause?
To thy voluptuous Den, fly Witch, from hence,
There dwell, for ever drowned in brutish sense.

Mom. I concur, and am grown so weary of these tedious pleadings, as I Will
pack up too and be gone: Besides, I see a crowd of other suitors pressing
hither, I Will stop'em, take their petitions and prefer 'em above; and as I
came in bluntly without knocking, and no body bid me welcome; so I Will depart as
abruptly without taking leave, and bid no body farewell.


Merc. These, with forced reasons, and strained arguments,
Urge vain presences, whilst your Actions plead,
And with a silent importunity
Awake the drousie Justice of the gods
To crown your deeds with immortality.
The growing Titles of your Ancestors,
These Nations glorious Acts, joined to the stock
Of your own Royal virtues, and the clear
Reflexe they take from th'imitation
Of your famed Court, make Honors story full,
And have to that secure fixed state advanced
Both you and them, to which the laboring world,
Wading through streams of blood, sweats to aspire.
Those ancient Worthies of these famous Isles,
That long have slept, in fresh and lively shapes
Shall strait appear, where you shall see your self
Circled with modern Heroes, who shall be
In Act, what ever elder times can boast,
Noble, or Great; as they in Prophecy
Were all but what you are. Then shall you see
The sacred hand of bright Eternity
Mould you to Stars, and fix you in the Sphere.
To you, your Royal half, to them she will join
Such of this train, as with industrious steps
In the fair prints your virtuous feet have made,
Though with unequal paces, follow you.
This is decreed by Jove, which my return
Shall see performed; but first be hold the rude
And old Abiders here, and in them view
The point from which your full perfections grew.
You naked, ancient, wild Inhabitants,
That breathed this Air, and pressed this flowery Earth,
Come from those shades where dwells eternal night,
And see what wonders Time has brought to light.

Atlas, and the Sphere vanishes, and a new Scaene appears of mountains,
whose eminent height exceed the Clouds which past beneath them, the lower parts
were wild and woody: out of this place comes forth a more grave Antimasque of
Picts, the natural Inhabitants of this Isle, ancient Scots and Irish, these
dance a Perica or Martial dance.

When this Antimasque was past, there began to arise out of the earth the top
of a hill, which by little and little grew to be a huge mountain that covered
all the Scaene; the under part of this was wild and craggy, and above somewhat
more pleasant and flourishing: about the middle part of this Mountain were
seated the three kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; all richly
attired in regal habits, appropriated to the several Nations, with Crowns on
their heads, and each of them bearing the ancient Arms of the kingdoms there
presented: At a distance above these sat a young man in a white embroydered
robe, upon his fair hair an Olive Garland with wings at his shoulders, and
holding in his hand a Cornucopia filled with corn and fruits, representing the
Genius of these kingdoms.

The first Song.
GENIUS.
RAise from these rockie cliffs, your heads,
Brave Sons, and see where Glory spreads
Her glittering wings, where Majesty
Crowned with sweet smiles, shoots from her eye
Diffusive joy, where Good and Fair,
United sit in Honors Chair.
C^ll forth your aged Priests, and crystal streams.
To warm their hearts, and waves in these bright beams.
KINGDOMS.
From your consecrated woods,
Holy Druids. 2. Silver stoods,
From your channels fringed with slowers,
Hither move; forsake your bowers
S^rew'd with hallowed Oaken leaves,
Decked with slags and siedgie ^eaves,
And behold a wonder. 3. S^y,
What do your dul^r eyes survay?
CHORUS of DR VIDS and RIVERS.
We see at once in dead of night
A Sun appear, and yet a bright
Noonday, springing from Starre-light.
GENIUS.
Look up, and see the darkened Sphere
Deprived of light, her eyes shine there;
CHORUS,
These are more sparkling then those were.
KINGDOMS.
These shed a nobler influence,
These by a pure intelligence
Of more transcendent Virtue move,
These first feel, then kindle Jove,
From the bosoms they inspire,
These receive a mutual sire;
And where their slames impure return,
These can quench as well as burn.
GENIUS.
Here the fare victorious eyes
Make Worth only Beauties prize,
Here the hand of Virtue ties
'Bout the heart lov's amorous chain,
Captives triumph, Vassals reign,
And none live here but the slain.
CHORUS.
These are the Hisperian bowers, whose fair trees bear
Rich golden fruit, and yet no Dragon near.
GENIUS.
Then, from your impris' ning womb,
Which is the cradle and the tomb
Of British Worthies (fair sons) send
A troop of Heroes, that may lend
Their hands to ease this laden grove,
And gather the ripe fruits of Love.
KINGDOMS.
Open thy stony entrails wide,
And break old ^tlas, that the pride
Of three famed kingdoms may be spied.
CHORUS.
Pace forth thou mighty British Hercules,
With thy choice band, for only thou, and these,
May revell here, in Loves Hesperides.
At this the under-part of the Rock opens, and out of a Cave are seen to come
the Masquers richly attyred like ancient Heroes, the Colors yellow,
embroydered with silver, their antique Helmes curiously wrought, and great
plumes on the top; before them a troop of young Lords and Noble-mens sons,
bearing Torches of Virgin-wax, these were apparelled after the old British
fashion in white Coats, embroydered with silver, girt, and full gathered, cut
square coller'd, and round caps on their heads, with a white feather wreathen
about them; first these dance with their lights in their hands: After which,
the Masquers descend into the room, and dance their entry.

The dance being past, there appears in the further part of the heaven coming
down a plea^sant Clond, bright and transparent, which coming softly
downe-wards before the upper part of the mountain, embraces the Genius, but
so as through it all his body is seen; and then rising again with a gentle
motion bears up the Genius of the three kingdoms, and being past the Airy
Region, pierces the heavens, and is no more seen: At that instant the Rock
with the three kingdoms on it sinkes, and is hidden in the earth. This strange
spectacle gave great ca^se of admiration, but especially how so huge a machine,
and of that great height could come from under the Stage, which was but six
foot high.

The second Song*
KINGDOMS.
HEre are shapes formed ^it for heaven,
Those move gracefully and (...),
Here the Air and paces meet
So jus^, as if the skillful seet
Had struck the Vials* 1. 2. 3. So the Ear^
Might the ^unefull footing hear.
CHORUS.
And had the Music silent been,
The eye a moving tune had seen.
GENIUS.
These must in the unpeopled sky
Succeed, and govern Destiny,
Jove is temp'ring purer fire,
And will with brighter flames attire
These glorious lights. I must ascend
And help the Work.
KINGDOMS.
We cannot ^end
Heaven so much treasure. 2. Nor that pay
But rendering what it takes away.
Why should they that here can move
So well, be ever-fix'd above?
CHORUS.
Or be to one eternal posture tied,
That can into such various figures slide.
GENIUS.
Jove shall not, to enrich the Sky,
Beggar the Earth, their Fame shall fly
From hence alone, and in the Sphere
Kindle new Stars, whilst they rest here.
KINGDOMS.
How can the shaft stay in the quiver,
Yet hit the mark?
GENIUS.
Did not the River
Eridanus, the grace acquire
In Heaven and Earth to flow,
Above in streams of golden fire,
In silver waves below?
KINGDOMS.
But shall not we, now thou art gone
Who were our Nature, wither,
Or break that triple Union
Which thy soul h^ld together?
GENIUS.
In Concords pure immortal spring
I will my (...) renew,
And a more a^ive Virtue bring
At my retu^ne. Adieu.
KINGDOMS adieu, CHORUS adieu.

The Masquers dance their maine dance; which done, the Scaene again is varied
into a new and pleasant prospect, clean differing from all the other, the
nearest part showing a delicious Garden with several walks and perterra's set
round with low trees, and on the sides against these walks, were fountains
and grots, and in the furthest part a Palace, from whence went high walks upon
Arches, and above them open Tarraces planted with Cypress trees, and all this
together was composed of such Ornaments as might express a Princely Villa.

From hence the Chorus descending into the room, goes up to the State.

The third Song.
By the Chorus going up to the Queen.
Whilst thus the Darlings of the Gods
From Honors Temple, to the Shrine
Of Beauty, and these sweet abodes
Of Love, we guide, let thy Divine
Aspects (Bright Deity) with fair
And Halcyon beams, b^calme the Air,
We bring Prince Arthur, or the brave
St. George himself (great Queen) to you,
You Will soon discern him; and we have*
A Guy, a Beavis, or some true
Round-Table Knight, as everfought
For Lady, to each Beauty brought.
Plant in their Mart^l (...), War's seat,
Your peaceful pledges of warm snow,
And, if a speaking (...), repeat
In Loves know^ ^guage, tales of woe;
Say, in soft whispers of the Palm,
As eyes shoot darts, so Lips shed Balm.
For though you seem like Captives, led
In triumph by the Foe away,
Yet on the Conqu'rers neck you tread,
And the fierce Victor proves your prey,
What heart is then secure from you,
That can, though vanqui^, yet subdue?
The Song done they retire, and the Masquers dance the Revels with the Ladies,
which continued a great part of the night.

The Revels being past, and the Kings Majesty seated under the State by the
Queen; for Conclusion to this Masque there appears coming forth from one of
the sides, as moving by a gentle wind, a great Cloud, which arriving at the
middle of the heaven* stays; this was of several colors, and so great, that
it covered the whole Scaene. Out of the further part of the heaven begins to
break forth two other clouds, differing in color and shape; and being fully
discovered there appeared sitting in one of them, Religion, Truth, and Wisdom.
Religion was apparelled in white, and part of her face was covered with a light
veil, in one hand a Book, and in the other a flame of fire. Truth in a
Watchet Robe, a Sun upon her forehead and bearing in her hand a Palm,
Wisdom in a mantle wrought with eyes and hands, g^lden rays about her head,
and Apoll^'s Cithera in her hand. In the other Cloud sat Concord, Government,
and Reputation. The habit of Concord was Carnation, bearing in her hand a
little faggot of sticks bound together, and on the top of it a heart, and a
garland of corn on her head: Government was figured in a coat of Armor,
bearing a shield, and on it a Medusa's head; upon her head a plumed helm, and
in her right hand a Lance. Reputation, a young man in a purple robe wrought
with gold, and wearing a laurel wreath on his head. These being come down in
an equal distance to the middle part of the Air, the great Cloud began to
break open, out of which stroke beams of light; in the midst suspended in the
Air, sat Eternity on a Globe, his Garment was long of a light blue, wrought
all over with Stars of gold, and bearing in his hand a Serpent bent into a
circle, with his tail in his mouth. In the firmament about him, was a troop
of fifteen stars, expressing the stellifying of our British Heroes; but one
more great and eminent than the rest, which was over his head, figured his
Majesty. And in the lower part was seen a far off the prospect of Windsor
Castle, the famous seat of the most honorable Order of the Garter.

The fourth Song.
Eternity, Eusebia, Alethia, Sophia, Homononia, Dicaearche, Euphemia.
ETERNITY.
BE fixed you rapid Orbs, that bear
The changing seasons of the year
On your swift wings, and see the old
Decrepit Spheres grown dark and cold*
Nor did Jove quench her fires, these bright
Flames, have eclipsed her sullen light:
This Royal Pair, for whom Fate will
Make Motion cease, and Time stand still*
Since Good is here so perfect, as no Worth
Is left for After-Ages to bring forth.
EVSEBIA.
Mortality cannot with more
Religious zeal, the gods adore.
ALETHIA.
My Truths, from humane eyes concealed,
Are naked to their sight revealed.
SOPHIA.
Nor do their Actions, from the guide
Of my exactest precepts slide.
HOMONOIA.
And as their own pure Souls ^ntwin'd,
So are their Subjects hearts combined.
DICAEARCHE.
So just, so gentle is their sway,
As it seems Empire to obey.
EVPHEMIA.
And their fair Fame, like incense hurl^d
(...) Altars, has perfumed the world.
S O. Wisdom. A L. Truth. E V S. Pure Adoration.
H O. Concord, D I. Rule E V P. Clear Reputation.
CHORUS.
C^wne this King, this Queen, this Nation*
CHORUS
(...), Truth, etc.
ETERNITY.
Brave Spirits, whose adventrous feet
Have to the Mountains top aspired,
Where fair Desert, and Honor meet,
Here, from the toyling Press retired,
Secure from all disturbing Evil,
For ever in my Temple revell.
With wreathes of Stars circled about,
Guild all the spacious Firmament,
And smiling on the panting Routs
That labor in the steep ascent,
With your resistlesse influence guide
Of humane change the incertaine tide.
EVS. ALE. SOP.
But oh you Royal Turtles, shed,
When you from Earth remove,
On the ripe fruits of your chaste bed,
Those sacred seeds of Love.
CHORUS.
Which no Power can but yours dispense,
Since you the pattern bear from hence.
HOM. DIC. EVP.
Then from your fruitful race shall slow
Endless succession.
Scepters shall bud, and Laurels blow
'Bout their Immortal Throne.
CHORUS.
Propitious Stars shall crown each birth,
Whilst you rule them, and they the Earth.
The Song ended, the two Clouds, with the person sitting on them, ascend; the
great Cloud closes again, and so passes away overthwart the Scaene; leaving
behind it nothing but a Serene Sky After which, the Masquers dance their last
dance, and the Curtain was let fall.

The Names of the Masquers. The Kings Majesty.
Duke of Lenox. Earl of Devonshire, Earl of Holland. Earl of Newport, Earl
of Elgin. Viscount Grandeson. Lord Rich. Lord Feilding, Lord Digby. Lord
Dungarvin. Lord Dunluce. Lord Wharton. Lord Paget. Lord Saltine.
The names of the young Lords and Noblemens Sons.
Lord Walden. Lord Cranborne, Lord Brackley. Lord Shandos. Mr. William Herbert.
Mr. Thomas Howard. Mr. Thomas Egerton. Mr. Charles Cavendish Mr. Robert Howard.
Mr. Henry Spencer.
The Songs and Dialogues of this Book were set with apt Tunes to them, by Mr.
Henry Laws, one of His Majesty's Musicians.


