A Stay against Straying.

OR, An Ans^^^ to a Treatise, entitled: The La^fulnes of hearing the Ministers
of the Church of England.

By JOHN ROBINSON.

Wherein, Is proved the contrary, viz. The unlawfulnes of hearing the
Ministers of all false Churches. By JOHN CAN.

ESA. 57. 14. And he shall say (...) ye up (...) prepare the way, take up the
(...) way of my people. coat of arms or blazon

Printed in the Year 1639.

ERRATA.
P. 2, l. 1. read they. l. 39. the wanting. P. 5, l. 28, r. Calfes. P. 11, l.
38, r. Ministry. P. 52, l. 6, r. doer. P. 57, l. 25, r. Claidon. P. 59, l. 11,
r. resorted. P. 83, l. 16, r. folly. P. 86, l. 2, r. (...) P. 88, l. 30, r.
dicit. P. 120, l. 2, r. streathned.

For other faults, if thou find any, I desire that thy love may be such as
to amend them thy self.

To all such as desire to receive and follovv the truth in Love, and with
holiness; The feeling assurance of life and peace, be wished in Jesus Christ.
Men Fathers and Brethren:
WHAT the Lord says, touching the revealing of the Man of sin, 2 These. 2, 8.
and the consuming of him by the brightness of Christ's coming: We may see
(blessed be God for it) now accomplished in a great measure. For whereas in
times past, many of the Professors, have used both their tongues and pens, to
plead for their Parish-Churches, Ministry and Worshipp; They now (being of
sounder minds, and better informed) let those things fall: Insomuch, as there
are few (if any) except Formalists and Familists (virtutem qui verba putant, ut
lucum ligna, as Horace speaks) and men of corrupt minds, who suppose that
gain is godliness; That will appear in the defense thereof. So that in
likelihood, for the time to come, there will be little use, for any man, to write
any more, against that Church State, Minister ie, Worship and Government,
seeing the falsnes thereof, is now seen and acknowledged, of the honester and
better sort every where.

Notwithstanding as Pharaoh used sundry means, to stay Israel still in Egypt,
after he saw them desirous to depart* So does Satan labor what he can, to
hold Gods people in spiritual thraldom, after he perceives they are willing
to obey Gods call, and come out of it.

And that he may bring to pass what he desires, he uses most effectual
delusions and deep deceits: Well knowing that the snares which he laid in our
forefathers blind and ignorant days, are now out of date, and will not serve
the turn, to beguile many people withal; But he must more transform himself
into an Angel of Light; I say, use more artificial and crafty devises, then
formerly he has done.

It is said of Praxiteles Clemen: Alex ^in protrept.
the Painter, that he made the silly people worship the Image of his
strumper, under the title and pretense of Venus. Now sure I am, in those days,
there are some, who under the name of Gods worship, do cause many people to
worship Satan and Antichrist; And that men may the easier and sooner be
persuaded to it; they set forth their lies and vanities in as plausible and
fair away as can be.

What man would seem to deal so plainly as a Iugter: He will strike up his
sleeves and make bare his arms, and open his hands and fingers, and lay all
things before thee, and bid thee behold, and thou would think him to be a
man of a fair carriage, and not imagine thou could possibly be deceived;
And yet indeed, his whole skill and seeking, is nothing else but to deceive,
and the more simply and plainly he would seem to deal, the sooner and easier
he does beguile thee. For thou shall think thou see all, and see nothing;
Feel it senceablie with thy fingers, hold it fast, can not loose it,
and yet shall open thy hand and find nothing.

The passages of some men, in points of Religion, are carried much after such a
sort: For one would think, to hear the smoothnes of their tale, and what
integrity and plainnes they do profess; That it is all Gospel they speak,
and that their cause, is clear, and nothing is to be said to the contrary:
Notwithstanding when another comes forth, and replies against them, rips up
their tale, weighs their reasons, discloseth the error and weakness of their
pleading. Men wonder at their own simplicity and ignorance, and that ever
they should be so fond as to believe them. But seeing I am now to deal only in
the point of hearing of false Ministers: I will not therefore step out of the
beaten way to take in any by-discourse; Only I think good to certify, that I
marvel, that such men who walk not as we do in Church Way, but think us to
censorious and over just: Why they do not publicly answer our grounds and
arguments published to the world, and so prove their new Principles in as
fair and open a way; that either we may come to them, finding them to walk
more agreeable to the Scriptures, or show our reasons to the contrary.

For the matter here in controversy: That the Reader may profit the more by
it, there are 5 things, which J desire him to do. 1. When thou set thy
self to read, set thy self as in Gods presence, look on with a single and
impartial eye; weigh the arguments well on both sides, not by shows and
shifts, but by the just Balance of the incorruptible and unchangable Word of
God; In judging, judge I beseech thee righteous judgment; and let the truth be
dear to thy soul; and do not side with any side, because thy mind gives
thee, it leads most to ease, credit, profit pleasure, or such wordly
respects, but to that which most tends to the glory of Gods great name, the
purity of religion, and to the most comfort and peace of thy own conscience.

2. I would have thee to live by thy own faith, and not build upon another
fancy, it is a great fault in some, in that they see nothing, but by other
men's eyes. What this man, or such a man holds, that is their belief; And
besides this, they can give no more reason for what they hold, then the Parrat
of her speaking. I need not go far for proof; The point in controversy
cleares it sufficiently. For as one Galen: Clas. 2. lib. de cuiusq: animi
peccat* notitia at que medela.
well says: That which a credible person tells, is easily thought credible
by such as are well persuaded of him. What has drawn many unto this practice
of Hearing unlawful Ministers? But taking the thing upon trust, without due
trial and examination. Sure I am, had men measured it by the Goulden Read of
the Scriptures, they would soon have perceived, that it was never set apart by
Gods appointment, for the spiritual building.

3. Be not wise in thy own eyes. But rather deny thy self in thy own
judgment, will, affection, reason, etc. And be contented to be guided by the
alone Word of God. What is the reason that some men do seek after the truth,
as a coward does his enemy, loath to find him? But because loving their own
conceit (as Apes their young ones) beyond measure, they are not willing to hear
of any thing that is said against it.

We see in nature, he that will hear well, must stopp his breath; It is so in
things spiritual: if a man will not keep in his breath, I mean set aside
conceitednes and self-love, and be willing to embrace the truth, though it be
contrary to that which he formerly held he shall not profit by any thing, he
hears or reads, but like Pharoahs^ kine remain lean and ilfavored still.

Things in the earth will grow as they find room; A Light in the dampes of
mines, goes out: Thus stands the case with men, when any good help is pur
into their hands: If their hearts then, be free of self-love, spiritual
pride, personal prejudice, base desire of vain glory and human applause,
etc. They will profit by it; Contrariwise if their hearts, like a deep hole,
be full of those filthy Foggs and Mists, the truth then (how clearly soever it
shine) will dampe and quench in them, as a light in the mines of the earth.

4. Civil dig. 4. de legib. Senatusque consult:
Whereas the Civil Law says, it is uncivil for any man not having weighed
the whole Law, to give advice or judgment some one parcel of it, alone
proposed. I do therefore entreat the Reader, to forbear his Censure, till he
have read the whole book over. And if it be so, that he thinks, in some point
I have erred (as who lives and erreth not) I would not have him, for such a
particular failing to condemn the whole. But let that bear its own burden,
and let the rest be received, as (after due trial) the same shall be found
agreeable to the Word of God.

I speak not this, as being privy to any known crime this way; But because I
am privy to many known wants and great weaknesses in my self. Besides, it is
the manner of some, if they can spy some thing not well handled in another man's
writing, to take such advantage, as hereby they seek to bring the whole under
reproof and condemnation. Of this shall be all their talk, at this they will
gird and jest; not being able in the mean time to take away the force of any
one of the maine arguments. Neither indeed dare to attempt it, but like the
snaile keep in their horns.

5. I think good to speak here a little concerning the manner of this answer.
And that no man may be offended as it; I do profess in the Word of truth,
that it has much greeved me all along the discourse, to speak so much of the
Treatiser, whose learning I do much reverence; But the cause being the Lords,
and I seeing how much it lay upon me, to take away the Maskes and visards,
whereby many have been deceived, I have done my best to show the absurdities,
contradictio^s, unskilfulnes and daungerousnes of that Treatise. And for this
not sparing but speaking home, I have had some reasons for it, as partly here
follow.

1. Because the Book contains a pernicious and most hurtful error; and by
how much it is carried forth, under a colorable show of a pious and godly
practice, by so much the more has it caused many greevious and long lasting
miseries. I know there are many viler errors daily maintained; But if we
respect men's walking in the Holy Order of the Gospel, this is a main
stumbling block and bar in the way to it: There are some humors, which some
where placed in the body, are quiet and do little hurt, but in other places,
specially in the passage, they do much mischief. This error, is as a corrupt
humor, fallen into the passage of the body, the Church; and therefore it must
needs be the more perilous.

2. I have spoken the more plainly against it, because they say, there are
many in England and in other Countries, who hold it unlawful to be present at
their divine service, and to receive the Sacraments in the Parish-Churches; and
yet think it lawful to hear the Ministers of that Church. Now, if such men
have (as had David) tender hearts, and hearts that will smite them for a
little; They will surely come off from this too. Seeing I have here proved,
that the ground they build on, is very sand, and their pleading for it, wants
both Religion and reason.

3. Such a general fame is gone forth of the book, as to be so learnedly and
absolutely done, that it gives all men satisfaction (some few riged spirits
only excepted) and that no man would ever be able to make any sound reply to
it. And for my self, I have been by name challenged (as it were) to answer,
with much base insulation, as if I d urst rather eat my pen, then put my pen
to write against it. And this both before my thoughts were settled on thing, and
since too. Now, whether the work be according to the praise of it, let all
indifferent men judge.

4. Seeing it is given out (but me thinks it should not be true) that there
are some learned men, which plead for the Hearing of false Ministers; and upon
the Treat. grounds; I have therefore discovered the sleightnes of it (to say no
worse) the more: That such (if there be any such) may see their error; If not,
reply if they please and when they will.

But for the person, or persons that shall reply; These 3 things I desire may
be considered: 1. That they change not the state of the question; which is not,
whether it be lawful to hear the Ministers of the church of England, or of
Rome, or of any Church; But taking it granted, a Church to be false, and the
Ministry Antichristian; whether Hearing in such a case be lawful; For the
question now stands thus, and no otherwise.

2. J exspect an answer, in a more honest and fairer way, then I had the last
time namly, by a sort of gnats, It has bee^ objected as I hear, that I should
answer dead me^* now how so ever it is well known that my former book was both
finish ed and at the Press, before Dr. Ames death: yet say I had written after
his death: do not all me^ know, that in points of differences, we have respect
to the matter it self, and no to any person on either side holding the same*
whom I felt but never saw: the Law of God and Light of Nature teaches.

Quod tibi vis fieri, hoc facias and alteri. Indeed it is a very unbeseeming
thing, that men who do profess Religion and learning, should disgrace other
men's work, behind their backs, shunning in the mean time the open light,
whereby their deeds might be made manifest. As for such Replyers, whose
arguments are Trencher-squibs, and reach only as far as to the end of the
table Not so far as to pen, Ink and paper, to answer in a fair and honest
way.
; well they may satisfy men of the same humors; But with men fearing God they
shall find no acceptance.

3. I exspect plain dealing; Truth is like the glassie sea before the throne,
which is bright, clear, not a clouded body or covered with the vailes of men's
fond fantisies and dreams. Let such Childish toys be kept for Children. I
require the voice of the Shepherd, read it me out of the Prophets show it me
out of the Psalms, read it out of the Law or Gospel. For without this men's
judgments have no credit. Ego vocem pastoris requiro, lege haec mihi de
Prophetis, lege de psalmo; recita de lege; recita de Evangelio; recita de
Apostolo. August. de Pastorib. cap. 14.


Before I end my speech, I think good to mention you my Brethren, with whom I
am in special communion, and over whom the Holy Ghost has made me overseer.
This answer will serve to clear us, from such untrue reports, as some
maliciously have raised up, as if we were declined from our ancient profession,
Now, what we hold concerning the fallacies and fantasies newly broached, I
desire all the Churches of God, here to take knowledge off, for our clearing
and justification.

I thought when J first began with this Treatise, in ending of it, to have
ended with public controversies; and so have followed a more quiet kind of
study; But seeing, what the truth suffers in regard of adversaries to it on
both sides, the love of God constrains me not to be silent, but according to
that measure which the Lord has dealt unto me, and as my small abilities are,
to contend for the faith, against dexteriores and sinesteriores, adversaries on
both hands, and to deliver it from the evil report which both have sought to
bring upon it.

And as I have made way now for Gods people, to enter into the sweet order of
the Gospel and covenant o^ the Lord; So J purpose very speedily to publish
something for their stay and preservation therein.

You know (my Brethren) for the divisions of Reuben are great thoughts of
heart. Lord, how are we spoken of in Gath and Askalon, for the rents and
Schisms amongst us. In truth, I do not know, for what our profession, is
beholding unto, in respect of some men, but only to be despised and reproached
for their idle and giddle courses Of certain turbulent spirits it is said:
Illis quieta movere magna merces videbatur. Salust. They thought the very
disturba^ce of things quietly established an hyre sufficiently to set them on
work.
But that the truth of God may no longer suffer, but the sin and shame lie
where it ought; I will by the good hand of God assisting me, clear our
Religion, as that it leads not to Schisms and Church-breakings; but such
things are roots of bitterness and cursed taires, planted and sowed by the
Envious man, in the unsanctified hearts of ungodly people; Besides, I purpose
to show from the Word of God, why men ought to keep themselves with true
Churches. Howbeit, in their opinions very corrupt, and how. Again, how far
particular men have liberty to deal with a Church; and when they are to rest,
and how, a why; Moreover, how far a Church Covenant binds every member of the
body to that body; and wherefore there must not be divisions, neither from,
nor in the body. Again, in case there be a division in Church, I will show by
what signs and tokens, the Church may be known from the Schismatics. In a
word, I will show how far the Office of the Eldership extends in matter of
Government; and how far obedience is due unto them of the people. These
things and many more of the like nature, you shall shortly see them handled;
For J purpose to publish a large Treatise of Ecclesiastical Polity, even the
whole external regiment of the Church of God. And thus commending you to God,
J take my leave; and will during life always rest

Amsterdam, Month 1. day 28. 1639. Yours in what he can, to do you service I.
C.

A STAY AGAINST STRAYING, OR A Reply to a Treatise published in the defense of
hearing Antichristian Ministers.
SECTION I.
An answer to the nameles Epistoler.
HOwsoever the publisher of the Treatise has thought it fit to conceal his
name: it is question, vvhethe^ he were not a shamed, to put his name to it. a.
pro: 27. 14.
yet he has prefixed to it, a large preface, wherein with a Loud voice a he
blesses the author, his friend, and the work it self, and seeks by many
unchristia^ speeches, to disgrace some men what he can, inregard they
Zealouslie opposed his new minion Idol.

Three reasons he gives, why (after 9. years concealment,) he has now
Published the book* first the large abilities of the author a boue many
others. etc.

Answ: 1. this ground is sandy, and he speaks ( Ar^^^
(...)) besides the matter: For howsoever we confess, that the Author, was a
godly and learned man: notwith standing it follows not, that whatsoever he
said, it was therefore true, and necessarily to be published. Without offense
that fitly may be applied to him, which a learned writer, writes of
Chrysostom, Cal^ehil Treatise of the Cross page 26.
he was not without his fault. his goulden mouth wherein he passed others, had
otherwhile leaden words, which yielded to error and abuse of the time.

2. Had the Pistler respected (as he should) the authors large abilities, he
would not have made that book so common as he has done, to the man's great
dishonor. When one Pammachius Ieroms (...) Epist: ad pamm:
a Learned Man, understood that Hierome, had written some things amiss,
against Iovinian, he sought to suppress all the Copies, and to have them
concealed, till the faults therein were corrected. If the Publisher Let such as
had a hand this way think of Christ's vvorde^ in mat. 18. 7. vvo^ to them by
whom offenses come.
or others, had so don with that first copy which they found in his study,
they had don well, and manifested good affection to the author: but in that they
caused so vile a thing to be spread abroad, they did ill, and were his enemies.
And here I think of that sentence in Eccles: 10. 1. dead flies cause the
oy^^^e^t of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking savor: so does a little
folly, him that is in reputation for wisdom and honor. I acknowledge to Gods
glory, and the Treatisers due Praise, that there are in print of his, sundry
fruitful treatises Specially his Justification of separation. a book so
sufficiently penned as no Adversary hitherto durst reply.
: but certanelie this published since his death, is like the wild gourd in the
Pottage, a chief cause that the former are the less accepted with the godly.
It is true therefore as Ferus ferus Annot. in Ecclesic; 10. v. 1. fol. 95. 2^
Chro: 19. 12. 1. King: ^. 46.
says one fault depriues men of many favors. Iehosaphats near affinity with
Ahabs house, marvelouslie eclipsed his other virtues: so the Treat: his
pleading for Antichristian Priests, and the hearing of them, lies as a great
blott upon him. But what shall I say, there is no man that lives and sins
not. Wise men do not things sometimes wisely. Nemo morta^^^^ omnibus (...)
sapit* plin.


3. It is a weak ground to persuade men to embrace any doctrine from the large
abilities of some persons holding it: for we are charged, not to believe what
an Angel from heavens Gal. 1. 8.
should teach us, if he speak not according to the Oracles of God. The
imitators of Alexander thought it not enought, to follow him in his virtues,
but in his stouping and other gestures. But christians have learned to do
better: to wit, In a certain sermon which he made to* young men.
to leave all men (be he king, minister, master etc) where they leave the
truth. Basil for this purpose uses a fine similitude; we must (says he) be
pertakers of other men's sayings, after the manner of bees: they fly not to all
flowers, nor where they sit, do the cropp them quite away, but take only so
much, as suffices to their honey making: so we, (if we will be wise) must take
from others, so much as is sound, and agreeable to truth, and for the rest not
meddle with it.

His second reason is, the worth of the work. For it were (says he) great I
ittie It seems the 9. years before he printed it he vvanted pity.
that such a work as this should be concealed: And therefore he tells us in the
title page, he has published it for the common good. And in the conclusion of
the preface, desires the Lord, to make the whole work (for the general good
now set forth) profittable to those that love the truth.

Answ: 1. The things that are not fair, seem fair to him that is in love.
Theocrit* i^ Bucoliast.
So Daphius, in the poet says to Polephemus. It is just so with superstitious
men, they think passinge well of their vain in ventions, howbeit they have no
reason for it.

And surely, were it not, but that this man is Fallen excessiuelie in love with
the Treatise, Quid non cogit amer. martial, l. 4. Encolp
he would not so applaud it, much less have been at the charge of the
printing. But what may be reason, that he and others, are so in love with it?
if they would answer here [bona fide,] my mind gives me, they would say as
Samson did when he desired to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines: she
pleases me well Judge: 14. 3.
So these covet to be unequally yoaked with this harlot-hearing: because it
pleases them well. and why so? oh it leads them unto an easy and plausible
walkinge: they have a trick now to deceive the Prelates, and to shun
Persecution for the cross of Christ.

2. Touching a common good, this is the common pretense of all deceivers, Pro;
1, 11. 12 1. Pet. 2. 19. Eze. 12. 22.
and the same as old almost as the world: for the Devil used it, Genesis 3, 2. 30.
to beguile the woman in Paradise saying God does know that in the day ye eat
thereof ye shall be as Gods. He reasons here (as Pareus Comment: in Gen: c. 3.
v: 5. p. 115. Tom: 1.
observes on the place) to this effect that which will be for your good, Duaran:
distinct: 8. Field of the Church. l. 3. p. 157. 158. Sanders de visib: m^n:
lib: 5.
ought not to be omitted: But the eating of the forbidden fruit will be so: (for
ye shall be as Gods:) Therefore, etc.

And the children of this wicked one, have since in this followed their fathers
stepts: for what lies and beastly vanities are there extant, but the authors
in publishing of them, have professed an aiming at Public profitt? Was not the
Hierarchy that monstrous monster, cunningly erected at first (and to this day
justified) under color of common good: 22. Gui^. hard l. 4. c. 6. sun. Lomb.
l. 4. Rhem in 1. Cor. 14. Soct. l.
namely to Preserve the unity and peace of the Church: for the avoiding of
schisines and factions and that there may be no Tyranny or oppression among
brethren. The like may be said of the mass, merits, purgatory, 2^. Qu^st. 1.
art 1. Polidor l. 6. c. 12. invent:
pilgrimages, bowing at Altars, praying to Angels, worshipping of Images,
Crosses, Pardons, Holy oil, Fasts, Feasts, absolution by priests, prayer in
an unknown tongue: and the rest of the filthy trash and dung in Babilo^:
Allexan ab. Allexxan: l 3.
do not the couetuous merchants of that see, tell their chapmen all is for
common good: [se Sotus l. 4 distinct 43. art 3. Bellarm. de purgat. l. 2. c.
17. Thomas Aquin: ^ did:
their Bookes] Not but their bells in the tower, and the cross on the steeple,
are set up under a pretense of common good: the one being to drive away evil
spirits* and the other to keep the Church from burninge, To vel us therefore
of common good, we tell him, Plus aloe^s. quam mellis habet. Iuvenal: Sat: 6.
. This is but a cunning bait, which imposters formerlie have used, to draw
simple people into a snare. But to keep our selves from it, we need go no
further, then to a saying of an Ethnicke: That only are we to esteem good and
profittable, which we see to be right and lawful Nihil vtile, quod non idem
iustum et honestum. Cic: De Offic li^: 3.
.

But seeing the thing he pleads for, is most unrighteous, (for it tends to the
dishonor of Gods great name, the discredit of the gospel, the keeping back of
many from receiving the love of the truth VVitne sie many in England, which
hold the parish Churcher false, and yet go thither to hear, being misled by
this Treat:
) great pity it was, so corrupt a thing ever saw the light, but rather had
perished in the birth, or at least, upon the first sight of it, the finders had
burned it, as the books mentioned in Act: 19. 19. For so a great deal of
common hurt had bee^ prevented in the Churches of God, and in the world too,
Woe unto them that call evil good. Esa. 5. 20.
.

His third reason is, to preserve the Churches priuileidge: defend Christ's
cause against the enemies of God, which aim at the utter ruinating of the
Church, and labor to rent it in pieces, etc.

Answ, The Romans [as it is reported Varre.
) keept in Capitolio certain dogs and Geese, which by their barking, and
gagling should give warning in the night, of thieves that entered in but if
they cried out in the day time, when there was no suspicion, their legs were to
be broken of, because they cried when there was noe cause. If the Publishers
conte^ding here, be [ Doctrinsa vana est, rati^ ut accesserit. Tull:
as he says himselfe] to preserve the churches privileidge. and the thing
certain which he charge his brethren with: to weet, that they were the
troblers of Israel. let him then ((...) Suidas:
) we are the laurel. But if he be erroneous in the one, and a false accuser in
the other, I hope among the godly wise, he shall have his demerit accordinly.
To the matter.

First that hearing of false ministers is a privileidge of Gods Church, I deny
it, this is but the froth of his own lips, neither soled nor sauerie: as well
he may say, that whoredom is a woman's privilege: theift a servants: rebellion
a subjects: disobedience childrens: reason and ground there is alike. And to
prove this, thus I reason.

What soever God has bestowed upon his Church as her privilege, the same is
to be found in his word: But it is not mentioned there, that true believers (as
their privilege) ought to hear Antichristian Teachers: Ergo: etc.

The proposition is vnquestionablie certain by these scriptures. Psa: 19. 7.
2. Timot 3. 15. 16. Esa. 8 20. John. 15. 17. Act. 20. 27.

Besides this is the unanimous consent of learned writers. The scriptures
(says Athanatius Cont, Gent. In John. hom. 49.)
do help us with the knowledge of every truth. Here (says Augustine f.) we
find whatsoever is to be don, or not don Allthings (says Chrysostom Comment:
in 2 These: 2.
) that are meet to be known, in Gods word are manifested. The same says
Iustine In Apol: 2. et. inst. Stror^. l. 6.
, Clemens 2. Lib. 2. e. l.
Paraeus Disput. Aphoris iu Bellarm de verb. dei. Aphor. 1.
Polanus, Synt. theol. lib. 1. C. 46.
, Cartwright Ansvv. to the Rhem on Heb. 9 sec^. 2.
, B, Hall Romans irrecon. sect. 16.
, D. James Manuduct. to divinit. Page 1.
. and others. The Assumption is proved thus: If the hearing in question be
condemned in scripture: then it is no privilege of the Church: but the first
is true. therefore the second.

The first part which is only controversall is evident and clear by these
scriptures. Levit. 17. 3. 4. deu. 12. 5. Pro. 5. 8. Hos. 4. 15. Mat. 7. 15. 2.
Cor. 7. 15. 16. 17. Revel: 18. 4. Son. 1. 6. 7. To this all sorts of writers
ascent. Zanchie Explicat. in Philp. c. 3. ver. 2, page 17 4. Tom. 4.
on philip. 3. 2. Beware of dogs: Writes thus: Tales doctores, qui testimonium
non habent ab Apostolis, Apostolicisque viris atque ecclesijs: nempe summa
diligentia ac studio curandum esse, vt eos observemus, cognoscamus, et
fugiamus: Such Teachers as have not their authortie, From the Apostles, and
Apostolical men, and true churches, we ought with great study and care to
observe, know, and avoid them. The Authors Admon. ^. page 27.
of the Admonition to the parliament affirm: Whosoever preaches by an
unlawful calling he may not be heard: noe, though he speak the truth, no more
then the Devil was to be suffered, howbeit he preached Christ. As God (says
One T. C. repl. 1. p. 83. 155.
) has ordained that the word should be preached, so also in what order and by
whom: And therefore as we care for the truth, so we must of whom we receive
it. So judicious Rolloc: Comment. in 1 These. 5. 21. l. P. 228.
: Non audiendi et explorandi sunt, nisi qui antegrestam ad id vocatione^ habent
aliquam. They are not to be heard and tried, who have not a lawful fore-gooing
calling to the ministry. And of the same judgment, is Rivetus, Comment. in
psa. 16. page 52
, musculus Comment. in Mat. 7. 15.
, Oecolampadius Comment. in Esa. c. 2. sol. 20.
, Calvin in Psalm. 16.
, Fenner Interpretat. Son. chap. 1, ^. 6. 7.
, Lation Syons Plea. page 283.
: yea the papists in this point are sounder then either the Pistler or his
Leader.: Paul, The Popes first Breue, dated in the years 1606,
, the fifth, in a certain Bull sent to his Calves in England (Catholics Imight
have said) charge them by all means, not to go to the parish Churches, or
hear their sermons, least they incur the wrath of God. The Rhemists Annot in
1. Cor. 10. sest, 21
say the like: so the Doway translators. and add thus: Such as go unto false
Churches, are to be counted of that rank Paul speaks of, in Tit. 1. Vit. who
confess they know God but in works deny. him. In 1 king. chap. 5. v. 19.
.

For the munition therefore which he speaks of here, if this sinsull hearing be
his best, to preserve Gods Church from the attempts of adversaries. Let him
keep it himself: for we know (oh that we had never known it) by unhappy
experience, the use and nature of it. As the Jews of old by taking the
Egyptians for their munition Esa. 30. 2. 3.
, where it has entertainment, a very fyer-brand that consumes the building: a
Gangrene that stays not in one place but corrupts by degrees the whole body,
and kills It Fernel, Amb. physiolog. l, 7. ^^ p 6^^.
: in a word it is as the wild Bore of the forest, which wastes the Lords
vineard. Witness the Church of Leiden vvhe by this means now sits sol^tary,
that was full of people. thy Calse O Samaria has cast thee off. hos. 8. 5.


The Butler talks of Athalias spirit, and compares his opposites to her, but
surely were not his eyes blinded, with the unlawful love of his dear
Delilah, he might see that the similitude holds better another way. Did not
that wicked woman occasion trobles in Israel, 2 King. 11.
by seekinge to put down their right king, and set up her self (a usurper
and murderer) in the place of him: now what else (speak on your credit) has
this idolatrous hearing don, since the time it was hatched? but like the thing
that God hates, sowed discord among brethren, Pro. 6. 19.
and why? because it tends to the putting down, of our true king Christ
Jesus, and to raise up Antichrist again, that bloody Tirant.

2. Touching the personal wrong here offered to his opposites: as naming
them the enemies of God, church renters, schisme-makers: matching them with
most notorious sinners: and publishinge to the world private things purposelie
to disgrace them. I think this not worthy of answer: the men are now at rest:
besides such was their good walking when they lived, as that his uncharitable
tongue and pen, cannot weake^ their well deserved praise, among the saints that
knew them. Notwithstanding sober words would better have becommed him. Is this
religion? is this conscience? is this charity? To tell in the ears of the
world private things against brethren. Methinkes the man should blush at it:
specyallie being reputed (or at least would be) one of large Charity, tantane
animis calestibus ^rae, Aneid. l. 1.
and a great reprouer of others for rash censuringe: Now knows he not what an
odious thing it is, to condemn that thing in another, wherein he himself in
the mean time is a transgressor, this not only lies under the just reproof
of the scriptures. Mat 7. 3 4. Rom 1. 21.
But also condemned by heathens. It is note of folly (says Tully) est enim
proprium stulriti^^ aleg^ru^ vitiae cernere oblivissi suorum. Tul: de offi^. l.
3.
to see another man's faults and forgett our own, foe in the Poet.

Turpe est doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum. But it is no new thing, for
such as are earnestly zealous for the churches reformation, that all things
may be there according to the divine pattern, to be tongue-bitten by
innovators and corruptors of religion: for so were the Prophets used, ^ King.
18. 18 Eze: 4. 15. Ame 7. 10.
so was Christ Luke 23. 25. Ieh. 19. 12.
and Act 19. 12. Act. 17. 6. Act. 24. 6.
his Apostles served by the Jews. So in ages after, Constantine S^zomen: l. 1.
c. 8.
was accused as a pervertor of Gods order, because he furthered and followed
christianity. Other goodmen wanted not their cross this way, but were always
reviled with most words of reproach, and deemed of their adversaries the vilest
persons of the earth. When the Scythians as Justine Just. l. 2.
reports saw they could not overcome their enemies with weapons: they laid them
aside and took up whips. Men in error do so: finding in scriptures nothing
for them, they make whips with their tongues: that is, slander always their
opposites with heresy; schism, pride, obstinacy, disloyalty, sedition, et
quid non: hoping to get that by railing, of which they have no (...) to get by
reasoning. Such a one he seems to be* that has set forth the New English
Canaon. the profane Ismael seeks to disgrace the truth by scoffing at it. As
he loved cursing, so let it come unto him as hedelighted not in blessing, so
let it be far from him psa: 109, 17.


3. But to speak a little of the accusation it self: How soeueuer I will not
meddle with their divisio^, neither justify his opposites in the man^er of
their departure: not withstanding, al though he wipe his mouth, and would make
others, chief authors of the breach: yet the truth is, he and such which went
ordinarily unto false churches, with such as justified and abetted so vile a
practice, were principally the instruments, of that great scandal. It is a
received Tenent amongst the learned: Such are the causers of contention, that
bring new doctrines into the Churches of God.

Commen. in Romans 16. 17. 18. ot. 1 Cor. 1. p. 7.
Pareus describes the authors of dissentions, to be men that adulterate pure
doctrine by humane inventions, violate the discipline of the Church, and seek
by sugared words, and counterfeit zeal to pervert others. To the same effect
writes Gaulter, Comment. in Rom: 16. 17.
Mornaeus, lib: de Eceles. l. 2.
Martyr, de Calib et vot: cont. Smit.
Morton, f Parker: On the Crossed pa. 2. c. 9. sect. 3 p. 116
yea some Papists too, as Cassander De Rora. Eceles. art, 7.
and others.

To apply this, seeing the Publisher and others with him, have committed
apparent idolatry, meantained it in the Church, and sought thereby, to pervert
the right ways of the Lord, and to draw the sincere into error and sin: it
must follow necessarily, that the strife and contention which has fallen out
upon it, either among brethren of their own congregation or else where, came
cheiflie by their occation, and means.

For the exclamation therefore, which he and others take up against the godly,
Apol. l. 2.
for their contentions, I mind it truly, as a great prophanes in them. We would
count him a most vile person, that would do whatsoever he could, to make
another angry, and when he saw him so, would reproach him for it, blaze it
abroad, speak of it behind his back, to his great disgrace. It were happy for
some if they had never abused Gods people this way, by seeking (as it were) to
anger them in hearing unlawful ministers, marying their wives by Popish
licenses, through justifying halters and neuters, comunicating spiritually with
Antichristians: and other such muddy stuff found the valy: and afterward
perceuing them to be stirred hereat, cry out with a full mouth. oh what a
contentious people are they, oh how scandalous, better for aman to walk alone,
then with such a compaine. And this shall be published in Gath and Askelon, that
the enemies of the Lord may rejoyse and triumph. A seru^^^ that runns away
(...) of his master.


But good it were, that these make bates did consider of that great day, in
which Christ shall appear in the brightness of his father, to avenge the quarle
of his least commandment? when God ryseth Ioh 31. 14.
up, wh^^ (...) they answer him? what will they say, when he shall not only
cl^^ge them, with idolatry and covenant breaking. But also to be the cause,
and ground of the divisions, and schisms in his churches: by means whereof,
his name was blasphemed, the souls of the righteous grieved, the truth
slaundered, the weak scandalized, and the wicked hardened in evil.

It is sure [as some do observe Pareus in Rom: 14. ver: 13. page 469.
] that a more greeuious punishment is reserved for them which cause others to
offend, then for they which do such things themselves. Thus the serpent was
punished more then Eve, she more then Adam: so lezebel felt heavier and deeper
judgment then Ahab. To sin has not so much perdition in it as to induce
others to sin, so Chrysostom. Peccare non tantum in se per litionis habet
quantum quod reliqia ad peccandum inducuntur. hom. 25 in Epist: ad Romans in mor.
ad locum.


Who is wise, that he may understand these things, and prudent that he may take
knowledge of them: ffor the ways of Jehouah are righteous, and the just shall
walk in them, but the When at the day of Judgment it so^lbe laid to their
charge that they have given scandal, they will vvish rather to have been
drowned Parre on Rom: chap. 14. v. 13. p. 173.
rebels shall fall in them.

SECTION 2.
THus [Reader] thou have seen the reasons, why the Treatise was published: Now
in the next place the Epistoler entreats thee, to take notise of two things: 1.
That this practice of hearing unlawful ministers, Is not against any article
of says, which is by the Church professed whereof the author of this treatise
was pastor.

Answer 1. Nay stay there, that is not so, for in Article 31. of our
profession, (consented unto by master Robinson Justification of Separat: page:
123,
) this thing is absolutely condemned. We, speakinge there of Antichristian
Assemblies profess, that the faithful may not have any spiritual communion
in their public administrations. And for proof thereof, these scriptures are
alleged Reu: 18. 3. 4. Hos: 4. 14. 15. 1 Cor: 10 14. 17 2 cro: 6. 14. 15. Son.
1. 6. 7.
. But says he in the same place, this is no act of communion. I answer, our
Christian predicessours so understood it, and so do the faithful generally to
this day: besides this new devise wants, as truth so common sense: for it is,
as if one should affirm, that he eats and drinks, but partaketh not in the
things he uses. Hoccine credibile est, aut memorabile Teren. And: Act. 4. so.
1: ^
.

But it may be he thinks the following lines will help him. If hearing
simply were an act of communion, then every heretic, or Atheist, or
whatsoever he were, that should come into the church, should have communion,
which if it were true, it were good that every Church that will avoid Communion
with profane men to meet in private, and then shutt the door, when their own
company is met together, or else I cannot see, New you may, if you shutt ^
et your eyes against the lig^^ a Regula (...) est distinguere aliter omnia quae
a so invicem Possum seperari.
how they can avoid communion with wicked men,

Answ. It is a certane rule (as Logicians teach) things are really to be
distinguished, which in themselves are to be separated each from other. The
ignorance of this distinction, is a maine cause (as I have observed) of some
men's erring in this point of hearing: ffor they think, (as the Pistler here
unwisely writes) that if members of true Churches have not communion with the
unbelievers which come unto their meetings: that then it will follow, that they
may be present in false Churches in time of public exercise, and yet have no
communion. Melano. l. 4. distinct. Systemat. theol. 1. c 4 P. 58.


To reply briefly: (for I purpose to speak more largely of this in an other
place) There is besides Church communion, a communion in the ordinances of the
Church: as in the state it self, ministry, worship, Government: Howsoever
therefore a man be no member actually, of such, or such a body: And so in that
respect (to speak properly) he has no Church communion: yet being there a
worshipper, he communicates in the actions don, I say whether they are good or
evil.

The christian Corinthians were separated formally from the Heathen-state, and
constituted in a true Church State: notwithstanding Paul says, 1 Cor. 10.
that such among them, as went unto Idol Temples, had there communion: as how?
not Church communion, but they communicated in the evils there practiced. They
communicated as Comment. 1 Cor. 10. ver. 18. page 640.
Pareus layth with idols, or as Jerome on the same place.
phraseth it, the participation of devils. To be short according to Bezas
ciusdem cultus ac sacrificij sunt conscij, sieve in eodem sacri ficio consortes,
ac socij, ac ejus quasivinculo in eadem religione cop^^lati.
interpretation, they were guilty of the same seruise and sacrifice, or were
companions and consorts therein, and coupled themselves (as it were) in the
same religion.

To apply this to our point in controversy, If an Heretic Atheist, or
whatsoever he be, come to our Churches, we acknowleidge he has communion: to
weet, in the ordinances: how be it no Church communion, that is, no communion
in, or with the saints gathered into the faith and order of the Gospel: so in
gooing unto unlawful Assemblies, if a man be no member, his communion there,
is not with the people in that state, but in the humane inventions: Beza Anno^^
in 1. Cor. 10. 1, page 137.
that is the Idol Church, will worship, false ministry, and other such
abominations: And this common reason shows, for he that is not a member of a
Corporation, may yet communicate, in the administrations thereof, howbeit (true
it is (in, or with the body he does it not.

We need not therefore shut our doors against any person, for there follows no
danger, by their coming unto us: ^for howsoever [as I said] they have
communion, yet not with us, but rather in the things practiced with us. Now
what can the Pistler hence conclude? only thus: [vnlesse he be Graculus inter
musas ] If I may do a lawful thing, then I may do an unlawful thing: Jf a
foreiner may partake in the civil justice of true magistrates, then he may so
do, in the sinful administrations of Rebels and Traitors. I wrong him not:
for his reasoning and this [^] is all one in substance: If it be lawful to
communicate in a true Church, Omnia idem pului^, Lucian.
with Christ's ministry and worship; then a man may lawfully communicate in a
false Church with Antichrists ministry and worship. I could say more, but I
am loath to discover his nakedness too far. But no marvel when men leave the
way of truth if foolish and false things do follow,

2. But admit this hearing were not against any article of our Churches? what
is the note, that the Reader must then observe: Surely unless the Epistoler
would be noted for nonsense, we must needs conceive, that he holds, as the
Papists Bellarm^de c Romans po^^: l. 4. 1. 4. Rhemist. n Luke 18. sect* 4*
do: to wit, that the Church cannot err: and therefore we must believe as the
Church believes. But are you in good earnest? well, we will so take it, till we
are better informed. In the mean time take you notise what the Lord says Esa:
8: 20
, To the Law and to the Testimony: Sermon,: de^em (...).
if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them,

Take notise also, what Augustine Just mart. cont: tryph^
says: we ought to believe a Church, but not in a Church, because the Church
is not God, but the house of God. To the like purpose others: Neither Pastor,
Council, B: Bilson. par 2. p. 266
or Angel, ought in point of faith to be received, I say not against, but
without or besides the scriptures. These k are only safe. and Hilar: in psa 86.
to be credited* for human pra^pts they want weight: Lactan: l 3. c 17.
they bind not. Id cont: Faist: l. 23.
ego soli scripturae fido said Theodoret Z^nch. de Tripl. Epis. p* 103.
. J give trust to the scripture alone. And some papists in words say no less:
as Thomas of Aquine, l 9 art. vlt.
Abbas, Deelect cap, significasti.
pan^ (...) Gerson, In locchi P^pper. Mech^inien^.
Picus Mirandula. Quaest ^an Pa su^. con.
Occam, Dial. l. ^. p. 1. c. 28.
P. Pi^s the second Abba^ Vespers^n^is:? p. 443.
and Others.

In conclusion then, seeing the hearing of unlawful Ministers, is flat against
scripture articles, (as we have partly manifested, and God willing, more will
do) we ^ must (...) as Jerome* in Mat. 23
speaks) it, though it should in the mean time be justified and practiced by
many Churches and people.

The second thing, which he desires may be noted is, that this hearing was not
in the judgment of the Church esteemed as a thing that might not be borne
with all.

Answ: 1: The doctrine of the Nicolaitans (which was Trenan* l. 1* 27.
Epiphanc. 1. Tom. 1. E^^^^ 3. 29.
that adultery and fornication were no sins, and that men might communicate
with the sacrifices of Idolaters, in their idol temples) was not in the
judgment of the Churches at Pergamos, and Thyatira esteemed as a thing that
might not be borne withal: was the same therefore good? indeed such a
conclusion we must either here gather from his words: or conclude he knew not
well what he wrote.

2. To the judgment of that Church, when they wrote to London: I may oppose
their former and better judgment: ffor with reverence to the Phrase, from the
beginning this was not so: ffor in their constitution, and many years after,
they held Remember therefore from vvh^nce thou art fallen, and repent, and do
the first works. Reu. 2. 5.
hearing of unlawful Ministers a very unlawful practice.

And so much appears in sundry passages Published to the world by the Pastor
himself. And for the Readers better satisfaction, I think it not amiss to
sert down their Own words,

Those Munumission to a manuduction page 5.
who partake in the work of Preaching of one sent by the Bp: DO PARTAKE IN
WHAT LIES JN THEM IN THE AVTHORITY OF THE SENDER. Again The authorite of
Ministers in their Parishionall Churches, c Page. 4.
may not be, by Gods people partaken with, no not in actions otherwise Lawful,
under the pains of Babilons Plagues. Again in another book Religious
Communion page 20.
thus they write: Let all them that fear God, consider, that when they come to
worship in the Parish Assemblyes, they join themselves where God has not
joined them, and do acknowledge that society for the Church of God, and
communion of saints, which he has not sanctified for that purpose, and in
saying ourfather with them, they acknowledge them, for the children of God, who
in the perswation of their consciences are of their father the devil. And in
the same book a little after: page 32.
Their very administrations by unlawful calling, are the sins, and so to
PARTAKE WITH THEM IN THEIR ADMINISTRATIONS, IS TO PARTAKE WITH THEM IN THEIR
SINS: contrary to. Timot. 5. 22. Reu. 14. 4. In their answer to, Master
Barnerds book, thus they write largesie of this point. Justification of
Separat: page 78. 79. 80. ^e also page 17. 162. 276. 433.
Some of which, is as follows.

But the thing which most grieves Mr. B* and at which he has greatest
indignation Pap. 62. is, that we will not hear his sermons though he preach
nothing but the true word of God. And so he desires to hear of us, where the
hearing of the true word of God only preached is sin and forbidden by Christ,
or the Prophets or Apostles.

For answer hereof I would know first whether Mr. B. speaking here and in many
other places, of the true Word of God, do means that God has a true word and a
false word, or rather bewray not an accusing conscience, that they in England
have not the true word truly taught, that is, in a true office of Ministry?

Now for the demand (referring the reader for more full satisfaction to that
which has been published at large by others) I do answer, that as it was
unlawful to N^mb. 16. 2. C^. 26. 1 King. 12.
communicate with Corah or with vzziah though they offered true sacrifices, so
IS IT VNLAWFVL* TO COMMVNICATE WITH ADEVISED MINSTERY, WHAT TRVTH SOEVER IS
TAVGHT IN IT.

Secondly the Lord has promised no blessing to his word but in his owe
ordinance, though by his superaboundand mercy he often times vouchsafe that which
no man can chalendg by any ordinary promise

Thirdly * no man may partake in other men's sins, ^^m. 5. 12.
but every Ministry either devised or usurped is the sin of him which
exercises it. Rev. 18. 4.
And as no good subject would assist or communicate with any person in the
administration of civil Justice to the Kings subjects, (no not though he
administered the same never so equally and indifferrently) except the same
person had commission from the King so to do: so neither ought the subjects of
the kingdom of Christ to partake with any person whomsoever in the
dispensation of any spiritual thing: (though in it self never so holy) withot
sufficient warrant and commission from the most absolute and sovereigne King of
his Church Christ Jesus. And where Mr. B. speaks of hearing the true word of
God only preached, he intimates therein, that if we would hear him preach it
would satisfy him well* and so teaches us with himself and others to make a
schism in the Church, in using one ordinance and not an other.

It is all one whether a man communicate with the minister in his pulpit or
with the Chauncelor in his consistory, both of them minister by the same power
of the Bishop. The Chauncelor may judge justly, and who knows whither or no
the Minister will teach truly? And if he do not, but speak the vision of his
own heart, what remedy has the Church, or what can they that hear him do? May
they rebuke him openly according to his sin, and so bring him to repentance? or
must they not bear his errors yea his heresies also during the pleasure of the
Bishops, even their Lord, and his?

And would you Mr. B. be content your people should hear a Mass Priest or
Jesuit, though he professed as loud as you do, that he would teach the true
word of God? And think not scorn of the match, for you have the self same
office with a mass Priest though refyned. If he be ordained by a Bishop
(though it be the Bishop of Rome) he may minister in any Church of England by
virtue of that ordination. Andbesides masse-Preists preach some and those the
main truths, and the Ministers in England neither do nor dare preach all, no
nor some which (it may be) the others do.

Is it not better then for the servants of the L. Jesus to exercise and aedify
themselves according to the model of grace received, though in weaker measure,
then to be so simple as to come to your feasts, though you cry never so loud
unto them, thinking that because your stolen waters are sweet, and your hidden
bread pleasant, that they have no power to pass by, but must needs become your
guests?

And here (to use the Pistlers words,) it is well to be marked by the Reader,
how the Church when these things were written, enjoyed as a Pastor, so a
judicious Ruling Elder too, and their company greater by far then it was,
when that letter was framed.

Such as write of the Government of Commonwealths do hold it for a rule, that
to redress abuses in any State, a better Way cannot be taken, then to have
things brought to their first institution. Hence it is, that the Venetians,
have a supreme Magistracy, which they call A Syndicate that once in a few
years, ^ survey^ all the Offices and dignities in their wealth that so all
things may continue and stand entyre, according to the rules and precepts of
their first Constitutions and Ordinances.

If the Pistler had desired the common good of that Church: he would have
sought, to have had things reduced to their primitive Original, and good
beginning: and not Mention as he does, their deprivations, declinations,
departures ser^en^ qualitas vi^i dignoscitur.
: as a rule for all Posterity to measure their faith and actions by. It is an
infallible maxim, (as D: Usher De Christianor Eccl. success. et stat^^ cap. 1.
page 19.
and other observe out of Tertullian Id verum quodcunque primum. id adultorum
quod cunque posterius.
) whatsoever is first, that is truest, and what comes after is adulterate. The
first in any kind, or sort of things is truest and best: so Field.

3. But admit there were many that held this hearing lawful, and so have don
along time, what of this; is the thing he better for that? in no wi^e: For not
custom or multitudes must be followed, but the truth of Gods word. Walk ye
not in the statutes of your fathers, I. Of the Church. l. 2. c. 5. p. 49.
neither Observe their judgments, nor defi^e your selves with their idols
Ezech. 20.
The like precept we have, in 3: ^ch: 11. Follow not that which is evil, but
that which is good.

Cyprian and others of the Fathers (as they are called) speak well to this
purpose: we must Non debemus attende^e quid alius ante nos f^cerit aut
faciendum putauerit sed quid ante omnes est Christus prior fecerit. Cyp^ Epist.
63.
not regard what others did be fore us, or thought fit to be don, but what
Christ did who was before all. We Must non est de consuetudene praescribendum
sed ratione vin cendum. Epist. 74.
not prescribe upon custom, but persuade by reason. Whatsoever Tertullian lib
de vi^g:
sauoreth against the truth, it is heresy be the practice thereof, never so
ancient. Non illa tantum in religione fugienda, quae Verbo dei adversantur: sed
ea etiam quae verbo dei, non sunt praescripta, etiamsi ab acutissimis hominibus
excogitata, a doctissimis defensa, et diuturna consu etudine recepta. Not only
in religion must we avoid all things contrary to the word of God; but also
whatsoever is not therein prescribed: o Polanus Comment: in Ezec: 20 page: 481.
yea howbeit the same should be devised by the acutest men, defended by the
most learned, and received by long custom.

Then we serve God, p. Fox Act. and mon: p. 18 29.
when in his worship, we follow his word, and not man's fantasies, custom,
multitude etc: so Bradford the martyr.

Thus we have (according to his entreaty) taken a view of his two things, the
which are so vain and frivelous, as indeed deserved no answer. yet least any
of that faction should think we passed them over without any examintion,
because we feared the weight and force thereof: I have breiflie replied: and
desire the humble and godly Reader, to con^ider what both have written.

SECTION: 3.
^The Epistoler having ended his two observations, prepares now himself in
the next place (in earnest) for disputation Dulce bell^^^ in expertis.
: And first of all, (after some spiteful words cast on his opposites,) like
Thraso in Terence (who thought himself a nonesuch, o. Metuebant omnes iam me.
in Eunuch:
and thereupon boastingly prayseth himself: They are all afraid of me, Act:
3. sc. 1.
as if he had don some great pe^ce^ of service,) he daringly prouokes who Et
calum territat armis. Virg. in Aeneid:
will to reply, if their stomachs serve. And because he will speak (omissis
nugis) to the purpose indeed. He undertakes to handle the point in controversy
methodicallie: that is, to propound first his opposites objections. And
afterward to give some answer to them,

First (says he) they object and say that we hold the Church of England to be
a false Church, and the ministers thereof to be Antichristian, and yet we go
thither to worship, and this say they is absurd.

His answer hereto is: Before we answer directly to this objection, we
shall entreat the Reader, and themselves to consider of what follows.

Answ: we read of one Doria the Admiral of Genua, that fighting at sea against
the Sarasens, he fetched his course so far about to gain the wind, that he
could never come to strike a blow before the battle was ended. The Epist: is
here fallen into such a wild and wandering course, for seeking to get some
advantage by windy words, he goes quite away from the thing which he
propounded, and comes not again to speak either much or little of it.

But no marvel our new master It seems the Pist: is one of Antontes
scholars mentioned in Tullie, who wishes men if they be trobled about a hard
question to say nothing to it.
has showed us such a trick: Cic, de orat, l. 2,
the truth is (as one D. Couel, Church Government. c, 1, p* 5,
speaks in the like case) he made the objection stronger then he was able to
answer: Better therefore to be silent then light a candle to discover his own
nakedness.

But it may be he, or others of that side, will be the more willing to reply, if
they shall se this argument laid down in some better form. If that will do
it, we will do our best to make way for them. Thus then we reason.

To worship God in any other way or manner, then he has in his word
prescribed, is unlawful:

But to hear Antichristian Ministers in false Churches, is to worship God in a
way and manner which he has not prescribed:

Therefore it is a sin to do it.

The mayor no man dares deny I assure my self: For it is manifest and certane
by the whole course of the scriptures. Deu: 12. 8. Leuit. 10. 20. psa: 119:
133: Mic. 7. 18: Hos: 9. 15 Ihon 4. 23. mat. 15. 3. 4. Colos 2, 8. 2 Ioh. 16.
17.

Moreover all sorts and sects of writers acknowledge this For a truth. Zanchy
Explicat: in Coloss: 2^ 23. page ^19. To^^. 4,
says, Deus et solus vult coli, et eo solo cultu, quem ipse instituit. God will
be worshipped alone, and with that worship alone, which he himself has
appointed. So writes Luther, Comment. in Galat. Cap. 6. page, 871.
Omnis talis religio, qua colitur deus sine verbo et mandato eius, idolatria
est, et quo ea est sanctior et spiritualior in speciem, hoc pernicior et
p^stilentior est.

All such religion wherein God is worshipped without his word and precept, it
is idolatry, and the more holy and spiritual the same is in show, the more
dangerous and pernicious it is.

Brentius Qui^unque cultus (...) tam aut verbum (...) ta tum ab^st, (...) vt
major^m ab^^t (...) ^psi (...) cap. ^, ^0, 2*
a man of rare learning among the followers of Luther says; whatsoever worship
is set up without the commandment or word of God, it is so far from being
acceptable to him, that a greater abomination thou can not put upon him. the
like says Chrysostom Etenim quod fit iuxta dei volu^tatem quamvis videatur
improbum ess^, tamen omnino deo gratum est, et accceptum: contra, Quod fit
praeter dei voluntatem, quanquam existimatur (...) deo, tamen est omnium
pessimum et iniquissimum. Of a truth that which is (...) according to the will
of God, although it seem to be wicked, yet it is altogether pleasant and
acceptable ^o him: (...)
Contrariwise whatsoever is don besides the will of God, and otherwise then he
will have it don: though it be esteemed as a thing acceptable to him, yet it is
of all other the worst and most wicked.

Famous Iunius Election ^n Ion: cap. 3. ^. 48.
writes so too, God will not be worshipped either for matter or manner, but in
his own way. And this is the judgment of Calvin, Instit. l 4. c. 10 Sect. 30.
Chemnitius, Exam. par. 1 page 82.
Cha^sanio, Loc. comm. page 328
Aretius, Exam Theol. page 42*
Piscator, In deu. 12* Observe. 4.
Keckerman, System. The^l. page 401
Trelca^ius, Loc. comm. page 10*
D. Fu^ke, Refutat. of Rastel. pa. 339
D. Androwes: Catach: upon the second comt:
B. Jewel, Repl. to Hard. Art. 1. divis. 29. page 604
and others.

Touching the minor or second part, I may spare all proofs, and send them to
their own consciences, For confirmation and conviction.

For: 1: That this hearing is a worship, the same is manifest and clear to
any that have an eye of reason, and any light of religion shining in them: None
to my knowledge (saving a poopish Parasite Hovvson. Sermon ^n Psalm. 118. page 78
or two) ever held otherwise, And they by men of better judgment Dr. La^ton* in
Syons Plea* p. 327.
have been sharply blamed for it.

Again, that this worship is don in a way and manner which the Lord never
appointed, it is as clear as the sun at noone day, and cannot with any
modest face be denied.

The Treatiser Page 37*
confesses that it is no particular Ordinance left by Christ: mark that: and,
in another place, Iustificat* Separat p. 93, 94
a false Church, says he, is a real and substantial idol.

Also Re^^giour communion. p. 37
Every such Government and ministry, as is not commanded by God and Christ,
is an idol forbidden in the second commandment: and all subjection to it, is
a bowing down to an idol.

To compare now all this, first with the scriptures: Is the Church an idol,
Abridgement p. ^3
the ministry an idol, the Government an idol etc. In the words then of the
Prophet: Hos. 14, ^
what have we do any more with idols? what agreement has the Temple of God
with idols ^ 2 Cor. 6* 14
For we are the Temple of the living God? Is it not said: Little children keep
your selves from idols. Again, my dearly Beloved flee from idolatry. But
how? mente et corpore: (says Pareus,) Comment* in 1 Cor. 10, ver. 14. page 614
in mind and body, that is the worship and reverence of Idols: And to flee
idolatry, is not only to absteane from it, but with all the heart to avoid it,
as an abominable thing and a most hurtful plague.

Again, a little after on the same place, whosoever (...) a christian, it is
necessary that he be careful, to keep himself from all idolatry, and the
occasions, kinds, and instruments thereof: so he.

2. To compare their former positions, with the doctrines taugh^ us by learned
men. Iunius Sacrifica^ur autem da^^nibus fi a^^a ^^co aut ^^tu and modo
sacrificatur, quam prascrip^it dominus.
in his notes upon Leuit: 17* 17* says thus, men sacrifice to devils, if they
sacrifice either in any other place or after other rite or manner, then the
Lord has prescribed.

B: Babington Comfortable notes upon Levit. 17. page 130.
writing on these words, what mansoeuer there be of the house of Israel, that
kills on ox, etc. And brings it not to the door of the Tabernable, etc.
says: Hereby was signified that only in the Church, by faith in the chief
high priest Christ Jesus, sacrifice and service accepted of God, is, and can be
offered and don, and no where else. And of this judgment was Deu. 12, p. 178
Luther, Brentius, Exegis. in Ioh: 4.
Calvin, and others. Levit. 17.


Touching the high places 1 Kin. 12. 31 2 King. 12. 3 2 King. 4. 14 Ier. 1^. 5.
Eze. 6. 2 and 6. 25
of which we read often in scripture. The time was when it was lawful to offer
sacrifices upon them, So writes Augustine Qua^st. 36. in lib. Judge.
, Drusius Ad diffic^l. loc. Deu. 12. cap. 68. page 571.
, Rivetus Comment. in Hos. 4. 13. page 148.
, and others. And so much our Learned Ainsworth in his Annotations upon Leuit:
17. 5. observes out of the Hebrew Rabbis. Before the Tabernacle was set up,
the high places were lawful, and the service was by the first borne: after the
Tabernacle was erected, the high places were unlawful and the service (was
performed) by the priests. Thalmud: Bab: in zebachim: chapt. 14.

Besides the Fathers of old, many hundred years there worshipped Brint. Amos:
c. 7. page 43.
almighty God, in spirit and truth. Notwithstanding it was Isreal's great sin
so to do Amos 7. 9*
. And the reason hereof is laid down by Zanchie Comment. in Hos. 4. 13. page
81.
. Quia verba non habebant, cur debere hoc facere, they had no divine precept
for it: and wanting that, idcirco fornicabantur, says Mercer Comment. in Hos.
4. 13. page 42.
: they committed therefore Fornication. Here also it must be noted, that in
these places they worshipped not idols Calvin. pralect. in Hos. 4.
but the true God, Deum quidem col^bant pa^^um* sed ^li^i quam loco quem
^legerat: Iunius Ann^t. in 1 King. 12. v. 4.
and the sacrifices which they there offered, were according to the law, 1. 50
their intention and meaning good Lavaterus in Josh: c. 22. ^om. 59. p. 70*
: and the reason why they made choice of them, was out of devotion, and for
imitation sake of the Patriarchs Al^^ed. prae^: 2. p. 370. cognit. ^^eol
, and quasi caelo propriora Brentius Comment. in Amo: 7. p* 42 O^^^^mp. in Hos.
4. 13.
, as being nearer to Heaven and the like.

Now if it were a fault in them, to carry the oblations under the law, to a
place (howbeit sometimes lawful, and where their godly ancestors had before
truly worshipped) because they had no commandment so to do: Then certainly
more in fault are those, which (with the worship of the Gosple) go, where it
was never lawful publicly to serve God, and where their forefathers never to
this day, rightly served him: I mean to an idol-Church, and there offer up
spiritual sacrifices, in, by, and with an idol-ministerie: I say there being
in the word of God no one precept for it.

If the Pistler can show us, what coulorably can be said, for the justification
of this latter: which the old idolatrous Jews, could not say as well, or rather
better in the defense of the former.

Et eris mihi magnus Apollo. In conclusion I shall desire every christian
heart, unto whom the Lord has given wisdom, to consider seriously of these
things. If the Prophet, only for his civil eating in a place prohibited, felt
so sore and greevious a punishment: ah* what judgments then, may all such
justly exspect, who dare eat spirituallie any where, against the express
commandment of God.

Was the Lord so zealous For the ordinances of the old law, to have his people
observe as the substance, so every circumstance: whether it respected the
place, the person, the time, or any other rite: and shall we think that now he
cares not, whether men be precise and strict in doing all the particulars
belonging to the worship of the new Testament.

Ought we not to believe, that as God has commanded us to worshipp him, that
is, to hear his word, receive the sacraments and to use other his ordinances,
so he has also called, and separated unto himself a Church, a communion of
saints and holy ones, in, and amongst whom, those holy things are to be used:
And that we are to look in what fellowship and communion we receive the holy
things of God as what the things are, we do receive. In a word ought we not
to be persuaded that as the legal sacrifices out of the Tabernacle or Temple,
within whose circle they were prescribed by the mouth of God, were unlawfully
offered: so all the ordinances and exercises of the Church under the Gospel,
don out of a true constituted Church, are altogether and every way sinful.

Unto the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes,
Deu. 12. 5. 6. 7. 8.
to put his Name there, even unto his habitation shall ye seek, and thither
thou shall come. And thither ye shall bring your burnt-offrings, and your
sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave offerings of your hand, and your vows,
and your free will offerings, and the firstlings of your herds and of your
flocks. And there shall ye eat before the Lord your God, and ye shall rejoice
in all that you put your hand unto, ye and your households, wherein the Lord thy
God has blessed thee. Ye shall not do every man whatsoever is right in his
own eyes.

But seeing the Epist^ler has something to say, we will now give him audi^nce:
the sum of his long discourse is this.

A Church may be said to be false in diverse respects, as first in respect of
outward order, when the same is not gathered according to the rule of Christ.

2. In respect of faith and doctrine. To the latter we will not counsel any
man to go: but only the other. Howbeit he confesses this la^ter false and
Antichrictian.

Answ: Eu ipides.
1: Pantheus in the poet * thought he saw two suns in the firmament, when
there was indeed but one: it was the distraction in his head, that made him so
to think. I will not say, that the Pist: when he wrote this was in such a
distemperature; But this I am sure of, their conceptions are both alike: For
where (I pray you) do yo^ read in the scriptures, of two kinds of
Antichristian Churches; speak out man? show us the place, the Chapter, the
verse: ingenious dealing requires it: As for your bare saying, it is far from
proof: To affirm or deny (according to Aristotle Propter nostrurm affirmare,
vel negare, nihil in re sequitur. De ^nterp lib. 1. c. 6
) is of no consequence. That some false Churches in some things may be less:
corrupt then others, this is possible; Notwithstanding if we consider in what
respect they are both false, that is, the ground and cause of their
Antichristisme, or falsenes, here we shall see no difference at all; Noe two
respects as the unadvised man affirms.

For example, one harlott may committ more whoredom then another:
notwithstanding as they are harlots both, so it is of one and the same ca^se:
namely Fornication. The like may be spoken of other things, whether Animals,
vigetals, minerals: howsoever in goodness or badnes they may differ, I mean,
as it respects degree, e Lib* ^. de prop necess c. 8
measure, quantity, etc. yet in the Genus or kind they are one, and no
otherwise to be considered. To this purpose writes A^uinas Aquinas 1 Sent.
did. 9
, Scotus Super predicabili^ Qua^t. 18*
, Porphirius Cap. 2. Sect. 32.
, Zarabel Keckerman, Systemat. Log. l. ^, c. 3.
and others.

Besides if that be true in the Philosopher: Opposita sunt sinul in natura
Arist. Tropic. l. 6, ^^num est, cutus contrarium est m^lum. R^ctor. l. ^.
opposite things. in nature are alike. Again, this is good whose contrary is
evil: it must needs follow, unless the Pist: be a false Teacher, that as some
Churches are visiblie true, in respect of faith and order: so others may be
true too, having only outward^ order albeit the members thereof have no faith
at all. The which astertion is not to be answered, but abhorred.

2. The ten Tribes which departed from the Lord, from his Temple, sacrifices,
Priests, alter, and other holy signs of his presence at Jerusalem: from that
time, and still after, were not Gods Church and people: so the scriptures show:
Hos: 2, 2, 2 Chro: 15. 3. Ier: 3. 8, Hos. 13. 1. Amo: 9. 7. This being so, I
would gladly know of the Pist: in which of his two respects they were a false
Church? I take it he will say the latter: not only in respect of outward order,
but likewise in respect of faith, and doctrine.

If he grant this, as needs he must (unless he have their spirit, whom the
Apostle 1 Pet. 2, 10
terms (...) prosumptuous and selfe-willed) note then the consequence: as his
respects are foolish, so the Church he pleads for hearing in, is false in both
his two respects. The reason is; because the Israelites when they worshipped at
Dan and Bethel, were not in respect of faith and doctrine (to use his terms)
more corrupt then the other now is.

And because he undertakes nudo capite barefaced and boldly to defend
Antichrists cause: we shall exspect in his next Pistle-making some thing from
him, which hitherto no man has attempted: that is, to answer Mr. Ainsworth:
I^roboam^ ^^pology in his Arrow against idolatry.
and the non-conformists Course of Conformity* p. 161, 162
who affirm that the Apostate Jews could justify their way and course of
religion: as well if not better, then the other. In short therefore, if he can
show us what essential truths his disordered Church retains, or gross
errors rejects, wherein we cannot manifest that the other went as far, For
my part I will freely confess my error, in being a long time persuaded
omnia similia that they are both alike, and one no better then the other.

3. Are the Lords ordinances with the Pist: only matter of order? What is the
Church of Christ, his ministry, the right administrations of the Sacraments
and Censures, no points of faith: oh fearful saying. Not only is there wrong
here don to the scriptures, but also to many worthy Christians: For were this
true, they have sun in vain, their sufferings have been invaine: I mean, our
predicessors, and others, who have suffered joyfullie the spoiling of their
goods, spilling of their blood, etc. I say for this, which according to his
writing is no point of faith and doctrine.

But we need not wonder, that Gods house and his Ordinances are thus slighted
of him? do not all adulterers after they have set their unclean affections
on strangers, think meanly of their own wives, disgrace them what they can:
so do Idolaters, etc.

Now I do not know (this gentleman excluded) one man that has affirmed, that
the whole outward worshipp of God to be no point of faith. Cartwright speaking
of this, terms it the substance of the Gospel T. C. l. 1, page 48 Page 26
And in the same answer to Whitgyfe he writes thus: You say that in matters of
faith and necessary to salvation it holds, which things you oppose
afterward and set against matters of ceremonies, orders, discipline, and
Government: as though matters of discipline, and kind of government, were not
matters necessary to salvation, and of faith. The case which you put whether
the Bishop of Rome be head of the Church, is a matter that concerns the
Government and kind of Government of the Church, and the same is a matter that
touches faith, and that stands upon our salvation. Excommunication and other
censures of the Church, which are forerunners unto excommunication, are
matters of discipline, and the same are also of Faith and Salvation. The
sacraments of the Lord his Supper, and of Baptism are ceremonies, and are
matters of Faith, and necessary to salvation.

So Fenner Difence of Eccles. discipl. page 33
, certain points of discipline, are of necessity to salvation, in such
absolute degree of necessity, as is of any ordinary outward means. Of which
sore is the ministry of the word, and of the sacraments, and of the censures
of the Church.

Others of the Non-conformists. I could alleidge which say the same, as Parker
De pol. Eccles. l. 1, c. 11, pa. 30
, Traverse Necessity of discip. p. 21.
, Vdal Demonst. discipl. pref.
, Baines Dioces. Trial. pa. 50.
, Bates Pa. 60
Yea and Conformists too; as Bilson Perpet: Govern. chapter 1, p. 3
, Whitgyft Treat. 2, c. 1, divis. 2. pa. 80
, Sutclift C^^t. Bez. c. 2 p. 32
, Lo Compl. of the Church p. 60
. Add to these Scultingius Hierar. Anacr. l. 9. p. 1
the Papist. Who calls Ecclesiastical Polity, the soul, joints, and synews of
the Church.

Besides howsoever the Pist: puts out the whole external worship of God, from
being points of faith, yet the Reformed Churches in France Art. 25
and the Low cuntries Art. 30
do put this in, as an article of their faith. To be short, that which he calls
order, is in the Treatisers Iustif. separ: p. 348
opinion, absolutely necessary to the Church, an essential property. And as
D. Ames De consc: l. 4 c 24. p. 214
says, it cannot be a true Church that wants it. For by this, the parts and
members thereof are knit together. And this is true, as in divinity, so in
Philosophy. For Form (according to Aristotle 3 Phis: 3, 5
) (...) is the reason of the essence. Another: Every thing is senceable by
matter and intelligible by form. Averr: in 1. de Calo.
As things by the light are decerned: so we understand the matter by its form
Boeth. de unit.
. It is a known Tenent. Form guies to things, being, distinction and
operation. So Keckerman Syst. Theol. l. 1. c. 17. p. 161
, Timpler Metaph; l. 3, c. 2. Pr^bl. 71, 72.
, C^^rlm C. 6, page 35
, Scallger Ex. 6, S. 3.
, and others.

4. Seeing he holds it unlawful, to go unto any Church which is false in
respect of order and doctrine: it must needs follow, that all Antichristian
Assemblies are to be wholly left, because they are false in both, these respects.

And touching the Church of England here pleaded for, what notorious errors
and abuses, she mainteaneth and practices, may be seen in her
Convocation-Canons, visitations, Articles, the English mass book, their
manner of making of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. To let pass the many
scoores, of heathenish, Jewish, and poopish superstitions, which the
Nonconformists See Soldier of Barvvick. Table.
have in printed books branded her for.

And that the measure of her iniquity, Syons plea.
may come to a speedy fulness. Admonitions to the Parliament Altar of Damascus,
and other of their books.
Let the Reader observe, the multitude of gross errors, which she has added
lately to the former: And these not only in printed books, the high
commission and sermons in the court, city, university, and cuntry averred, but
also allowed them by public authority: among sundry other. Romish erroneous
positions these. Sec Chovvne, Reeve, Pocklinton, Heylen, B. White, B.
Mountague, Shelford, P^imerose, Laurence, Studly, Coal from the Altar, Bishcp
VVren, and other Prelates their visitation Articles.


The Church of Rome is a true Church: That she has never erred in
fundamentals, no not in the worse times; That personal succession of Bishops is
requisite and essential to make a true Church; That the Archbishops and Bishops
of England derive their lineal successions and Episcopal dignity from St.
Peter's Chair, and the very Sea of Rome, and that we should not acknowleidge
them for Bishops in case they either did not, or could not do so. That the
Pope of Rome or papacy is not the Antichrist, nor Antichrist yet come, or
revealed; That Crucifixes and Images in Churches are lawful, and necessary
comlie ornaments; That Christ is really present upon earth on the high Altar
and Communion table; That Communion tables are Altars; Ministers of the Gospel,
Priects serving at the Altar, the Sacrament of the Lords supper, the Sacrament
of the Altar, and may yea ought so to be phrased, That men ought to bow to
Altars and Communion-tables, and to place and rail them in Altarwise at the
east end of the Church, and come up to them, and receive when there is a
Sacrament, and that Ministers must read their second seruise at them when there
is none. That auricular confession to a Priest and absolution are very fitting
and necessary; That the Lords day is no Sabbath; That it is lewish to call it
or keep it as a Sabbath; That it is not of divine, but human institution,
not with in the morality of the 4. commandment; That two hours only of it,
is to be sanctified, not the whole day; That Morises, dancing, sports and
pastimes (yea labors of men's calling, not specially prohibited by (...):
^^maine laws, even out of cases of necessity) are lawful on it. That men may
fall totally and finally from Grace; That they have freewill, and may exactly
fulfill the Law of God if they please themselves; That men are justified by
works, yea by charity, and not by faith alone; That men are elected from the
foresight of faith and works, and reprobated only out of the foresight of
their sins; That there is a universal grace given to all men whereby they
may be saved if they will; That Christ died alike for all men whatsoever; That
preaching is an extraordinary thing VVelfare the Bishops who are true to their
ground, for it is an extraordinary thing with them to proach.
only for extraordinary times, and belonging to none but extraordinary men;
That one Sermon in a month is enough, and better then two a day; That reading
is properly preaching; That Archbishops and Bishops Episcopal jurisdiction and
degree above other Ministers is jure divino; That the Ministers know more then
the Lay People, the Bishops more then the Ministers, the Archbishops more then
the Bishops; And therefore what ever the Ministers shall teach or prescribe the
people, what ever the Bishops, the Ministers and people, what ever the
Archbishops, the Bishops, Mininisters and people too, are bound to believe and
obey without further question or dispute; That the Popes Laws, Decrees, and
Canon Laws are still in force, and our Church ought to be governed by them,
and our Ecclesiastical Courts proceed lecally according to them; That Bishops
have power to make and publish Articles, Canons, Injunctions, Oaths, Rites,
Ceremonies, in their own names and rights, and to enforce both Ministers and
people to obey them; That they may silence, suspend and excommunicate, (yea
deprive and imprison) Ministers at their at their pleasure without any legal
cause.

That Bishops are not bound to preach so much, or so often as other men, (though
they have greater wages, and so should do more work.)

That they may Lawfully and laudablie neglect their spiritual functions, to
manage temporal Offices and affairs, exercise both Swords at once, and rule
both Church and State together.

Now, that the Reader may be sure, what I here set down is true, let him
peruse a Book entitled the Quench-Coale, and there he shall find all these
Assertions affirmed, in an Epistle written unto the King.

5. Whereas he says, in a Church that is false in respect of outward Order,
there may be taught many sound and seasonable truths.

This I grant, for Jesuits and other Heretics, deliver oft-times many true
Doctrines: And what of this, may we therefore Lawfully hear them? In no cause;
For as one Vsus est Nabuchodonosor Musicis Instrume^tis in erectione statuae,
ut homines ad ejus honorem and venerationem excitaret. Pintus Comment. in Dan.
cap. 3. page 195.
says of the Musical Instruments which Nabuchadnezzar had in the plain of
Dura, they were brought thither, that men thereby might be the sooner drawn to
honor and worship the goulden Image. So truly are the Truths taught in false
Churches, a bewitching Music to lead people unto them, and to cause them to
fall down before the Idols of the place, set up by Worldly Princes, against
the express Commandment of Jesus Christ.

Again, howsoever the Priests he pleads for, Preach sometime sound truths,
notwithstanding otherwhile they speak vain and foolish things.

Mr. Fox Acts and Monum. page 1027
reports of one Hostius, who being in Gaunt, was told that a certain Friar
there, used to preach good and sound Doctrine: But when he came to his Church,
he heard him justify Transubstantion, and nothing else.

And the like comes many times to pass, that men reputed rare Preachers, make
whole Sermons in defense of gross Idolatry, and speak most reproachfully
against the way and worship of God.

This being so, I would know of the Pist: if a man be present, when such
blasphemous Positions are delivered, whether he offend. If he say, No, then it
follows that a man may hear any one and any where, and his distinction
between hearing this Priest, and not that, is (nihil adversum) impertinent and
idle. If he say Yes, then it must follow (from his own grant) that no fal^e
Minister is to be heard, unless a man know before hand, that he will not
speak perverse things.

SECTION. 4.
THat the Church here pleaded for, is Antichristian and false: the Epist: does
acknowledge. Yet (says he) that worshipping of God, which consists in
hearing his Word, is warrantable for us to do there: And so much he undertakes
to prove by this Argument.

That Preaching which ordinarily begits men to the faith of Christ, may
lawfully be heard.

But the Preaching of many Ministers in the Church of England has and does
ordinarily beget men to the faith of Christ.

Therefore the Preaching of many Ministers in England may lawfully be heard.

The first part of this sillogisme is proved out of Romans 10. Where the Apostle
telling what is the ordinary way God used to beget men to the faith of Christ
tells us, it comes by hearing of the word of God preached, if faith comes by
hearing the Word of God preached (to wit, if that be the outward means) then
there is no question but that a man may hear such preaching, and any man may
blush for shame, that shall deny this: So that the major part of the Argument
is clear:

And for the Minor part they can not deny it, no more then a man at noon day
can deny the sun to shine: for if any man make question whether faith comes
ordinarily by the preaching and hearing in England, it is a great question
whether they ever had faith or no: yet because some are so gross as to deny
this, we will therefore: prove the contrary by this Argument: Ne puero gladium.

That preaching and hearing which makes them which were altogether carnal, and
so not capable of a church estate, to become saints and so fit for a
church estate: That preaching must needs beget men to the faith.

But the preaching and hearing in England, made them that were unfit and
carnal to become saints, and so fit members to the true Church, which were not
so before.

Therefore the preaching in England and hearing the same does beget men to the
faith. That the preaching and hearing in England has done this: Witness the
Church of Leyden and of Amstelredam.

I cannot say of this man's Logic, as Aristotle (...).
did of Theodorus his making of Epethites, it is his whole art. But rather if
that be true, the Bird E cantu dignoscitur avis.
is known by her singing, then the Publisher is very unskilful this way.

Touching his Sillogisme, the same is many waves peccant, as I shall make it
obvious and clear in the particulars following.

1. To reason from the effect of things is unsound and unconcludeable by the
Scriptures: This is, as if a man would say, the Midwives Exo. 1, 9
which lied unto Pharaoh, did mvch good to the Israelites: Therefore they did
well to Lie.

It has been (says Cartwright First repl. against D. Whitg. p. 79.
the manner always of wise and learned men to esteem of things by the causes
and not by the event: And that especially in matters of Religion. D. Twist The
Doctrine of the Synod of Dort and Arles reduced to practice, p. 5. 6.
in his reply to the Arminians: calls it a strange course, because a thing is
useful, therefore it is to be concluded that it is true: And a little after,
they that do such things manifest hereby (says he) that their case is
desperate, and that they have very little or no ground for their opinion out of
the Word of God.

And this no doubt is most true, touching the Pist: For were he able to prove
the hearing in question lawful, he would not have published (as here he does)
so vain a reason: Or rather indeed that which has no weaght of reason in it.

Tertullian, De praescript. advers. haerec.
Epiphanius, Haer. 38, p. 124.
Irenaeus L. 1. c. 16. and 17.
and other Ancients: make mention of a Sect, named Cains, which held that ludas
did well to betray Christ: The reason they render for it, is the same which the
Pist: here brings for the hearing of false Ministers: To wit, the good effect
Quonia^ per ipsum parata est nobis crucis salus, and per hoc propositum
supernoru^ revelatio.
, that followed upon it. Thus he gratifies vile Heretics, in raking up their
old ground, to build his new error upon.

2. Seeing this practice of hearing, is condemned by the Scriptures: should it
be granted (the which I deny) that ordinarily their preaching begits men to
the faith: yet his proposition is unsound: For no evil may be done that good
may come of it. Romans 2, 8
No, not the least to procure: he greatest good; that is a true saying: E malis
nullum. May not I lend God a lie Job. 3, 7
for his glory: Much less do any other evil for any other whatsover. As
well the means (says one D. Slater Expos. on Romans 3, v. 8, page 308.
) as the meaning must be good. Hos. 4. 15, Mat. 7 Rev. 18 4 Son. 1, 7.
So writes Pareus, In Romans 3. v. 8, ad bonum finem, bona and legittima
requirantur media.
Timpler, Exerc. Philos. Sect. de act. h^ma^. not. quest.
Lavater. Comment. Josh. c. 2, hom. 8, fol. 10.
Unto a good end, lawful and good ways and means are required. The reason
is, ( D. Willet. Comment. in Romans 3, Quest. 12, p. 154. Par:
no sin is eligible; for whatsoever is eligible, and to be made chose off is
good, but sin is no ways good, for then it should not be sin.

Moreover, according to this man's Argument, men may commit Schisms and
Heresies, for good comes of them; namely, a clearer Illustration of
Orthodoxall verity: So they may lie, steal, committ adultery, etc. because of
some following good effects: Which is the glory of Gods wisdom in his mercy
toward the elect, and justice upon the reprobates.

But this I know he likes not: Notwithstanding his and it (pedes ad caput) for
the matter of reasoning is all one: For thus he disputes; If the effects of
false Ministers prove good: Then may they lawfully be heard: But the first is
true: Therefore the second.

But stay, the consequence follows not: For non mox bonum est, ex quo bonum
sequitur; says a judicious Writer. Comment, in 1 Cor. 11.
We may not straight way say the thing is good, because good followed of it.

As for the good effect it is not perse, or (...): But ex accidente, as
Logicians Dionis. Areopag. c. 4, de divin. nom: Fr. Pieolomen. in Doct. Ethica
Rod. Goclen. cont. Philos. Theol. par. 3, p. 85, Keckerm. Syst. log. l. 1, c.
13.
phrase it, By an accident. It comes, says Lyran, In Romans 6, ver. 1,
ex bonitate Dei, qui bona elicit ex malis. The like says Theodoret. Lib. de
providenc. fol. 85.
) Deus malis ad bonum aliquod utitur. So Paez Cantic. Moys. Text. 4. An^ot. 1,
p. 67.
peccata a Deo ordinantur in bonum.

To conclude though in evils of punishment, we may choose a lesser to shun a
greater. Yet in evils of fault election has no place. For Divines Dispute
against Eng. Popish Ceremon. part. 2, chapter 1, page 10,
hold absolutely, that no thing which is evil in the use of it, may be done,
either for prevention of evil, or for any good whatsoever, inter duo vel plura
mala culpae says Alsted Theol, Cas. cap: 12, p: 210,
nullum est eligendum. And Pareus In Rom: 3, 8.
the like: Nec ullum admittendum malum, ut even iat aliquod bonum, sive per se,
sive per accidens.

3. The maine drift and scope of his reason, is not only untrue; But indeed
very dangerous, to say no worse of it, as rending to restrain people from
hearing the true Ministers of Christ. And that this is so, I prove it thus.
That preaching which has not, or does not ordinarily begit men to the Faith of
Christ, may not lawfully be heard. But the preaching of many true Ministers in
their Congregations neither has, nor does ordinarily begit men to the Faith of
Christ; Ergo, etc.

If his Argument in the affirmative be true: Tam forma, quam materia; To say
nothing of mood and figure. Then in the negative this is true also, according
to that known rule, parium par est ratio: There is alike reason of things
alike. So in the Philosopher: Arist: Eth: c. ^
Contrariorum est eadem ratio. For instance, let it be in the affirmative thus;
The godly please God; Must it not on the contrary follow: The ungodly
displease God.

To apply this: If this be a reason and ground, why some Ministers ought to be
heard; Namely, because true conversion ordinarily follows their Ministry.
If this [I say] be a main cause that they should be heard; Then surely it must
follow: Where such effects of ordinary conversion appear not; There must be no
hearing. I say such Ministers are to be rejected, be they in their places never
so painful and conscionable.

This being so, mark the inference: Noah preached a 120 years, and yet there
followed no ordinary conversion in the old World. The like may be said of
Elias, Isaiah, Jeremy, Ezechiel, and other Prophers; Therefore it was not
lawful to hear them.

Has not the Pist: here showed himself an acute disputer; For to build Babel,
he pulls down Bethel; To justify false Prophets, he condemns the true. In a
word, whiles he seeks to open a door unto the Synagogues of Satan, he
shuts up the way and passage unto the Courts of the Lord of Host. Had he
thought on the Wisemans P^o: 16, 20
saying, I think he would not have written so unaduisedly. He that handles a
matter wisely, shall find good.

4. For the proof of his Major, there is not one sound sentence in it.

For 1. touching the disdiapason or il-favoured coupling of the matter. The
Scripture he alleges is Romans 10, verse. 17. Faith comes by hearing the Word
of God. Now, what of this? His Argument hence is not proved, neither does this
place, Romans 10. look that way. For example, suppose I should lay down this
Position, the ordinary way to have right, between man and man, is to seek
unto the lawful Magistrate: Would any one (unless he had Boeoticu^n ingenium)
hence infer, that those who had right ordinarily done them by Usurpers and
Tyrants, did well to take it.

2. The hearing there mentioned, is not (as the Pist: imagines) a hearing
promiscuously of all preachers, but it respects such only, as (legitime vocati)
have a true outward calling to the Ministry. Thus Tertsllian Lib. co^t.
Mareien.
, Danaeus Comme^t. in 1. Tim. 5 22.
, O^colampadius In Esae 52
, Mayer On Iam. 3, Doct 3, p. 179.
, Pareus On the place.
, Guiliaudus Id.
, Beza Jd.
, Piscator In Romans 10. Obser. in ver. 17.
, and others understand the place; Therefore should his words be cast into a
form, the very expression will be confutation enought; For so they must run.
If the Apostle, Romans 10, say, that the ordinary means of men's conversion is
by hearing the lawful Ministers of the Gospel; Then may unlawful Ministers
be heard; If he can make it hang otherwise, he were best to do it, and save
his credit what he can.

Thirdly, Paul Romans 10, speaks of the ordinary way, which God has ordained
to begit faith; But the practice here stood for by the Publish. is quite
another thing: Even a tempting of God; For as the Learned Muscul. in Mat. 4,
Tom. 1, p. 47. Moller. in Psa. 78, v. 18. p. 684. P. Mart. Loc. Com. Clas. 2,
c. 4, p. 209. Polan. Syntag. l. 9, c. 8, P. 596.
well observe, God is tempted, when men, leaving the ordinary and appointed
means, use their own devise; to obtain either spiritual or temporal good
thereby.

That this hearing is so, we have in part proved, and more will, if God permit.

Now, for his Minor. 1. All Sects do boast of the effects of their Ministry
in converting men unto Christianity. Bellarmine De not. Eccles. lib. 4, c. 12
tells us, that Iew^s Gentles, and Turks too, are converted in multitudes by
their Church. Another Mass Priests supplication to the King, Sect. 31.
lays down the particulars, viz. Bessites, Dacians, Getes, Scythians, Morins,
Nervians, Armenians, Huns, Burgunnians, Scots, French Pictes, Bavartans, and
well nigh an hundred other Nations are there reckoned up. The Arrians in old
time said Freculphus in Chronico Tom. 2, l. 4, c. 20.
no less: By their Ministers the Goths and others, were turned to the says
from Paganism. But this is not proved or true, because they say so.

2. If it were needful, I could bring their own testimony against him. For
(to use Mr. Robinsons Justificat. Separ. p. 51.
words) there is nothing more common both in the Sermons and Writings of the
forewarder sort, then their complaints how little good their preaching has
done. For Example, mark what some Ministers of good note among them do
affirm.

This J dare warrant (says Mr. Gifford Country Divinity, fol. 48.
) if it be not so let me loose both my ears, that go through the Parishes of
these grave and learned Divines, and unless such as run to such their
victuals otherwhere, ye shall not find five among five skore, which are able to
understand the necessary grounds and principles of religion. Another Catholic
Conference, p. 164.
says more: Were it not for the good Laws of our Kingdom, which do
constrain and compel men to make outward profession, the greater number of
our people of all sorts in this Island, would make none at all. Mr. Nichols P.
218.
in his Plea of the innocent, reports, that conferring with the particular
persons in his Parish (after he had preached some good space among them) about
the means of salvation, of 400 Communicants be scarce found one, but that
thought and professed a man might be saved by his own weldoing, and that he
trusted he did so live, that by Gods grace he should obtain everlasting life,
by serving God and good Prayers.

This being so, what credit is to be given to the Pist: Minor. Seeing the men
he speaks for, give in their evidence and witness against him.

3. Howsoever many living in jdola^rous places are converted; yet how knows
he, that the preaching in question does it. For private men and wemon, may and
do turn their neighbors from evil, and that ordinarily: som^^ime by
teaching, and witnessing the truth, otherwhile by reading, talking, conferring
of the Scripture, informing their Children and family in the faith. And this
the Scripture Levit. k. 27, 28, Prove. 31. 26, Man. 3, 16, Mat. 18, 15, Iam. 5,
19, 20, 1 Cor. 14, 24, Act. 8, 4, 26, 1 Cor. 7. 16, Ephesians. 64, Deu. 6, 7.
shows, and the Treatiser Iustif. Sep. p. 457,
acknowledges; D. Fulke In Romans 10, ver. 15,
in his answer to the Rhemists, shows out of Ruffinus; how diverse great
Nations have been converted by men and women out of office: As a great Nation
of the Indians, by Aedesius and Frumentius; The Country of Iberians by a
captive woman.

And here by the way, this may serve to his demand: Let them tell us where
they have received their faith? We answer, the wind blows where it listoth.
Sure we are, faith we had, when we left our unsanctified standings there; But
if any should hence affirm, that we had it by hearing false Ministers, he
should show folly and rashness. Secret things Deu. 29, 29.
belong to the Lord; Quae supra nos nihil ad nos. Augustine Melius est dubitare
de occultis, quam litagare de incertis Lib, 8, c. 5. de Trinit.
advises us well: It is better to doubt of secret things, then to strive for
uncertain things.

If the Pist: had minded this, I think he would not have written so
peremptory in a matter unknown.

4. Where reads he in* Gods Book, that men are named visible saints, and
judged firt matter for Church estate, they being in the mean while actually
members of false Churches, and practice daily gross idolatry.

I think with the Treatiser Iustific. Separ. page 269.
, true visible Christians, have Christ for their King, visibly or in outward
appearance, and so far forth as men can judge: (For by visible, we mean that
which may be seen of men, opposed to invisible which only God sees,) for
Christ is not divided, but look to whom he is a Priest to save them, and a
Prophet to teach them, to the same persons he is also a King to reign over
them.

That Christ then should be said to be a King, unto any people continuing
members of Antichrists Kingdom: Or that such ought to be deemed visible
saints, and firt matter for a true Church, which live under a false Ministry,
Worship; and Government. For my part, as yet I cannot see reason for it; But
think the word is against it. Rev. 14, 45, Ephesians. 2, 20. Deu. 33, 3 Esa. 4,
34, Romans 1, 7. 1 Cor. 1, 2 Philip. 1. 1


If a man should give up his name unto a Usurper, take his part, obey his
precepts, join with him in rebellion and treason? May he for all this, be
counted (and that justly) a visible good subject unto his King. To me it is
fide majus.

For his wordy and windy insultation; That any man may blush for shame that
shall deny this; I pass it by, wishing him hereafter to lay things down
according to allegata probata; Let the Scripture speak Sanctis Scripturis non
loque^tibus quis loquitur; Ambr. de vocat. Gent. l, 2, c. 3, Tom. 2.
in the points between us: For without it, nothing is to be affirmed Omne quod
loquimur debemus affamare de Scripturis sanctis. Hierom. in Ps. 98 Tom. 8.
: and beyond it, nothing to be concluded Nihil ultra quam sacris literis
proditum est definiendum. Erasm. in Hiliar.
: Gods word alone is certain, other proofs uncertain and false, if they
descent from it. Solum Dei verbum certum: caetera falsa si dissentia^t. Ferus
in Epist. ad Roma. c. 3. p. 303.


5. Howsoever it is true (as Polanus Comment. in Ezech. cap. 16, page 365.
, Deering 23. Lecture on Epistle to the Hebr.
, Whitaker Romans Pont. Cont. 4 Quaest. 5, page 681.
, and others say) in a false Church by the preaching there, some sometimes are
brought to the faith: yet (with these) I deny, that this is an ordinary work,
but rather extraordinary; The reason is, because their hearers generally by
their Doctrines, are kept in blindness, idolatry, wilworship, etc. So that they
fit not members to true Churches, but unfit them rather; For no sooner see they
a man to set his face that way, but they seek immediately, to keep him from
it (nolens volens) either by flattery, persecution or the like.

Lastly, if there be any weaght of reason in his words, they make then against
himself, and quite overthrow his own cause. And thus I prove it: No man can
lawfully hear false Ministers, unless he know before hand that they have and
do ordinarily begit men to the faith: But such foreknowledge is not to be
had: Ergo, etc.

The proposition is certain by his own grant; For the maine ground whereon
the whole weaght of his matter relyeth, is this, viz: that some Antichristian
Ministers ought to be heard, because they have and do ordinarily begit men to
the Faith: Now, this must needs be understood of that which is visible, for
otherwise (n^que Coelum neque terram attingit) he speaks idly and from the
point.

The Assumption cannot possibly be denied, except men will be senceles; For who
can say upon certain knowledge, that any false Minister in the world, has and
does ordinarily begit men to the faith. Thus the man is snared in his own
words; And may say with the Poet: Heu patior telis vulnera facta meis.

Before I end this point, I think i^ good to present here unto the Readers
view, one observation or two, from the Pist: Argument.

1. Howsoever he says but little, yet that which he says is so abstruse,
dark, full of evasions and starting holes, as a man cannot tell what to make
of it. He sends us to the effect of preaching: But to what end is this? What
light? What information can a man take hence: considering that as God is the
Author of true faith, so the time, instruments, means, etc. by which he
exhibiteth it unto man, is known only to himself, and not to others of others.

Indeed here we may observe a clear difference between truth and falsehood;
Between Christ's institutions, and man's inventions. Whatsoever God will have us
to do, or not do, he lays down the same openly, precisely, manifestly: All
the words Pro. 8. 9.
of his mouth are plain unto him that understands. The spirit speaks
expressly: 1. Tim. 4, 1.
Non obscure, and in voluie: Sed manifest, praecripte, praecise, says
Guilia^dus. Comment. on good the place.
Whereunto accords Augustine: Divinitus visu^ est, ut sacra Oracula simplici
and pershicuo exararentur dictionu ^enere, ne praetendere quisquam possit nihil
a se, in illis intelligs Ad vonsianum
It was thought good unto Almighty God, that the Scriptures should be penned in
a simple and plain kind of speech, least any man should pretend, that he could
understand nothing in them. Another Sam: Bachiler Sermon. Camp Royal, p. 36.
Gods Oracles are plain, and labor with no ambiguities, like those of
Pyrrhus, and Croesus, whereof no certain meaning could be gathered.

That the truth is simple and plain, Ethnickes by the light of nature, could
sufficiently see into such things. One of them touching this matter, says
thus: Veritatis sermo est simplex and apertus nec varijs indiget
explicationibus and ambagibus; sed iniusta causa cum per se sit morbida,
necessario indiget astutis pharmacis. Euripid.
The truth is simple and plain, and needs is not variety of windlaces and
fe^chings of matter about the bush: But an evil cause in that it is sick and
deseased, has need to have a cunning plaster set unto it. Another Aristo.
of them has these words: That phrase and form of speaking has truth in it,
which is common and used of all, having in it nothing craftily devised, neither
cloking some other thing then is professed.

Contrariwise when Satan speaks by his instruments, he speaks so
ambiguously and clokedly, as fitly, that of Apollos Oracle may be applied to
it: (...). Quod ambiguis ambagibus respo^sa consulentibus daret.
For one knows not how to take it, nor which way to apply it. Pertinently to
this purpose writes Sibelius Desacrific. Abra. p. 56, 57.
: Human Doctrines are various and ambiguous, wrapped and foalded with
abstruse labrynths of opinions, whereby peoples minds are so troubled and
tired, that they cannot plainly open themselves, neither have any quietness, or
come to their desired end. But the Doctrine of God is right, that is, plain
and perspicuous, not wrapped with un-even and crooked suttleries and delusions
of Sophistry, neither leads us into by-pathes and errors; but brings peace
to the conscience, ad removes all scruples and doubts: So he.

Sadeel Opera Theol Pref. de Meth. Theol. disput. Error. 3. p. 8.
writing of deceivers, and the sundry ways they use to beguile the simple:
Notes them to be men affecting dark sayings, and seeking by mists and fogges
of strange and unfamiliar arguments, to blind their spiritual eyes, and puzzle
their understandings. And this is no late devise; For Augustine in his Book of
Heresies makes mention of the Heretics Marcitae, so named of one Marcus. And
touching them, thus I find it written: Obscurissime and quibusda^ verborum
tanquam misteriorum in volueris utentes loquebantur de Deo, ut stupere^t
audientes homines, potius qua^ intelligerent.
They did speak darkly, and used such a wrapping kind of words, that the
hearers were rather astonished with the strangnes of the words, then edified with
any understanding they had of the meaning thereof.

The thing being thus, the Reader hence (as by a light) may gready help
himself to discern, on whose side the truth is, in the difference between us.
Our dispute is about Church-hearing: We say, that Christians are bound to
perform this service unto God, in true constituted Churches; There (we say)
must men hear the whole Counsel of God, taught unto them, either by lawful
Ministers, or by Brethren out of office; For confirmation hereof, we can
produce many divine precepts; Also the Example and practice of our forefathers
from the first age of the word hitherto. Besides, this is a Position, so
certain and clear, as it is holden in all Schools, written continually in
Books, preached every day in Sermons, taught in all Churches: So that (haec
Momo ipsi satisfaciant) no body can speak against it. Danaeus in August. haer.


Our Opposites howbeit they grant us this, yet affirm that in false Churches
Antichristian Ministers may be heard also: Page 3.
And this is not only (they say) lawful, but in some cases necessary for all,
of all Sects and sorts of Christians, having opportunity and occasion of so
doing.

This indeed they say? But how prove they it to be true? Not by any law of God
taken out of the old or new Testament: For that they cannot do; Not by any
holy man's Example, for they know there is none extant? Not by any sound
consequence rightly drawn from the Scripture, for (quid si Caelum ruat Teren.
in Heautont.
) that is impossible. What do they then? as Jeremy Ier. 2, 13.
says, they forsake the fountain of living waters, and hew them out
cesternes, broken cesternes that can hold no waters.

They devise certain obstruse, dark and ambiguous phrases and distinctions:
As of natural hearing in a Church, and of a hearing wherein there is
Communion: Of some Churches, false in respect of order: Others in respect of
faith and order: of hearing false Ministers, not (quatenus) as they are false
Ministers, or their Ministers, but as men gyfeed and the Bishops Ministers: of
certain effects which follows men's teaching, etc.

Thus their proofs are only their bare and bold affirmation: For leaving the
Scriptures, they use Paralogismes, fond cavils, and false arguments. The which
course not only shows an il case, but also manifests, that the embracers
thereof, are either ignorant people who cannot judge of things that differ, or
some, that have some men's persons in admiration: Or such as are unwilling to
suffer affliction with the people of God.

I could here mention some other devises in this kind; as an implicit
Church Covenant. A true outward calling which some have, to the Ministry from
their Congregation, but secret and unknown either to the Minister or the
people.

But I will at this time abstain from such by-controversies, and the rather
because I shall have a firt occasion to speak hereafter of it; Namely, when
the Undertakers have finished their answer to my former Book, and Mr.
Davenport published his many things that he has to say against it. For so much
he insinuates in his Treatise between him and Mr. Pagit. Page 282 283.


2. Observe again, to what gross absurdities his argument leads; For unles
it be only wind and vanity, these sweet collections must needs follow. 1. No
Minister coming newly to his place, is to be heard. 2. Before any are,
inquiry must be made, whether they ordinarily begit men to the faith. 3. If
after trial it be found, that they do not so, then they must not be heard
what true Doctrines soever they teach.

Is not this workman-like done? (say Reader) has not the Pist: (omne tulit
punctum) made the way clear now, for the hearing of false Ministers? Truly I
think, except a man be partial in the point: And of his mind who said: Non
persuade bis e^i imsi persuaseris.
Though you do convince me, yet I will not be convinced; He must acknowledge,
that he has made it doubt fuller then ever it was, and such as were not well
satisfied formerly in the thing, have enought here from his own pen, to put
them quite and wholly off.

SECTION. 5.
THe Pist: having done with his Logic: comes in the next place to charge his
Opposites, with contradiction, absurdity, and speaking little better then
Blasphemy. A great fault, if true; But how does he prove it? They say, it is
not the Word of God, as it is preached in Antichristian Assemblies.

Answ. The Publish: had done well, if he had published out assertion (de manu
in manum,) truly and faithfully. But seeing he has not done so, I will here
lay it down; Thus it is: The word preched by false Ministers, is not that word
unto which God has promised a blessing of increase. Or it is not the ordinary
way and means which the Scriptures speaks of, to begit men to the faith. Had
he so alleged it, he might well have held his tongue, and not talk so vainly
as he does, of Gods Word, if Mr. Can shall preach it; And none of Gods Word,
if another do preach the same. For our difference is not about the Word
simply, as it stands in sillables and letters; But rather in respects the time
and place preached in, and the persons preached by and to; That is, as the one
being an ordinance of Christ, the other of Antichrist; As the one (that is the
word preached in a lawful office) being like Mount Gerizim under the
blessing; The other like Mount Ebol under the curse.

I will express this paticular more fully in this manner, put the case, a
Company of Rebels going apart, should take with them the Statute-booke of the
Realm, and set up among them, one or more to administer civil justice
according the contents thereon, now though no man can deny but this is the
Kings Law which they have, yet as they administer it, so it is not his Law, or
more plainly, that is not his Law, which they administer, neither may any good
subject in such a case receive any administration at their hands.

The holy Vessels in Babylon were the Lords still, yet the Israelites there,
might not make any religious use of them; So in spiritual Babylon, the Bible
there is Gods Book; Nevertheless the Godly are forbidden to go thither, to
hear it, either read or taught to them.

We find under the Law a difference between the Creatures, some are said to be
clean, others not; But how comes this? Not of themselves, for so nothing is
evil or unclean; (for all Gods Works were created good; Genesis 1. ult.
But in respect of the use forbidden: So thouching Gods Word preached, in one
respect it is pure, in another not? How ^o? Not but the Word in itself is
still good and true. The difference is, because of Gods Commandment, he
having as flatly forbidden the use of it (taught or heard) in false Churches,
as he did some beasts under the Law. I would have the Pist: to tell me, what
contradiction, absurdity, or blasphemy it is to say: though Circumcision in
itself were of God: yet as it was used in the false Church under the Kings of
Israel: It was none of Gods ordinance; If was Gods ordinance, if a true
Minister in Gods Church administered it; But if a Priest of Ieroboams making did
administer the same, It was none of Gods Ordinance.


I wish therefore the Reader, to note in what respect we place our difference,
between the Word preached in a true Church and in a false Church; We say in the
one (that is in the true Church) it is clean. In the other, we say it is not:
Nevertheless, if it be considered, as God is the author of the whole
Scripture; And as it contains words and sentences, so we say, it is all clean
and good; The reason then, why we say their preaching is unclean, is in the
same respect, that some creatures were unclean under the Law; Namely, in
respect of the use forbidden.

As the tree of knowledge of good and evil, hurt not of itself, I mean the
fruit, but the transgression after the commandment, the thing in itself
good, but the use forbidden; So Gods Word in false Churches (as that fruit) in
itself is good, but the use there prohibited.

And because the Publish: takes it so ill, that any difference should be put
between the same word preached in Bethel and Babylon. I will (to appease him)
add one word more. As a false and forged Constitution, makes a Church a real
and substanciall Idol; So all that comes from it, is touched with the Idolatry
of that Constitution. This is a ruled opinion of many Divines, the State makes
all the public actions to be formally good or evil; For as the Temple Matt.
23, 17, 19.
sanctifies the gould, the Altar the offerings; So the ordinances of the Church
under the Gospel, are sanctified to us; That is (as Bucer In Mat, 23, v. 17.
truly speaks) in the use of them made lawful to us, in that they have
their Rise, from a true and right Power.

Seeing then the Church in Question, wants a right Constitution, it must
follow, that all spiritual actions done in it, (whether prayer, preaching
Sacraments, Censures) as they are there done, are none of Gods ordinances;
though true it is, in themselves they are of God. Yet I say, as the Word is
there preached, the Sacraments there administered, etc. So they are not his; I
say not his, though in outward performances they are practiced, as in true
Churches. But of this more in another place. Jn defense of Object. 15.


Another thing for which he blames his Opposites, is, their misapplying the
Example of Nadab and Abihu; I will here set down their words, as he reports
them, and his answer thereunto.

It was true incense which Nadab and Abihu took, to offer up to the Lord, but
because they took strange fire; and not the fire which was from the Altar, as
the Lord had appointed, therefore the Lord sent a fire to destroy them: So say
they, it is the true Word of God, which is preached in England, but because
they preach the same by an unlawful office, therefore the Lord abhorres it: A
stranger collection I think can hardly be heard, for here strange fire is
opposed to an unlawful outward calling; which nothing can be more absurd, for
Nadab and Abihu had a true outward calling to Offer, they were the sons of
Aaron (says the text) therefore if any thing hence might be concluded, in just
proportion, it must be to the Doctrine taught, and not in the least to the
calling: So that we may from thence gather thus much, that if a Minister in
regard of his outward calling true: shall teach any thing that is not from the
Lord, they are to expect Gods judgment for the same, and more cannot hence be
collected.

What Origin Non est periculum ut eis subvertuntu^ ullus fidelium, lib. 1 cont.
Cells.
said of Celsus works, may fitly be applied to this man's writings: There is no
danger, least any faithful man should be subverted by them; For he talks
and not reasons.

To answer: But are you in earnest, speak out aloud? Can no more be concluded?
What; will a little more be (aliena are) beyond the mark; So you say; But a
stranger collection I think can hardly be heard; Dicclare Teren. in And.
For I dare say, you are alone Solus sapit.
here in your opinion; Learned men generally give a more^large exposition of
the place.

The scope of that text, we are taught by an English Bishop, Babington, in his
Notes on that place: We may hence learn and settle in our hearts, with what
severitie the Lord challenges and defends his authority, in laying down
the way and manner of his worship, not lea^ing it to any creature to meddle
with, but according to praescription and appointment from him. Content he is,
that men shall make Laws for human matters, etc. But for his divine worship,
he will prascribe it himself, and what he appoints, that must be done, and
that only, or else Nadah and Abihu their punishment exspected, that is, Gods
wrath exspected in such manner as he shall please.

And this he learned of Calvin Alium ignom sacris adhiberi vetuit Deus, ut
adventities omnes ritus excluderet, ac doceret, se detestari quic quid aliu^de
profectum erat. discamus ergo sic attendere ad Dei mandatum ne eius cultum
ullis extraneis Commentin vitiemus.
who upon the Place says: God forbad other Fire, etc. to be used, that he
might exclude all inventious rites, and teach that he detested whatsoever was
come from elsewhere. Let us therefore learn so to attend to the Commandment
of God, that we defile not his worship with any far fetched devises.

Iunius Peccatum in eo fuisse, q^od in ratione divini cultus non attenderint ad
mandatum Dei, etc. Anal, in loc.
mentioning their sin, says: It was in that they kept not Gods Commandment
in the matter of his worship. And a little after: They should not have added of
their own any thing thereto.

Piscator Cultum Dei exten^^um praecise ex Dei praescriptum exercendum esse:
itaque non habet hic locum bena hominum intentio.
from the place, rayseth this observation: The outward worship of God must be
strictly done according to his Commandment: A good intention therefore has
here no place.

Mr. Attorsall also in his Commentary upon Numb. 3. 4. does largely declare
out of this Example, how God disliketh and disclameth men's devises in his
service, as trash, trumpery, and mere dotage. So Beda, Bruno, Brentius.
Pelargus, Chytraeus, Sarcerius, S^rigelius, Aretius, Borrhaeus, and other
interpret the place.

And whereas he applies it to false Doctrine taught by one that has his
outward calling true. He may say in the words of that boasting City: k I am,
and there is none besides me; For this is his own devise, and it must live and
die with them.

The place being thus understood; Let us now see, if the same may not be (ab
uno de grammate) fithe applied against this practice of Hearing. From the place
then I do thus reason:

All will worship and superstition is sin.

To hear Antichristian Ministers in their unlawful assemblies is superstition
and will worship.

Therefore it is sin to do it.

The first Proposition is grounded upon the forementioned example: Levit. 10.
1. 2. and the same is without exception. The second Proposition is thus proved.

1. Lib. 1. vit. ex: cult: oppose. Col. 501. 502.
From the nature of superstition, which is, as Zanchy describes it a taking
into the worship of God more then he requires in his worship.

Hence superstition (as some derive the word) is that which is done supra
statutum; And in this respect the hearing in question, is superstition, as
being used in Gods worship, upon no other ground but man's devise.

2. According to the Schoolmen, Vel cui non debet, vel non e^ modo quo debet.
that is Superstition, when divine worship is not exhibited, either to the
person it should be, or not in the way and manner as it ought. And this is held
to be a sound truth by all Orthodoxal Writers.

Now, Aquin. 2. 20. q. 92. Art. 1.
howsoever the Hearers of False Ministers do exhibit worship to God, yet it is
not in the manner and way that they should worship him: And this is clear by
the Treatisers own confession; For he confesses that the hearing which he
pleads for, Page 37
is no particular ordinance left by Christ. Again, he says: It were to be
wished, that no Church Ministry were to be found which is not approveable by
the Word of God, notwithstanding any good act performed by them that posses it.

If I am not deceived, in these words he destroys what he built before: Is
this hearing no ordinance left us by Christ? Is the controverted Ministry so
evil a thing, as that every good Christian is to pray for its rooting up? How
then can it be both lawful and in cases necessary for all Sects and sorts of
people to partake with it. If this be not (ex diametro) cross work, and
gross contradiction, I know not what is.

3. This hearing cannot be free of superstition, in regard men are present at
false worship; The which presence (as the Learned write Praesentia est
communicatio quaedam in cultu, Slater. Epist. 1. ad Corinth. c. 10.)
is a certain communion therewith.

4. It is great superstition to approve, countenance, or give honor to any of
the ways of Antichrist. They that are sincere Christians (says in Censura
cap. 9. fol. 471.
Bucer) cannot abide any thing that is his. The least show (says Vigandus
Syneps. Antichrist
) to please either him or his followers, is will worship. Of this judgment
were Iunius Jn Hos. 2. 16.
, Musculus Loc. com. de ^radit. p. 421. 422.
, Beza Tract. theol. vol. 3. pa. 210.
, Mollerus In Ps. 16
, Zepperus de Polit. p. 72.
, Sadeel Contr. Monachos p. 70.
, and others.

Now, me thinks there should not be a man so void of reason, as to say, that a
Minister of Antichrist, as he is preaching by virtue of his Masters commission,
and under his seal and authority, may even then be heard, and yet no honor,
no approbation, no countenance, nor any show thereof, be given unto Antichrist
therein.

5. It is vicious and superstitious to simbolize with idolaters; The Scriptures
Levit. 18, 3. Deu. 12. 30. Exo. 23. 24. 2 Chro. 13 9. Levit. 19. 27. 28
forbidd it. And the Saints in all ages have carefully shund it, as we shall
show in another place. But this Hearing is no other; For idolaters in this, are
imitated in sundry acts of their idolatry; In so much as Papists and Atheists
too, may well twitt our balters in the words of the Samaritane woman, how is it
that thou being a Christian joynest thy self to us Antichristians? Is it not
strange that thou who professest our Church to be false, our Ministry
unlawful, our Church Government Popish, should yet come to us, and partake
in our administrations? Surely this argues, that either thou understandest not
the practice, which thy grounds lead thee too, or else for some by respect;
refusest to walk accordingly to them.

6. Superstition is committed, when more estimation is had of a thing, more
dignity and excellency placed in it, and more regard had to it, then God
allows or can stand with his will revealed in his Word; And so much Zanchy
Lib. 1. de vit. ext. cult. oppos. col. 504. 505.
proves by sundry instances; In this regard also, hearing false Ministers, is
supersticious, because that thing is honored and embraced, which we find not
in the Scripture to be lawful: and thus an idol is set up, tanquam Deus ex
part, though not vt Deus simpliciter.

Thus I have answered the Prefacer: Now, how he will take it, J know not.
Cotis, a Thrasian King, breaking some vessels to pieces, was asked a reason; He
answered, that he might not be moved to anger at another for doing of it. Had
the Epist: been so wise, as to have torn his writing himself, and so not
published it, he would not (as it may be he now will) have been angry at
another for laying open the weakness and vanity of it.

AN Answer unto the Treatise.
SECT. 1.
WHen Satan cannot draw men to one extremity, he seeks to bring them unto
another. The truth of this, the Holy Scriptures 1 Cor. 5. 11. compare with 2
Cor. 2. 6, 7.
not only show, but sundry examples also prove it in this present age.

It is true (as the Treatiser says) there are many who affecting alienation
from others, Numb. 14 35, 45.
make their differences as great, and their adverse opinion or practice as
odious as they can. Deuteronomy. 1, 42. 44.
A moat shall be a beam with them, a knatt, a Camel. And hence through want of
a take heed, they become rejecters of persons and things which they ought not.

Again, on the other hand, there are not a few, who desiring liberty, and
large walking, and to have the credit and love of all men, use all their wit,
skill, and power, to have great things (I mean evils and sins) esteemed
small things: And what is small, that nothing. That so they may find a door
of entry, to accord and agree with others in unlawful practices.

Here therefore is the wisdom of the Saints, namely, that they shun both
these two extremities. Medium tenuere beati. And for my part of this later
number, I shall, while I live, profess my self (by Gods grace) be to both a
Companion and guide: That is, not at any hand to condemn what is to be
justified, neither to approve that thing which ought to be condemned.

There are two reasons laid down by the Treatiser, wherefore he penned this
discourse. 1. For the freeing of his own conscience. 2. The information of
other men's.

Answ. 1. J dare not think, but the Treatiser when he fell first upon this
point of Hearing, spoke as he thought of it, and did nothing but what his mind
gave him to be right and good: But this makes not the thing therefore
justifiable; For as Martyr says: Lex Dei is regula conscientiae. Loc. Comm.
Class. 2. cap. 1. page 165.
The Rule of our Conscience must be the Law of God. Gideons Ephod was erected
with a well meaning mind, but it became a snare, ^udg. 8. 27.
and a scandal, and an occasion of great idolatry, and the overthrow and
ruin of his whole family. What has this hearing been? but a snare in Israel,
an occasion whereby many people have turned aside from the streaght ways of
the Lord.

2. I do not see what satisfaction any man can have from his writing: Seeing
he has not alleged any one Sentence of Scripture to prove the point in
question lawful. Omne quod loquimur, debemus affirmare de Scriptur is Sanctis:
says Hierom in Psalm. 98. Tom. 8. But this he has not done, only he tells us,
that Hearing is a natural action: Hearing is no Communion, etc. Now, where
this so (which is not in the sense he intends) yet it serves not his turn in
the least.

If a Thief, to clear himself, should say, that he has not stolen such
particulars: Yet if he have done other things, he is a Thief notwithstanding.
So in this case, thought to hear false Ministers, be not a sin in such a
respect: Yet if it be in some other, the action is neither Lawful nor
necessary.

And here by the way, let me speak a word to you, whose warrant for your going
unto unlawful Assemblies, is only the Treatisers writing: This J do affirm
and will make good against all gainsayers, that if the thing could be
justified, yet for his part he has not proved it so, but has left the point
it self wholly untouched, and taken up a by-thing.

Therefore what Alcibiades said of the Athenians, I may well apply to you, You
take things from other men, not by trial, but by trust, and do them rather of
affection and will, then out of any sure knowledge you have of the truth of
them.

That the Treatiser made account to meet with Opposites, I marvel not: Only
I marvel, seeing he foresaw so much, that he had not done his work to some
better purpose.

The first sort of Opposites are such who truly desire, Treat:
and carefully endeavor to have their whole course both in Religion, and
otherwise, framed by the holy and right Rule of Gods Word.

Answ. These cannot choose but be his Opposites, and that for 3. reasons
specially.

1. Because of his lightness and inconstancy in the matters of God: and for
that he seeks to build again the thing which he had before destroyed. What
he has said against this Hearing, the World is not ignorant of; and therefore
here is a fit place to lay down his own words, and to apply them to himself:
He sucks up his former breath; and eats the words he had formerly uttered, as
though he had either forgotten what he wrote before, or cared not how he
crossed himself, so he might oppose us. Iustificat. of Separ. p. 276.


2. Because the drift and scope of his writing, thwarteth the truth, and
leads unto sin against the Lord.

3. Causes troubles in the Churches of God, and hinders many from receiving
the love of the truth.

But did the Treatiser think, that the closest walkers with God, would oppose
him in this thing; Then it must needs follow, he made account, that the loosest
people for judgment and practice would be the embracers of it.

A second sort is of them, Treat:
whose tender and scrupulous conscience makes them fearful and jealous of
everything that has in it the least appearance on show of evil, etc.

Answ. He that will not fall into a deep pit, will not come very near to it
in his travel.

Gods people (says Theodoret Comment. in These. 5, 22.
) must be so abhorrent from evil, both in Doctrine and manners, that the show
of both ought to be avoided. And thus the Scriptures 1 These. 5, 22. Iam. 1, 27.
Iud. 23. Rev. 16, 18.
press, and the Saints Dan. 1, 8 Rev. 3, 4. Luke 1, 5.
have practiced.

For his distinction between things only naturally good in their kinds and
use, and others morallie, etc. I see nothing in it, wherefore he should desire
the reader to take knowledge of it. For as for riches, credit of the World, and
outward peace, here instanced, as they are good things in themselves, so they
may be desired, and in a right way and course Lawfully sought after.

For the other, namely, Hearing of the Word, obedience to the Magistrate, etc.
In these things too, we must keep our selves within the limits and bounds,
which God has set us. For his phrase of streaning and gooing as near the
Wind as may be, J hope he meant no streaning of a good conscience; If he did
not, then his counsel is of no use at all: except it could be proved, that the
Lord requires his people to hear in the way and manner he pleads for: a work
(ab Asino lanam) not possibly to be done.

As there are some scrupulous in things amiss touching outward Ordinances, and
yet faulty otherwise: So I believe there are many not scrupulous in things
amiss touching outward ordinances, and yet in their course of life, base and
scandalous enought.

But what of this, must not Gods House and Ordinances be dear to our souls,
because some men's conversation is not according to their profession? God
forbid. For in the holiest Society upon Earth, it is possible that there should
be wicked persons. When there was but 4: in the World, one was a Kaan: when 8.
only in the Arc, one was a Cham: Among the 12. one a Judas. The purest Wheat
has some chafe with it; The fairest garden some weeds in it; Therefore let no
man forbear to practice any known truth for other men's lewd lives; only let
them be careful to do well themselves: Mourn for such as do otherwise, and
seek by all due and lawful means their Amendment. And this is the burden,
and no other, which the Lord lays upon them.

The last sort he divides into 5 ranks; at which he either girds, or right-out
charge, with Hypocrisy, partiality, pride, ignorance, mallace, and the like.

It is said of Tamberlane Richard Knowles in the life of Baiazee
that he raised war against Bajazet the fourth King of the Turks, because he
refused to receive certain strange Garments, which he sent unto him. I
believe, had these men, embraced the Treatisers opinion in this point of
Hearing, they should not have heard him speak so bitterly against them. But to
the particulars.

Some are carried with so excessive admiration of some former guides in their
course, Treat.
as they think is half Heresy to call into question any of their
determinations, or practices.

Answ. Howsoever we must live by our own faith; notwithstanding we are not
lightly to esteem of the determinations and practices of our guides, specially
when we know they are no reeds; but men stable and unchangeable in the truth.
He is a foolish traviler that will leave the way which he has long kept,
unless he be sure, he is out. There is (as Polanus Comment. in Ezech. cap. 20.
page 487.
says) a laudable imitation of Elders. That is, so far to follow them, as
they are followers of Christ.

2. J know none more faulty this way, then such as have learned of him to hear
unlawful Ministers: For were not these men superstitiously addicted to his new
devise, they would beware, how to reject (as they do) the unanimous judgment
and practice of all Learned Men and true Churches, and follow the blind trodd
of his single opinion.

Such as lay down rules to find out the truth by, write thus: What the
Fathers Quid-quid omnes pariter uno codemque consensu, etc. Vincent: Lirenens.
cont. prophanos haeret. c. 4.
all with one consent have held and written, is a necessary token to know the
truth by.

Again, D. Field of the church, l. 3. c. 43, p. 175
Whatsoever has been holden at all times, and in all places, by all
Christians, that has not been noted for novelty, singularity and division is
to be received as the undoubted truth of God.

If these Assertions be true, the Treatisers then is untrue. For not only are
all old Writers against it, but the most Learned of later times: Yea (and let
it be minded) all Sects and sorts of people, professing Christianity, abhor
it; J except only Familists: For they and he (^^dem in lud^ docti,) are for
the pleading and practice here much alike.

Some again are much addicted to themselves as the former to others: Treat:
Conceiving in effect, though they will not profess it, the same of their
Heads which the Papists do of their Head the Pope, that they cannot err or be
deceived. And this specially in such matters us for which they have suffered
trouble and affliction formerly.

Answ. 1. We are all more ready to blame faults in others, then to see our
own and amend them. Had not the Treatiser thought to well of himself, I doubt
whether he would so lightly have singled himself out, and become (as it were)
every man's opposite, Humble minds, are afraid to meddle with novelties: but
such as seek humane praise, imagine they cannot enought be observed, unless
out of the dreggs of Sophistry, they raise some strange quiddities, whereby to
cross truths generally received.

2. That any man should love and like a thing, because it leads to persecution;
That J cannot think; But this J think: There are some which do profess and
practice many things (and namely this of Hearing) on no better ground or
reason but hereby, to keep themselves out of troubles.

There is also a third sort who bend their force rather to the weakening of
other men in their courses, Treat:
then to the building up of themselves in their own; half imagining that they
draw near enought to God, if they can withdraw enought from other men.

Answ. I cannot devise for what end the Treat. Aliquid latet quod non patet.
should seek thus to discover other men's nakedness, except it be, he thought
that the more vile and contemptible he made his Opposites appear in the
Readers eye, the easier he would be won, to embrace this his opinion of Hearing
Antichristian Ministers; a prittie trick; Much like that Lesson of the Cannon
Law: Si non cast tamen cause. But such shifts profit not, for a godly mind
will search and look into the cause it self; and not on the persons either
for, or against it.

To oppose a bad course, is meet and lawful, and should we be silent when we
are called to testify against it, we should make our selves hereby open
transgressors.

Touching the building up of our selves: This (as Jude Ver. 20.
teaches) must be in our most holy faith. He that rayseth up a House with
rotten stuff, What is there else in Babylon.
will loose his cost and labor by it.

I know not what withdrawing he means from other men: if he intend a
withdravving from the Hearing of false Ministers, then I answer, they do well
that do it. For if the Temple made with hands, defiled through idolatry, was
odious unto God, how much more will he loath our Spiritual Temples (not made
with hands) if we suffer them to be polluted with filthy superstition. But so
absolutely we shall do, if we do the thing which the Treat: here contends for.

A good man (says Ambrose Lib 5. Epist. 30.
) will be earnest and Zealous against idolatry.

Another says: Bradshavv on 2 These. 2, p. 130.
The better a man is, the more careful will he be to withdraw himself from
it. These witnesses are true.

Fourthly, there are some to be found so sowred with modines and
coffeehouse, Treat.
as they become unsociable: If they see nothing lamentable, they are ready to
lament: If they read any Books, they are only invectives specially against
public Sa^es and Governors.

Ansvv. 1. As to be unsociable, is inhumaine and brutish, so to be careless
with whom we join in communion, is sinful and vicious. A traviler were
better go alone, then have one in his company that should rob him, and cut his
throat.

2. This is not an age, which wants cause of just lamentation, considering not
only the evils without, but what perverse things are brought into the Churches
of God, whereby poor people are daily deceived.

3. That we should look into public States and Governors, there is reason
for it; and specially, if the same be Ecclesiastical, for else, how can we
walk as men of knowledge, and hold fast only that which is good.

Lastly, Treat.
some think to cover their own both grosser and more proper and personal
corruptions, under a furious march, not only against the faylings, but the
persons also failing of infirmity in matter of Church Order and Ordinances.

Ansvv. I suppose by Church-ordinances and Order, he means the Ministry,
Worship, and Government under Antichrist. Now, that some of ignorance submit to
these things, there is nothing more certain; notwithstanding this gives not
allowance to others others (knowing better) to do so too. If there failing be
of infirmity, there is the more hope of their reformation, I mean when they
shall hear the truth taught, and see the Teachers walk closely in it.

In conclusion, the Treat: pleas the Rhetorician, and makes a show, as if he
could say more, but he will spare his opposites.

Ansvv. As for his minsing figure of extenuation (to let much pass) I like it
not; For he does here no otherwise then if a These when he has stripped a man
out of all that he has, would feign yet be counted merciful, in that he does
not murder him, or bind him as some others have done. Let any indifferent man
read his writing, and he will say, the Treat. has not spared his opposites.
but short at them arrows of bitter words, and made them as odious and vile as
a man can do. But blessed is he, that is not offended at the truth for such
things.

SECT. 2.
THE Objections undertaken to be answered by the Treatiser, are (as he lays
them down) of two sorts: Some of them are framed upon supposition, that the
Ministers in that Church are in themselves Lawful and of God; But yet not to
be heard by reason of the abuses and evils to be found in their
administrations. Others withdraw herein (and those the more) upon the
contrary supposition: to wit, that the very order and constitution of that
Church and Ministry is papal and unlawful.

Ansvv. For the first I have nothing to say to it. It being a point beside our
present dispute. Again, for my part, I am of his mind in the thing: that is,
to use his own expression:

Supposing a Church, and the Ministry, thereof essentially lawful, it cannot
but be lawful for the members of other Churches in general union, and
association, with it to communicate therewith, in things lawful, and lawfully
done: seeing the end of union is communion. God has in vain united persons,
and states together. But he, who would have us receave the weak in faith, whom
God has received, would not have us refuse the fallowship of Churches in that
which is good, for any weakness in them, of one sort or other. And this we have
so plainly and plentifully commended unto us, both by the Prophets, yea by
Christ himself in the Jewish Church; and Apostles, and Apostolical men in the
first Christian Churches; In which many errors and evils of all kinds were
more then manifest: and the same ofttimes both so far spread, and deeply
rooted, as the reforming of them was rather to be wished then hoped for: as
that no place is left for doubting in that case by any, who desire to follow
their holy steps in faith toward God, and charity toward men, and effectual
desire of their own edification.

What he here writes is surely true; for the Scriptures approve not of rending
away from true Churches for any corruption: I use the word any, because so long
as we acknowledge the Church to be true (whatsoever her sins are) a
separation from all communion with it, is utterly unlawful.

Our godly Predicessours had in them the zeal of God, and love of his truth;
Two things I would know of these me^ 1. Whether they think not that the
primitive Christians were as zealous and sincere as themselves. 2. Whether they
think not, that the Churches from whom they separate, have as fevv, if not
fewer corruptions, then such Churches had, in which the Apostles and other
godly people daily communicated.
But how showed they it? Not by forsaking their Brethren for offenses, but in
witnessing against them, and seeking their reformation. But now (ah that I
could not say it) some men know not how their zeal like Iehues may be seen of
men, unless they make public Schisms in Churches; and this many times, not
for any sin, that they can justly prove the Church to be in, but upon
coffeehouse, and because they cannot have their way and will.

But of this no more now: For I purpose (if God spare my life) to set forth a
Treatise touching this very point.

The Treatiser in page 23, Treat.
would have us consider distinctly of Religious actions, according to the
several Ranks in which they may rightly and orderly be set. And how we
should conceive of them, a little after, he tells us thus: Some such actions are
Religious only, as they are performed by Religious persons. And of this sort is
Hearing (and so Reading) of Gods Word. The Scriptures teach, and all confess,
that Hearing of the Word of God goes before Faith, for Faith comes by Hearing,
as by an outward means. Hearing then being before Faith, and Faith before all
other acts of Religion inward or outward; it must needs follow, that Hearing is
not simply, or of it self a work of Religion, and so not of Religious
Communion.

Answ. That the Reader may the better perceive, how greatly the Treat: was
deceived in this matter of Hearing: as to think it not to be of Religious
Communion: ^ 1 Cor. 1. 9. 2 Cor. 6. 14.
I will speak here a little touching the nature of Communion. Philip. 2 1. 1
Ich. 1, 3.


For the word: the Greek koinoneo, signifies to have a part, or share, in, or
with persons and things, answerable to it, is the Hebrew Chabar, and imports a
consociation, copulation, or meeting together.

Again, Communion is three-fould; The first between God and Man; The second
between Man and Man; The third between Man and actions; For the two later, the
same is either civil, or spiritual. I call that a civil Communion, when the
matter or ground of it is not in, and of it self divine and spiritual, but
earthly and temporal: For spiritual Communion, this is practiced two ways:
1. With persons and things: 2. With things, and not persons. Where there is a
foregoing joining of people together in a spiritual outward society, or body
Pelitick, there is a Religious Communion with persons and things. But where
this is not, there is a Communion with things, as the State it self, and the
administrations done by the power thereof. Howbeit, as I have said elsewhere,
they have no Church communion, that is, to speak properly, they have no
Communion with the persons, who are not in Church Estate or union with them.

And that this is so, the Scriptures 1 Cor. 10, 18.
not only show: but also the denial of it, leads unto gross absurdity: For
if a man communicate not, in, and with the Worship he does, then it must
follow, that he neither helps himself in performing true Worshipp unto God,
nor hurts himself to do the contrary; And so by this ground, it is all one
whether I do the one or other. But of this we shall have occasion to speak
more hereafter; Now to his distinctions.

1. It cannot be proved, that Hearing and so Reading of Gods Word, are actions
Religious only, as they are performed by Religious persons.

This is not so: for it is not the person that makes the action Religious; The
reason is, if the action in it self be Religious, it must then be reputed a
Religious action, be the door Religious or not.

That no man may mistake me, let it here be observed, that actions are
Religious, either in respect of the matter alone, or the matter and manner too.
I confess, it by a Religious action, we understand the later, that is, a thing
well done for matter and manner, in this sense, none but Religious persons can
perform Religious actions.

But if by a Religious action, we mean the thing it self, and as (eo nomine)
it is to be distinguished, from what is, civil, natural, worldly; then I say
again, it is a Religious action (and of this sort is Hearing and so Reading of
Gods Word) howbeit performed by irreligious people.

2. Whereas he says, that Faith goes before all other asts of Religion inward
or outward.

This also is untrue: For men wanting faith (witness Kaan, Ahab, Saul, Judas)
may yet perform acts of Religion. The Scriptures here cited 1 Timo. 1, 5.
are (extra organum) not to the point; For they do not say, Romans 10, 10.
that Faith goes before all acts of Religion; But thus, without faith, we
cannot please God by them. So then, note the difference between the Scriptures,
and what he infers from them. Gal. 2, 20.


Without faith all acts of Religion are without acceptance with God; So these
Scriptures; Ergo (says he) faith goes before all acts of Religion.

To his mis-applying here, J may well apply that in the Poet: Ego de alijs
loquor, Lucan:
tu respondere decepis.

3. Here is made true the saying in the Poet. Fallacia alia aliam tradit.
One falsehood or suttlety brings in another. Teren. in Andr.
His needs must follow, follows not, but it is an unsound inference from a
false principle. Hearing the Word of God, is more (though he deny it) then a
natural action. viz. Religious and Spiritual; He reasons a specie ad genus
negative: because Hearing in some cases is so, therefore it is so in all.

If it be his meaning, that Hearing is a natural action, as it respects the
Organ or means, in, and by which a man receives the knowledge of what he
hears. Then it is true, according to that rule in Philosophy Relata esse
simul natura.
, Relations in nature are alike. But this is nothing to the purpose. Arist. in
Categ. Relat.


He that eats and drinks bread and wine at the Lords Table; or speaks to God
in prayer; performs natural actions, I mean as the members of the body are
here used: But if we consider either the Sacrament or Prayer in the subject or
object thereof, so they are not natural actions, but religious, and the like
is Hearing of the Word of God.

For his two reasons, they are of no weight; For 1. though the light of nature
teaches a man to listen to another, yet this proves not, that it teaches him
to Hear in the way and manner here pleaded for.

2. Were it granted it did: yet might the action be Religious; For the light of
nature Romans 1. 20, 21. Epictetus a Stoic writes thus: It is before all things
to be learned that there is but one God; that he rules all things; that he
provideth for all; that whatsoever we do, speak, or think, nothing can be
hid from him; that we should worship him as our Creator and Father, and the
only author of our felicity. Epictus apud Arrian.
, leads us to sundry divine duties, howbeit insufficient to guide us in the
right manner of doing them.

3. I grant, a mere natural man ought necessarily to hear Gods Word;
Notwithstanding it will not follow, when he hears in a Church Way, that he
performs no Religious action. This is as if one should say, because a rebel is
no good subject, he cannot do any civil service to his Prince; I speak not of
the aim of his heart, but only of a formal doing.

That which the Treatiser unjustly lays as a fault on Mr. Johnson in page 23.
is most true of himself in page 26, 27. to wit, a want of distinction
between things. It is so as he says, Preaching by some, and Hearing by
others, may be performed without any Religious Communion passing between the
persons preaching or hearing.

This I say is right, but that which afterward he makes one with it, is
different and otherwise; namely, that a man may hear a Minister teach
officially, and yet not have communion with the state of the Teacher.

I may apply here against him, that in the civil Law, testes dome stici
househould witnesses are of no validity. This is but his own saying, said
over many times, and indeed argues more wit then truth, and sophestry then
sincerity.

Scholars are taught out of the Topics, that it is ill arguing a consequenti,
when in two positions things utterly unlike, shall be compared together, and the
one by no means can infer the other.

I have proved before, that howsoever a man stand not in spiritual and
political church communion with a Church and ministry thereof, yet he is
there a participant or communicant in, and with the ordinances, as with the
doctrines taught, so with the state of the Teacher.

For the better clearing of this; Let us in few words consider, a Church state,
Ministry, and administrations, make up (as I may so say) the body of divine
worship. Now it is a known Maxim quidquid est pars partis, est etiam pars
t^tius. The hand is a part of the body, the finger a part of the hand, he
therefore that holds either my hand or finger touches my body. So in just
proportion, he that touches any part or member of the spiritual and
political body, he touches the body or state, be the same true or false: if
true, his communion is lawful: if false, he touches an uncheane thing, and
^o^ sins against that precept in 1. Cor. 6. 17.

To end this Section howsoever hearing of the word of God, lies in common for
all, for the good of all. Yet has God appointed away and order unto all, how
to hear it. Food and raiment lies in common to all, for the good of all: What
of this, shall we hence conclude it is noe matter by what means or course men
have it; indeed so he reasons or else (Oleum et operam perdidit) he speaks
neither for himself nor against us. Mr. Baines Diocesen. trial. p. 7.
writes well, no people can worship God in repairing to any Church, or
ministry without warrant of his word. Let the reader note it.

SECT. 3.
THe Treatiser for this opposities, has framed 16: objections: the which (as
himself says Page 13.
he has either heard from others, or could conceive of himself, ooulerably
against the practice by him propounded. The first is laid down thus:

No man may submit his conscience to be wrought upon, Object. 1.
by an unlawful and antichristian ministry: neither has God promised, or
does afford These words in a different letter, are the Treat. own, and we
disclaim them.
any blessing upon it, neither can any have the sanctified use thereof.

His answer hereto is this. The office of the ministry works not upon the
conscience of the hearer properly: the office gives only power and charge to
the Teacher, to teach in such aplace: it resides in the person of the officer
alone, the communion lawful or unlawful which any has with it, is in regard
of the lawful or unlawful relation and union foregoing between the persons,
and not in any working of the office upon the conscience of any: God may and
does bless the truths taught fauls ministers.

Answ. It was Heiroms Paulum quotiescunque lego videor mihi non verba audire,
sed tonitrua: cont. Iovinian.
censure of Paul's Epistles, that when he read them He thought he heard not
words but Thunder. This cannot be well applied to his reply here. For should I
speak my conscience, it is a mere Phrasiologie, words without weight of
reason.

1. He denies our first assertion: But how cleares he it to the contrary? As
is his ground, so are his proofs: Only bare saying: Sit pro ratione voluntas.

That the Office of the Minister, works upon the Hearers conscience; It is
certain, and not to be denied, without loss of credit, both to the person and
cause of the denyer in the eye of all reasonable men: Exo. 28.
For this is evident by the Scriptures, whether we respect an Office true or
false. Ephesians. 4, 11. 2 These. 2, Rev. 9.


Again, if it be considered, what we mean by the Office working upon the
conscience; Common reason will prove it too: Our meaning is, that the state or
power by which he administers, is herein submitted too. As Magistrates are
obeyed in civil Justice, because of their calling, and were it not for it, men
could not for conscience sake receive their administrations: So the conscience
of a Hearer is brought in subjection to the ordinance of Hearing, even for the
Office sake of him that teaches; We intend here Ministerial teaching.

It is most certain (says one Mr. Peitry of the Ministry of the Church of
England: Page 37. 38.
) Satan rules in the consciences of men, not only by false doctrine, but also
by his false power and ordinances; His Kingdom of darkness not only consists
in the lies and false doctrine, and worship which he has coined, but also in
the false and Antichristian Ordinances, which he has invented for the ruling
of his Idolatrous den: And therefore the Children and Saints of God ought to
avoid both the one and the other. So he.

2. It is not true, that the Office only gives power and charge to the Teacher
to teach in such or such a Church State. For properly it respects not that at
all, but rather the Office of the person gives him power to preach, pray,
administer the Sacraments, etc. according to their Order and Canons. He that
that has not a Church State to preach in, yet being ordained Priest, has
power by his Office to do the work of a Priest any where. And so much the
Treat. Manumis. to a Manuduct, p. 70.
in another Book acknowledges: The Office is the very state and function
conferred upon a man by his calling, from which Office arises immediate Note
this.
power, and charge to administer, and to perform the works of that Office: In
the performance of which works the Office is executed and. power used.

And whereas he mentions here, the truths they teach: J grant these are from
God, but the Office which gives them power and charge to speak them, is from
Antichrist: And a special Character or Mark (as the Learned Mr. Simon on the
Rev. page 120.
write) of the Beast. Thus said John Chaydon, Acts and Monuments, Edict. 5.
page 588.
a Martyr of Christ: The Bishops license to preach the Word of God, is the true
Character of the Beast, that is of Antichrist. The like Mr. Bale On Revel chap.
14. 9.
, and others.

3. Whereas he says, the false Office resides in the person of the Officer
alone; Here I might take that exception of the Law In testimon. dig: de testibus
against him. They who wander against the credis of their own Testimonies, are
not to be heard. Against this, we have his own testimony; For thus he says
Manumiss. to a manuduct. page 5.
those that partake in the work of preaching of one, sent by the Bishops, do
partake in what lies in them in the authority of the sender. And this is so
indeed. The sinful Office of the Teacher, becomes his sin, who practices
will worship with him: For hereby he enwraps himself into the guilt of the
Office; And this thing by another is so clearly proved Treatise of the
Ministry of the church of England, by Fran: Johnson. Page 5, 6, 7, etc.
, as no man can deny it, that has any light of reason or Religion shining in
him.

4. What can be vainer said (our enemies themselves being Judges) then to say,
God may and does bless the truths taught by false Ministers: A posse ad esse
n^n valet consequentia. To reason thus, is both against Logic and Divinity.
To dispute (says King James A speech in Parliament, anno 1609.
) what God may do, is blasphemy, but quid vult Deus, that divines may
Lawfully, and do ordinarily dispute and discourse.

It never came into our hearts to think, that God may not bless the Truths
taught by false Ministers: But this we hold, he has not in his Word promised
any blessing unto it. And in this Luther is with us. God blesses not (says he
Comment. in Galat. cap. 1. page 42.
, meaning by any ordinary promise) their labor, who are not lawfully called to
the Ministry.

The injunction Injunction 3.
of Q. Elizabeth, set forth by public authority, is much to this purpose.
Works devised by man's fancy, (so is every unlawful Ministry, and condemned
as Cartwright Christ. Cate^h. of R^lig. chap. 16. Page 98
says in the second commandment) have not only no promise of reward for doing
of them, but contrariwise great threatenings and maledictions of God.

The Treatiser Iustificat. of Separ. page 79.
was of this opinion too, when he said: The Lord has promised no blessing to
his Word, but in his own Ordinance, though by his super abundant merey he
oft-times vouchsafe that, which no man can challenge by any ordinary promise.

And because the Treat. is here so breife, a touch and away: As if our
Objection had no weaght; I will therefore lay the argument down in this manner.

Such Churches, unto whom God has made no promise in his Word, to bless the
things there done; ought not by Gods people to be resorted to.

But God in his Word has made no promise to bless the things done in a false
Church.

Therefore Gods people are not to go unto false Churches.

The Proposition cannot be excepted against: For 1. The Scriptures prove it
clearly. Ier. 23, 21, 22.


Again, there is no duty charged upon us, Ex. 20, 24
but there is a blessing promised, Psa. 134, 3 and 147, 13.
unto the due performance of it.

The assumption is as clear, and thus we prove it.

If false Churches have not the promise of Gods presence, they cannot from the
Word of God, exspect his blessing upon what they do. But the first is true:
Ergo the second.

The Major, which is only controversall, we prove thus.

If every false Church be an Idol Exo. 20. 45.
, and God require his people to come out thence Rev. 18, 4.
, threaten to destroy it Rev. 20. 8, 9.
, and will do it, and promise his presence unto the true Church Mat. 18. 20.
: Then is he not present We mean such a presence of God, as by his Word we can
be sure of it.
in the false: But the first is true, therefore the second.

Here I might name sundry learned Men, who give witness to this thing. Christ
(says Raynolds De Romans Eccles. idolat. l. 2. c. 1. page 99.
the Pastor of his Chruch, does tell us, that he feeds not in Antichristian
assemblies; in the den of Thieves, neither is it his will, that his flock
should there rest at noone: But in the pleasant pasture, by the still waters,
that is in the shadows of the true Christian Churches, detesting idolatry.

Another thus: They that do usurp Ministerial function in the Church, Dr.
Slater on Romans 1. Page 8.
cannot exspect Gods blessing on their labor. Doctor Ames lays it down as a
reason why a lawful calling is necessary; namely, that so they may exspect a
blessing from God.

It is true which these men say, for our ground for Hearing in church way is
not because the speaker is a man gifted, able to open and apply the scriptures.
etc, But because that which he does is a a divine institution, an ordinance
charged on us, to practice, and to which God has promised his presence and
blessing.

Let our opposites show us where it is written, that the gyfts and personal
graces of the man, is sufficient to justify the hearing of him We intend
Ministerial teaching. a Chap. 23 2.
but rather the reason wherefore we he are him, is, because of the lawful
calling which he has to administer the holy things of God.

Our Savior as it appears by Matthew approves of the hearing of the Scribes
and Pharisees; But upon what ground, not because they were able to open and
apply, the doctrines of Faith by that Church professed: but) as Piscator says
because they were called and ordained of God, Adeo vocati at que constituti
su^t vt legem Mosis in Synagogis populo praelegant cumque ad (...)
observationem exh^^tentur. Analis. in Mat. 23, v. 2.
that they should preach the Law of God in the Sinagogues to the people, and
exhort them to the observation thereof-Aretius on the place says the like and
adds, their calling bound the people to hear them.

So then here we see that men, being lawfully called to the ministry are to
be heard howsoever in some qualifications defective: but that such who have
taken on a false office, are to be heard th^s I deny: and ever shall do,
until they show me some divine precept for it, as we have for the other,
which is (Tantah horto fructus colligere*) a thing that they can never do.

For his phrase Balaam-like to curse: I pass it by: only I think good to put
our opposites in mind, of that which is written in I^sh. 6. 26. Cursed be the
man before the Lord that raises up and builds the city lericho.

J am sure, God of old-hath devoted Babylon to destruction: let men therefore
see to it that they bring not themselves under a greater curse, by using their
pens and tongues, to rise up again one part of the Kingdom of the beast which
the Lord before had consumed with the spirit of his mouth.

SECT. 4.
THE Treatiser frames our second objection in this manner.

To hear such a minister is to honor approve and uphold his office of
ministry. Object.


In confutation of this, thus he says.

If this he simply true then when the heathenish Athenians heard Paul preach:
Treat.
or when an unbeleever comes into the Church assembly, an a hears the preacher
he approues, honors and uphold the office of the ministry.

Ansvv: The virgins in Cypryans time granted, they walked with young men,
talked with them, went led with them, but when they came to the act, they
absteyned.

The Treat. writings here, and in all the rest of his Book, is much to the
same purpose: He grants, that men may walk to the Harlots House But the Word
of God forbids it, Pro, 5, 7. Lyran expounds this place of the false Church,
Tom. 2, p. 314.
, hear her told gueists, and yield to sundry dallying gestures (as bowing the
knee, uncovering the head, etc.) but when they come to the act they must
absteane: What that learned man Non est locus dondus Diabolo: Nemo diu tutus
periculo proximus, l. 1, c. 11.
then answered, so do I: No place must be given to the Devil, no man is long
safe, who is near the point of danger. To the matter.

That our argument may appear strong; Secundam legem oppositionis (as the
Lawers term is) we will put it down in this form.

To yield any approbation, liking, or reverence unto men's institution in the
exercise of Religion is a sin.

But in hearing Antichristian Ministers, there is approbation liking, and
reverence yielded unto men's institution in the exercise of Religion.

Therefore it is a sin to do it.

The Major cannot be denied; for the Scriptures Mat. 15, 19, Ps. 16, 4 Colos.
2, 20, 21, Deu 5, 9, 10, 1 Cor. 6* 17, Hos. 2, 16, Ex. 23, 13
teach us the very thing. Besides the most judicious Writers affirm so too.

God forbids (says Mr. Jacob Exposition on Com. 2.
) all approbation, liking or reverence, though never so small showed toward
any institution and inventions of men whatsoever in the exercise of Religion,
yea all words either of tongue or pen, tending to defend or excuse such humane
inventions in Gods service.

I might allege. Calvin Sermon. 52, on Deu.
, Mollerus In ps. 16, 4. p. 108.
, Smilerus In Exo. fol. 90.
, Macabeus Enarrat. in Deu. 12, loc. 1.
Vrsinus Explic. Catech. p 759.
Vigrandus Synops. Antichrist
, Zanchy De redempt. fol.90.
, D. Andrew On the Com. 2.
, D. Fulk Confut. of Allen. 378.
, Perkings Catech. c. 16, p 96
, Cartwright, Ainsvvorth Annot. on Ex. 20 45.
, and others, who in their writings affirm the same.

The minor is as clear: for 1. It is not possible that men can come unto
Antichristian churches to worship God, but they must by their presence there,
show reverence and honor to the public false state and ministry.

Note what an English Prelate Determinat. Quaest. 7, p. 40.
says, it appertains to the virtue of truth, that as a man shows himself
by external signs, so he is indeed to be esteemed.

The Doway Annotat. in 2 King 5, 19, p. 771.
translaters of the Bible write thus, such as frequent, or repair unto
unlawful assemblies, for the public service of God, by their being there are
to be reputed of the same religion, or else dessemblers: as it were to have noe
care of religion, knowing God and not glorifying him as God.

Cornelius a lapide In Epist. 2. p. 505.
) in his commentary on John, says, false ministers are favored and approved in
their unlawful way, when they are heard.

Chytraeus De Eucharistia, p. 317, 318.
handeleth largely this point, and from 1. Cor. 10. 14. concludes, that all
false Churches are to be left utterly, because (says he) a man's presence there
is an approbation of them, Rivetus Comment. in Psa. 16, p. 53.
adds this: Etiam si nemo ad confessionem adigeretur: Yea though a man came not
thither for confession sake.

If the fathers thought that the Christians could not wear garlants of bay,
Tertull. de corona milit.
nor deck their houses with leaves, and green bavves; Nor sit after they had
prayed, nor rest from their labor those days that Pagans did, nor keep the
first of every month as they did. Brac. z Tom. Can. 73.
But they should countenance and honor heathenish ceremonies, and
superstitions.

If these fathers (I say) conceived so, of these things, surely then upon the
like, or better reason, may I conclude, that to go unto false churches, and
there hear unlawful Ministers is, to show approbation, liking, and reverence
unto men's institutions in the exercise of religion.

The Prophet Hosea Hos. 2. 13.
reproves some, for kissing the Calves: But what was this sin. Pareus In Hos.
13. 2. page 557. Tom. 1.
says it was, their bodily presence at false worship, by which presence they
showed aliking to it. So Calvin. Praelect. in Hos. 13. 2. page 157.


Again, the point is further cleared, in that idols by this practice are
honored. Observeable it is, whereas on Evangilist Man. 4. 9. See Pareus on the
place.
(setting down the Tempters words to Christ) says, worship me: Another Luke
4. 7.
has it, worship before me: Showing that it is all one to worship before the
Devil, or to worship him; Now, he is worshipped, when idols 2 Chro. 11. 15. 1.
Cor. 10. 20. Rev. 9. 20. 1 Timothy 4. 1.
are worshipped, or any false institution are observed and practiced: Yea (as
Cartwright Histor. Christ lib. 1. page 14.
says) ta^etsi ex amino, aut superstitione quadam deceptus hoc non faciant.

To apply this, the Treat grants, that a false Church is a real idol, apart of
Antichristisme, and of the apostasy of the man of sin; If so; then hearing
there, must needs be unlawful, because it is to worship before an idol, and
such an idol as that the worship there done, issues from it, as the stream or
river from the fountain.

To the particulars of his reply. 1. For the Athenians hearing of Paul, it is
as impertinent a speech as was ever used by a man of learning* For we dispute
only of Church hearing, and not of what is occasional, and done out of
publick-state, or Church-vvay. We never held it unlawful, to hear any man
deliver the Word of God, as the circumstances may be. But what of this: hence
the Treat, will infer, that we may hear any where, and in any way.

If another should have framed such an answer to him, he would have said, that
either he had not learned his Sophestry, or else thought he had to do with
fools; For he reasons, ab eo quod est secundum quid ad simpliciter. Makes a
general consequence of that which is true in part.

2. To say, if I approve of the Office simply, because I hear the Officer
preach, then I much more approve of all the Doctrines which he delivers. This
is not so, nor so; For the Office is an institution, by which the Officer has
power to administer: And howsoever, we have our freedom to like or dislike of
the administrations, as we see just cause for it: Yet by our joining and
communion with them, we certainly approve of the state it self, whether
lawful or unlawful; For Example:

If I come where the Majestrates are sitting, and have civil justice there
administered to me; Albeit by this going of mine to their Court for judgment, I
really approve of the state that they are in: yet J am not therefore
necessitated to approve of all the acts and conclusions they make, but may
dislike them, if I see they are not as they ought to be.

The Corinthians, for ought I can see, resorted unto the Feasts of idols, upon
the same ground that the Treat. lays down for hearing. They went not of
superstition; for they were to well instructed; and Paul in their person brings
forth an excuse for them: 1. Cor. ^. 4.
We know that an idol is nothing. As if they should say, we regard not what
they have devised their public falsestate concerns us not, for we have left
it: We are in no Churchcommunion with their Officers, our meaning is not to
worship as they do, they intend one thing, we another. But did this satisfy
the Apostle? Not in the least; For he knew their private differing intention,
was* but a strong fruit of the flesh, monstrous presumpt on, and a mere
delusion; For their eating was not to be looked upon, and judged after their
secret meaning. But according to that public state where they were.

And here I desire the Reader to note the difference between Paul and the
Treat. Paul makes the sin of the Corinthians to be their resorting to an
idol-state; Not simply their eating (for tha^ they might have done elsewhere)
but because it was in, by, or from an institution of the Devil.

The Treat. lays us down a contrary Doctrine, and tells us, a false
Church State, is nothing: And Antichristian Officer nothing; And that we may
lawfully worship God in the one, and hear his Word preached by the other,
provided we be not in Church Communion with the Officer, etc.

Truly the difference here is great: For the Treat. cleares the Corinthians of
the thing for which the Apostle condemns them. But I will not press this
further now; Only what Augustine * said of the learned Fathers, I may speak of
the Treatis. in stead of him, or rather above him, Paul the Apostle comes to
my mind, to him I run, to him I appeal, from all sorts of writers that
think otherwise.

For conclusion, if the false state of a Church and Ministry defile only the
members thereof: And as for other present worshippers, they are blameles: Jf
this (I say) be a true saying, the^ has he vainly confind himself to the
Ministry of the Church of England; For his Position will serve as well to
justify hearing among Papists, Arrians, Sorcinians, Jews, Turks, etc. Yea
further, and to be present at any service or worship they do.

For what should hinder, but according to this ground, a man may lawfully go
to the Temples of the Saracens, and he are their Priests: considering they do
deliver many material truths. As that God is true and righteous in all his
ways a: ^ In Alcho ran Azoara. 1.
: The Creator of all things b: The giver of every good gift Azoar. 14.
Ad that Jesus Christ is the Son of Mary Azoar. 11.
, the Messenger of God, and a true Prophet Azoar. 7.
.

If any object, but they utter many lies and blasphemies. I answer, the hearing
simply of errors, corrupts not the Hearer: For so he consents not to them in
judgment, not practice, but testifies against them, he delivers his own
soul.

SECT. 5.
THE Treatiser lays down our next OBJECTION thus:

By this then it seems, a man may be present at any act of Idolatry, and do
as others do, that practice Idolatry, yet not approve of it. And so the three
Nobles in Danial needed not to have put themselves upon such pikes of danger
as they did, for not falling down as others did in the place.

To this he answers: Treat:
1. In preaching of the truths of the Gospel, no idolatrous act is performed.

Answ. I perceive it is an easy thing to conquest, if begging may procure one
that: But we are no such children as to give the cause so away.

1. Therefore J say, in preaching of the truths of the Gospel (viz: by a false
Minister, about which is our dispute) an idolatrous act is performed; And that
the Reader may understand this thing the better: He is to consider, that divine
worship is not to be determined by a particular thing (howbeit in it self
good) but as all the essential parts belonging thereto (whether they are
persons or things) are kept and observed.

The Church of Rome in Baptism uses water, and in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, gives bread, and otherwhile wine too; does this clear their
administrations of idolatry? So runns the Treat: reasoning: But we cannot
receive it, for the Lord never spoke so by him.

J think all men do think, that Vzziah 2 Chro. 26. 16.
committed an idolatrous act, when he invaded the Priests Office. But what made
it so? Took he unlawful incense? No. Used he strange fire? No. Offered he
prohibited sacrifice, or upon a wrong Altar? No. Where then lay the fault? The
Scripture tells us it pertained not to him to burn incense unto the Lord, but
to the Sons of Aaron Ver. 18.
To apply this, if his act were idolatrous, because he wanted a calling,
howbeit observed many truths of the Law; By the same reason, the Church-acts of
Antichristian Ministers, are idolatrous; Yea and as for the truths which they
preach, this clears their acts no more from idolatry; then Vzziahs true incense
and Altar, quitted him from transgression.

It is truly said of one Lavaret. in Josh. 22. Hom 61. page 7.
We ought not to conclude of an action, that it is good, because it has in it
some thing which in it self is so.

And this is true, as in divine things, so in humane too: For it is a known
Tenent of Philosophers, Omne totum suis partibus ordinatur, mensuretur and
determinatur.
the whole is composed, measured and determined of all the parts.

Unto the constitution of the whole (according to Aristotlec) is required (...).

2. As Job Job. 24.4.
says, who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one. The false
Office by our Opposit^es is acknowledged to be unclean. Now, to deny that
their Ministerial acts are not from thence, is against common sense. And this
further may be amplyfied by that passage in the Prophet, Hag. 2. 12 13. See
Iunius on the place.
where it is showed, that holy things are polluted by touching things unclean.
Arist. 12. Met. 3, and Lib. de Poet. cap. 7.


3. If in preaching the truth (according to the point in question) no
idolatrous act is performed: Then it will follow, that a man may remain a
Minister of a false Church all his life time: Provided, he only teach Note that
such whom they call Lecturers, in some places only preach, and do nothing
else: As I my self for some years stood so^.
the truths of the Gospel; Our reason is, for in this, if he do no idolatrous
act, then he sins not, and so Consequently no just cause of his coming out
from among them. The vileness of which thing, I leave to the Readers censure.

4, By the Treat: assertion, all usurpers of civil Offices can justify
themselves easily; For although they are inrtuders and Tratours: Yet seeing
their administrations are so and so: No Rebellious Act is performed. I could
note here many more such absurdities and inconsequences, tualoga in theologa,
as they call them: but enough is said; Considering the truth brings forth no
error nor absurdity by true consequence. Neither does one part contradict
another, as Augustine Scriptura sancta in nulla part discordat. De verb. dom.
2. and 11.
well observes.

Let us hear what he has further to say: Treat.
The Jews after Christ's death, and the taking away and abolishing of the
legal ordinance thereby, circumcised their infants, and frequented the Temple
for purification and other M^saicall Ceremonies, as parts of Gods Worship, and
still remaining of divine institution. Paul also circumcised Timothy, entered
the Temple, and yet did not approve any manner of way of the error and evil
of the Jewish worshippers.

Answ. It is truly said of the Orators, there is nothing done so evil, but
with fair colors a man may defend it. To allege the Legal Ordinances for
the justifying of this Hearing, is a poor shift, and shows a desperate case.
For 1. it is doubtful to some, whether any did well to practice the Mosaicall
Ceremonies after our Lords suffering; I could name not a few, who say, it was
their failing that did so.

But 2. grant (and so I think) that yet the Jewish Rites were tolerable, I
say in respect of the time, of an indifferent nature, and therefore their
observation till further propagation of the Gospel in offensive, and in it
self not evil; And so thinks Calvin Instit. l. 3 c. 19, Sect. 10.
Bez^ Annot. in Act. 21, 27.
P. Martyr Loc. Coo^. in Clas. 2, c. 4, page 200.
, Zanchy In praecept. 3, page 338.
, the Writers of the Centuries Cent. 1. l. 1^ page 416.
, the Rhemists In Act. 21 24.
. God minding (says Augustine Ad Hierom. Epist. 16.
) to have them honorably buried.

Now, what makes this for his purpose: if there be any agreement between this
Example and the thing he stands for, thus it must be: if it were lawful for
Paul and others, to do a thing which might be either done or not done,
according to circumstances; then it is Lawful to hear false Ministers,
howbeit the practice be against the Word of God. I shall need say little more,
for if his best friends will but draw the curtain and look on both parts with
a single and impratiall eye, they must without more ado, confess that I have
rightly applyd it, or they themselves applied to it, what we say commonly, non
causam pro causa; he takes that for defense of his cause, which makes naught
to the purpose.

3. To speak a little further in this thing, (because some of our Opposites
conceive it is much for them:) I desire these few particulars may be
considered: 1. The Ceremonies whereof we speak, had a necessary use of
avoiding scandal Act. 15, 28.
2. They were expedient for drawing of people unto the faith and order of the
Gospel 1 Cor. 6, 20, 22.
: 3. Of Gods own institution at first. 4. No part of worship. 5. During a time
after Christ's resurrection in their nature indifferent Rom: 14 16, Gal. 6 15.
. 6. In the use of them it was not a holding of conformity with idolaters in
their Ceremonies.

Contrary to this is the Hearing in question. For it gives offense to
Brethren, hinders many from entering into Church Estate; it has no other ground
but man's invention, it is a special part of divine worship, in it self a
practice sinful and unlawful, and makes the observers like idolaters in their
idolatrous actions.

That which next follows, is his Wodden Reason of a Cross. I will sert down
his own words.

To come nearer home, Treat:
it is the custom in Popish Countries, that all that pass by a Cross, must
in honor of it leave it on the right hand, as they may do, by reason of the
placing of it, coming or going. D. Rainold against Heart. c: 1, divis: 2, page:
46
Now, if I ride with others that way, I may do the thing that they do, and
keep Company with them, and yet not honor the Cross.

Answ. It was a common practice (as a wise and learned man observes) among
young Students, in the time of the Dunses, that if in disputation they were
brought to an inconvenience, were it never so absurd: they would have a
distinction, though without brain or sense.

I will not say, that the Trea. distinction here is senseless, but this I say
(and will make it good) it is truthlesse, besides hurtful and dangerous.

For to take the things as he lays it down; that is, there are two ways to
pass by a Cross, and I know there are in company some, who in honor of the
idol, will leave it on the right hand; Now in this case, if I should silently
pass on that side with them, I should offend, yea though I did it, for no
other cause, but to keep on with my company.

My reasons for it are these: 1. The practicing of an indifferent thing,
wherein others superstitiously put holiness and necessity, is an occasion of
confirming and hardening of them in their superstition. Of this judgment were
the German Churches in the Confession of Auspnrg Harm. Confess. page 222.
, and Musculus Loc. Com. page 422.
, Chyereus In Mat. p. 342, 343.
, Bucanus Loc. page 353. and 332.
, B. Jewel Defen. of Apol. p. 386.
, D. Whitaker Descript. page 483.
, and others.

2. Gods Word charge us to avoid all appearance of evil, and condemns all
such, as with their bodies, and in outward show Levit. 18. 34. and 19. 19 Exo.
23. 24.
, give any appearance to idolaters, of conforming themselves to them in their
idolatrous actions; howsoever they do it not with the same mind and intent
that the others do. And this is affirmed by Bucer Com. in Mat. c. 18. fol.
143. 6.
, Polanus In Ezech. c. 16.
, Calvin In Levit. 19. page 207.
, B. Hooper Upon Jonas: Sermon. 6. fol. 146.
, and others.

3. Deu. 14. 1. and 12. 4. 30. 31. Ge^. 35. 5.
I must please my neighbor to edification Romans 15. 2. 1 Cor. 8. 33.
. Now mark it, if I yield him not due help in fit time and place, whereby to
withold him from sin, I become accessarie to the evil he does, So write
The^philact Com. in Romans 15.
, D. Ames De conscien. l. 5. c. 10. p. 282.
and others.

4. Here the Proverb is fulfilled, Silence is consent, For not only by words,
works and Examples, may a man become partaker of another sin; Verum etiam
silentio, and dissimulatione vel conniventia, communionem possimus habere cum
aliorum peccatis, says D. Ames in the forenamed place.

Another Danaeus Comment. in 1 Timothy c. 5. ver. 22. p. 339.
thus: Agentes and consentientes pari paena puniuntur, qui cum furibus pro
fures habentur apud Deum.

5. If that passage in Calvin Instit. l. 3. c. 19. Sect. 11.
be true, they give offense who do any thing unseasonably, rashly, and out of
order and place, unto the hurt of others: then is not this thing void of
scandal.

6. Dissimulation is a kind of denial of Christ. So says Zanchy Praecept. 3.
page 554. Tom. 4.
And Aquinas Aquin. 2. 2. quaest. 3. art. 1.
calls it mendacium in factis. And that this is dissimulation: the description
of that vice will make it evident. For according to Davena^ Determ. quaect. 7.
page 40.
that is dissembling, cum aliquis per signa factorum contrarium eius significat
quod in mente clausum habet. And these reasons may be applied against the
going with others to an idol-ministerie, Church, Worship, etc, as here unto a
Cross.

The Treat. goes foreward thus: If I have just and reasonable cause of coming
or standing before the Magistrate (to whom I owe civil honor) while he is
performing some act of idolatry, in the streets or else where; I may upon the
same ground, go or stand uncovered by him, without just blame.

Answ. I may say (as another said D. Fulk. Confut. Rhem. on Philip. 2. 10.
in a like case) with such respects, relations, and distinctions, all idolatry
and will worship may be defended.

It greeves me truly, to see his fearful retyring into the battered works
of the Familists: for howsoever he minseth it, and would make his thread
somewhat fairer; notwithstanding their web and warpe is one: for let the
doctrine of the Familists be perused, and it will appear, it is all one here
with the Treatisers. Men (say they See a Book set forth by Edmond Iessop.
against Anabapt.
) upon occasion may be bodily present where idolatry is practiced; yet so, as
they loath the same, and keep their hearts to God only. So they

What they (by Occasion) do mean, and he by a just and reasonable cause, I
know not, neither do I much desire to know; but this I know, there can be no
reason given, that a man should come where idolatry is practiced, (be the
Magistrate present) and there in any outward signs and gestures do as the
rest, secretly proposing to himself, not to give any honor to the false
worship, but to the Magistrate, to whom he owes civil worship.

If Namaan had been of the Treat. judgment, he would not have questioned the
lawfulnes of going with his master into the House of Rinnon: For he had as
just and reasonable a cause, as the Treat. I think could instance. Moreover,
he meant only in applying himself in civil service to the King, and had
renounced before all superstitions of the Heathens, so that he would not bow in
respect of the idol, for he detested it with his heart: Notwithstanding all
this, to go thither, he could not lawfully do, I say upon no terms was it
lawful for him, to do any civil reverence and honor to the Magistrate*
while he was performing acts of idolatry. And so, say Calvin In 2. King. 5.
, Martyr Loc. Co^. p. 199. and 643.
, Sedelius Comme^t. in 2. King. 5.
, Bidembachius Id.
, Zanchy Praec. 3. p. 536.
, Musculus In a dial. translated out of French into English
, Virel Ground Rel. l. 2. p. 103.
, and others.

We are to serve God in the sight of the world, and what we think in our
hearts, that should be written (as it were) and seen in our foreheads. But
many now a days, make no conscience of dissembling in Religion, so it be for
some worldly advantage; as that Iewd fellow professes in the Poet Teren. in
Phorm. Act. 3. Scen. 2.
, Non pudet vanitatis, minime, dum ad rem.

But such as desire to walk (^ Gal. 2. 13.
) with a right foot, cannot endure it. Policarpus Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15.
might have saved his life if he would have dissembled before the Magistrate,
but he saw it would have been an appearance of evil, and a discouragement to
the breathren, and therefore spoke boldly, Christianus sum.

Sozemon Hist. l. 5.
reports that Julian the Apostate calling all his soldiers before him, gave to
every one a grain of incense to cast into the fire, and a piece of gould; they
that were christians, having also received each man his insence and gould; not
understanding at the first that he was performing any act of idolatry, but that
the rite tended either to his own per^onall dignity, or to make some sweet
perfume; but hearing-afterwards that this perfume was made unto the idols, they
returned every one with his gould again, gave it to him, deplored their
oversight, though in so doing they endaungered themselves of martyrdom.

The protestant princes of Augusta, in the days of Charles 5. could not be
won either by fair means of foul to stand by the Emperor uncovered while
he was performing some acts of idolatry: For if they would have done so, there
estates, honor, liberty, etc. would have been granted to them.

I could preduce the examples of many others, who rather then they would come
and stand by the magistrate whilst he was performing some act of idolatry and
there bow the knee, or vnc^ver the head and suffer both their krees and head to
be cut of; and good reason too: for such a practice, is the high of delusion
and deph of dissimulatio: and as one Calf hill on the Cross, fol. 185.
truly says howsoever men flatter themselves with a hidden opinion yet the
evident and apparent work of capping bowing and kneeling, shows that the
heart is unsound, and the door a mere idolater. Blessed is he therefore, that
condemns not himself in the thing he approves.

In conclusion he says: To apply these things to the Objection moved, Treat:
seeing no other cause could reasonably be conceived of the Kings commanding
such a thing, or of their doing the thing at his commandment, save the
worshipping of the idol, in so doing they could not have escaped the just
plaime of idolatry: But now I have just cause more then one of my hearing, and
amongst the rest mine edification; and therefore cannot be challenged therein,
to appr^of the ministers state, or standing, besidee that, as I formerly
answered here is none idolatrous act performed.

Answ. 1. Thine own mouth (says Eliphaz in Job Chap. 15, 6.
condemns thee, and not I: Yea thine own lips testify against thee. His
application here, is indeed against himself: For Jf the 3: Nobles in Daniell,
had committed idolatry in falling down before the idol^ (yea howsoever they
had not intended to honor it) because it was the known and public intent of
the setting up of it, to be adored, and the Kings commandment was that it
should be so: This being so, then it follows, that seeing false churches and
false ministers are real idols, set up by earthly Princes; and their known
intent by public proclimation is, that all people within their dominions
should come to them, bow before them, and by outward gestures approve of them:
This I say being so, the conclusion is (certo certius) not liable to exception,
that whosoever comes, and bows before those idols, cannot e^cape the just
blame of idolatry, howsoever in himself, he intends no such thing.

And here let it be observed (what we even now said) if a man perform an
action in a state, and of public nature, he is to be considered (in respect of
himself) as is that state, and according to the public ordinances: For If the
state, be false, and the officer unlawful, it is familisme for him to say, I
know this state, is set up against the Lord Jesus Christ, and every commer
here to worship, according to the constitution, is an idolater: but I will have
in my self asecret meaning from the rest, and in this regard, I cannot be
accounted an approver of the state, or that I do any worship here, as the same
is publicly established and intended it should be don.

The learned condenme this, and style it gross dissimulation, and a mocking of
God. So Scarpius, Symphom proph. page 238.
Caelius, A little Treat: to all faithful Christ.
Hemingius, In Ephe. c. 5.
Rivetus, In Psa. 16 p. 53, 54.
Zanchy, in Comt; 3, p. 534;
Mr. Philpot, Act. mon. page; 2002;
yea the thing is so vile, as a Papist Called the love of the ^oule;
has written against it, a whole treatise.

The authors of Pirth assembly write thus: Wheresoever the public intent of a
Kirk is to worship the sacrament, every private man following that intent, is
formallie an idolater: if his private intent be diverse from the public, yet
he is still materially and interpretative an idolater.

What they say, we say: and hear lies the difference between our opposites
and us. We both, grant the public intent of a false Church, is, to have their
State, Worship, and Government, approved, x Page 49*
But here is the ods; they say, seeing their private intention, is diverse from
the public, they are not trespassers with the public: though in public they
do the same action. We on the contrary affirm, seeing the public intent of
the Church, is to honor the idol, every private man following that intent is
formably an idolater: if his private intent be diverse from the public, yet he
is still materially and interpretatiue an idolater.

Ismenias (as the same authors note) stoping down before the king of Persia,
Ibid.
to take up a ring, which he of purpose let fall; was not excused, because
this stoping in common use, was the adoring of the Kings of Persia: Let the
godly reader consider of it, take advise, and speak his mind.

2. J deny, that any man has just cause to hear (in the way we speak of)
for his edefication. For what he says here, he produces neither scripture nor
reason, nor any authority but his own; as if his ipse dixit, like the popes
sentence were penitus definitiua, absolate difinitiue and to be rested in: but
to use his own words Iustificat. separat. page 47. 48.
seeing he soevveth himself barren of Divine authority. I will proof what I
do deny by these reasons.

1 Whatsoever Christ has thought fit to teach his Church and the instruments
and helps whereby, that has he fully set down in his word 2 Timot. 3 16* 17.
Act. 20. 27. Ioh. 20. 30. 31. 2 Pet. 1. 3.
: so that to acknowledge any other means of edefication, then such as he has
appointed, is to receive another Teacher into the Church besides him, and to
confess some in perfection in those means which he has ordained for our
edefication; this argument is brought against the vain traditions of Rome and
England by Gualter ^n Habac. fol. 270.
, Lavater in 1. Chron. 10. 11.
, V^sinus Catech. par. 3. p. 758. 760.
, Polanus Partit. Theol. page 83 191*
, Ames (...)
, the authors of the Abrigement (...)
, and it holds every way as firm and good in our dispute.

P. Martyr speaks (...)
home to this point. For as much as God* is most wise, he needs not our devise
for instruments to stir up faith in us, which thing no tradesma^ in this kind
would endure; but would choose to himself at his own pleasure wha^ he should
think most fit, etc. How bold are these (...) who w^ll P^aescribe to God after
What manner and by (...) shall edefie ^s. So he.

2 Seeing our discourse (...) edefication, which Christ the only Teacher of
his Church has appointed, then is it is set down, by the appostle in Ephesians:
4. 11. 12. 13. the reason is, because Paul there mentions all ministerial
means for the perfect and complet building of the Church from the first to the
last: so write, Fenner Sacr. Theol. c. 7, p. 119.
, Laiton Syons p. 10.
, Piscator Aphorism. loc. 20.
, Cartwright Repl. 1. to Whitg. p. 85.
, Beza in Ephesians. 4, 10.
, Calvin instit. l 4 c. 1. Sect. 5
, Polanus Syntag. l. 10, and 11.
, and others.

But ^ think our Opposites will not say, that Paul there intends this
Hearing, as a means of our edification: Jf they should, l the Treat: would be
against them, for he confesses it is not any particular ordinance left us by
Christ. Ergo. etc.

3. As Augustine says Mori fame, qua^ idolothytis vesci. de bono congug. c. 16.
it is better to die with famen, then to eat with Idolothites, Daniell chose
rather to live upon pulse, then to be fed, with the most delicate meats from
the kings table, seeing they were such meat as he ought not to eat. For he knew
(as one Osiand. in Dan. 1. p. 367.
writes on the place) Not by the power of the meat, but by Gods divine
blessing, is the body preserved: To apply this, seeing the Hearing stood for, p
Page 37.
is a spiritual eating with idolaters: and men cannot receive the food without
pollution; Our best course, is to content our selves with what means of
edefication, we find in Gods way, be it much or little, I say not despise Zach.
4. 10.
the day of small things: and the rather, considering, that it is not the
means, but Gods blessing on the means, that edefieth us.

4: Whosoever takes to himself, a practice, which is not grounded on Gods
word, and therein is strict, he is just overmuch D. Gouge on Ephesians. 6, 14.
and presumes bove that which is written: and this is their case who hear
unlawful ministers for edefication.

5. It is not true, that a man being out of the false Church, and a visible
member of a true, should be furthered in the way grace, by returning thither
to hear the word. Upon better ground I may say, his grouth in knowledge and
sincerity hereby will be hindered, and probably he in time drawn back to his
former vomit; or if he escape shipwreck this way, Treat. 2. par. 4, p. 78.
yet to meet with such heavy terrors of conscience, as that his time after
will be spent with grief, and his years with sighing.

And here (christian reader) I think fit; to make known unto thee, Cartvv.
Hom. in Eccles. 7, fol. 149.
what happened about 7 years past in England, there was a gentle man of warick
sheir, by name Mr Edward Grefwold, aman very religious, as many besides my
self can testify: He and I, being bosom Friends (or to use his own common
saying o^hearts being as David's and Ionathans, knitt together) upon just cause,
we both left the parish assemblies. He afterward by the means of some crafty
men, was persuaded unto hearing again: upon this he fell into great troble of
spirit, and could have no feeling assurance of any peace with God: remaining
thus awhile, at length he sent a letter by his servant unto me (the which I
have kept a long time by me) in this letter he largely acknowledges his
offense, and among other passages writes thus: You, ah you are happy: but I by
my fall am miserable and wretched: and for the present time, I feel my soul
to be no otherwise, then if it were in hell: etc, ever since I went to their
Assemblies I have observed the Lords hand against me: etc, wherefore I beseech
you by the mercices of God, set a day apart for me, and seek the almighty by
fasting and praying, that the waterflood over flow me not: etc. what his
refreshings were after this, J cannot say, the report is, that to his changing,
he had sad and sorrowful days: notwithstanding I am confident, that his soul
is with Christ in paradise. As I am writing this, I think of the words in the
Prophet Psalm. 119 120.
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. He
that is wise will consider of these things: For as one Hal. antiq. Romans l. 11.
says providing before is better then repenting afterward.

It is no marvel that false churches by some are called Officina scelerum,
and carnificina sanctorum, shops of wickedness, and chambles of the saints; for
what can a tender conscience expect in frequenting them, but indeed, pricks,
racks, and tortures. Aquila and Symmachus for the Hebrew Aven, which signifies
the false state under Jeroboam, render it in Greek (...), an unprofitable
house: and well they might for whosoever goes to such houses, he may be sure he
shall lose by it. And this is the judgment of Botsach Prompt. alleg. c. 21, de
minist.
, Lutz In Eva^g; Dom. 8, post pent. p 339.
, Polanus In Ezech. 44* page 800.
, Pelargus d, and others. And whereas some put difference between the
Preachers there; as one says e the best are the worst: a Quaest. Evang in Mat.
23. Motives to the king and state, Page 32.
For these as evil workers, secretly, and by degrees, and with as little noise
as may be, seek to keep people in error and disorder.

3. The consequence of his (therefore) conclusion, no logician can make it
good: For he argues just for all the world, as if one should say, Because I
go to the assize or session for right or to school for education, therefore I
cannot be challenged therein, to approve of the Judge, Justice, or master their
state or standing: J could go on thus a tribus ad centum, for there is no end
of such absurdities; the very naming whereof, is answer enought.

But to the point, the Treat here yields the cause; For if a man shall hear in
a false church for edefication; therein he approues directly of the state, For
this is a sure thing (and let it be noted) no administration performed in a
state, and by a power and constituted office, can be sought, There are maine
difference betvveene a man's bare presence in a co^stituted stat^; as being
there, unavvares, unvvillingly, or by compulsion; and presence there of purpose
to partake of the admistrations.
desired and received, but in so doing, the doer (Ipso facto) really approves
of that state, power, and office be the same lawful or unlawful. And as for
any man's saying to the contrary, it is sine capite fabula, a vision of his own
head, and will prove as good as the miracles which Iamnes and Iambres wrought,
even means to harden his own heart and some others, as they did Pharoahs by
doing them.

Lastly where as he tells us, He has formerlie said here is noe idolatrous
act performed, in stead of this twice sodden Coleworth, I looked he should
have alleged some Scriptures from whence this might have been gathered, or
concluded at the least, or brought some convincing argument, which might have
cleared it, or if none of those, yet that he would have showed some authority
or author, which had so written or spoken; but here is deep silence; and we
must take all (pro confesso,) upon his bare word; but by his leave, we purpose
to try his novelties, and not take them upon trust.

And howsoever I have said enought before in confutation of this, yet I will
add a word more, and the rather, because not only is this a main point between
us, but also here is a ground laid, for gross idolaters, to justify their
evils by: For If in preaching of the truths of the Gospel in a false Church
(say by a Pope, a Cardinal, an Archbishop, a Lord-Bishop, or any other enemy
of God) no idolatry be done, then may a man worship God in a way of his own
divising blameless. We have hitherto been instructed, that unto divine worship
two things are required, matter and manner, First it must be a true matter of
worship, grounded on the word: Secondly done in aright and lawful manner,
order, form, way, etc. and if either of those be wanting, it cannot be a
reasonable service; and of this judgment were Perkins, Jdolat. last times, p.
674. 675. last volum.
Brinsley, True vvatch, p 28.
Elton On Colos. p. 308.
, Dod, On the command. 2.
Hieron, On Psa. 51, page 4.
Bates, His book against Ceremonies, p. 191.
Trailor, On Tit. c. 3. v. 10. p. 715.
and others. But according to the Treat: teaching the later here, is (etrivio)
of noe use at all; for so a man preach the truths of the Gospel he does no
Idolatrous act; although in the mean time he exercise an antichristian office;
hence this must follow: viz, so the truth be preached it is no matter whether
the preacher be sent from Antichrist, or from Christ; nor whether he preach at
Dan and Bethell, or at Jerusalem in the temple. For if the former committ no
idolatrous act, he is then as blamles in his way, as the latter is in his.
Better the Treat, had spared his words, and lookd better to his answer, or eat
them both, then to blott paper, and abuse the reader with such unsound and
hurtfall assertions.

SECT. 6.
Our. 4. Objection is laid down for us thus: He that hears them preach,
hears them as ministers of the Church of England, and as sent by the Bishops,
and so in hearing them hears and receaves them that sent them: according to
that of our Savior he that hears you, hears me, and he that dispiseth you,
dispiseth me, and he that dispiseth me dispiseth him that sent me.

It was some addition to David's 1 Samuel 17* 51.
victory over the Philistime, that he slew him with his own sword. The ta^ke
is very easy, to confute all that the Treat: here writes against us, by the
engine of his own acknowledgements: For to say the truth, Howsoever he frames
Objections for us, yet originally they are his own, and even word for word
published by himself in former books to the world: so that Obliquus cursus
forgetting (as it were) What he had before held and written, he makes himself
in this controversy his own greatest opposite.

That this Objection can call no man Father, so properly as the Treat; It is
certane; for to my knowledge no man but himself has used it: Indeed he has
done it, and applied i^to the same purpose, that he brings it here for us, that
is, against the Hearing of unlawful Ministers. His words are these Manumiss:
to a Manuduct. page: 9.
.

If it belong to the chief Prelates to call Ministers, and that in calling
them, they give them power and authority (though no absolute charge) to preach
according to the order of that Church; Then follows it undeniably, that those
Ministers thus preaching do therein exercise the Prelates power: And that it
may be said of the Ministers, and Bishops, as Christ said of his Disciples and
himself, that whosoever receives them that are sent, receives them that sent
them. In submitting unto, or withdrawing from him that is sent by the King in a
work of his Office, men do submitt unto, or withdraw from the King himself,
and his authority; So it is in all estates and subordinations whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil; as every one that is not dim in himself, may see
by the light of nature. So writes the Treat: Now let us see how he confutes
himself.

I grant the former part of the Objection, Treat:
and account the denying of it a point of Familisme, seeing the Officers of
public states in the executing of their offices, are to be esteemed according
to the public Laws and Orders of those states, and not according to any under
hand course or intention either by themselves or others.

Answ. A man that goes with a veil before his eyes; comes now and then into
his way, although he know it not. The Treat. in this walk about Hearing in
false Churches, is sometimes cut, otherwhile in, he says and unsayes; But so
far as he speaks the truth, he speaks it against himself: for his answer
here, it is nothing but a yielding the case, in some compass and
circumlocution of words; and that the Reader may perceive it is so, I will make
it obvious and clear to him by an argument or two; and first thus:

If to hear Antichristian Ministers, be to serve God in, and by an ordinance,
way, or institution, devised by idolaters, and with idolaters; Then is it
unlawful.

But the first is true, therefore the second.

The proposition is undeniable by the Treat. own confession: For he grants
that (...) course of hearing is no ordinance left us by Christ: Then (...) it
must be from Antichrist: Again he professes* they (...) as they preach, and
preach as Ministers of the (...) according to the public (...) is, to speak
(...) form religious worship to God, in, and by a public ordinance, way and
state which idolaters have invented, and with idolaters.

This I say (aperto pectore) he grants to the full: And no marvel, for to
deny it, were an audacious fiction, monstrous unparelled presumption* and would
mark a man out, for an Athesticall Familist, as perspicuous as the leprosy of
Vzziah, which brake forth in his forehead.

The Assumption is as manifest; For 1. by the Scriptures Deu. 12. 30. Levit,
18. 3. Exo. 23. 24. Levit. 9, 27. 28. Deu. 14. 1 Levit. 19. 17. Genesis 35. 2. 3.
Esa, 27. 9.
we are prohibited from all conformity with idolaters in any of their ways,
order, and manner of worship, and Religious Observations. It was the custom
Herodot. in Thalia: Becan. in analog. vet. and nov. Test. c. 15.
of the Arabians and other Heathens, in imitation of Dyonisius, that is
Bacchus, to round the corners of their head; Now this the Israelites might not
do Levit. 19. 27.
(though in it self an indifferent thing Calvin. in Levit. 19. 17.
) because God would not have them to be like idolaters.

This also may be further proved by the testimony of learned men; For to have
any thing common with idolaters, or to serve God after any way of theirs; Or to
take up, and make use of any of their rites, orders, observations, institutions
for to worshipp God in, or by them: they hold to be unlawful. Yea howbeit a
man be not in Ecclesiastical union with them. Thus have the old Fathers
affirmed Tertull: de Coron. Milit. Greg. lib. 1. Epist. 44. ad Leon. Theod* l.
1. c. 10. August. Epist. 86. ad Casul.
; So our later writers: Calvinists Pareus in 1 Cor. 10* 14. Bucer in Mat. 18.
fol. 143. Beza Tract. Theol. vol. 3. page 210.
, Lutherans Cent. 4. c. 13 col. 406. Chemn^t. Exam. Theol. Melanct. par. 2.
page 491.
, formal Protestants B. Jewel upon 1. These. 5. p. 219. Sulclief. Chal. page
62.
in England, Reformists Perth. assemb. p. 55. 56. Alt. Damas. p. 539.
Papists Bellar. de Monach. c. 40. and de effect. sacr. l. 2. c. 31. Sect. 10.
Rhemist. annot. on 1. Cor. 6. 14. and 1. Timot. 6. Sect. 4. in Apoc. 1. 10.
, and Schoolmen Aquin. 1. 2a. q. 102. Art. 6. c. 6. m.
, yea many Iew-Doctors See Mr. Ainsworth in Levit. 19. 27.
, some Councils Toledo Can. 5. and 40. Laod. c. 38. Brac. Can. 32. and 73.
, have thus concluded, and the Cannon-Law Deer. Par. 2. Cause. 26. quaest. 7. c.
13. etc. 14. etc. 17.
speaks so too.

And here I desire the Reader to observe, that were the grounds true which he
lays down for hearing: to wit, that there is no Religious Communion between
the persons preaching and hearing; They cannot be challenged to approve of the
Ministers state or standing: They have no communion with the office of the
Ministry, etc. I say, were these things so, (which are not) yet would this
practice be found sinful; because (as we have before showed) herein men
worshipp God in, or by a way and means, which idolaters have instituted.

Our second argument is taken from the Treat. words following, which are these:
Treat.
I profess I hear them, as Ministers of the Bb. sending, and of the Parishes
sent (...). Hence I argue thus:

He that hears the Ministers of the Bb. sending, and of the Parishes sent too:
he hears (in the sense of the Scriptures) false Prophets: But it is not
lawful to hear false Prophets:

Therefore it is not lawful to hear the Ministers of the Bb* sending, or of
the Parishes sent too.

The Major is proved clearly in the defense of our 12. Objection. The Minor is
certain by these reasons.

1. The hearing of false Prophets is forbidden in the Word of God Ex. 20. 5.
Pro. 5. 8. Mat. 7 15. Philip. 3. 2. 1. Timot. 5. 22.
. 2. The practice of it is will-worshipp Joh. 4. 23. Romans 12. 1. 2. Mat. 15. 9*
Col. 2. 23
; the which is unacceptable to God. 3. It is to rebel against the Lord, and to
seek what is in man, to uphold that thing which the Lord will cast down and
consume. Number. 16. 2 These. 2. 10. 11. Rev. 18. 1. 2. 1 Samuel 15. 22.
4. This is to embrace the bosom of a stranger, and so to co^mitt spiritual
whoredom against the Lord Pro. 5. 20. Psalm. 106. 39.
. 5. It defiles the name of God Ezech. 43. 7. 8.
. 6. This is to hold conformity with idolaters, and to be like them; The which
thing ought not to be Levit. 18. 3. and 19. 19. 27. 28. Exo. 23. 24. Deu. 12.
30. 32.
. 7. It shows that a man is not one of Christ sheep, but carnal and
unconverted Ioh. 10. 4. Esa. 30. 22, and 27. 9.
. 8. It manifests great want of the love and zeal of God 2 King. 23. 4. Rev.
2. 3. 4. Psalm. 119. 128. Ioh. 2. 16.
. 9. It is to serve Satan and Antichrist; as it is written: His servants ye
are whom ye obey 2 Chro. 11, 14. Rev. 9. 20.
.

10. It defiles the soul Eze. 20* 7
Lastly, the doer hereby is exposed, to the wrath of God Re. 144. 2. These. 2.
8, 10.
.

Thus the Treat: like the Be is drowned in his own Honey; And truly pity it
is, but all pleaders for Baal were always thus entangled in their own words,
Rev. 14* 9 Eze. 16. 54.
according to that in Ovid.

Non est lex iustior ulla
Quam necis artifices art peri^e sua.
The Treat. Lib. 2. de art amand.
speaks on thus: But not as my Ministers, either sending, Treat:
or sent to, except I be of those Parishes, or at least in Ecclesiastical
Union with them.

Answ. A man bent to declyning, is glad of every color which he may pretend to
justify him^el^e in declyning; It is a poor distinction, which he use^h here
to declyne the point in question: For 1. what use was there to tell us, He
bears them not as his Ministers; This well might have been spared, and
something said, to warrant by Scripture the hearing of them at all. If a woman
be accused of adultery, and to excuse her self, shall suy: The adulterer is in
no covenant or band with me. Is this enought to clear her? No. I have proved
before, that all religious performances in false Churches, are idolatrous
actions; Now then to worship God there, and for excuse to say, we are not in
Ecclesiastical union with the state or Ministry; I may well say (lingua quo
vadit) it is idly spoken; and much like the Friars plea, we are exempted Lord.

Again, for his distinction, it is the same which Papists, and others
allege, to justify there idol-Ceremonies; They say, how soever these are
things, which Jews and Pagans did be ore them, yet their end and respect in
doing them, is different. What is said of some, in answer thereunto, I may here
say the like: To practice that thing in Gods worshipp, which neither directly
nor consequently is included in the word, is an open breach of Gods Law, be
the doers meaning this or that.

What jealous or wife husband, if his wife should receive some love tokens from
a known adulterer and one that goes about to undermine her honesty; would
take it for a sufficient excuse, if she should say, I receive indeed such
things from a known adulterer, and as he is an adulterer, but not wine etc.
The weight of the Treat: distinction, lies between meum and tuum; He
pro^esseth to reciue love-guifts from spiritual adulterers and as they are so,
but not his.

Now I marvel how his pen could drop such poysen, and he not smell the stinck
of it When he wrote it. I wish all men in all places, to take heed, that they
deceave not their own souls by such folish distinctions: for if such things
will not stand before sor-ry-man: how then before the great God, Who is a
jealous husband, and a consuming fire.

Now let us hear what follows in the Treat: Treat.
By hearing and receiving there, Christ means properly the hearkening too,
beleiving and obeying the doctrine taught by the Apostles, which many despised,
unto whom he opposes the former that heard it.

Answ: He that co^es to the field without his weapon it is an argument, he
means to save himself by flying, and not by fighting. Whether the Treat: had
on any armor to fight with against this objection. I will not determine, but
this I say (and will abide by it) he flies away from the point, and speaks
nothing either for it, or against it: For 1. Were his distinction granted,
between hearing them as BB: Ministers, and not as his. And again that by
receiving the Apostles, Christ means properly hearking to, and obeying their
doctrines. I say suppose this (but I grant it not) yet does not this take a way
the weight of our reason, nor in truth so much as touch it.

I shall expect that he who comes nex to the field, in the behalf of
Antichristian Ministers, do prepare a better Answer to this objection. And
that he may know, what he has to confute, I will a little enlarge the point.

1. The Treat. in applying hearing and receiving to the doctrines of the
Apostles, does not well; For the first only respects their teaching, the latter
their persons; This is evident in the Text Mat. 10. 14. whosoever shall not
receive you, and hea^e my words etc. Implying that Christ is two ways
received, in the ministry of the Gospel; viz. In the person of the Teacher,
and in the doctrines taught by him. And thus do out best Expositers understand
the place. Calvin, Pareus, Piscator, Aretius, Musculus.

It is further to be noted, where Christ sayh* he that receives you, receives
me etc. His meaning is that such as hearken to, and obey the doctrines of his
Ministers, therein do acknowledge his authority, power and kingly office over
his Church, to appoint her laws, I mean in a work of their ^ffice.
offices, ordinances; etc. and also the fathers donation or the delivering up
of the same into his sons hand.

To apply this; As they who hearken unto Christ's ministers; do therein approve
of his lawful power over his Church, and of the fathers gift this way to him;
so contrariwise, such as hearken * to Antichrists Ministers, do therein
approve of Antichrists unlawful power over the false Church, and the devils
Satan is the author of false ministries in the apostasy of the man of sin.
donation; or his putting of that power into his eldest sons hands. If any say
we intend not so, I answer (Res ipsa aliud ostendit) the actio^ which they do
is so. quid verba audiam cum factae videam. And here that saying of a learned
(a) man is fulfulled: There are some* which deny that they worship Idols, T.
C. Repl 1. p. 88. and 204.
when in the mean time their own doings charge them with it: Now there are
too many in those days grossly guilty this way.

His next words are, Lavat. in Josh. 22. Hom. 61. Treat.
The Minissters in the Parishes, have not the doctrines of the Gospel from the
Bishops as they have their offices, but from God in his word.

Answ. It was a law Eugin. Boron. Iure consult. l. 1. p. 120.
among the Romans, that whosoever passed not into their City at the gates,
but attempted to break throw the walls, or to clyme over them, should be put to
death. The Treat. in pressing the hearing of the truths of the Gospel, would
persuade us, so we do receive them, it is no matter whether it be by order or
disorder, whether from the Ministers; of Christ or Antichrist. Whether in a
true Church, or in a false. But this counsel we cannot take, because to our
knowledge, there is a divine statute in force against it: and therefore as we
must T. C. Repl. 1. p 155.
care for the truth, so must we care of whom we have it: and he gives this
reason. Ibid. p. 83.
As God has ordained that the truth should be preached, so also has he
ordained in what order, and by whom it should be preached. We may not therefore
adventure Penry Exhort. to the govern. of Wales page 46.
to go unto him for those, things, which he has no commission to deliver.

Suppose Carah or some other in that Conspirasy, should have said thus: Come to
us ye men of Israel, and hearken to; believe and Obey the truths taught in
our Tents. If you object that our Calling is anti-Mosaicall and false: we
answer, this cannot be any bar or let in the thing, seeing the doctrines we
teach are from God in his law.

J cannot see according to the Treat. arguing, how in such a case they could
have staid without: for if we may go into the Sinagogues of Antichrist; so the
Doctrines of the Gospel be there preached? I would know then of our Opposites,
why an Israelite upon the same ground (viz. to hear the Doctrines of the law)
might not have gone with them rebels into their Tents. I believe if we come to
open terms, these will be found to be par pari things alike, and the one as
lawful as the other, and both stark naught.

But to come more nearer to the point, the thing which the Treat, harpes most
upon, is, that they teach the truth: And our opposites use this as their
special and main position viz. Where the truth is taught, there they may
lawfully hear. To discover their follow herein. J pray let it be minded what
was said before, As the hearing in question, is a religious action, so to have
it lawful and good, the circumstances perteyning to it, must necessarily be
observed, of which circumstances the truth taught, is only one particular. It
is a received maxim both in divinity and Philosophy, that circumstances make
actions formally good or bad, so write Junius De pol.
, Aquinas 1a. 2a. q. 8. Art: 3*
, Camerius Praelect* Tom. 2. p. 49.
, and Burgess of the lawfullnes of kneeling C. 1.
confesses they are intrinsecall and essential to actions, and especially
making up there nature. Fed: Morellus upon these words of Seneca, k Scho. 2.
Lib.
refert quid, cui, quando, quare, says that without these circumstances of
things, persons, time, place etc. facti ratio non constat. Friar Ambrosius
Caturinus Counc. l. 2 p. 224.
following the doctrine of Thomas, meanteyneth in the council of Trent, that
to do a-good work the concurrance of all circumstances is necessary.

What these circumstances or parts are, is showed in that old verse. Quis, quid,
vbi, quibus auxilijs, cur, quomodo, quando. And to apply them to our point,
howsoever it be granted, that their teaching may be without vitium rei, yet in
it there is vitium perfo^ae, loci, ordinis, relationis, etc as the. Tr^. in
aletter to D. Ames published in Brownists schis.
phraseth it else where.

1. The Person designed is not lawfully called: now a false Office and a true
worship (are (...)) they are no way compatible. 2. As it respects the place,
(that is the Idoll-Churchstate) so it is to worship God there, where he has
forbidden men to worship him. 3. For the instruments and means, in this men
make themselves beholding to Antichrist, for his order, constitution, manner
and way to serve God in, and by. Now fie for shame, that any should be so base,
as to scrape acquentance with that Babylonian whore, who is the greatest enemy
that the Lord has upon the earth. I^ is a most certain ^igne (says one
Estque merae proditionis certissimum indicium si quis alique^ ex suis, videat,
concilia cla^ cum host captantem aut in eius aurem insu^ure ante^.
of a very traitor, when a man shall see one of his own, take secret counsel
with his enemy, and whisper him in the ear.

Touching the other circumstances: viz. why, how, when: these all are also here
wanting, as I could instance in sundry particulars, if need were. But to wind
up all, and bring all the former into some fewer heads. the goodness or
badnesse of divine worship, is to be considered either in actu signato and quo
ad specium: or in actu exercito and quo ad individium. Divine worship is said
to be speciated by its object, and individuated, by its circumstances: when
divine worship is good or evil, in respect. of the object of it. we say it is
good or evil, quo ad speciem. when in respect of the circumstances, we term
it good or evil quo ad invidium. Cartewr. kissed. chapter l. 1. p. 253.
Now I will not deny, but this hearing worship quo ad specium, as God is made
the object of it, so it is right: but quo ad invidium, as it has circumstances
and parts, so it is a false worship: and this is so clear a truth as no man
will deny it unless the denier will deny all religion and reason, all sence'
and scinence. It is not sufficient (says Rivetus Comment, in Hos, 4, 14, p,
152,
unto the^ true wor' ship of God, that a man erres not in the object which he
ought to worship, that is, if he propose to himself to worship the true God,
but also that, that manner be exactly kept, which God has prascriin his law:
from the tenor or rule whereof whosoever in the least departs the same
cannot be held lawful.

He ends thus: Treat.
And so far forth as a man hears, that is bearken too, and reciues them by
receiving it, he so far bearkens too and receives Christ. (...)


Answ. This is spoken gratis, and without any foundation, and therefore not
more easily avouched then rejected. But say we grant that So far forth Christ
is hearkened too, etc. yet does not this hinder but So far forth as he hears
in an Antichristitian assembly and a false officer, (...)
and performs a religious worship in away and manner which Idolaters have
divised, etc. I say let his (so far) stand, yet in these respects and
consideration, He so far forth hearkens too and receives Antichrist.

If I should put over the Treat, reasoning in spiriturl things, to things
civil and worldly: the very expression of them, would make them odious: For
suppose aman should use the help of a known sorcerer, to recover some lost
gould or silver; and being afterward reproved for it, would reply, Seeing they
were good things and from God, he did well therefore to get them in the way
and manner that he took. Or if a these offering certain stolen goods,
should persuade another to receive them, because howsoever he has no right to
give such things away, yet seeing they are good, and from God, he may take them
safely: for it is all one, whether they are received in away of false-hood and
theift, or by the Ieaue and grant of the true owner,

If these things appear vile and absurd, no otherwise is his reasoning here,
if it be with the eye of Judgment lookd upon: the Priests for whom he pleads,
in the Scriptures are said to be robbers and thieves, yea Spiritual sorcery is
charged upon them. But all this with the Treat. is nothing; For so they deliver
good things, the same may be received from them in a work of their office. But
if a man stood before an earthly Judge, accused of using a forcerers assistance
to recover his lost mony^ or for receiving goods from a known these, it would
not free him to say, the things are good which I took. Neither will it excuse
men when they shall appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, to say it was
the truth which they heard, though not in the way and order, which the word
taught them.

Be not deceived God is not mocked: Gal. 6, 7.
for whatsoever a man sows that shall he also reap.

SECT. 7.
NOw we come to the 5 Objection, the which is laid down for us, by the Treat.
thus: Yet such as hear them, have communion with their office of Ministry,
what in them lies.

It is the manner of some to set up marks, and afterward to show their art,
in shooting of them down again. One would think that the Treat. former
writings against the hearing of false Ministers, were written by him, to be (as
it were) his But mark, that thereby he might show his skill and wit in
striking down the same afterward. Touching the objection which he here frames
for us, and undertakes the confutation of; It is his own, and under his own
hand, even word for word published to the world, and in defense of the same
thing which he brings it here for us: as the Reader may see in his manumissi on
to a manuduction: page 5.

But to let this pass, hoping it was rather a slip in his pen, then a
downfall in his judgment: Let us see now how he hits the mark, his answer to
it is thus.

That is, they have no communion at all with it, if it ly not in them to have
any, as it does not. If I hold up my hand as high as I can, I touch heaven with
my finger, what in me lies, do I therefore at all touch it: if such think to
have, or that they have any such communion, it is their error and Ignorance,
but makes not the thing to be the more then if they thought not so.

This is all his answer (a capite vsque ad pedes) from head to foot. Unto the
which I answer: 1. To his peremptory affirmation, (they have no communion at
al) may apply the saying fathered on the old Philosopher multa dicti^sed pauca
probat. Ple speaks much, but proves little: For our parts (as I have said) we
cannot take his bare saying, de iure et de fide, to be a rule of faith to us,
For our consciences are not (like Sampsons shoulders) strong enough to bear it,

2. He dallies and deceives by a general and ambigious term of Communion: If
it be intended in the order and way of Church State, it is true then here is no
such communion, as have members gathered into a body politic. But if by the
word we understand such a communion, as makes the hearer really pertaker of the
sin of the Officer; in this sense here is a communion of fellowshipp. For 1.
Hereby is allowance and approbation given unto a work of darkness; I say his
very presence there to hear, is an open countenancing of an unlawful officer
in an vnrghtteous course, tanquam legimae et sacrae actionis approbatio. As
Davenat. deter^ Quaest. 7. p 40.
Slater Explic. Anal: in 1 Cor. C. 2 p. 92.
and others note in the like case.

2. It is apparent to a right discerning eye, that the ministers of Antichrist,
in all acts of their ministry, do use such ways and inventions in worshipping
of God, as are not commanded of God in his word, but be devises of men. Now
whosoever joins with the^ in the practice of such worship, becomes a pertaker
of their sin and trangression. Of this writes Joan. David. Veridicus
Christian. c, 28, p, 7.
And the reason is, because he commits will worship: for what is well-worship?
but to worship God not after his appointment, but our own. And hence was Ahaz
an Jdolater, eo ipso, for that as P. Martyr Comment: in 2 Reg, ^, 17
notes, he took the pattern of an Alter from Idolaters to serve the true God,
with it and by it.

3. When Israel did eat with the Moabites, they did communicate Ainsw; Annot,
on Numb, 25, 2,
with them: but how was it? it was in that the meat there given and taken, was
in a public way of a false institution. This holds proportionably true here:
for we cannot separate the false state of the office, from the administrations
done by virtue of it, that is to make the latter so ours, as not to be polluted
in one respect or other with the foulnes of the former. Zanchie Quicu^que
facris ali cuius comunicat, is particeps quoque; fic ejus, ad cujus c ^emmuni
onemha bendam et conferuandam sacra illa sunt ordinata. de vitio, ext. cult^.
Opp. l. 1. These 11.
cleares this very well. Whosoever communicateh in the holy things of another,
he is made partaker with him, for whose communion the holy things ordained, are
kept and observed.

3. For his comparison, it is so far fetch, as that it comes not home to the
matter, but is an evil and idle wandering from it. When Saul fought to excuse
himself, he was demanded of Samuel, 1 Samuel 15.
quid ergo sin vult vox pecuduin astarum, what means then the bleating of the
sheep in my ears: we may ask the like of those men, who say it is no sin
to hear in false Churches. what means your uncovering the head and bowing the
knee before idol? your keeping company with Idolaters in their public
worship? your observing the time and coming to the place of their worship?
your serving of God in such a way? is bring it to the text of the word, compare
it with the example of the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, bring it to the
practice of the primitive Churches: it is quite differing from it.

we are sure in a true Church, the bending of the knee Psalm 95. 6.
, and other signs of reverence, is to give honor and countinance to that
state. Now the reason of contraries is a like, and therefore as Calvin Comment.
in 1 Corin. 15.
says, the same being done in a false Church, is no less allowance and
approbation of it: J say again every reverend submissive gesture, Deuteronomy. 5 9
hos. 13. 12 Eze 18 6. 1 Cor. 10. 16. 18.
as bowing down, kneeling, prostrating, lifting up of the eyes, and all other
like lowly and lovely behavior do appertain and lead to Idolatry.

Again if the Ordinances of God, do associate and join the the faithful with
God, then the observation of superstitious institutions must needs linck men to
the society of Idols, and so reasons the said Calvin Ibid. 2. 17.
And for any to say, they do not countinance such Churches and Ministeries, or
they will not; herein their acts give their tongue the lie, for we are not to
Judge of a work, Non exarcana intention operantis, sed ex manifesta
co^ditione operis. Davan. Quaest. Determ. page 40.
by the secret intention of the doer, but by the outward condition of the work
it self. For what Augustine Eo damnabilius agit, quia quod mendaciter agit,
sic agit tamen, vt eum populus veraciter agere existimet. De Civit. 16, C. 10.
blames Senica the Philosopher, may be said and truly applied to these men, in
this he did the more wickedly because what he did, he did lyingly, for he did
it so, as that the people though he did it truly. If the Corinthians sinned,
when they sat down at the Idols table, because they kept them company whose
end was superstitious, then it follows questio^^^, that where the public end
of a people is to committ will, worship, whosoever has any fellowship with
them, is partaker of the same ungodliness. Now no man J dare say, will affirm,
that the public end and intention of the people, is not to allow, honor, and
reverence, their false Church, ministry, Government etc, therefore howsoever
some particulars, intend not so, yet joining with such, as so profess and
practice, they are guilty Society in sin brings felloship in wrath. Forbes
Com. in Rev. 18. pa 189.
of the same sin, though I will not say in measure and degree a like.

4. Howsoever the comparion here brought, proves nothing: yet so much there is
in it, as it overthrowes the cause he stands for. For be it granted, that a man
holding up his hand as high as he can, does not touch heaven materially, yet
understanding it in another way or sense, he may be said, and that truly to do
it. I desire our opposites to speak here sincerely as of God, in the sight of
God, whether a man be less bound to make use of any institution of
Antichrist, in divine worship: then bound, to join with a Harlot in any
practice of her uncleanness.
As for example: suppose a man with a lustful desire, put forth his hand after
a woman who is locked up, and so out of his reach, does he not touch her? yes
says Christ, and has committed adultery with her Mat. 5 28.
Again say he covet his neighbors money, and lift up his hand as high as he
can after it: does he not touch it, though the same be out of his reach? yes
says God, for he breaks the tenth commandment Exodus 20. 7.
In short, imagine, a man treacherously minded, streach forth his hand after
the Prince, does the not touch him, albeit the other be out of his reach?
indeed Gods law and man's law too, so concludes. Hence then I conclude thus;

Whosoever lusts after aspirituall harlot, commits with her spiritual
adultery. But such as hear the word in false Churches do so: Ergo, etc.

The later part of the argument, which is only doubtful, is proved by opening
and applying the similitude thus. As they commit carnal whoredom, who have
fellowship with harlots in any degree; kind, or Practice of their whoredoms:
so in this cause, it must needs be spiritual adultery, to hear the word in
the way and manner we despute of: because it is to have a fellowship or society
with the great whoorantichrist: I say it is to go all along with him in some
acts, orders, and devices of his spiritual whoredoms. And what I here lay
down, is laid down by the best learned in all ages, viz. that we must go out
from idolaters, as not to be behoulding to them, for any of their rites, or
ders, institutions: neither serve the Lord in, or by any helps, means,
furtherances of their sinful devices, for to do otherwise, is to commit
spiritual adultery with them: so write Agustine Confess, lib 6, c. 2.
, Haeimo Comment. 1. Corin, c. 10. v, 17.
, Calvin Sermon. on Levit. 19 27, p. 207.
, Bucer In censu^a c 9, fol. 4. 71,
, Martyr Comment. on Judge c. 2 v 3.
, Polanus Comment in Eze c 12 p 229
, Pareus Comment. in Hos c. 2. 16, 17.
, Zanchus Comment, in Hos c. 16, 17.
, Ainsworth Arrow against Idolat. c 2, p 8
, Jacob Expofit; on co^m 2.
, Marburie Catech. on co^m 2
, Bilson Answ. to the Apol. of the semin. p, 22. Iesuitisme par, 2, p, 515.
, D. Humfrey (a) and others.,

5. If a man's cause should be judged, only as his adversary lays it down, it
would be a great prejudice and loss to him. might we have liberty to speak
in our own cause, we would bring in more exceptions against their delectable
thing Isa. 44, 9
, then the state of the officer, albeit the Treat, speaks but little else for
us.

For 1. In this kind of hearing, men undertake to do an impossible thing that
is to serve two Masters, viz Christ and Antichrist, and each opposite to other,
and requiring diverse and contrary service at on and the same time se a book
entitled a light for the ignorant or the 3. estates.
ffor the first commands that the doctrines of the Gospel be heard in a true
Church, and Taught by a lawful minister, and forbids the contrary, the later
prohibiteth what the former requires, and requires that the word he heard, in
a false Church, and taught by an unlawful minister. Now whether it be right in
the sight of God to obey Christ rather then Antichrist judge ye. Acts 4, 19


2. This is not only to simbolize with Idolaters, and to give special honor
to Antichrist, as we have before proved: but also a reviving of an error held
by certain old Heretics, as the Nicolaitans, Irenaen: l; 1; c. 27, Eusebius: l:
3, c, 29.
Bisilides Cent, c, 5, p, 77.
, Helchesaits Cent, 3, c, 4, p, 98.
Priscillanists Cent, 4, c, 5, p, 403.
, etc. condemned inscripture, and by the fathers which lived in them times.
Their error was, that Christians in worshipping of God, might outwardly conform
themselves unto the practice of such ways and means as Idolaters had divised,
yet so, as they did inwardly and secretly dislike of the intentio and ends,
which the others had in the observatio^ and use of them. Our opposites are here
(manium inania consilium) in judgment alike corrupt with the^. For though they
daube it over with more artificial cunning, to make their, delusion the
stronger, yet for their principles and maine grounds (aspis a vipera) they are
all one and alike, as I shall make it good whenever any of them gives me
occasion to reply.

3. It is such an act of religion as the paltre petigree of it, is only
grounded upon the wit and will of man, void of all scripture, yea indeed all
show thereof, and therefore by learned rightly termed a mocking of God Luther in
Amos c, 7 p. 134
, gross superstition Lavarat in los. 22.
, great rebellion P. Mart in 1 Samuel 15.
, and wichcraft.

4. ibid 2128.
It is so vile a thing as our blessed Martyrs, would rather give their bodies
to the fire then do it. witness, Thomas Reed Acts and Monum, page; 2197
, and his wife and daughter, Rafe Allerton bid 2^08:
, John Fetty ibid 2256.
, John Moyes ibid 2217:
, John Hallingdale ibid 2222.
, Joan Wast ibid 2134.
, Thomas Whut ^ll ibid 2029:
, I fabell Foster ibid 2030.
John Cavil ibid 2074.
, Thomas Spicer ibid 2092.
Thomas Ha^land ibid 2099.
, John Rough ibid 2226.
, Roger Barnard ibid 2098:
, Adam Foster ibid 2099.
, Robert Lawson e, John Careless ibid 2114.
, Alice Benden ibid 2167.
, Thomas Harding ibid 1117;
, William Tims ibid 2078.
, mother Sem^n and her Soane ibid 2234:
, Angels wife ibid 2299.
, and many more. If any should object but these went not to the Church because
of the Mass: I answer; 1. they refused to go thither at all. 2. many of them
showed their dislike against this Hearing in particular, and suffered for it
greevious persecution, as the Reader may see in the places quoted.

5. By this means men break their vow which they have vowed unto God: Among
other vows under the Law, the Jews had one which they named Cherem * that is
of the curse, a word derived of Charam, to wast, destroy, kill etc. and it
implied that such a thing, was separated and quite set of, and so a great sin,
either to-touch it, or put it to any use afterward, Such a Vow do all the
faithful make, when leaving Babylon, they plant their feet in the pleasant
ways of Sion. Their promise then is, not to touch the unclean thing any
more, but utterly to forsake all the orders, customs, institutions ways and
worship of antichristisme, and to practice entirely and only, ibid 2099.
, both for matter and See P. Mart, Comment, in Judge, c, 1; v; 17. 18. m 1 Cor.
10 14, Esa: 2. 18. 20.
manner whatsoever the Lord their God commands: Therefore in going back to
make use again, of any of her constitutions, and divised means, whereby to
worship God: in this men certainly foresweare themselves, and so are guilty of
fearful perjury before the Lord.

6 It is a worship before Idols, and mark it, not accidentally but purposely
present before them: and such Idols, as have a religious state in the worship:
And to do this, is against the clear tax of Scripture. Exo 20 5. 1. Cor. 10.
20. Psa. 106. 37.


And as Pareus comment. in Hos^. 8 p 529.
says, is a post a sie from God, great Idolatry, very scandalous in it self,
ahorible abomination in the Lords sight, and the end of it, causes death and
wrath eternally. Rivetus, coment. in Hos. c. 4, p. 151.
writing of the same thing, ads thus: Howsoever such worshippers have their
minds void of superstition and intend to serve only the true God, yet in truth
(says he) this they do not, but worship and serve the Devil. Ainsworth Annot.
in Exodus 20. 5.
and Cartwright, Histo. Christ. lib. 1. pa. 140.
say the same.

7. In this men cast themselves upon temptations, P. Mart loc. com. clas. 2, c.
4 p. 209. Aret, in Mat. 4, 7, p. 155
and provoke the Lord so to wrath, as justly he may give them up to satan and
Antichrist, for to blind them and harden their hearts.

8. A tender conscience by it will be wounded, and afterward tanckle inwardly as
a thorn in the heel: in that it leads men to equivocation, dissimulation,
reservation, and in a kind to a denial of Christ, and to condemn themselves in
the things which they approve of. David's heart smote him for a little. See
before in M. Gres molds cause.


9. It gives just cause of offense Melan. in Evang fest, mich* p. 552.
unto the brethren weak and strong, and lies as a stumbling block in their way
to hinder the due practice of Gods ordinances.

10. By it Idolaters are caused to shut their eyes and harden Cornel. a lapide
in Epist. Ich. Secun p. 505.
their hearts against the truth: and so consequently held the longer and
stronger in the snare of the Devil.

11. It is for nature and kind the sin of the high places: For wherein did
the Isralites offend that way. But because (as Rivetus, quod fi by adoratio nis
loca arbitrio delegerint in Hos. 4. p. 146.
says) of their own accord, they made choice of them places for divine
worship. Iunius Annot. levit, 17, 7.
says so too: when they sacrificed in ALIO LOCO in any other place then the
Lord had prescribed, it was offered to D^vils. I will not here dispute of the
material place, I mean their temples of wood and stone, whether Christians
in them may lawfully perform public worship: But this I do affirm, and will
stand to it, that it is every way as evil to bring our spiritual offerings
unto an Idoll^state, and there in it, by it, or with it, to present the same
unto God, as it was unlawful for the Jews under the law, to offer in the
places before named: some say, Lyran. comment. in Amo. 5 27.
the former is much worse, because the same was never warrantable, whereas the
other sometime was, as we have else where noted. page 18. 19.

12. To conclude this practice takes away the cross of Christ and persecution
for righteousness. It decks an adulterer with the spoil of the spouse of
Christ. It maks schism in the Church in that men break the order, and bounds
which God has set in it. Melan, in Evan dom. 4. Advent. p 94.
Maks way for greater evils as apostacy from God, sliding back to great
ungodliness, Pare. in Hos. 8. p. 592.
and to be corrupted in the substance of religion and purity of Doctrine. And
what shall I say more. It gratifies the Jesuits in commending Maffeus In vita
Ignat Laiola.
blind obedience. and argues great presumption and pride of heart, as if man
were wiser then God, and could devise either some better means, or some other
way for his edefication, then the Lord has prescribed D. Willet Comment. in 1 Samuel 15. 23.


I do not know what engine of wit and art some men have, to elude these
reasons, and to batter them so down, as to make a safe passage through for a
good conscience; For my part I confess such do go bejoynd my line and measure
of faith, I dare not bevvise above that which is written, it is enough for me
to know and believe, that in this point we have the word of God with us
and for us.

SECT. 8.
Our six Objection, Object. 6.
as he lays it down for us is thus. If there be no communion at all between
the Teacher and taught, what profit then comes by such hearing.

To this his answer is. Treat.
The Church Officer feeds the stock of Christ over which he is set, as the
object of his ministry. Such as come in, (being not in Church union
therewith) hears him so doing as a stander by hears me talk or dispute with
another, etc, Here is communion only in the effects of the truths taught. It
were usurpation in any to partake in a Church previleidge (which the office of
ministry is) that were not in Church state first, and so if hearing imported
Church Communion none but in Church members might lawfully hear.

The Treat. answers, are much like to one that turns himself many times
about, but moves not out of the place. All that he says is (Homoeologia) one
thing often said over and over. That is a change of the state of the question,
which is not about Church Communion, but whether a believer, when he hears a
false minister in a work of his office, do such an action as can be proved
lawful by the word of God. Now to this (which is the maine Sacra scriptura
tota vera, necessaria sufficiens viatori consequen dum fine^ suum: nec est
dubia via salutis. Harum etiam explicatio and quantu^ adcreden da, and qua^ tum
ad speranda, et quantum ad operanda ex plicatur, ex diversis scripturae locis.
Scotus in 1. sent. quaest.
thing) we find nothing in the Treatise, but much paper blotted (...) about
questions and strifes of words, which are indeed vain and unprofitable, and
and whereof comes envy, strife, evil surmisings, rather then edefying which
is in faith so to do.

Jf J should say nothing to this, some would say there were some thing in it.
Therefore I answer. 1. It is a false kind of resoning (which Logicians
condemn under the term, non causae vt causae) when a thing is spoken either
with limitation or without, to conclude more the^ the proemisses: this fault
the Trea. commits here; For he would persuade us, that because the
Church Officer and his flock are relatives, therefore no man, not in Church
union has relation to his office. M. Constable. Cnrin. Metaph. l. 2. c. 1. R.
Goclen. in co^tr^v. log. p. 1, c. 18, Seal. c 93, de cause. Lat.
But we are not altogether such novices, but know a little how to distinguish
Sophestrie from Philosophy.

Touching Relation, the same may be considered, 1. in ordinatione, 2. in
applicatione. For the first, which is a Relation by order, or coniunctione,
that is, relatio per se, as Logicians Fonsec. 5. Metaphy. c. 18 Quoest. 2,
Sect. 3. Timpl. Metap. l. 4.
Phrase it; Here now I grant in this kind of Relation no man has relation to
the office of the Teacher, that is not in Church Communion therewith. But for
the second, which is, relatio imperfecta, or per accidens; Here I affirm that
in this kind: The Hearer, howbeit not in Church Estate, yet has relation, to
the Office of the Teacher, and so far forth is the object of his Ministry.

Aristotle Meta. l. 5, c. 5.
speaking of sundry ways of Relations unto persons and things, sets down
these particulars: (...). So then, to go where unlawful Ministers teach,
observe the time, hearken to their Doctrine, show the like outward submissive
gestures and reverence that others do, perform divine worship there with
them, and among them: This is to have relation to the idol-state, both of
Church and Ministry, if the Philosopher speak truly.

Again, consider a relation in the parts thereof. 1. Here is subjectum, viz.
Hearing. 2. Fundamentum, i. e. a false-state. 3. Terminus, viz. superstition
(but our Opposites name it edification) 4. Relatum, to weet, the speaker. 5.
Correlatum, viz. the Hearer.

And howsoever, it may be said, that in respect of Church-union the Relation,
here is properly in the two later, that is, between the Church Officer and his
Flock; notwithstanding this cannot be denied: But for the other kind and way of
Hearing, albeit it be not the Relation, yet it is in Relation, and belongs
reallie to the praedicament or matter of the Relation.

I am sorry, that J am constrained to speak so often of Philosophy, but
indeed I can do no less, considering, that leaving the Word of God, he seeks
to lead men a stray, by abstruse and ambiguous distinctions, strange and
wrapping words: Now, howsoever this may puzzel the understanding of some
people, as not able to apprehend the strong delusion, yet the truth is, let
them be brought to the rules and grounds of true Philosophy, Vera Philosophia
cum S. Theologia nusquam pugnat: and quod in Theologia verum est, etiam in
Philosophia; and contra. Keckerm. disput. Philos. p. 5
they are as unable to be defended by art and reason this way, as by the
Seriptures. Notwithstanding I do desire the person, whosoever he shall be that
undertakes the cause here against me, to prove what he says by divine
authority; For I would willingly deal with him by that book alone, as by the
book of all truth; Nay, I require Scripture, for without it, I shall believe
nothing, though he bring whole Cartloads of such carnal caveling devises. But
to proceed.

2. To apply the hearing in question, to a stander by, that hears a man to
speak occasionallie, and in a private way: Here again, as in all the rest, he
takes his scope without orb or order; For where things are done, ex mero
alterius obsequio, by a power and institution, there can be no participation in
the administrations thereof, M. Constable. Cnirim. Metaph. l. 2. c. 1
but it is a submission to the power, whether it be true or false. By such a
gloze, the Corinthians might finely have put of Paul's reproof: Seeing we are
not in union with them, we can at their sacrifice only as standers by, and in a
private way: and so have no relation to the idol. But such a shift would not
serve their turn; For whatsoever they did, it was to be determined, and
reputed, according to the public acts, and not as themselves vainelie
fantised: So comment: in 1 Samuel c. 27 v. 4
Martyr, Chytraeus, De Eucharist. p. 216
and others.

The time was, when the Treat. thought that there was use Preface before
religious Commun.
of a distinction of Religious actions, into personal and Church-actions; and
how he understood it, he shows afterward: Treat. of private Communion, page 10
in private I communicate only with the presons and personal graces of holy
men; in public I communicate with their Church State and order, as also with
the public Ministry, and in, and with it with the Prelacy, whence it is.

The truth here, is never the worse nor less, howsoever he left it, for he
that joins in the exercise and practice of public actions, he must
necessarily join himself to^ the State, Order, Ministry, etc. in which,
and by which the same are performed.

3. In this answer he plainly confutes himself: For mark all Readers that
have sense: In a true Church he grants, there is Communion between the Teacher
and taught, and the reason which he gives for it, is, because the Flock is the
object of his Ministry.

Now, if that in this way, make a Lawful Communion; then by necessary
consequence, there can be no hearing in the other way, but must be an unlawful
Communion; My reason is, because the Office of a Priest, is not an institution
of any one independent body, but of universal Hyerarchicall state, and
extends it self too, and over all manner of persons whatsoever, I say so
many, as do congregate and bend an ear thereto.

If any should object and say, but many of them, are Parish Priests, and so
resident in one place. I answer, this respects not the state of their Office at
all, but only imports a license that some have from their Prelate, to do
certain services specially in this or that Assembly; not that their Office of
Preisthood is here by any way limited or circumscribed, but is, (as we said
before) universal and every where over Sea and Land: Hence then, every hearer
must needs be the object of such a Ministry, and so communicates therewith,
if there be any weight of reason in the Treat. words. And here we have verefied
the old saying.

Ipse sibi nocet is alium qui laedere quaerit. 4. Where he says, here is
communion only in the effects of the truths taught. Here is another invention
of his own head, and makes true the saying, Vno absurdo dato, mill sequuntur
grant one absurdity, and a thousand will follow. That the effects should be
dividuated from the working-cause, is against the rules of reason, Clement.
Templ. Metaphy. l. 3, p. 251, 260.
for common principles show, that there is an essential connextion between
them, and the former is to be considered for quality and kind, as the later
is. These Canons are well known, as is the cause, so that which is caused of
the doing of the thing. Idem qua idem, semper facit idem, Arist. l. 2. de Genesis
and corrupt. c. 10,
Again, Rodolph Goclen. c. 9 p. 90
as is the same, so always follows the same effect.

We speak not here, of what may fall out by accident, Arist. 2 Topic. c. 9, 5,
31,
but of things considered in themselves. qualis causa tale causatum,
And to take it thus, and say, they effects are right and Lawful, when the
instruments, and working-causes are wrong and unlawful; Or to say, I may
communicate in the effects, and yet not with the instruments, or working-cause.
It is (caput vacuum cerebro) as vain a thing as ever man held.

If a Traitor or Rebel should set up one to be a Judge, another a Major, etc.
and give them commission to administer, justice publicly; Were it Lawful for
any of the Kings subjects to communicate in the effect of their
administrations, because the same in it self was just? I say no: For it were
treason so to do. And is it a lesser offense, to offend God in a matter of the
like nature?

If a man may communicate in the effects of such actions (say good in
themselves) whose instruments and working-causes are unlawful: I say, let this
be granted, there are few Idolaters, Adulterers, Thieves, Witches, but will
easily excuse themselves. But as it is a Maxim in the civil Law, Fr.
Connanus Comment. juris civil. l. 5, c. 9;
and grounded on the Law of God. Mart. Azpilcueta Enchyrio, c: 17, p. 330, calls
it a breach of the 7. ^ Command.
That to have any thing rightly: just and lawful instruments must be used; So
it is in this cause here; For howsoever God may use what instruments he will: I
say, bring his purpose to pass by what secondary means he pleases, yet has
he bound us straightly, not to make use of any unlawful instruments or
working-meanes, (whether it be Church, Ministry, Worship, or any Rite or
Order) in hope thereby to have some good effects.

And here I desire our Opposites to tell me, seeing as the Treat. Treat. of
pub. commun. p. 29.
confesses, that the Chancelour in the Consistory, and the Priest in the
Pulpit or Desk, does administer by one and the same power: Namely, that of the
Prelate; which, from, and by him, both the one, and other does receive. Why a
man may not as well communicate in the effects of the administrations, done by
the Chancelour in his Consistory, so they are truths: As in the effects of the
truths taught by a Priest in his Pulpit or Desk?

5. Though hearing simply imports not Church^communion: yet all hearing in a
Church Way, imports a justification and allowance of the state, both of the
Church and Ministry, in which, and by which a man is taught. And this we have
already so proved, that unless men resolve not to yield to the truth, which
is most plain, but to kick against the prick, and with Cavils, Glozings, and
facing out of things (like so many fovle feer to trouble the clean water) they
must needs see, and say, that the Treat. in this point held an error.

SECT. 9.
THe two next Objections, and his answers to them, are not worth the writing
down. If any other, do otherwise think, I wish much good it may do him,
that can make any good of it. But I proceed to the 9. Objection, which he
frames in this manner.

He that hears, Object. 9.
appears to have communion with the Church and Ministry; and all appearance
of evil is to be avoided, 1. These. 5. 22.

To this, Treat.
thus he answers: The Scripture is not to be understood of all that appears
evil to others out of an erroneous and deceived judgment, etc. but it is
meant either of the Doctrine in Proph^sie, etc. or of that which appears evil
to a right discerning eye. By this imagined exposition I might not hyre a house
in a Parish, where I were not known: seeing thereby I appear a Parish member.

Answ. 1. I know not in truth, what better to liken this answer, then to that
Nightingale, of whom a Lacedemonian Plutarch. in Apothed. lacon
(when he had plucked of her sethers, and saw only a little Karkesse left)
said: Thou art a voice, and nothing else. The truth is, the utmost that he has
here said, is a mere color of some thing, while nothing is to be found in it.
For, what was in the Objection, remains still virtualiter, for ought he has
said to it, or against it.

2. If a man were to make a sword for his enemy, he would set as little edge
upon it as could be, for to save himself. The Treat. in framing this, and
other Objections for us, is sure to make them blunt enought, that so they may
the less hurt him, and profitt us.

But seeing we have the weapon now in our own hands, we will do our best to
sharpen it. Our argument therefore here, shall be thus laid down.

Whatsoever is an appearance of evil, to a right discerning eye, the same
ought to be avoided.

But to hear unlawful Ministers in Antichristian Assemblies, is an appearance
of evil, to a right discerning eye.

Therefore it is a sin to do it.

The Proposition is proved from 1. Thessal. 5. 22. and here granted by the
Treat. The Assumption is as certain by these reasons following.

For 1. This going to the place where they go, and hearing as they do, is an
occasion whereby a man comes into a suspicion of idolatry, and that he is of
the same mind with the rest, whatsoever otherwise he pretends; And thus have
our Martyrs testified, as Smith Acts and Monu. 1876.
, Bradford ibid. 1829.
, and others. And that this is an appearance of evil, both Papists, Eckius
Tom. 3. in fest. 5. Mich. p. 706.
and Protestants (d), do acknowledge it. Peter's adjoining himself to the
Jews. Gal. 2. was ostentatio falsae opinion; is; as Pareus Exercit. Theol. ib.
2, p. 111.
says, a showing of the same error that they did, though his private meaning
was other wise: So here. B. Jewel en 1. These. 5. 22. p. 219 Cent. 2, l 2, c. 4.


2. It is an appearance of evil, when men do that, which causes others to
fear they are unsound. But such a fear is here justly caused; For many holy
men have counted these Table-Gospellers Act. Monum. p. 1876, and 1829.
and said they did it, to avoid persecution; And reputed this action much like
the Counsel in the profane Orator. Servire temporibus apientis semperest
habitum. Tul. in Ant.
It is always thought great wisdom to apply ones self unto the times. The
reason wherefore Iohashaphat is blamed for his affinity 2 Chro. 18. 1.
with Ahab, was quia scandalum dedit subjectis quass foris non improbaret
idolatriam, quam domi abrogaverit? This is their cause, Pareus Exer. Theol. l.
2 p. 101.
who go to false Churches: It makes the Godly to think, that their
performances among them, are not perfect; But that they have some sinester
ends, both in coming to them, and going back again to the other.

3. When idolaters see us present at their worship; they must needs hereby be
hardened and hartened in superstition; And this is another breach of that
precept in 1. These. 5. 22. It is observed of some P. Mart. Loc: Commun. Clas.
3, c. 2, p. 241.
that Namaan might not do any civil reverence in the House of Rimnon, least
through any appearance or show of idolatry, some might be strengthened by it,
in false worshipp.

Augustine Tom. 10 Hom. 6.
writes very well to this purpose: Do ye ask me (says he) how the Gentles
may be won? How they may be called to salvation? FORSAKE THEIR MEETINGS, let
go their toys, and then if they agree not to our truth, let them be ashamed
of their fewnes. This Counsel we shall do well to follow; For there is not a
readier way to bring people off, from their idolatry, then to let them alone
Hos. 4 17. See Iunius on the place.
as Gods bids us; Keep away from all their human forms and fashions of
Religion, and especially such as are round about us, and live amongst us, as
Cartwright Reply 1. to Whitg: p. 131.
excellently shows.

4. It has a show of evil, in that it is a matter of active scandal, and
gives occasion to our brother, to fall into that evil. whereof it has ashew;
to wit, that there is no just cause to separate from false Churches, but that
people may remain members thereof: And howsoever, there be not here an
intention in the doer, to draw another into sin, yet of itself Quando ipsum
factum est tale, quod de sui ratione habear, quod sit inductivum ad peccandum
puta cum aliquis public facit peccatum, vell quod habet similitudinem peccati.
Aquin. 2. quest. 43. Art. 1. a. 4.
this is an inducement to it; And gives another occasion to fall. And so much
in effect writes Zanchy Explic. in 1 These. 5. 22. p. 419, Tom 6.
, on the place.

5. This is not without appearance of evil and scandal, because hereby, men
seek to uphold such ways and inventions in divine worship, as the Lord of old
has ordained to destruction ler 51. 26 2 The. 2 8. Rev. 18.
, Merdecah would not give countenance, nor reverence to one of that Nation
Brent. Comment. in Hest. c. 3, v 2.
, whose name God had appointed to be blotted out under Heaven.

Wherefore did the Lord give so straight a charge unto Israel, to break down
Altars Deu. 7, 5.
, groves high places, etc. Vt ex eo intelligamus, because, says Junius Anal.
in Deu. 12 p. 71.
by this we should understand, that they were not to retain any thing that
concerns either the substance or show of Idolatry. Calvine Comment. in Esa
27, 9.
speaks the very same: (So detestable is idolatry before God) Vt eius
memoriam vult penitus deleri, ne posthac ullum eius vestigium appareat.) That
he will have the very memory of it utterly to be abolished, least any
footstept thereof should appear afterward.

Jacob abolished out of his House not only the idols, but the ear-ings, Genesis
35. 4. because they were superstitionis insignia: Monuments of superstition; As
Calvin Comment. in Genesis 35 4.
, Monilia Idolis consecrata: Jewels consecrated to idols; As Pareus ibid.
: Res idolatriae pertinentes: Things appertaining to idolatry, as Iunius ibid.
.

To be short, would not God have the Jews under the law, to countenance any
human devise, whether Ministry Numb. 8 22. 24. Numb. 4. 24, 31. and 1847
, Ministration, Altar, Sacrifice, Sacraments, either by word, Psa. 16. Hos. 2,
16, 16, 17.
writing, presence, assembling together Deu. 16, 1, 6 1 King. 12, 32.
, observing the time, coming to the place, bowing down Deu. 5, 9. Ps. 95, 6.
Hos. 13. 2. Eze. 18, 6. Neh, 10, 32. 37. Ex. 30, 16. Eze. 5, etc.
, kneeling, lifting up the eyes, paying of tithes (g), Offerings,
Contributions, etc. And shall we think that all these outward obseruances,
are now out of use, and that men in such respects may publicly countenance
the vvayes of Antichrist. As for such, as so think, let them know, they are
in error and sin; And as the Papists have condemned Montanus for an
Heretic, and yet raetine among them his vile opinions. So do these men,
embrace the lies and beastly vanities of H. N. that monstrous Monster, although
in words they will disclaim all Familisme. As cats love not the Master of the
house, but his housholds-goods: so many say they cannot abide the Pope, and yet
love his household stuff to well.


Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding.

For the instance, which he brings of hyring a House in a Parish, it is
discrepant and impertinent, and so of no validity. For, let Barnards Consirat.
Eugen. l. 3.
useful Canon be observed, an liceat, an deceat, an expediat, we shall soon
see, there is no agreement betvveen it, and the thing he applies it to.

For first, the Law of God allows us, to live where wicked men do; and to
have necessary society with them in civil things; And thus the godly in all
ages have practiced. But let them show us, where it is written, that we must
go, unto their unlawfull-Church-meetings, and there worship God with them, and
among them. I ask again, who of the Saints has done this? The Lord ler. 15.
19.
says: Let them return to thee, but return not thou unto them.

2. It is seemly that we dwell among them; and reciprocally give and take
earthly helps each of other. Compossessores mu^di non erroris. We must be co
partners with them in the world but not in their errors, says Tertullia^.
But in Religion we may not use any of their devises, as means and
furtherances of our edification.

Elias was careful to repair the Lords Altar; For as Martyr In his Comment.
on the place.
says, he judged it an unbefitting thing, and a great indignity to God and
his truth, to Offer Sacrifice on Baals Altar. If men in those days had the
Zeal of that good Prophet, they would scorn and loath to make use of any
thing that is Antichrists. I say it again, were men zealous for the Lord God
of Hosts, they would fear to run to false Churches and Ministers to be
edified. Is it not because there is not a God in Israel that ye go.

3. This also is behovefull and expedient, as the Apostle 1 Cor. 5. 10.
says; But the other is not so, as we have before proved. For Conclusion,
wheresoever I live, my constant absence from their Church is an evident token,
that I have left them; But on the contrary; if I go thither to worship, this
gives them just cause to think that I approve of their unsanctified standing;
Whosoever therefore can make these two things hang together? I must needs say,
quid libet equolibet, of every thing he can make any thing. But of this no
more now: let us hearken to what follows.

SECT. 10.
THe next Objection is thus laid down: None can hear without a Preacher:
None can preach, except he be sent, Romans 10. 14. 15. Therefore I cannot
Lawfully hear him, that has not a Lawful sending.

His answer to it is: Treat.
1. That Conclusion is neither in the Text nor sound. 2. I may Lawfully hear
him that has no Lawful calling, as I have formerly showed. 3. The sending
there intended is Gods gracious work of providence in raising up men, by
enabling and disposing them to preach, etc. 4. If faith came by the preaching
of unlawful Ministers, it follows thereupon, that such Preachers are sent in
the Apostles sense. This is the sum of his answer.

Answ. It was a cunning trick, which Themostocles was once taught by a man of
Lacedemonia, that because they might not take the Tables away, wherein a Law
was engraven; He should therefore turn them up-side down, which was as good
as to take them away altogether. Howsoever, the Treat: takes not from us the
Tables of holy Scriptures, wherein is written the Law of Christ's Ministers,
yet by a prittie devise, he turns them here upside down: Which is as good as
to take them quite away. J know what J speak, and will stand to it; For if
this place, Romans 10, 14, 15. respects not a true outward calling, but is to be
understood promiscuously of all Ministers, be their calling never so false,
divilish, Antichristian. I say, if this Text be so to be interpreted, then have
not the Ministers of God any more to say for the justification of their
standing, then the Ministers of Satan (I use Paul's phrase 2. Cor. 11. 15.
) have to say for theirs. Yea moreover, hence the base Familists H. N. his
Exhort. to his Childr.
, and such giddie-heads, who deny all outward calling to particular men and
say, every one that can preach the Word, are Ministers alike; Are justified He
that justifies the false claim of a usurper* condemns the party, whose title
is right and good.
in their most vile assertion. facinus horrendum, sancti viri.

But to clear the Text from the Treat: false gloss; And by it, to prove the
truth, which we hold; I will here lay down this argument.

If Paul by sending, Proof 1.
Romans 10, 14, 15. does not at all intend unlawful Ministers: Then are not
unlawfll Ministers to be heard: But the first is true, therefore the second.

The proposition which needs only to be cleared, may be thus manifested:
Such as the Apostle intended, Romans 10. ought and may Lawfully preach: But
Antichristian Ministers, neither ought nor may Lawfully preach; Ergo, the
Apostle, Romans 10, means not Antichristian Ministers.

The Major is most evident, and cannot be denied by any that bears the face of
a Christian. The Minor is clear and certain by these Scriptures Heb. 5; 4.
Numb. 16. 5, and 18, 7, 2 Chro, 26 18 Act. 14 23. ler. 23 21.
. Besides granted of all, both Papists and Protestants. To wit, that it is
great sin to exercise any spiritual function or Ministry, without a true
outward calling. Of this judgment were Francis Ribera Comment. in Heb. 5, 4.
, Toletus In Joh. 10. page: 597.
, Royardus Feria Ter: Post. Pent.
, Luther Comment. in Gal. c. 1; v. 8.
Pareus Comment; in Heb. 5. 4;
, Piscator ibid.
, Ames Cas. Consc. l. 4. c. 25.
Slater, On Romans 2. v. 3.
, Cartwright Repl. to Whitg; p. 54 63.
, Wilson Comment; on Romans 10; v. 15.
, Bilson Chur; Gov.
, and others.

2. If we may Lawfully communicate in, and with that Ministry, which the
Apostle speaks of, Romans 10. 15. then he intends not here any unlawful
Ministry. But the first is true; Ergo the later is true also.

The Proposition cannot be doubted off. The Assumption we prove by our
Opposites Confession; For they grant, it is unlawful to communicate in, and
with a false Office.

3. If the Holy Ghost does testify that by sending, Romans 10. the true and
Lawful Ministers of Christ are intended: Then are not false and unlawful
Ministers intended in that place. But the first is true; Ergo the later is true
also.

The Proposition is grounded on the words of the Text: How shall they preach,
except they be sent? As it is written, how beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad tytings of good things.

These words are taken out of Esa. 52. 7. where the Prophet (according to the
interpretation of all Learned men upon the place) has reference to the
Ministers of Christ; I say, to such only, whose outward calling (whether
extraordinary or ordinary) was Lawful and true.

So Cyrillus Comment. in Esa. 52. 7.
, Dionysius ibid.
, Areularius ibid.
, Wigand ibid.
, Hyperius On the place.
, Bullingerus ibid.
, Mollerus ibid;
, Zwinglius (x), Marloratus ibid;
, Gualte ibid;
. Musculus ibid;
, Vrsinus ibid;
, Oecolampadius, and others.

The Assumption needs no proof; except a man would make some question, whether
it should be day, when it is manifested to him, that it is not night.

4. If unlawful and false Ministers are not sent from God; But from the Devil
and Antichrist; Then does not the Apostle in Romans 10. 15. intend false and
unlawful Ministers; But the antecedent is true; Ergo, also the consequence.

The Major or antecedent is ground ibid;
on these Scriptures Ier. 14: 14; Rev 9 3; and 13; 14; 15; 16 and 18; 15 17; 2
These. 2; 3; 4; 2 Chro. 11. 15; Rev. 16. 3.
. And among other reasons laid down by Zanchy Quia non mittuntur ab eo, sed a
Diabolo. Explicat. Philip; 3. 1 p. 176; Tom. 4.
, wherefore unlawful Ministers ^h^uld be avoided, he gives this for one;
Because God sends them not, but the Devil. So Cartwright Repl; to Whitg. p.
88; 204.
speaking of the Hierarchy (which comprehends all false Offices in the
Kingdom of the Beast) says, it came out of the Bottomless pit of hell, and
from the Devil. Perkins Expos. Sermon; mount. Mat 7; p. 239; vol. 2.
, Pareus Comment; in Mat. 24. 23.
, Musculus Comment, in Mat. 7.
, Latton Syons Plea.
, the Authors of the Admonitions to the Parliament Admon. 1.
, and others say so too.

The Assumption is as manifest; For durst any man affirm, that Ministers not
sent from God, but from Satan and Antichrist, are here meant by the Apostle.

5. Such have a promise of Gods gracious presence with them, and of his
blessing on their labors and Ministry, who are said, Romans 10. 15. to be
sent; But unlawful Ministers have no such promise of Gods presence with them,
nor of his blessing on their labor and Ministry. Therefore by sending Romans
10. the Apostle intends not unlawful Ministers.

He that should deny this argument, would show more spite then wit; For both
pa^ts are as clear as the Sun at noonday. For the other part of the reason,
there can be no exception against it; For seeing this place, which is the
foundation of their cause, is very Sand; the whole building (like a tottering
wall) must needs fall to the ground.

2. For his saying; He has before showed, that it is Lawful to hear him that
has no Lawful calling.

I answer, I cannot find this proved any where in his Book; For I profess in
the word of truth, I see little difference between his grounds for hearing in
false Churches; and the Nicolaitants reasoning for eating in idol-Temples.

For thus they would plead: Eusebius: lib: 3; cap. 29; Ireuaen lib: 1. c. 25
Meats and Drinks are the good Creatures of God, and may be used in a civil
way Lawfully; Now we receive them no otherwise, whatsoever ends and respects
others have.

Convenient rebus nomina saepe suis. What is the Treat. plea but the same:
Hearing is a natural action: And although he hears false Ministers, yet is
not his private meaning to honor the state of the Office, as the rest do.
Thus (Chius ad Coum) their Doctrines are alike.

But does not this in the mean time, show a desperate cause, which has not
any authentical records of the Holy Ghost. Under the shadow whereof, it can
find any shelter to shroud it self.

What, in the whole Book of God Evangelicae and Apostolicoe literae, and
veterum Prophetarum Oracula perspicue nos instituu^t, quid oporteat sapere de
voluntate, and sensu Dei. Ponentes ergo contentione^ ex divinitus inspiratis
Oraculis queuaeram is solutionem eorum, quae proponuntur. Theod. lib. 1; c. 7.
is there not one place of Scripture to be found? What, nothing in the
Prophets? Nothing among all the writings of Christ and of his Apostles? But it
must be held up (as the Apostle speaks (...)) by the slight Ephesians. 4. 14;
of men, and cunning craftines, whereby they lay in wait to deceive.

Against this kind of reasoning, I might here bring that exception which
Tertullian De praescript: advers: haeret.
did of old against his Opposites. What has Athens to do with Jerusalem, the
School of Philosophy with the Church of Christ.

Jn matters of faith men should so weigh and consider of things, as not to
write what reason, but what Religion, not what Philosophers, but what the
Prophets and Apostles, not what fancy thinks, but what the Spirit of God does
say. Sensus nostri, and enarrationes sine his testihus non habent fidem.
Origin: in Hierom. Hom. 1.


Indeed, if a man list to be contentions, he may find something to say to
every thing, though little to purpose to any thing; For what cause so bad, but
some will have a color for it.

Has not the Stews of Rome found Patrons Harding in confutat. of the Apolog.
Have not some defended commones of Wives P. Clemens.
; yea and worse too; Therefore with the Prophet this shall always be my
prayer: O let me not wander from thy Commandments; Remove from me the way
of Lying; And take not the Word of Truth out of my mouth.

3. For his Exposition, it is drawn in by the hair of the head; And well,
Psalm. 119 10. 29. 43.
it resembles a Shipmans hose, for you may apply it to what you will, rather
then to the point in hand. There is not a Writer, I am persuaded, that ever
gave such a sense of the place; As if wisdom had been borne with him* and
should dye with him.

I shall not step out of the way, to call in here a few well deserving
audience of the Learned. Famous Pareus Comment. in Romans 10. 15.
an interpreter one of a thousand; upon the place writes thus: How shall they
preach, except they be sent, why so? What hinders but he may preach that is not
sent? indeed he may so to do, but not as Gods messenger: For as no man is the
Kings Ambassador, unless he have his Commission: So such Preachers as will
declare in Gods name his mercies and benefits, ought necessarily to be sent by
him; For he rejects all them as intruders, which run and teach without his
Commission. Unto the preaching therefore of the Word, a calling is required,
etc. And though he speak here properly of the Apostolical Commission, which
was extraordinary. Notwithstanding it must also be understood of ordinary
Ministers: For none is a Lawful Preacher of the Word, except God call him.
Now, the Lord calls some immediately, as of old the Prophets and Apostles.
Others mediately by an outward calling of the Church. So he. The very same
Hyperius, Fagius, Ochinus, Tossanus, Olevianus, Grinaeus, Martyr, Rolloc,
Hunnius, Rungius, Brentius, and others on the place.

Now, howsoever false Ministers are not sent of God, according to the intent of
the Apostle, Romans 10. 15. yet I confess, he has a special guidance,
government and direction, both in their raising up, coming forth, and
preaching such and such truths, for the good of his elect in many places where
they come.

It is said of Joseph's Brethren, that out of envy they sold him to the
Midianites Genesis 4, 8.
; and yet the Scripture elsewhere says Genesis 45. 3. 8. Psalm. 105 17.
; God sent him into Egypt.

Now, surely the same God, which could use their mallace, by which he was sold
into Egypt, for the corporal profit of his people there; he can use as well
the power Pareus in Comment. Gen: 45 7. p. 429. Tom. 1.
of Antichrist, (by which the Ministers of false Churches have their calling)
for the spiritual comfort and good of his chosen ones. And howsoever he is no
author of unlawful Ministeries: Neither can it be properly said that he sends
them: Yet he so wisely orders and disposes of them, that he brings to pass
hereby his own purpose and will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, in
the propagation of the Gospel, to the conversation of many.

But let it here be remembered, that their places for all this, are not the
better, neither their administrations the more warrantable; Nor any people the
more justified to hear them, then were Jacobs Sons to be justified in what
they did to their Brother, because the Lord by it did them good.

That which God does this way, is not of any promise Cartwright, Hom. in
Eccles. c. 3 fol 83. 84.
that he has made, but out of his superabundant grace, turning the sins of
his people (as the Apothecarie does poysen to Medicines) to their profit and
good. Things done by unlawful instruments, so far as they respect the
accomplishment of Gods will and pleasure, either in the safety of his Church
trial of his Children etc. the Scripture attributes them to God; as author and
doer; and so far forth are most holy works; But so far as they respect
the action done, and instruments; they are wicked works, and they instruments
are sent from the Devil Pareus in Hos. 8. p. 529.


Lastly, that which he says follows, it follows not, but is ((...)) a
Conclusion il-gathered. But I see it is an easy thing to conquer, if begging
will procure one that. Put case usurpers of civil offices, should by their
administrations profit some people; Must it follow thereupon, that such men are
sent forth by the King? Indeed so it must be taken, or else the Treat:
exposition is neither in the Text, nor sound. But (cadet in cursu) he runs in
vain, as he has done all the way before.

Before I end this Section, I desire to ask one thing of our Opposites.
Suppose there be a man whom they would hear, but know not whether ever any
conversion has followed his preaching: May they in such a case hear him or
no? If they say yes, then wherefore are the effects of false Ministers made the
maine ground of hearing them? If they say no? Then how can they hear any?
Considering they know not certainly by whose preaching another is converted.
As is the way of an Eagle in the air, such is the way of an adulterous Woman,
it is hid and cannot be seen.

SECT. 11.
THE 11. Objection is thus laid down: The sheep of Christ hear his voice, but
strangers they will not hear: Joh. 10. 3. 8. 37.

He answers: Christ does not there speak of the outward hearing, but of the
hearking unto; that is, as he expounds himself, Verse. 3. 4. 5. 14. 16. 26. 27.
of the knowing and believing of his voice, and following it, etc.

Answ. It is a speech of Augustine Ne sitis multi Magistri dissentientes a
Doctrina vnici magistri Christi. in Lib. 1. detraction.
: Be not many masters, dissenting from the Doctrine of Christ, our only Master.

The Counsel is good, for it is a great sin and hurtful vice, to be rash
and adventurous upon opinions, in matters of Religion, where men are not first
well informed in judgment, by true grounds of knowledge. Now truly I have not
seen in so short a Tract. any man that has more adventured to broach private
conceits In Ecclesia ponitur idolum, quan do novum dogmastatuitur. Ier. in Her.
32.
, then the Treat: and to single himself out from all writers, ancient and
modern. As if his fancies like Oracles were to be lickd up; and his (...), he
said, as another Pythagoras Diogen. Laer. in Pythag.
must be rested in; or as the Popes Traditions Counc. Tren. Sess. 4. dec. 1. p.
11. distinct. 19. c. sic omnes.
to be received, as if Chrst spoke them. But before I come to discover the
nakedness of his answer, I will first from this Scripture lay down this
argument.

Such as Christ intenteth by strangers in Ioh. 10. 5. may not Lawfully be heard.

But Christ by strangers in Ioh. 10. 5. intends unlawful Ministers.

Ergo unlawful Ministers may not Lawfully be heard.

The Major is without controversy. For 1. the Greek (...), is of that
plainenes, as no wit of man can put by the ^orce thereof; Properly it imports
a going after another bodily Mat. 4. 20. 22. 25. Mar. 1. 18. Ioh. 1. 37. 38.
40. Act. 11. 18.
; as a Scholar follows the Master to be taught.

2. It cannot be showed If they can, let them.
that words so generally laid down, as these, ((...), etc.) are used any where
to restrain a person only from believing the Doctrines of false Teachers, and
allowing him in mean time freely to hear them.

3. Whereas Christ says, they will flee from him, this must surely be
understood, animo and corpore: For otherwise with reverence be it spoken: The
prohibition here were unnecessarie and vain: Considering if true Ministers
shall err in Doctrine, we must fly from it 1. These. 5 21;
. So then by this Exposition, there is nothing more meant of flying from
strangers, then from Christ's own Household servants. The which to affirm is
(...), as the Philosopher says Arist. l. 2. Elench. c. 3.
, absurd and idle.

Finally, Learned Men generally, understand it of flying with body and mind.
And so not to come near the breath of unlawful Ministers. So Augustine De
verb. Dom. Sermon. 49
, Cyrill Comment. in Ioh: 10. l. 8; Tom. 1
, Chrysostom Hom. 83. in Ioh.
, Calvin Comment. in Ioh. 10. 5;
, Hunnius ibid;
, Zepperus ibid.
Tossanus Comment. in I. 10. 5.
, Stumfius Postel: Alleg. Dom. 8. Post. Trinit. p. 481
, Royardus Hom: in seria tert. Pent.
, and others.

The Minor is undeniable, and proved 3. ways. 1. By divine Pro 2, 16 and 10,
20, 24. and 7. 5
authority, which gives them often this title. 2. By their agreement and
likeness: in Scripture men are named strangers in 4 respects. 1. Of their
strange sect. Mat. 17 25. Esa. 62 8
2. Of their strange Religion. Mar 2 11. Ps 81. 9;
3. Strange Laws. Judge. 19, 12; Neb. 92.
And lastly, of the strange work Luke 16, 12.
and service which they do. This holds true here in the case of unlawful
Ministers; For 1. they are not citizens with the saints and of the Household of
God We speak not here of the invisible Church, but the true visible.
2. Their way and manner of serving God, is contrary to the rules and orders,
which he has praescribed. 3. Their Canons and Institutions are none of his,
but Satan's and the Bishops. 4. In their administrations (according. to their
Service-Booke;) they serve not Christ, but Antichrist. Mali thripes, mali ipes.

3. By the testimony of Learned men, as Pareus Comment: in Hebr: 5, v. 4. p.
211.
, Polanus In Ezech. c 44; p 800.
, Danaeus Comment. in 1 Timot. 5, 22, p. 343;
, Toletus in Ioh. 10, p. 597.
, Luther Enarrat. in Evang. Tom. 5, p. 158.
, Hoffmister Hom. in Evang: Dom. 9; Post Trinit.
, Guiliaudus Comment. in Gal. 1, p. 241.
, Poligenarus Dom, 7, post pont in Evang: p. 26.
, Topiar In Evang; Dom. 8; post. Trin; p. 73.
, Anton: Gonigston Postil; Oct; post. pent; p. 175;
, the Rhemists Annot; in Ioh: 10; v. 5.
. All these affirm, that whosoever takes upon him to preach without a
Lawful sending, comes in, not by a Lawful Election, and holy Church
Ordinance, but breaks in against Order; By force and favor of men, and by
humane Laws. he is a stranger, a thief, a murderer, according to Christ,
saying in Io. 10. and thus have the old Writers expounded the place. As
Irenaeus L. 4. c. 4.
, Clem: Alexand. L. 1. Stromat.
Cyprian Lib. 1. Epist. 6 and 76.
, Didymus In Ioh: 10.
, Rupertus In Ioh. 10.
, Theodorus ibid.
, and others.

To come now to the Treat: 1. His whole answer is merely a declyning from the
state of the question.

A negatione unius disparatorum ad positionem alterius non valet argumentatio.

He reasons for all the World, as if one should reason thus: A man may not
put in practice the bad Counsel of a murderer or thief; Ergo, he may hear
them. Christ (says he) will not have us to believe and obey the unsound
Doctrines of strangers; Ergo, he does not speak of the outward hearing of them.

Diffido oculis meis, and identidem interrogo, an legerim, an viderim Plin.
Paneg.


I suspect my sight, I question my Copy, I ask of my self again and again,
could the Treat. write so unskilfully; For if this be not a non-sequitur, then
fools cannot speak Nonsense.

2 His distinction between hearing and hearking, is much like to that of the
Papists Bellarm. de Eccles. triumph. l. 1. c. 12.
, between Dulia and Latria. The Scripture forbids worshipping of angels: True
say they, as Mediators, Hassels pro invocat. c. 19. p. 47.
so it is unlawful, otherwise not; Christ bids us to fly from strangers, and
not to hear them: yea, says he, as to obey their Doctrine? otherwise we may
follow them, and hear them; is not this to presume above that which is
written? Surely, if men may take such boldness in expounding of the Scriptures,
the grossest Idolater may excuse himself easily.

3. I grant that to hear is some time taken for believing, approving,
following, etc But what of this? Will it therefore follow, that Christ in Ioh.
10, 5. does not speak of the outward hearing of strangers.

I may safely protest his proof here, is only his bare opinion And so it is
all along the book.
And he argues ex non concessis: From that which is not granted. I think no
wise man will engage himself to defend the conclusion, which cannot be
defended. Ne conare quid fieri non potest.


4. Where he says, the strangers of whom Christ speaks, were of the true
Church and of Israel.

Jf his meaning be, that Christ here has respect only to them, he is greatly
deceived. For he intends all strangers, which in the sense of the Scriptures,
either then were, or afterward should come into the world, whether of the true
Church and of Israel, or not.

It has hitherto been a ruled case among divines, not to distinguish where the
Word makes no distinction; But the Treat: keeps seldom this Canon; For as
Lizards, who out of the open field do run into Bushes; So he leaves the
plain Text, and literal sense of the Scriptures; And turning their necks
clean about, I hear that some say, that these later works of the Treat. are
far better then the first. Now, these say so, because they lead to loose
walking, and therefore they like them the better. For otherwise they are much
worse. Unless to prove a thing soundly by the Word of God: is not so good as a
bare and bold affirmation
, makes them speak what he pleases; And by this means neither deals with
the Objectson, nor cause of the Lord, as is meet. I hear that some say, that
these later works of the Treat. are far better then the first. Now, these
say so, because they lead to loose walking, and therefore they like them the
better. For otherwise they are much worse. Unless to prove a thing soundly by
the Word of God: is not so good as a bare and bold affirmation


5. It is a question, whether the Godly in the Jewish Church, having by hearing
discovered the Scribes and Pharisees to be strangers, that is, false Prophess,
might afterward hear them again. The Treat See his justificat. separat. page
434.
was once of the mind that they might not; and gave some reasons for it To be
lightly moved in Religion, is Childish weakness, says he: divine and Mor.
Observe. p. 44. It had been a happy thing, for the Church of God, if he had not
showed such a Childish weakness.
. But howsoever, the case is not easily to be determined; considering the state
of that Church and time; Yet this is clear to all men of sound judgment, that
in the Churches now under the Gospel, false Prophets may not be suffered; But
after due and orderly conviction, (being found so, and abstinate) they are to
be rejected, and so no outward hearing of them any more. Of this judgment
Camerius Comm. in. Apoc. c. 3.
, Borrhaeus In Apoc. c. 3.
, Tossanus In Mat. c. 7.
, Oecolampadius In Mat. c. 7.
, and others

Lastly, by his answer, all false Prophets may be heard; For, if nothing make
a false Prophet, but (as he says) unsound Doctrine; And Christ does not
forbid the outward hearing of such; Then what I said follows necessarily.
Now, if this were true, Lord, in what a miserable case were Gods people. But it
is neither so nor so; For the Scriptures show the contrary; besides he
contradicts here himself, and is so variable and unsettled in that thing. As it
may be said of him as it was said Melanch. in Cron.
of Severus: Omnia fuit and nihil fuit. He turns every way, and cannot pass
any way. He anglieth in all waters, and yet catches nothing; he has spent all
his oil, in making a salve for the foul sore Antichristian Priests; and yet
to say (as the truth is) has left them in a worse cause For they need not by
his writing leave their unblessed standing. For so they only preach the truths
of the Gospel. They sin not. And then what need is there to lay down their
false Office.
then he found them.

SECT. 12.
THe 12. Objection follows thus: The Scriptures of the Old and New Testament
warn Gods people of false Prophets; which the Ministers of that Church are,
having an unlawful calling.

To this he thus replies: Treat.
1. They warn not to hearken to them, nor to believe them; But to try them,
which without hearing them, cannot be done. Not that all false Prophet are to
be heard by all, that they might try them; For that were to tempt God: But now
I answer Not as Apollo answered the Jews by the Scriptures Act. 18. ult. for
so he could not: seeing he writes against them.
the Scriptures cited; which speak of Prophets in the true Church, which were
to be heard, till they were orderly repressed, or at least plainly discovered
by their Doctrine heard to be such.

Answ. The soldiers which served Marcus Antonius, fell unawares on an Herb
Appian. de Bell. Parth.
, the which greatly distempered their heads. To say, what my mind gives me,
it was an unhappie thing, that ever the Treat. found out this Wild gourd, for
it much weakened his large abilities, and caused him in this point, to be no
more like the man, that he was, when he was against it; Then an apple is like a
nut. We cannot apply the saying in the Greek Proverb to him (...). Our later
thoughts be wiser then our first. For here he rather striveth then teaches; As
Ierom. confesses of himself, being reproved by some, for writing some thing
against lovinian (as the Treat: does against us) by way of contention, rather
then of Doctrine, Hierom, in Apolog. ad Pammachiu^ pro libris adversus Iovinian.


Some thing he would say here, but to profess my own ignorance, I do not
understand him.

For 1. he peremptorily denies the whole Objection; and so conquently affirms
that all False Prophets may be heard; yet presently with the same breath, he
unsayes what he had said before; And says, all false Prophets are not to be
he heard by all; And within 4 lines after, lets both sayings fall again, and
says, false Prophets, being discovered so to be, are not to be heard. This
is so deep and inextricable a riddle for me to unfould, that I must confess
my self here Davus, not Oedipus. And therefore will leave it for what it is,
and come to the defense of our A^gument.

1. 1 Cor. 6 15.
Howsoever the Treat: in the point of hearing of false Prophets, is off, and
on, so that no body by his words can well tell, what he held; yet, as I have
before showed, Page 81.
Gods Word damnes it utterly.

And to the former reasons, these may be added, 1, That the members of Christ,
and the members of Antichrist, must not be mingled together, but in all the
points of Religious Communion, as Prayer, Prophecy, Preaching, etc. be
separated and apart. For to do otherwise, is as great indignity offered to
God, as to take the members of the body, and make them the members of an
Harlot.

2. It Christ, who in those last days speaks evidently by his Gospel and
Spirit, had judged it fit, that his Children should go unto false Churches, he
would certainlly have made known the same to them. Cirill observes that such
of the things done by Christ, are written, as the Writers thought to be
sufficient for manners and Doctrine. In Evang. Io. lib. 12. c. 68.


3. This seems much to eclipse the glory of Christ's wisdom and
faythfulnesse, in providing for the full and perfect instruction of his people
in his own Ministry: That they should nevertheless (like an unchaste spouse)
go out from, and make use of a stranger. An honest man would be ashamed to be
seen to be familiar with an Harlot.


Moreover, for the Learned, they are against all hearing of all false Prophets,
and speak down right, as the Word of God does in the thing; I find in their
writings, no such false and idle distinction, as the Treat: devises; namely,
that some false Prophets may be heard; Others not.

As for the weaker sort Page 17.
, and less able to discern of things that differ: they must not hear them:
but the stronger and wiser may. As this is the idea of his own head, so for
ought truly I know he walks alone in it. For, I am sure, Calvin Sermon. against
idol.
. Musculus Comment. in Mat. 7. ver. 15.
, In Mat 7. 15.
Pareus Comment. in Psalm. 16, p. 52.
, Zanchy Explicat. in Philip. 3. v. 1. p. 174 Tom. 4.
, Fenner interp. Son: ch; 1; v. 7, 8;
, Palladius Postil; Dom. 8. Post. Trin; p. 256;
, the Rhemists Annot. in 2 Cor. 6. 14; and 2 Ioh. 10.
, the Douay- translaters Notes on ps. 16; p. 56; and on 2 King: 5; p. 941;
, etc. those speak otherwise; yea, and some Elder Writers too. As Theodorus L.
4; c. 14.
, Chrysostom In Mat. 7, v. 15.
, Eusebius Lib. 4; c. 22.
, and others.

These say (as I before said) that no false Prophet is to be heard, by any
person whatsoever.

2. For those two Scriptures, Deu. 13. 1. 1 Ioh: 4. 1. here brougth, to prove
it Lawful, to hear unlawful Ministers: They are as fitly brought, as were
the two witnesses brought against Christ, to prove him a transgressour.

For 1. the hearing, mentioned in those places, respects only a true Church.

Again, it concerns no hearing of false Prophets; but the godly are there
admonished to examine the Doctrines delivered to the^ in a right way and order;
And if they find any by teaching to be a false Prophet, they are to depose
him, and afterward not to hear him again Populus Christianus detectis eorum
erroribus fidem non habeat, aures ne praebeat, sed tanquam lupos fugiat. Par:
in Mat. 7. 15.
; And thus our best Writers, interpret the places: as Frantzius Imlerus,
Orinaus, Danaeus, Bugenhagius, Selneccer, Hunnius, Oecolampadius, and others.

Now, mark (good Reader) how this hangs together. If the Saints in a true
Church may hear one that is not known, to be a false Prophet, but afterward
by his unsound Doctrines plainly discovers himself so to be; Then may they
go unto a false Church, and hear one, whom they certainly know to be a false
Prophet before they go, etc. The expression of it is conviction enought. If it
be a fit thing to use a Touchstone, for trial of coin, and that finding the
same false, to refuse it; then it is meet, to receive money known to us to be
counterfeit, and false. If this be absurd, so is the other too.


The Treat: goes thus foreward. 2. No man's unlawful outward calling, makes him
a false Prophet; Nor his outward lawful calling, a true; But his true or false
Doctrine only, makes him a true or false Prophet. A man may have a Lawful
Office of Ministry, and yet be a false Prophet: if he teach false Doctrine;
so he may be a true Prophet, if he teach the truth, though in unlawful and
Antichristian state of Ministry.

Ansvv. I never saw in my life, an error held by a man of learning, that has
less brought to countenance it then this; For whereas others commonly do
quote Scriptures (albeit ill applied) and allege for themselves the judgments
of other men. He goes not this way to work; But as if he had to deal only
with Papists; we must take (as they must the Popes Distinc. 40, c. 51. Papa.
Decrees) his will for a reason, and measure things by the rules of his breast.

But surely such kind of reasoning will have little weight in the conscience of
any truly fearing God. For they will be loath to leave an old faith for a new
fancy.

He says, No man's unlawful outward calling, makes him a false Prophet; But J
say, it does; And the Prophets Numb. 16. 2 Chro. 26. 1 King. 12. Son. 1 6. 7.
Jer. 14. 14. and 23. 21 and 27. 15
, Christ Mat. 7. 13.
, and his Apostles Heb. 5. 4. Rev. 2. 2.
say so too. Perkins Exposit. on Christ's sermon: in the mount. Mat. 7, v. 15. p.
239. vol. 3
is held among all the Godly Learned or a soled and judicious Writer; Now,
what his judgment herein was, he shows it thus: The first note which we
must make of a false Prophet is this; Namely, to come on his own head; and to
preach not being sent; And by this mark are false Prophets noted, Jer. 14.
14. I have not sent them, neither did J command them, and yet they Prophesied
in my name.

And no less do these words of Christ import, they come unto you, that is of
themselves, without a calling from God and his Church, So he.

What he says, is said of Hierom Comment. in Mat. 7. in Ier. 14. 14.
, Chrysostom g, Cyrill in Mat. 7, Tom. 1.
, Pareus Comment. in Mat. 7, 15.
, Luther Enarrat. in Evang. Dom. Oct. Post. Trin: Tom. 5,
, Pelargius Quaest. Evang. p. 97.
, Aquinas In Comment: in Ier: 14, 14.
, Corvinus Post: in Sexages. p. 54:
, Bullinger Comment: in Ier: 14. 14.
, Ferus in Io. 10, p. 239.
, Guiliaudus In Ephesians. 1, p. 292.
, Bugenhagius Comment: in Jer: 14, 14.
, Toletus In Jo: 10, p. 599.
, Topiar ^^st: Dom: S, Post: Trin: p. 73.
, Hoffmister Homil. in Evang. Dom. 9, post:
, and others.

Again, if an unlawful outward calling, make an unlawful Minister; then it
makes a false Prophet; For according to the Scriptures, it is all one thing,
only expressed in sundry terms.

The Treat. Divine and Mor: Observe: page: 60.
tells us that their sin is great, and full of presumption, who shorten and
strengthen the Scriptures to make way for their own devises.

This fault he commits here himself; For where the Scriptures take all for
false Prophets, which are unlawful Ministers, he (to make way for his own
devise) will restrain the appellation to such as err only in Doctrine. And
thus he makes good the rule, which Logicians term de omni and de nullo, as if
true in the general, but not in the particular; As if true, that all unlawful
Ministers in the sense of the Scriptures, are false Prophets; yet such as are
unlawful Ministers in respect of their unlawful outward calling, are not
false Prophets.

Lastly, I would know, whether Corah burning true insence, and Ieroboams
Priests, offering true sacrifices, were false Prophets: if they were, (as no
rational man will deny,) then the other follows consequently.

But J guess what caused this error in the Treat: he found in the Scriptures,
that some are false Prophets, because of their false Doctrines; Hence he
concluded, there were no other false Prophets; But it follows not, unless a
man will say, he that robs a house, is a theife; Ergo, there are no thieves,
but House-Robbers. The which thing, whosoever holds, shall be Paralogizer, a
deluder of his own soul And this may serve for answer to the Pistle maker;
who enclosing up of his Epistle, crows out; Like a Cock of the game that has
beaten all his fellows out of place, now let them tell us, where they find in
the Scripture, that men are named false Prophets, for want of a true outward
calling; Forsooth here we show it, if you have eyes to see it, and grace to use
it well.
.

Touching the other point; he speaks ((...)) in consideratelie, for to say, No
man's outward Lawful calling makes him a true Prophet; For as in Wedlock a
woman is truly a wife immediately upon the action of her Lawful marriage;
yea though she should afterward never do the duties of a wife; So he is a true
Ecclesiastical Officer, incontinently upon his outward lawful calling, Let
his practices afterward be good or bad; The reason is, because his
administrations after his calling, as prayer, preaching, etc. gives nothing to
the formal being of it; As I have showed elsewhere Necessit. Separ. p. 236.
.

His words following are: Treat.
Balaam Number. 22 and 25. Josh. 13. 21. 2 Pet 2, 15. 16. Rev. 2 14. Number. 25. 5.
9. 10, etc. And chap. 24. 2 3, etc.
was a false Prophet, in cursing (in purpose) where God would have him bless,
and in teaching Balak, to put a stumbling block before the people of Israel;
and yet a true Prophet in blessing Israel, by the spirit of Prophecy, and Word
of the Lord put into his mouth.

Answ. Would men receive his sayings, as they do gould and silver, by due
trial and proof, they should find reason enought to refuse them, and turn
them back; Now, for the falsenes of this Ea doceat Episcopus quae a Deo
didicerit, non ex proprio cord. Let the B. teach those things, which he has
learned of God; And not of his own heart or fancy.
. My answer to it, shall be in the words of another man Attersol hist. of Barak
and Balaam. on Numb. 22. p. 8 11.
: We know no mean between true Prophets and false, for whosoever is not a true
Prophet, is a false Prophet; and whosoever is a false Prophet, cannot be a true
Prophet of God. He that is of God, is a true Prophet; He that is of the Devil,
is a false Prophet; Neither does the Mark this well, for it shows all the
Treat: answer to be caecum insomnium, a vain dream and nothing else.
DELIVERIE AND UTTERANCE OF SOME TRUTH, MAKE HIM A TRUE PROPHET; For then the
Devil should be a true Prophet, who sometimes speaks the truth; albeit to a
sinester end. And a little after, he concludes thus: Balaam was a uery Witch,
a Wizard, a false Prophet, a true sorcerer, famous or rather infamous, for his
Devilish Magic, which he practiced among the wicked idolatrous Nation, So
Attersol. And many others write so too; As Iunius Annal Expli. Number. 22. p. 109.
, Symson Exposit. on 2 Pet. 2; v. 16; p. 372.
, Ferus Comment in Numb. 22.
Canutus ibid.
; and before them, Origin ibid.
, Greg Nazianzen ibid.
, Basil ibid.
.

Again, as he writes against the truth; so against himself. For in Page 70.
71. A Letter sent to London, written by the Treat.
he says, to name men idolaters, adulterers, murderers, etc. because they do
some acts of idolatry, murder, theift, etc. agrees neither with Christianity,
nor civility, but is a consequence and collection made without rule of
Charity, Hierom: distinct. 36. ca. fin.
or ground of Truth. Yet see (aliud stants, aliud sedens,) How he is one while
for the thing, another while against it. Balaam delivers some truths:
Therefore he must be a true Prophet. But if another (cum Care Carizas) do
reason after the same sort, he calls it (and that rightly) a consequence made
without ground of truth. Testimonium tuum, quod aliena re leave est, hoc contra
re grave, etc Thine own testimony, which in another case is of small weight,
but this against thy self is of great moment. Tull.


3. Whereas Balaam in 2. Pet. 2. 16. is said to be a Prophet: the Apostle
means a false Prophet. And the like we read in other places 2 Kin. 3. 13. Hos.
9. 8. See Iun. notes, on the place.
, not that the name (Prophet) is due to them; But given them ironicallie, that
is, because they falselie assume it Non quibus hoc nomen vere congruebat, sed
qui illud arroganter and falso sibi summebant. Bright^^. Comment. in Cant.
Cant. cap. 4. fol. 78. and 16. T. W. Expos. upon the Book of the Cantic. page
18.
, glory in the title, and willingly would be so reputed and taken. For the
other Scriptures in the margin, I know not for what end they were quoted,
unless to show the reader, in how many places he may find the word Balaam, in
the Old and New Testament.

The Treat. goes on thus: He is a Prophet that speaks or declares a thing
past, present or to come. And to prophecy in our sense, is nothing else but to
speak to edification, exhortation and comfort. He that does this is a true
Prophet; He that speaks the contrary, a false.

Answ. Men pleading for error, are driven often times to use that kind of
reasoning, which in Schools they call fallacia ex ignorantione very Elenchi:
which is to change the state of the question, and to draw Conclusions contrary
to the true rules of the axioms, or propositions disputed off. The Treat. is
fallen into this fault: For whereas our question is only about hearing in
Church Way, and of Church Officers; He alters quite the state of the point;
and speaks of hearing at large. As if we should question, whether Hearing
simply be unlawful; and not rather hearing with certain adjuncts: That is,
in an Antichristian Church, of a false Minister, and the like.

But to come to his answer. 1. What it is to Prophecy in his sense The Trea.
wrote once that no Scripture justines preaching out of a true Church; much
less in a false Church; justificat: Separ: p. 73.
, I know not, neither do I inquire after. For it is sufficient for me to know
what Prophecy is, and what true Prophets are, in the sense of the Scriptures.

In the Book of God, I find true Prophets to be taken three ways. 1.
Strictly, for one, who from the inward counsel of God could foretell things to
come Genesis 20. 17; Numb. 12 6; Deu. 18 55.
. 2. For Lawful Pastors and Teachers in the Churches of Christ Mat. 10. 41. 1
These. 5. 20; Rev 11, 6;
. 3. And more largely; For such private members 1 Cor. 14; Romans 12. 6.
, of particular Churches, as have received the gift of the interpretation of
the Scriptures, and so are able to speak to edification; exhortation and
comfort. Of no other true Prophets do I read in all the Scripture: Seeing
therefore the Priests he pleads for, are not of any of these rancks Quae. in
what rank of Prophets unlawful Ministers are; And under what Scripture they
are comprehended. I would have a private Christian ask this question of some
learned divine, whom he knows does hold it lawful to hear false Ministers.
And it is very likely he will answer him by deep silence.
: Then needs must they be false Prophets, and so consequently not to be heard.

2. Again in p. 77. He says, No man teached the Gospel, but was a member of
a true Church.
For the other part of his answer; Which is, he that teaches false Doctrine,
is a false Prophet. Here I think we must take his meaning, and leave his
words; But what he means J know not; And therefore will cast it aside; only
here is a fit place to propound a question or two. 1 Whether to hold, teach,
and practice the errors and lies contained in their Canons, Service-Booke,
Books of Articles, and the Ordering of Bb. Priests and Deacons, do make a
false Prophet. 2. Whether to hide from the people the knowledge of all the main
truths, which concern the outward regiment of Christ's visible Church, make a
false Prophet. 3. Whether it be Lawful to hear any false Prophet, known so
to be There is one question more, viz. whether the Lords Lawful Priests, which
served at the Altar in Jerusalem, might not as well urge their people to hear
Ieroboams Priest at Dun and Bethel; As the Ministers now under the Gospel, to
persuade men, to hear in false Churches. If it be not all one, show the
difference.
. The simple believes every word Pro. 14. 15.
: But the prudent man looks well to his going.

There is nothing more in this answer, but a little girding at some men's
persons, and at their exercise of Prophecy; to which J will say no more, but
in the Poets Iuvenal. Satyr. 2.
words: Dat veniam Corvis vexat Censura Columbas.

SECT. 13.
THE 13. Objection is laid down in this manner: The Lords forbids Judah going
to Gilgal, or to Bethel. Hos. 4. 15. 16.

Treat: The meaning is plain, and the words express, that they were not to
go thither to offend and play the Harlot, in joining to idols, Ver. 15. 16.
This I grant Nos qui Christiano nomine gaudemus dicemus nos abjicere Deos
alienos, and verum colere, cum pars idola defendat, adoret, colat, breviter
divinis honoribus pro sequatur. Lavar. in Josh. c. 24 Hom. 71. p fol. 81.
is to be done in no place. But deny any such thing to be done in the hearing
by me pleaded for; The Scriptures every where forbid the going, or coming to
such places, or persons, as in, by, or with them some evil is done, to wit,
for the doing of any thing evil, or unlawful in, or with them. This is all a
primo ad ultimum.

Ansvv. When Children find any hard words in their Lesson; They will be sure to
pass them quickly over; Hoping thereby to save themselves. I must needs say,
the Treat. met here with a strong argument; And therefore it is no wonder,
though he show us a Scholars trick: To wit, leave that speedily, the which
he knew not how to answer See the like answer to our 1. Object. It is Antonies
precept in Tullie, if men be troubled about a hard question, to say nothing to
it. De Orat. l. 2.
. If the Reader do not see the weakness of it (to say the best of it) I will
set before him a glass to view it in.

For 1. He makes himself here an Opposite to science. 2. To Conscience. 3. To
the truth; And lastly, to himself. And first of the first: They were nor
(says he) to go thither to offend. J profess in all good conscience, my
desire is not to pervert his meaning, but to understand it; But how to
understand it, J know not; For his speech is much like the answer, which
Pythius the Priest gave to Pyrrhus the King Epire. Cicer. de divin.


Ajo te Ae^cida Romanos vincere posse. An answer so dubious and discrepant, as
it cannot be gathered from it, whether He, or the Romans should overcome. The
Treat: answer is of the like ambiguitie and darkness; It is an (...), as the
Philosopher Arist. 1 Seph. 4.
, speaks; For you cannot directly say, whether he intends that Judah might
Law^ully hear Ieroboams Priests at Dan and Bethell, or not. You may take it
either way, or no way; For it is (utroque nutans sententia) a speech like an
Echo, and will say whatsoever you will say before it.

But it is no marvel, Hoc neque prophetae predicaverunt, neque Dominus docuit
neque Apostoli tradiderunt. Iren. l. 1. c. 1.
though he leaves the matter thus in a doubtful sense. For I believe what
Augustine Liberius improbare non audio. ad Ian. Epist. 119.
says of himself, was here true in the Treat: he durst not freely speak his
judgment.

But in the mean time, this shows a wretched cause; For whosoever sees his
cause to be good, he will search and weigh rather what should be said plainly
and to the full: then what may be said darkly and coulorable, and so to put it
off with a shift.

2. If he meant to say any thing, his meaning then must needs be: that it was
lawful for Judah to hear the Doctrines of the Law Preached at Dan and Bethell
by Ieroboams Priests. The which exposition is an unsufferable perverting of the
Text Sua si docere velint, nolite audire, nolite facire; certe enim tales sua
quaerunt, non quae Jesus Christi. August. in Johan: Tract. 46.
, and leads unto great impiety; For to distinguish things in such a sort, is
for all the World, as if one should say, the Law of God forbids adultery;
True, but how? To satisfy lust, not to begit Children, as Sejanus did Tacit.
Annal: Lib. 4.
.

Again, the Law of God forbids perjurie, as how? As it tends to the shedding
of innocent blood, but not to accommodate a friend, as Cicero merrily speaks
of Clunius Pro Q. Rassio Comaed.
. I could multiply instances this way of the same nature with his exposition:
The Lord says expressly, go not to Gilgal. But how say our Opposites; As to
Offer Sacrifices; but not to go thither to hear the Doctrines of the Law
preached by the Priests of Jeroboam. Is not this horrible presumption to
contradict Sua si docere velint, nolite audire, nolite facire; certe enim tales
sua quaerunt, non quae Jesus Christi. August. in Johan: Tract. 46.
the plain Word of God?

For to establish their own inventions: What Heresy held by any Heretic, may
not by such bold distinctions be justified. I may say as a Learned man says
Verba sine crimimine sunt, sensus in crimine.
: The words are without fault, the sense is in fault.

Of this corrupt handeling of the Scriptures, Bucer Impium esse, verba Christi
ultra propositum materiam extrahere. de regno Christi, l. 2. c. 29. p. 149.
writes judiciously, Hilari: de Trinit: lib. 2.
and shows what a wicked thing it is, to apply the Word of God, beyond the
proposed matter. If it be an unjust thing (says he) to streatch the Doctrines
and answers of a wise and pruaent man, beyond the matter and question unto
which they are given; But specially to apply them to the thing which he
intends not, neither does it agree withal; Then much more is it, a vile
thing to abuse the Doctrines and precepts of Christ in such a manner, etc.

Of such as do so, that fitly may be said, what Hierom Rhetius eloquens quidem
est, sed ineptus interpres. Hieren. ad Marcellam:
says of one Rheticius, they may be wise men, but are foolish interpreters.

3. If the Prophets had so meant (as the Treat: closely insinuates, but durst
not, it seems speak it out,) viz. that the Hearing of the Word preached by
Ieroboams Priests at Bethell, Dan and G^lgal, (able to open and apply the
Doctrines of faith by that Church professed) both Lawful, and in cases
necessary for all, etc. They could easily have expressed it We ought not so
much, as to know the things, which the Book of the Law conteyneth not. Hilai:
in Psalm. 132. The Scripture denies it what it notes not. Tertull. Lib, de
Monog.
; For they were filled with Spirit of God in all wisdom and Spiritual
understanding; But the truth is, in plain expressions, they speak the
contrary. And unless men's minds be overcast in like sort, as were the eyes
of Elymas, they cannot but see it.

But to press them down with authority, for the preventing of error in the
simple, and for caveling in such as desire to contend. We will here set down
the judgment of the most Learned, touching this thing. The Prophet (says
Zanchy Comment. in Hos: 4, 15. p. 82.
) says not Sacrifice not at Bethel and Gilgal, but simply and plainly com ye
not thither, noting that they were interdicted not only from sacrificing
there; BUT JNDEED THAT THEY SHOULD NOT THITHER COME AT ALL. Rivetus In Hos. 4.
p. 156.
understands it of such a keeping away: As that they might not be bodily
present at any spiritual exercise there performed. So Calvin Praelect. in Hos.
4. p. 52.
Pareus In Hos. 4. v. 14. p. 504. Tom. 4.
, Oecolampadius In Esa. 2. l. 1. fol. 20.
, Lyra In Amo. 4. 4.
, Brocardus In Levit. 10. page 69.
, Luther In Amo. 4.
, Brentius In Amo. 4.
, Fabritius In Hos. 4.
, Mollerus In Hos. 4.
, Osorius In Hos. 4.
, Shaddaeus In Amo. 4.
, Sedelius In Amo. 4.
, Cramerus In Hos. 4. 15.
, and others.

Moreover, of the same judgment are the Jew Rabbines, as Mercer ibid:
notes. He that desires to see more, let him read what the Lovanists Annot. in
August. Brevic. Collat. cum Donatist: Collat. dici. 3. c. 9. And Annot. in
August: Post: Collation: ad Donatist: c. 20.
, have written about it.

4. Jf we may not come, to such places, or persons, for the doing of any evil
and unlawful thing with them, then I conclude from his own mouth, that the
practice he pleads for, is sinful; And so I have already manifested unto all
men, except some men will contend without cause, and against reason, out of a
Spirit of contention and contradiction.

SECT. 14.
OUR 14. Objection is thus framed: They that eat of the Sacrifice, partake of
the Altar, 1 Cor. 10. 18. So they that receive the Word, from an unlawful
Officer, partake with his Office.

To which he thus answers: Treat.
I deny the consequence A Child can say so much, but he had need be no Child
that shall prove so much:
. The Office is not to the Word, as the Altar is to the Sacrifice. The Altar
makes the thing to be offered actually to become a sacrifice, which it was not
before, save only in destination; as Christ plainly teaches: saying the Altar
sanctifies the gift. But so does not the Office make that to become the Word
of God, which was not so actually before.

There goes a story among Scholars of AEsops deceiving Mercury: He having
promised him one part of his Nutts, keeps all the meat to himself, and
delivers the shells to the other. As the Treat: gives us here but half of the
Argument, so that half, is only the bark or outside. For had he laid it down
(unum ad unum) according to the scope of the place, and as we apply it, thus it
should have been.

Such as did eat of the sacrificed flesh, taken off from the Altar under the
Law, approved of the Jewish worship Par. Comment. in 1 Cor. 10. ver. 15 18
, and showed themselves to be of the same Religion Calv. in 1 Cor. 10. 18.
, Again, they which went unto the idol-Temples, and did there eat of the
Heathen Sacrifices, joined themselves by this outward act to that society and
superstition, So by just consequence, whosoever goes unto false Churches, to
eat spiritually of any of the Sacrifices there administered, in and by an
Antichristian state of Ministry; He justifies Guiliad. Comment. in 1 Cor.
10, 18.
by his going, their idolatrous Church, Ministry worship, etc. and makes
himself a will-worshipper with the rest; according to Paul's Doctrine in the
former Examples. See the Rhemist. on the place.


How they will chop this argument small, that they may the easier swallow it, I
know not? But this I am sure off; they cannot press it down with divine
authority Auserantur de medio, quae adversus nes invicem, non ex divinis
Canonicis libris, sed aliunde recitamus. August. de unita: Eccles. cont.
Petilian. c. 3.
. But either they must verba dare, as they speak: and use technas peiseis,
uncunning proofs: Or acknowledge it to be a truth, as in truth it is.

To come to his answer, which is like a faggot of thorns, full of prickles,
bound up with straw, the which by the fire of Gods Word is quickly burned. 1.
He applies things here (aschematiston) very ilfavoredlie. The Office (says
he) does not make that to become the Word of God, which was not so actually
before. True; Neither did the Altar make the thing to be offered, to become
that which it was not so actually before; For we know, before it was laid upon
the Altar, it was flesh, but afterward it became a Sacrifice. The same is true
concerning the Word; For howsoever the Office makes it not to become the word
of God: (as neither did the Altar make the thing to be offered to become flesh)
yet by the Office it is made a Church-sacrifice, the which it was not so
before. Daverba and decive nerves Persius Sat: 4.


And here I desire the Reader to observe, how disorderly he sets things down.
The Altar makes the thing to be Offered, actuallie to become a sacrifice, which
it was not before.

But so does not the Office make that to become the Word of God, which was not
so actually before.

Inguinis and Capitis, quae sint discrimina nescit. What Child may not see the
absurdity of it? For all that he could conclude from the first assertion;
unless he would conclude nothing; was either thus: The Office makes the Word
of God to become a Church-sacrifice, which it was not before, but in
destination; Or thus: The Office makes not the Word of God to become a Church
sacrifice, for it was so before This latter howsoever it be void of truth, yet
there would have been some sense in it. Do not think that the Treat. wrote
this Elenchum sophisticu^ ignora^tly, but rather foresaw what inconvenie^ce
would fol lovv, if he should let the argument runn out orderly and
proportionably. I believe he savv well enought, should he grant, that the
Office makes the word to become a Ministerial Church-Sacrifice; This
Scripture would stand in force against the thing they pleaded for.


2. For the place of Scripture, Mat. 23. 19. the meaning is: As they had
erected an Altar, and dedicated it to the Lord, according to his appointment,
whereon to offer Sacrifices; So the things offered to God on it, and by it,
were after a sort sanctified by the Altar (f); That is, it made them public
Church-services, acceptable to the Lord. And the same is true of Christ's
Ministry; As it is a divine institution, given unto the Church, for the
performance of Holy things, so it sanctifyeth the things, that is, makes them
to become Lawful Ministerial Church-Ordinances, without which they were not
so; Neither could they be so reputed.

And this may be as applied also to a false Ministry; For as it is an
institution of Satan and Antichrist, to have their wicked devises administered;
So it defiles every administration, done in it, and by it; And for the
administrations, they are all false, unlawful, Antichristian Church-actions,
Quamvis Dei solius sit sanctificare; tamen aliquo modo quae principalius Deo
sunt-consecrata, ad se pertinentia, sanctificare dicuntur. Muscul. in Evang.
Mat. c. 23 p. 477. Tom. 3.
offered to the Devil Hoc est judicium Dei de quavis cultu and de de quavis
Religione, quem non secundum verbum eius exercetur: Non Deo sed demonijs
prestatur. Pare. Com. in 1 Cor. 10. 20. Fingere enim falsum cultum, est falsum
Deum fingere; quia tunc fingitur falsa Dei voluntas, and sic falsus Deus. Par.
in 1. Cor. 10. 7.
, and otherwise to be taken.

3. Where he says, the eating of the Sacrifices in Israel became their
Sacraments, and the Heathen sacrifices were their Sacraments: Howsoever, were
this so, it neither hurts us, nor helps him. Yet I cannot see how it can be so
applied. For 1. Circumcision and the passover were Isreal's Sacraments; And
therefore by Altar, their whole Religion and Worship is understood. As Zanchy
Altar pro tota religione and cultu accipitur. praecept. 3 p. 534.
truly observes.

Again, the Apostle prohibiteth not only the eating of the Heathen Sacraments,
but all going to their Temples, to do any thing there, with them, or among
them; Yea, though it were not with any intent to perform a Religious Action.
So Respicit congressus etc. Comment. in Psul. 16. p^g. 53.
Rivetus.

4. As meats considered in themselves, may Lawfully be eaten any where, if it
be done without the offense of the weak, as Paul Teaches at large, 1 Cor. 10
25 29. Yet if meats be considered as they are offered to idols, and eaten in
the Idol^Temples in the honor of idols, See his justificat. of sep. 94.
they be unlawful. The like may be said of the word, if we consider it in it
self, the same may be preached Lawfully any where; But if the Word be
considered, as Antichrist uses it, Distingue tempora and locus and
reconciliabis scripturas.
or rather abuses it, in setting up a false Church and Ministry, to teach it
in, and by; In this respect the Word is not Lawfully preached; How oever here
again he insinuates the contrary. Distinguish (says Augustine k) times and
places, and thou shall reconcile the Scriptures.

Lastly, J desire the Reader to make it well: Howsoever the Treat. has said
something, yet nothing at all to the Objection: For he should have proved, that
howsoever, they who did eat of the sacrificed Beasts of the Altar, justified
the Altar: And they which went to idol-Temples, honored the idol; Yet now we
may Lawfully take and eat the spiritual sacrifices, which come off from the
Altar of false Churches, and false Ministeries; And yet not justify the Altar,
nor give any honor or consent thereto; No nor any show or appearance thereof
Quae: Whether such as pretend to ground their practice of hearing on this
Treatise: do not show either lightness in not weighing what is said: Or
ignorance in not discerning what they read: or wilfulnes, in doing a thing, for
some by respect, pretending this Book as a Cloak for it.
Hic labor hoc opus est.

But it may be, we shall hear hereafter of some other, that will say something
to it; In the mean time we will wait for it, and proceed to the rest.

SECT. 15.
THE 15. Objection we have thus framed: The places called Temples and Churches,
having been built for idolatry, should be abolished; And therefore are not to
be frequented, specially being accounted and made holy place, Deu. 12. 1.

Ans. What is said of some men's Sermons, I may say of the Treat: answer here,
the matter had been much better, if he had named no Text; For he touches not
the Objection at all; which is concerning Antichristian Temples, in the
unlawful use of them, but of the Lawful Worship of God, in those places, from
whence the idols and idolatries are removed. Now, howsoever J purpose not to
speak of those material places, in regard our exception lies rather against
their false Constitution, not of stones, but of people, yet this I do affirm,
that as the idol-Temple in the use of Antichrists idolatrous worship, is a part
of his false worship Page^. Arrow. ag. separat. page 173.
: So they do pollute in the use of such worships, as are practiced in them.
And that they should be destroyed, having been corrupted with idolatry, there
are many Examples for it. Guagninus de Lituania Casstod. lib. 3. hist. Tripart.
l. 9. Sozom. l. 5. Theodorit. l. 3. and l. 5 c. 20. 37. Eusebius. de vit. Constable.
lib. 5. c. 53 Socrat. l. 1 c. 14. August. de Civ. Dei, l. 18. c. 54. Cranz.
Saxon. c. 9. and 12. Helmoldus in Sclaevorum Chron. 11. Cent. l. 2. c. 9.
Cramer l. 15.


But to let these things pass, if we may have leave to put down our own
argument, it shall be thus.

If the false Churches of whom we dispute They hold as we do, that the Church,
Ministry, Worship, and Government of the Church of England, is Antichristian
and false, so that our difference is not, whether these things are so, but
being granted on both sides, they are so: The question is, whether we may
Lawfully hear there or no.
be that spiritual Babylon, mentioned in Revel. 18. 4. Then it is not Lawful
for Gods people to go unto them, to perform any spiritual or Religious
action; and so consequently not to hear there.

But the first is true; Ergo the later is true also.

The Proposition needs no proof, because our Opposites and we herein are of
opinion alike.

The Assumption is manifest by these reason. 1. The words in the Text prove it
plainly: Come out of her my people; That is, remove your selves from all false
Assemblies, covenant together to walk in all the ways of God, serve the Lord
among your selves in spirit and truth, and return not from whence you are
come. But repent rather that ye have suffered your consciences to be wrought
upon by any unlawful Offices. And thus do they Learned interpret the place;
namely, of such a coming out, as that we may not be bodily present at any of
their worship Artopaeus in Rev. 18. p. 198. Place. Illyric. in Rev. 18 4.
: Ne quidem spectatum, says Pare^s Comment. in Hos. 4. page 506. Tom. 1.
no not so much as to behold it. Bullinger In Apocal. cap. 18. Concio 77. p.
241.
in his Exposition says, we must fly from their Temples, and not enter
afterward into them to do any spiritual worship. So Rupertus, Theophanes,
Lambertus, Winckelmanus, Wirth, Camerarius Ribera, Leoninus, Conradus
Brocardus, Capella, and others.

2. Seeing a devised Constitution, is an idol, all that comes from it, is
taunted 2 Cor 6. 1. Ioh. 5. 21 Zach. 11. 17.
with the idolatry of that Constitution; and therefore not to be touched,
because they are unclean things: A false Church State, is rightly likened
Botsac. Promp: Allegor. c. 21. de Minisi.
, to the Leprosy spread in the walls of the houses of the Lepers, because of
the pollution It is like that filthy Bird, which carries this motto, contactu
omnia ^oedat.
, which it causes to persons and things. Take for instance a city or town; If
the civil state or corporation, which they have, be usurped, devised, or
derived from a false power, all their public administrations are unlawful,
and every one partaking thereof, offends; So all administrations done in a
false Church, (whether prayer, preaching Sacraments, Censures, etc.) are
unclean actions, and do defile every receiver; I say, because of the
idol-state, which is devised out of man's brain, and used as a means to serve
God in it and by it.

As poison is carried from the fountain to the Cesterne, and from the root to
the branches; So from a false Constitution, (as from a poysened fountain and
root,) a spiritual poison is carried and conveyed into every one of her
administrations. Nature teaches this, where generation is betwixt (...) of one
kind, the like does ever bring forth the like; Neither can a Sheep bring sorth
a Wolf, nor a Wolf a Sheep* but one nature is ever common to the breeders
and to the brood.

This holds true in the cause of a spiritual Harlot, as she is a viperous
body, so she begitts a brood of vipers: I say all the ordinances, done after
the invention and will of Antichrist, can no other wise be judged ^hen a brood
common to the nature of the breeders, that is the Devil and the Whore of Rome,
the Father and Mother that begat them.

3. Because the Lord has not promised to them, his presence and acceptance;
what the Lord may accept, or will, we dispute not: Only this I say, whoseoever
hears in a false Church, cannot by any promise that he has in the Word of
God, exspect Gods blessing on that which he does; The reason is, because a true
constitution of a Church, that is, where men are gathered together, according
to the Gospel of Christ, is that only Lawful Religious society, or Communlon
of Saints, wherein God will be honored, whereby he will be served, and whereto he
has promised his presence and acceptance; So then, howsoever we are not bound
unto hearing in a true Church, necessitate medij, as if Gods grace were tied to
the means this way; Yet as they say in Schools, necessitate praecepti, if we
consider Gods Commandment, so we are bound to Church hearing, only in a true
Church, and in no other Church can we exspect Gods presence, promise and
acceptance.

4. Lots flying from Sodom, and Isreal's departure out of Egypt and Babylon,
shadowed out Bulling. in Apocal. 18. Con. 78. Ciril in Esa. c. 48. l. 5. Tom.
Zwinplius Comment. in ler. c. 51. Chytraeus in Apoc. c. 18.
our coming out from Antichristian Assemblies; Now they came off wholly and
fully; And were not one while out, and another while in again. But made an
intyre and constant separation.

That this may accord with the thing tipified; we must come quite away from
Sodom, Egypt, and Babylon spiritual. Not come near the door of the Harlots
Pro. 5. 2. 8, and Chap. 7. 24. 25.
house, nor eat of her Offerings; as the wise man speaks. We must not be one
part of the day before the Lord in Sion, and the other part at Dan and Bethell,
worshipping before the Calves. As the Manner of some is Componistae ergo, and
temperatura vel ferruminatio eorum Deo ita disciplent, ut fasti lium ei
ingenerant, abominationi sint, and abdicet eos. Bulling: Com: in Apocal. c. 3.
Con. 20. page 57.
I speak it to their shame.

5 In hearing there, men do countenance, that false-state: As he that receives
stole^ goods of a theife justifies him: so Pro. 17 15.
etc. 6. It is a strong presumption they are not Gods people: Rev. 18. 4.
specially when they stay in Babylon after many warnings to come out. 7. Such
as will not leave Babilons sins, must look for her plagues and judgments.
Forbes in Rev. 14 p. 135


And so says the Treat. Manumiss: to a Manu: page 4.
The authority of Ministers in their Parochial Parishes, may not be by Gods
people partaken with, (no not in actions otherwise Lawful) under the pains of
Babilons plagues.

Before I end this Section, it will not be amiss, to examine what our
Opposites do say, being pressed with the authority of this Scripture.

Their plea is that which the Treat. Page 3. and 64.
has taught them, viz: So they sequester and withdraw themselves from all
Communion. with the Hierarchicall Order of Church Government and Ministry,
there established, they may Lawfully hear, and are come out of Babylon so
far as the Lord requires.

Ansvv. 1. They have no reason for all this they say, nor authority but their
own.

2. What they say, is a gross contradiction, and mere nonsense; For it is,
for all the World, as if one should say. Be thou joined to an Harlot, and be
not joined; Be ye partakers of other men's sins, and be not; Have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, and yet have. Magna inter
molles concordia; This and theirs is all one: Withdraw your selves from the
Hisrarchicall Order and Ministry, and yet hear: As if men in hearing are not
so far from withdrawing from the Hierarchical Order and Ministry, that by
the verse action they join themselves to it, are partakers of it, and have
fellowship with it; As I have before showed and proved. What deceiver ever
taught men to commit sin in plain expression, that it was so; But rather
under terms of the contrary persuaded them to it. Nicolaitas contagia, cultus
idolorum, scortationes, adulteria and omnes libidines, pro adiophois habuisse.
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 29 Irenaen. l ^* c. 27.


3. Such distinctions as these are the wiles of Jesuits, (q) D. Rayn. de
idolat. p. 348.
as some Learned Men have well observed. Yea the truth is, out of this quiver
all Heretics draw their arrows. For let a Familist be pressed with such
Scriptures as these. Fly idolatry, keep your selves from idols, etc. How will
he answer? By a distinction To uphold the Heresies of H. N. this is one
special and principal practice, that the history and native sense of the
Word of God is altogether neglected of him, and in steed thereof, is entertained
an allegorical and bastar lie construction, foolish and fond distinctions,
which thing utterly defaceth the certainty of the sacred Scripture, and makes
no other thing of it, the^ a nose wax. J. knew stub against the heresies of H.
N. p. 61
, the body is not meant, but the mind only; When we allege to our Opposites,
Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her my people, what is their answer? by the same
distinction, to come out from hearing it is not meant, but this and that, and I
know not what. Behold here how they reason alike, and resemble those two, of
whom the Poet speaks: Alter in alterius jactantes lumina vultus.
One looking asit were babies in another eyes.


4. This is to gratify the error of Montanus Discipuli Montani dicunt
paracletum plura in Montano dixisse, quam Christum in Evangelio protulisse: Nec
tantum plura, sed etiam meliora atque majora. Epipha: lib. 1. Haere. 27.
Tentull: de praescript.
, who professed, that he knew more then the Apostles. Now, I am sure John the
Disciple whom Jesus loved, knew nothing of this distinction; to weet, how to
come out of Babylon, in one respect, and yet in another to stay there still;
For, had he known it, surely he would have taught it; specially it being such
a weaghtie point, as (says the Treat:) is both Lawful, and upon occasion
necessary for all of all Sects and sorts of Christians.

Were our Opposites of that Company, who are called by the name of Apostles, I
should think that they thought themselves to be some new Apostles indeed.

5. When the words of a Text are plain, agree with the circumstances of the
place, with the Analogy of says, and with other Scriptures; For men then, to
leave the native sense, and to force a sense contrary to that which the letter
expresses, It is ((...), to wrest the Scriptures, and not to expound them by
the true rules and Canons of Divinity. 2 Pet. 3. 6.
So Augustine Lib. 2. de Doct. Christ. c. 31.
, Hieron. Comment. in Am. 4.
, Keckerman Rhet. Eccles. l. 1.
, Perkins Prophetia c, 2. de modis inter pretendi.
, and others.

But so do these men, For whereas this Scripture speaks of leaving all the
administrations in false Churches. And this well agrees with the scope and
drift of the place, with the rules of faith, and with other Scriptures;
Notwithstanding against the literal sense, they peremptory say, that me^ must
not leave all the administrations in false Churches; But hear there
Antichristian Ministers; how be it, this is no more expressed, then their
Sacraments, or Service-Booke. Quaer. Why a Familist using the liberty and
boldness that these men do, may not say, and prove it as well, that there is
not coming out of the outward man here mea^t at all


6. As their distinction is untrue, so it is also new; For we find no such
Doctrine in other men's writings; whether Calvinists Par. in Rev. 18. 4
, Lutherans Brent. in Exeges. Ioh. 4.
, Papists Doway Transl. in Psalm. 26. p. 56.
. Besides the martyrs Page 93
, first and last would not receive it, least to save their lives, they should
lose their souls. It was the answer of Fredrick the Duke of Saxony. Who
being prisoner to Charles 5. was promised releasement and restitution of
dignity, if he would go to the false Church; Summum in terris Dominum agnosco
Caesarem: in Coelis Deum. I am ready to yield to the Emperor in civil
accommodations; But in Heavenly things I acknowledge but one Master. Christ is
more welcome to me in bonds, then Caesar's honor without Christ. The like did
the Prince of Condee; yea the zeal of Q: Marie may condemn our Opposites; For
she would not hear B: Ridlies Sermon, because she thought he was no Lawful
Minister.

I remember what Diogenes At malo inquit sal Athinis lingere, quam Craternm
frui magnifice instructa mensa. Diog. Laret. invit. Diog. lib. 6 c. 2.
said to Craterus, one of Alexanders chief Captains, who being a man of
great wealth, invited the Philosopher, to abide with him, promising him great
entertaynment; Sleid.
But he replied that he had rather lick salt in Athens, then fare delicately
with Craterus. Preferring liberty, albeit accompanied with poverty, before
the delicates of rich men, where freedom is diminished. This we may apply to
all upright men, they will more esteem of the means, which they find in Gods
way, and which they may enjoy with liberty of conscience: (how little soever
it be, and what afflictions soever accompany it.) Then the the large
entertainment, which false Ministers promise them in the ways of Antichrist,
unto the enslaving of their consciences, and losing of that precious liberty,
which Christ has purchased for them with his own blood.

SECT. 16.
OUR last Objection is laid down thus: Seeing whatsoever is not of faith is
sin, what word of God, and so of faith, is there for this practice.

To which he thus replies: Treat.
Every Scripture that either commands the hearing of Gods Word, Mat. 7, 24.
Luke 11, 28.
or promises a blessing to them that hear and keep it; Or that commands me
to edify and build up my self: To obey the Magistrate; or to follow after
peace; 1 Pet. 2, 5
Or to prevent offenses; warrants, and in cases enjoins this practice. Tit. 3,
1, Heb. 12, 14.


Answ. He that can make anything of this answer, I will say of him, as they say
of the Pope Papa ex nihilo potest facere aliquid. Extra. de Translatione
Episcopi quanto in Gloss. Ext. de concess: praebendae proposuit: in Gloss:
; Of nothing he can make something. For indeed it is as frothy and unsoled a
speech, as can be expressed. And if it carry any force with it, 1 Cor. 10, 32.
the frame must stand thus: If the Scriptures command the hearing of Gods
Word, promise them a blessing which keep it; Command men to obey the
Magistrate; follow after peace, prevent offenses; Then they warrant and enjoyne
them to hear unlawful Ministers in false Churches. (In eodem haesitat luto.)
It is either thus, or it is nothing.

He reasons here like one whom I well knew, who having accused another,
alleged 2. or 3. Sentences of Scriptures, for to prove his chardge; Now all
men know, that the Scriptures could not testify and witness, that the person
had so said or done; But only condemned such a fact, if it had been proved.

To as good purpose is this answer; He says the Word of God commands us to
edify our selves, obey the Magistrate, follow after peace, etc. And hence
very handsomely concludes, that the Word warrants this practice. He might
have cited all the precepts in the old and new Testament, and from every one
of them, as wisely have inferred this practice.

But the Reader needs not wonder to see the Scriptures so alleged, for the
truth is, either our Opposites must so apply them; Or leave them out;
Considering there are not any authentical records of the Holy Ghost, neither
any inevitable consequence grounded upon the same, to be produced for the
justification of this practice. As for the 3. first precepts: (viz. the Hearing
of the Word, with a promise of Gods blessing to it, and how we are to be
edified:) J have already spoken off; And therefore do now pass them by.

To answer the other places: 1. He says, Our obedience to the Magistrates does
warrant and enjoyne this practice.

I answer, we are not (throught Gods mercy) so ignorant of our duty this way;
But we know wherein our obedience concisteth, and how it is to be limited in
things Lawful Parr. Exposit. on Romans 13. v. 1. p. 6.
and not contrary to the Word of God. As for the Oath of our Allegiance Cartw.
Hom. in Eccles. c. 8 fol. 195, 166.
to them, it binds us not simply, but in the Lord; For we are entered so
strictly into a Covenant with God, as no authority of Man or Angel can break
it. Obligatio haec tam arcta est, ut nullius creaturae imperio possit ullo modo
solui. Ame: de consc. lib. 1 c. 3; p. 6.


Now, we are sure it is against Gods Law, that Magistrates either of themselves
or by others, should devise false ways Bucer de regno Christ. lib. 1, c. 1, 2,
3. Martyr. in Judge. 19.
, as Churches, Ministeries, Worshipp, Discipline, etc. For to serve Jesus
Christ in, and by them. But say they do? We say then we must not give any
approbation Bast. Castalion Annot. in 1 Cor. 8.
, honor, or allowance unto them; No not so much as with our outward presence
and bodily gesture: For as their institutions are real and substanciall idols,
so they are by bodily presence and outward gestures 3. ways honored and
reverenced. Genuflectione, capitis apertione, and corporis inclinatione. By
kneeling on the knee, uncovering of, the head, and bowing of the body Zanch.
de rede^pt. lib. 1. p. 401.


To be short, this our refusing to do their unlawful commands, is no
disobedience at all perkins Comment. on Heb. 11 v. 23. Pareus Comment. in Hos.
5, page 514. Tom. 1. Tailor on Tit. 3. p. 549.
, because the fifth Commandment, in this case cease to bind, and gives place
to the Commandments of the first Table which are greater. Some Papists are so
reasonable in this thing, as they say the Pope is no further to be obeyed and
followed, then it may be done without sin. So Felinus De Rescriptis: Si
quando ver: sed nunquid.
Hostiensis De Concess: praebend. proposuit.
, Alphonsus de Castro Advers. hoeres. lib. 1, c. 7.
, and others. A reason for it is given by Ambrose Comment. in 1 Cor. 7
: They are the slaves of men, that make themselves subject to men's
superstitions.

2. He says, Every Scripture that commands them to follow after peace,
warranteth and enjoynoth this practice.

Answ. Our concord and unity with men, must be held, (usque ad aras,) not in
error and sin, but in truth and goodness Parr: Expos. on Romans 15. 6. p. 250.
For if it be otherwise, it is no peace but war Orig. in Romans 15. 5. Cyprian
de lapsis Sermon. 5.
; Yea a mutual conspiracy against Christ. I confess, the name of peace Cicer.
Philipp. 12.
, is sweet, the thing it self both pleasant and desirable. But this is when
it is with Purity and Holiness Zach. 8, 19. Romans 15. 4 Heb. 12. 14. Chrysostom.
Hom. 30. in Heb. 12, Tom. 3 p. 64.
nihil laeden pietatem, according to piety, and in the Lord. If peace should
be made (as the Treat: here would have it) with Antichrist and his adherents,
that is, to worship God, in, with, and by their false Church and Ministry, it
would be like the peace with Antonie Cicer. Philipp. 12.
and his Mates, that is not a peace, but an agreement of slaverie to them; Yea
truly of great impiety. Wherefore as Agamemnon (in a Greek Poet Eurip:
Iphigen. in aulid.
did answer his Brother, of whom he was requested to show himself a brother, in
giving his consent to a wicked act. So do J answer the Treat my Brother, who
would have me to join with others in the fellowship of false Churches and
Ministers.

(...).
My wits with thee J would retain,
But mad to be I do not mean. Melancth. in Romans 14.

3. For this place, 1 Cor. 10, 32. which speaks of the preventing of
scandals; It is as fitly brought, as if a man defending adultery, should bring
for it, the words of the 7. Commandment, Thou shall not committ adultery.
For what is more directly against the thing he pleads for then it, if we
consider the many offenses which are caused by it; And that the Reader may see
how forceably the place is, to overthrow his own cause. I will speak here
little touching offenses.

The word (...) in Greek, has the signification * of breaking a Rule, Order,
or institution. In Hebrew it is named Micesol of halting, or causing another to
tripp or fall by something cast in his way. The Chaldee Takul, and Sireak
Cheshela, is of the like derivation.

In the Arabian tongne the word is Shuch so named of unsetling another. In
propriety of speech, it signifies the crooked piece in a trap, to which the
bayt is tied; at which a Mouse, Rat, Wolf, or any other vermin biting, the
trapp falls down and catches the beast.

According to Tertullian, a scandal is Example of a thing not good, but evil,
leading or emboldening unto sin. Or thus it may be: It is a Word or deed,
either evil in it self, or in appearance giving occasion of falling to
others. Daven. Quaest. 7. p. 40. Aquin. 2. Qu 43.


Again, Touching offenses, they are given 10. ways. 1. When false Worship is
practiced Eze. 23 33. Pelarg Quaest. Evang. in Mat. 18. p. 205. polan. Syntag.
Theol. l. 6, c. 3. p. 339.
. 2. Bad counsel given Mat. 23, 22. Hunnius in Mat. c. 18. p. 606. Melancth.
in Evang. fest. 5. Mich. p. 552.
. 3. Weak Christians caused to go a stray Willet. on Romans 14. Quaest. 3. p.
641.
. 4. The stronger greeved Eckius Hom. fest. Mich. p. 700. Tom. 5.
. 5. Evil men hardened in sin Zanch: prae: 3; p. 539. Aret: in Mat: 18; p:
643
. 6. New opinions broached Pareus in Rom: 14 v. 13; p: 173.
7. The Gospel caused to be evil spoken off Eze: 36 Cent: 1, l: 2; c. 4; p:
448:
. 8. Our duties neglected to the Brethren Ames de Consc: l. 5; c. 11; p: 286,
287; Chrisost: in 2 Dom: advent: p: 309. To^ 6
. 9. Ill Example showed August; cont: Adimant: c. 14 fol. 136, 6,
. 10. Consent or approbation given to unlawful things Perkins on 1 Mat: 5; p.
58, To^: 3
.

The hearing stood for, causes scandals in every one of these particulars;
For it breaks the Holy Order See Par: Rivet: Calvin, Mercer; Comment; in
Hos: 5, 10;
, which the Lord has set and settled in his house; makes way unto downright
halting between Christ and Antichrist; draws many aside from their former
careful walking. And sooke as when a man sets up and baits a trap, we say now
woe to rats and mice; woe to Foxes, Wolves and the baggage vermin; So when
this scandalous snare was first laid, men might have said, woe, woe, woe,
considering how many would be ensnared, catched, destroyed, and killed thereby.
Again, what is it, but a will worship, a pernicious and most hurtful advice;
a ready way to persuade weak ones Daven; Quaest* 7; p: 40.
, to think that the false Church is not so bad, but that they may go back
unto it. Hence are many righteous hearts made sad: Idolaters countenanced and
made believe, that such as come to their worship, do like their way well
enough^ in their hearts, but for some by respects differ a little from them.

For the practice it self, it is that which Paul never planted Chrisost: de in
comp: not. Dei Ho^: 3.
nor Apollo watered, nor God increased: Of it I cannot say as one said in
Sophocles Soph. Anti.
: It is no Child of two days or years birth, but has been, no man knows
how long since. For if we look beyond the Treat: there will be found no
footsteps of it, either in the Example of former churches, or among the Orders,
rules, and commandments of our Savior Jesus Christ and his Apostles, or in
any learned man's writing; either ancient or modern; So that I may say of it,
as one Leo Epist: 97; c. 3;
said, How are th^se new devises brought in, that our forefathers never knew*

To be short, our Profession for it lies under contempt and reproach; witness,
Mr. Pagets, Arrow ag: Bro^; p. 59.
passage in his book against us, where he scoffingly writes, that the Treat.
first book, being his Justification of separation, sick of Iehorams incurable
desease, the guts of it fall one day by day, yea he openly plucks out some of
the bowels thereof with his own hands.

Again, what watch can the Saints keep each over other, when some are in the
true Church, other at the same time in the Sinagogues of Antichrist. Finally,
seeing we have not one Example for it in all the Scriptures, we may well say, it
is a bad Example; and he that allows of it, allows that which the Lord never
allowed. For the rest in his writing, seeing it concerns not the point in
hand; I will not therefore meddle with it. But for the present will here
conclude; desiring the Lord to show mercy to such as have offended in this
hearing of false Ministers; and with the right hand of his power to raise them
out of this pit; and to keep the feet of his saints from falling into this or
the like snare.

FINIS.

