The Deserving FAVORITE.

As it was lately Acted, first before the Kings Majesty, and since publicly
at the BLACKFRIARS.

By his MAIESIES Servants.

Written by LODOVVICKE CARLELL, Esquire, Gentleman of the BOVVES, and Groom
of the King and Queens Privy Chamber.

AT LONDON, Printed for MATTHEW RHODES. 1629.

TO MY VERY NOBLE AND approved Friends, Mr. THOMAS CARRY, Son to the Earl of
Monmouth, and Mr. WILLIAM MVRREY, both of the Bed Chamber to his Majesty.
A Approved Friends, this Play, which know at first was not designed to travel
so far as the common Stage, is now pressed for a greater journey, almost
without my knowledge; and to give some stop to preiudicate opinions, which may
happily arise from the Authors known want of Learning, I am bold to say you
both approved the Plot and Language; for your abilities to judge, I held them
so great, and believe the world did so to, that your approbation to this, has
made me against the opinion even of many friends, continue to wast more paper.
If ye then flattered, or were loath to discourage me in this way, which few
delight to practice, though most to see and censure, ye are justly punished now
when ye expect it not, in being chosen Patrons of what is presented to you thus
plainly by your Servant.

LOD: CARLELL.

THE Printers Epigrammaticall Epistle to the understanding Reader.
Unknown to the Author this fair Courtly Piece
Was drawn to the Press; not for a Golden Fleece,
As do our Midan Mimickes of these Times,
Who hunt out Gain, with Reasons loss in Rhimes,
Heaping together such indigested Stuff,
Can scarce out-beare true Judgments Counter-buffe:
He with a new, choice, and familiar Strain
Strikes full Conceit deep in the Master-Veyne,
Stoopes not for dross; his profit was his pleasure,
Has (for his Friends) ransackt the Muses Treasure,
Brought thence such lustrous sparkling Jewels forth,
As well improve his Scoenes of real Worth;
Prompt Wit, ripe Art, with Judgment fell at strife
How best to express true Nature to the Life:
Yet filled with pleasing Language and so filde,
As best beseemes MINERVA'S high bred Child:
Accept these Strains, as here you find 'em dressed
By me the Printer; All stand ready pressed
At your sole Service rightly understand 'em,
And if more such I meet with; still command 'em.
Yours obsequious, in what is good and virtuous. I. R.

THE PROLOGVE, AS it was spoken before the KING.
Do not expect strong Lines, nor Mirth, though they
Justly the Towne-wits, and the Vulgar sway:
What hope have we then that our Play can please
This more Judicious Presence, wanting these?
We have a hope (the Author says) this Night
Love in our weakness shall express his might.
He in each Noble breast himself will place;
The Subject being all Love then, must find grace:
Yes you may say, if it be well expressed,
Else love does censure him from out our breast:
Thus what he hoped should help him, if he err
In the expression, turns his Censurer.
I for the Author stand, and in his Name
Do here renounce the glory or the shame
Of this Nights work: Great Love, this Play is thine,
Work Miracles, and show thy self Divine;
Change these rude lines into a sweet smooth Strain,
Which were the weak effects of a dull Brain:
If in this Prologue Contradictions move,
That best expresses: it was writ by Love.
THE NAMES OF THE ACTORS.
Mr. Benfield, the King. Mr. Tailor, the Duke. Mr. Lewin, Iacomo. Mr. Sharp,
Lysander. Mr. Swanstone, the Count Vtrante. Mr. Robinson, Count Orsinio, and
Hermit. Mr. Smith, Gerard.
Women.
John Honiman, Clarinda. John Tomson, Cleonarda. Edward Horton, Mariana.
Iaspero, Bernardo, Servants, Huntsmen, etc.
THE FAVORITE.
Actus primus, Scoena prima.
Enter Mariana and Lysander. Mariana. COme, prithee tell me brother, why ar't
sad.

Lys. From thee my dearest Sister
I have not hid my nearest touching secrets:
Thou know how truly I did love,
And how at last I gained my dear Clarinda.

Mari. I do; and wish that I could tell you such a secret of mine own; for of
all men living, I think you most happy.


Lys. Most miserable of men.

Mari. How can that be! is not Clarinda yours?
In which (were I a man) I should believe
More happiness consisted, then for to be a Monarch.

Lys. Clarinda yet is mine.

Mari. Nothing can take her from you but the grave,
I hope she is not sick.

Lys. Nothing can take her from me dear Mariana,
But I must give her.

Mar. Why, love you any one so well to give away your heart
I know she is dearer to you?

Lys. She Is so much deerer to me then my heart,
That I must kill my heart if I do give her.

Mari. Be plain sweet brother.

Lys. The Duke who is too near a kin in love
And blood to our dread Sovereign to be denied,
Dies for Clarinda.

Mar. Why, think you she will prove false?

Lys. She false! Oh no:
It is I must play the traitor to my self
Virtue does undermine my happiness,
And blows it up. I must release my interest
In Clarinda, that she may marry this loue-sicke Duke,
And save his Life.

Mari. Why who compels it?

Lys. Gratitude compels it;
For to the Duke I owe my life and fortunes,
My fortunes when my wicked Uncle would have
Wrested from me by false witness that state
Which I am now possessed of; which the Duke finding,
He employed his power, and so I had my right:
My life I then received: when I was rescued
By his valor from the dreadful bore,
Which I (too young) thrust on by honor, venterd to assail,
Yet all these obligations touch me not so near,
As does the danger of the Count Vtrante,
( Clarinda's Father) who has been long a prisoner,
For the same cause for which my Father fled.

Mari. He is now at liberty.

Lys. It is true he has his liberty, and greater honors
Are proposed if he can win his Daughter
To marry with the Duke, then he has lost:
But on the other side, if she deny.
And it does wholly lie in me to make her grant,
Her Fathers head is in danger, the King
So passionately does love the Duke.

Mari. How came you by this miserable knowledge.

Lys. Sister, you know I often visited
The Count Vtrante in the prison, besides
The wished occasions which I ever took
To wait upon his Daughter thither;
This he so gratefully accepted,
That now that he has liberty,
He still sends for me, where I chanced to be last night,
And as a friend heard when he did propound it to Clarinda.

Mari. Then he does no way suspect there is love betwixt you;
But tell me Brother how poor Clarinda
Did receive her Fathers deadly proposition.

Lys. Her Father not believing that she would deny
So great a blessing, came with joy to tell her,
That which once told, forced tears from her fair eyes,
At which, he being amazed, desired to know
The cause, why she received his and her happiness
With so much sorrow: she answered him with broken sighs,
Offering to tear her hair; which when I would not,
Give her leave to do, she cursed her beauty,
As the cause of all this mischief: at last
Considering who it was that spoke,
A Father, that deserved an answer:
Her judgment shut her passions in a less room;
For having calmed the tempest of her greefes,
She mildly answered that she was happy
In his liberty, though now she saw
It was but given him to procure her bondage;
For such she did account all ties of marriage
Made by the parents without the child's consent,
Though nere so rich or hononrable.

Mari. And having said so, did she not cast her watery eyes
Upon you, and in this sad, yet pleasing language,
Tell you, that she would not forsake you for the Duke.

Lys. It is true, she did so; there is no tongue
That can express the hearts of those that love
Like their own eyes: but Sister, it will be late
Before you reach the Forest, the Princess too
May wonder at your stay.

Mari. Brother it is true; but I so seldom see you,
That I Will not go, unless you promise to come and see me.

Lys. You know the strict command,
That none but those appointed should come near the Lodge.

Mari. That is but your excuse;
I have told you how often the Princess
Earnestly has desired to see you; yet you would never go.

Lys. Sister, I fear these sad occasions will hinder me;
But I will write.

Mari. Will you not come six miles to see a Sister
That so dearly loves you?

Lys. Sister, I know you love, nor will I be a debtor;
You are both my Friend and Sister. Exeunt.

Flourish. Enter King, Vtrante, and Attendants. King. My Lord Vtrante, can you
not then
Persuade your Daughter to receive a Blessing,
Which even the greatest Ladies in this Kingdom
Would desire on their knees:
Enter Duke and Followers. Is this a Man to be neglected? Though he were not
A Kinsman to your King: besides, my Lord,
Remember you may draw upon your self
Our high displeasure by her refusal.

Duke. Great Sir, let not your love and care of me
Barfaire Clarinda the freedom of her choice,
By threatening punishments unto her Father,
If she choose not me: for, should she, offended,
Which she might justly be, if I should seem
To force Love from her, it were not within your power;
Though that you would give all that you possess,
To make me satisfaction for the wrong.

King. Yes, I could make you satisfaction,
Though she were offended; by forcing her
Into your arms, to whom the wrong was done.

Duke. Her Person Sir you might, but not her Mind;
Which is indeed the object of my Love,
That Is free from your subjection: for it is free
From Love, a greater power by far.

Vtran. My Lord, I think she is free from reason too,
For did that govern her, she could not thus neglect
Her happiness: or rather she may yet suspect, your Lordship
Does not mean what you profess; and from that fear
Seems coy, till she be more assured.

Duke. I cannot pluck my heart out of my breast
To show her (I wish I could) yet live to do her service:
There she might see her worth truly engraven
In lasting Characters, not to be razed out
By the hand of Time; nor (which is more) her scorn.

King. Cozen, if you will be ruled by me,
I Will make her leap with joy into your arms.

Duke. Sir, so that it be by no way of violence,
I will obey you.

King. In act I Will use no way of violence;
Yet I must threaten it.

Duke. Sir, if you threaten her, you ruin me;
Her Sun-bright Eyes, by faithful service,
May in time shine gently on me, and warm
My frozen hopes. But on the contrary,
She knowing thar I Am the cause of these your threatenings,
Will from her just vexed soul throw curses on me.
I would not see thee heaven of her fair face,
Clouded with any raised by my power, to be a Monarch.

King. You know my love, and you presume upon it,
Take your own way of love, deliver up your self
Unto her mercy, that I would make at yours,
Would you be ruled: go, see your Mistress,
Tell her you love her more then ever man did woman;
To prove which true, pray her that she will command you
Taskes more dangerous, then did the envious Juno
To great Hercules: all which you will perform
With much more ease; since you by her command
Shall undertake 'em whose virtue has the power
To arm you against a world of dangers: do,
Make her proud with praises, and then see
How she will torture you.

Duke. Sir, she may torture me, and justly too,
For my presumption: since I have dared
To tell so much perfections that I love,
Not being first made worthy by my suffering
For her.

Vtran. My Lord, if you will be pleased to grace my house
This day she either shall requite your sufferings,
O I will deny her for a child of mine.

Duke. My Lord, most willing, I would see fair Clarinda,
But not upon such conditions; nothing
But gentle entreaties must be used: for tho the King
Were pleased to say that my humility
Would make her proud; I would not have a subject
Say, not you that are her Father, that she can
Do an act or think a thought that tends not
To perfection.

King. Come my Lords, we will go hunt a Stag to day,
And leave my Cozen to his amorous thoughts. Exe. K. Atten.

Duke. I thank your Majesty for this days license:
My Lord Vtrante, shall I then see Clarinda,
And will you lend your best assistance
To make me Master of a happiness, the world may envy.

Vtran. My Lord, you make an Idol of a peevish Girl,
Who has indeed no worth but what you please
To give her in your opinion.

Duke. I must not hear you thus blaspheme.
You might as well say Pallas wanted wisdom,
Diana chastity, or Venus beauty,
As say she wanted worth, for every several excellence
That shined in them, and made them
By men's admirations Goddesses,
Flow mixed in her; indeed she has
Too much of Dians Ice about her heart,
And none of Venus heat: but come my Lord,
I lose my self in her vast praises, and so
Defer the joy of seeing what I so commend. Exe.

Enter Iacomo and Lysander at several doors. Lys. Good morrow honest Iacomo,
is my young Lady ready?

Iaco. She is my Lord.

Lys. And where is her Father?

Iaco. He was this morning early sent for by the King.

Lys. Tell your Lady I would speak with her.

Iaco. My Lord I will. Exit.

Lys. The Count Vtrante is happy in this honest servant:
Let me before I do persuade Clarinda, consider well;
Surely that hour in which I see her led to the Temple,
And there made fast with Hymeneall rights unto another,
Will be my utmost limit, and death is terrible;
Not where there is so glorious a reward proposed,
As is her happiness: she shall be happy,
And in her happiness consists mine,
Have I not often sworn I loved her better
Then my self? and this is only left to make it good.

Enter Clarinda and Iacomo. Clar. Good morrow noble Brother, for by that title
I am proud to call you, being denied a nearer.

Lys. It is a title that I am blessed in,
Nor can there be a nearer betwixt us two,
Our souls may embrace, but not our bodies.

Clar. Let us go walk into the Garden, and there
We may freely speak, and think upon some remedy
Against this disaster. Exeunt Lys. and Clar.

Iaco. What a dull Slave was I; had not I last night ouerheard their loving
parley, I never once should have suspected that they had been in love: she
always seemed an enemy to love, yet has been long most desperate in love
with this young Lord, which quite will spoil my hopes at Court; yet when I
better think, it will be for my advantage, as I may handle it and further my
revenge; for I will insinuate my self into the Dukes good opinion, by making a
discovery of their loves: and then advise him that there is no way to gain
Clarinda's heart, till first Lysander be removed by some employment; for out of
sight with women out of mind; or if he impatient of delays; I will advise
him to use some bloody means; which if he want an Instrument to do, I will
effect it my self, pretending that it is out of love to him when it is indeed
the satisfaction of mine own revenge; and when the Duke is once a partner of
my villainy, I will be richly paid for what I do, or else for all his greatness
I will affright him.

For though great men for bloody deeds
Give money to a Knave;
Yet if he be a witty one like me,
He Will make that Lord his Slave.
Exit.
Enter Clarinda and Lysander. Clar. Come, let us sit down, for I am tired
With walking; and then I will tell you
How I am resolved to free us from this torment.

Lys. I fear there is no remedy, but we must part.

Clar. Yes, if you will give consent to what
I shall propound.

Lys. First let me hear it.

Clar. My Father, though he have his liberty,
Is not yet restored to his Lands: when next
The Duke does visit me, which I believe will
Be to day; I Will seem as if I did mistrust his love
To be but feigned; he then will strive by some strong
Testimony, to prove he truly loves:
Then will I urge my Fathers restoration
To his Lands, which he being once possessed of,
Will not be hard for me, the world knowing
How well he loves me, to get some coin and Jewels
In my power, sufficient to maintain us
In some other Country, where we like shepherds
Or some Country folks may pass our time with joy:
And that we may without distrust effect this,
I to the Duke will promise, that when a month
Is expired, if he will come and lead me to the Church,
I Will not refuse to go, do you approve
Of this Lysander?

Lys. No, dear Clarinda,
Though most men hold deceit in love for lawful,
Lysander does not; Ere you for me shall spot
Your yet pure self with such a stain, as to be
A deceiuer, this sword shall pierce my heart:
The debt I owe you is too great already,
And till I clear some part, I shall unto my self
Appear a most ungrateful man. When first I saw you,
The height of all my aims was only to have leave
To love you, so excellent I then esteemed you:
But you in time, out of your bounty,
Not for my desert; for no desert can reach
Your height of merit, gave love for love,
For which I owe my life saved by that mercy
From despair, and lent me for to serve you.

Clar. You are too thankful, and attribute that
To my bounty, which was the wages of your true
And faithful service.

Lys. Were this granted, yet how ever I shall be able
To free my self from that great burden of debt
Which your intended flight for my sake
Will lay upon me, as yet I cannot see;
For did at all value your own happiness,
You could not thus fly the means
That can best make you so.

Clar. Lysander, to what tends this great acknowlegement?
I understand you not, what is your meaning?

Lys. My meaning, dear Clarinda, is to make you happy,
And I conjure you by your affection,
And all that is dear to you, to lay by
That little portion of wilfulness
Which being a woman you are forced to have,
And hear me with your best attention,
And with the same affection, as if I were
Your Brother, which if the heavens had pleased
To make me, I had been most happy,
With your best reason look upon your present fortune;
Look first upon the man from whence you had your being,
And see in reason what pity it will challenge from you;
A noble ancient Gentleman, deprived of Lands
And honors, by injustice, that as a stranger
Might exact your pity; but as a Child,
It being within your power, it forces your consent
To give a remedy: If pity of your Fathers fortune
Cannot move you, pity your own I beseech you,
Consider not of me as a tormented Lover,
That has lost his Mistress, but as a fortunate Brother,
Fortunate in seeing of his Sister, whom he dearly loves
Married to one so worthy, whose merits
Compels fortune to wait upon him, for such the Duke is,
Whom you must not refuse, for such a poor
Unworthy man as I am.

Clar. Lysander, should I grant your want of worth,
I then must give consent to the committing
Of a Sacrilege against the Gods, in suffering you
To rob your self, you being the purest Temple,
That yet they ever built for to be honored in:
And for the Duke each worth which you express of him to me,
Is but a doubling of your own,
The way to speak for him, were to appear
Your self less, worthy, in this your worths increase.

Lys. Would you but look with an impartial eye,
On our deseruings; you soon would find me
The less worthy; for even in that, wherein
You think me not to be equaled, he goes
Far beyond me, (I mean in true affection)
For being but a private man as I am,
Who would not think him blessed to love, and be beloved
By you that are esteemed the wouder of this Age:
But for the Duke, within whose power it lies
To choose the most transplendent Beauty of this Kingdom,
Set off wirh Fortunes best endowments; for him, I say,
To choose out you amongst a world of Ladies,
To make the sole Commandresse of him self,
Deserves (if you would give your reason leave to rule)
The nearest place in your affection.

Clar. Do not thus vainly strive to alter my opinion,
Of your worth with words, which was so firmly grounded
By your real actions; it is a fault, but I will strive
To wash it from you with my tears.

Lys. These tears in her stagger my resolution;
For sure he must be worthiest for whom she weeps:
Clarinda, dry your eyes.

Enter Jasper. Clar. How now Jasper, where is my Father?

Ias. Madame, he does desire that you will make you ready,
To come to Supper to the Dukes to night.

Clar. He was resolved to have supped here,
How has he changed his mind!

Ias. Madame he desires you not to fail.
But come and bring my Lord here with you.

Clar. Well, I will obey him. Exeunt.

Enter two Servants. 1. Come, prithee be careful, we shall gain
More upon my Lords good opinion,
If we please him this day, then hereafter
In the whole service of our lives.

2. Why prithee?

1. Here will this day be his fair Mistress Clarinda
And her Father.

2. I thought it was some extraordinary occasion,
He was himself so careful; will there be none else?
Will not the King be here? the entertainment
Would be worthy of him.

1. It may be brave Lysander will be here, none else;
For he is always with the Count Vtrante.

2. When came he home from travail?
I did not see him since he lay here in my Lords house
To be cured of the wounds the bore gave him.
He owes my Lord for saving of his life then,
I helped to bring him out of the field.

1. My Lord was happy in saving of so brave a Gentleman.

Enter Lysander, Vtrante, and Clarinda. Lys. Can I love Clarinda, yet go about
To hinder her of being Mistress of all this riches;
Each room we pass through is a Paradise,
The Music like the Music of the Spheres,
Rauishing the hearers with content and admiration;
But that which adds unto all the rest,
Is the Dukes true affection; I am ashamed
When I consider of my indiscretion
That would have brought her to the counterpoynt
Of this great happiness.

Enter Duke and Followers. Duke. Noble Lysander, welcome; Excellent Lady,
All the honors that my great and royal Master.
Has bestowed upon me, equals not this,
That you have done, in gracing at my request
This now most glorious house, since it contains within it
The glory of the world.

Clar. My Lord, your praises fly too hie a pitch to light on.

Duke. They must do so, or they will fall short
Of your great worth.

Clar. A reasonable pitch would sooner strike
Me with belief.

Duke. To give you a firm belief of the respect
I bear you, is that I only aim at.

Clar. My Lord, it lies in your choice whether I shall
Believe you or no; for if you will speak
Only that which in reason is likely to be true,
I am no Infidel, I shall believe.

Duke. You are so far from being an Infidel
That you are a Saint, at whose blessed shrine
I offer up my life, and Fortunes
With a truer devotion then ever Lover did.

Clar. I see I must allow you the Lovers Phrases,
Which is to call their Mistress St. and their affection
Devotion: but to let your Phrases pass,
And answer the meaning of your protestation,
How can I believe that you can love me
Better then any man did ever love his Mistress,
There being such an inequality in our present fortunes,
When equality does give birth to more affection,
And those more violent, there being no respect
To be a hindrance, I mean both the equalities
Of Birth and Fortunes, in both which we far differ,
You being the next a kin unto the King,
And I the Daughter to a condemned man,
Though now for your own ends at liberty.

Duke. If it be lawful for your devoted servant
To contradict you in any thing, it is
In the defense of his affection.
You know that Rivers being stopped by any impediment,
As rocks, or bridges, run the more fierce
When they are from that which did incomber them;
So might I say for my affection,
If I should acknowledge, which yet I will not,
That the consideration of my Greatness
Was for a while an Impediment to the current
Of my Love; but alas, those considerations
Could never find harbor in that heart
Where love and admiration had already
Taken up their lodgng; nor do they in my opinion
Deserve to be happy, who mix the consideration
Of the good of fortune, with their affections.

Clar. My Lord, in this last I do unfeignedly believe you,
I mean in your opinion, which is, that true love
Cannot be mixed with respects, and to show now
How well I believe you, I will make it my shield
Both to defend me against your worthy affection.
(I confess if your thoughts and words agree)
And against my Fathers unjust commands;
For since you confess, that to mix love with respects
Spoils the purity of it, and that they
Who so mix it, deserve not to be happy;
It must needs be great injustice in you
And my Father to desire me to love you
Unworthily; since I cannot love you
Without mixing the consideration
Of the benefits my Father shall receive
By my Marriage with your Grace, besides
The satisfaction of me own ambition
In being a Duchess, may make any stream
Of affection which can proceed from me,
Unfit to mix with so pure a stream
As you profess yours is.

Duke. Madame I cannot deny what you affirm,
Since you ground your argument upon my confessed
Opinion; but know dear Lady, that as you manifest
In this your cruel answer, your disdain of me,
Which will incense my despair; yet on the
Other side the excellence of your wit
Will increase my desire; for even out of that
Which I brought as an argument to move you
The more to love, you conclude that you are
To neglect, and with a seeming Justice,
Which shows that your wit can bring -ny thing
To pass, that your will shall employ it in.

Clar. I should account my self happy, were I
So furnished: but my Lord, I must not look
Upon my self in the flattering glass
Of your praises; for I hate flattery though a woman;
And as I am my self armed against flattery,
So would I have you be; therefore I tell you
That I can never be yours, to arm you against
The flattery of hope; yet I must tell you
That your deserts, if it were possible
For me to love, might sooner do it then any other,
But as I am a votresse to Diana, in whose Temple
I do shortly mean to dwell, I am free
From any fire that can be kindled
By desert in Man.

Duke. Tho your intention in this cruel answer
May be charitable, as intending
To allay my heat, by manifesting your boldness,
Yet it has wrought deadly Effects; for it
Forces me tell you, that I must disobey you:
For rather then I and the rest of the world
Will lose so great a blessing, there shall not
Be a Temple left standing, that is sacred
To Diana within this Kingdom, when this is done,
To make your cruelty admired. I Will build
An Alter to selfe-lone; it is that power you obey,
And not Diana's, on which some friend shall lay
My bleeding heart, which now in thought,
And then in act, shall be a real Sacrifice:
Smile not, nor think this jest;
For by that Dian whom you seem to worship
Being your self a greater Deity,
When you do cruelly perform what
You have rashly said, this heart
Which now seals what my tongue has spoke,
Shall make the covenant perfect.

Clar. I see this is no way my Lord,
This rash oath you have made, may cost you dear.

Duke. In that consider the greatness of my love.

Clar. The greatness of your folly rather,
That think by threatening punishments to your self,
To make me pity you, when since I do not love you,
I am not touched with any feeling of your greefes.

Duke. If not for mine, yet for your Goddess sake,
Give over your ill grounded resolution.

Enter Bernardo. Ber. My Lord the King is newly lighted at the garden gate,
And in all have calls for you.

Duke. Madame the King, to whom my person is a subject,
Commands my presence, and I must obey him:
But my heart which I have made you Sovereign of
Shall stay to wait on you; my return must needs
Be speedy, since I leave my heart at the mercy
Of you my cruel enemy.

Clar. My Lord I shall so martyr it before I come again,
That you will repent you.

Duke. You cannot give it deeper wounds
Then you have done already, and in that
Confidence I Will leave you.

Ber. Madame, will it please you walk into the gallery,
There are some pictures will be worth your seeing. Exeunt.

Actus secundus, Scoena prima.
Enter King, Attendants, Iacomo, Duke and Followers meeting. King. Will none go
call the Duke? Welcome dear Cozen;
You lost a brave chase to day, but you had other game
A foot: what says your cruel Mistress will she love you?

Duke. I hope she will Sir, she does hear me speak.

King. How hear you speak?

Duke. Of love I mean Sir.

King. Fie, passionate man.

Duke. Why Sir, do you not think him happy
Whom she will vouchsafe to hear?

King. You know my love has made you what you are
Out of an opinion that you deserud it;
Not for that you were my Kinsman. I never yet denied
What you would ask, relying on your judgment
And your virtue. Should you have asked my Sister,
For your Wife, I sooner should have given consent
And taxt your judgment less, then I do now
For doting on this Lady. Call back for shame then
That judgment which had wont to govern all
Your actions, and make me once more proud
That I have such a Kinsman, whose judgment
Can control his strongest passions, even love it self,
When it is prejudicial to his honor.

Duke. Sir, You have always been a Father to me,
And studied that which has been for my good,
Better then I could think. I know your Majesty's
Intent in this, is to persuade me from that
Which you believe is prejudicial to me:
But since without her love gained the fair way
Of service, not by threatenings I can take joy,
In nothing this world can afford me;
Pardon me Sir, if I desire you to spare
Your Counsel, since I am capable of none,
Except you persuade me to love more.

King. Well Sir, I will leave you to your amorous passions,
See me no more till I send for you. Exeunt King, Atten.

Duke. The King is moved;
Should he take from me all that he has given me,
Yet it were a happiness, if for her sake I lost it.

Iaco. My noble Lord.

Duke. Friend, what is your suit to me?
If it be reasonable, it shall not be denied
For your young Ladies sake.

Iaco. My Lord, the business I have to deliver,
Concerns your Grace.

Duke. How! me; what is it? speak.

Iaco. My Lord, it is a secret, and does concern Clarinda,
And therefore send your people off,
That with more freedom I may speak with you.

Duke. Wait me without, now speak. Exeunt Servants.

Iaco. What thinks your Lordship is the cause
That moves Clarinda to neglect your Love?

Du. The knowledge of her own worth and my unworthiness,
Which defect I hope in time my faithful service
Shall make good, and she will love me.

Iaco. Never, my Lord.

Duke. Why, is her vow of Chastity already past?

Iaco. She vow Chastity!

Duke. Why villain do thou smile at that,
Think thou Diana's self is Chaster?

Iaco. Great Sir, mistake me not. I smile to think
How she deceiues your Grace, telling you
She never means to marry, when I dare
Pawn my life she is already contracted.

Duke. Traitor to my best hopes;
Thou have kindled in my breast a jealous fire
That will consume me; fiends take thee for thy news;
Would thou had been borne dumb: betrothd; it cannot be:
Who durst presume, knowing I loved her once,
To think of Love, much less to name it to her?

Iacom. My Lord, if you will with patience hear me,
I will tell you whom.

Duke. Speak quickly, give me that case.
For I vow the earth shall not long bear us both.
I will not tell you, unless you will promise
To follow my advice, which if you will,
I will show you a clear way to your desires.

Duke. What, do you riddle me; is she contracted,
And can I by your counsel attain my wishes?
No, the House of Fate, though they should all
Take Counsel, cannot back restore the happiness
Thou Have robbed me of in saying she is contracted.

Iaco. My Lord, do not thus wast your self
In fruitless passion, but hear the remedy
That I Will propound.

Du. First let me know which of the Gods it is,
That in a mortal shape has gained her love,
That thou suspect'st she is contracted,
Or else some King, that in disguise has left
His Kingdom, to obtain her Love
Who is worth many Kingdoms.
Name not a meaner Rival, if thou do
Expect I should believe.

Iaco. My Lord, it is a man, to whom
Your valorous hand gave life.

Du. Cursed be my hand then for that unkind office,
Against my heart; name him.

Iaco. It is the young Lord Lysander.

Du. Take that ignorant fool, Lysander! Strikes him.

Iaco. How! struck: is this my hoped reward?
By all that is good, I Will be revenged.

Duke. I was too rash,
She is a Woman, and may dissemble, Lysander to
Is noble courteous valiant, handsome,
But yet compared with me his fortunes nothing.
Alas, that cannot bar love, out of a noble breast,
Such as Clarinda's is: what ways my Birth
Or greatness with the King, in her consideration?
Lysanders equal fortunes, and her own,
In that their Fathers suffer for one cause,
His banished, hers a prisoner (till I releast him)
Has I fear, begot a mutual love betwixt them.
Friend, prithee pardon me, I was too rash,
I Will heal thy hurt with gold.

Iaco. My Lord, I am a Gentleman,
And were you not a Kinsman to the King,
The blow you gave me might have cost you dear.

Duke. I Will healechy reputation, and thy head
With store of crowns; here: but prithee tell me,
What moved thee to discover this to me?
Or how camst thou thy self to know of it?
I think her Father does not.

Iaco. I think he does not, it is long since,
Since I suspected it; and to assure my self,
The other night I crept behind the Arbor,
Where they use to meet sometimes, and soon by their
Discourse, I found what I suspected, to be most true:
My love unto your Grace made me so curious;
For I protest there is no man alive,
That Is more ambitious to do your Lordship service;
It grieved my soul to see a man that so deserved,
So much neglected and abused. Some of this is true.

Duke. If thou will make thy fortune,
Bring me where unseen, I may ouerheare them.

Iaco. So your Grace will not discover your self,
I Will promise you once within three nights.

Duke. By mine honor I will not, perform
Thy promise, and I will make thee happy.

Iaco. Be sure you show not
At your return to them the least distemper.

Duke. Fear not that. Exeunt.

Enter Clarinda, Vtrante, Lysander, Bernardo. Clar. Sir, you have showed us
many Pictures;
But above all the rest, I like that of your Lords.

Ber. Madame, I know my Lord would think him happy
Would you accept the picture; but much happier
If you would take the substance.

Clar. It may be Sir I will.

Vtran. Daughter, I charge you on my blessing,
When the Duke returns to use him with respect.

Clar. Father, I see you have no skill, you do not know
The craft we women use to make men love the more;
The smallest favor I shall show him after this harsh usage,
Will make him think himsele in heaven.

Vtran. Before you part, when he comes back,
I pray you urge my restoration,
But first promise to marry him.

Clar. Leave that to my Discretion

Enter Duke. Duke. Gentle Lady, I crave your pardon for my stay,
Which was drawn out beyond my expectation.

Lys. Me thinks my Lord looks sour upon me.

Clar. My Lord, indeed I wondered how you stayed so long,
O rather how you lived your heart and you being parted;
For that you left behind you when you went.

Duke. Madame, I do confess it is a miracle
Proceeding from your beauty, that I could live
So long wanting a heart; but trust me,
If my faithful service cannot procure me yours,
But that you needs will send my own again,
The Miracle will then be alterd quite;
For now the Miracle consists in that I live
And yet you have my heart; and then it will
Be a Miracle indeed if I do live after
Your scorn shall give it back again.

Clar. My Lord, I see it was not bounty
But hope of gain made you give me your heart;
For you expect that I should give you mine
By way of recompense, which yet I cannot do:
But that I may be sure they are true Miracles
That you are pleased to say my Beauty works;
For there are many false ones here in Loves Religion;
I Will take a Month for trial of the truth,
All which time my charity compels me to keep your heart;
For should I send it backs, you say it would kill you,
Or work another Miracle, which I desire not,
In that time I shall be acquainted with your heart,
If then it does appear the same it now does,
Clad in the same pure zeal that now it wears,
I Will make a change, and give you mine for it;
For when a Month is once past, come you
And lead me to the Church, I Will not refuse to go.

Du. Slave that I was to trust that villain Iacomo,
That told me she loved Lysander. Dear Lady
You have in this comfortable answer
Revived a dying man, this mercy at the block,
Shows you to be divine, and so an object
Fit for my affection, which has been still
Above my reason: but would you in the mean time
Command me something, where my faithful service
Might appear, more then in words, I then should be
Most happy.

Enter Servants with a Banquet and stools. Clar. This offer I expected;
My Lord, you know the injuries my Father
Has received: if you will see him righted,
His Lands and Honors back to him restored,
Which is but Justice for a bribe, for even just causes
Now have need of bribery: I Will give you thanks,
And trust me that is more then great men
Should expect for doing justice.

Duke. Rather if it please you,
Let it be something, wherein I shall have no other tie
Upon me but only your command, my honor
Ties me to see this performed.

Clar. This once performed,
Since you so much desire it, I will study
Some Command, that may add honor to you
In the fair performance.

Vtran. Come my Lord, we will draw near,
I see their parley's at an end.

Duke. Come sit fair Lady.
My Lord, what says my Daughter?
Will she yet yield to his own happiness.

Du. I hope she will at last make me a fitter mark
For Envy, in that I am beloved of her,
Then for my present greatness.

Lys. My Lord, there is no cause of Envy for either,
The greatness of your hnors being but the Just
Reward of your vnequal'd merit: and for Clarinda,
Tho her worth be great as you can wish it;
Yet you do well deserve her, both for your worthy Love,
And for the many favors you have done her Father.

Vtran. My Lord, believe me, he has spoke my thoughts.

Duke. Now when the King sent for me, I had prevented
Your Daughter in a command that she laid upon me
Concerning your restoring to your Lands,
But that the King was angry at something that I said.

Lys. I thought it had been Impossible,
He could have been offended with your Grace.

Duke. It Is true, at other times he could not,
But the Lords told me that his Sister
Fair Cleonarda, had receiud a hurt,
By rescuing of the hounds from the Stags fury,
When he stood at bay, and that made him it may be
So apt for to be angry.

Lys. Why did they suffer her so to endanger her self?

Du. My Lord, she apprehends not danger,
Which you will confess your self, when you have heard
Me tell, what I have seen her do.

Lys. This act to me my Lord, is a sufficient testimony
That she does not fear; for by the laws of hunting
It is not to any man thought a disparagement,
To give way to a Stagge, his head being hard.

Du. She is a Lady of that noble Spirit,
That she wants nothing but the person of a Man
To be one, her heart being equal
To the most valiant, with these eyes I saw her,
(The King her brother being in the Forest)
Break from the company, and pursue a wolf,
Which the hounds following of a Stagge,
Did bring out of a thicket, and being well horst,
She plied him with so many wounding shafts,
That he at length was forced to stay his course,
And seeing there was no way to escape by flight,
He turnd', for to revenge the wounds he had
Received, in which he showed himself a beast indeed
And led by brutish fury; for had he been
Indew'd with reason, he would have taken the wounds
She gave for favors, and kissed the instrument,
That honored him with death from her fair hand.

Lys. My Lord, it is strange a woman should do this.

Duke. I was the near'st, but ere I could come in
She had cut off his head, the service
That I could do her, was to carry to the King
Her brother, that Trophee of her Victory,
Whilst she followed the hownds, and so fled
From the hearing of her own just praises,
Which all with admiration did bestow upon her.

Vtran. But that your Grace does tell it,
I should not think a woman could do this.

Clar. My Lord, did I love you so well as to be jealous,
These praises of the Princess, were apt food
For it to feed on.

Duke Madame, I honor her as the beloved Sister
Of my Sovereign; but adore you as my Goddess,
At whose blessed shrine, I offer up my life, and fortunes.

Clar. My Lord, I should account it as the most acceptable
Service that you could do, to bring me to kiss the hands
Of this much to be admired Lady.

Duke. Madame, once every week She comes to see the King,
And the King every time he hunts, fails not
To see her, when next she comes to the Court,
I will wait upon you to her.

Clar. What is the reason
She lives not with her brother at the Court,
Since he so dearly loves her as they say?

Du. It Is certain no Brother loves a Sister better,
For there is no Brother has a Sister so worthy,
You having never a Brother.

Clar. My Lord, it is late;
And though heretofore the company of a Father
Were a sufficient buckler to bear off slanders darts;
Yet now world is ehanged, grown so vicious,
That Fathers are become the likeliest Instruments
Of sin, and women are not to satisfy themselves
Alone, with being good; but they must give the world
A firm belief of all their actions,
That they are so; there may be some seeing me here
Thus late, that will not stick to say, my honor
Is the bribe paid for my Fathers restoration.

Du. Though there were found one envious woman foolish
And wicked to report it; (for both these she must be)
There could not sure be found another Fiend
Of the same stamp, that would believe it;
I dare not though I wish it bid you stay longer:
I will wait upon you to your Coach.

Clar. My Lord, it shall not need.

Vtran. My Lord, I hope it will not be long
Before this ceremony of parting will be quite lost,
And that you will not be so far asunder.

Duke. In hope of that blessed hour I live.

Clar. Do not too strongly apprehend your happiness,
A month's a long time, all things are uncertain,
Especially the promises of women. Exeunt.

Enter Iacomo. Iaco. Fortune, I see thou art a friend to working spirits,
Thou would not else have given me this occasion
So soon to compass my ends by; I ouer-heard Clarinda,
When she entreated Lysander to meet her in the
Accustomed place, and thither will I bring the Duke.
He from Clarinda's promise of Marriage,
Is now grown something doubtful, whether that
Which I did tell him be true or no; but now his own ear
Shall be his witness; for which service he cannot choose
But both love an reward me.
But I lose precious time, which wise men ever
Consider of, but fools seldom or never. Exit.

Enter Clarinda, and Lysander, (as in an Arbor) in the night. Lys. Had you not
sent me word, I had not come to night,
It is so dark.

Clar. It is dark indeed, the fitter for one orecharged
With grief in heart as I am.

Lys. Why dear Clarinda, are you not resolved
To marry with the Duke?

Clar. I see Lysander you do not love me now,
Nor wish my happiness, you would not else
Persuade me from loving you, wherein it only
Can consist.

Lys. Will you still for the ayery name of Constant,
Rob your self of a substantial happiness,
Besides, think what duty bids you, do it
In respect of your Father; if he should marry
He must needs fall into the Kings displeasure,
He being his Kinsman, so what happiness
Could you enjoy? Will you be ruled by me,
And I Will show you a direct way to happiness;
Do you love me as you profess?

Enter Duke and Iacomo. Clar. You know I love you more
Then I have words to utter.

Lys. Yet you would never give consent to marry me
Though it were still my Suite, alleging
That our fortunes were too mean, and had we
Without Marriage inioy'd the sweets of love,
It had been dangerous unto your honor,
Should you have proved with child; but will be now
Secure in that respect, if you marry with the Duke;
And for our difficulty in meeting,
'Twill add to our delights; now every time
That we shall meet in secret, will far pass
A wedding-night in joy, stolen pleasures give
An appetite, secure delights but cloy.

Duke. O my vexed soul!
Must I then hear a villain speak thus to her
I love, and not revenge it presently?

Iaco. My Lord, remember your Oath.

Clar. Lysander, why do you stare so and look pale?
Your hair stands up an end, as if your sense
Began to fail you sure you are fallen mad,
Nay, I do hope you are so; for if you be not,
I am more miserable then if you were:
For, can Lysander be himself, and speak thus
To his Clarinda? No, he cannot: either Lysander
Is changed from what he was; or else he never
Was what I esteemd him, either of which
Makes me most miserable.

Lys. You would seem to think me mad, when indeed
Your self are so, you would not else thus weep
When I advise you to that which will be most to our content.

Clar. Pardon me Lysander, that I have seemed
For to believe; for sure I did no more,
That which you have spoke proceeded from your heart.

Lys. Why do you think that I dissembled in what I said.

Clar. Yes, Lysander; I know you did dissemble;
For if you did not, you were a loathed villain.

Lys. I do confess if I were that Lysander
Which I have seemed to be; it were impossible
For me to think what I have spoke; but know
Clarinda, Though hitherto I have seemed
To carry in my breast a flame so pure,
That never yet a spark of Lust appeared,
It has been a dissembled show of modesty,
Only to cozen you; and if Clarinda,
The requital of my affecton be that which
Hinders you from these great honors, be not deceived,
For you shall have more power then to requite it,
When you are greater: we are now equal;
But when you are a Duchess, then t'enioy you
Will be a double pleasure, then you shall have
Occasion to express your love in my advancement

Duke. I Will kill him instantly.

Iaco. Your oath my Lord.

Duke. The merit of the act being so just,
Will expiate the sin of perjury.

Iaco. My Lord,

Duke. What, shall I hear her whom I have adored
Almost with as much zeal as I have offered up
My prayers to the Gods, tempted to acts of Lust
And not revenge it?

Iaco. My Lord, hear me but speak, and then do what you will: if you should
thus in the night, and in the house of the Count Vtrante kill Lord Lysander,
your honor Clarinda's, and her Fathers would be tainted, and so breed strange
combustions: but if you be resolved that he must die, which in my judgment is
most necessary, if you still love Clarinda, I will undertake for to dispatch
him by some means or other; but should you now here in Clarinda's presence
kill him she loves, her mind is so noble she would never endure you.


Duke. This is a villain, an incarnate Devil:
Yet will I follow some part of his counsel:
Lead me the way back unseen. I Will stay no longer;
For if I hear him speak again in that base Key,
I shall do that which I hereafter may repent.
No. I Will take the noblest way to my reuengement. Exit.

Lys. Clarinda, you have long been silent,
What is it you consider of? if it be my words,
You must needs find them full of reason.

Clar. I Will seem as base as he would have me,
And so find out whether he speaks this from
His heart or no.

Clar. I must confess that this which you have spoken
Stands with good reason; and reason is the rule
By which we ought to square our actions:
Dare I believe that you would counsel me
To any thing, but that which will be most
For my content, and for the Duke, will it not be
Far less to his content, not to enjoy at all
Me whom he loves, then if he should possess me,
And yet you have a share with him in my embracings:
For what is that husband worse, whose wife abuses him,
If she have but the wit to keep it from his knowledge.

Lys. It is true the Duke is so noble, and does withal
So truly love you, that it will quite banish
All base distrust, so that we might with all security
Enjoy our loves.

Clar. Leave, leave.

Lys. Or if he should find out our craft,
How soon might we dispatch him by poison?
There have been such things done.

Clar. You do ouer-act your part,
I see the end you aim at, your virtue shows it self
Quite through that mask of vice, which love to me
And to my Father made you put on; you thought
If you could have given me a belief
Of your unworthiness, that then I would have given
Consent to have married with the Duke:
Leave your dissembling then, since you are discouerd,
Lest you offend the Gods; I only seemed
To give applause to what you said, to find
Your craft.

Lys. I see my heart lies open to you,
You have spoken my very thoughts, indeed
This was my end.

Clar. Lysander, I perceive that your affection
Is altogether governed by your reason,
For which if it be possible, I love you more,
Because it well becomes a man to do so:
But I should hate my self, if I should love
According to your rule, which I will manifest;
For here I take the heavens to witness,
That if within three days you do not marry me,
I Will kill my self, speak quickly; for if you do not
Love me, it is a greater mercy to tell me so,
(That I may dye) then to persuade me
To love another, that being impossible,
But death is easy.

Lys. Clarinda, you have overcome by this rash oath
My resolution: for I perceive the fates
Had fore-ordain'd we should enjoy each other,
After such real testimonies, to make our love the firmer.
I do with joy embrace what you compel
Me to by your rash oath; and if your Father
Wilfully will stay, and not fly with us,
Rather then I will ever draw tears
From those bright eyes.
I so dearly love, we will leave him to the danger. Exeunt.

Enter the Duke with two Letters. Duke. Shall I still love one that neglects my
faithful service?
Alack I cannot help it now, I yielded up
My heart at the first summons, her fair eyes made,
Me thought it was a kind of treason, once
To doubt that she was not the sovereign of all hearts:
Thus she that came to Court, to beg her Fathers liberty,
Had not that granted only, but that I who begged
It for her, became my self her prisoner,
And never man was prouder of his bondage
Then I was: what though she love a villain
Whose intemperate lust, and base dissembling,
Kather deserves her hate; yet she is fair
And virtuous still; it is my part to let her
See her error, tho with the danger of my life,
If I survive the combat, and that she know
For what respect I fought, she cannot choose
But love me, and if the heavens have so ordained,
That I must fall under Lysanders sword,
Yet I have written that, which shall give a better
Testimony that I did love her more then he.
Who waits there?

Enter Francisco and Bernardo. Fran. My Lord.

Duke. I mean to ride abroad this morning,
And if I come not back at night, carry this letter
To the King; Bernardo, carry this presently
Unto the young Lord Lysander. Exeunt.

Enter Iacome. Iaco. My plots are dashed, the Duke does turn his eyes upon me
as though he would look me dead, I shall gain hate on all sides, if I be not
wary and cunningly dissemble; revenge and profit are the ends I aim at; since
I have mist the one, I Will make the other sure. Lysander, I do hate thee for
coming into the world to rob me of my land; yet I do think thou art not
only false; my Brother did tricks, which when I would have proved in open
Court the Dukes power boulstred up against me; but I do hope I shall be now
revenged upon them both. I Will poison the Duke my self, and to the King accuse
Lysander, as if he had done it, fearing that the Duke should rob him of his
Mistress: I have a servant shall swear what I would have him, I keep him for
the purpose; since the Duke would not give me leave to use my drugges for him,
he shall himself taste of them; lest for that kindness I offered him, I
should my self be punished: He that to honor looks is not for my black ends,

Revenge and profit I Will pursue through blood of foes and friends.


Enter Lysander and Bernardo. Lys. Where is the Duke Sir?

Ber. He is this morning ridden forth,
Whither I do not know.

Lys. Your Letter Sir, does not require an answer,
It will not be long before I see his Grace my self.

Ber. Good morrow to your Lordship.

Lys. Good morrow Sir, I Will read them once more over,
He reads. Though the small number of Lines seem not to require it, Lysander,
I wait for you at the great Elm within the Forest, make have, and to prevent
danger, come armed. Few words, but I believe a Prologue to much mischief.
I fear that my affection and Clarinda's
Is to the Duke discovered; and now disdain
And anger to be out-riual'd, boil within his breast,
If it be so, he takes the noblest way,
To use no other force but his own arm:
But how shall I employ my Sword to take
His life that gave me mine, my conscience tells me
Though it be not apparent to the world,
That I am even with him; for that since I to him
Would have given up my interest in Clarinda,
Would she have given consent. It may be
I am deceiud in this my apprehension,
And rhat it is in love he sends for me;
If it be so, I shall be glad; if not, howeuer
I will meet him according to his desire;
But first I Will write a Letter to Clarinda,
It may be I shall never see her more:
If I come not home to night, carry a Letter
You shall find within upon the Table to Clarinda:
Honor thou tiest us men to strange conditions;
For rather then weel lose the smallest part of thee,
We on an even lay venture Souls and Bodies,
For so they do that enter single Combats. Exeunt.

Enter Cleonarda, and Mariana. Cleo. It is hot Mariana; we will rest our selves a
while,
And when the day grows cooler have another course.

Mari. I wonder how the Dear escaped; the follow-dog
Once pinched him.

Cleo. It was the bushes saved him.

Mari. Why will you course among the bushes?
Gerard the Keeper would have brought you
To a fairer course; but you will never let
Him go along.

Cleo. I hate to have a tutor in my sport.
I will find and kill my Game my self;
What satisfaction is it to me if by another skill
I purchase any thing?

Mari, Yet you must have
Your husband chosen to your hand; the King your Brother
Will take that pains for you.

Cleo. He shall have leave to name me one;
But if I do not think him worthy of me,
I Will break that Kingly custom, of marrying
For the good of the State; since it makes Princes
More miserable then Beggars; for Beggars marry
Only those they love.

Mar. Madame, it is true, we not alone in Princes
See the bitter effects of such forced Marriages;
But even in private Families, Murders and
Adulteries, do often wait upon those Couples
Whose Bodies are compeld by Parents or Friends
To join for worldly respects, without the souls consent.

Cleo. It Is true Mariana, how many careful Parents
That love their children dearly, thinking
To make them happy by marrying of them richly,
Make them miserable, both here and in the other world.

Mari. Madame, it is very hot, will you go bathe your self
In the River.

Cleo. With all my heart Mariana,
It will refresh us well against the Evening:
I am resolved to kill a Decre to night,
Without the Keepers help. Exeunt.

Enter Duke and Lysander. Lys. I hope your Grace has not long staid for me.

Duke. No, Lysander, you are come before
My expectation, though not before my wish:
You cannot guess the cause that I sent for you.

Lys. My Lord, I cannot,
Unless fortune be so favorable to give me
A fair and just occasion by being your Second,
To hazard that life for you, which by your valor
Was preserud; but why to hope so great a blessing
I cannot see; since who within this Kingdom
Dare injure you; yet you commanded
That I should come armed.

Du. For being my Second, banish that thought,
And yet I mean to fight to day, and for an injury
That is done to me; and you Lysander shall fight to,
Not as a Second, but a Principal.

Lys. With whom?

Duk. With me Lysander.

Lys. With you my Lord, upon what quarrel.

Duk. I will maintain that I do love Clarinda
Better then you, and better do deserve
To be beloved by her.

Lys. My Lord. I do confess it,
And so this cannot be a cause of quarrel;
She is your Mistress and deserves to be so,
There being no other worthy of your Service:
But for my part I have no interest in her
More then a friend. Why should your grace think
I love her then so well, to make my love
To her, the quarrel?

Duke. Lysander, I did not think
Thou Had been so base to have denied thy Mistress;
But I will further maintain, thou art thy self
A Villain, a base dissembling lustful one.

Lys. Had these words,
(Which wound you deeper far then they do me,
Since they are scandalous) come from another,
My sword should first have answered, not my tongue;
But since you are one to whom I owe my life,
I Will keep another method: First, I Will let you see
The wrong you do me, which if you shall not
Straight acknowledge, our swords shall then decide
Whether this title be my due or no,
And lest you may condemn me for an enemy,
As thinking me your debtor, I Will let you see
That you my Lord, are as much bound to me,
As I to you, though you did save my life.

Duk. Lysander, do not think,
You owe me any thing for saving of your life,
The thanks if any was due to Fortune,
Who brought me thither; for what I did
A peasant might have done, you being your self
Almost a Conqueror before I came,
Though sure enough for want of blood to perish,
Had I not brought you home, which yet indeed,
Was but my duty to help a wounded man:
But how Lysander, I should stand engaged to you
For greater obligations, (though this, I grant,
Be small) I cannot see.

Lys. Tho you should amplify, as you diminish
What you did form; yet 'twould never equal
The pulling of my heart out of my breast,
For to give you content.

Duke. I cannot understand your Riddle;
Yet fear it tends to base submission.

Lys. Duke, be not deceived for after the discovery
Of that secret which I will tell you,
I Will give you an assurance with my sword,
I do not fear.

Duk. What secret is this?

Lys. I did but now deny that I did love Clarinda,
But now I call the heavens to witness
Who must assist me in so just a quarrel,
That I do love her equal with my life;
And now I will maintain that I deserve
To be better beloved by her then you.

Duk. Come then, may the truest Lover
Prove the Victor.

Lys. First let me show you,
How I acquit the obligation, I ought you,
Clarinda loves me more then I can her, yet though
She thus love me, I out of my gratefulness to you,
Used the best part of my eloquence,
To persuade her to marry you; and is not this
A secret, and a discharging of the debt I owed you.

Du. These ears indeed can witness thou did persuade her
To marry me, but it was to satisfy
Thy own base ends thy lust and thy ambition,
Not out of thy gratitude to me as thou pretendst.

Lys. My lust the vestall Virgins that keep in the holy fire,
Have not more cold desires then I have.

Duke. I in her Fathers Garden late last night,
Ouerheard thee tempt that bright Angel
Which my soul adores, to acts of lust;
And with such moving reasons, that flesh and blood
Could never have resisted, considering
That she loved thee; but that there was a power
That gouernes above reason, guarded her
From thy strong temptation.

Lys. My Lord, that curiosity has undone you,
For I do call the heavens to witness,
That what I then spoke when I seemed vicious,
Was all dissembled; intending you the fruit
Of that dissimulation; for when I once
Have made my self a peer unworthy,
I thought that she would then have turned
The stream of her affection upon you.

Du. Can this be true?
Sure fear makes him invent this; no sure,
He cannot be a Coward. Lysander,
Thou have told me that, if it be true,
Does render thee a perfect man; but not
A perfect lover: and trust me if there were
A possibility that I could live without Clarinda,
I should be friends with thee; but since she
Is the mark at which we both aim, the one must
By the blood of the other, purchase that happiness:
And therefore guard your self. They fight.

Lys. My Lord, the injustice of your cause,
Not Fortune has difarm'd you, and therefore yield.

Duke. If fear of death could make me
Forget Clarinda, wear the Victors prize
Then I perchance might yield; but since it cannot,
Make use of your advantage.

Lys. I scorn to gain a victory so poorly,
But to this man that saved my life.

Du. You are a noble enemy, and have so won
Upon me by my courtesy, that could you
Quit your interest in Clarinda, I should with joy
Share fortunes with you.

Lys. We lose time; for since we cannot both
Enjoy Clarinda, both must not live. Lys. falls.

Du. Fortune, I thank thee,
Now I am even with you, rise.

Lys. I owe you for my life; we were but quit before;
I would our quarrel were of another nature.

Duke. I would it were; but as it is
One of us must lie cold upon this grass,
Before we part. Fight. Duke falls.

Lys. Ah poor Clarinda, this is too sad a witness
Of thy perfections; would thou were here yet,
That I might take my last farewell.

Enter Cleonarda and Mariana. Mar. O dear Madame, what a sad obiect's this?

Cleo. Be not afraid,
See if the breath have quite forsaken that body.

Lys. O my best love Clarinda,
Receive from my dying lips, a dying kiss.

Cleo. How Is this!

Mari. Madame, the breath has quite forsaken this body, as I think: O my
dear Brother!


Cleo. Is it Lysander then, whom I have longed so much to see?
I saw him not since he came home from travail,
And much it grieves me that I see him thus,
This is the second time that I have seen him:
Besmeard in blood!

Mari. Dear Brother speak, who has hurt you?

Lys. Dear Sister,
What blessed Angel has brought you hither?

Cleo. This it no fit time for questions Mariana,
Let Us help him to the Lodge, before his loss of blood
Overcome his spirits.

Lys. Fair and courteous Lady, pardon me,
My sight did fail through my excessive bleeding,
Which made me to mistake.

Mari. Brother it is the Princess.

Lys. O Madame, lead me no further then;
For you will curse your charity if you preserve me.

Cleo. Why Sir?

Lys. Because I have by this unlucky hand,
Robbed you of such a Kinsman, as our Sovereign
And your self were justly proud of.

Cleo. Who is that?

Lys. The Duke, who lies there as you see.

Cleo. It cannot be.

Lys. Madame, it is too true.

Cleo. Alas my Cozen!
Sir, you have an unlucky hand indeed;
For you have this day murdered two:
Justice will at your hands require his blood.

Mar. O Madame say not so, had you but even now
So great a care to save his life, and are you now
So cruel to say that he must perish by the hand
Of Justice, though he should escape these wounds?
Would not the Duke have killed him if he could?
I Will pawn my life upon 't, my Brother killed him fairly.

Cleo. What shall I do, if I help to preserve him
That killed my Kinsman, it is unnatural in me,
And I besides may lose my Brothers good opinion;
And should I be the cause that Mariana's brother perish,
I shall lose her for ever; either she will dye for grief,
Or else she will hate me. I Will do as I did first intend,
My conscience tells me it is the nobler course;
Besides, there is something, I know not what it is,
Bids me preserve Lysander, the great desire I had
To see him, bred from the general commendations which
The world bestows upon him, imported something.

Mari. Dear Brother, what was your quarrel?

Cleo. Come Sir, be of good comfort, neither your wounds
Nor the cold hand of Justice, if it be
Within my power to help it, shall rob
Your loving Sister of you, she is by me
So well beloved.

Mar. I want words to express how much I love
And honor you.

Lys. Madame I would not have you go about
To preserve me with your own danger,
I mean the Kings displeasure, besides, I fear
Your labor will be fruitless; for if the Lodge
Be not hard by, sure I shall bleed to death,
Before we can come thither.

Cleo. It is but hard by.

Lys. Then I may live to do you service,
Rather let me perish before I trouble you.

Cleo. You are her Brother, and cannot trouble me,
We Will lay the body behind yon bush, until we
Send for it. Exeunt.

Actus tertius, Scoena prima.
Enter Cleonarda and Gerard. Cleo. Can you not find the Dukes body
Say you Gerard?

Ger. No where Madame can I find it,
And yet I have sought it round about the place
Where you appointed me; I found the bloody plot
Where it had been, his horse I found to
Tied fast to a tree.

Cleo. It is strange, what can become of it, Gerard,
Upon your life keep secret what you know,
And see that none come near the Lodge.
I will send you all provision necessary,
Pretending that Mariana is sick.

Ger. Madame, I fear she will be so indeed,
She does so apprehend her Brothers danger.

Cleo. She has no cause, no wounds of his are mortal;
Or if they were, I have applied such sovereign remedies
That they shall cure 'em: but who shall be my Surgeon?
Love, I must fly to thee I fear for remedy,
I pray thee go back, and see that all things be well,
And in the morning bring me word how she has
Slept to night.

Ger. Madame, there shall be nothing wanting
That lies within my power. Exit.

Cleo. How careful am I
Of his wounds? me thinks I would not
Have him dye for all the world: fie Cleonarda,
Taken at the first sight with outward beauty,
Nor being assured first of the inward worth!
I wrong my self, and him: It was
The inward bravery of his mind, which all
The Kingdom does admire, that turned my heart,
Which until now has been like adamant
To Kings, to melting Ice to him, and not his
Outward beauty, that never could have found
A passage to my heart, but that the way
Was chalked out to it by his Fame: but stay,
Whither do my vain imaginations carry me?
Though Lysander could in worth equal the Gods,
Yet it were not fit for me to love him as a husband;
He is my Brothers Subject, shall he be my Master?
No. To my old sports again: to morrow
I will be up by break of day,
And Reason (as I chase the Stagge)
Shall chase these thoughts away. Exit.

Enter King, Bernardo, Iacomo, Attendants. King. When rode your Lord abroad?

Ber. Early this morning.

King. How chances you then did not sooner
Bring me this Letter?

Ber. I was commanded otherwise by him.

King reads. Royal Sir, add to the number of your many favors, the
performance of this my last request:

What does he mean by this?

I pray you see Clarinda (who is my wife) possessed of what was mine, and
withal, pardon him that kills me; for I will compel him to fight. How Is this?
Begin not after my death to deny me that which is just, since in my life time
you never did see the will of the dead effected, as you desire to have your
Testament performed after your death, which I pray the Gods that it may be yet
a long life.

O what a Character is here delivered, of a pure mind,
Which only seems to show the greatness of my loss
The plainer, his death is not yet certain,
Let me not like a woman spend that time
In fruitless lamentations which may perchance
Afford a remedy, but now it is night:
What shall I do? call all the Court, and let them all
Disperse themselves, each man a several way;
He that brings word the Duke is alive,
Shall have a thousand pounds: he is gone to fight
A Combat with whom I know not; but he that
Apprehends the man that killed him, shall have his land
Is there none here that knows of any falling out
Between him and some other Lord? speak,
Is there none can tell me?

Iaco. And if it please your Majesty, I think
I have a guess.

King. Speak then.

Iaco. If he be gone to fight, it is with
Young Lysander.

King. Let one go look for Lysander presently.
What grudge was betwixt them? or fell they lately out?

Iaco. I will tell your Majesty in private. I am a servant to the Count
Vtrante, and was employed by that most noble Duke, (whom I do fear sleeps
now in death) for to solicit his true love to my young Lady, which I did
faithfully perform: but I found all I did was vain, for she long time has
been in love with young Lysander, which when I knew, I gave the Duke straight
notice; this has so far incenst the Duke against Lysander, that they are
gone to fight.


King. This that thou have told is cerraine true,
Else she would never have denied to have married
With the Duke, and for thy love and faithful service to him,
Which I believe is now no more; for else by this time,
He would have returned. I will requite thee.

Iaco. He was the noblest Gentleman
That I shall ever know. He weeps.

King. Alas goodman, he weeps.
He that can bring me word the Duke is alive,
Redeemes his King from misery. Exeunt. manet Iaco.

Iaco. I hope he never shall come back alive, he knows I am a villain, I was
too forward in my offers to him, til I had tried his dispositions better. It is
kindly done of him and of Lysander yet to spare my pains: there now wants
nothing of my wish but that the Duke be killed, and I to find out where Lysander
is, then I shall be revenged upon them both, and be possessed of that which is my
due, ( Lysanders land) for so the King has promised. My way to find Lysander
if he has killed the Duke, is for to give Clarinda a firm belief that I do
dearly love him; for sure if he be living, she shall hear of him, and if I
find him, I have another villainy in my head, which I will put in act, besides
my giving notice of him to the King.

My vil^^ny shall Virtue be in show,
For all shall think me honest Iacomo.
Exit.
Enter Clarinda with a Letter. Clar. reads. I fear the Duke has notice of
our loves; for he has sent to me to meet him armed, I fear it is to fight,
if it be so, and I survive the Combat, I will send you word where I abide, if
I be killed, I do conjure you by your virtues, not to to be ungrateful unto
the Duke, who you see does not desire to live, without he may enjoy you for his
wife.

No my Lysander, in that hour when I shall hear
That thy fair soul is parted from thy body,
I will quickly follow thee.

Enter Servant. Seru. Madame, the King is at the gate, and in a rage,
Threatens your Fathers death and yours, they say Lysander
Has killed the Duke.

Clar. I feared as much,
This comes of my dissembling.

Enter King, Vtrante, and Attendants. Vtran. Why is your Majesty offended with
your Vassal,
Who as yet never so much as in a thought offended you.

King. Where is that Inchantresse, which you call Clarinda?

Clar. Here Sir, is the unhappy object of your anger.

King. I am amazed, I never till now saw true beauty.
Why kneel you Lady?

Clar. It is my duty Sir, you are my Sovereign.

King. Rise fair Creatue; came I to chide, and do I kiss.
This is the force of Beauty; who lives
That can be offended with so sweet a Creature?
I cannot now blame the Duke, for valuing
Her so much. I would she were the Daughter.
Of some neighboring King, that I without
Disparagement might love her: but I forget
My self, these are poor humble thoughts,
And far beneath the Majesty of a King.
Lady, I came to chide, I fear you are the cause
That I have lost a Kinsman, a worthy one
In all the worlds opinion, excepting yours.

Cla. Sir, pardon me you were your self the cause
By your excessive love to him; for that made me
Dissemble my affections to Lysander,
Fearing to daw your frowns upon my Father,
Should I have showed neglect unto the Duke.

Kin. Who ever was the cause, you shall not feel
The punishment; the Duke did truly love you,
Lady, which you shall see here in this Letter
Apparently, may you see your error,
And grieve to death for your past folly,
In refusing the quintessence of Mankind:
Read it not now, you shall have time to grieve in,
He shows there in his Letter, that you are his wife,
That by that means I might be drawn the sooner,
To perform his will, which is, that you should
Be possessed of that which was his, and so you shall
If he be dead.

Cla. Sir, I do utterly refuse it, all that I desire,
Is that your Majesty will give me leave
To depart, my griefs do so oppress me,
That I am sick at heart.

King. When you please Lady. Exit Cla.
My Lord how chanced it that you never told me
That your Daughter loved Lysander?

Vtran. Sir, let me perish it I knew it,
I am amazed to hear it now. Exeunt.

Enter Lysander and Mariana. Lys. But Sister, can you think it possible,
The Princess should thus love me.

Mar. Brother, I know you see it your self,
Though you will not take notice of it.

Lys. Believe me Mariana, it does grieve me much
So great a Princess should be so unhappy
To love a man whose heart is not his own;
For he that had a heart at his disposing
Could not deny to give it her.

Ma. When she shall know you have another Mistria,
She will call back her judgment, and quickly
Free her self: but Brother, I do fear
You love her too; you look and speak to her
With more affection then well becomes your faith,
Being promised to Clarinda.

Lys. What would you have me to do?
Shall I not back return those courteous looks,
That she the sauer of my life bestows upon me?
One knocks without.

Mar. I Will see who it is. Exit.

Enter Cleonacda. Cleo. How has your brother slept to night?

Mar. Exceeding well Madame;
Brother, here is the Princess.

Cleo. Lysander, how does your wounds?
Is your pain lessend?

Lys. Madame, I have no pain
But that I fear I never shall be able to requite
This undeserved favor.

Cleo. Let not that trouble you; it is to me
You owe the debt, and I will find some way
To pay my self, that shall not make you poorer.

Lys. What shall I say, each virtuous deed
Rewards it self, and that is the coin with which
You must be paid, or else you will be a loser.

Cleo. Tell me Lysander, and tell me truly,
Have you a Master?

Lys. I dare not lie Madame.
I have one that loves me equally.

Cle. Lysander, she has reason, were I your Mistress,
I think I should love you better then my self:
But tell me Lysander, what was the quarrel,
Betwixt the Duke and you.

Lys. Madame, I cannot tell you without discovering
That which I would gladly keep conceald;
Yet why I should deny you the knowledge of any
Secret my heart holds. I cannot see, except I should
Be most ungrateful, you being the only cause
That I have now a heart to keep a secret in.

Cleo. What was it, speak; I long, yet fear to know it.

Lys. The Duke and I were riuals,
Clarinda was the mark at which both aimed.

Cleo. Which of you loved she best?

Lys. Madame, she loved me best.
We being brought up together,
Which was her great misfortune;
For had she known the Duke before me,
Her judgment would have taught her
To love the worthier,
And one indeed that loved her better,
At least, with greater passion.

Cleo. But did not half so well deserve to beloved
By her as you, since he did go about
To force love, or at the least to take from her
The loved, that which she most delighted in, her servant.

Lys. Having once removed me, he hoped she
Would accept of him, who would have made
A worthier servant far, since he had power
To raise her to that glorious height of fortune,
Which well would have become her merits:
But on the other side, he knew the means
Of my Fortune, must needs obscure and darken
Her perfections, so that he out of love
To her rather then to himself, desired
To make her his.

Cle. He could not choose but know that if he killed
The man beloved by her she needs must hate him,
If she were worthily constant; if not,
Then he with danger of his life had purchased,
Her too dearly; for I should still believe,
If once she changd, she always would become
The victors Prize.

Lys. Madame, there was some unlucky mistaking
Betwixt us, or else we had not fought.

Cl. Would it had pleased heaven you had not fought
Or that the Duke had escaped with life; but since
Your quarrel was not to be reconcild, though I
Do blush to say so. I am glad it was he that perished,
For I have ever wished you well;
I would not have you think I am now in love
With you; yet by my life I cannot say, but I may be
Hereafter, tho I know you have a Mistress,
Whose perfections darken mine, give me those
Things to dress his wounds with.
The wounds sure were given to me to make me happy,
In being touched by your soft hands, my wounds
Can never heal, my prayers are against it;
Because being well I cannot have this blessing.

Cleo. What a strange alteration do I feel now!
When I touch you, a certain coldness seizes
On my heart, and all my blood flies to my face:
Sure I do love you; I never yet knew what it was
For to dissemble; if I love I say so,
And if I hate, I keep it not conceald,
I will not give a thought that is base
A harbor in any breast; what need I then
Conceal my heart? the praise Lysander
Which was bestowed upon thee had bred in me
A great desire to be my own assurance,
Whether thou were the master of so many
Excellencies, as fame bestowed upon thee.
And now that I do find they rather do
Come short, then any whit out-goe thy merit,
Wonder not that I, though a Princess, am in love
With thee, for I have still professed to love the
Richest mind, which is in thee complete,
With the addition of a comely Personage.

Lys. I hope your Grace does not mock me.

Cleo. No by my life, I take delight
In looking upon you.

Lys. I cannot think you are in earnest, yet I will
Answer you, as if you were: should you love me
Think you, or would you wish that I should break
My forepast vows unto Clarinda.

Cle. No, it must be for your worth if I do love you,
And when your prove unconstant, you are
No longer worthy.

Lys. If I be constant,
What fruit can you receive from your affection?
A barren Love will ill become
So great a Princess.

Cle. Be you still constant, love your Clarinda still;
For when you cease to be so, I shall hate you;
Only respect me as a Sister: for when my reason
Shall have leave to combat against my passion,
It will convert it to a Sisterly affection.

Lys. Madame, I know
In that you say you love me, you do it only
For to make a trial how strongly I am armed
By my Clarinda's merits against inconstancy;
And I confess, if it were possible
To undermine my faith, and blow my former
Promises into the air, your pleasing speech,
And those, yet maiesticke glances
Of your eyes, were the only Instruments that yet
I ever saw to do it.

Cleo. But speak you as you think Lysander.

Lys. Else may I perish; but mistake me not;
For though I could believe your beauty
And merit to be above Clarinda's;
Which is impossible, either that it should be,
Or that I should believe it; yet where my word
Is once past, though all the tortures man's wit
Can invent should at one instant inuiron me
To torture the mind and body, yet
I would not break my faith.

Cle. May I be miserable if ere I persuade you to 't;
Yet I could wish that you did love me,
And with a little passion; but do not make show
Of more then you do truly feel, thinking
To please me; for if I find it I shall be angry,
I will not hide a thought from you.

Mari. But Madame, is it possible that
(You) should love him thus?

Cleo. I scorn for to dissemble; for who stand
I in fear of? were the King my Brother here,
Sure I should not deny that I loved Lysander.

Mar. Madame, I rather wish
My Brother never had been borne,
Then that the King should know you love him,
Nay, I hope you know it not your self:
Shall I believe that your great heart, that ever
Yet contemned love, can on a sudden in four
Or five days knowledge, be struck by my unworthy
Brothers slender merits, and one that must
Be perjured too, if he should love you.

Cleo. Mariana, take heed how you do pursue
This Subject; for if you do, I should begin
To hate you, are you not ashamed to contradict
Your self? How often has your own tongue
Given him the highest attributes of worth?
Nay, you have been so lavish of his praises,
That I have checked you for it though I beliu'd
Them to be true, because it comes
Something too near the praising of our selves,
To praise a Brother, I am my self a witness
Of his valor and his wit, and those are sure
The maine supporters to all other virtues,
Blush not Lysander to hear thine own just praises,
Except it be that I do sully them in the delivery,
Thou gave too sad a witness of thy valor
In ouercomming him, which through this
Kingdom was esteemd the brauest man.

Lys. Madam, a brauer man by far then he
Under whose sword he fell: Fortune that did envy
His worth, because his mind was fortified
Above her reach, applied her self that day,
Unto the ruin of his body; and then though
Never before nor since fought on my side.

Cle. When next I come,
I will entreat you tell me every particular
Accident through the whole Combat.

Lys. Most willingly, for I by that Relation,
Shall make apparent the difference betwixt
His worth and mine. Exeunt.

Enter King, Vtrante, and Attondant. King. So many days o'repast, and yet no
news
Of my dear Cozen, whether he be alive or dead!

Vtran. Sir, there is a Hermit,
Which has brought sad news.

King. What of his death, or that he is deadly hurt?

Vtran. Sir, to your Majesty he only will relate
That which he has to say, and yet by the sadness
Of his countenance, know his news is ill.

King. Call him in,
Whilst with patience I fore-arme my self;
Enter Hermit. Speak Father, is the Duke dead? what sad news
Is this you bring? give me my torment in a word.

Her. Your fears are true indeed, the Duke
Is dead.

Kin. How do you know.

Her. Your Majesty shall hear,
As I was gathering Roots within the Forest,
The best part of my food, casting my eye aside,
I saw a man lie weltring in his gore,
Straight I was stricken with a sudden fear;
But Charity prevailing above fear,
I stepped to see, if yet the soul had left
That comely Mansion, for so indeed it was;
Finding some sparks of life remaining, I took
A cordial water which I ever carry with me,
And by the help of that I brought him to his senses,
So that he was able to deliver these few words.
Death I embrace thee willingly, thou being
A far less torment, then for to live
And know Clarinda loves another better.
May she enjoy Lysander, whom now I do
Believe is worthy of her: for I that
Most unjustly went about to cross it,
Must pay my life down for my error;
Lysander, I forgive thee my death, and so
I hope the King, and with that word the King,
He sunk between my arms, and never
Spoke word.

Kin. O what a man was this, what marble heart
That would not melt it self in tears to hear
This sad relation? but what became of the body?

Her. There Sir begins occasion of new grief,
Whilst I did vainly strive to call back life,
Three barbarous thieves seeking some booty,
Came by chance that way, and seeing his garments
Rich, they went about to strip him; but hearing
Of some noise within the wood, one of them
Did advise to carry him to their boat, which lay
Hard by within a Creek. I went about
To hinder them, and for my pains they did compel
Me to carry the body upon my shoulders,
Threatening to kill me if I did refuse;
But not content with this, they made me row
Them down the stream, three days together,
Until they came unto their fellow Pirates.

King. What did they with the body?

Her. Threw it ouerbord, when they had
Rifled it first.

King. How chance you came no sooner to tell
This news, though yet too soon, they are so ill?

Vtran. I see the King did dearly love him,
He weeps.

Her. Sir, the current of the water bare us farther
In three days, then I was able to return in ten.

King. Give the poor Hermit something,
Though his news deserve it not,
Yet his sufferngs does:
It is an addition to my grief, that when I parted
With him last, I seemed to be offended with him
For his dotageon Clarinda, which he has
Dearly paid for; and yet I cannot blame him,
For she is the fairest creature that yet I ever saw.
Enter Cleonarda. O Sister, we have lost our dearest Kinsman,
And that which ads unto my grief, is, that I cannot
Be revenged on him that killed him.

Cleo. Are you certain Sir that he is dead, or
Who it was that killed him?

Ki. Too certain of them both,
It was Lysander that killed him,
Whom If I ever get within my power,
The sharpest kind of death that justice can inflict
Upon him, he shall feel.

Cleo. Say you so brother, he shall
Not come within your power if I can help it then;
But royal brother, if the Duke had killed Lysander,
I know you would have pardoned him.

King. Sister I think I should.

Cle. With what Justice then can you pursue
Lysanders life, who as the Duke himself
Informs you in his Letter, sought
Only to maintain what was his own;
But on the other side, the Duke like an usurper
Without any title would have taken from him
That which he valew'd far above his life
His Love.

King. It is not I
That pursues Lysanders life, but Justice;
The Law condemns him to dye,
Had it been but a private man, much more
Being so near a kin to me.

Cle. There is no Law; but does allow us to defend
Our selves, Lysander did no more; for who can deny
He was compeld, honor compeld him,
The Duke compeld him, and love (which cannot be
By noble minds resisted, did above all compel him;
Then all the fault Lysander did commit in my
Opinion, is that he was too slow, needing
Compulsion in so just a cause, and therefore Sir
If you should apprehend Lysander, though by
The letter of the Law his life is forfeit;
Yet remember that mercy is the greatest atribute
Belonging to those powrs, whose substitute you are.

King. Sister, you often have had occasion
To show your Charity, in being a Suitor to me
For the lives of those that had offended;
Yet until now you never begged my mercy unto any.

Cleo. Sir, you never had occasion given you
Till now to whet the sword of Justice by your own
Particular revenge, that it might cut the deeper,
And being not intressed, your mercy of it self
Did blunt the edge, and needed not my intercession.

King. I do conjure you by my love,
To speak no more of this unpleasing subject;
For if I get Lysander once within my power,
I will sacrifice his heart-bloud to the Ghost
Of my deceased Cozen.

Enter Clarinda. Vtran. You know it is bootlesse,
The King is so incenst, in begging mercy
For Lysander, you may prove cruel to your self,
And unto me your Father.

Clar. O Sir, how ill you do requite Lysander;
His love to you was the only cause
That pulled these miseries upon him;
For had not he so dearly tenderd you,
Fearing to draw on you the Kings displeasure,
We had long since bin married, then this unlucky
Combat had not bin, nor I had need of that
Which now I am to beg: Mercy, great Sir.

Kin. Why, know you where Lysander is?

Clar. Ono, but I do fear he cannot escape
Your hands.

King. Why Lady,
Can you hope that if he were taken
I would pardon him: has he not killed the man
That in the world was nearest to my heart?
I cannot grant this; rise, and by mine honor
Ask or command what is within my power
(But this) and it shall be performed.

Cla. Sir, all the suite
I Will make, since this cannot be granted, is
That in the self same hour that my Lysander
Is to suffer; I who have been the fountain
From whence these bloody streams have issued,
May be permitted to show Lysander the dark
Yet pleasing way to the Elizian Fields;
For though we could not here, yet there we shall
Enjoy each other.

Cleo. Lysander, should thou prove false to her,
Though I my self were cause of thy inconstancy;
Yet I should hate thee.

King. I hope you will better consider
Of the general loss the world shall sustain,
In losing such a Jewel as your self:
Sister, I will leave you to advise her better,
And pray you use her with your best respect,
Her worth and beauty does deserve it;
My Lord Vtrante, have you in your daughters name
Taken possession of all that was the Dukes,
As I commanded?

Vtran. My Lord, I have the full possession;
But she does utterly refuse them.

King. I know my Sister will advise
Her better. Exe. manet Clar. and Cleo.

Cla. The Princess is the fairest Creature
That yet mine eyes ever beheld, why does she look
So steadfastly upon me? Gracious Madame,
What see you in this worthless frame,
That so attracts your eyes.

Cleo. I see Clarinda,
In each particular of the whole frame,
Which thou term'st worthless, an excess of beauty,
Which in another Lady might breed envy;
But by my life I take deligt to look on thee.

Cla. And Madame, may I perish,
If ere mine eyes yet met an object, wherein
I took half that delight that I do now
In looking upon you; were I a man,
And could frame to my self a Mistress by my wishes
Having the wide world to choose in, for each
Particular to make up the whole. I should believe
It were a fruitless labor, if I went farther
Then your self thus framed.

Cleo. Clarinda, as I am Sister to a King,
I see I must partake of their misfortunes,
Which is to be grossly flattered: but it may be
You give me this fair language by instinct;
For I have pleasing news to tell you,
If that you had come to Court, I thought
To have sent for you, which unto you
I know appears most strange, for till this hour
I never had the happiness to see you.

Clar. Madame, it does indeed.

Cleo. It will appear more strange,
When you shall know the cause for which
I would have sent for you.

Cla. Dear Lady, what is it for?

Cleo. I would have sent for you,
To know what you would have given willingly,
To one that would undertake to save Lysanders life.

Clar. I cannot name you a particular,
But all that I have, or can give.

Cleo. I mean not goods or money,
But could you be content if it were
A woman that could do this,
To quit your interest in Lysander,
And give him leave to marry her?

Clar. If it should come to that, I know
I sooner should be willing,
Then I should draw him to give his consent.

Cleo. It is nearer it then you believe,
I know a Lady that has saved his life already.

Cla. How, begged his pardon of the King!
And upon those conditions has he given consent?

Cleo. He has not yet; but when he knows
Your mind I think he will.

Clar. Is she a hansome Lady, and well borne?

Cleo. Not very hansome; but her birth is great,
In both she equals me, and in affection to
Lysander, you.

Clar. Madame I do beseech you
Leave this too harsh discourse: for it hardly
Can be true, since there is no Lady
In this Kingdom, that ever I saw
That equals you in beauty, yet
The imagination that it may be so,
Does from mine eyes draw tears, and chases
From my heart the usual heat.

Cleo. Weep not Clarinda, I cannot hold thee
Longer in suspense. I am the Lady that I mean,
And therefore chase away thy fear.

Clar. I never saw true cause of fear till now,
The tale you told appears much likelier truth,
Now, that you are the Lady, then it did before;
For you have in you that full excellency,
That would make Gods forswear themselves,
If they had made an oath, should you propose
Your self as the reward of that their perjury:
Shall I believe then that Lysanders frailty,
Can resist such an assault, if you be so resolved;
Besides, what Lady has the power to beg
Lysanders life, at your incensed brothers hands;
But only you that are his Sister:
Go poor forsaken maid, and melt thyselfe
Away in tears, and do not live to be an eyesore
To this noble Lady, nor to vpbraid Lysander
With his falsehood.

Cleo. Stay sweet Clarinda,
And for as many tears as I have made thee shed
From those fair eyes, so often I Will kiss the Crystal
Fountains from whence they flowed; believe me,
Dearest maid, though I do love Lysander,
Yet I would not wrong thee for a world,
Of which to give the more assurance,
Thou shall see, and speak with thy Lysander,
For thou art only worthy of him;
He is now at Gerards Lodge within the Forest,
None knows of it but Gerard, and his own Sister
Mariana, how I brought him thither wounded,
I Will take another time to tell you: when you would
See him you must go disguised: farewell Clarinda,
Be confident I love you dearly. I will stay
No longer lest it should breed suspicion. Exit.

Clar. Madame, your humble servant.
How strange a tale is this! yet sure it is true,
Why should the Princess say so else?
But can it be the Princess loves Lysander?
Can it be otherwise, if she do know him?
If it be true, sure Lysander will not neglect
So great a blessing: hence Jealousy, the canker
Of true love, that do in time consume that
Which did give thee being; why should I wrong
Lysander, to mistrust his faith, till I have
Better cause, I must to him, and in disguise,
Which how to get my self I know not,
Enter Iacomo. I must trust some body, and who so fit
As honest Iacomo, who I know loves Lysander.
Come hither honest Iacomo.

Iaco. Madame.

Clar. I know thou love me,
And wilt do any thing that I command thee.

Iaco. Madame, I hope you make no doubt of it.

Clar. No thou shall see I do not doubt;
For I will make thee privy to a secret,
That torture should not draw from me.

Iaco. If it be that that I suspect, torture shall
Hardly make me to conceal it.

Clar. What say thou Iacomo?

Iaco. Madame, I say although I should be rackt,
Yet what you tell me shall be still conceald.

Clar. I know it should; come trusty Iacomo,
I Will tell thee all the Story as we go. Exeunt.

Actus quartus, Scoena prima.
Enter Clarinda in disguise, Iacomo. Clar. How am I bound to thee for this
disguise,
I think my Father if I had met him
Could not have known me, how far is it
Yet to the Lodge?

Iaco. It is not above a Mile; but are you sure
He is there?

Clar. I would not else have come so far a foot
Nor put on this disguise.

Iaco. Madame, if you be weary, here is a fair
Cool shade, where you may rest your self a while.

Clar. Though I befaint and weary;
Yet I will not stay, the great desire I have
To see Lysander, does support my weakness.

Iaco. But Madame, I am weary, and I have
No such strong desire as love to carry me.

Clar. For shame say not so, can you being a man
And used to walk, be weary in so short a journey?

Iaco. Madame. you must refresh me with a kiss,
I cannot walk else.

Clar. How Iacomo?

Iaco. Why, does not the pains that I have taken
Deserve a greater recompense then that?

Clar. I do confess
The pains that thou have taken, and
I intend thee a reward equal to it,
But it amazes me to hear thee ask,
That which would trouble me to give;
And yet to thee that shoul'st receive it,
Do no good at all.

Iaco. If it will trouble you to give it, then let
Me take a kiss.

Clar. How stangely art thou transported.
With a fond desire!

Iaco. You will not kiss me then?

Clar. I prithee be not angry Iacomo,
I Will give thee that which is better;
Here take this Jewel; yet let me tell thee,
The Duke would not thus boldly have demanded
What thou did ask.

Iaco. He was a fool then,
And did not know his own advantage,
Which you shall find I do, you that
Denied me now a kiss, shall give me that
Which you perchance the first night
Would have denied your husband.

Cla. I do not like this, what is that honest Iacomo?

Iaco. Your Maidenhead.

Clar. How! I know thou do but speak this
For to excuse thy self from going; sit still,
I Will find the way my self.

Iaco. Are you so crafty, stay and hear me.

Clar. What say thou honest Iacomo?

Iaco. Not too honest neither, I know you are wise, and therefore I Will use no
persuasions, else, but only letting of you see the danger.


Clar. O, I fear this villain.


Iaco. Lysander you told me was at the Lodge, and there the King shall find
him, except you will redeem him from that danger, by the loss of your
Virginity; I know you would be well content to kiss me now, but now it will
not serve.


Clar. Will honest Iacomo then prove a villain?

Iaco. Who would not prove a villain for so sweet a recompense: How I do
glory in this purchase of my wit, the Duke striving to gain the happiness, I
shall have offered me, paid down his life fort; besides, he went about the
ceremonial way of Marriage; but I shall meet my happiness a nearer way, which
will be an addition to the pleasure. Come, are you resolved?


Clar. Why villain, do thou prize Lysanders life
Above mine honor?

Iaco. If for a word, for honor is no more,
You can endure to see Lysander suffer cruel death,
It seems you love him little, do as you will;
Make have unto the Lodge, you know the way well
The King may chance be there before you,
As I will handle the business.

Clar. Stay Iacomo, can thou be such a villain
As thou do seem; I do not think
Thou art in earnest.

Iaco. All torments that man did ever feel,
Light upon me, if I do not perform
What I say.

Clar. Then may they all light on thee;
For thou deseru'st them all.

Iaco. Stay Lady.

Clar. Do thou relent?
I knew thou did it but to try me.

Iaco. It is true indeed, I did so.

Clar. I thought thou still were honest.

Iaco. Be not deceived: I tried indeed if you would give consent, because the
pleasure would have been the greater so; but since I have you once again within
my power, I will enjoy you whether you will or no.


Clar. Can thou believe, the heavens that have the power,
To strike thee dead, will suffer such a wicked Act?

Iaco. It is in vain to strive or cry,
There is none to help you.

Clar. If the fear of Heaven
Cannot deter thee from this villainy;
Yet tremble at the punishments my Father
And Lysander will inflict upon thee;
For do not think there is any place that is so remote,
But they will find thee out.

Iaco. Tush, they shall still believe me to be
Honest Iacomo;
Yet I will let the King know where Lysander is.

Clar. Why villain, do thou think I will not Discover thee?


Iaco. Yes, I do know you would; but I will take a course with your Ladyship
for telling, when I have done with you.


Clar. I know thou will not be so merciful to kill me.


Iaco. Yes, fear it not, rather then I will be hanged for a short minutes
pleasure.


Clar. Then kill me first, before thou do dishonor me.


Iaco. It may be you will be of another mind anon, and wish to live. The trees
stand here too thin, I Will carry you into a thicker place.


Clar. Help, Murder: is there no power that will transform me to a tree, and
save my honor?


Iaco. Yes, I Will transform you, you may bear fruit too, if you will be
willing. Exeunt.


Enter Duke disguised. Duke. How happy are those men that lead a Country life,
And in the nature of each several creature,
View the great God of Natures power, who can find
Nothing in the whole frame, but either for the composition
Or the existence, is worth our admiration!
Within Clarinda. Murder, help, help, Murder!

Duke. It was a woman's voice sure. Exit.

Enter Iacomo. Iaco. Slave that I was, that did not stop her mouth, as well as
bind her hands; it was well the bushes were so thick; for had he once got
sight of me, he would have coold my heat: since I have mist this pleasure, my
revenge shall be the greater; I Will to the King and tell him what I know
concerning Lysander, which will ingraft me in his favor, and for Clarinda's
accusall, let me alone. Exit.


Enter Duke and Clarinda. Duke. Tell me pretty Boy, why did the villain bind
thee?
I thought thou had been a woman, when I heard thee cry:
How pale thou lookst of a sudden; be not afraid,
He dare not come again to hurt thee.

Clar. My hard hearted Master I fear will come again.

Duke. He had a hard heart indeed, that could hurt thee:
It is the pretiest boy that yet I ere did see,
And yet me thinks I have seen a face like this before:
Where were thou borne sweet child?

Clar. Sir, I was borne in Naples.

Duk. Sure I have seen a face like thine,
Why do thou blush?

Clar. Where Sir, do you think you have seen
A face like mine?

Duke. Not in this Country, for I am here a stranger.

Clar. Then Sir,
you do not know the way to Gerards Lodge.

Duke. Would thou go thither?
I think I do.

Clar. Yes Sir, if I did know the way.

Duk. I Will bring thee thither if I can.

Clar. Sir, I do owe you much,
And have no other payment but my thanks:
But might I be so happy as to meet you
In the City, I have some friends that would
Perchance do you some pleasure.

Du. If thou will stay with me here in the Forest,
At a little house where I do lie, to morrow
I will bring thee to the City.

Clar. You are the most
Courteous man that ere I met with:
I am so weary that it is not possible
For me to reach the City, and at the Lodge,
Lysander must not stay, nor must I fly
With him; I am not yet provided of money,
For our flight. Fool that I was to trust
That villain Iacomo, alas, I did not know
Him then to be a villain. Sir, if you will bring
Me to the Lodge, I will only speak one word
With one that is there, and go along with you.

Duke. Come then.

Clar. He takes me for a Boy, and so long
There Is no danger. Exeunt.

Enter Cleonarda dressed like a Nymph, Huntsmen. Cleo. Lay on the Hounds where
the young Dear went in,
These old fat Dear make no sport at all.

Hunts. If it please your Grace he is not a Stag.

Cleo. No matter Sir,
I am the Mistress of the field this day,
My Brother not being here, and I will
Have it so: the sorer that the Chase is
My being absent will the less be marked. Horns.

Enter Mariana and Lysander. Mar. Brother, me thinks now your wounds being
well.
It were good to quit this Country for a while:
For it is impossible but by some means or other,
If you stay hear, you will be discovered.

Lys. Sister, it is my intent; but I without
The Princess leave, who has preserved my life,
Will certainly resolve of nothing.

Mar. The time has been, that you without
Clarinda's leave would have done nothing.

Lys. And is so still,
For may I perish when I prove false
To my Clarinda; yet should I say I do not
Love the Princess, and with some passion too,
I should but lie. See where she comes
Enter Cleonarda and Gerard. And with the splendour of her heavenly eyes
Amazeth my weak senses; not Dian's self
Looked half so lovely when she wooed
The pale-faced Boy Endymion;
Nor Pallas when she stood Competitor
With the two Goddesses to gain the golden apple,
Appeared with half that Majesty
That she does thus attired: hold faith,
Thou never were in such a danger.

Cleo. Lysander, I am glad to see you thus
Recouer'd: I glory in my cure.

Lys. Madame, I am so well,
That I desire your license to depart,
There Is danger surely in my being here
Both to your self and me.

Cleo. Lysander, I know you do but jest*
For should I give you leave, I know
You would not go.

Lys. Madam, it is best we part, should I stay here
And daily look upon those Sun-bright eyes,
And hear your charming tongue, my faith I fear
Would prove like wax, and melt, Clarinda's picture
Would be soon defaced, and I should then deserve
The hate of all the world.

Cleo. Lysander, do not fear it, You shall this day
See fair Clarinda, whose merits will arm you,
Too strongly to misdoubt a change.

Lys. Did your Grace see her then?

Cleo. Yes Lysander. I saw Clarinda,
Whose perfections have compeld the heavens,
In Justice, to give her the most deserving man alive
To be her servant.

Lys. Madame, its true,
She has indeed the most deserving man
That then did live, the Duke, given to her
For a servant: but when the heavens saw
That she did refuse him whom they knew
Was only worthy of her, they left her then
To her unhappy choice, in me, in which
She cannot fail to be miserable,
And that they might torment her with
The knowledge of her error, they took from
The earth unto themselves whom she refused,
Making him equal unto one of them.

Cleo. Lysander,
I will give you leave to praise the Duke,
Because it still tends to your greater praise,
Since you did overcome him both by your valor,
And your other merits: for fair Clarinda
Whose judgment is complete, esteem you
For the worthier, Lysander never was there man
So blessed as you are, in a Master, for it is
As impossible to equal her in love,
As in perfection; for though she know that her
Perfections far transcendeth mine, yet her
Excess of love did make her jealous,
When as I told her I had saved your life;
And how, but I to show her that I loved
You only as a brother, did tell her where
You were, and much I wonder that she
Is not come.

Lys. It may be she does wisely fear that there
Are some that watch each step she makes,
Hoping by that to find me out; for now
It is no news that she does love me,
When I am at Florence I Will send her word,
For so I promised her in a Letter when I went
To fight, if that I escaped with life.

Cleo. You shall not go to Florence to day,
Yet do so, and be not sad to go;
For when my Brothers passion is once over,
And that he shall consider the justness
Of the Dukes request, in his last Letter,
I mean your pardon, he cannot sure
Be any longer cruel.

Lys. Why Madame,
Did he write a Letter to the King,
In which he begged my pardon?

Cleo. Yes Lysander, he did;
And the last word that ere he spoke, was
To that purpose, the letter I can show you,
I never till this day could get it from my Brother.

Lysander reads to himself. Lys. He in this Letter does express himself
To be so near the composition of the Gods,
So filled with all perfections, me thinks it is strange
They should not build him altars: yet my unfortunate
Hand did rob the world of this precious Jewel;
For which offense my heart shall drop in justice
As many bloody tears, as now my womanish tears
Do drops of brinish water.

Cleo. Worthy Lysander,
Each pearl like drop falls from thy manly eyes,
May expiate a greater sin then that thou did
Commit in thy intention: I cannot choose
But kiss thee for this noble sorrow. Say Mariana,
Have I done ill to kiss your Brother?

Mar. Madame, it were in me presumption
To censure any of your actions.

Cleo. Lysander, Must you go to day?
Sure you do not love me as a Sister, else
You would not part so soon.

Lysan. By this kiss, which I believe shall be
The last that I ever shall be blessed with,
Did not my faith oblige me otherwise,
I should love you equal with Clarinda,
Nay had I known you first, I should
Have loved you better; but as it is
I know you are so noble in you self,
That you would hate me if I should prove inconstant

Cleo. It is true, it were a baseness for which
My judgment would condemn you as unworthy
To be beloved; but yet I think my passion
Would make me change that saying of loving
Of the Treason; yet hating of the Traitor;
For I should hate the Treason, and yet I fear me
Too much love the Traitor.

Lys. It were impossible that you should love
A perjured man.

Cleo. I do but fear it;
I know your worth will never put it to the trial.

Lys. Dear Princess,
Gerard, to whom I am much bound,
Has horses ready for me, so that there is
Nothing wanting but your leave to make
My journey happy.

Cleo. Which I unwillingly do grant you, yet
Pray the heavens to make your journey prosperous.
O Mariana, would I had never seen thy brother,
Or having seen him, that I might enjoy him
For my Husband: but I do ill to wish another
Right; that happiness belongs to fair Clarinda's
Merits only.

Lys. Go Gerard, get the horses ready. Ex. Ger.

Cleo. Lysander, let me hear from you,
And if you think it no way prejudicial
To your faith. I pray you wear this favor
For my sake.

Lys. Madame, most willingly,
And think it for the greatest honor that ere
Was done me.

Within Cry, round beset the house. Cleo. What noise is that Mariana?

Mari. Madame, I Will go see.
O Madame 'we are undone, it is the King,
Who threatens to hang up Gerard for concealing
Of my Brother.

Lys. Dear Madame, hide your self,
What will the King your Brother say,
If he do find you here?

Cleo. I will Lesander fly from his anger now,
That I may have more power hereafter
To do thee service; what will you do Lysander?
It is no matter what becomes of me,
So that you be safe from the Kings anger.

Enter King, Iacomo, Attendants, Gerardbound, Guard. Iaco. Sir, set the
houseround, lest he should escape
At some back door.

King. Be that thy charge, take half the Guard, I Will search
The house my self: Where is this bloody Traitor?

Lys. Sir, hears a bloody-handed, though not a bloody
Minded man, that does not yet deserve the title
Of a Traitor. I know it is me you look for.

King. Bloody villain, it is thou indeed,
Lay hands on him.

Lys. Keep off, and hear me speak first,
And then I will deliver up my sword.

King. What would thou say.

Lys. I see poor Gerard bound, whom I
Compelled to conceal me.

Kin. How could thou compel him?

Lys. Royal Sir, with patience hear me:
When I by the assistance of Fortune, not my valor;
(Yet I did nothing basely) had killed that noble Duke
I was my self sore wounded, so that I could not
Fly out of your territories, and well I knew
Into what house so ere I came, though they
At first might pity me, not knowing
What I had done; yet when they once should know
That I had killed the Duke, they then I knew
Would straight discover me, rather to gain reward,
Or else to save themselves from future danger,
Which to prevent. I thought my safest course was
For to compel Gerard, whom well I knew
Lived far remote from company, to swear
Not to discover I was in his house,
Or else I threatened straight to kill him,
Hoping that rather then he would forswear
Himself, he would conceal me, wherein I was
No whit deceived.

Ger. If please your Majesty,
He came into my house before I was aware,
With his sword drawn, and setting of it
To my breast, threatening if I would not swear
For to conceal him, to kill me instantly.
I (not knowing what he had done)
Swore all that he would have me.

Cleo. A God transformd into a humane shape
Could do or say no more then he has done.

King. But when thou knew'st that he had
Killed the Duke, how durst thou then
Conceal him?

Lys. I then began to fright him with strange
Examples of the cruel punishments that perjured
Men had felt, and awed his conscience that way.

King. So thou do mine Lysander;
For I have made a vow, after that I had got thee
Once within my power, the Sun shall not
Twice set, til I had with a sacrifice of thy heart blood
Appeased my Kinsmans Ghost. I dare not
Be forsworn, away with him to prison,
And Gerard. Exeunt Lys. Ger. and Guard.

Cleo. It is then no time for to conceal my self.
O cruel Brother! you have in that rash oath
Mutder'd all virtue that Mansfraile nature
Is capable to receive.

King. I am amazed,
Tell me dear Sister, what make you here,
I hope you know not of this villainy.

Cleo. O do not call a demi-god a villain,
Though Fortune made his valiant arm
The instrument to rob you of a worthy Kinsman.

King. Sister, you speak with passion, as if
You loved him.

Cleo. Yes Brother, I do love him,
With all my heart I love him, which I will
Manifest more then in words,
If you be cruel.

King. Sister, as you respect my favor,
And your own fair Name, blemish not so
Your royal blood by loving of a murderous
Ungrateful villain.

Cleo. O that you were no Brother to me,
Nor my King, that I might satisfy mine
Anger by a brave revenge.
By loving of a murderous ungrateful villain.

Cleo. O that you were no Brother to me,
Nor my King, that I might satisfy mine anger
By a brave revenge; by my life, I would have shed
His heart blood with my Iauelin, that should
Have spoke this but your self, but as it is,
I Will let you see your error, you might as well
Call him a murderer that being assaulted
By a barbarous thief, killed him that would
Have robbed him; for so Lysander did, and
Whereas you call him ingrate, there you do
Err, the Duke being his debtor; and so
Indeed is all the world, for he has left them
Such a Story in his actions, that he that can
But read and imitate them to the life,
Shall in another iuster age, be made a God,
And worshipped for his virtues.

King. Sister, did you but see how ill
These praises do become you; (for you indeed
Are drunk with affection) you would leave
Them me. I know when you recover by the help
Of reason, you will hate your self, and wish that all
You Have spoke or done this day were but a dream.

Cleo. O never, never; poor Clarinda,
What will become of thee when thou shall hear
This killing News! Exeunt.

Enter Clarinda and the Duke. Duk. It grieves my heart that I have brought thee
wrong,

Clar. Sir, must we lie here in the wood all night.

Duke. I fear there is no other remedy,

Clar. O my Lysander thou art lost I fear
For ever, and that same villain Iacomo
is cause of all. There is some comfort yet,
I see a light, sure it is some house.

Duke. For Charities sake open the Door. He knocks.

Enter Hermit. Lord Sir, where have you been?

Duke. Mercy upon us, how are we mistaken!
This is the old man's house where I have been
Still since I came into the Forest.

Cla. Pray heaven he did not miss his way a purpose.

Duk. Good Father, if you have any meat
Fetch me some for this sweet youth, I met him
In the Forest, and would have showed him
The way to Gerards Lodge, but lost my self,
And wandered up and down till now.

Her. Here, here is some meat;
I was my self at Gerards Lodge, and saw those
There whom you would little think.

Duke. Who were there?

Her. The King and his fair Sister,
Lysander bound as a Prisoner, for killing
Of the Duke.

Cla. O my Lysander's lost. falls.

Duke. Look to the Boy, he swoones; speak
Child, what do thou ayle?

Cla. That same who is Lysander, now a prisoner,
(And must die) was the only cause I would
So feign have gone to Gerards Lodge,
For that villain who had bound me, I knew
Would tell the King that Lysander was there,
And I would feign have given him warning,
That he might have fled, because he is
Thy Kinsman.

Her. Be not sad Boy for that,
I heard the Princess swear if the King
Put to death Lysander, that she will not out-liue
Him; and he too well loves his Sister,
To lose her so.

Cla. How! Is the Princess so in love with him?

Her. Indeed they say she is.

Duke. Come, and eat your meat, tyou shall
Go to bed, I know you ate weary.

Clar. Sir, I cannot eat, I had rather sleep,

Her. Come then, I Will show thee to a Bed.

Clar. No Sir, I Will lie upon the Rushes, I never use
To lie with any body, and I am sure
Here in this house there are not many beds.

Her. Come, thou shall lie alone;
There are two beds, we two will lie together.

Clar. Please Sir to leave me here, I Will go to bed.
No child, I Will help thee.

Clar. If he should see my breasts, I am undone;
I will keep on my doublet.

Her. Go to bed sweet child, we will leave thee. Exeunt.

Actus quintus, Scoena prima.
Enter Iaspero and Bernardo. Ias. What news at Court?

Ber. Sad news believe me.

Ias. Why, must brave Lysander suffer to day?

Ber. The King has sworn to have his head off ere Sunset.

Ias. The Kingdom will be poor in such a loss,
For he leaves none behind him worth his equal.

Ber. I, but is it not strange the King should grace
That villain Iacomo that did betray him?

Ias. His extreme love unto the Duke makes him
Love Iacomo, who does profess that he did not
Discover Lysander in hope of gain; but only
Out of love to the Dukes memory.

Ber. At one o'th clock he is to suffer, let us be there betimes and get a
place near the Scaffold to hear his last words. Exe.


Enter Vtrante in black. Vtran. How black and sorrowful this day looks!
This day, in which Lysander is to suffer:
Noble Lysander, to whom my Child and I
Are so much bound; and yet he is the cause
Of both our ruins; or rather I am cause:
It was my ambition to have a Duke
My Son in Law: no, it was my Clarinda's
Beauty bred all this mischief, and it was
The Heavens that gave Beauty to her:
Why did they then not bless that gift in her,
But turn it to her curse? Peace wretched man
And argue not with those high powers,
But wait their pleasure, and pray for their assistance,
Who can yet change this Scoene of blood into --
A Scoene of joy, and back return thee thy Clarinda.

Enter a Servant. Ser. If It please your Lordship, my young Lady
Is returned and gone again.

Vtran. How!


Ser. She has been in the house this hour as the maids tell me, has changed
her clothes, and's newly stolen out at the backgate, and gone toward Lysanders
prison; two of my fellows are gone after her, and I came back to tell your
Lordship. Exit.


Enter Cleonarda and Mariana. Cleo. And does the Kings cruel resolution hold
still?

Mar. O Madam yes, my poor Brother must dye to day.

Cleo. And wilt not thou dye with him: speak Mariana.

Mar. Madame, I could wish that I might not out-liue him.

Cle. Why say thou thou could wish, have thou not hands?
Or do thou want a knife? if so, yet there is many ways to die.

Mar. Madame, how strangely do you talk.

Cleo. Why, would thou wish to live,
After the untimely death of such a Brother?

Ma. Madame, we must not go until the Gods do call us,
Yet I bylieue it is the better place.

Cleo. The better place, assure thy self of that, they would
Not else thus early call thither the best of Men. I will follow
Him where ere he goes to see. Enter Iacomo.

Iac. Madame the King desires your company.

Cleo. Villain, had he none else to send but thee
That did betray Lysander, hence from my sight. Exeunt.

Enter Duke and Hermit. Her. What did you with the Boy?

Duke. I left him at the Count Vtrante's house:
He told me he dwelt there.

Her. At what hour say they must Lysander suffer?

Duke. At on of the clock, fail not to be there,
And get near the Scaffold.

Her. You need not bid me. Exeunt.

Flourish. Enter King, Cleonarda, Iacomo, Mariana, Attendants, one of them in
Habit of a Countreman. King. Sister, believe me, you have told me such
particular
Arguments of Lysanders worth, that I do pity
His misfortunes much, and have quite lost my anger;
Yet Justice must be satisfied.

Cleo. Sir, the offense that he committed, was but against
The Law, although he robbed you of a Subject;
You are above the Law, and may remit it;
A King should in points of life and death,
Be like the Chancery, in other cases, and help
By mercy against the cruel letter of the Law,
As the Chancery does by conscience.
Especially when your own conscience tells you
That he was forced against his will to fight.

Kin. Sister, it were an example too dangerous
To pardon him that killed my next of blood:
It might encourage some to strike my self;
And therefore it is in vain to plead for mercy.

Enter Vtrante and Clarinda. Vtran. O daughter, let not your passionate love
Unto Lysander, make you accuse good Iacomo.

Cla. O Sir, you are cozened, he is a Devil incarnate,
Justice. Justice great Sir.

King. Lady, I thought your plea would have been mercy,
And not Justice.

Clar. Sir, I have lost all hope of mercy; but Justice
I hope you will grant me against that villain Iacomo.

Iaco. Now have at me, but I have fore-arm'd the King with such a tale, that
and mine own impudence, which never faild me, shall well enough defend me.


Kin. Arise fair Clarinda, and by my Crown,
Bring your sufficient proof, you shall have Justice;
But well I know you hate good Iacomo, because he did
Discover where your Lysander was.

Cla. Would I had bit my tongue out of my head,
When I gave it power to tell you where Lysander was.

Iaco. Your majesty may mark by this how true the rest is that she has to
say. Madame, then you would seem as if I had deceived your trust, and that you
had to me discouerd where Lysander was; make me not so odious, I never was a
traitor, had you to me discovered it, wild horses should have torn me in a
thousand pieces, ere I would have confessed; no, this same country fellow one
day being within the Lodge saw him, and so discouerd it to me.


Cla. Though thou deny'st this with a brazen brow,
Yet thou can not deny thou would have ravished me,
When I did trust thee to go along with me,
I being disguised then, where I to thee discovered
When Lysander was; and more thou threatendst
(If I did not give consent to thy base lust)
To murder me, when thou had done,
Because I should not tell.

Iaco. Madame, I did not think that love to any man could ere have turned that
excellent wit of yours so ill away, as thus unjustly to accuse a man that is
innocent, and one that honors you.


Enter Duke and Hermit. Vtran. Sir, I do grieve,
My Daughters love unto Lysander, should
Move her for to seek a most unjust revenge
Against good Iacomo, whose like for honesty
I know not in this Kingdom of his quality.

Clar. Sir, here is a witness, that will confirm
What I have said for truth.

Duke. What gentle Lady?

Cla. Sir, 'twas I that you rescued yesterday,
From a villain that would have ravished me.

Duke. Why Lady, were you in such danger?

Iac. Mark you Sir, she knows of no such thing.

Cla. I was the Boy you found in the wood,
Whom this villain would then have ravished,
Which then I told you was my master.

Du. I thought no boy could have so sweet a face,
Indeed Sir, it is most true, I found this Lady bound,
And that same villain as I think; for I had but
A glimpse of him in the bushes, his fear making
Him fly as soon as ever he saw me.

Clar. I beseech your Majesty let him be hanged,
For on my honor what I do affirm is truth.

King. Your affirmation is to me a hundred
Witnesses, yet it were in me injustice to deny
The combat against this gentleman that does accuse
Him on your behalf, if Iacomo desire it.

Duke. Believe it Sir, he that will do such villainies,
Will never dare to fight, Sir send him to the Galleyes,
If he will nor fight, it shows his guilt.

Iaco. Hell take you all, I dare not fight might I have all the world given.
I Will rather to the Galleys. I shall get out there with some trick or other, and
then I Will poison twenty of you, I Will not discover what I am that will but show me
more.


King. Let him that rescued Clarinda have the land
That Iacomo should have had, for discovering where
Lysander was: call forth the prisoner, and proceed to execution.

Enter Lysander, Executioner, Guard. Lys. Weep not Clarinda, you may live
happily
You and the Princess may together make
A kind of Marriage, each one strongly
Flattering themselves, the other is Lysander;
For each of you's Lysanders better part:
Pardon Clarinda that I borrow from
That stream of love a part to pay the Princess,
Which ever yet ran constantly to the Ocean
Of thy perfection only, for now a gratefulness
To her, makes some of it run in another current;
For which I know thou being wise, can never
Love me less, knowing that I have love enough
For both, since I can marry neither.

Cla. Lysander, do not think I grudge that part of Love
You pay the Princess, her merits fair transcending mine,
Besides, you owe her for preserving of your life,
And I have been the only cause, that you must lose it;
But I Will bear you company, and in that pay the debt I owe you.

King. Why stays the Prisoner?

Lys. Only to take
A parting kiss; then when you please, I am prepared.

King. What mean you Sister, will yon make apparent
To the world your folly?

Cleo. Sir, do not hinder me;
For if I may not here speak with him,
We will converse in death sooner then you believe;
Lysander, thou art going to thy lasting home,
And in thee all virtuous men must suffer,
They being but branches, thou the root of all perfection:
Who will be Courteous, Valiant, since these are causes
Of thy death; for thou unto the world did manifest
In thy last action with the Duke, that thou were
Really possessed of these: but I, in summing up thy worth,
Do but increase my grief; since I must part with thee,
The rich unhappy owner; for they have only served
To revive thee, and those that loved thee for them,
Poor Clarinda, I from my own conceptions
Could weep, to think upon the torment thou will feel,
When as the Axe shall sever from thee loves
Worthy person, thy comely head, worthy,
Most worthy, in that it was the Cabinet appointed
By the Gods to keep their richest Jewel in,
His mind, which is indeed an Index,
In which judicious men may read as in a Book,
The whole contents of all their excellence.

King. Sister, for shame do not thus wrong
Your self and me, by throwing such high praises
On a man, condemned by Law. Lysander,
Prepare thy self to die, and take no notice of her
Idle praises, which if they could to any mortal
Man be due, they were to him, for whom
Thou now must suffer.

Lys. Sir, I do confess it and am ready to receive Your doom.

Cleo. I need not to a mind so fortifide as thine is
Give any Antidotes, to arm thee against death.

Lys. All the encouragement that I will desire
Shall be a kiss of your fair hand.

Cleo Lysander, thou know my soul embraces thee,
These are the first tears that ere fell from mine eyes,
Although a woman, which I am pleased with,
Since it well expresses this is the greatest grief
That yet I ever felt.

Lys. This kiss Clarinda is thy due, thou art
The nearest to my heart in Justice. Clarin. swoones.

King. Look to Clarinda, carry her home.

Cleo. I thought she would have out-gon me; but now
Mine shall be the glory: who would live in a world
That Is bankrupt of all virtue? Lys. kneeles.

Exec. I pray Sir forgive me your death.

Lys. Friend, do thine office; I forgive thee.

Duke. Hold villain.

King. How dare thou hinder the sword of Justice,
From lighting where it is designed.

Duke. Sir, if you execute this Lord, you are a Tyrant.

King. Why Sir, will it be tyranny in me
To execute the Law? the fellow's mad,
Lay hands on him.

Duke. It is a cruel Law that does condemn the innocent.

King. Why, is he innocent?

Duke. Let me dye for it if I do not prove
He did not kill the Duke.

Kin. And by my Crown, since thou do interpose thy self
Betwixt the sword of Justice and the Object,
It shall cut through thy life too with Lysanders,
If thou do fail to prove what thou affirmest.

Lys. I do beseech your Majesty,
Let not this frantic man, (for so he seems to be)
Out of his love to me, ruin himself:
I do confess again it was this unlucky hand,
And no other, that killed the Duke.

Duke. I call the heavens to witness, it was I
That was the cause he bled that day,
And well he did deserve it, for thinking
So unjustly to rob thee of Clarinda,
Who only do deserve her.

King. Carry the fellow hence;
Do I sit here to hear a mad man talk?

Duke. Call me not fellow, I am as good
A Gentleman, as was the Duke your Cozen,
And were he now alive he would acknowledge it.

Kin. Away with him to Prison, I Will have him
Strangely punished for this presumption.
Away with him.

Her. Sir upon my credit,
And men of my Profession should not lie, he is both
In Birth and worth equal unto the Duke.

Kin. Though I do reverence your Profession,
Yet I see no cause to believe you,
For in this Kingdom there is none so worthy.

Her. Sir, yes; every way as worthy,
And one your Majesty does love so well,
That if he ask you, I know you will pardon
Lord Lysander for his sake.

King. Sure all the world's infected,
One that I loved so well and equal to the Duke
In Birth; how can thou prove this?

Her. Thus I can prove it, Discover Duke.
To your great joy and all the Kingdoms.

Kin. I am amazed; art thou a Coniurer,
And from the quiet grave has raised
The beloved person of my Kinsman to delude me?
For thou were he that said thou foundst his body.

Duke. Ghosts do not use to pay their duty to
The living, Sir, feel my hand, I am your Servant.

Kin. O my dear Cozen, can this be true!

Duke. Sir, I will make all plain: but first I must
Relieve the worthiest of men, noble Lysander,
Send for Clarinda, and tell her this glad news:
Madame, let me kiss your fair hands,
I ever honored you, but now I do adore
That high raised mind of yours, that fears not
To profess your love to virtue, though in distress.

King. Dear Cozen, I do long to know by what means you were preserved.


Duke. This reverend man that did the pious act,
Can best resolve it you.

Kin. 'Twas he that brought first word that he
Had found your body, by which we were resolved
That you were dead, he told his tale so punctually.

Duk. When I began to be past danger of my
Wounds, I framed that tale about the thieues,
Intending to conceal my self, and so to make
Trial of your love to me, and of Clarinda's
Love unto Lysander, both which I find
Not to be equaled.

Kin. Good Father tell us how you found him
Wounded, and how you did preserve him.

Her. Sir, what I told you
Concerning the finding of him wounded,
All that was true, and how I did recover him
By a sovereign water; but that he after
Dyed within my arms, you see is false
And yet he spoke those words that I delivered
As his dying speech, he having then indeed
No hope of life: but heaven so ordered it,
That he recouer'd by my skill in Surgery,
In which Art I shall not boast to say
That I am equal with the most skillful of this age,
Which I think well appears, since I have cured
Him in so short a time; yet I must attribute
His sudden curing to a sovereign balm,
That an Egyptian gave me, from which country
I late came.

Kin. Holy man, expect from me a great reward;
For you have back to me restored the comfort
Of my life; but where have you since lived,
Or how came you by this disguise?

Enter Clarinda. Duke. I lived with him still in a little Cottage,
And he did fom the City fetch me disguises:
Divine Clarinda, pardon me, I was your bedfellow,
And did not know my own happiness then;
If I had known you, I would have done
Just as I did; I see you are amazd, it was I
That in disguise rescued you, and saved your honor,
When that villain would have ravished you;
In which I was most happy; for I shall now present
You, so much the richer gift to your Lysander.
Here brave Lysander, let me deliver up
Into thine arms the Jewel of thy life;
And in that make some part of satisfaction,
For the wrong I did he, in compelling thee
To fight for that which was thine own before
In justice.

Lys. My Lord, the service of my life hereafter
Shall make manifest how much I honor you,
And with what joy I do receive your gift.

Cle. I would have given my life to have redeemed
Lysanders; where is the joy then that I should feel
For his deliverance. O I have found the cause.
That does suppress it; it is envy that Clarinda's
Happier then my self: why should I envy that
Which is her do, both by his vows and her
Own merit.

Lys. How sad the Princess looks? I wonder
She does not speak to me.

Cle. Heart, though thou burst, the world shall not
See I grieve or envy Lysander and Clarinda,
May you be happy in your loves, which I can never be.

Lys. Her noble heart will burst with grief,
Would I had dyed, or rather that I had two hearts,
By death I had been free, this way I am
A debtor to the Princess, and that ingratitude
Torments me worse then death.

King. Call for the sacred Priest, and let us change
That which we thought should have been a Scoene
O blood, into a Scoene of joy, by joining
Two despairing Lovers hands together.

Du. O what a happy man's Lysander at this instant
Compard with what he was half an hour since!
Imagination cannot reach it; but on the other side
How far am I fallen from that happiness
That I possessed when fair Clarinda said
That she would marry me within a month.

Enter Priest. Kin. Come reverent Sir, perform an office
Acceptable to the Gods: Sister, take you Lysanders
Hand, and Cozen you Clarinda's.

Cleo. O what a cruel office has my brother put upon me.

Duke. I would this task were past,
Virtue I see thou art a cruel Mistress.

Clar. I in my soul grieve for the Duke,
His manly eyes shed tears to perform this Office;
I would to heaven he were my Brother,
Or that Lysander were; the consideration
Of his worth and infinite affection,
Which has appeard in all his actions,
Has gaind much upon me.

Priest. Will you Lysander take Clarinda for
Your Wife, forsaking all other till the hand of death
Arrest the one of you?

Her. Say no Lysander.

Lys. Reverend Sir, why?

Her. Because the Marriage is not lawful.

Duke. Can you prove it unlawful?
You saved my Life, but I shall value that no benefit,
Compared with this, if you can prove
Lysander and Clarinda cannot marry;
I Will make you more then you can wish to be.

Her. Lysander, did not your Father
When you last parted with him, give you
A little Cabinet, in which he bid you look
When you should marry, on his blessing
Not before, not at your death.

Lys. It is true, he did so, but I
Was so distracted betwixt joy and grief,
That I had quite forgot it.

Her. Send for it with all haste.

Kin. What can this Cabinet produce to stop The Marriage.

Cleo. I cannot plead desert,
Thou God of Love, because I have so short a while
Been subject to thy Laws; but well thou know
If thou oblige me to become thy subject,
By giving me Lysander, that I shall
More extol thy power then any Subject
That thou have: but on the contrary,
If thou do not assist me, I will return again
Unto Diana, thy utter enemy, and in her service
Spend the loathed remnant of my life.

Enter with a Cabinet, Paper in it. Kin. The Cabinet is come.

Duk. I make no doubt,
If It be within thy power, thou God of Love,
But thou will grant to me thy truest Subject
The wishes of my heart; but I do fear a greater
Power then thine, does overrule the destinies.

Her. Here Sir, read that paper; there you shall
Find, what you do little think.

King reads. Lysander, I do give you leave to marry whom you do think sit,
because I know you are able to make a worthy Choice, only Clarinda you cannot
marry, for she is your Sister. Lys. How! my Sister!

Duke. Love thou have heard my prayer, though I were
Ignorant, and knew not what to ask.

Kin. I am amazed, sure this is Witchcraft.

Duke. Sir, I beseech you prove this to be true.

Her. My Lord, if you will beg a Pardon from the King,
It is for a fault, that was never proved against me;
I then will make all things so plain, that no man shall deny it.

Enter Messenger. Mes. And please your Majesty, Iacomo is proved to be
The Count Orsinio's Brother.

Her. My Lord, let him be brought, heel help to the clearing of the discourse
I am to make.


Duke. Sir, I must beg a pardon for the sauer of my life.


Kin. What has he done? I pardon him, be it what it will.


Her. Then Sir, behold a banished man. pulls off his beard.


Kin. The Count Orsinio!


Lys. My Father! your blessing Sir.


Vtran. My dear friend! welcome. Enter Iacomo.


Duke. Sir, I Will not bid you welcome,
Till you make it plain, it can be no Marriage.

Iaco. My Brother!

Her. O thou wicked villain! art thou alive yet?
I might have known thee by thy villainies,
Through thy disguises.

Du. Good my Lord proceed unto your discovery.

Her. My second wife being barraine, I had
No hope of Issue Male; for I had Mariana
There by my first and it did grieve my Soul
To think that villain there should be my heir;
For he daily practiced mischief before unheard of.
It was not long before my wife observed
That the chief cause of all my discontent
Grew from her barrenness, and she being fearful
That my affection might decline as did my hope
Of Issue, thought of a strange and most unwonted
Means, to make her self appear a happy mother.
My friends Wife here, the Count Vtrante
Finding her self to be with Child; my Wife,
By help of Art did seem so too: but strange
To see how gold will work! for by a sum of
Money, my Wife did work the Mid-wiues, Nurse,
And Doctor, to cozen the true Mother of her Child
When ere she should be brought to bed.

Kin. How was that possible?

Her. Most easy Sir, as they did handle it,
The Child was borne, and proved a Boy,
As my Wife wished; for had it been a Girl,
It could not then have eased me of my grief,
My land being tied upon the Heirs Male.

Duke. Good Sir, proceed.

Her. The Nurse was by the Doctor straight
Commanded to carry into the next room the child,
Alleging that it was most necessary,
The Mother, after so much labor should
Sleep, which the Child's crying might hinder:
Within a short space comes in the Midwife
Pitifully weeping telling the Mother
That the Child could hardly live; but straight
The Nurse she entering the Chamber cried out
Alas the Child is dead; the woeful Mother
Falling in a swoone, had almost made
That sorrow real for her, which then but
Counterfeited for the Child.

Duke. The Child then was not dead.

Her. No Sir, the crafty Nurse
Had by a back-dore conuaid it out o'th house
By help of another Nurse that she had there
For the purpose: having recouer'd
The Mother out of her trance, the poor Lady
Desired to see her late comfort, though now
Her only cause of sorrow, the dead Child:
But the Doctor utterly denied that,
Alleging that would but increase her sorrow,
Which might impeach her health:
My friend here was not then at home,
And who durst contradict the Doctor
In such a case.

Kin. Was there
No servants in the house? Did none of them
Ask for the Child?

Her. Sir, to prevent that,
They had before provided a piece of wood
Shapt like a Child, and about that they put
A winding sheet.

King. But what excuse then made they
For their haste in dressing of it
For the grave, that was not then
Scarce cold.

Her. For that they told the servants
The Child being deformed they made such haste
To hide it from the neighbors; that they
Might not be witnesses of their Ladies shame,
In bringing such a Monster into the world.
The Nurse the same night came, and told my Wife
What they had done, and she aduising with
Her agents, the next night after seemed
To fall in labor, and by the help of those
Her creatures made perfect by their former practice,
She cozened me and the world, by making us
Believe, that she had truly brought me forth a son.
I did a thousand times kiss my young heir,
And by my careful education and his own
Brave natural parts, he is grown to be
What now you find, Lysander, for he is the same.

King. But how came you to know
Lysander was not your natural son, and these Particulars?

Her. My Wife Sir,
Being upon her death bed, she found her conscience
Troubled with this deceit, and could not
Depart in peace, till she had freely told me
Of this strange Story; I still concealed it
Out of my just anger against my wicked Brother;
Besides that great affection which I bare Lysander,
Continued still, and is now so great,
That if your Majesty by your Prerogative
Will but confirm it. I do adopt him for my Heir.

King. It shall.

Iaco. Thus Sir, was I defeated of my right; My Lord the Duke there by his
power, though I did prove this in the open Court, by witness of the Nurse and
Midwife; yet he made me to be banished as an iniurer of others.


Duke. I do confess the wrong I did thee
Though ignorant, and for to make thee satisfaction,
I will be a suitor to the King in thy behalf:
Sir, now upon my knowledge I dare affirm
That Lysander is son unto the Count Vtrante.

Lys. It was nature in me, that made me so much
Love the Count Vtrante: you blessing Sir.

Clarin. It does not grieve me that you are My Brother.

Lys. And for my part, I cannot add
To my own happiness, if I might have my wishes,
Now that you are my Sister; for I did ever love you
As a Sister rather then as a Mistress.

Duke. Divine Clarinda,
I cannot claim your promise till a month be past,
There is some part of it to come, but I hope
You will not strictly stand upon the time.

Clar. My Lord,
I should too much wrong my self, though I did not
Love you, in deferring of so great a blessing*
But the large testimony that you have given
Both of your worth and affection to me,
Have turned that great affection in an instant,
That I bare Lysander, as you could wish it,
Upon you; nay to say truth, I ever loved you,
Though not so well as he, and held your worth As great.

Duke. Dear Clarinda, give me not a surfeit.

Lys. I fear the King will here consent. whisper.

Duke. But good Sir,
What made you desire me to beg your pardon.
Or what made you conceal your self so long?

Her. My Lord, I Will tell you;
Your Lordship may remember, for it is not
Five years since, that this my Friend, the Count
Vtrante and my self, were both suspected
For poisoning of your (...), because we were
His professed Enemies; especially my self,
Which made me fly, though I were innocent*
For it was known to many, that the villain
Killed him for's own particular revenge
Yet my wicked Brother there, persuaded the fellow
At his death to say, that we had set him on
And got another rascal to witness with him
That it was true; my friend, not having so great
Enemies, did stay to justify himself,
And for his pains was laid in prison, and kept there
For his lands, till you got him releast,
And yet he was never brought unto his trial;
I, ere I left this Country, did leave this Cabinet
With my son, or rather yours, and withal
The charge of looking in it when he should
Be married. After many a weary step abroad,
I came home to my Country, and in disguise
Have lived here in the Forest, and saw my friends
Full often, although they knew not me;
And having this occasion of doing your Lordship
Service, I thought it would be a sure means
To get my pardon; especially when things
Were grown unto the extremest point
Of danger, I knew a timely remedy would be
Most welcome then of all, and that made me
Conceal my self so long.

Lys. Cleo. We are resolved.

King. My Lord, I freely pardon you, for I believe
It was indeed a lie, invented by your wicked
Brother, whom I do give you power to punish
As you think good.

Her. My Lord, I then desire
He may be kept a prisoner all his life;
For should he have his liberty, I know
He would do mischief that we should all Repent of.

Iaco. Brother, thou art wise,
Thou should have been the first that should
Have felt mine anger.

King. Away with him.

Duk. I dare not speak for thee thou art so great
A Villain. Exe. Guard with Iacomo.

King. Come, let us set forwards to the Temple.
And pray the Gods to shower a blessing
Tpon this Couple; - What means my Sister?

Lysan. and Cleon. set swords ta their breasts. Cleo. Thus Sir,
Lysander and my self have made a solemn
Contract, and with our bloods we will seal it,
Either to go thus to the Temple to be married,
Or to the grave.

King. How Sister!

Cleo. What is it Sir, in your opinion, makes
Lysander unworthy of me.

King. His blood compard with yours, is base.

Cleo. But Sir, his mind's heroicke,
And who will compare the servant with the Master?
The Body is no more unto the Mind.

King. What would you marry with a Subject?

Cleo. Who would not
Marry with a Subject that is a King of Virtues,
Rather then with a King that is governed
By his Vices?

Duke. Sir, you know the greatness of her
Spirit; If you will have her to live, you must
Consent.

Cleo. Brother, you stand to us
Instead of destiny; for you have in your power
Our thread of Life. Say, will you spin us out
A happy thread, that we may live to serve you,
Or will you cut it short?

Duke. O be not cruel to your only Sister;
What Is all the out ward glory, if you rob
The mind of that which it delights in?
I know that your intention is to make
Her happy, do not mistake the way;
Her mind is not taken with the glorious title
Of a King; for if it had, she might have made
Her choice, since all the neigbouring Kings
Admire her: No Sir, she aims at that
Which made men Kings at first, Wisdom,
And Valor, and should she search the world
She cannot find a man where they
Do meet so fully, as in brave Lysander:
O Sir, then be not cruel, thinking to be
Careful of your Sister.

King. She Is cruel to her self,
And rather let her perish by her rash hand,
Then so dishonor me, by marrying with
A Subject.

Cleo. Farewell then
Cruel Brother: Lysander, let us part
To meet again for ever; I Will go first,
Because my Brother shall not think of saving me
When you are dead.

Lys. No Madame,
Let me show you the way, and when I feel
The pain, I Will tell you if it be too great
For you to suffer.

King. Hold: take him Sister,
And be happy in him: I love thee more
Then ever, because I see, thy mind is only
Fixed on true Worth without additions.
I learned of Count Orsinio to bring things,
To the extremest point, so to increase
The joy: it had been a sin to part
Those Bodies, whose very Souls seem to be
Joined together.

Cleo. Brother, may I perish,
When I forget this benefit, or cease to pay
To you my Lord, my thanks for pleading so
Lysanders Cause and mine.

Kin. Great Love this day has shown his mighty power
Without the help of, Fo^^^^^ In an hour
He has relieved from death and from despair
Four of his truest Subjects and made fair
This day that was of(...), let us praise
His power that in (...) can raise
From misery to an excess of Joy,
And in an instant that content destroy:
He has to us been just this day as well as kind.
Rewarding virtuous Love let none then call him blind.

Exeunt omnes. THE EPILOGVE.
Our Author fears there are some Rebell-hearts
Whose dullness does oppose Loves piercing darts:
These will be apt to say the Plot was dull,
The Language rude, and that 'twas only full
Of gross Absurdities; for such as these
He cares not now, nor ere will strire to please:
For if your selves as Masters, and Loves Friends,
Be pleased with this sad Play, he has his ends.
FINIS.

