THE LIFE OF BERNARD GILPIN, A MAN MOST HOLY and renowned among the Northern
English.

Faithfully written by the Right Reverend Father in God GEORGE CARLETON Lord
Bishop of Chichester, and published for the satisfaction of his Countrymen, by
whom it was long since earnestly desired.

The just shall be had in everlasting remembrance. Psalm. 112. 6. The memory of
the righteous shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot. Prove. 10.
7. LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES, dwelling in Red-crosse-streete. 1629.

GEORGE BISHOP OF CHICHESTER, TO WILLIAM BELVSS Knight, wishes salvation in
Christ.
IF in the Church of God, there were many such as Gilpin was, I should hold it
needless, to recommend the memorial of this Man unto the world. But seeing
there are so few, or (to speak freely what I think) none at all, who (following
the rule of sorare piety, and sanctimony) have propounded so notable an
example, to all those who do aspire to ablessed life, and constantly walked in
the same) I conceive that such a pattern, would kindle the zeal of many good
men, to walk in so fair a way, though happily they were not able to attain
to the perfection thereof. Examples of the like piety in holy men we have heard
of many in ancient histories, and often read of them in their writings, but in
men of this our age it is not to be found: For so far short are we from this
zeal in furtherance of piety, that now it is to be feared, left Religion (so
eagerly and joyfully undertaken, and professed at first) will come to be even
^oathed, and rejected of many, and so finally come to confusion: seeing
experience of former times has confirmed this truth unto us that profanesse of
life and manners has drawn withal the ruin of Religion, thereby to give us
a taste now of what it is like to do hereafter; Now we make no doubt, but (in
so great a decay of ancient holiness) Gilpins name (like the Owl amongst
other Birds) when it comes abroad will prove hateful to many; Yet I held this
no sufficient reason why to suppress it: Wherein though some pick out matter
for their derision and scorn, yet other some may meet with matter for their
admiration, others for their Imitation to work on. As for you (Worthy Sir) you
hereby enjoy the harvest of your earnest and often desire. Many years this
writing has line by me from the common view, the edition whereof I did
therefore of purpose defer, to prevent them, (who may seem to stand at a
distance far off from this form of holiness) from judging themselves
preiudized hereby: But as my purpose is to further all, as much as I might, so
it was not to hurt any: If any good or furtherance redound to any by this my
labor, he must thank you whose importunity has extorted it, such as it is,
out of my hands. And seeing you live in the very place, where Gilpins life and
virtue was notoriously famous, and your self have been so earnest with me for
the same, this very careful desire of yours to preserve and perpetuate Gilpins
memory, is a most pregnant proof and an undeniable testimony of the ingenuity
and goodness of our own mind: which worthy disposition of yours has
commanded me to dedicate this little work to your name, to stand for ever as a
pledge of your Religious affection to Gilpin, and my true love unto you. So
Fare you well.

TO THE VIRTUOUS memory of Mr. BERNARD GILPIN, his Reverend Kinsman, sometimes
Parson of HAVGHTON.
Show me that man who can, one amongst ten,
Who did as this man did, this man of men,
Who never knew Symony, that spreading Tetter,
Which makes the bribe-swolne soul the Devils debtor;
Who e're encountered with so many thieves,
Vnript their rankling sores, and cured their grieves!
For gifts so richly rare, for wit so quick,
And would refuse a proffered Bishopric!
Who made the poor his children, eased their need,
And fed the hungry with the staff of bread!
To blind, to lame, to sick, to sore, to poor,
Aneye, a stay, a care, a cure, a shower,
To right, to rear, to cure, to cheer, to water,
And show the temper of his generous nature!
Find me out such a man, North East, South, West,
Unless you rake him from the Phoenix nest.
Now trust me these rare virtues make me proud,
Deep-stamp'd in this grave Patriot of my blood:
Who though translated from the paths of men,
And now translated by an English pen,
Yet shall the substance of his inward shrine
Out-liue the vading period of time:
For these sweet odours shall preserve his fame,
So long as Kext from Kentmire takes his name.
Dignum la^d^ virum
Musa vetat mori,
Coelo beat. --


Acts. 20, 28, 29. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to the whole
flock, whereof the holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of
God, which he has purchased with that his own blood. For I know this, that
after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the
flock.
Philip. 3. 18, 19. For many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell
you weeping, that they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ: Whose end is
damnation, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is to their shame, which
mind earthly things.
The life of BERNARD GILPIN.
BErnard Gilpin was borne at Kentmire in the County of Westmorland in the year
of our Lord 1517. of an ancient and honorable family, being the son of Edwin
Gilpin, the elder brother of which Edwin was slain in the battle of Bosworth,
being heir in the fifth descent of Richard Gilpin, who in the Reign of King
John was enfeoffed in the Lordship of Kentmire hall by the Baron of Kendall for
his singular deserts both in peace and war. This was that Richard Gilpin who
slew the wild Boore, that rageing in the mountains adjoining, as sometimes
did that of Erimanthus, had much indammaged the Country People: whence it is
that the Gilpins in their Coat Arms give the Boore. The Mother of Bernard
Gilpin was 'Margaret the Daughter of William Laton of Delama^n in Cumberland, a
man of an ancient house, and a family famous in that warlike age, as from
whence had sprung many right valiant Gentlemen.

This Bernard being yet a very child gave testimony of future holiness upon
this occasion. A certain begging Friar the better to dispose the hearts of the
people to liberality toward him, professed himself a Zealous Preacher: how
beit the Friars of those days, and that rank were but a fordid and dishonest
people, some of them, yea the greatest part laboring for a form of holiness,
but denying the power of it in their lives and conversations, whereas others of
them retained not so much as an outside thereof. This wa^dring companion was
come upon the Saturday to the house of this Gilpins Father, as purposing to
preach the next morrow being the Lords day; where he was enterteined
respectively enough: for at that time it was a sin unpardonable to offend the
least of these locusts. The holy Friar at supper time eat like a glutton, and
like a beast could not give over tossing the pot, until being overcome with
drink he exposed himself a shameful spectacle to so chaste and sober a
family. But in the morning as if he had been some young Saint lately dropped
from heaven, he causes the Bell to towle to the Sermon, and in the midst
thereof blustering out certain good words, he presumed to grow hot against
some sins of the time, and amongst the rest to thunder bouldly against
drunkenness. Young Gilpin who had but newly got the use of his tongue, having
observed (as it seemed) the hateful baseness of the man by his oversight the
night before, and now hearing the beast cry out so loud against these crimes
which himself had so lately been guilty of, as he was sitting near to his
Mothers lap in the Church suddenly cries out in these words: O Mother, do you
hear how this fellow dare speak against drunkenness, who was drunk himself
yesternight at our house? The Mother made speed to stop the childs mouth with
her hand, that he might speak no further. After this the parents of the boy
perceiving his disposition by many evident testimonies were diligently careful
to make him a scholar. He had a schoolfellow one Edwin Airy whom afterward he
loved entirely for his good disposition and approoved honesty, but Gilpin did
far excel the rest in acuteness of wit. Having therefore with great
approbation passed his time in the Grammar-schoole, he is by his parents, (who
had now conceived great hope of their son) sent to Oxford. At that time in
Oxford both learning and Relligion were in all things out of joint, and
overgrown with the rust of Barbarism. And now was young Gilpi^ sixteen
years of age at his coming to Oxford, being in the year of our Lord 1533.
Being entered in Queens College, he profited wondrously in humane learning: He
became, as almost all the good wits of that time very conversant in the
writings of Erasmus. He fell very close to the study Logic and Philosophy,
wherein he was observed to grow excellent, and to bear away the bell in
schools. He added to this his humane learning, the singular knowledge of the
Greek and Hebrew, wherein he made use of the assistance and friendship of one
Neale, betwixt whom and this Gilpin was grown much familiarity by the affinity
of their studies. This Neale was a Fellow of New-Colledge, and afterward
Professor of the Hebrew in Oxford. And now after some few years carefully
spent in these studies Gilpin began to be so famous, and so beloved in Oxford,
that there was hardly any place of preferment for a scholar, whereof the
eminency of Gup^ns virtue had not rendered him worthy in the public estimation.
There was then an enquiry made for men of more then ordinary learning and fame,
who might make up a number of scholars in Christ-Church at that time newly
begun, and honor it with the commendation of learning. Amongst these was our
Gilpin one of the first elected. At that time he had not fully attained to
truth and sincerity in Relligion, as having been always instructed in the
traditions of the Church of Rome; for in those days the most part of men did
not regulate their Relligion and peity by the rule of Gods word, but according
to the Traditions of their Fathers received from hand to hand. His mind
although disposed to holiness did for a while remain in darkness, and being
overclouded with prejudicial respects labored under the burden of
superstition not without some shadow of Antiquity; being more earnest against
vices and corruptions of the time, then against the traditions of the Fathers.
Therefore at that time Gilpin seemed a great vphoulder of the Popish Relligion.
He held disputation publicly against John H^^per, who was afterward Bishop of
Worcester, and at the last a glorious Martyr of Christ. After the death of King
Henry the eight, when Edward the sixth was King, Peter Martyr induced by the
piety and Munificence of such a Prince read the Divinity Lecture in Oxford.
Against whom the Sophisters endeavored to make opposition, Chedsey, Weston,
and Morgan, who desired also to draw in Gilpin on their side, that by his
advise and help they might the more distract Peter Martyr: and the matter at
last came to this push, that Gilpin was produced to hold disputation against
the positions of Peter Martyr. Upon occasion of which dispute Gilpin to the end
that he might defend his cause in hand adventureth more diligently then
ordinary to examine the Scriptures and the ancient Fathers: And by how much
the more he studied to defend the cause which he had undertaken, so much the
less confidence he began to have therein, because he supposed that he ought to
stand for the truth, which he strove with all his might to discover and find
out. But whiles he was zealously searching for the truth, he began by little
and little to have a sight of his own errors. Whereupon Peter Martyr was wont
often to say, that he was not much troubled either for Weston, Morgan, or the
like, but as for that Gilpin, (says he) I am very much moved concerning him,
for he does and speaks all things with an upright heart. The rest seem to me
to be men, who regard their bellies most of all, and being most unconstant are
carried away as it were with every blast of ambition and covetousness. But
Gilpin re^ting firmly upon gravity of manners, and the testimony of a most
laudable life seems to honor with his own goodness the cause which he
undertakes. Yea, and he did often pray unto God that he would be pleased at
the last to convert unto his truth the heart of Gilpin, being so inclinable to
all honest desires. And doubtless God heard the prayer of Peter Martyr: For
from that time forward Gilpin drew near to the knowledge of the truth, not
upon a sudden, but as himself confessed by degrees.

Peter Martyr had much illuminated Oxford with the truth of Divinity and the
knowledge of humane learning. Whereupon Gilpin resolved more earnestly to apply
himself both by study and prayer to search out the truth. To which purpose he
determined to put in writing the disputation which had been betwixt himself
and Hooper. But in the expressing and unfolding of the said controversy,
while he dwelt for a time upon an accurate examination of the points which he
had resolved to confute, whiles he searches them to the bottom, and
regulateth the institutions of the Church to the authority of Scripture,
without which he well understood that there could be no true Church at all, he
felt himself easily overcome, and was not sorry to be overcome by the truth.
Those draughts being found amongst Mr. Gilpi^s writings reserved in his private
deske do testify his ingenuous and free confession, together with the power
of the truth and Gods great mercy in his conversion. Whiles he curiously pryeth
into the Popish relligion, he was enforced to acknowledge that very many
errors were crept into the Church which hinder and obs^ure the matter of our
salvation, insomuch that they are no small offense to as many as hunger and
thirst after righteousness and the knowledge of the truth. He discovered many
corruptions and changes of sound doctrine, he found not so much as word
touching seven Sacraments before Peter Lumbard: and that the use of the Supper
was delivered under one kind only contrary to express Scriptures: that
Transubstantiation was a devise of the Schoolmen: that the doctrine of the
work wrought called Opu^ operatum* was newly risen: that the Mass was turned
from a Sacrament to a Sacrifice: that in the Church wherein all things were
ordained for the edification of the people, all things were now done, to the
non-edification of them: that the adoration of Images was instituted against
the express commandment of God. Demurring for a while as distracted with
these thoughts, behold the rule of faith lately changed in the Council of Tr^n^
utterly astonished him. For he had observed out of the ancient Writers as well
as out of the later ones, Lu^. ba^d, Scotus, Aq^inas, and the rest, that the
rule of faith was to be drawn only from the holy Scriptures, but in the
Council of Trent he beheld humane traditions made equal wi^h the Scriptures.
And seeing he understood these traditions to be nothing else but peevish and
cross expositions of the holy Scriptures, devised by the Bishops of Rome, and
thrust in among the Decretall Epistles, as also that the said Decretall
Epistles were merely feigned and suppositions, as is confirmed by the
testimonies of many learned men, and indeed by the confession of the very
Papists themselves is acknowledged to be out of all doubt, this so great a
confusion of things being risen in the Church in these latter ages enforced
Gilpin now earnestly desiring nothing so much as true piety, to begin to doubt
whether the Pope might not be that Antichrist foretold in the Scriptures, and
the Popish Church plainly Antichristian. For what is it to exalt and set up
himself against all that is called God, insomuch that he sits as God in the
Temple of God, behaving himself as God, if not this, that the Pope is head of
the universal Church, the Lord, the Monarch, and as it were the God thereof?
And that the word of the Pope is defended as the very word of God? For how
shall not he whose word is as the word of God, be as God, opposing himself to
God, and showing himself that he is God? But this word is called the unwritten
word, or verbum non script^m* is drawn out of the stinking puddles of the
Decretals, that is to say, patched up together out of false and fictitious
writings. And this word which is in no respect worthy to be compared with the
word of an honest man, is the unwritten word of God, and to be enterteined with
the same pious affection as are the holy Scriptures. Can Antichrist when he
shall come, (if yet there be another to come) more grievously wrong and
blaspheme Christ and the holy Scriptures then the Pope does? And here at the
last he demurred as in an exceeding great doubt. For who would have thought the
Pope to be Antichrist? who durst to speak such a word before Martin Luther?
Therefore, thus he argued with himself: If the Pope be Antichrist, I fee not
only probable but even necessary causes to depart from the Popish Church. But
if the Pope be not Antichrist, I see no sufficient ground for such a departure.
It is not lawful to make a separation from the Church: but we are not only
enjoined to come out of the Church of Antichrist, but we see the fearful
anger of the living God, and hear his dreadful threats thundered out against
those who shall remain in Babilo^ that Sinagogue of Antichrist. Forasmuch as a
voice from heaven speaks unto us. Apoc. 18 Come out of her my people: and it
is denounced that they shall receive of her plagues whosoever have been
partakers of her sins. Here therefore he stoppeda while: because except the
Pope were manifestly detected to be Antichrist, he did not understand how he
might separate from the Church: and therefore he applied himself by searching,
reading, prayer and meditation, to be resolved of this truth. He observed out
of the Ancient Fathers, Tertullian, I^rom, Ambrose, Augustine, Chrysostom,
Cyrill, and others, that passage wherein Antichrist is described, 2 Thessalonians. 2*
7. He which now withhouldeth shall let till he be taken out of the way, to be
so interpreted as understood of the Roman Empire, that the Roman Empire which
now held pre-eminence should keep possession until Antichrist shall come, who
shall possess the seat of the Roman Empire. And moreover whereas it is said
in the same place, that Christ shall not come again except there be a
depart^r^ first, he observed this thing to be fulfilled likewise. He perceived
first a very maine departure of the Church of Rome from her primitive
simplicity and truth. And secondly, a second departure or separation no less
manifest, to wit, of that of the Reformed Churches from the Church of Rome.

Mr. Gilpin would often say that the Churches of the Protestants were not able
to give any firm and solid reason of their separation besides this, to wit,
that the Pope is Antichrist. For he understood that a departure was commanded
from the Church of Antichrist by that heavenly iniunction, Go out of her my
people, and be not partakers of her sins, lest ye reciue also of her plagues,
Revel. 18. 4. In which place S. lohn wisely foretells that the people of God
should be called out of the Synagogue of Antichrist: that here was no third
thing to be thought upon: that either the Church of Christ was not to be
forsaken, or the Pope to be accounted Antichrist, out of whose Church the
Church of God is called forth by an heavenly voice and command. And now event
which is the most undoubted interpreter of Prophecies has prooved all these
things unto us: We have seen already many Ages ago that Kingdom taken away,
which ruled over all in the time of the Apostles: and in the room thereof an
Ecclesiastical Kingdom erected, such an one as was never seen in the Church
in former Ages. We have beheld the fearful departure of the Church of Rome
from the ancient purity and integrity of the Church. We have observed and do
daily the people called as it were by a voice from heaven, coming out of
Babylon, that is to say, out of the Church of Antichrist. Our eyes have seen
these things fulfilled, which we have read of as being foretold so many Ages
ago. These things moved the mind of Mr. Gilpin wonderfully to follow that
Church which was showed unto him out of the word of God. The Church of Rome
kept the rule of faith entire, until that rule was changed and altered by the
Council of Trent. And from that time it seemed unto him a matter of necessity
to come out of the Church of Rome, that so that Church which is true and called
out of from thence might follow the word of God. For this calling out seemed to
point out unto us a peculiar estate of the Church: so Abraham was called out
from Vr of the Caldees, the people of Israel were called out of Egypt, the
Jews out of Babylon, after the captivity of seventy years: and at the last
after the self same manner the Reformed Church called out of Mystical
Babylon* or the Church of Rome. These things were seen to have been brought
to pass by the wonderful providence and powerful hand of God. Therefore he
saw that there was a necessity of commi^g out of her, and that that
Apostaticall Church was to be forsaken. But he did not these things violently,
but by degrees. In the mean while Cuthbert Tonstall Bishop of Durham had a
purpose to send Mr. Gilpin to visit the Churches in forrane parts allowing him
means for his travel. This Tonstall was Mr. Gilpins Mothers Uncle. But before
he undertook his voyage being commanded to Court he preached before King
Edward the sixth touching Sacrilege; which Sermon is public in print. Then he
applied his mind to think upon his travel. Now so it was that he had a
Parsonage bestowed upon him by the care of his friends. This Parsonage Bishop
Tonstall persuaded Mr. Gilpin to keep still in his hands, as means to furnish
him with allowance for his travel, that he might demean himself more
honestly and more Gentleman like therein. But Gilpin who had retained this
Parsonage but a short while, before he would betake himself to travel called
unto him a friend, whom he knew to be relligious, and a scholar, and one that
would not be idle in the function of the holy Ministry, and unto him he made a
resignation of his place but a little while before bestowed upon himself.
Which thing when Bishop To^stat came to know of, he chid with Mr. Gilpin: And,
I (says he) have a care of thee, and thou reiectest it as impertinent. But I
tell thee this before hand, that by these courses thou will die a beggar. At
the first Gilpin indeavoureth with fair language to appease the mind of the
Bishop his especial good friend. Afterward he added that he had left his
Parsonage upon necessity, because he could not keep it in his hands with any
peace of conscience. But (says the Bishop) thou may hold it with a
dispensation, and in this case thou shall be dispensed withal. But (answered
Gilpin) the Devil will not be restrained by any bonds of dispensation from
laboring in mine absence the destruction of my people committed to my charge:
And I fear that when God shall call me to an account of my stewardship, it
will not se^ue my turn to make answer that I was dispensed withal whiles the
Devil made havoc of my flock. At which answer the Bishop seemed offended: but
having hereby made trial of the sincerity of Gilpins heart he began to use him
with more and more respect. Yet he did often threaten him, as Mr. Gilpin was
wont to say, that Fathers soul, (a familiar word of the Bishops) Gilp^n would
die a beggar. In his travel abroad he first visited his brother George at
Mechlin, who had written unto him to that purpose: then he lived for a while at
Lovaine, and at Antwerp, and at Paris. After he was departed out of England, he
received letters a second time from his brother George, whereby he was directed
to meet him at Mec^lin, because he had something to deliver unto him by word of
mouth that he could not conveniently write. After they were met, Mr. Gilpin
understood the reasons why he had sent for him thither to be nothing else, but
only to persuade him to take upon him a Parsonage, which might afford him
maintenance while he should visit foreign Universities. Gilpin now seemed to
himself to be in a strait, for he knew that he had lately given the Bishop
distaste upon this occasion, and he perceived that in this matter his brother
was put upon him by the Bishop. At last therefore he writes back to the Bishop
in these words.

The Letter follows.
MY very honorable good Lord, and most worthy ever to be honored by me: I
thought it not fitting ^o conceal from your Lordship that my brother has
written unto me of late, that setting all excuse aside I should give him
meeting at Mechlin, because he had something to say unto me touching very
necessary affairs which could not be dispatched by letters. When we were met,
I understood that ^his business with me was nothing else but to try me, if I
would take upon me a living, whiles my self in the mean while should remain
a student in the University. But had I known before hand that this was the
cause of my journey I should not have thought it necessary to have interrupted
my studies with going to Mechli^. For now I confess I have discussed it with
all the learned, but especially with the holy Prophets, and with the most
ancient and most godly writers since the time of our Savior: so that I am
fully resolved so long as I live never to burden my conscience in this case,
nor to keep a living in mine own charge with condition to live from it. He
answered that your Lordship had written unto him that you would gladly confer
a living upon me, and that your Lordship and mine other friends, whereof
himself was one, judged me too scrupulous in conscience in this case.
Whereunto I answered, if I be somewhat too scrupulous, (as I think I am not)
yet it is a matter of that nature, that I had rather be little too strict, then
to give my conscience too much scope herein. Forasmuch as I am once persuaded,
that I shall not offend God in refusing such a living as I cannot be resident
upon: so long as I do not censure evil of other men, as I hope I never shall:
yea I pray daily for all those who have the care of souls, that they may be
able so to give an account unto God of the charge committed unto them as may be
most for the glory of God and the edification of his Church. He told me also
that your Lordship would not confer any charge upon me but such a one as should
be served as well, or perhaps better in mine absence, then if I were there my
self. Whereunto I answered, that I doubted not but that there might be in
England a great number of men far more able then my self to take the cure
upon them: And therefore I wish above all things that they may retain both the
place and the benefit, and feed both the bodies and the souls as I suppose
all good Pastors bound in conscience to do. But for mine own part I cannot in
conscience reap benefit from that place, wherein another man bestows his
endeavors. For though any other should teach and preach for me as constantly
and industriously as ever Saint Augustine did, yet cannot I think my self
discharged by another man's paines-taking. But if yet I should be persuaded thus
to offer violence to my conscience upon condition to remain either here or in
any other University, my disquiet of conscience would never permit me to profit
in my study. At his present, I praise God, I have obtained a comfortable
privacy in my studies near to a Monastery of Minorite Friars, so that I have
opportunity to make use of an excellent library of theirs so often as I will. I
frequent the company of the best scholars, nor was I ever more desirous to
learn. Hereupon being given to understand by my brother George, that your
Lordship had some thoughts of bestowing a living upon me, which thing might
interrupt the course of my studies, I emboldened my self (upon the experience
which I have had of your Lordships love toward me) to unlock the closet of my
thoughts unto your goodness freely: Humbly beseeching that your Lordship will
be pleased to permit me to live free from a Pastoral charge, that I may the
more quietly apply my studies. And forasmuch as I understand that your Lordship
is sollicitous, how I should be provided for, if God should call your Lordship,
(who are now well in years) out of this world, I beseech you that the thought
thereof may no more disturb you. For if I shall be brought low in means, I
doubt not but in short time to be able to obtain some lecture either in this
University or else where, where I shall not lose my time, a course which is
much more pleasing unto me, then if I should take upon me a Pastoral charge. I
beseech Christ preserve your Lordship.

From Lovaine the 22. of November, 1554.
Thus far Mr. Gilpins Letter.

Now tell me, what one of all those gaping rookes of our time has endeavored
with more art to acquire the^ this man to decline a spiritual living? At his
first coming over into the parts beyond the Seas, he resided for the most part
at Lovaine, afterward he went to Paris. Whiles he abode in Paris, Bishop
Tonstall was careful that a certain book which himself had written at that
time concerning the truth of the body and blood of Christ our Lord in the
Eucharist should be published in print by the diligence of Mr. Gilpin. I am not
ignorant that some Papists have objected to Mr. Gilpin, that the same work was
by him corrupted contrary to the mind of the Author. And even in mine hearing,
when after these things I was a scholar under him at Houghto^, Francis
Wickliff: gave notice unto Mr. Gilpin what was mattered touching the corrupt
edition: Whereupon he having disprooved that suspicion by many reasons, at the
last produced the letters of Cuthbert Tonstall, wherein the Bishop gave him
very great thanks, because he had been both faithful and diligent in the
edition of that work. At Paris Mr. Gilpin resided in the house of Vascos^nus,
and conversed with learned men. And whiles he asked the opinions of learned men
concerning these things which had troubled his mind, for the most part they
answered him in that manner, not as if they regarded the pacification of
conscience, which he aimed at only, but the establishment of the traditions of
the Church. At that time was Neal^ at Paris also, with whom Mr. Gilpin dealt
somewhat freely, that both of them together might join in pursuit of the
truth. They had by chance some discourse touching the adoration of Images; Mr.
Gilpin was much troubled hearing the Papists condemn Idolatry in their
discourses and yet permitting to the people every where the adoration of
Images. He demanded with what comfort of conscience any man could bow himself
before an Image: and is not this (says he) the idolatry forbidden in the
second commandment? This did Mr. Gilpin demand of him the rather, because he
observed the man a little too much addicted to the Popish opinions. Neale
answered with that usual distinction of an Idol and an Image. That the Images
of the Saints were not Idols, and so consequently that the worshipping of their
Images was no idolatry. Mr. Gilpin replied, there is no mention of an Idol in
the second commandment, but there is a prohibition of bowing before a g^aven
Image, or the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth
beneath, or in the waters under the earth: wheresoever they are, we are
forbidden to fall down before the likeness of them. And what (says he)
makes an Idol. The workman frames the similitude of some man, the graven
Image is not an Idol, but ado^ation makes it an Idol. Therefore the Apostle
says, that an Idol is nothing, because there is but one God. In the opinion of
the person adoring it seems to be something, but that which the fancy of the
party adoring apprehends is indced nothing in the world: therefore Idolatry
is when the worship due to God only is bestowed upon the creature. But
whosoever in prayer boweth down himself before any creature whatsoever gives
unto the creature the worship due to God alone. The commandment of God
forbids us to make unto our selves any graven Image, or the likeness of any
creature. But they make it unto themselves who make it for a religious use. We
are also forbidden to bow down ourselves before any such creature; for those
who do so, do serve and worship the same creature. And in this place that
distinction of La^r^a and Doul^^ is frivolous, which are words of the same
signification, forasmuch as that distinction is taken away by the express words
of the commandment; Thou shall not bow down unto them. So that bowing down
unto them is forbidden, notwithstanding we see it practiced every where. To
this Neale answers, that the ordinances of the Church are not to be altered
without mature deliberation, Gilpin replyeth that it is not in ourpower to
alter the ordinances of the Church. But seeing I cannot alter things already
determined in the Church, it remains that I especially endeavor to charge my
self, and to draw near to the sincere worship of God, as his grace shall
enable me.

Mr. Gilpin did often profess that when he lived amongst the Papists, he had
observed many things which had estranged his heart from that religion. He
understood that a man's chiefest comfort consisted in the Article of
justification, which Article he saw so obscured in Popery that true consolation
was utterly excluded. Therefore he did with all diligence enquire into the
Scriptures and writings of the Fachers. Returning into England in the days of
Queen Mary he beheld to his great grief the Church oppressed with blood and
fire: and being placed by Bishop Tonstall in the Rectory of Essingdon, he began
to preach the word of God, and sharply to tax some vices which then reigned in
the Church. He propounded the doctrine of salvation plainly and soundly, which
thing procured him many back friends, especially among the Clergy whose faults
he had touched to the quick. There was at that time among the Clergy of the
Bishopric of Durham one Tonstall Parson of a Church in that Diocese. This man
was very hot against Gilpin, and accused him often to the Bishop as an
heretic, and one that deserved to be burnt as other heretics were. But the
Bishop could not endure to shed blood, and therefore dealt mildly with him, and
preserved him from the proiects of his enemies. I have heard Anthony Carleton
relate, (and he at that time lived in the Bishops house) that the Bishops
Chaplains at a certain time had some discourse with Gilpin about Luther: and
that one of them had asked him what he thought of Luther and his writings.
Gilpin confessed that had not read the writings of Luther, I propounded unto my
self, (said he) this course; first of all to search the Scriptures diligently,
and to be acquainted with the expositions of the Fathers upon them. As for the
writings of the Neoterickes, I have only looked upon them: howbeit I refuse
them not when and where they agree with the Ancients. One of them commended
Mr. Gilpins resolution, and said, it would be well with the Church, if all men
would duly respect the writings of the Fathers: for then the vpstart opinions
of late writers would not so much disturb the Church, such as are of these of
Luther. But Gilpin answered, if Neoterickes and late writers produce the
opinions of the ancient Fathers, the novelty of the men is not to be
disdained, but the antiquity of the doctrine is to be reverenced.

They hereupon subtly draw on Gilpin into a disputation concerning the
Sacrament of the Altar; propounding therein two questions, the one concerning
the Real presence, the other concerning Transubstantiation. Touching the Real
presence Gilpin confessed that he had no very strong Argument wherewith in his
judgment he might oppose the Real presence: For I suppose, (says he) that
therein lies hid a great mystery, such a one as is above my capacity, rather
to be adored then disputed upon. They asked then what he thought of
Transubstantiation? He answered that there was no necessity why we should
believe those things which have no solid foundation in the word of God. Do you
not then believe, (said they) as the Church believes? Gilpin replyeth that the
Church had not always held that as an Article of faith: I am (says he) of the
Catholic faith, and the Catholic faith changes not. But in this point I see
alterations* such as the Catholic faith is not capable of. They demanded what
alterations in faith he had observed touching the Sacrament of the Altar. He
replyeth: I do not find that in the Church in former ages, there was any
thing spoken, or written about Transubstantiation. Peter Lumbard was either the
first, or at least one of the first that brought in the alteration of the
ancient faith. And what do you your selves think? Is the bread in
Transubstantiation converted into the flesh and blood of Christ? They answer,
that they believe so absolutely. But, says Gilpin, Peter Lumbard who was the
first man that made an alteration of the faith of our forefathers in this
point, himself did not believe as you do. For in his fourth book the
eleventh distinction, F. thus he has it: there is no Transubstantiation but of
bread into flesh, and wine into blood. And if that be true, then doubtless it
follows consequently, that in the Transubstantiation of the bread there is no
blood. And now (says he) how will you reconcile these things. They stood at a
stand, as having nothing to answer, because the words of Lumbard plainly deny
that in the Transubstantiated bread can be any blood, or in the wine his flesh.
Whom when Gilpin had observed to stagger in this point, take notice now (says
he) of the immutabillity of the Catholic faith: we see the alteration of
Transubstantiation. For when Lumbard had broached this doctrine, that there was
a kind of change, he would have it non otherwise understood then thus: that
the bread only should be changed into flesh, and the wine only into blood.

Nor did men at that time dream of any other conversion in the Sacrament of
the Altar, until the fiction of concomitancy was broached by Thomas Aquinas.
He was a man that understood well the difficulty of this point, and therefore
he underpropped it with Concomi^ancy, that forsooth by reason of Co^comitancy
there is both flesh and blood in the Transubstantiated bread. But these are the
inventions of later men, whereas the Catholic relligion abhors invented,
alterations in matters of faith. While they were houlding this disputation
without speakeing aloud, because they were close at the Bishops back, who at
that time sat before the fire, for it was in the winter season: the Bishop
leaned his chair somewhat backwards, and harkened what they said. And when
they had done speaking, the Bishop turning to his Chaplains, uses these
words. Fathers soul, let him alone, for he has more learning then you all.

Whilst he lived at Essingdon, he preached the word of God constantly to the
people. Now so it was that the Archdeaconry of Durham was annexed to the
rectory of Essingdon. Thereupon Mr. Gilpin for a time supplied both places. And
when by chance he had notice that the Bishop was so careful of him, that he
had a purpose to increase his maintenance, he made answer that he was provided
for sufficiently and even somewhat more then sufficient already; and desired
the Bishop that he might have his good leave to resign either the Rectory or
the Archdeacons place: for (says he) the one of them will be sufficient, me
thinks both together are to heavy a burden for me. Hereat ihe Bishop seemed
to be moved with him, and said: have nor I told thee before hand, that thou will die a beggar? I found them both combined; and combined I will leave them.

Not long after he bestowed upon Mr. Gilpin the Rectory of Houghton being a
very large Parish containing 14. Villages with very large possessions, Mr.
Gilpin being settled at Houghton persevered most constantly in the duties of the
Ministry, and repaired the decayed houses. His Parsonage house seemed like a
Bishops Palace; nor shall a man lightly find one Bishops house amongst many
worthy to be compared to this house of his, if he consider the variety of
buildings, and neatness of the s^ituation.

Whiles Mr. Gilpin lived at Houghton he was touched with a care not of that
parish only but of many more: for he saw and was much greiued to see many
congregations through the distaste of impropriation, as they call it, to be even
dispersed and destitute of Pastors. For the parsonages being in the possession
of Laymen, there remained not maintenance for a Minister, for the Laymen sought
out for poor base preistes, who were only able to read prayers to the people
morning and evening: nor did the one use to require, or they take care to
perform any more. This desolation of the Church, and ignorance of the common
sort much troubled the holy heart of Mr. Gilpin. He therefore purposed with
himself, with as much care and vigilance as he could, not to make up the breach
wholly (for that was a thing impossible for him to do) but to do this own
duty to the best of his endeavors, that the truth may be propagated, and God
glorified. This desolation of the congregations appeared most of all in
Northumb^rland and the ports adjoining which are called Riddesdale, and
Tindale. For in these quarters, especially, in that time, the word of God was
never heard of to be preached amongst them but by Mr. Gilpins Ministry. So that
once a year it was his custom to make a journey amongst them. For which
purpose he would usually take the opportunity of Christmas Holidayes, when in
respect of frost and snow other men were loath to travel. That time he liked
best, because then there came many Holy Days together, and the people would
more usually assemble upon the Holy Days, whereas at other times they neither
would come together so easily, nor so often.

He got himself a great deal of estimation and respect amongst this people
both by preaching and by distribution of moneys to the poor in his Journey,
being sometimes benighted before he was well aware, and forced to lodge in the
snow all night. In which extremity, he commanded William Airy, who for the
most part attended upon him to tro^t the horses up and down and neither to
permit them nor himself to stand still, whiles he himself in the mean while
did bestirre himself sometimes running, sometimes walking, as not able to
stand still for could. At home his daily care was for the discharge of his
Ministry and provision for the poor. Now there was in this town of Houghton a
street of poor people: for their releife he took order that every Thursday
through the year a very great pot should be providedfull of boiled meat
purposely for the poor. And not at Houghton alone, but even wheresoever
oppo^tunity presented it self, he was careful for the poor, insomuch that by
the common consent of the Country people he was styled a father of the poor.

Upon a time as he was returning home upon a journey there was a certain
husbandman at plow, in whose teame of horse one upon a sudden fell down,
whether with being overwrought or upon some disease it is uncertain. The
husbandman and those who were with him did their best to raise the horse again
with all the strength they had: but it was in vain, for the horse was dead.
Mr. Gilpin passing by accidentally stayed to observe the issue of the matter:
And perceiving that the horse could not be raised again, and that the
husbandman was exceedingly grieved for the death of his beast, and that he
cried out he was even undone by that miserable accident, he commanded his man
to alight from the horse he had under him, and patiently to carry the saddle
and bridle to the next town, and to give to the poor man the horse whereon he
rode. The husbandman thereupon cried out, Alas Sir, I am not able to pay you
the price of so good an horse. Be of good cheer (says Mr. Gilpin) thou shall
never pay me for him till I demand it, in the mean while go on with thy
work. Yea, and many a time as he travailed was he accustomed thus to help
poor men. When at any time he chanced to meet any naked poor, he would put
off part of his apparel to cover their nakedness: and at his table he
usually fed many poor persons. When that blessed Queen Elizabeth of never
dying memory after the direful times of her sisters Reign came to the Crown,
the scarsity of learned men who were able to preach the word of God, moved not
only many religious persons, but even the very Counsel of the Queen to seek
a salve for this sore by all the means they could. Mr. Gilpin observing the
laudable endeavors of many in relieving the Churches want in this kind,
himself also was exceeding studious to do what good he could possibly in his
own charge. Whereupon he began to conceive thoughts of a seminary of good
literature* or a Grammer-schoole; and builded a school allowing maintenance
for a Master and Usher. Himself also made choice out of the same school of
such as he liked^best to be privately instructed by himself. Which resolution
of his much benefited Mr. Gilpnn himself, and the whole Church of God all
England over. For in that school of his were bred very many learned men, who
very much graced the Church by their endeavors and uprightness of life. There
was great resort of scholars to that school of his, many of whom were boorded
in the town, and many at Mr. Gilpins house. He boorded the sons of Knights
and Esquires at a small rate: those who were of his kindred were free: yea and
he had many poor, men's sons upon whom he bestowed both meat, and drink,
and cloth, and education. Whereby Mr. Gilpins school was every where spoken of
to his credit, but himself much more. Out of this school of his he sent daily
very many to both Universities, unto diverse whereof he also allowed maintenance
in the University at his own cost and charges. And now while he was wholly
taken up with these employments, glory and reputation which follows him that
flies from it, and flies from him that had pursued it, had made the name of
Mr. Gilpin most renowned, insomuch that he was was not only honored among
the Fathers of the Clergy, but amongst all the Nobility of the Kingdom.
Amongst the Nobles at Court the Earl of Bedford was one that marvelously
respected Mr. Gilpin. This Earl earnestly desired of the Queen that the
Bishopric of Carlisle, at that time vacant upon the death of Owen Oglethorpe,
should be bestovved upon Mr. Gilpin, and obtained it. And thereupon the Earl
dispatcheth his letters to Mr. Gilpin to gather that power of election which
is termed Congedes^ier. Mr. Gilpin receiving the letters together with the
Congedeslier, sent back a messenger out of hand with letters to the Earl,
wherein having returned all hearty thanks to the Queen, and to the Earl, he
humbly beseeches the Earl to be mediator to the Queen for him, and to get
him excused as concerning the Bishopric, alleging that he was best acquainted
with his own strength, and conscious to himself of his own insufficiency for
the discharge of so great a place: if in the meane-while he could be any other
way serviceable to the Church, he would be diligent and careful in some meaner
employment. At that time was Edwin Sands Bishop of Worcester, a man venerable
for his approved wisdom, learning, and holiness of life, who was afterward
translated to London, and thence to York. This Bishop happened to be in London
at the same time when the Earl of Bedford was busy about the preferring of Mr.
Gilpin to a Bishopric: and he, either by the persuasion of the Earl, or out
of the entire love which he bore to Mr. Gilpin, (for he was near a kin unto
him) dispatched letters to Mr. Gilpin, whereby he persuadeth him to accept of,
and to keep the Bishopric thus offered. The Letter was found amongst Mr.
Gilpins papers in these words.

MY much and worthily respected Coozen, having regard unto the good of the
Church of Christ, rather then to your ease, I have by all the good means I
could been careful to have this charge imposed upon you, which may be both an
honor to your self, and a benefit to the Church of Christ. My true report
concerning you has so prevailed with the Queens Majesty that she has
nominated you Bishop of Carlisle. I am not ignorant that your inclination rather
delights in the peaceable tranquillity of a private life. But if you look
upon the estate of the Church of England with a respective eye, you cannot with
a good conscience refuse this charge imposed upon you: so much the less,
because it is in such a place, as wherein no man is found fitter then your
self to deserve well of the Church. In which respect I charge you before God,
and as you shall answer to God herein, that setting all excuses aside, you
refuse not to assist your Country, and to do service to the Church of God to
the uttermost of your power. In the mean while I give you to understand that
the said Bishopric is to be left unto you untouched, neither shall any thing
of it be diminished (as in some others it is a custom) but bou shall receive
the Bishopric entire as Doctor Oglethorp has left it. Wherefore exhorting
and charging you to be obedient to Gods call herein, and not to neglect the
duty of your own calling, I commend both yourselfe and the whole business of
the divine providence. In have* At London, the fourth day of April, 1560.

Your kinsman and Brother, EDVVIN WORCESTER.


Mr. Gilpin returns thanks to the reverend Bishop his kinseman. But as
touching the Bishopric, he desires to be excused, and in that resolution he
became immovable. And many there were who thought him blameworthy because he
had so stiffely rejected a Bishopric. But amongst some Mr. Gilpins reputation
seemed to grow greater by this refusal, then if he had accepted the offer. I
remember that I my self have heard him discoursing amongst his friends
touching this occasion, when one of them asked him upon what grounds he had so
stiffely refused a Bishopric: to whom he made answer, that he refused not so
much the Bishopric, as the inconvenience of the place. For (says he) if I
had been chosen in this kind to any Bishopric elsewhere I would not have
refused it, but in that place I have been willing to avoid the trouble of it,
seeing I had there many of my friends and kindred, at whom I must conniue in
many things, not without hurt to my self, or else deny them many things not
without offense to them: which difficulties I have easily avoided by refusal
of that Bishopric.

Upon this refusal of Mr. Gilpins, Doctor John B^st a learned and religious
man was made choice of for the place: but whether he had it conferred upon him
upon the same terms at it was proffered to Mr. Gilpin, that no diminution
should be made of any part thereof that I know not. Not long after this his
refusal of that Bishopric, he was set upon by another request, to wit, that
he would take upon him to be Provost of Queens College, in Oxford, whereunto
he was chosen, or at least he would be pleased to nominate some other for that
place who might be a good and fitting man for the same. There was a letter
written unto him by Thomas Francies to this purpose.

COmmendations premised etc. Seeing I have a resolution to relinquish this
place which I now hold in Queens College in Oxford, being heartily desirous
that some virtuous, godly, and learned man, and such a one as by the statutes
of the College shall be fit, may be chosen to the place, I have thought good
once more to to make a tender of the same unto you: which if it shall please
you to accept I shall be ready upon the receipt of your letters to that purpose
to advertise the Fellows thereof, whom I know to be marvailously well inclined
toward you. But if so great a trouble with so small a maintenance (for so I
may truly term this burden) do no^ give you content, I entreat your advice
and direction as a friend to nominate me a man unto whom I may resign the
place, such an one as your self shall know to be a man fitting; and one who
may and ought to be chosen. I shall gladly be directed by you so scone as I
shall understand your mind by your letters* which I pray you be careful to
send me wi^h all convenient speed. In have from Oxford the 17 of December. 1561.

What answer Mr. Gilpin returned to this message, I do not find, but it is
manifest that he refused the offer of that preferment. For against all the
entreaties of friends in these kinds, he remained constant and immovable, as
the Poet spoke of King Latinus.

I lle vel^t pelagi rupes immo^ar^sistit. Moved no more
Then Rock on shore.



ANd all this while Mr. Gilpin seemed even to supply the place of a Bishop by
preaching, by taking care of the poor, and by making provision for the
necessity of other Churches, by erecting of schools, and by accommodating men
learned and fitting for the holy function of the Ministry. As for Mr. Gilpins
house it was like unto a very Monastery, if a man consider a Monastery such as
were those in the times or Saint Augustine, but not such as these latter ages
have brought forth.

William Lord Cecill Baron of Burghtey principal Secretary to the Queen being
sent into Scotland about affairs of State, in his return homewards being
drawn with the fame of Mr. Gilpin, came to Houghton, and visited him. Mr.
Gilpin* entertayneth him with all respects and due rites of hospitallity. When
the Lord Ceci^^ had well observed Mr. Gilpin, and had approoved the
extraordinary courtesy of the man, and had took notice of such diligence, and
abundance of all things with so complete service in the entertainment of so
great a stranger, and so unlooked for a guest, being now ready to depart
thence, he spoke on this wise: that he had heard much be the report of others
touching Mr. Gilpin, but what he now had seen and tried was much more then
that which he had formerly heard. Therefore speaking in very friendly manner to
Mr. Gilpin, he said: Sir, if you have any occasion or suite at Court or before
the Counsel, I pray you to make use of me as a mediator for you.

The honorable Baron being returned toward Durham, when he came to the hill
called Rai^ton hill, reflecting his eye upon the whole champion Country which
he had now passed, he looked back very earnestly both upon Mr. Gilpins house
and the situation thereof; and uses these words, I do not blame this man
(says he) for refusing a Bishopric: for what does he want that a Bishopric
could more enrich him withal? Besides that he is free from the greater weight
of cares. Mr. Gilpin did not omit to visit the people of Ridsdale and Tindal^
once every year. Amongst whom he was esteemed a very Prophet, and little less
then adored by that half barbarous and rusti^k people. It happened by chance
that whiles Mr. Gilpin preached amongst them, a certain good fellow had stolen
away Mr. Gilpins horses: upon the missing whereof, there is Hue and Cry raised
through the Country, that Mr. Gilpins horses were stolen, and must be searched
for with all possible diligence. The fellow who had stolen them so soon as he
hear that they were Mr. Gilpins horses (for he knew not whose they were when
he took them away) was in great fear and trembling. The theft did not much
trouble his conscience, but when he heard the name of Mr. Gilpin, it cast hin
into trouble and distraction of heart. Therefore in much trembling, and with
all the speed he could he brought back Mr. Gilpins horses, and humly craved
the pardon and benediction of Father Gilpin: and protested that after it came
to his knowledge that they were Mr. Gilpins horses he was afraid to be thrust
down quick into Hell, if he should do him any wrong.

Upon a time when Mr. Gilpin was in these parts at a town called Rothbury,
there was a pestilent faction amongst some of them who were wont to resort to
that Church. The men being bloodily minded practiced a bloody manner of
revenge, termed by them Deadly-feod. If the faction on the one side did perhaps
come to the Church, the other side kept away because they were not accustomed
to meet to gether without bloodshed. Now so it was that when Mr. Gilpin was in
the pulpit in that Church, both parties came to Church in the presence of Mr.
Gilpin; and both of them stood, the one of them in the upper part of the
Church, or Chancell, the other in the body thereof armed with swords and
iavelins in their hands. Mr. Gilpin somewhat moved with this unaccustomed
spectacle goes on nevertheless in his Sermon: and now a second time their
weapons make a clashing sound, and the one side drew nearer to the other, so
that they were in danger to fall to blows in the midst of the Church.
Hereupon Mr. Gilpin comes down from the pulpit, and stepping to the
ringleaders of either faction, first of all he appeased the tumult. Next, he
labowreth to establishe peace betwixt them, but he could not prevail in that:
only they promised to keep the peace unbroken so long as Mr. Gilpin should
remain in the Church. Mr. Gilpin seeing he could not utterly extinguish the
hatred which was now inveterate betwixt them, desired them that yet they would
forbear hostility so long as he should remain in those quarters: and this
they consented unto. Mr. Gilpin thereupon goes up into the pulpit again (for
he had not made an end of his Sermon) and spent the rest of the allotted time
which remained in in disgracing that barbarous and bloody custom of theirs,
and (if it were possible) in the utter banishing of it for ever. So often as
Mr. Gilpin came into those parts afterward, if any man amongst them stood in
fear of a deadly foe, he resorted usually where Mr. Gilpin was, supposing
himself more safe in his company, then if he went with a guard.

Upon a certain Lord's Day Mr. Gilpin coming to a Church in those parts before
the people were assembled, and walking up and down therein espied a glove
hanged on high in the Church. Whereupon he demanded of the Sexton, what should
be the meanning thereof, and wherefore it hanged in that place? The Sexton
makes answer that it was a glove of one of the Parish who had hanged it up
there as a challenge to his enemy, signifiing thereby that he was ready to
enter combat with his enemy hand to hand, or with any one else who should dare
to take down that challenge. Mr. Gilpin requested the Sexton by some means or
other to take it down. Not I Sir, (replied the Sexton) I dare do no such
thing. But (said Mr. Gilpin) if thou will but bring me hither a long staff, I
will take it down my self: and so when a long stafe was brought, Mr. Gilpin
took down the glove and put it up in his bosom. By and by came the people to
Church in abundance, and Mr. Gilpin when he saw his time went up into the
pulpit: In his Sermon ^e took occasion to reprove these in huma^e challenges,
and rebuked them sharply for that custom which they had of making challenges
by the hanging up of a glove, I hear says he, that there is one amongst you,
who even in this sacred place has hanged up a glove to this purpose, and
threatens to enter into combat with whosoever shall take it down. Behold, I
have taken it down my self, and at that word plucking out the glove showed it
openly, and then instructed them how unbeseeming those barbarous conditions
were for any man that professed himself a Christian, and so labored to
persuade them to a reconciliation, and to the practice of mutual love and
charity amongst themselves. After his Sermon it was his custom to distribute
money amongst the poorer sort, and many times to visit them who were
imprisoned, and after he had preached unto them in prison to bestow money
largely amongst the prisoners: many of whom he brought home to repentance for
their former passed life, and to honest conversation: and for many who were
condemned to die he procured pardon, and saved their lives.

When we were children a rebellion was raised in the North by the Earls of
Northumberland and Cumberland. Which Mr, Gilpin perceived before hand by
certain evident signs. And because he understood that in so trouble-some a
time he should want power to defend himself and his own, he conceived
thoughts of going aside for a while. Therefore after a speech made to the
Masters and Scholars that they should demean themselves carefully and
peaceably until his return, himself went to Oxford: residing there until
the Queens Army under the command of the Earl of Suff^x should make speed to
Durham for discomfiture of the rebels. The rebels were now within Durham, but
at the report of the Queens Army they dispersed themselves and fled. After they
were put to flight, there was sharp and cruel proceedings against the simpler
sort, whom the rebels had drawn to their faction under pretense of serving the
Queen: for the silly people were solicited as for the Queens service, the
rebels in all places giving it out that they stood for the Queen. During the
time that the rebels had possession of Durham with their Army, Mass was sung
in the Cathedral Church day by day; some of them flew out as far as
Houghton. There they found Mr. Gilpi^s barnes full of corn, young cattle
ready fatted, and many things provided for hospitality: but they make wast of
all, selling the corn, consuming the fatted ware, and basely making havocke of
all those things which Mr. Gilpin had provided for pious and honest uses. There
was among them one fellow whom Mr. Gilpin had sometimes saved from the gallows,
and this knave was the wickedest of all the rest in rioting away Mr. Gilpins
goods. Now after the rebels were dispersed, and proceeding made against the
simple people somewhat more sharply then was fitting, Sir George Bows, who was
constituted marshall for that purpose, Mr. Gilpin who was now come home again
begged the lives of many by his intercession: for he knew well enough that
many men were drawn as it were into the snare, not wilfully, but through
ignorance, and through the fraudulent practices of others. And now the whole
trouble being over, Mr. Gilpin returns to his accustomed endeavors of
studies and charity. There was betwixt the most learned and reverend James
Pilkington then Bishop of Durham, and Mr. Gilpin more then ordinary friendship
through their long acquaintanc and pari^ie of dispositions. The Bishop was wont
oftentimes to visitt Mr. Gilpins at his house, and the Bishop also incited the
rather by Mr. Gilpins example builded a school at Lancester, and brought the
statutes of the school to be over looked and examined by Mr. Gilpin. He was
also familiarly acquainted with, and marvaylously respected Thomas Levery a
godly and learned man master of Sherborn-hospital. There was at that time,
published a book of Thomas Cartwrights touching Ecclesiastical discipline
which book was exceedingly liked by many in those days. William Bir^h a
Canon of Durham, a man learned, but too hastily inclining to that form of
discipline which Cartwright had proposed sent one of these books to Mr.
Gilpin to read over; requesting him to look over the book, and that he would
be pleased to writ back his opinion concerning the same. Birch seemed to be
somevvhat in have upon the matter: for very shortly after he vvrote again to
Mr. Gilpin, requesting him to send over his book with his censure of it,
before M. Gilpin had read it all over. Mr. Gilpin did accordingly send back
the book, and a letter to Mr. Birch, and as he had an excellent vein in
versifying, in the end of his letter he wrote certain verses, which are these
that follow, Multa quidem legi, sed plura legenda reliqui,
Po^^hac qu^m dabit^r copi^, cuncta legam:
Op^ant vt (...) ma^^lis Ecclesi^ cunctis,
Praesens vit^ negat: vita futura dabit.
Which verses of his I have thus Englished, Much have I read, but more remains
behind,
I Will read the rest when I can leisure find:
Men wish our Church no blemish had at all,
It cannot be so here, in heaven it shall.


THere came unto Mr. Gilpin a certain Cambridge man, who seemed a very great
Scholar, and he dealt earnestly with Mr. Gilpin touching the discipline and
reformation of the Church. Mr. Gilpin told him that he could not allow that
an human invention should take place in the Church in stead of a divine
institution. And how? Do you think, says the man that this form of
discipline is an human invention? I am, says Mr. Gilpin, altogether of that
mind. And as many as dilligently turned over the writings of the ancient
fathers will be of mine opinion. I suspect that form of discipline which
appears not to have been received in any ancient Church. But yet, says the
man, latter men do see many things which those ancient fathers saw not: and
the present Church seems better provided of many ingenious and industrious
men. Mr. Gilpin seemed somewhat moved at that word, and replied: I for my part
do not hold the virtues of the latter men worthy to be compared to the
infirmities of the fathers. The other man made answer that he supposed Mr.
Gilpin to be in an error in that point. But Mr. Gilpin used these words
purposely because he perceived that this fellow had a strong conceit of I know
not what rare virtues in himself, which opinion Mr. Gilpin was desirous to
root out of him. George Gilpin who had most elegantly translated out of low
Dutch into English the book of Phillip Marnixius Earl of Aldegun^ called the
Beehiue of the Roman Church came out of the low Countries unto Bernard. This
man was brother to Bernard and Agent for the Queen with the States of Holland,
amongst whom he left behind him a famous memory of himself for his singular
wisdom. And having lived for some space most lovingly with his brother Bernard
being about to return from Holland, he had advised with the Queen and
Council of the Kingdom touching the affairs which he had to treat upon with
the States in the Queens name. The Earls of Leicester and Bedford exceedingly
favored the two brothers, George for his wisdom in affairs of state, and
Bernard for his holiness of life. These requested George to persuade his
brother Bernard to declare in wrighting the motives and means of his
conversion from the Roman superstition to the light of the Gospel. To which
request Mr. Gilpin answered that he would do it plainly and sincerely without
any dissimulation. The copy of his letter to that purpose I found among his
papers to be thus.

The letter of Bernard Gilpin to his brother George in the year of our Lord
1575.
YOu do request (brother) that I should relate unto you somewhat at large the
manner and means of my conversion from superstition to the light of the
Gospel: a thing, which I suppose, is not unknown unto you to have been a
work of many years: nevertheless as time and health shall give leave I will
conceal nothing from you herein. I will confess mine own shame to the
confusion of the Devil; I will say with the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 13. I was
received to mercy, for I did it ignorantly. In the days of King Edward I was
drawn to dispute against certain positions of Peter Martirs: howbeit out of a
natural inclination I have always so far as I could avoided controversies
and disputations. And when I was but a young Divine, and had found out by
holding that disputation that the foundation where to I trusted was not so
solid as I formerly supposed it, I thereupon began somewhat seriously to read
over the Scriptures and writings of the Fathers, that I might confirm my self
in my received opinions. But God freed my mind from that preiudicate conceit
by little and little, and the zeal which I had for the Popish religion began
to cool in me every day more and more. But on the other side I felt certain
sparkling desires which urged me to search out the truth. In the mean while I
repaired to the Bishop of Durham, that I might be further instructed; who told
me, that in the matter of Transubstantiation, Innocentius the Pope the third of
that name had done unadvisedly, seeing he had made it an Article of faith. And
he did further confess that the Pope had committed a great fault in that
touching Indulgences and other things he had taken no better order for the
quiet of the Church. Afterward I conferred with Doctor Redman, in whom I
reposed much hope in regard of his eminent virtues, and great schollership. He
affirmed unto me that the book of Common Prayer, was an holy book* and
agreeable to the Gospel. These things cast me into many distractiue thoughts.
After this one of the fellows of Queens College in Oxford told me that he
heard Doctor Chedsey saying among his friends, that it must come to this
point, that the Protestants must grant us a real presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, and we likewise give way unto them in the opinion of
Transubstantiation, and so we shall accord. Doctor Weston made a long Oration
touching the Supper of the Lord to be administered under both kinds. Mr.
Morgan told me that Doctor War^ a man most famous for life and learning had
affirmed unto him that the principal sacrifice of the Church of God was the
sacrifice of thanksgiving. This was his answer when I had demanded of him what
could be said for the sacrifice of the Mass. The most learned Bishops in this
Kingdom at that time confuted the primacy of the Pope both in words and
writing.

Mr. Harding being newly returned home out of Italy, in a long and famous
oration so plainly set out and painted to the life the Friars and unlearned
Bishops, who had met at the Council of Trent in their green gowns, that it
abated in me and in very many others a great deal of that opinion and
confidence which we had reposed in General Councels.

These things and many others gave me occasion diligently to search the
Scriptures and the writings of the Fathers: whence I had began to observe very
many and very great abuses, and some enormities oftentimes used, and as often
defended in Popery, and to judge reformation necessary on the other part.
Whiles I went on in this manner, I was overruled by the persuasions of some
friends to accept of a Parsonage; whereunto I was drawn against my will. If I
offended God in undertaking the charge before I was a more sufficient scholar,
and better grounded in Religion, I ask God forgiveness. Nor do I doubt but I
have obtained mercy in his sight. Before I was entered upon that Parsonage I
preached before King Edward at Greenwich a Sermon which had approbation of many
good men.

The Lord Treasurer being at that time Secretary obtained for me from the King
license as a general Preacher throughout the Kingdom so long as the King
lived which time fell out to be not much above the space of half a year
after. In my Sermons I handled those points wherein I was best grounded, and
wherein I was undoubtedly resolved o^t of the Scriptures. I examined the Mass;
and the abuse so far as I was able to observe at that time consisted in the
too much reverence, and grosser worship of the people; because I believed not
Transubstantiation. Nevertheless at some times I read Mass, but seldom and
privately. Then was I forthwith sent beyond the Seas that I might oversee the
printi^g of my Lord Bishop Tonstall his book touching the Eucharist, with two
or three books more as you know, at Antwerp: where I beheld for the space of
three years at Paris, Antwerp, and L^va^n^, and in some other places very
gross Idolatry. This thing did more and more estrange me from the Popish
religion: most of all because the learneder Papists did in their disputations
in schools deny, the adoration of images, yet allowed the intolerable abuse
thereof in their Churches. And now whiles with all earnestness I advised with
the holy Scriptures, and writings of the Fathers, I observed many things
alienated mine heart from the Popish Church. I observed in that Church notable
corruptions of the doctrine of the Bible, many things in the Sacraments
instituted against Scripture, some Sacraments lately added: In the Sacrament of
the Supper the one half taken away: the fiction of Transubstantiation brought
in: traditions of the Church made equal to the word of God, and to the holy
Scriptures, and to be embraced with the same pious affection: the worship of
Images brought into the Church: all things performed in the Church before the
people in an unknown language: but above all the rest the question concerning
Antichrist troubled me most, because it seemed not to me a safe thing to make a
separation from the Popish Church, except I were first fully resolved that the
Pope is Antichrist: and in this point I cannot easily express with how many
difficulties and distractions I was daily opposed. Afterward I was sent for
home again by the Bishop, who conferred upon me the Rectory of Essi^^don:
where when I had endeavored to be constant in preaching, I observed that I had
upon a sudden procured to my self many and heavy enemies thereby: for I had
preached against plurality of Benefices, and Non-residency. Mine adversaries
cried out that all such as broached that doctrine would prove heretics
quickly. Others were much displeased with me for that I had preached repentance
and salvation by Christ. They laid to my charge that I did not make whole
Sermons about Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Holy water, the worshipping of
Images, the invocation of Saints, and the like; which they could never hear
come from me. And by how much the people were more earnest to resort to my
Sermons, so much the more eagerly they took offense at me and hated me. A
very small matter brought me into danger. An honest Matron, because in her
pangs of childbirth she had often called upon God, was grievously checked by
the other good women, because she had not called upon the blessed Virgin. To
whom she made answer: I have heard* (says she) a certain famous Preacher, one
Gilpin, a man that came lately out of France, if he will advise me to call upon
the Saints, I will take his counsel in that point. I told them that I durst
not persuade any one to invocate the Saints, but that those who call only upon
God for help in all their dangers, have a commandment from God so to do, and
a firm promise for the infallible comforting of their conscience. This
occasion stirred me up many foes. In the mean while I often conversed wit^
learned men, my very loving friends and kindred. I demanded how it came to
paste that there was no reformation of so many abuses touching Images,
Relics, Pilgrimages, buying and selling of Masses and Trentalls, with many
other errors which in the time of King Edward the Papists had not only
confessed to be superstitious, but had promised reformation of them* and
professed that it was meet the Church should be purged of them: which thing
they said they would gladly do, if ever the power came into their hands
again. When I asked of them in which of these points reformation should begin,
in expectation of which thing I returned from Paris the more willingly, answer
was made unto me, that no way m^st be given to the ignorant multitude. If (say
they) we once confess any errors at all, they will straightway cry out that
many other things also are worthy to be reformed, besides those which we shall
yield unto them, and so they will be still growing upon us, that we shall never
have done reforming. These things wounded me grievously, and drove me to seek
out for peace of conscience. After these things, having preached two or three
Sermons at Newcastle, I began to explain my conscience more at large, where
there were gathered twelve or thirteen Articles against me, and sent to the
Bishop. And now had mine adversaries of the Clergy whom I had grievously
provoked, obtained what they had long looked for. Nor would they give over
until the Bishop had called me before their faces, to examine me in the point
of the Sacrament. The Bishop showed me as much favor, I suppose, as he durst.
In Transubstantiation he would not trouble me, only he inquired concerning the
real presence, which I granted, and so was freed out of that danger. And as
touching the real presence, I found not my self fully resolved. I supposed
that therein lay hid a mystery above my capacity. Nevertheless my conscience
did sometimes chide me, for that I had before them yielded in express words to
a point which seemed unto me doubtful. But I hoped that God would pardon mine
ig^orance, and in time bring me to a greater light of knowledge.

The winter following Q^eene Mary departed this life, and then I had begun to
explain my mind more fully. For before that time (for I must needs confess
the truth) weakness, ignorance, and the terrors of mine adversaries had
somewhat restrained me. About Easter I was accused to the Bishop upon many
Articles, both out of the Diocese of York, and of Durham, all which things
nevertheless hurt me no further then thus, that the Bishop incited thereto by
the complaints of mine adversaries struck my name out of his last Will and
Testament, forasmuch as the Plebeians and ordinary sort of people were
extremely offended with me. Now I in that I lost the Bishops Exequutorship
found my self eased of a great burden, and was glad thereof. But as for the
favor of the multitude, I hoped in time through the goodness of God to
recover it again, that my preaching might profit the more to edification, for
otherwise I never desired the love of the vulgar. In harvest came the visitors,
and Doctor Sands sent for me to Aukland, and appointed me both time and place
to preach against the primacy of Durham. But he himself preaching the day
before, whiles he seemed utterly to deny a real presence, had so wounded my
tender conscience, that the night following I could not sleep at all; and I was
much troubled in my mind, whether I should preach the next day or not. At the
last I went almost out of my bed into the pulpit, where, I know not how it
happened, whether it was through my disquiet of conscience, or want of sleep,
or in that I had offended God to go up against my conscience, but me thought I
did never feel such a want of utterance, and yet in my judgment I had
provided matter enough, and weighty reasons. The next day all the Ministers in
the Diocese were met to subscribe. Now so it was that in a point or two of the
Articles my conscience did not appear to me so well resolved, as I could have
wished. Therefore I stepped a little out of the way hoping that I might escape
from being called. But when my Curate came to the book, who, I supposed, would
never have stood at it by reason of some discourse I had formerly with him, he
withdrew himself as unwilling to subscribe; and thereupon I was called for,
and the book held out unto me; when straightwayes I had these thoughts in my
self: My greatest confidence is reposed in this religion, because it gives
glory to God, and authority to the word of God for the rooting out of
superstition, and humane doctrines. Only mine heart doubted in certain points
of smaller consequence, which God (as ^ hope) shall in time reveal unto me. If
I shall refuse, I shall be a means to make many others to refuse, and so
consequently hinder the course of the word of God. Therefore I subscribed, and
the night follovving I sent unto Doctor Sands my protestation touching those
two points which had troubled me. He being nothing offended took my
protestation very courteously: so my Curate subscribed also, and the day
follovving fell sick. And vvhiles I was gone along with the visitors to
Kendall and Lancaster, he dyed before my return having not been sick a whole
week. Some supposed that subscription killed his heart, others said his
infirmity proceeded from excessive drinking, God only knows what was the
cause of his death. In process of time, me thought I grew more and more
strengthened and resolved: but I will confess the truth, I had many and
grievous temptations, which would not let me sleep for many nights, and drove
me betwixt sleeping and waking into such dreams, as I think few men ever had
the like. My nature did ever desire to avoid controversies. My chiefest comfort
and endeavor was to preach Christ, and salvation through Christ plainly and
sincerely, and to comfort my self in the most sweet promises of holy
Scripture, and in pouring out my prayers to God. The insatiable covetousness
that could be restrained by no bounds of temperance and moderation, together
with the pride and carnal liberty, and other vices of the same rank, which
reigned among all sorts and degrees of people, but most of all in us the
Priests and Ministers, who ought to be as we are termed, the Salt of the earth,
have oftentimes broke my sleeps. But recovering I quieted my self in God,
saying, surely how much more the iniquity of men does abound, of (...) the more
glorious shall God appear in purging, sanctifying, and preserving his elect
people in the midst of a froward generation. I was ever sollicitous and wary
either in subscriptions or oaths not to be catched in a trap. It appeared
enough to me, and su^ficient for the Doctors of the Church, that all men were
satisfied in the Scriptures and the Articles of the faith. In other things as
they are agreeable to Scripture: because the holy Scripture ought to hold
sovereign place and preheminency above all the writings of all men. I remember
when I went to be admitted into Orders by the Bishop of Oxford* that the
Bishops Chaplain did administer an oath unto us that we should allow the
Ordinations already made, or hereafter to be made. Touching which oath when he
considered somewhat seriously what it was to oblige our selves to ordinations
to come, concerning which we could resolve upon nothing, these things not only
much distracted me, but troubled nine or ten more, who were sworn with me, men
far better scholars then my self. For my part ^ resolved to be sworn to no
writings but with this exception, so far only as they are agreeable to the
word of God. Now, how much it distressed my mind that an oath should be
exacted in doubtful ca^es, I have explain^d in another discourse for the quiet
of my conscience. And this I may boldly say, that since ^ took the ^^urse to
explain mine infirmities by writing, not fearing who took notice of them, so
that it might benefit my self or others, I have found exceeding peace and
quiet of consci^nce, and ^ am day by day more edified and consumed by the
reading of Scripture. And in this case, ^ praise God, that when I found my
self most distressed and weak my faith in the mercies of God was so firm, as
^ assure my self, that if at that very instant I should die, yet I have had
and do retain that confidence, that these distractions could nothing hind^r
my salvation. I am resolved with St. P^^l* I (...) obtained mercy, for I did it
ig^orantly; and with Job, Although the Lord kill me, yet will I trust in him.
Yet I have full many a time asked God mercy for these offenses, infirmities,
ignorances, and all other things, and will ever do so whiles I shall live in
this world. God be merciful unto us all.

Thus far Mr. Gilpin.

THou see (Reader) Mr. Gilpins upright dealing: He speaks nothing of his
own virtues, but he is wholly taken up with the acknowledgement and
enumeration of his weaknesses. Perhaps some Critics will laugh at the
simplicity of the man, but I herein admire his Apostolic spirit, who after the
example of blessed Paul dare not boast of himself, but boasts in his
infirmities, that Christ may dwell in him. Nevertheless howsoever he is wholly
taken up with declaration of his own infirmities, and has of set purpose
spoke nothing of his own virtues, yet this is apparent that he was twice
accused by his back-friends to Bishop Tonstall in the days of Queen Mary: But
Bishop Tonstall who abhorred to shed blood was a sweet defense to Mr. Gilpin
against the diverse informations of his enemies. At the last he was accused to
B^nner Bishop of London who gave order to a Messenger for his apprehension. Mr.
Gilpin perceived the imminent danger, (for he had notice that a Messenger was
dispatched to attach his body) and perceiving the relief which he had found in
Tonstalls clemency would now fail him, he prepared his holy soul for
Martyrdom: commanding William Airy the Steward of his house to provide him a
long garment, that he might go the more comely to the stake. But the sudden
death of Queen Mary freed the man from this danger. After the publication of
the Council of Trent, when by chance there happened some discourse betwixt Mr.
Gilpin and Thomas Levery, and Levery had asked the question what Mr. Gilpin
thought touching that Council: The Fathers of the Council of Trent (says he)
have done the Church a very shrewd turn: for that which was indifferent before
times they leave not so now. I remember that Bishop Tonstall often told me
that Pope Inn^cent the third had done very unadvisedly, in that he had made the
opinion of Transubstantiation an Article of faith: seeing in former times it
was free to hold or refuse that opinion. Moreover the Bishop told me that he
did not doubt but that himself, if he had been in that Council, could have
prevailed with the Pope to have let that business alone. And what he judged
concerning Transubstantiation, the same may a man resolve touching all Popery
after the publication of the Council of Trent, for that which was indifferent
before, now they do not suffer so to be. Therefore I suppose that the times of
our forefathers though oppressed with much ignorance were happier far then
the ensuing Ages can be under the Papists: because they have now altered in the
Council of Trent many institutions of the ancient Church. For whereas they
have placed a part of the rule of faith in Traditions, that is a thing which
was never done in the Church before. Many things which were permitted to be
taught in the Church formerly touching Justification and the Sacraments are not
now tolerated. And upon these occasions the Fathers of the Council of Trent
have laid upon other Churches a necessity of making a separation from the
Church of Rome: wherein me thinks that they have not dealt advisedly: For the
Church is thereby distracted into differences and factions, and whatsoever was
formerly indifferent in doubtful points, the Fathers of Tren^ have made it all
necessary, and took upon them a very hard task. There were some Papists, who
perceiving Mr. Gilpin quite alienated from the Popish religion which he had
first been of in the days of his ignorance in his youth, took many courses
to have recalled him, if they could possibly. Amongst them was one Thomas
Gelthrop a man well descended, and a kinsman of Mr. Gilpins. This man wrote a
letter to Mr. Gilpin, wherein he dealt earnestly with him not to forsake the
religion of his forefathers. In that letter Gelthrop amongst other things
inserted these words. You have a great and a good report both at London and in
all other places: And I am of this opinion that either you will do the Church
a great deal of good if you adhere unto it, or else (which God forbid) you
will stir up more mischief in the Church then ever Arrius did. That sin
abounds it is not the fault of the Mass or of the Mattins, but the
pernicious doctrine and filthy life of the Clergy and of others. They have
already reformed the Communion, and have published a book of the reformed
Leiturgy. But this reformation has not removed the evil, because we see the
people grown far worse then before. These things I found out amongst M.
Gilpins papers, but I could not possibly get any more out of them, the most of
them were so exceeding worn and defaced.

Unto this letter Mr. Gilpin made answer, which I found entire. The Letter had
this superscription.

To his Coozen THOMAS GELTHROP. And thus it was.

GRace and peace. Your large Letter was brought unto me, when I had small
leisure to answer it, as he can tell you who brings back this unto you.
Howbeit I thought it not fit to let him come back without an answer, albeit the
conclusion of your letter gave me small encouragement to write. For who would
take the pains to write unto you, seeing you are fully resolved and
determined, as you affirm, never to be persuaded from your opinions by any
argument a man can bring? It could not choose but be a most grievous thing to
the Prophet Jeremy, when he cried out to the people, Hear the word of the
Lord, that they should answer with a stiff neck, we will not hear. But let
us leave these things to the divine operation, which is able to mollify your
heart, and to open the ears of the deaf Adder that stops the same against
the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely. You look back upon the
ages passed, you do well, if also you look back to the times of the
Patriarchs, the Prophets, of Christ, and his Apostles, and other holy men, with
whom if you advise without prejudice of blinded affection, they will lead you
far from that blindness, from that error, I may well say, from that gross
idolatry, which crept into the Church while men slept. Whereas you are grieved
at the fall of Monasteries and suppression of Abbeys, I am sorry you should be
blinded in this case. For very many of your own religion have confessed that
they could not possibly subsist any longer, because the cry of them like the
cry of Sodom was ascended into the ears of God. Their Sodomiticall crimes
were so manifest that they could not be longer concealed, the Lord could endure
those wicked men no longer. But if you call to mind what enemies those men
were to the Ministry of the word of God, taking away most sacrilegiously the
maintenance allowed for the Ministers of the word, hardly leaving in the most
Countries any one Rectory vnspoiled, you would easily judge that those men
could not possibly stand and flourish any longer. This is the fruit of Luthers
doctrine, and the whole word of God truly preached, that God shall destroy
that wicked one with the breath of his mouth.

Whereas you say that he which comes to God must believe, I wish you would
consider that thing rightly, that faith and religion can never find peace and
quiet but in the sacred word of God. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the word of God. Whence it comes that whosoever believes in Bulls, Indulgences,
Images, and many other vain constitutions of men cannot possibly have true
faith. All those things vanish away, wheresoever the word of God has power and
authority. That rest which you say that you find in the Church of Rome your
Catholic Church forsooth, if you take not the better heed, will undoubtedly
fail you in your greatest necessity. You say that you do not find in that
religion any thing opposite to the Gospel. But if you look narrowly into it,
you may see in that religion the word of God rejected, the golden Legends and
Festivalls, with Bulls, Indulgences, and many other things of that sort for the
most part obtruded upon men in stead of the word of God. But here is a large
field and I want leisure. I hope I shall get opportunity to write unto you more
at large concerning these things. God open your eyes that you may see the
abomination of that City which is built upon seven hills: Apoc 17. Look over
Hierome upon that place. If in that Church the Sacraments be corrupted, will
you reject the grace of God when he opens the eyes of his servants to reform
these corruptions? Beware of that fearful sentence of Saint lohn: He that is
filthy let him be filthy still. You allege that if you should now begin to
drink of another cup, etc. quite forgetting that in the Church of Rome your
self and all other Laymen are utterly excluded from the cup, contrary to the
manifest commandment of God, Drink ye all of this. Your learnedest Doctors of
Lovaine with many others were not able to defend so great an abuse of the
Supper. If you call us heretics, and fly from us, because we have forsaken so
great abuses, superstitions and errors, to the end that we might draw near to
the sacred word of God, and holy institutions of Christ, we can appeal from
your uncharitable prejudice, and are able to say with Saint Paul, I little
esteem to be judged of you, it is the Lord which judges me.

But you allege that it is a perilous thing to hear our Sermons. So said the
persequ^tours of Saint Stephen, Act. 7. and stopped their ears. So spoke
Amazia touching Amos the Prophet, Amos. 7. The land is not able to bear all
his words. Like unto which are those whom David compares to the deaf Adder
which stops her ears, Psalm. 58. Like unto whom were many in the time of the
Apostles unto whom the Gospel was hid, in whom the God of this world has
blinded the minds of unbelievers, that the light of the Gospel should not
shine upon them. Touching those Roman thunderclaps there is no great cause why
we should be afraid, those bugbeares were invented to affright children, they
are not to be feared by men of years. Erasmus calls them Brutafulmina,
foolish false-fires. If there were in the Pope and his Cardinals who curse us
with so much bitterness but the least resemblance of Peter and Paul; had they
the servent charity of those holy men, and their exquisite diligence to feed
the flock of Christ day and night, with other Apostolic virtues: then were
their threats to be feared: but they have changed the humility of Peter into
the pride of Lucifer, the poverty and daily labors of the Apostles into the
riches of Cresus, and into the laziness and luxury of Sardanapalus. To
conclude, what agreement is there betwixt light and darkness. God has
promised in the second of Malachy, that he will curse their blessings, or turn
their blessings into curses, who consider not in their hearts to give glory
unto his name. See Hierom upon the third of Esaias: Those which call you blessed,
seduce you: How many thousands of men are seduced by Indulgences, which are
extended to many thousands of years, if the price be according? The world sees
and is grieved to behold how the brothers of Saint John's Hospital, had
granted licenses to those who had laid violent hands upon themselves to enjoy
the burial of other Christians with many such like flattering fictions. As
touching the life of your grandmother, I never heard bur well; but I suppose
she was a superstitious woman. If she kept you at home with her out of her
tender* and natural affection only, and not to prevent your knowledge of the
Gospel, I shall desire pardon for my mistaking. Yet many men are persuaded
that she and your uncles withheld both from your self and your sisters a great
part of the portion which was left unto you. But let these things pass, seeing
I have not been able to effect, nor have effected as yet any thing for you,
that money which was given to me by legacy, I will bestow upon your sister, if
it please her, with some addition also, because I am persuaded she has more
need of it. As concerning the Catholic Church, God is my witness, that it is
the whole desire of mine heart, and mine assured confidence, that I shall die a
member of it. But if I shall be so far misled by the pompous outside of the
Church of Rome, as to approve those intolerable abuses, superstitions, and
idolatries, which so many ways rob God of his honor, I should not believe my
self a member of Jesus Christ. If you approve of none interpretation of
Scriptures, but what proceeds from Rome, you may easily affirm whatsoever you
please. There is nothing so absurd, or so contrary to the truth of the eternal
God, which may not be wrested by their corrupt glosses, as it may seem to
serve to a wicked cause. With such kind of men is no disputation to be held.
As for that which you infer touching Arrius, and the rest of that rank, it
is nothing to the purpose. For all the writings of the Prophets, together with
other manifest Scriptures, whereunto we ought to have recourse in doubts of
this nature, and to be concluded by them, do evidently confound Arrius, and
all the rest his partakers. Consubstantiality, which the Greeks call (...), is
confirmed by very many evident testimonies of Scripture. But so is not
Transubstantiation, which has so molested the brains of Scotus, Occam, Biel,
and all the school Divines, that many a time they are shrowdly put to it, what
they had best stay for removing the absurdities which arise therefrom.
Therefore it is apparent that it is a mere fiction without any foundation of
Scripture. So that Scotus, (as Bishop Tonstall did many times ingenuously
confess) was of opinion that the Church might better, and with more ease make
use of some more commodious exposition of those words in the holy Supper. And
the Bishop was of the mind that we ought to speak reverently of ^he holy
Supper, as did the ancient Fathers, but that the opinion of Transubstantiation
might well be let alone. This thing also the same Bishop Tonstall was wont to
affirm both in words and writings, that Innocent the third knew not what he
did when he put Transubstantiation among the Articles of faith, and he said
that Innocentius wanted learned men about him, and indeed, (says the Bishop)
if I had been of his Council, I make no doubt but I might have been able to
have dissuaded him from that resolution. When Mr. Cheasey said that the
Catholics should do well to give way in the Article of Transubstantiation, I
heard not himself speak the words, but one which heard him told me. Whereas
you write touching the imprisonment of him and others, truly I am of the
opinion, that as for this present life, they live most quietly. Nor do I think
that themselves could have made choice of a more retired kind of life, if the
sting of conscience trouble them not, for maintaining a cause that is not good,
but built upon the sand. But if you will needs have it that men must of
necessity conniue at the beastly and abominable lives of so many Roman
Bishops, above thirty, you may also find fault with our Savior himself, for
discovering so plainly the pernicious enormities, both of the Pharisees, (who in
those times were accounted forfooth the holy Fathers) and also of their Fathers
then dead: you may blame also the Prophet Esaias, who will not have evil men to
be called good, denouncing a curse against that man, who calls him holy that
is not holy: find fault also with Saint Bernard, who calls them the Ministers
of Antichrist. Those things which other godly men have written to this purpose,
do worthily excuse us. He blames those things openly concerning which he
confesses that it is a shame to speak: I reveal not hidden things (says he)
but I reprove things publickely known: unto which thing we are even obliged
by the commandment of God. Esaia. 58. 1. Show my people their sins: whereas
you say that five Sacraments are rejected by us, you do not say well,
rejected, for we use them reverently, according to the word of God, nor do we
take away the name of a Sacrament, as the word Sacrament is generally used, as
was the washing of feet, and many other things which may retain the name of a
Sacrament in general, as also they do among the Fathers. But the ancient
Fathers and some School men do a^firme, that only Baptism and the Eucharist
are properly called Sacraments: It is also the testimony of Bessarion: We read
(says he) of these two Sacraments only manifestly delivered in the Gospel. I
wonder at you that you do so wrest the words of Saint Paul to such a sense, as
that out of those words all the Ceremonies of the Mass may be established:
whereas you cannot be ignorant, that the greatest part of them has been added
many ages after by the Bishops of Rome. We read also that the Apostles
consecrated with the words of the Gospel, and with the Lords prayer. Moreover,
whereas Saint Paul had even at that time ordained already, that the people
should not only eat the bread with the Minister (as his own words do
manifestly prove but also drink of the cup, you see how there fellows have
utterly ^obbed the Church of that ordi^ation of Christ and his Apostles: but
how justly, or by what good authority they have done thus let the^^elues look
unto it, I could never in my reading find (...) ground of that authority. I
find the contrary, to (...) that all men are altogether forbidden to alter any
thing touching the word and will of God, delivered in the holy scriptures.

You say that the Scriptures allow prayer for the dead, and that you know this
well enough. Saint Hierom says, that the book of Maccha^^s is profitable for
manners, not to establish doctrine. You allege that Saint Augustine doubted in
many places whether there be a Purgatory. If that be a doubtful point then it
is not to be obtruded as an Article of faith; but to be left indifferent. For,
faith is a substance: Heb 11. 1 and faith ought not to waver, says Saint
James, The Bishop of Rochester writes concerning Purgatory, that amongst the
Ancients, there was either little or no mention of it. And so long as there
was no care taken for Prgatorie, no man sought after Indulgences. And so those
innumerable gaynes by Pardons were never known before Purgatory was found out.
What shall we now say to be meant by those words of Saint Paul, esteeming
gain godline, if this be not it. This Mart has fed and still does feed many
idle bellyes, who stoutly drive away the word of God to the best of their
abillity that they may not loose their Swine. Howbeit at the last the truth
shall prevail, how ever these men have conspired together.

As touching that which you add concerning the Invocation of Saints, Saint
Augustine exhorts us rather to stand to the Scriptures, then either to his
writings, or the writings of others: and not to build upon his writings without
the authority of Scriptures. And surely in this point my conscience is
resolved, that there is not one point of all these which are controverted, that
is proved by more evident testimonies of Scripture, then this, that God alone
is to be prayed unto, and by one mediator, namely Jesus Christ. Romans 10. 13.
How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? We must believe in
God only, therefore he only is to be prayed unto: That distinction touching
Invocation and Advocation, that albeit you allow not the Invocation of Saints,
at the least you allow their advocation, is frivolous: because, as those men
robb Christ of his honor, who seek another mediator, so these are no less
injurious to Christ, who seek another (...), because we have Christ an
Advocate with the Father. 1 Job. 2: ^. and Esai. 63: he affirms that Abraham
knows us not. Truly I assure my self, that Abraham the father of the
faithful is no less a Saint, then any other of the Saints in heaven. You say,
you believe the Communion of Saints, which we also do all of us believe: but
you infer thereupon, that you understand not how there can be a Communion of
Saints: if the Saints departed do not pray for us, and we call upon them for
assistance. But the Church of Christ understands the Communion of Saints
far otherwise. For in the usual phrase of Scripture, Saints are not
understood to be those that are departed, and whose souls are in heaven, but
those who are living here on the earth. Nor shall you almost thorough the whole
Scripture of the Old and new Testament find the name of Saint given to any man,
but that thereby is understood a Saint living here on the earth. Yea,
sometimes the Scripture speaks more expressly as in Psalm. 16. 3: to the
Saints which are on the earth: all my delight is in them. If any man ever had
or could have a Communion with the Saints in heaven, surely David had it. But
he expounds the communion wherewith he was acquainted, that is the communion
of Saints on earth. So Saint John expounds this point. 1 Ioh: 1, 3. What we
have seen and known: that declare we unto you, that ye also may have
communion with us, and that our communion may be with God, and with his son
Jesus Christ. First, all the Church of Christ have communion with the
Apostolic Church, that you may have communion with us: Secondly, this
communion of Saints shall consist in the preaching of the word, and in the
participation of diverse gifts for the edification of the Church in public
and private prayers. Thirdly, but in powering out of our prayers we have
communion with the Father and the Son, or with the Father by the Son. Here
is no mention at all, no respect had to the Saints departed. This communion
according to the words of holy Scripture extends no further then to the
Church on earth. The Saints departed are not called in Scripture simply Saints,
but the Congregation of the first borne in heaven, and the spirits of just and
perfect men. Heb: 12. 23. After this life we shall have communion with them,
but as for those who require this communion with them in this life, let them
either product from Scripture what they say, or let them hear that sentence of
our blessed Lord, In vain do ye worship me* teaching for doctrines the
traditions of men. Math: 15 9.

I confess that if you have respect to the use of this our age, or some former
ones, the deceased are called Saints, but it is not the custom of this or that
age* but the rule of the holy Scripture that is propounded for our imitation.
But what do we contending about this points? Those men who stand so hard for
Invocation of Saints shall grant it us to be a thing indifferent: for indeed it
is the safest way to go to the fountain of mercy it self, and let the
streams alone. Nor suffer those men to persuade you, who say that they detract
nothing from God, by detracting their prayers to the Saints: For no man can
detract from God more then he who transferreth the worship due to God alone
unto the creature. For invocation is a part of divine worship: and this worship
he communicates to no creature, who will not give his glory to another.

As for your Arguments touching Images, and fasting (which point of fasting God
forbid that either I or any one should deny, yea rather we exhort all persons
to the practice of it, only we desire to have the superstition and wicked
opinions remooved) together with those other Arguments touching Relics, and
Exorcismes in casting out unclean spirits forsooth, which thing when it
leads to Idolatry is the sign of a false Prophet: Deuteronomy 13. Although answer
might be made to all these with much ease, yet because I how want leisure, as
being over leaden with employments, in regard that I am destitute of a Curate
at this time, and have a very large Parish to visit, and also my body is weak,
and subject to faint with weariness, being worn out with pains taking:
therefore in all these respects, I have thought it fitting to defer mine
answer to these points until another time. If you be unwilling to come to
Houghton upon Sunday next, because you will not be an offense to my
Parishioner^ (in which case you cannot blame me if I appear very careful of
my Parishioners, in regard of the great charge laid upon me) for it is apparent
in the times of the Prophets, and in all succeeding ages, since that the vulgar
people have been too too pro^e to superstition, and a micheife does increase
easily, and creep further in one day, then good lessons in a whole month:
therefore, sundry excepted (unless you will come up into the Quire, which in my
judgment you ought not to refuse) if you come straightwayes after the Sabbath
day is ended, and depart about Saturday noone, you shall be heartily welcome:
therefore that excuse which you pretend ought not to retarde your access. And
although your last conclusion do (as I told you already) take away all hope
and confidence from a man who shall confer with you, yet I will not cease to
hope better things touching your conversion, then you seem to hope of your
self. Saint Paul had once a firm resolution to dye a Pharisy, and a
persecuter of Christians, but God had reserved for him the treasure of power
and mercy, to the end that he might ordain him to Preach that glorious namee
which he had formerly persecuted. I commend you to the good^es of the Almighty
God, which is able by the spirit of knowledge, to lead you into all truth.
Fare ye well. From Honghton the 14. of October. 1580.

Your loving Uncle BERNARD GILPIN.


SO long as Bishop Pilkinton lived, Mr. Gilpin had a most kind friend of him,
after whose decease Richard Bar^es succeeded in the Bishopric. This man was
somewhat offended with Mr. Gilpin: And hereby hangs a story which I must
fetch somewhat far. Mr. Gilpin was accustomed sometimes to ride to Oxford,
especially in his younger time when he was able to endure travel. Now it
happened upon a time as he was upon his way toward Oxford, that he espied by
the way side a youth one while walking and another while running. Mr. Gilpin
demanded of him who he was, whence he came, and whither he was going. He made
answer that he came out of Wales, and that he was bound for Oxford with intent
to be a scholar. Mr. Gilpin examineth the youth, and finds him a prompt
scholar in the Latin, and that he had a little smattering of the Greek. And
will thou (says Mr. Gilpin) be contented to go with me? I will provide for
thee. The youth was contented: whereupon Mr. Gilpin took him along with him
first to Oxford, afterward to Houghton, where he profited exceedingly both in
Greek and Hebrew: whom Mr. Gilpin at the last sent to Cambridge. And this was
that famous Hugh Bro^ghton, so exceeding apt in learning the Greek and Hebrew,
but a man of a most inconstant nature. For when Mr. Gilpin grew old, whether
it was in expectation of Mr. Gilpins Parsonage, or for some other cause, it is
reported that he procured Mr. Gilpin to be troubled and molested by the Bishop
of Durham. Now so it fell out, that whiles the Bishops mind began to be turned
from Mr. Gi^pin the Bishop sends unto him and gives him notice that it is
his pleasure to have him to preach at a visitation in time and place appointed.
Which thing fell out at the very same instant when Mr. Gilpin was preparing for
his accustomed Northern journey, to wit, amongst them of Riddesdale and
Ti^dale: wherefore he dispatched his servant unto the Bishop to make his excuse
unto him, and to inform his Lordship the reason of his purposed journey; and
to entreat the Bishop that he be pleased to appoint some other to preach at the
visitation, seeing there were many who would be willing enough to preach at the
visitation, but that there was not a man who would perform that duty among
those borders if he neglected it: and that at any other time he would be ready
to perform his duty. The servant having been with the Bishop returns to his
Master, who demanded of him whether he had made his excuse to the Bishop: I
have, faith he: well, and what (says Mr. Gilpin) was the Bishops answer?
Whereunto the servant answered, the Bishop made no reply, but held his peace.
Qui tacet, consent^re v^detur: says Mr. Gilpin: He that replyeth, not seems
to consent. Therefore Mr. Gilpin went on with his purposed progress. Which
thing so soon as the Bishop understood, he presently suspended Mr. Gilpin from
all Ecclesiastical employment. Mr. Gilpin returning home finds himself
suspended, a thing that he little dreamed of, yet he took it patiently. The
Bishop having notice that Mr. Gilpin was returned home, sends unto him
instantly warning him to meet him and the rest of the Clergy at Chester. M.
Gilpin being come to Chester finds there the Bishop with many of the Clergy,
who were all commanded to assemble themselves in the Church. The Bishop had at
that time a brother of his own one John Barnes who was his Chancellor, a man,
of whom it is hard to say whether he was more lustful or more coveto^s: who
whereas he should have been the man that ought to have reformed many
enormities in the Diocese, was indeed the author of them, permitting base and
dishonest persons to escape ^cotfree for a piece of money, so that the Bishop
had a very ill report every where. When they were all met together the Bishop
calls Mr. Gilpin unto him, and says, Mr. Gilpin, I must have you preach to
day. Mr. Gilpin desired to be excused, for I came not (says he) provided; and
moreover I am suspended. But I can free you (says the Bishop) from that
suspension, and do now free you. Mr. Gilpin replied, that he durst not go up
into the pulpit vnprovide^. But we know (says the Bishop) that you are never
unprovided, for you have now gotten such an habit of preaching, that you are
able to perform it, if you please, even upon the sudden. Mr. Gilpin remained
vnmooveable in his resolution, answering that God was not so to be tempted,
saying that it was well with him, if he were able to perform any thing in this
kind upon mature deliberation. Whereunto the Bishop replied, I command you
upon your Canonical obedience to go up into the pulpit forthwith. Mr. Gilpin
delaying the time a little while, answered: Well sir, seeing it can be none
otherwise, your Lordships will be done: and after a little pause began his
sermon. As he was in his sermon he observed some extraordinarily prepared who
wrote all he spoke. But yet he proceeds in his sermon, until he came to a
word of exhortation, and reprehension of vices. At the last he proceeded to the
reproof of those enormities which then reigned in that Diocese, and were
every where spoken of. And now, says he, Reverend Father, my speech must be
directed to your Fatherhood. God has exalted you to be Bishop of this
Diocese, and God requires an account of your government thereof: a reformation
of all those matters which are amiss in this Church is expected at your hands,
and an account thereof is required. And now lest perhaps, while it is apparent
that so many enormities are committed every where, your Lordship should make
answer that you had no notice of them given you, neither did these things ever
come to your knowledge, (which words Mr. Gilpin used, because he knew well
enough that this was the Bishops usual answer, that whenever men made any
complaints against the evil government of the Chancellor, the Bishop was
accustomed to say, alas, these things I never knew of; what is done can not be
undone; I will take a better order in these matters hereafter, if any such
shall come to my knowledge.) Behold, said Mr. Gilpin, I bring these things to
your knowledge this day: Let not your Lordship say these crimes have been
committed by the fault of others without your knowledge: for whatsoever either
your self shall do in person, or suffer through your connivency to be done by
others, is wholly your own. Therefore in the presence of God, his Angels, and
men, I pronounce your Fatherhood to be the author of all these evils, yea and
in that strict day of the general account I shall be a witness to testify
against you that all these things have come to your knowledge by my means; and
all these men shall bear witness hereof who have heard me speaking unto you
this day. Now whiles that Mr. Gilpin thundered out these things, he did
thereby put all his friends into a great fear, and distrust what would become
of him. Therefore when he had made an end of his Sermon, his friends came about
him and told him with tears, that now at last the Bishop had gotten that
advantage against him which he had long desired and sought for: you have, say
they, put a sword into his hand to slay you: if heretofore he has been
offended with you without a cause, what may you now expect from him, who being
provoked shall make use of his own power to injure you by right or wrong? To
whom Mr. Gilpin made answer, saying: be not afraid: The Lord God overruleth us
all; so that the truth may be propagated, and God glorified, Gods will be done
concerning me. After the Sermon they met all together at dinner, and all men
were afraid that the Bishop would have done Mr. Gilpin some shrewd turn for his
Sermon, and silently expected what would become of the matter. After dinner Mr.
Gilpin comes to the Bishop to see him, and to take leave of him, and so to
return homewards. It shall not be so, said the Bishop, for I will bring you to
your house; And so Mr. Gilpin, returned home in the company of the Bishop.

And when they were now come to Mr. Gilpin^^ house, and walked within into the
parlour, the Bishop upon a sudden caught Mr. Gilpin by the hand, and used
these words unto him: Father Gilpin, I acknowledge you are fitter to be Bishop
of Durhams, then my self to be Parson of this Church of yours: I ask
forgiveness for errors passed; forgive me father: I know you have hatched up
some chickens that now seek to pick out your eyes; but so long as I shall live
Bishop of Durham, be secure, no man shall injure you. Mr. Gilpins friends, that
is all good men began to rejoice, and to give God thanks, acknowledging the
powerful hand of God, in that the Bishop being so offended with him, was so
prevented by the power of God, as that the thing which he had purposed for his
disgrace, should turn to his greater credit. In the mean while Mr. Gilpin
reaped the fruit of a pious life in all plentiful manner.

After that age began to grow upon him, there was in the town of Newcastle one
Genison who had received to home a son of his own brothers lately returned
from the parts beyond the seas. This Genison was much aggrieved for that his
brothers son was (as he understood) made a Jesuit: whereupon he sent the
young man to Mr. Gilpin, entreating him to have a care of him, and to dissuade
him if he could possibly from his wicked and dangerous opinions. After that Mr.
Gilpin had often conferd with him, he found the young fellow most insolently
proud, and armed with boldness and impudence, corrupting the holy Scriptures
with certain new and unheard of expositions. Whereupon Mr. Gilpin wrote to his
uncle Mr. Genison, that he was a most audacious young fellow, and come not to
him to be instructed, but to teach him rather.

The young fell our, says he, thinking I know not how, a great deal too well
of himself, had an hope to draw me at these (...), no acknowledge certain
abrurdities. I see that the Jesuits have found out, (...) away all respect,
and set upon men with impudency. They dare prove the Invocation of Saints from
Abraham, Isaae, and Jacob. This fellow does obstinately affirm that the Church
of Rome has not erred in any one thing. Their most horrible errors touching
Indulgences, falsified Miracles, falsified Relics, Pilgrimages, worshipping
of Images, and the rest of the same sort, all these this wonderful man finds
out in the Gospel. And he stands upon it stiffely that all these things are
good and holy. I desire not to have any more to do with such a monstrous kind
of men, with such fierce natures, who open their mouths against heaven, for
what is it to open their mouths against heaven, if this be not, so violenty
and disgracefully to handle the holy Scriptures? They have devised and daily
do devise horrible strange expositions such as were never heard of before in
the Church of Rom^: I therefore desire to rid mine hands of this fellow as of a
scabbed sheep, for fear he might infect my whole flock.

After that his lean body was quite worn out with diversity of paines-taking,
at the last even feeling before hand the approach of death, he commanded the
poor to be called together, unto whom he made a speech, and took his leave
of them. Afterward he did the like to others. He fell sick about the end of
Febr^ary, and after many exhortations used to the scholars, to his servants,
and to diverse others, at the last he fell asleep in the Lord in great peace,
the fourth day of March, in the year of our Lord 1583. and in the 66. year of
his age.

He was tall of stature, and slender, being hawke-nosed. His clothes were ever
such as cost not very dear. He could never away with gay apparel. In things
belonging to his own body he was very frugall, and retained the austerity of
the ancient. In things which might tend to the good of others he was exceeding
bountiful, especially toward poor people and schoolers. He desi^ed still to
keep his doors open for the intertainment of any poor (...). In his own house
he (...) and ^ent at the most four and twenty scholler^, sometimes fewer, but
seldom. The greater (...) boorders were poor m^ns sons, upon whom he
bestowed meat, drink and cloth and education in learning. He was wont to
enterteine his Parishioners and (...) at his table not only at the Christmas
time, as the custom is but because he had a large and wide Parish, and a great
multitude of people, he kept a table for them every Sunday from Michaelmas to
Easter. He ha^ the Gentlemen, the husband men, and the poorer sort set ^^very
degree by themselves, and as it were ordered in ranks. He was wont to commend
the married estate in the Clergy, howbeit himself li^ed and dyed a single man.
He bestowed in the building, ordering and e^^^blishing of his school, and in
providing yearly stipende for a Schoolmasters and vshe^, the (...) hundred
pounds: out of which school he supplied the Church of England with great store
of learned men. He was careful to avoid not only all evil doing, but even
the lightest suspicio^s thereof. And he was accounted^ Saint in the judgments
of his very enemies if he had any such. Being full of faith unfeigned, and of
good works, he was at the last put (...) his grau^ as a heap of wheat in due
time swept into. the (...).

FINIS*

