CARDAnus Comfort translated into English.

And published by commandment of the right honorable the Earl of Oxenford.

Anno Domini. 1573.

Jmprinted at London in Fleetestreate, near to S. Dunstones Church by Thomas
Marshe.

Cum Priuilegio.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and my good Lord the Earl of Oxeforde, Lord great
Chamberlain of England.
MY GOOD LORD, I can geeue nothing moore agreeable to your mind, and my
fortune, then the willinge performance of such service as it shall please you
to command me unto. And therefore rather to obey then boaste of my
cunninge, and as a new sign of mine old devotion, I do present the book
your Lordeship so long desired. With assured hope that how so ever you
mislike or allow there of, you will favorably conseale mine imperfections
which to your Lordshippe alone I dare discover, because most faithfully I honor
and love you. My long discontinuance of study, or rather the lack of grounded
knowledge did many times discorage me, yet the pleasure I took in the matter
did counteruaile all despair, and the rather by encouragement of you^ L. who
(as you well remember) unawares to me fou^d^ some part of this work, and willed
me in any wy^^ to proceed therein. My meaning was not to have imparted my
travail to any, but your honor has (...) to countermaund mine intencion. Yet
I (...) humbly beseech you either not to make any pertakers thereof, or at the
least wise those, who for reverence to your L. or love to me, will willingly
bear with mine errors. A nedelesse thing I know it is to comfort you, whom
nature and fortune has not only not injured, but rather upon whom they have
bountifully bestowed their grace: notwithstanding since you delighte to see
others acquitted of cares, your L. shall not do amiss to read some part of
Cardanus counsel: wherein consideringe the manyfolde miseries of others, you
may the rather esteem your own happy estate with increase of those noble and
rare virtues which I know and rejoice to be in you. Sure I am it would have
better beseemed me to have taken this travail in some discourse of Arms
(being your L. chief profession and mine also) the^ in Philosophers skill to
have thus busied my self: yet since your pleasure was such, and your knowledge
in either great, I do (as I will ever) most willinglye obey you. And if any
either through skill or curiosity do find fault with me, I trust
notwithstanding for the respects a^^^esaide to be houlden excused. From my
lodginge (...) first of Ianuarye. 1571.

Your L. alvvayes to command Thomas Bedingfeld.

To my louinge friend Thomas Bedingfeld Esquyer, one of her Majesty's gentlemen
Pentioners.
AFter I had perused your letters good master Bedingfeld, findinge in the^
your request far differing from the desert of your labor, I could not chose
but greatly doubt, whether it were better for me to yield you your desire, or
execute mine own intention toward the publishinge of your Book. For I do
confess the affections that I have always borne toward you could move me
not a little. But when I had throughlye considered in my mind of sondrye and
diverse arguments, whether it were best to obey mine affections or the merits
of your studyes. At the length I determined it better to deny your unlawful
request, then to grant or condiscende to the concealment of so worthy a
work. Whereby as you have been profited in the translatinge, so many may
reap knowledge by the reading of the same, that shall comfort the afflicted,
confirm the doubtful, encourage the cowarde, and lift up the base minded man,
to atchiefe to any true su^me or grade of virtue, whereto ought only the noble
thoughts of men to be enclyned. And because next to the sacred letters of
Diuinitye, nothing does persuade the same more then Philosophye, of which
your book is plentifully stored. I thought my self to commit an unpardonable
error, to have murdered the same in y^ wast bottomes of my chestes, and
better I thought it were to displease one, then to displease many: further
consideringe so little a trifle cannot procure so great a breach of our amity,
as may not with a little perswasio^s of reason be repaired again. And herein I
am forced like a good and politic Captain, oftentimes to spoil and burn
the corn of his own country, least his enemies thereof do take aduau^tage.
For rather then so many of your countreye men should be de^ided through my
senister means of your industry in studyes, (whereof you are bound in
conscience to yield them an acco^pte) I am content to make spoil and havoc
of your request, and that that might have wrought greatly in me in this former
respect, utterly to be of no effect or operation, and when you examine your
self what does avail a mass of goulde to be continuallye imprisoned in your
bags, and never to be employed to your use. I do not doubt even so you think
of your studyes and delightful Muses. What do they avail, if you do not
participate tbem to others? Wherefore we have this latin Proverb. Scire tuu^
nihil est nisi te scire hoc sciat alter. What does avail the tree unless it
yield fruit unto an other, what does avail the Vine unless an other
delights in the Grape? What does avail the Rose unless an other took
pleasure in the smell? Why should this tree be accounted better the^ that
tree, but for the goodness of his fruit? Why should this Vine be better then
that Vine, unless it brought forth a better Grape then the other? Why should
this Rose be better esteemed the^ that Rose, unless in pleasantnes of smell it
far surpassed the other Rose? And so is it in all other things as well as in
man. Why should this man, be more esteemed then that man, but for his virtue,
through which every man desires to be accounted of. Then you amongst men I
do not doubt, but will aspyre to follow that virtuous pathe, to illuster your
self with the ornaments of virtue. And in mine opynion as it beutifyeth a
fair woman to be decked with pearls and precious stones, so much more it
ornifyeth a ge^tleman to be furnished in mind with glittering virtues.
Wherefore considering the small harm I do to you, the great good I do to
others I prefer mine own intention to discover your volume, before your
request to secret ye same: Wherein I may seem to you to play the part of
the cunninge and expert Medeciner or Physician, who although his pacient in
the extremity of his burninge Fever, is desirous of cold liccour or drink
to qualefye his sore thirst, or rather kill his languishinge body. Yet for the
danger he does euidentlye know by his science to ensue, denies him the
same. So you being sick of to much doubt in your own procedinges, through
which infirmitye you are desirous to burye and inseuill your works in the
grave of oblivion. Yet I knovvinge the discommodityes that shall redounde to
your self thereby (and which is more unto your Cou^treyemen) as one that is
vvilling to salve so great an inconvenience, am nothing dainty to deny your
request. Again we see, if our friends be dead, we cannot show or declare
our affection more then by erectinge them of Tombs: whereby when they be
dead in deed, yet make we them live as it were again through their
monument, but with me behold it happens far better, for in your life time
I shall erect you such a monument, that as I say in your life time you shall
see how noble a shadow of your virtuous life, shall hereafter remain when
you are dead and gone. And in your life time again I say, I shall give you
that monument and remembrance of your life, whereby I may declare my good
will though with your ill will as yet that I do bear you in your life.
Thus earnestlye desyringe you in this one request of mine, as I would yield to
you in a great many, not to repugne the settinge forth of your own proper
studyes. I bid you farevvel.

From my new country Muses at VViuenghole, wishing you as you have begun,
to proceed in these virtuous actions. For when all things shall else forsake
us, virtue yet will ever abide with us, and when our bodies falls into the
bowels of the earth, yet that shall mount with our minds into the highest
Heavens.

By your louinge and assured friend. E. Oxenford.

The Earl of Oxenforde to the Reader.
THe laboring man, that tilles the fertile soil,
And reapes the harvest fruit, has not in deed
The gain but pain, and if for all his toil
He gets the straw, the Lord will have the seed.
The Manchet fine, falls not unto his share
On coursest cheat, his hungrye stomach feeds
The Landlord does, possess the fynest fare
He pulles the flowers, the other pluckes but weeds.
The Mason poor that buildes the Lordlye halles
Dwelles not in them, they are for hye degree
His Cotage is, compact in paper walls
And not with brick, or stone as others be.
The idle Drone, that labors not at all
Suckes up the sweet, of honnye from the Be
Who works most, to their share least does fall,
With due desert, reward will never be.
The swiftest Hare, unto the Mastiue slow
Often times does fall, to him as for a pray:
The Greyhounde thereby, does miss his game we know
For which he made, such speedy have away.
So he that takes, the pain to pen the book
Reapes not the gifts, of goodlye golden Muse
But those gain that, who on the work shall look
And from the sour, the sweet by skill does choose.
For he that beats the bushe the bird not gets.
But who sittes still, and holds fast the nets.
Thomas Churchyard gentleman, to the Reader.
IF I had (gentle Reader) as great Art to persuade as desire to do the good,
the force of my wrytinge and truth of the matter should be a sufficient
mean, to make thee delight in the divine discourses of this book: whereon as
Cardanus has bestowed great study, so master Bedingefelde has showed no
little labor. And setting forth to sale the hidden treasures of the mind (that
long might have lurked in the latin) he bids every man bie somewhat of the
ware (or cheapen at the least) those things that serves best for their
purpose, and peradventure by touching of tryfles, they may be attempted with
noble Jewels, and so fall to beat a price of more mighty matter. For sure in
this shop of secrets, are sondrye sorts of far fetched merchandise, the
goodness whereof may as well content the inward judgment, as the gayest
riches of the world does please the gazinge eyes, but if with handlinge alone
and careless lokinge of the same you lay it a side (refusing that is offered)
I skarce think you worthy of so worthy a benefit, and misdoubt ye want a
storehouse for so stately a treasure. O who could hold you from gadding after
May games, runninge unto tryumphes, staring on strangers, wondering on Maskes,
waytinge for Piayes, and blasinge of your own braueryes. Whose beggary
beauties in general, are all as vain, as the shadow of the Sun: and Ioe
being so unbridled in such baggage, so ready to wretchedness, so apt for
apishe pastimes, so gredy of vain glory, and so glad to gaze on games whereon
no gain grows, but loss of wit wealth and time. Me think you should
blushe to forgo the blessedness this book may bring you and bless the
beginner of the same and setter forth of the work. But I fear as the horse
waxes whot when his ryder takes him up from stombling, or as a churlish child
waxes worse for the check of a wise father, you will fling away the glass,
that shall bewraye your blotted brows, and so follow your follyes so far,
that neither Cardanus Comfortes nor no other yt calls you back again (to see
through your selves) shall any whit prevail, if so you be bewitched and rather
yield to Cyrses charms then Ulysses counsel, I lack Apollos pype to please
your ears, and leave you in a labourinth of endless travail, me thincks the
hard nut being cracked and presented unto you with cloven shell, argues of it
self, if you scorn to pill away the skin of the kyrnel, ye ought not to taste
any piece or part of the fruit: so if you but read your senses a sleep, and
with slack search of knowledge slomber out a sentence conninglye shaped for
the safetye of man, you gain little by this work, and loose but labor with
slobberinge hands or head to blot or blemishe the beauty of this book. For
neither ye mislyking of your head, nor tryfling with your hands, can hinder
the fame of so famous a study. And I pray you consider how hardlye it comes to
your hands. The translatour thereof (as many others the more pity do y^ like)
sent the coppye to a noble man to be read and lapt up in silence, he groping
the ground and bowels of the book, sets incontinent openly abroad the body,
ye every good imagination might make a noble notamy of the matter, yet making
courtsye (in any cause) to offend his friend, he showed me the book, and the
translatours desire (always eger to pleaser good people as I coniectured by
his countenance) and I who found mine own infirmityes finely healed (or
fauourablye handled by this good hap) persuaded as I durst the publishing of
this precious present, hoping that some as sick as my self shall be cured or
eased by this good counsel. The person yt puts it out, I tell you may a little
(yea and very much) lead you to good lykinge: My Verses though simple they
are, somewhat shall tell you of the nature of the book. Give credit as you
please, disdain no good meaning, do somewhat your selves ear you find
fault with others, cloak not your sloth with the barenes of barraine brains,
yield fruit as you flourishe, and bear with the blossoms that buddeth from this
tree. So fare you well.

Thomas Churchyard in the behalf of the Book.
YOu troubled minds with torments toste,
that sighs and sobs consumes:
(Who breathes and puffes from burning breast,
both smothring smoke and fumes.)
Come read this book that freelye bringes, a box of balm full sweet,
An oil to noynt the bruised parts, of every heavy spriete.
A souplinge salve for every sore, a medcine for the sick,
A seed that eats up cankred flesh, and searches near the quick.
Each grief y^ grows by error blind (that makes ma^s judgment jar)
May here a precious plaster find, ear corsye creep to far.
The blind that mournes for want of sight, could he but hear this red,
Would take his blindness in good part, and bear a quiet head.
The lame whose lack of legs is death, unto a loftye mind,
Will kiss his crotche and creep on knees, Cardanus works to find.
The beggar bare bedeckt in brats, and patched rotten rags,
In budget if he bare this book, would scorn the roysters brags.
The shepehearde that in skortchinge sun, sits skowling on the skies,
Would leave the wolf his flock of sheep, to see this book with eyes.
The surlye snodge that sweepes up gold, and makes his God thereon,
Would sure confess this pearl should shine, when glistring gold were gone.
The wyldest man or monster strange, whose natures naughtye are,
Would stand a ma^de as bucke at baye, upon this book to stare,
This is no fable finelye fylde, as cutlare works the blade,
This is a substance of it self, this is no sillye shade.
This speaks out of the brazen head, full many a golden word,
This strykes the stordye stomachs dead, and yet it draws no sword.
This threatens thonderboltes for fools, yet weather fair it shows,
So such as can bear of a storm, and calmye weather knows.
This teaches me^ to tune their strings, who would sweet music make
This shows who faynes, or sweetly sings: and where the tune we take.
The poor that playnes on pinching plagues, by this does stand content,
And yeldinge thanks for food and cloth, takes well y^ God has sent.
The rich whose raging reach would reap, the sweet of every soil,
Shall learn to singe a mixrye mean, and leave the poor the spoil.
The hye or hautye heart shall here, a liuelye lesson learn,
How wisdom holds himself upright, and halting heads deserne.
The low that lours at loathsome lock, and lingers out his time,
Shall see how safe the simple si^s, and how they fall that clyme.
The strong that strives to win the goal, by strength and stoutnes vain,
Shall shun the shouldring crooked play, and walk the path full plain.
The weak whose wits with woes are worn (which breeds in breast debare)
Shall laughe y^ giants strength to scorn, and praise the feeble state,
The sick that seeks a syrope sweet, for sour disease within,
Shall help the heaps of harms in heart, ear blister rise on skin.
The proud y^ poultes and pickes his plumes, and prunes his feathers gay,
Shall meekenes show and forthwyth fling, his painted sheath away.
The prisner that in fetters lies, shall think his fredome more,
In closed walls than al his scoope, that he has had before,
The banished wight that beats his brains, with many busy broils,
Shall see what gain exile does bring, by sight of sondrye soyles.
The servant that in seruage lives, shall fee he has more ease,
Than has his master who of force, must many people please.
The fearful man that hates death, shall see that death is best,
And death is most to be desyrde, where life can breed no rest.
The dronken dolt that does delight, in sosse, in swashe, and swill,
Shall see some snib or sour rebuke, to break him of his will.
The fool that all sound counsel hates, perhaps in reading this,
May wax more wise and fondnes leave, and so amend the mis.
The flatterer here may find his faults, and fall to better frame,
The currishe earl may civil be, in noting of the same.
The cowarde shall win courage great, as he this book shall vewe,
And he that is not shaped right, may here be made a new.
The plowman that with sweat of brows, does dearly win his bred.
Shall see what danger dwell they in, that are with daintyes fed.
There is no state that bears life, of hye or low degree,
But for the sickness of his mind, a medsine here may see.
This book bewrayes what wretched wrack, belongs to life of man,
What burdens bore he on his back, since first this world began.
This is a glass to gaze upon, where man himself may find,
A shyning sun that plainlye shows, A man is but his mind,
And who that reads and marks a right, the reasons couched here,
Shall win such treasures by the same, as he shall hold full dear.
Pass on plain book of pearelesse price, and preace in worthy place,
Dread no disdain of froward heads, nor fear the frowning face.
A worthy work does justly crave, a worthy patron still,
Whose noble bucklar shall defend, this worthy work from in.
And he that made thee English speak, his tongue and pen be blessed,
With happy hope of virtues hye, from heaven, here possessed.
FINIS.
Of Comfort the first Book
Among such and so many ancient monuments as perished in ye Barbarian
wars: would God (that at least Marcus Tullius books of comfort, written at
the death of his daughter, had been till this day preserved. For as in all
other matters he declared him self more then a man, so may it be thought that
herein he had written most excellently: the matter being neither common, feigned
or touching others, but procedinge from his own natural affection and extreme
perturbation of mind. And such is the condition and quality of comfortinge,
as al be it no persuation or eloquence were there in used, yet wants it not
reason and sufficient proof to try it self: wherein so excellent, wise,
and eloquente a man as Marcus Tullius having travailed: it must be presumed he
framed a work not only worthy praise, but also above all expectacion.

And albeit these ancient wars have among many other noble works deprived
us of so learned a book, yet have we thought mete to entreat thereof (not
because it is so praiseable as amiss it cannot be praised) but also so
necessary (as in all things which of necessity must be had) better it is to
have the worst, then none at all. For examemple we see, that houses are
needful, such as can not possess yt stately palaces of stone, do persuade
themselves to dwell in houses of timber and clay, and wanting them, are
contented to inhabit the simple cotage, yea rather then not to be housed at
all refuse not the pore cabbon, and most beggarly cave. So necessary is this
gift of consolacion, as there lives no man, but that has cause to embrace
it. For in these things better it is to have any then none at al. And well we
see there is none alive that in every respect may be accounted happy, yea
though mortal men were free from all calamities, yet the torments and fear of
death should still offend them. But besides them, behold, what, and how many
euilles there be, that unless the cloud of error be removed, impossible it
is to see the truth, or receive allay of our earthly woes.

And above the greues that all other necessities do bring with them, this has
somewhat more greveous, and intolerable: for they satisfied with that they
desire, forthwith they cease to offend: as honger is eased with meat, thirste
is appeased to drink, labor contented with rest. But the memory, of evils is
so settled and manifold, as wanting good persuasion does never cease to torment
the mind, but from one discontented imaginacio^ to an other, from one
calamity or misery to an other, continually leads on our displeasi^g
thoughts And for yt cause we have framed this book, which although it profits
nothing to drive away the cares and anxietie of mind in others, yet shall I
therein not a little content my self, for which respect thiefly I took the
matter in hand. And as men say, that Asclepiodorus without colors did right
cunningly paint: so shall we void of all craft and skill, with true reason
declare how much each man erreth in life, judgment, opinion, and will. Yea,
somethinges there are that so well do prove themselves, as besides nature need
no proof at all.

Of which kind in this our incertaine life, vain glory, and in nature of
things, great plenty was evermore to be found, and in all such the more
cunninge and eloquence is used, the less we see oftetimes they receive
credit and belief. Who is so much misaduised as would paint the pillars of
perfect marble or Porfery? or who does color the vessels of Allabaster? When
the natural gloss does give chiefest grace and reputation to ye work we
plaster and painte the ragged walls of mortar and claye, to the end that
art should supplye, that nature has left unseemly. Neither do I think our
work here in so great as at the beginning we thought to be. For albeit we
know ye number of miseries and cares to be many, yet diverse of them be of
such kind as being well considered do need no medicine at all. As those which
men willingly and unconstrained do force the^ selves to bear: for who would
take in hand to comfort Marcus Regulus, amids his miseries? who^ neither the
pity of his children, nor the prayers of his kinsfolks, could persuade to
remain in Rome and not to return to the hands of the Carthaginiences. Of the
same greatness of mind were the holy martirs, Paul, George, Laurence, with
almost innumerable others. Some other sorts of payns and travail there are
which the faintest hearts do not refuse to abide, either in respect of y^ glory
or gain that grows thereof. As some we see vnco^pelled do serve princes,
others do labor to please their lovers, some consume their time in studies
some follow traffic, and some seek authority and rule. So little trouble
they find in these travails as being removed from them, they are greatly
grieved. Some led on with only hope, do voluntarily take upon them a life with
patience and travail to be endured: as those that pass their days in
solitary places, as they that live in cities continually, as they that observe
religion straight lie, praying and fasting, who being asked for what end they
so do: answer, for hope that after death they shall receive eternal
felicity. Some there are that take great pains and willinglye suffer in
respect of swetenes and delight (as they think) that is joined there unto. As
harvest laborers, who after long toil and sweat in summers son, do not
withstandinge dance when the pype does sound. Others with cold feet do
leave the fire to cast the dyce: for though the cold do pinche, yet the
pleasure of the play is more. But far greater incoueniences do Cupides
knights with adventure of life abide and yet, with all their hearts they
hazard all, that in the end all their desires may be obtained. Some there are
that although they seem evil either in respect of natures necessytie, as old
age* or of comparison, as breaking of prison, yet are they more patiently
borne: because before they came they were desired, and being com may not
therefore be unwelcome. Wherefore if in particular I should entreat of every of
these, besides yt no fruit should grow thereof, I might also seem combersome and
tedious. I do therefore think best to speak of those which men do condemn
and flee as evil. Among which number somewhat I will say of the evils
abouesaide, for y^ one thing is not to every man alyke pleasant or disconting,
but of them old age seems y^ chief, which though no calamity, but a gift of
nature (and yet in some respect may be so called) because we se it unwillingly
born of many, and therefore Cicero has thereof curiouslye written, and though
it cannot be justly nombred among y^ evils of man's life, yet of us shall not be
omitted.

We say therefore that among things we account evil, there be three sorts.
That is to say, Common calamityes, private calamities simple, and private
calamities manifold: common calamities we call those that happen to al men, or
the greatest number of our acquaintance: as honger, pestilence, subversion of
countries, and such like. Private calamities simple, be of two sorts, the one
disco^mendable, as if a thief lamenteth that he loses the opportunity for
murder: or dishonest as the weping of Vrsus in Papinius. The other honest and
in no wise worthy great discommendacion: as the destruction of houses, the
loss of children, and death of friends. Private calamities manifold we account
those when a man by many mishaps at one instant is molested: as ye holy
scripture tells of Job, who depryued of his house, children, cattle, and
substance, was also tormented with most pitiful diseases and sores.

Some men do hold for true opinion that albeit, a man may sustain one kind of
calamity, yet ye sufferance of so sondrye myseries is not to be found in any.
Wherefore of private and simple evils in general we will first take in hand to
write, next we shall entreat of sorrow and death either of our selves or nere
friends: In the second book, and in the last, we will not omit to speak of
tormente, bondage, imprisonment, exile, injury of old age, pouertye, and in
general of many miseries assembled togethers. But first let us begin at private
evils, declaringe y^ the good or evil fortune, imports nothing to blessed
life, and y^ the fruit of al felicity (as Plato says) rests in virtue, or as
the Poet says.

Whose conscience giltles is, does not grovve pale for fear.

And yet (as at yt beginning I said) who so would consider how many
discontentatio^s do happen and diligently mark every one of the^, should find
to what small purpose in aduersitye a man tormenteth himself, considering how
short, frail, uncertain, and miserable the life of man is. So as if at any
time for yt misery it is to be lamented, then after the manner of Heraclites, is
continually to be bewailed, and as Palladas says. Al weeping was I borne,
all weeping must I dye: my whole life in weeping have been consumed. O
lamentable life of man remayninge on earth in sickness, sorrovv, and continual
miserye. Therefore if at any time we must take leave of lamenting, the^ ought
y^ same either ever or never to be done, for life is either ever to be
lamented or never.

Among other myseries what I pray you ca^ be greater then when a man rises
from bed in the morning, to be incertaine of his return to rest again? or
being in bed, whether his life shall continue till he rise? besides that, what
labor, what hazard and care, are men constrained to abide with these our
brittle bodies, our feeble force, and incertayne life: so as of no nation I
think a man better or more fytlye named then of the Spaniard, who in their
language do term a man, shadow. And sure there is nothing to be found of less
assurance or sooner passed then the life of man, no, nor y^ may more rightlye be
resembled to a shadow. Sometime I consider with my self, and think (if the
chrystian law were thereunto consentyng) that the souls of some wicked devils
were entered into the bodies of men as torments for sins, and so after death
none other hell or punishment to follow. So great is ye mass of worldly
miseries, as this life is either for wicked folk, or by some wicked god
appointed. But when I duly consider al, I leave this common opynion as
altogether untrue: and perceive that in this life there is nothing found y^ may
justly be called good or evil, and do allow of those philosophers as wise, who
thought that al things consysted in opynion. For what custom, what law, or
what judgment, is so certain, as is not encou^tred with contrary opinions? and
surely believe me, y^ the philosophers would not so long have contended among
themselves, if the matters of their contention had not rested only in opinion:
what man is so mad as will say the swan is black? or that the raven is in
color white, when the matter is otherwise to be judged by common sense. But
what is good or evil (O lord) how much speech, how great disputation, and how
long contencion has been. The blind man sekes a mote. How can it be other
the^ discention, when the thing dyffreth from it self, and the philosophers do
disagre among themselves as of that, that no where is to be found. And here upon
comes to my memory a certain fable written by an ancient poet, which does
lively in my judgment set forth man's life. It is told that when mighty Jupiter
had made the heavens, the earth the seas, the beasts, and men, he soberly
considered that unless he allotted both punishment and reward for men's
deserts, it should so come to pass as they would not only approve al kind of
dysorder but also dysdayne the gods them selves, for which consyderation the
great Jove commanded Vulcan to frame two brazen tons, the one to receive
all that was good, the other to conteyn the evil, and made both good and evil
things wynged, to the end they might more fytlye be sent among mortal men,
according to the quality of their deserts. But Pandora being a busy gods
and gredie to look into the vessels, did open them, and suddenly both the good
and the evil brake forth and flewe their ways, the good houered up to heaven,
the evil made speee to the hell, and in y^ barel of evil remained only hope:
and in the vessel of good was found suspycion as that wherwt they were
maynteyned, which news when Jupiter hard (as he is an angry god) took the
empty vessels, and in a rage threw them down, which mortal men seeing,
desirous of news drew nere and embraced the emptye barrels, some of the good
and some of the evil But they that laid hold of the empty tonnes did
nevertheless persuade the^ selves to have gotten both good and evil, and yet
in deed neither good nor evil fell to any mortal man, saving that they y^ happened
upon the better barrel found in themselves opinion of good with suspicion, and
the other opinion of evil with some hope. And so it came to pass, not unlike as
when men in dark nights walkyng in Arabia do happelye tread upon some piece
of iron or other cold thing, are suddenly affrighted with fear least they have
happened upon a venomous serpent, and yet have not: even so the only suspicion of
good and evyll is that, that perplexeth al mortal creatures, because all that is
good is ascended to heaven, and all that is evil, gone down to the infernal
sprytes.

And therefore ever since the great Jupiter have disdained to take acompt of
mortal men's deseruings Truly although this be a feigned fable, yet does yt as well
declare the original both of good and evil as if it had been set forth in the
learned schools. But as these earthly joys are vain and instable, so in the
world to come al things are certain, assured, and everlasting, whether through
sufferance of these afflictions which we call euyls, the godly love does call
us: according to the saying of y^ prophet, because thou were accepted by god,
it was expedient y^ temptacion should try the: for the almighty God not unlike
a father that entierly loves his children does bring them up in all
contynencye and sober life, restrayning their pleasures, not suffering them
without chastisement to exercise any evil or ungodly life. And contrary wise
such as he estemeth not, and that live like children destened to perdicio^,
without regard he does suffer to pursue their dronken and disolute manner of
living. Shall we therefore say the life of such servants is more happy, or more
to be wished for then those sons. For none are admitted to heavenly joys,
but those that in all good life and perfection do deserve the same: for as gold
is fined in the furnace so the life of a just man, by adversity in this world
is tried. And yet if al either good or evil should be compared to y^ heavenly
hope, yt were no more then one grayn to a hole heap. S. Paul therefore said
that al we suffer in this world was not meritorious enough to gayn the glory
of y^ world to come, who so ever then that fyrmely embraces this faith,
should he not in aduersyty rejoice and in prosperitye lament? and amids his
miseries persuade himself that god does make trial of his faith, after trial
to call him among the number of his chosen? If in getting worldly glory thou
do so much rejoice, the reward thereof being small, the continuance short and
mortal: what should we do for this heavenly glory, which is everlasting, great,
and assured? So great is this comfort, y^ if there were not many y^ swerued in
faith, the holy office of co^forting were al ready finished, who would not
change this short life, with that life everlasting? this frayl with that
fyrme? this unhappy, with that most happy this troublesome, with that most
quiet? but in want of belief is sin, and in sin is want of belief:
where by the condition of man is berefte both of hope and faith, For what can
be unto man either more profitable after death, or more to be wished in this
life, then the hope of the life to come? And though ye same were not, yet ought
a man no whit to be discouraged, because there is almost no mysery so great but
may be converted to better hap. Neither is there among mortal men any opinion
so assured, as that nothing is sure. For as aduersitye and misfortune has been
to some men a way to good chance: so has prosperity been to others the
occasion of miserye. But it is not our determination to discourse hereof,
though by often proof it is to be tried. Our care only is to entreat of
calamityes: for if I should write of all such as misfortune has advanced,
this book could scantly contain them. Neither do I believe ye holy Scripture
to mean other by the history of Job, the^ thereby in one example to show the
varietye of fortune which ye Gentiles by diverse examples were taught to believe.
For Job being first happy, having health, children, abundance, land,
possession, and cattle, was bereft of all his worldly goods, and such as in
prosperity were his greatest friends, became in aduersitye his most cruel foes,
yet afterward in more abundance then before, he received the goodness and
liberalitye of fortune. Such and so many be the occasions both of good and evil
fortune, as nothing is more incertaine.

The servitude of Ventidius was cause that after he became Consul and gained
great glory, which he without decay of the Roman fortune could never have
looked for. But by his bondage he had occasion to show his virtue which was the
way to felicity. The proof thereof is daily seen among the barbarouse
nations, as y^ Turks, and those people which were called Mamaluchi, Among
mortal creatures what can be more intolerable then sickness? yet did the same
greatly profit the Emperor Augustus being in arms against Brutus.

For he, warned by his physician to remove from his pauilion by sleep he
recovered health, which if for other respect he had done, the same had been
to his great dishonor, or if he had abydden he had been slain or forced to
flee. Plotinus a philosopher of Platoes sect, had among others a scholar named
Ornucius Marcellus who was greatly diseased with the gout and palsy, through
diligent hearing his master (who disputed and red with great swetenes and
facilitye) he forgot often times to eat: and so with attentive hearing became
a singular philosopher, and with much abstinence recovered his health. So
through sickness he gained both learning and good recovery.

The evil disposition of the body does often times profit the virtue of
mind, for sickness make the the surfyter to become of good diet, ye proud more
covetous, the wicked religious, yea other whiles it profits the body also,
for more men of sickly body then health do attain to old age. Such is the
change of worldly things. For as with in the tail of a Stagge lyethe most
present poison, and all the rest of his body is wholesome Flesh: So the
Serpent Tyrus whose venom is incurable, has flesh so wholesome, as it is
medicinable against all other poisons.

Paulus tertius though he was learned and not unlike to aspire to the
papacye, yet the opinion of his old age, and syckelye body did, greatly
enforce to his aduauncemente. The great adversity of Sparticus condemnned to
dye in combat was the occasion he became glorious and while he (...) to the
Romans terrible. When the memory of many kings is wor^e away. Among the
rest of such commodities as adversity brings withal, this benefyte it
has, that a man's misfortunate days once paste, he lyuethe the rest of his
life with greater delighte. Who esteems his health that has not tasted of
sickness? Who knows the swetenes of his country that never has bent
banished? Or who can be happy or take pleasure in riches, that never has
lived in poverty? Or why do childlesse old men take (...) in children? But
because they have been (...). We read that Agissolaus king of the (...) was a
wise and severe man, yet in his age hie so much loved children, as he seemed
to (...). As falte (...) adversity by paste, makes (...), and the more if it
be not long. And (...) very well (...) the example of (...) comfortinge his
fellows saying.

O mates (quod he) that many a (...), have bid and borne or this,
Worse have we seen, and this also shall end when Gods will is.
Through Scilla rage you wot and throug he the roaring rocks we past,
Though Ciclops shore were full of fear yet came we through at last
Pluck up your hearts and drive from thence, both dread and fear away
To think on this may pleasure be perhaps another day.
Among the rest of Marcus (...) Cicero his oratious of life and proceeding what
was more to his avail, then the banishmente from his country: when his goods
was sold, his house subverted, and he him self confyned only, then he
learned how welcome he was to the citizens, how necessary to his country,
how dear to his friends, and (had he modestly used his glory) nothing that
ever happened to him in life was more to his reputacion: for after his
reuokement, he became more glorious then before. And in all misfortunes of man's
life, this reason is of no small importance, that necessity drives us to
comfort our selves: as whether we patiently or with impacience bear our
adversities, yet nedely in the end we must bear them.

Neither is sorrow or sadness to other end, then to encrea^e care, and make our
minds more unmeet to receive good counsel: and thereby both hope and help
are clearly taken away, and what good or allay of grief (...) continual
tears or desperacion procure? Truly sith in thy power it is to aggrauate or
decrease thine own care, it is the part of a wise and well advised man to
disburden himself of sorrow, and with pacient mind to bear all adversity,
calling to memory.

A giltlesse mind all sclauhders do dysdayne. Alas, what shall thy languishing
life avail the or what can thy pensive thoughts prevail. It has been seen
oftimes that patience or sufferance of adversity has helped valiauntemen. For
we sonest take pity of those that courageously do suffer miserye, and presume
more of their innocencye and virtue, then of those that impacientlye inlike
fortune abandon all courage of mind. Agis the Lacedemonian king; being by
certain officers of authority condemned to dye was drawn with a cord
toward the place of execution: it happened he espied a servant of his
standinge by wepinge to whom he said these words. I pray the my friend
forbear to lamente my death* for being unjustly condemned to dye, I am
become more worthy life, then they that enforce me to it. And having spoken
thus, wyllingly strangled himself:

We read also that a noble mind do move men to compassion* When Sceuola had
determined to kyl the king Porsenna, for his valiant and voluntary confession
received pardon, which if he had not done, but with denial craved mercy,
besides dishonor he should have suffered most cruel death. (...) taken for M.
Brutus, Seruius Terentius, for D. Bru. and fallinge into Antonius hands gained
both perdo^ and the friendship of their enemies, more through nobility of mind
then submissio^. What need more words? patience in captivity, and magnanimity
in adverse fortune have ever been praised and helped most. And thus (...) I
say, that saying the gilty conscience does only (...) a man unhappy, he is to
evil advised that (...) his mind to misfortune when wholly he might remain
in liberty. A man is nothing but his mind: if the mind he disconte^ted y^
man is al disquiet though all the (...) well, and if the mind be contented
though all the rest misdoe it forseeth little. I remember a certain rich man
growing mad, snatched at his straw and complained that he should dye for
Honger because there was no Corn within the emptye ears, did not (I pray you)
his discontented mind only make him unhappy.

An other one there was that ymagined himself te be made of glass, and ever
feared to be broken: was not this good fool without all misery the most
miserable man alive? But some there be that through imperfection of mind or
error are causers of their own evil, who ought therefore with more patience
bear it. As children who though they byte their own hands never so much do not
complain, yet if never so little they be hurt by others do cry out. But it
were unfit for us to follow the manner of children and unseemly to be more
foolish and of less courage then they. What can be more fond then a man to
hurt him self and then complain, better it were to follow the counsel of the
Poet.

Thine own deserved woes bear thou with patient mind.
Such pay^es are (...) with greatest grief, as causles men do find.
What can be said more deseruingly to chance unto us, then that, where (...)
fear, haste or (which is (...) of all) disorder, give occasion of our own
grief. Why would they complain? sithe there is none other cause of thy
sorrow? against whom seeing (...)? upon whom would thou be revenged? (...) thine
own self. Who so does mark it well, shall find that for the most part we are
causes of our own evil. And though it is plainly declared in the book De
Arcanis eternitatis, yet being here requisite, we will again speak thereof. And
yet were ye same nedelesse, if men were not so far in love with themselves, For
every one be he never so simple persuades himself to know most, imputinge
the good success of things to their own wisdom, and the evil to the
default of fortune. Neither does it suffice them to accuse the follye of
fortune, but also find fault with some evil spirit and lurking devil. In
which error princes do more often fall then others, not only because they are
pertakers of all kind of imperfections, but also for yt their ears are always
open to all sorts of parasites and flatterers, who make them believe they want
no virtue, wisdom or other perfection y^ man or god can be endued with all.
And these fair spoken people do study nothing more then to practice that
princes may know nothing, for otherwise they would not entertayne such
Gnatoes as they be. How much more comely were it in mortal men, to impute al
good success to God (or if they thought not so good) to fortune: and al evil
success to their lewdness, vilety, and lack of judgment. But would thou
know why thou art a fool? because thou do account thy self wise.

Socrates who by sentence of Apolloes oracle was judged the wisest, confessed
himself to know but one thing, and that was he knew nothing But thou that
in deed know nothing at all, will womanlyke take upon the to speak of
Mazageta India and rather then fail, of things above the skies.

Ptolomeus the noble astronomer was wont to say that a man y^ pleased himself
was hated of god And he pleases himself that imagines himself wise or
prouidente, and imputes all to his own glory and profyt. Such kind of people
be yt most part of mortal men, and therefore subject to so many evils and
misfortune. But now we have a little disgressed from our determined purpose:
because we should rather have proved then disproued that men be causers of
their own evil. And if we respect all sorts of evils, the matter will so fall
out. What tyrant is so terrible, as persecuteth the simple and innocente
souls? who is so vnskylful an artisane as can not earne his own living? what
man so cruel as murdereth the humble and wise people? for it is the part of a
wise man to observe y^ time the persons and their aucthority among who^ we
live. Nero was a cruel Emperor yet in his time Vespasianus did not only live
vnoffended but also bare office. So was Tiberius to his own subjects accounted
severe, yet Thrasilus yt mathimatrician co^tynued in favor, and so did diverse
gra^marians. But who so happens to live in ye government of these unmerciful
mo^sters, the sureste way is to lurk and live unknown. A most assured rule
it is yt without a man's own folly, he cannot become miserable. And although al
other virtues were banished from men, yet wisdom should ever retain her place
and reputacion. As for justice, fidelity, liberality, and curtesy, are hundred
but as certain strange wandering birds: but fortitude moore often, because it
encountreth with all kind of perrilles, and yet sometimes occasyoneth rather
hynderaunce then good fortune: yea learning it self, is nothing but mockerye,
and subject to all injuries. But wisdom is an heavenly gift, and dwells
among men in great reputacion and reverence.

Wisdom I say, is that which Kings do seek for, which people have in
admyracion, and on every side is necessary. Therefore who so want the
wisdom, has none other cause to complain.

As a man's health is diverse ways empeached even so is wisdom: as with
anger, pleasure, cowerdyce, dullness, ambition, couetise, and fynallye every
vice of mind offends wisdom in man. A Follye I do think it to comfort
those that through debilitye of mind do cast themselves into miserye: as
foul delyghte, and desperate reuenges.

Some there be who not unlike to gudgines, knowinge the hook lies hydden
within y^ bayt, does not withstanding, drawn on with gredynes of Venus joys,
or such like fond delighte cast themselves into apparent misaduentures, Men
say that the gudgine, craftelye (and yet foolishely) does first with her
tail beat the bayte from the hook, but if that avails not, do forthwith
assay to byte it. To what purpose should a man with such peril play the
parasyte, when otherwise he might safelye live? But we moore wyttelesse then
these bruyte Beasts do not abide the beating of the hurtefull bait. And yet
what bitterness does this sorrow bring withal, being bred with such delightinge
pleasure, yet happily thou say, I would have pleasure without pain If this
difficulty does offend thee, then good fool thou seek a thing impossibly to
be atteyned: because every joy is accompanied with his discomodity. Glory is
followed with envy, wisdom not gotten without labor, wealth is won with care
children are kept with trouble, banketting is backed with sickness, ease bredeth
pouertye, ambition begets hate, auctority has following fear, quietness
enge^dreth disdain. So I pray you whereunto tends the end of al mortal
things? And this in allayinge of men's discontentations is most comfortable,
that every man is afflicted with one misfortune or other, or as men say, each man
feleth his own private offense. Some are afflycted with poverty, some with want
of children, some with sycknes, some with fear, some with wrong, some with
children, some with wives, some with craft, some with foes: and that which is
greatest, and most to be meruayled at (such is the condition of man) to be
most happy and subject to no gryef, is also a calamity. It is therefore said
that Polycrates being lothed with abundance of fortunes grace, did greatly
desire to feel some offense, and therefore cast into the sea a ringe of
merueylous prise, of purpose to have some cause to complain But fortune (as it
seemed) having sworn his happynes in a fyshe restored it again. But lest I seem
altogether to persuade with fables I pray you what pleasure do princes take at
their diners? when continual eating of delycate dishes have taken away the
taste of their mouths. The physytions affirm that delicacye, is when a man
from evil releste recouereth his perfyte nature. Then I pray you what judgment
have they in delicacy yt never tasted any gross or dyspleasant meat? Or how
can he be happy that never felt of gryef? do thou not se how happy pore men
account theymselues, when they are invited to rich men's tables what is the
cause? seeing pore men have no better fare then the rich? surely nothing but the
noueltye of the diet. Wherefore yt is most assured that with out aduersitye a
man may not be happy* nor take delyght in mirth without (...) sorrow. The^ is
it not a comfort in these calamityes to have not only one man for a companion,
but also al mankind and as it is commonly said. Consors est miseris (...).

But of how much more force shall thy comforthe knowing that myseries do not
happen at al adue^tures, but rather in respect of felicity: and that y^
greatness of evil is accompanied with the greatness of good. And to begin in
general: there is nothing more noble then a common weal well governed: yet
what can be more hard, the^ to live there? at the beginning such a one was
the Roman government, and by that mean conquered the whole world. But what
can be more hardly born, then a life under such laws, when subjects are
exercysed only in labor, constreined to marriage, education of children, and
chyeflye to follow wars? And among these things that labor which
husbandmen do use, seems to our ears most intolerable. The bringing up of
children (and specially many) to a poor man, seems to surpass all sorrows,
for as a few children are great delights so many to a poor man is cause of the
greatest care that can happen.

What can for travail and peril be compared to the wars? where men do
labor, dygginge, and deluinge, sleaping in the wynters snow, and marchinge in
the summers son, watching, and warding, day and night, clyming the mountains
and sailing the seas: sometimes afflicted with hunger, somtymes with thyrst: yea
and in the end, either to kyl or to be killed. So as no marvel it is, to see
how willingly soldiers do behold the dysplaied ensygnes, and receive knowledge
of battle, when either by happy victory they shall be discharged of travail,
or by death receive end of painful life. The Lacedaemonians therefore led so
hard a life at home, as it never grieved them to serve abroad in the wars.
Then is it manifest that in a common weal well governed, men be most unhappy,
and happyeste be those Citizens, that live in most disorderly countries. And
kings (whom men beguiled with false ymaginacion do think equal to gods) are
also followed with their afflictions. As fynely the tragical poets have
feigned the tragedies and furies to be only in kings courts, and the comodies
and pleasant plays in private houses. The palaces of princes are ever open to
great evils, neither are these monsters at any time from thence: as envy, hate,
grudge, poison, and persecution. Yea the princes mind is the seat of al these,
whereby it is neither suffered to sleep quietly by night, nor rest by day.
Now assayleth him the memory of wickedness, now the suspicion of familiers,
now y^ mystrust of people, now fear of other princes, with care day and night
to prevent their practices. But be it, the prince, be never so just, never so
holy? yet fear and suspicion does never want, and as the poet fayneth of
Ixion and Lapithis.

Whom over hanges a stone that evermore, does seem to fall. The bride beds
fair are spread, and golden carpets shine full bright
And precious princely fare, before, their face is set in sight.
Then coms the foulest feend, and al their dainties ouerbroodes.
Forbidding them to touch, and from, their hands do snatch the foods and beats
with burning brondes.
Such is the estate and condition of courts, as Virgilius living in the happy
house of Augustus was well acquainted withal, But let us a while omyt to speak
of princes, and turn our talk to private persons. I can not with care or
diligence find any, that in every respect can account himself free from
misfortune, such a one I think as hardlye found as are those beasts called
Rinocerotes, of which kind Plynius confessed he could never find any,
though long time he hunted through the whole world.

Therefore seeing all mortal men be subject to some kind of misfortune: who
art thou y^ sekest to live fre from y^ law which al others are subject unto?
why do thou not complain, that thou art not made mortal, winged, and king
of the hole world free from al misfortunes?

But if thou can bear that lack which nature could not help, why should
thou not also be content with the other which is no less universal? and
according to the fable, think thy calamities ye less that thou see the
adversities of other to be greater. Men say that in old time, the hares
being cast into desperation, for that of all other beasts they were most
persecuted, consulted together and determined to drown themselves in the next
river: being assembled on they went to execute their determination, the frogs
that happened to be upon the bank, hearing the hares coming for fear cast
themselves into the water: which noise when the hares hard, they studied to
know the cause, and fynding that for fear of them the frogs were fled changed
their intent: because the frogs more unhappy than they, sought notwithstanding
to preserve their lives: and by y^ means the hares have till this day been
preserved. Surely the adversity of others, did never make my miseries seem ye
less, but the necessyty of evil which is known by other men's misaduentures,
has geeuen me great allay of my pryuate greues. For when a man shall truly
consider his myshaps to proceed of natures necessytye, and not iniuriouslye,
then will he yield himself to suffer al, unless that altogether he be void
of judgment, simple and foolyshe. A wise man therefore foreseinge the necessyty
of many my seryes, and well remembering, the frailtye and instabilitye of every
condition of mankind, does patiently look for all sorts of mysaduentures, and
when they come, it is therefore mete he show himself armed with fortitude,
least changed by reason of their coming he may seem to forsake his honest
determinacion, or else be unprovided. It is also to be co^sydered that time is a
medicine to all sorrows, yt takes away mourning, it bredeth forgetfulness of
injuries, yt remoueth ye memory of misaduentures and finally brings
forgetfulness and disdain of al sorts of calamities. What man has been so
impacient in fatherlye affection, as does take care for the death of his son,
thirty years since departed? or his goods lost so long ago? Such is the
condition of time, as first it deminisheth some part of extreme sorrow or joy,
next it wears away al feruency of affection, and lastly does clearly rote it
out of memory. Therefore since y^ couetise of time does in the most simple
work this effect, why should not thou do the same to thy self? and look
what benefyte time in short space should give the, the same may thou through
fortitude, learning, modesty, and good example give unto thy self. Persuade
thy self, that thy displeasant days be near passed, and hope that better
hap is at hand. Call to memory how many worthy men have vndeseruingly and
cruelly by fortune been cast down, and patiently suffered her most extreme
disgrace.

There is nothing more requisite in a wise man, then modesty to suffer both
fortunes. For who so knows not how to do in prosperitye, forgets he is
mortal: there is no greater argument of wisdom, then when a man does that
presentlye which others by benefyte of time have learned.

Be not therefore burdenouse to thy self and though thou art chanced into this
shadow of calamitye yet cast not thy self down into very misfortune.

Think assuredlye that some be free from every evil, and that time
bringethe with all the most certain and sure consolacion.

Not that we have all ready spoken of, but that which Auerroes and other
philosophers have written.

When soberlye thou consider that the life of man compared to the eternal
world, is not a moment, and in that short time al to be vain, incertaine and
by assured law of nature short, so as it makethe no matter at all, what a one
thou haste been or shalt be. And when with my self I ymagine of this
matter, I remember that which in books of common fables we read, where some
are feigned rich men, some mighty kings, and some so strong, as for
strength surpassed Hercules, what difference there should be betwixt these
feigned men and Caesar or Pompey, till this day I could never learn, unless
that either for our learning an historye is made differente from a fable. or
that we have consideration of souls that live for ever.

For otherwise when thou shalt no more be, it skillethe not at all what thou
haste been. Only Folly of man has found out this invention that we
should persuade our selves to be happy or unhappy, not only in this world,
but also after in the opinion of others.

Some I see most careful that after death they may leave behind them
riches or fame.

And entysed with such desire Herostratus burned the Temple of Diana*, that
thereby (though for wicked doing) he might gain eternal fame.

But who was this Herostratus? by what father begotten? or of what mother was
he borne? In what country did he dwell? what was his parson, or which ways
did he live? what do we know hereby, other, then either to know nothing or
a feigned man? And admit thou gain this desired glory? what shall it avail
thee after three hundrethe years whether thou were happy or unhappy?

And if no glory be, within fifty years after death what difference
shall be betwixt a king and a Carle. Betwixt Lucullus and Irus betwixt
Xenophon and Cleon, betwixt flaues and fremen, betwixt happy and unhappy.
But least perhaps thou live in doubt that time does still abide, and the
course of heavens be staide, or that the life of man does not of necessity
and speedelye decaie, behold that one stone where in was graued three Faces, a
Childs, a Man's and an Old man's. So sodeine are the chaunges and so nere as
the Poet does not vnfytlie call our age, Fleinge. Consider what number of
years since the beginning of the world, and thine age have passed, so shalt
thou learn, that no shaddowe more swiftelye fadethe away.

Imagine assuredlye that all time were passed, and so shall perceive that all
will return to nothing. Not unlike to them that with certain Hope of
deliuerye remain in Prison, who though in misfortune, yet do but little
lament, chieflye if they be of valiant mind. So men that in this troublesome
life, sith they look for and abide one equality in respect of death, I ca^ not
conceive why happy folk should not be more sorrowful then those that be
unhappy.

For if even now it were proclaimed as it was in the time of Licurgus that al
lands and goods should equalye among al sorts of men be divided, whether
do thou think that beggars or rich men, would be most sorry? Surely I
think no man thinks the rich men would rejoice; and the porer sort be sorye.
If therefore law of life is so equalye made as there is none that can avoid, I
see no cause but that every man here living in misery, ought willyngly to
embrace the benefit of so just a decree. What care I pray thee shall thou
have two hundred years hence, whether thou dyed having children or
childelesse? old or young, rich or pore, and bound man or free, in thy bed
or on the gallows, or whether in aucthority, or without honor thou lived or
dyed? But follye has brought in these opinions, by which we only become
happy or unhappy. Because follye enduseth forgetfulness of reason: it makes
Pigmeans to seem Gyantes: sometimes our euyls, sometimes our good it cloketh,
it multiplyeth it makes them obscure, it cloketh it, increases, darkneth,
hides, even as it pleases of us determines. But if in this life there be any
thing good or evil: or any differe^te of pleasure or sadness, the same
rests only in conscience and virtue of the mind. For the memory of wicked
and sinful doings excedeth al other torments.

The heart of the wicked (as says the prophet) fometh like the swellynge seas:
and their minds are ever vexed with fearful visions: because there is no
greater affliction then when their gyltye thoughts do continually accuse their
consciences As the poet says.

Whose mind most giltye is, and harboreth cruel thought
A secret scourge within himself, such sinful deeds have wrought
And pains more great he tastes, whom vvhyp of conscience beats
Then did Seditius ever feel, or Radamantus freates
Within thy breaste to bear, thy grief both night and day,
Thou have at hand, that vvytt to obtayn, thy hidden vvoes bewray
Of Comfort the second Book
BEcause in the former book we have discoursed copiouslye, (as could be
generally) of the comfortinge of all miseries, the consideracion of every
several evil, seemed scantlye needful: saying right reason, wise counsel,
and then our talk might suffice to remove al sadness out of the mind of
eeuerye wise man, but for that it was our purpose at the beginning, to
consider without affection, and with right judgment to speak diligently
of every adversity that may happen to men: it seemed also more necessary for
us to do the same, because some would think, those things which should be
let pass, to be left untouched of purpose, rather because they could not be
proved, then because they were superfluous. Moreover this historye of evils
has both for variety and for example no small pleasure, wherewith it may wash
away from the readers, that spotte of sadness which is wont to be left of the
sensible mind, and also of nature it self in great mishappes. For
oftentimes, though reason comfort us and teach us that neitter mourninge is
meet, neither that there is any cause of mourninge, yet the sad mind of it
self can not be merry: which thing where if happens not seldom with out any
adversity at al how much moore like is it to be left behind in them that
pine with long wearynes, not withstanding the very wound to be cured.

Therefore that now we may return to our purposed talk: of al things that
happen in man's life, sorrow, and death, be most bitter. For to be bereft
of the company of our most dearly beloved for ever, and without hope, is
wont to seem a most cruel thing unto all men. And death it self (as
says the Philosopher) of al terrible things is most extreme, wherefore if
any thing be able to shake a valiaunte and wise man, doubtless that ought to
be the death of him self and his most near friends.

For which cause I perceive excellent Poets to have mourned both for theirs
and theimselues and also to have feigned others mourninge for their friends.
Among whom Papinius bewayleth his father saying.

Give vvyt and woeful voice, O Sire, let me my vvoes complain.
For this the moon has hyd her face, and thrice come back again.
Sith first I set me down, in sloth and sobbinge cheer
No muse to comfort care.
An other in the same cause. What man can make a spring of tears, to feed my
gulf of grief
Or who has store of tears so great: and far from al relief.
Pitye has bereft my sight, and heart has cleft in tvvayne,
Which suffers not my vvoes to sound, my tongue cannot complayn
Such is my grief.
But would to God this complaint, were not that which is commonly spoken of.
The weping of y^ heir is the weepinge is of one that laugheth under a vizer:
for so rarely is the tender love toward the parents wont to be found, that
none is less, Yet admit it were such as these verses express. Surely this
book shall be thought less nedeful in no part, then in comfortinge the sorrow
which chances by the death of parents. For some examples there be of
brothers which have slain them selves for their brothers, of parents for their
children, and of husbands for their wives: but yt love of children toward
their parents has been confyrmed almost by no experience. Where by it
happens that the complaint of Catullus may seem rather (as they say) to come
from the heart. For thus he bewayles his brother.

Lo now my study stayde is, for cruel death have slain.
My brother dear: shall I pore wretch in vvretched life remain?
The only hope of all our house, O death thou have bereft me
Mine earthly joy this brother was, none other joy is left me.
Virgil counterfayteth a more bitter lamentatio^ not without wrath and
indignacion of the mind, in Mezentius lamenting his slain son saying.

My country wrought my vvoe, my friends did hate me all,
If death had taken my giltles soul, no grief had made me thrall.
Lo yet among you men I live, and still enjoy this light
But long I may not so.
Yet how much more cruel sorrow is feigned of the same poet in the mother
bewayling her only son Eurialus, for that she both a widow and an old
woman, saw him slain cruellye in his enemies hands. There truly he
contains the womanly tenderness of heart in these words.

Your deadly darts (O foes) for pittye cast in me:
With cruel svvorde before the rest, let me destroyed be.
Else thou Almightye God, on me such mercy have,
As that my vvretched head may rest, within mine earthly grave.
The slaughter of the son bewailed of y^ mother, in my judgment could not
be better described of ye Poet. And Homer bringes in Achilles, sorrowinge sore
at the burial of his friend Patroclus, when he said.

But him a careful cloud, did compass round about,
And on his head with heavy hand, the dust he poured out.
And after horriblye he cried out. Yea so far forth is the vehemencye of his
sorrow declared, that his familiar friends feared lest he should kill
himself. But another more moderately mourns for his death, and complayneth
of destines, when no feigned fear in others, but his own enforced him saying.

And in my greenest years, when youth has highest power,
Shall this my spirit depart away, and death my corpse devour?
The Gods I cannot guide, their will we must obey,
Where destny dryues I yield my self: with vvilling mind alvvay.
But while I set forth the follies of others, me think. I have framed a
mourninge dittye: and have not only described, but rather increased heavy
mourning. Notwithstanding the very matter could not be unfolded unless I had
also put to the judgment of Poets, for that is the common peoples opinion,
not only because the Poets be careful to speak those things which be
populer and liked of the common sort, but also for that if otherwise they
would speak they could not, when they be so far wide from all study of
Philosophye. For which cause also they be shut out of Plato his common weal.
And herein we must either condemn Plato if he banish them unjustly: or the
Poets if he do it iustlye. Therefore surely the better opinion is that they be
banished worthilye: for agreing with the people, they spoke those things which
be in the opinion of the ignoraunte. For no man denies that wise men be few:
and the common people contains ye most part of men: thopinions therefore of
the Poets and the common people, in which they disagree with the Philosophers
be all false, and unprofitable. Certes it is of necessitye, that the opynion of
the common sort is false: it the judgment of wise me^ be true: but who
doubts whether wise men's sayings be true? otherwise truly they should be no
wise men. But if in any thing at all the Poets deserve small credit, no where
less then in those things which co^serne manners and virtues.

Neither is it any maruayle though Archilochus a passing good Poet (but so much
worse Philosopher) was compelled of the Lacedaemonians the very same hour that
he came into town, to be packinge away again, for wrytinge this sentence.
Better it is to want arms, then suffer death. Verilye many times lewd talk
corrupts honest manners.

Therefore saying we will speak of sorrow and death, it seems necessary
first to examine whether in our own death, or in the death of our friends
there be any evil: and if there be, whether the evil may be overcome by good,
or rather the loss by gain. That shall be easy to discern if first we
distinguishe and diligently understand this: whether after we be dead,
there remain any thing of us beside the body. Or all the whole dye away
together with the body. In which cause although we have already spoken
many things in the book De Areanis aeternitis, and minds to speak in the
books of Death, yet is not this question, in this place meet to be shadowed
wholye with silence. But as in this Book chiefelye we follow the truth, and
every where briefenes, so one only reason of the reasonable soul shall
suffyce us for the knowing of his nature. For saying man has understanding,
he is endued with many habites of knowledge. That is to say Science, as
Geometrye, Philosophye, and Logic. Arts, as Saylinge, Husbandrye, Physic.
Intelligence which is of principles, as that the whole is greater then any part
thereof alone, and equal to all his parts together. Prudence, whereby he
consydereth and disposes all things that he has to do. And Sapience with
these, by which he knows GOD and embraces Religion. And some men do more
excel in some one or other of these or in many of them, whereby it comes to
pass that man does so use his understanding and reason in his own art, as
though in other things he may seem rude, yet in that one thing he exceeds
right notable men. Some though they have neither learning nor art, yet by
reason of exercise prove very wise. That it may plainly appear, that man's
understanding is in all men alike, and differs only in exercise, we
perceive in the barbarous and vplandishe men: Wherefore I wonder at the
doltishnes of some which profess wisdom, who think that only learned men
be reasonable, and others differ little from beasts. Worthelye therefore it
comes (as they say commonly) that the clean contrary falls out, that is
to say, that these learned men beside their Book, know nothing at all, and
may easily be beguiled of any unlearned soul.

For if they would way with themselves, that all men (unless they be
hindered with some disease) have the use of reason and understanding, and that
so much the more in one kind of exercise, how much further they be from
another, they should well perceive themselves to be overcome of them. What a
number leaving their vile occupations, have proved famous Philosophers? Simon
Coriarius when Socrates came often unto his shop, having talk with his
prentices became a perfect Philosopher, and left unto his posteritye no small
number of monumentes. So he that was a curryer, only by exercise is stertt up
to be a Philosopher. The cunning therefore of artisanes and others that want
learning is not to be despised as boyde of understanding. But as it is wont to
be said, How far Megara is from Athens: so far is Athens from Megara. So,
how far a learned man passes an artysan in speakinge, so far does an
artisan pass a learned man in his facultye. Of both then the reason is alike,
the understanding a like, and nature all one, differinge only in ends and
use. But seeing there is in other living creatures an excellencye above that is
in man, as memory in horses: strength and life as in the Elephant, power of
sight, as in the Eagle: hearing as in the boar, touching as in the spider,
swiftnes as in the hare: and yet of those habites of knowledge no other living
creature is any whit partaker, much less able to go beyond man in any of
them. It is then most apparent that man's mind is severed from all corporal or
bodily matter. Verilye whereas man in all those things, which depend of the
body may be overcome of some lyuinge creature, and in these virtues of the
mind no lyuinge creature is partener, no not of the lest part, it is not
possible at all that the virtue of understanding should not be both
seperable, and unmixed and everlasting. Neither yet remains it naked and bare.

For whereas of all other lyuinge things, the Dog, the Marmyset, and the
Elephant be with out controuersye endued with most wit, though a man would
spend his whole life, he shall never teach them ye least rule of any Art or
wisdom, besides that which of nature is bred in them. And surely to speak
of the easyest thing, if you travail to learn them to undo a knot, they
keep in memory how they may draw and slake, and so fynallye loose the knot:
but if you change the knot never so little, they shall never know how to undo
it, unless it be mere chance, so as you may well perceive they be utterly
deuoyde of reason. Likewise fowls learn to speak, and (as the Poet says) so
well, that the Pie with him braggeth saying: If thou should not see me,
thou would deny that I am a foul. Never yet shall you plainly teach her
what she should say, or any coupled sentence, to make a show of any printe of
reason. And the nerer they seem to attain unto man in speakinge, so much
surely is it well known that they be able to conceive no understanding. In
like manner also dogs know their own names, and are by teachinge learned to
hunt fowls: but all these things they keep by memory, and truly cannot tell
how to put or change any thing more then they be taught, what occasion soever
they have. Neither is it to be supposed they know more things which for want
of speech they cannot utter: saying the aptest fowls to learn (among which
is the Popingeye) although they can learn well to speak as men, be never
more fit to any use of reason. Brute beasts therefore be able for one only
art by nature, and for all things universally only by memory, not
conceyuinge reason at any time, neither by continual teachinge their race,
neither by process of time, neither by endeavor and diligence. Therefore as
Aristotle has taught, memory is no part of reason: but in deed with Plato,
remembering is the same that understanding is with Aristotle. Truly these two
differ only in this, because Aristotle believes the conceived forms of
things come newly into the mind, he gives them the name of understanding:
but Plato thinks they be borne in our mind, wherefore he terms it memory
Of neither of these two, therefore seeing they be the powers of reason, alone can
any brute beast be partaker, but only of that which Aristotle calls
memory, Plato opinion. But because Plato in every place uses names of
things confusely, he attributes unto men, recording or everlasting memory,
being part of reason: unto other lyuinge creatures opinion and memory, latelye
conceived of the fences. And it appears plainlye that that art proper unto
beasts is simple of nature, not of any skill, in that it is most excellent in
Swallows and pismiers, and other vile and base creatures far wide of al
perceiving. For if it were wroughte by discretion as arts be in men, it
should be so much more fine, by how much ye living beast were more excellent
in sense and memory. But it happens otherwise when dogs, horses, and
Elephants know not how to do any such thing as either the swallow, the pysmyer,
or the worm. There should be also in them as in me^, imperfections and
diuersityes about the same Art, yea and passing over into the like works as
there is in me^, of which forasmuch as there is none, it cannot be doubted that
this is wholly the institution of nature. And to speak generallye, if any brute
thing could have even the shadow of reason, it were simplye necessary that a
reason framed of two particular propositions should infer a conclusion, which
no way can be. Therefore be brute creatures governed only by nature, not by
reason. But certainly seeing nature it self the mistres and teacher of the
living creature, is doubtless immortal, though the living creature be mortal.
How much more necessary is it, that ma^s understanding, which knows all
the Arts of all living things, and more and more excellent, besides also the
disciplines and principles, God and all the furniture of Heaven and the
Elements, besides these to be immortal and incorruptible? For as nature it
self is not the living thing, but that which does teach the lyuinge thing,
and therefore remains when the lyuinge thing dies: So contrariwyse whereas
understanding is the whole man, and it self knows the same, as long as the
understanding remains, the whole man is also incorruptible, though the
body vanishe away. Wherefore me think Crito was rightlye reproved of
Socrates. For when Crito for good will asked of him where he would be buried
(for now had Socrates in prisonne dronken his poison ready to dye) He
aunsweared, alas what labor have I lost, that could not persuade Crito,
that I shall fly away from hence all whole. For the soul though it be most
simple, yet comprehends it al virtue in manne, not receyuinge many virtues
because it has diverse parts, but according to the nature and qualitye of
those things which be handled of it, it is called Intelligence and Judgment,
and wit, and deliberation, and will, and prudence, and sapience, and Art.
Also brute beasts must needs clearelye want all these things. For neither
does any of them use either judgment, or deliberation, or will (properly
called) or intelligence, or counsel, but are all equallye and universally
void of all these, like as on the contrary part all men are furnished with
these. Forsothe because their nature, which is understanding or soul, or
reasonable mind, contains and is by possibilitye all these. And therefore is
transformed into every one of them, even as it lysteth. Wherefore I wonder
not a little at their vanitye, who esteem men only of temperate Regions for
reasonable: and imagine the inhabitauntes of the furthest Elements of the
earth like wild beasts, and to have the monsterous shapes that Solinus the
Cosmographer describes. But sure they be much deceived in judgment. A few
years since Leonarde Apisan when he trauayled into India and Ethiopia,
brought out of India Arithmeticke, and out of Ethiopia, Algebras Art of
reckeninge: Arguments of most fine wits. No man almost denies the
Aegipsians to be inuenters of all Arts, but chiefly of Astronomy. Latelye
John Mounteregio of Germany, and Gulihelmus a Zelander a man of excellent
wit, Erasmus of Roterdame an Hollander, and now all the North Countries
flows in good learning. What an impudent matter is it, that they will
compare their wits with beasts, and prefer ours more dull to them: from
whom out of Affricke and Sarmatia be brought arts of great subtiltye, as we
Italians are no way able to imitate the same. The temperate country has
neither better wits nor quicker minds, but only more gentle manners, and
more moderate affections, wherein the plentye of all things helped with the
clemencye of the air, labors to challeng to it self the chief parts. But
if the armies of y^ Romans had not been, Italye for fine wits had lain
still, and given place to a great many of provinces. So Greece passed the
Barbarians, in study, not in wit. What makes it matter that the Barbarians
are more enclyned unto some affections of the mind, that therefore they
should be said to have less reason? whereas we may see for the most part
famous men to have been naturallye prone unto anger, by reason of the subtle
humor so plentifullye feedinge those parts of the sense which serve unto y^
reasonable mind. Neither for all that, ought angrye persons to be called
unreasonable, unless it be in this sense, that they suffer the reasonable
power of the soul to much, to be overcome of the affections of the body. In
which sense if it like them to call the inhabitauntes of the furthest clymates
unreasonable, I agree that they be more ready to yield unto vices. Not for that
they want any thing at all of the reasonable power of the mind, when
commonly they exceed us in wit, and counsel, and subtiltye of arts. For I
ask this question, if two men be equallye rich, and the one uses his riches,
the other will not, shall we therefore call him the poorer who uses them not.
All the noble Philosophers therefore saying this, and being enforced to define
the soul immortal, and never fading, were feign to fly with lie and all to
the unity of it* saying in deed our understanding to be vnfadeable, but
nevertheless to be all one in all men. Marye this they affirm, some one
way and some another. For some (as Auerr^es) make both the passive and agent
all one, each one of them seperable, but the one the form of a man, the other
a certain accidental thing, and utterly separate from the man. Some other
more reasonable of these opinions, hold that the agent only comes from
without yet not so to be coupled unto man that it may be simplye his form and
part of him: But as for that that Auerroes affyrmeth of the double
understanding, I never found it with Aristotle. Forsothe it is all one which
comes from without, and is not inseparable, all the rest proceed of the
matter and virtue of the seed. But to make in manne two understandings, and
both everlasting is a marvelous absurditye. But this at this time is nothing
to us, let us now show that understanding which is not mixte, and comes
from without, that it cannot possiblye be all one only. For if it were such
a one, and also the form of man, how could it before it were exercised in
us, be compared to a bare shaven table, being already imprinted with all
manner of discipline in others. All men should also a like continue, yea than
(that is more) all men should be one man, because their form should be one
in number, and one thing that understands. And if it be not ye form, what
is more fond then to say man understands, when understanding it self is
no part of man. Although these things be very trifles, yet let us bestow
them on these good fellows, and fetch up again the foundation from the
bottom. Either this only and everlasting understanding is only in men: or
else as it were a Son being separate in substance, it assisteth all men with
the light. If it be in men only, how is it severed? how comes it from
without? how does it not flow from the power of the seeds? yea what more
excellency has man then other lyuinge things? saying they have both
everlasting matter, and nature of whom they be governed vnfadable: for so to
continue, is no otherwise to remain the same thing, then in likeness, not in
number. For the same power should be nature in an other living creature, and
understanding in manne. But herefore is the living creature governed of an
other thing, because nature cannot be the same that the lyuinge creature is,
because that, of which it is governed, continues still when the lyuinge
creature is dead. If therefore man be ruled of himself and that be immortal
which rules it cannot be one in diverse, for nature which rules is severed
from ye lyuinge things, that it being one might serve many* but the power
of understanding is coupled in man. Wherefore one power of understanding,
cannot serve many men, but every man has his own understanding assigned him
by himself. But it does not as it were a son, shine unto us without us,
first for that we perceive our selves to understand, none otherwise the^ to
have sense. But sense is proper unto us, and all the fou^datio^ thereof is part
of us, ergo our understanding also. Then moreuer and if it should shine
without, we should be governed of an other thing, as the brute beasts be,
which for no other cause are governed of an other thing, then that same of
which they are governed without them. But this is a thing most proper unto us
men, that we should command our selves. For the virtue within us, moves
our lymmes, because it comes from understanding (is ruled with a strange
and foreign rule, does always obaye after one sort, and is not our own
simplye, nor known unto us, but we use it not knowinge, how we use it. And so
of those things which come from other where, we be not full masters of them.
So beasts because they be governed by the motion of the natural power, and
sense, which has an outward or foraine cause, in like sort be quite void of
liberty, and utterly subject to an others government, nothing differing in
their affections from ye sense and service which the members in man are wont to
do unto the will. For if those members be hurt, of their own accord, and
without the commandment of will, they shrink back, although they know not
wherefore they so do. Moreover and if understanding were without us, we
should no more differ from other living creatures, then they do one from an
other, and needs it must follow, y^ brute beasts should not want
understanding. Forasmuch as in the same manner the nature both of brute
beasts and men should be illumined in ye same sort, and of the same eternal
causes. And now is it showed how brutishe living creatures are for ever, by no
kind of means able to attain unto eue^ the least shadow of that part which is
reasonable, but by memory, or else nature sometime to have given a certain show
of some conceived reason. Wherefore it is manifest the mind of me^ to be
heavenly and divided according to the number of men neither fading nor waxeing
old at any time. But like as ye beams of the son, if they fall upon a thick
shadowed place or cloud do not shine bright, but if they light upon glass, or
water, or crystal, shine so much the brighter, how much clearer the matter
is: and yet these beams be no purer nor more lasting then the other, but be a
like perpetual: So the minds of men when the parts in which they chiefly
shine* be decayed either by age or by sickness, do cease to use their proper
glistring, and faculties so that unto some men they seem to fade, when for all
that in no part they are made either faulty, or faint, or sickly, but
continue, sound and untouched even to death: and flitting from thence give unto
us a probable opinion of the^, for otherwise how could any man judge the minds
of good men for ever blessed and happy, the minds of evil men wretched and
unhappy. Hereupon grows the opinion of Plato, that after the worlds end
men's souls should return to their bodies. Other think they dye not till the
world be consumed with fire, which after long time they look for, and of that
mind be the Stoikes. By either of which Philosophers, seeing nothing we have
assuredly confirmed I meaned not to say much, supposinge it should suffice to
have showed y^ the souls of al men do remayn after with those faculties which
be most properlye theirs, As will, understanding, wisdom, knowledge,
deliberacion, reason, the knowledge of arts and such like virtues. But now let
us return to our determined purpose. It was agreed y^ death could be neither
evil, nor worthy to be lamented, for proof whereof, the disputacion of the
immortality of the soul was no more necessary, then as men say to light a
candle at mydnoneday, for death did never seem less grievous to any, then to
those that afterdeathe believed no life at all. Nevertheless sith we have
fallen into this talk, and now do assuredly know, it is also our
determinacion to instruct others. Let us therefore show that death is neither
evil nor to be bewailed, and most dishonest of al it is, a man either to lament
or fear his own departing, from life, which no pity nor mercy can prevent.
But fear, imperfection of nature, and to much desire of life must nedelye be
the cause, yet hereof why is thy care so great, or what happiness haste thou,
that might make thy life so desired? do thou alone possess any delight
that we have not tasted of, which might make thee wyshe for longer life? For
every of us have seen yt stars, the Heaven, mountains, seas, ryuers, lakes,
fields gardeines, Cittyes and towns, we have also had sport, dalliau^ce,
music, songs, banquets, venerye, love, maskerye, and finally every sort of
earthlye folly, neither have we wanted commendable exercise and indifferent
skill of science, and besides that, we know the manner of contentions,
disputacions, public Orations. Yea for our condition we have borne dignitye
and office, we have satisfied the honest desires of our children, friends and
kinsefolkes, and together with them lived in glory, money, apparel, and
other necessaryes of life, we have enjoyed: and in every of them find greater
offense then pleasure, so as we may say with the Prophet Vanitas vanitatem
and omnia vanitas.

Yet if any man has found a more noble felicitye, or can teach a way more
straight to happiness or new delight, I know not, but for my part in every
thing have felt more grief then pleasure. But I think it happens to
these men y^ lust so much after life, as it does to those that labors
alteration of metals, who find every thing sooner then that they seek, for
besides that they make neither goulde nor silver, y^ little which they have is
also consumed. Euenso, such as with greatest care do seek for felicitye, not
findinge it, do with loss of their labor, also depart with quietness of
mind, and become most unhappy. Wherefore since this exceeding desire of life
helps nothing, yea though life were good, yet were it better without trouble
to lay by his mass of cares and like a faithful man restore that thou
had borrowed. But if perhapps thou in vain torment thy self, what, do
thou win thereby, other then to consume in dyinge that little life which is
remaining: saying what soever time is spente in thinking of death, may iustlye
be so called. How much were it better to follow the counsel of. Agathius who
right well commended death saying, that it did not only remove sickness and al
other grieves but also when al other discommodities of life did happen to man
often, it never would come more then once. Neither can death be accounted
any extreme evil considering it comes of most light occasions and is on
every side at hand. Such things as we take for hurtful be also rare and not
lightlye found, but there is nothing more commonnor more quickly had then
death. For death is taken by air, wynd, thonder, water, fire, earthquakes,
wild beasts, fishes, fowls, dust, smoke, serpents, meat, drink, bed, trees,
sleep, sorrow, joy, laughter, company, anger, discord, and fynallye of
innumerable other occasions death does proceed. Philomenes seeing his Ass
eating raysons said unto his boy, seeing thou have left the Ass raysons to
eat, geeue him also wine to drink, fell into a great laughter and not being
able to stay him self, coughing he dyed. Coma the brother of Diogines y^
notable thief, being by Rutilius the Consul taken and examined touching
outlawes fled, he required time to think of his answer, and putting down his
head betwixt his knees he stopped his own breathe, and in the hands of his
keeper dyed so quietlye, as none of them perceived when he took the last leave
of life.

Seeing therefore with such ease men dye, what should we account of death to be
resembled to any thing better than sleep, for as in sleep and wakyng be we
never so hedeful, yet feel we not when yt comes: even so when from life we
pass toward death, our senses declyning without all sense, at last we dye.
When Socrates had drunk poison and delivered his garment to his servant ready
to dye did notwtstanding jest with Crito: saying. I pray the remember to
sacrifyce a cock to Asculapius, for that was the ancient custom when any
man had drunk a wholesome potion. Do thou then think he felt any extreme
gryefe? surely no, for in extreme pangues ieastynge is never seen nor the
mind knows not it self. This is also greatly to be meruayled at, that though
every man seems to fear and fly death: yet seek they to eschew nothing
less, but rather follow every thing that brings death withal. Neither seem
they less careful to seek death then to shun yt. The lecherouse man without
regard of life prefers his pleasure, the irefull revenge, the eater his
glotony the ambycious honor, the covetous riches: the soldier spoil: the
mother children, the marcha^t traffycke: the studient learning, and in sum:
there is nothing that does not occasion forgetfulness of death. So we plainly
see that we both sho^ and seek for death, but not without good cause, for that
there is nothing that has in yt less evil, and they are therefore worthy
praise that do disdain to dye, if those things for which they neglect life be
either honest or necessary, and yet, for light causes to seek death is no
token of courage, but rather a sure sign of an abiecte mind.

Therefore the contempt of life is not so commendable, as intemperancye is
reproachful, and yet as the fear of death is not to be praised, so not to dye
chyeflye at necessary occasyons and times, is most reprochefull cowerdly and
exceadeth all other vylety of mind. But some percase do allow the saying of
Epicarinus. Dye I would not, but to be dead I care not. As though that which
follows death is neither pleasant, or not greatly evil. Alas what evil
can it be to want honger, thyrst, gryefe, labor* sadness, fear, and fynallye
the whoole heap of euylles, which the soul being parted from the body we
must of necessitye want, and saying it dies not, but instead of these
troubles, enio^eth heavenly joys: why should we not acoumpte this change good
and most delectable?

Therefore Socrates was wont to say, that death might be resembled either to
sound sleep, a long journey, or destruction, as is the death of bruit beasts:
If the soul does live and after death feels nothing, then is it like unto a
sound sleep, because therein we rest without either felinge or understanding,
and after a while return to the same exercyses. Most assured it is that such
sleapes are most sweet as be most sound. For those are the best where in like
unto dead men we dream nothing. The broken sleapes, the slomber, and dreams
full of visions, are commonly in them that have weak and sickly bodies.
Whereupon Horacius says.

Vain are the dreams, of sickly folks. But quiet and sound slepes and such
as weary men commonly have, are accounted sweetest.

So Homer ^doth call those sleeps the best, that be most like to death. And
Virgil.

The svvete and soundly sleep, which death resembles most. I remember my
father Faucius Cardanus while he lived was wont to say that he ever desired
death, because while he soundly slepte he tasted the pleasantest part of life,
(meaning as I think) that every pleasure, that we take by our senses has in
it more displeasure, then sweetenes. And therefore there could be nothing
better, then to lack y^ knowledge of them. But common opinion has compared
death to sleep, rather the^ travail or destruction (therefore Homer does call
it brazen sleep. Virgil iron sleep, either of which imports forgetfulness of
al things, the allay of cares, dulnes of senses, and careless mind of hap to
come. Betwixt sleep and death this only difference there is, that in death, y^
time of quiet is longer. Diogenes being sick, and sleaping, was asked of his
physician how he fared, to whom he answered well, for (quod he) one brother
enuieth an other, Such was the securitye of his mind: as even at point of
death he feared not to jest. In like manner did Cosmas Medices, a wise man in
our age who being nerse death, closed his eyes, which his wife saying, asked
why he so did, he answered that he did it to bring his eyes in custom.
For in deed the eyes of dead men, are neither broad open, nor close shut.
And so I think the Poet did well know saying.

Is not our sleep (O fool) of death, an Image plain?
For fatal course shall bring a rest, that ever will remain.
But if thou compare death to long trauayl and that the soul being let lose
from prison of the body sees al things and walks every where.

Than what can be considered more happy. For the soul being burdened with the
body, is neither free, nor rightly knows any thing, but being ouerladen with
cares, does behold, only the figure of things, and as it were through a
web or clothe, gesseth a syghte, and certainlye knows nothing, but being
free, does not only cast of all hyndraunce, but also beholds all things
without interruption, which being true, who is he that willingly would
eschew death? yea who is he that would not rather do as Theombrotus
Ambrociota did? who having red Platoes book of the immortalitye of souls,
cast himself headlong down from a wall not feelinge any offense or other
natural sickness, but only for desire of such heavenly happiness as
spirits were partakers of. Therefore men say that Socrates being by Crito
persuaded to fly from prison, as well for sauinge himself, as his friends and
kinsfolks refused to do it, answering wiselye. O Crito my children shall be
left in charge to God, which gave them. As for friends I am going into those
parts where I am assured to find as good or happily better then they be. And at
length I doubt not but you will also offer me your company meaning thereby,
that the life of man was of small continuance.

Such were the words of Socrates thynking that death necessarilye might be
compared to one of these three, and most like of al to travail, which may also
be coniectured by dreams.

For there is nothing that does better or moore truly prophecy the end of
life, then when a man dreameth, that he does travail and wander into far
countries, and chiefly, if he imagines him self to ride upon a white horse,
that is swyfte, and that he trauayleth in countries unknown without hope of
return, in such sort naturallye de^yninge of that shortly will come to pass
in deed. But if death be resembled to destruction, which as is all ready proved
is most impossible, yet can it no ways be accounted evil: Because what so
ever is not, can not be evil, else we should lament for them that never were
born, nor never were at all, and they that are not can nothing suffer.

But if thou bewaylest thy change, sure it is that Death does take away more
euylles, then it brings, and those more certain. And although Death were
evil, and brought with it but one only commodity which Epicharinus spoke of,
because the partinge from Life was painful: yet by death art thereof delivered,
for in all euilles, to have escaped is a great comfort. If then death be
evil, to be dead is to escape, but if it be good, thou haste no cause to
lament. And that, the one, or the other is, who doubts?

I remember now that, long since happened to my self (neither do I think to
digress from the purpose) that albeit the twentye and seventh year of mine
age, I became sore sick of a syngle Tercian, after Seven fyttes I ^ounded, and
lay for dead. In which time although every member was almost deprived of his
virtue, yet felt I neither grief nor pain, other then a certain ticklinge
throughout my whole body, even such as we feel in using venery.

Therefore as I said being in such estate I feeled nothing worse then that
this tickelinge where in was not so great pleasure as in Venus Sport. And
there with all a certain Fear, least in deed I should dye, and truly as
touching Sense or Strength I found small dyfference though the peril were
great.

Afterward askinge of many that had been near Death, whether therein
they felt any great evil or not, who aunsweared that in the Headeache, and
in every other sickness of the Body was greater Grief.

I found that in mine opinion of Death conceived, I did not err at all.

That proof may also be had, that although Children and women be most
fearful to receive all sorts of Medecines, and yield to Cuttinge of veins,
yet being ready to dye do neither complayn nor lamente, but rather are offended
if we seek to preserve their lives. Who cannot therefore conjecture, that in
death there is either none evil at al, or very little, seeing those pains
which we fear most are in dyinge not regarded. This is also worthy to be
noted that they that hope of no life to come, do no less valiantly dye the^
they that believe the soul immortal. As Cassius who having killed Caesar, with
the same dagger that Caesar was slain, aspecting no messenger of death slew
himself, so did Marcus Antonius, and Sardanapalus king of the Assyrians did
cast into the fire not only him self but also, his bed and his concubines, but
that he believed no life after death is known by these verses.

Now eat, now drink, now make good sport:
For since thy felfe on earth, a mortal man do see
Take here thy fill of earthly joys, no joys hereafter be.
Therefore albeit it were that with the body y^ soul did perish: yet death
could not be either evil grievous, or any ways to be feared, yea such as so
believe are in greatest security for not being subject, to judgment and free
from all suspicion of mind either of punishment or reward, which thing does
most torment men that are ready to take leave of life. But thou shall believe al
rather then this, that the soul perysheth with the body. For as it is not
altogether certain what does presentlye follow death: so is it most assured
that the soul of man, does never dye whereof although none other proof were
then the consideracion of life, and death, yet death is patiently to be
suffered: because there is nothing more hard or miserable then this life.
Besides yt by warning of god we are thereof assured. Also al wise men have so
thought, and in things inevitable the best is ever to be chosen. To return
therefore to the beginning, what is our life? other then a continual toil,
evermore bound to abide y^ discommoditie of so many necessities, so much
labor, so many suspicions and peril. There is no delight in man, that
repentance follows not. I am revenged, then beware: I have eaten my fill:
fullness does offend me. I have lightlye dyned, mine appetite is not satisfied:
I follow Venus sport: manifold repentance, sadness and in the end sycknesse
does ensue. And finallye either thy desire is not satisfied and there by thou
still discontented: or else with saciety, repentance, and discomoditye does
torment thee. So the only way is to keep yt mean. For what cause have all the
Godds of the gentiles preferred death before the life of man?

Unless it were the worldly miserye was to the^ most apparently known.
Pindarus tells y^ when Agamedes and Trophonius had builded the temple of
Apollo, they desired of the Gods, this reward, that where as Apollo, had
willinglye promised to return within seven days, that they in the mean time
might continue in banquetinge, and joyful life: but in the end of those days,
in a sound sleep they dyed, whereby Apollo plainly taught that for mortal men
there was no greater reward then death: after that time the same* God confyrmed
y^ meaning upon Pindarus who being by the Bo^tian Ambassador asked what
thing it was that best could happen to man? Pithius answered, that Pindarus
do prove true which already he has written of Agamedes and Trophonius
which if he does, he himself must shortly follow.

In which answer the Poet did mean that he should look for Death: where
in he was not deceived for within a few days he dyed in deed.

Plutarchus in an Epistle of Comfort written to Apollon^us, tells this
historye: When Midas had in Huntinge taken Silenus (this Silenus was of the
Satyrs stock, nourished by Bacchus, who was also called Silenus, Surnamed
Satyrus) of whom many descended he wrote (as Plyny tellethe) of wantonness
and there in feigned three Sileni. He asked of him what was most to be
desired of man? Whereunto he aunsweared not, but at length enforced by the
importunacie of the King, brake forth in this sort.

O you tormented Devils the seed of one day why constrain you me to speak,
that which were better for you if you never knew it? That is, that the
ignorance of your own euyls, is the only pleasure of man's life. But
saying you know your own evils, the best were not to be born, and next to
that, not to live long.

And your condition is such as you are partakers of no part of those good
things which nature has made, this spoke Silenus. The sentence of the
Philosophers do also here unto agree and Aristotle prince of the Peripatetian
sect, does call those most effeminate that murder them selves, and those
valiant which can abide Travail, Pain, Misfortune, and all sorts of myserie
which opinion the Poet followed saying.

In fortunes high disgrace: each man may death disdain.
But he most valiant is, that can, in vvretched state remain.
But Plato chief of the Academian Sect, says that a man ought not to yield
to Death, because we are ignorant whether it be good or evil, meaning that in
respect of punishment or Joy, that followed it was evil or good, because
death was the end both of good and evil.

Therefore even in the whole scripture death is not accounted other then sleep,
and to dye is said to sleep. What maruayle is it then though for Hope of Life
to come, we ought not to shun to dye. We find that Saint Paul wished to
dye and go to God, which desire ought to be not only in Holy men, but also in
all good men.

For three sorts of evils there be that may happen to men. The first within
us and our minds, with which temperancy do mete.

The second without us, and they by wisdom are prevented. The third are
those, that al be it they be in deed without us, yet are they inevitable, and
against them none other defense we have then fortitude. And I pray you, to what
purpose should fortitude serve, if to fear death were either good or
necessary? As therefore temporaunce and Wisdom are proffytable for Man: So is
also fortitude, yet what profit could proceed thereof, if necessarily we
feared death? or if that fear were either good or honest, sith of necessitye,
death must come to man one time or an other, one of these three must
necessarily follow, either that like unto beasts we should be ignorant of
death, which cannot be, either that with willing mind we will dye: or else that
we torment our selves.

Were it not more natural to man (and the rather seeing that bruit beasts with
ignorance escheweth the fear of death) that he wiselye in place of ignorance
should use fortitude, given him by God against the necessity of death. Neither
can we think yt God has more fauourablye forsene for brute beasts then
men, yet they, without al care do yield to dye. So we armed with fortitude
ought not to fear any death. What profit can we procure to our country or
friends? or what good can virtue bring, if we dysdayne to dye? Callicratides
the Lacedemonian captain hearing the Soothsayer pronounce victory to the
Lacedaemonians and death to himself, answered: Sparta by loss of me shall
nothing at al be weakened. How noble were the deeds of men that feared no
death, how happy was their lives, how comme^dable were their ends? how
glorious was their fame? and in brief, wh^ refuse we to yield to that
equality, wherein a common parson is like a king, a monster like a most semely
man, a tyrant like the simple and most harmless soul. The huge army of
Xerses, neither the treasure of Tyberius, nor the crueltye of Antonius, against
death did any thing prevail. All men are subject to one equallitye
(exceptinge true virtue) there shall be no difference, and thereinto without
disdain, hate, envy, or wrong, to nature, by destenye we shall be all called,
though no man is expert in that iorneye. Only false opinion of man has made
death to be accounted a fearful thing, not unlike as those that have not the
experience of travail, study, or concurse of kings do make of them great
admiration: when others that are acquainted with such things, do know them
without marvel at all. And some we see without experience have disdayned
death, and for light causes killed themselves. Of which number was Dioxippus
the Champion, who through envy of the Macedonians falsely accused of theft
before Alexander, and protesting the iniurye, with his own sword slew
himself: we have also seen a scholar a country man of ours, for not being
requited in love at the hands of a gentlewoman in Padoa, with poison procured
his own death: One other in our Cittye, having sustained loss by the price
of corn, willinglye hanged himself. One other (and he also of our Nation:)
finding he could not with commoditye pay his dettes, threw himself into a
water and so drowned: I my self did see a woman who for very sorrow that she
had committed adultrye (askinge God forgiveness for her offense) suddenly drank
poison. Cleopatra although she might have lived in honor, yet because she would
not be carried about in tryumphe, caused a Serpent to bite her body, and
thereof willingly dyed: Porcia the daughter of Cato and wife to Brutus (in
honest life far e^celling Cleopatra) hearing that her husband was slain
did eat burninge Coals and thereof died. For cause more just dyed Democles
a Boy of notable beauty in Athens. He being by the king watched when he should
enter naked into a bath, (and knowing the king meant to abuse him) cast
himself into the bottom of the whot water and so presently dyed. The death of
Lucretia is well known, who violently bereft of her honor, sticked her self:
The want of success and not will, was cause that Alexander the great escaped
voluntary death: for having in dronken mode stain his friend Clitus, he would
presently in the house have murdered himself, from which doing in space of
three days both by force and suit he could sca^tly be entreated to refrayn,
and afterward being at y^ siege of Sudracarus a city in India, he leaped from
the wall into the town of purpose to dye. For by mean thereof he did both fall
far, and alone among his enemies, but fortune would not permit that success
he desired. This book would not receive ye number of ensamples of such, as for
fear love, grief, anger and other occasions of no weight have sought their
own deaths: Besides whom we read of hole legions that have offered
themselves to apparent destruction. As they did that were with Leonida against
the Persia^s and fought nere unto Thermopile.

What would these people have adventured for great cause, or if death were a
great evil, that upon so light occasion did not refuse to dye. From which
determinacion no respect of age, sex, or honor, could fear them: But I se
what thou will say? death I do not fear, for as it is not evil, so is it
necessary, and to fear that is of necessitye, were vain, cowerdlye and
hurtefull. Yet would I dye easelye, and old, such a death as Augustus
desired and did obtain. For by lyuinge old I shall not only gain a longer
life, but also a more easyer death. Aristoteles in his Book De Respiratione
thincketh that very old men dyed not only without pain, but also without
any feelinge of death, because the heat of their bodies was quenched, which
may appear by this example: If thou go about to draw a tothe, that is not
loose, thou feel great pain, but if of it self it were loose before,
without any grief at all it comes away. Even so green youth with
extreme pain do yield to death: but old folk in dying feel no grief
almost at al: As the tragical Poet says.

In slomber svveete, the aged sprite departs. How can it be other the^ that
death is grievous to young men, when as sleep against nature is offensive. Often
times it happens that such as upon custom seek sleep at vntimelye hours
become thereby dry, pyned, and slothful, so as in steed of delight they get
disease. Theophrastus being ready to dye (though he were an old man)
complained of Nature: because she had ordained so long life in Staggs and
Ravens (al most unprofitable beasts) and to man, being the most noble and
wysest creature allowed so short a term to (...) in. What may they say then
that dye in y^ flower of their youth, have they not just cause to lament?
Surely no. But here the reason why nature has not: among other creatures made
man of longest life, and then that he that dies in youth does suffer nothing
more grievous then they that live old. For first it is doubted of many, (and
chiefelye of Aristotle, whether any creature (the Elephant except) does live
more long then man. Because he makes no mention either of the Phenixe, ye
Crow, the Raven or the Stagge: nor affirms them to be of longest life. But
let us confess that which is imputed in Virgill, though it does little
importe to the matter, where he speaking of men says.

A life more long nine times, the cacklinge Crovve does live. But confessing
with Aristotle that y^ Elephante does live more long then man: why need we
co^tende whether man be of one or more creatures in long lyuinge excelled?
Omitting also that the holy Scripture affyrmeth life more long to man then
other lyuinge creatures: let us now dispute that yt already is taken in hand,
that is to say, for what cause some beasts be of longer life then man? The
reason is this: saying all creatures are made either for the use or honor of
man* they were framed according to the descretion of Nature: at which time she
made their minds, as well for their bodies, as their bodies for their minds:
and were therefore made simple with few instruments, as plain things to
enduer long. But the body of man being made only for his mind, neded many
more instruments, to the end that the understanding might the more fitlye do
his office. Therefore although Nature has made for man the best proportion of
body, yet could she not give thereunto the longest life, by reason of
exceeding concauities, and subtilnes of the members: which if they were great
(besides that we should be al Giants) they would be troublesome each one to
other. Which is well proved in y^ no creature has so infinite members or part
of members, which were of necessity made small and slender, to y^ end they might
the rather be fit to yield: and so the breath (an instrument of the soul)
became y^ more subtle. Wherefore nature has not in this behalf omitted any
part of her duty* but rather with such diligence helped our life, as for the
length thereof we have no cause to complain, which is now well proved in y^
people of India latest found, where men live commonly a hundredth and thirty
years, because there the air is good, and the people without cares. But we
continuing incares, riot, and untimely labor, chosing air for profit and not
health, yea altogether forgetting the length of life, we cast our selves into
extreme sickness, disco^modities of body and present death, without cause
accusing nature, for the shortness of our lives: How much better were it to
know which way to use the benefit of nature? if so dear and pleasant a thing
thou do account this life? what is y^ cause that Philosophers and Hermits
have lived so very long? and yet their to great stinens and earnest
contemplacion hindered their health? unless it were because they lived void
of care and temperatly. How much were this rule of lyuinge to attain long life
more delicate, then to feed upon flesh and honye? But in this age me^
continue carefully in labors and care, watching the half night baskinge in
Venus bathe, abiding in cloudye Regions, and not in good air, and drinkinge
boiled wynes: do notwithstanding complain of short life. And howsoever in
deed our lives be short, it is opinion that does make it so to appear. The
people called Garamantes do not live above fortye years. I omit to speak of
the Pigmeians as people rather feigned then in deed, but we if we dye before
fyftye or threscore, do think that iustlye we lament: and yet who so dwells
in those countries do highly thank God if he attayneth fortye years, and thou
lyuinge much elder do nevertheless complain. Surely every life is long
that is continued till death since at the beginning the term is destined, and
as says the Poet.

In birth we breed our death, our end, on first beginning hangs. Read we
not in holy Scripture, that y^ number of days and months is appointed by
God? he has set the term which cannot be passed. The life of man therefore is
ended with old age: for old age is the last part of life. Old age is also the
necessitye of death: wheresoever therefore death is necessary, old age draws
near Whosoever dies in youth in this only is the more happy, that he escapes
the discommoditye of old age, will thou make life to seem long or short by
comparison? A kind of beasts there be called, Ephemera which are made in the
morning, and before son settinge do dye. If happelye they dye at noone, their
life is called short: but if they continue till night, they account it
long, and yet it exceeds not twelve hours. We marvel at flees for their
long life, if they live two Summers, and at flees that continue three months.
Yet which of these is thought any thing toward man's life? we call dogs
old that pass a leven years of age: but a man passes all these in long
lyuinge though he dies in youth. But the life of man must not be accounted
long or short: in respect of his years. The life of all mortal men is but
short: because with death it shall be most certainlye ended: It is virtue and
worthy acts that makes the life long, and idleness that shortneth thy days.
Alexander, though he lived not above thirtye three years, dyed an old man,
through the greatness and number of his noble exploytes. Argantonius having
lived a hundredth and twentye years, may be said to have dyed in youth,
because (besides the rarenes of his age) in all his life he never did any
thing that deserved memory. It ought also worthelye to be noted that for the
most part, all notable men have dyed in their youth. Among the kings none
almost continued to old age, Hercules, Athilles, Castor, Pollux, Ajax, Jason.
Among the Poets Lucanus, Catullus, Tibullus, neither was Vigill long lived,
neither Demostenes nor Cicero: how true, yea to true is the saying of the
Poet.

Their lives are short, and age is rare: where life does lack good rule.
JULIUS CAESAR Seuerus, Alexander, Probus, Aurelianus, Claudius the second of
that name dyed in youth: which men a I think lived the less, the more honest
they were, because being dear to the Gods were the souer called unto them.
Whervppon grew that saying from the Poets, whom Jupiter and Apollo do love, do
never attain to old age. This is also to be noted, yt choice is to be looked
for, where will may any ways avail: but in thy power it is not to make thy
life, either more long or more short. Yet if thou ca^ do it, there is none
offense at al, but if thou cannot, thou lamentest thy shortness of life for no
greater reason, then thou may thy mortality. And yt care of things impossible
is vain, and only proper to fools. But admit thou may continue thy life
and become old, art thou not thereby the more unhappy? because thou losest
that singular commodity which by God almightye is gauen to men for the allaye
of sorrow: which is ignorance of time. While we continue young, we live
meerelye, because we imagine death is not at hand: But how can old men
think that death is far away? when already they are entered the last end
of life. How true and worthy memory is that saying of S. Austen, A young
manne may soon dye, but an old manne cannot live long. And yet no couse
there is why thou should not be sorrye, seeing a young man may also dye sone.
Sith the end of life is unknown, a young man never ought to despair whether he
labors of deadly diseases, or be cast into cruel torments and prison. The
chances of mortal creatures, do show that men are subject to law of nature and
fortune: so as without cause they love certainties for most incerte^ties of
al. But admit thou do attain to old age it self? how many evils comes
thereby? labor, grief* sadness, loss of senses, disdain: and (y^ which is
almost worst of all) as Caecilius does well discribe, thereby thou shalt see
they company of all men eschewed: unwelcome are old men to their children,
unwelcome to friends, disdayned of young men, and odious to their own
familiars. Their senses serve not their bodies, their bodies obey not their
minds, they pass the night without sleep, and eat without all taste. They
loathe themselves, how should they be pleasant to others? We read that when
Zeno Citieus could not dye with age, he stra^gled himself. What diligence and
travail did Cicero take to persuade old age to be patiently borne? but if of
it self it had been good, or as riches, friends, children, and learning had
appearance of good: there should have been not cause for him to have taken
such travail. A mockerye it were to persuade that health or honor were
patiently to be suffered: and we agree that old age is sufferable, but not
to be wished for. How many old men have been, for whom it had been better
to have died in youth? Priamus for example, not for miracle in historye is
resited. Not long since Baccus Valor being old and ready to take leave of
life, before his eyes beheld his own son beheaded, a young man of singular
hope. The next year before, two other old men I saw that beheld the like
fortune in their own children. Wherefore I wonder much at the great wisdom
of Theramenes, woo only escapinge when his house fell down, said before his
friends that reioysed for his life: O fortune to what end have thou me
preserved? neither did he ask in vain, for within few days after by the
malice of tyrants, he was taken and put to death. Therefore such is the
condition of men, as although being old thou might return to youth again
and as the fable tells of Aeson saying.

And as twice tvventye years bypast, so now my force I find
Mine aged years are worn away, I feel my youthful mind.
Yet who art thou so mad or greedye of life, as would take upon thee such a
condition? wherein there is nothing but sickness, cares, contempt, peril,
lothsomnes and sorrow. So as I see not for what reason thou seek to live.
And if in lustye youth when strength, senses, beautye, wit, and auctoritye,
were all in thee, thou were notwtstanding oftentimes wearye of life, what shall
thou do at this age when thou hear thy self called old wretch, and
dootinge old fool? death does never come so much to sone to a young man, as
to late to them that be old. But if fear of deadlye pains do offend thee,
sickness resembles death, and in sickness by little and little the life is taken
away. Or art thou loath to dye alone? Be of good cheer, thou shall find more
dead then are left alive: and those also shall or long follow. As the Poet
says.

For either soon or late, in order as men say,
The vvretched flock of worldly folk, to death do take their way.
Neither does GOD suffer any to defer his destined tune. The destines do
drive all men, and remain as law for ever: they are y^ happyer sort that are
sonest dispatched of pains. And as among condemned folk the Law executes
those first that have least offended, to the end that the great offenders
should behold the terror of death: Even so, God does first take those away,
whom he loves, because they shall not be lokers on, but messengers sent
before: (unless in consideration of profitte either to their friends, or the
world) he suffers such men to tarrye more long. To conclude then seeing
in things that be evil, there is nothing more grievous then dailye and
certain expectation, old age when it comes, having in it both the one and
the other, does force a man to wyshe that in his youth he had dyed. I my
self being a child, do remember mine own mother Clara Michera then a young
woman was notwithstanding wont to wish that in her infancye she dyed: being
grown to greater age (for ever more she continued y^ speech) I asked the cause
why she so said? where unto this she aunsweared: Lo, now I know I shall
dye and yt with greater peril, besides that in ye mean time (who so does
mark it well) shall see there is nothing that does not bring with it greater
grief then pleasure: because pleasure being passed, do change to sorrow.
And that deseruingly. What is it in this life that can delighte? dailye trouble
to apparel and vnapparell thy self, hunger, thyrste, sleep not so plentiful
nor quiet as dead me^ have, heat in Summer, cold in Winter, disorder of time,
terror of wars, controlemente of parents, cares of wedlock, study for
children, slouthe of servant, contention of suits, and that (which is most
of all) the condition of time, wherein honestye is disdayned as follye, and
craft is honored as Wisdom. Artisans for their cunning not accounted of:
but for apparau^ce and opinion of people preferred. So as it is necessary
either to displease God, or else to live among men in miserye oppressed and
disdayned. I omit all evils, only yt which is common to dead men is not
evil, all other things which we do not account evil are worse then those
which dead men suffer. It is now requisite that somewhat be said of the
diuersityes of death, hitherto it has been deferred because they are many,
and of diverse men, thought worthy consideration. For death does seem grievous
to young men, both for that it is painful for yt mind to leave the body,
dishonorable, and certain, al which in common judgment are joined to gethers.
And some cowardlye young men have been compelled to dye a known death, but
sith I see diverse of the common people patiently enough do take their deaths.
I know no cause why other should be greatly comforted, considering that not the
manner of death, but the qualitye of the offense makes death dishonorable. For
if thou respect only the manner of death, thou shall find that the greatest
number of men put to vile death, were those that antiquity prayseth, and our
age do honor, notwithstanding they fell into the hands of Tirantes in whose
power it was to appointe the time and manner of death, though innocencye be in
them that suffer. Neither can a public death be dishonorable: if his life so
dyinge be void of foul vice because public death without offense, is not
only a sign but also a trial of virtue. We find in the new law how Christ
did first gain the glory of innocent death, and after him followed
innumerable martirs and prophets, and the moore good and holy they were, the
more cruelly forced to dye. Esayas cut with iron by commandment of king
Manasses, Hieremias by ye people stoned to death John Baptist beheaded, and
finally many other cruelly murdered, neither was the fortune of other Good
men much better at the hands of heathen Kings and in their Cities: for
Zeno Eleates, when quietly he might have lived in his house, he conspired
against the Tirant Nearcluis, but his intent was discovered and he hanged, yet
at his death he persuaded ye people to stone the Tyrant to death. When
Lysymachus, the king threatened Theodorus Cyreneus to hang him, he answered
thus what matter is it, whether on ye earth or hanging high, my carkcas do
stink. When Socrates might with silence have escaped death, being conde^pned
only in a pecuniall pain, did provoke them y^ did condemn him to procure his
death. And when his wife Zantippe complained that unjustly he suffered, he
answered, An mallet just senciens non esse malum preter culpam. The dishonor
therefore is not in dyinge, but in the cause of death: which proceeds of thine
own evil doing. But as for pains: youth and certain knowledge, of dying,
they add none increase of grief, to death, nor make it moore grievous, because
the knowledge of that is not evil, cannot be evil after, and only death after
torments is most pleasant. And torments either they can not be great, or not
long. Christ for ensample to al men died, that for ensample it might remain
Besides this seldom shall thou find any innocent to dye of great torment, no,
scantly once, unless it be at change of laws, when innocents are forced to
suffer the insolency of nocentes: as in hystories it appears most rarely is
also found example of violency in giltlesse men, if wilfulnes be not the cause
for such as so murder good men, do seem to do it of very will. But how easy a
thing death is either public, or by sword, examples do bear witness. When
Julius Caesar was in the murdering and felt the daggers of diverse men stubbed
into his body, he sought neither to save himself nor cried for help, but
falling kept hidden his secret parts. Such memory he had of comlines
notwithstanding his wounds, and readynes to yield up his ghost. And as
Lucanus says his son in law in such sort dyed. He discribeth Pompeius
death in this wise.

In have he stayde his woeful voice, and would no word complayn,
Least vveping tears might so vnvvares, his heavenly fame disdain.
And vvh^^ ^is noble side was pearst, with fearce Achilles blade
No sig^, no sob, no careful cheer, no sorovving sound he made but in disdain
of crueltye.
Cato Vtice^sis determined to dye, ordered his goods wiselye: forseinge the
good of others, though he neglected his own, which done reading Plato of ye
immortality of souls, laid himself down and slepte so sou^dly, as he snored
after being awaked sticked himself. And when through weakness of his hand the
wound was not mortal, such as were by saved him, till at length violently he
brake lose and dyed. Such was his gredy desire of death. Otho themperoure a
young man of thirtye seven years, of al men accounted soft and effeminate,
after he had won three battles of the Vitelli for the sorrow of one lost, gave
his money and substance to his friends and willed his familiar companion to
show himself to the soldiers, lest that after he should be suspected, and in
the night with two daggers murdered himself. And yet neither dispayred he of
ye holding of the Empire, nor wanted the love of the Senate or his soldiers,
but only for that nether in victory or victored he would hinder the common
wealth, Caius Julius by Caius the emperor condemned to dye* obtained ten days
pardon: all which time careless he consumed in sleep, and table play, and when
the hangeman came in to warn him y^ his time was even at hand, he told what
advantage he had in the game, and willed his play fellow that after his death
he should not boast of winning, and called the hangman to record: who led him
toward death accompanied with a philosopher Upon the way, being asked wha^ he
mused of? He answered I determined to observe what at the last instant my
soul shall feel, when it parts away to the end that after I may advertise
my friends. Aratus knowing he had taken a lingering poison at the hands of
Philippus the Macedonian king, speaking one secret word to his familier
friend, passed the rest of his life so pleasantly as seemed not to have any such
grief or assurance to dye. The seven brothers called Machabei, al yo^g men and
sons of one mother by the commandment of king Antigouns one after an other,
and in sundry sort together, with their Mother killed themselves. Tectamenes
condemned to dye, went his way laughinge, and being asked whether he
disdayned the laws, answered no: but by dyinge I must pay that I neither asked
nor borrowed of any. Which example although under the person of one unknown,
was much praised of Cicero, yet in wise judgments, such behavior argues: In
Tectamenes, rather vanity, the^ fortitude, for a man condemned specially for
wicked doing, naturally can not love death, neither was it our entente to prove
that death should be desired or sought for.

But as it is the condition of a faithless man, not to restore y^ he boroweth:
so is it also an vnfre^dly and unthankful part, not to keep that he
boroweth. As therefore death is not to be fled or lamented ^o ought it not to be
sought for. But as y^ Poet says.

Do neither seek nor shonne: the end of thine own life.
Yet happily Craton may hold such opinion, and though it be not maintained by
reason, yet for the marvel gains reputation among the common sort, The
example therefore of Theramon is more honest and more courageous. For he being
unjustly by thirty Tyrants condemned took the poison saying according to the
ancient manner of Athens, Critus I drink to the, for so was the greatest
Tyrant and worse then: Theramines called, that done whatsoever remained in the
cup, he threw upon the ground. The death of Phocion was more noble he seeing
his friend desirous to drink poison did stay him, after findinge that which
was not left to suffice did buy more, saying yt in Athens a man was forced to
buy his own death. But why do I labor to enduce more ensamples of men, when
whoole Nations may be called to record? As the Galathians, did so little
regard Death, as they feared not to fight Naked. So did also many noble
Romans and Germans that nedelesse it were to resyte their names. I do
therefore think best in few words to declare that men were made mortal for
three causes. First because there should be some end of their offenses.

This life is displeasant and the nerer age ye moore troublesome, and therefore
the Gimniophista, (as men say) answered Alexander well, askinge whether death
or life were stronger? (Li^e quod he) because it bears so many calamities.
The second cause is, that goodmen without envy might be honored, and evil Men
without fear condemned, and that riches and aucthority (for which men
commit great wickedness) might not be regarded. If those things which
mortal men have were justly wayed, they should as Cares and Euilles be
reputed. Yet if death were not, Men would muse only upon Theft, and
Violence, while in this short space that now they live, they think so much
thereof. The third reason is for that men might receive reward of good and
evil, according to the quality of their deserts. For after death, such as have
passed a godly life, shall live not only with their brethren and kinsfolk, but
also accompanied wtal honest and learned men, and above y^ stars receive joy
and everlasting felicitye. So contrary wise the wicked in darkness and
solitarye places shall be tormented. Therefore for wicked folk only death can be
thought evil, and yet is not, but Good men not unlike the Swanne who only at
his death do sing may boldly rejoice and be glad. Some there are so
ambicious that the care of their funeralles does trouble them much, who are
not to be comforted, but for their follye to be reprehended, what is the body
of man, when the Spirit is passed away? It is no moore accounted as part or
member of him, but rather a Carckcasse unprofitable, stinckinge and horrible.
Seneca therefore did well devise that the same should be buried, not in
respect of the Dead, but the living, least they by savor and sight thereof,
might be offended. Where upon in sundry nations has grown sundry customs
of buryinge the Dead. The Grecians were wont to wrye them in the earth. The
Romans did burn them in fire. The Nathabeians did burye them in their
dungehilles. Yea their Kings had none other Sepulcher. The Ethiopians do cast
them into the ryuers to be devoured of Fishes.

The Magi did geeue them to wild Beasts Hercani to Dogs. But the Massageti
most meruailouslye do eat them. The Egiptians with their own Nails do bury
them.

The Persians do wrappe them in Wax. So incertayne is the reason, where is
no reason at all. Alas good Fool do thou not hear the Poet saying.

To want a tomb, the lack is never great. What does it prevail the to lie
in marble, above the ground, or in the bowelles of the earth? do thou take
care for want of a workman. There is no cause of fear at all. The Heaven does
hide his bones, that can no coffyn find, as says the Poet. Who so were wise
would not with one hafepeny spence, buy this felicity. The first inuentoure
of names for these stately building, for burial of stinkynge bodies: what did
he other then make trial of an insolente, and vain ambicious mind, that
even in death would declare the same?

But this care caughte beginning at Silla, that Dead Men should be buried.

He was the first that at the Death of Cornelia caused burninge and not
burying to be used, because he feared to be dug up and suffer shame which
he had care of in the buryinge of Marius. But how much better did Diogenes
Cenicus, lyinge under a tree sick and ready to dye, aunsweared them that
asked where he would be buried? saying, I pray you let me alone: whereto
they replied that then the beasts would tear him in pieces (why then quoth
he) geeue me a staff, nay (said his friends) that were to none use when the
life is gone. Then Diogenes not vnwiselye reproved them saying: what harm can
I have when I shall be senceles and feel nothing? it makes also to purpose to
know that it is incertaine what does become of men's carcases cast away:
sometimes it was thought they gained an opinion of deuinitye as it came to
pass of Cleo ye Lacedemonian king, whose body hanging whole upon the
gallouse, there appeared in it a Serpent that brought forth deuouringe birds.
Whereof grew a religion, as though the Gods were keepers of innocent men's
bodies, which foolishly the people honored, It is said that Ctesias found the
carcass of Clearchus not unlike to the other, out of which grew a wood, and
became to be honored for a God. Yea at this day this superstitious opinion
remains of them that lie unburied, that their sprites should walk: So great
force has y^ memory of aunciente error, and the fear which men have in
walkinge alone. But now let us leave these unprofitable matters, and (as at ye
beginning was determined) turn out talk to sorrow. And first let us speak
of Parents because not only Love, but also Pitye was wont for them to move
tears. Neither can we with moore honesty lament any then them of whom we
came into the World. This is the duty of Love, Charity, and Pity: and if any
whitte the tears of Children can prevail to their good, sure lie then ought
we weep: But seeing no weping, or Sorrow does help, let us consider, whether
honestly or reasonably we ought to do it.

Wherein first comes to memory the universal reason of all them, that by
Death have been called away. For either we must lament in favor of them
that be deadde, or else in respect of our selves. But if in consideracion of
the^ we Lament, either we believe that their Souls do live, or else together
with their Bodies they are perrished. And if thou think that booth the Soul
and Body be perrished, then so thincking and lamenting the Death of an other,
thus thou Complaynest.

Alas alas hencefoorthe thou shall not be Thirssty, Hongry, Cold, Not,
Painful, Sick, subject to injuries, and Calamity, yea (that is most of all)
henceforth thou shall not dye, as I shall, but I know thou will say, I were
to be laughed at, i^ so I should lamente, nevertheless all this thou do,
and though thou confess it not, yet will thou know that so it is. Surely
there is no doubt that dye we must (Death) as thou thinckeste, is Evil: Why
art thou then sorry for him that is paste it, and not for thy self that by no
means can avoid it? But if it be superfluous to lam^t thine own Condition
(because in cases necessary, wepinge helps not) To what purpose do thou
be wayle his Death which is the moore necessary: that he is already deadde?

But if thou believe his Spirit does live, then of necessity thus must thou
lament. Alas alas from a mortal man thou art become immortal from Paynefull
Quiet, from Miserable Happy, from Sad pleasant, and from obscure noble.

Who is he that hears the in this sort complain (though he were of the
dead man's blood) but should fall unto laughinge? Neither do then think I tell
the an vntrothe (and therefore which I had almost forgotten) though thou
allege y^ for his cause thou mournest. Saying then there is almoost no man
so unwise as dare say he complayneth in respect of him that is deadde whether
his Soul does remain or not, so every manne says he does lament the want of
his fryend, which if thou acknowledge the eternity of his soul, cannot so
be, because (for so much as is (...)) he is not with the, and thou shall
shortly (...) to him. But take thou heed to (...) that thou bewaylest thine
own Calamitye, though he (...) not with thee.

To vain and Envious thou (...) thy self, if for thy proffite thou can not
(...) this benefit, for as with (...) to prefer their Children to Service of
Kings, in hope of Favor and Reward, that will come thereof notwithstanding the
minds of Princes, (...) times inconstante, the (...) faithful, and
generallye, (...) Good (...) as serve little (...) will ought we (...) we (...)
use Hate, Ambition not Disdain.

The mind of that Prince is neither (...) nor ignorant of any thing. There
is place with out perryll. Fellowship without (...) without doubt, and (...)
And would thou for thine own commodi^te deny him of these Joys? God
forbid. But besides this thou may perhaps seem iustlye to complain (...)
thy Commodities by (...) of (...) which (...) reason, yet of thou consider at
(...) to (...) enduce reason worthy thy consideration. And first saying in
respect of thy self (...) think that one other may be found ever (...) to him
for Frendshippe, Conversation; or necessitye. But admit that could not be,
or that such a man were not redely found: yet with all remember what pains
thou had taken for thy deadde friend, how often for him thou were called
in question, how often than (...) less, how burdenous he was to thee, and
finally, how he had been toward thee thou cannot certainly know, and what
hereafter he would have beue, (...). Alas how often have some men beue (...) by
their own Kinsfolk, (...) Children and Friends, of whom in times paste they
were helped.

Cassius and Brutus did aid Julius Caesar in fight against his country,
but being made Emperor they slew him. Full foolishly did Antoni^s commit
his counsel to Octauius, where in he discovered his friends, trustinge to
him whom oftetimes in doubtful Fortune he had received help, yet then
through his fear he was enforced to voluntary Death. Alexander while he
lived was faithful served of his Soldiers, but being dead, his Children,
Kinsfolks, and Friends, were all by them distroyed, and yet at the death of
one of them, he felt so great Sorrow, as searce, lie he could ever after
leave to lament.

The pitye of Parents, Brethren and Children, both begin and is as it were
borne with them* Yet how many have been thereby hindered, hereafter shall be
declared, But now to the matter: what I pray you can be moore unprofitable
among mortal Men or less certain of end, then Sorrow: which proffiteth not
others, and hurts him that does lament. I marvel not therefore at the
Thrasians, and Casions, though at the death of their Neighbor, they rejoice
and make good Cheer, because they know them delivered of all worldly woe,
and hope they are g^one to Felicity. So contrary wise they wail and weep when
any child is born, for that from most pleasant Quiet, it is come into this
troublesome Life: which Custom a Citizen of ours (as I have hard) did
follow, who dying desired that with music and (...) he might be (...) burial.
Yet know I not whether his desire was performed. But as touching sorrow, it can
not be reproved sith men do lamente that, that can not be eschewed, and that
which does save them from al other inconuenients, yea while they bewail ye
good of others, they forget their own miseries.

What is so vain, as either to lament nothing, if after Death be no Sense, or
if any be to make them sorye that love them, or be laughed to scorn if they
contempne them. Truly if we find fault with them that do weep befoore
their Lovers, not being beloved again, whereby growethe no good but the
declaration of their Follye, how much moore art thou to be blamed, if thou
think no Sense remains, or do thou according to the fashion of Fablers,
(and yet they believed there were Spirits) by weping hope to call back any to
Life as Orpheus did Euridice.

Alas do thou think that if sorrow had been either of necessitye or
proffite, that Nature which has geeuen to living creatures Knowledge of so
many arts, so manifold circumspection, (and so sundry customs, as to
fight for their young, to cherishe the old in venerye, to observe affinity,
wedlock, and revenge, that among the rest she would have forgotten Sorrow.
Besides man, there is no Creature after it be brought forth, that does
lament the Death of an other, though we see one Pysmyre does burye another,
yet Nature left nothing undone that for the necessitye of any Creature was
to be required, but in education Sorrow was necessary, least the youge
should forget their Parents, and distroye their kind, The wise and discrete
makers of Laws, have likewise with a certain Godly mean respectinge
popular Follye, and proffite, appointed short terms for men to mourn in.

Lycurgus commanded that above eleven days, no man should lament or seem to
mourn.

Solon did clearly take away all Solempnities of Sorrow, as wepinge, Cryinge,
and Tearinge. Who doubts but if Laws had been made only for common people,
and not wisemen: But that mourninge should have been clearly taken away yea
rather thereof no mention made at al, because they would have imagined Wise
men to have needed none admonition, as diverse of themselves we have seen to
do.

But now perticularlye let us proceed whenever one Kinseman, bewaylethe the
Death of an other, let him tell me truly, whether he had rather have dyed
himself, or not?

For thus it must needs come to pass, that the Children do dye before the
Parents, or the Parents before the Children, or else altogethers: as though
they were all destroyed by subuersyon of one House. But to perrishe all
together is holden for most Calamitye and greateste Mysfortune. If thou
desire to have dyed first, thereby thou do not only pervert the course of
Nature, but also incur one of these two that either Death is evil, and
therefore offends less in thy Parents then thy self, or else good: And
therefore for Pittyes sake to be wished first, to fall upon them. For every
man studieth to eschew Evil chiefly to him self. And Good is most commonly
wished to those we account dearest, or to those that for Pitties sake we
honor and reverence. What is that thou mournest for in them? because they
are delivered of Old age? Or doeste thou lament that in others, which in thy
self thou thinckest ought patiently to be suffered?

Or will thou weep not unlike the Old woman that complayued her barren Life.
Upon a time there happened a certain Old Woman to come beggine to the Gate
askinge almose and therewithal alleged she was without Father, or mother,
with which tale at the first somewhat amassed one good fellow standinge by, asked
what age she was of. Whereunto she answered an old woman of moore then seventy
years, forthwith we changed our cheer to laughter, although we took great
pity of the old woman being of so great age, yet no meruail was her loss of
parents. Therefore have good regard lest while thou weep thou move not others to
laugh, what would thou do if according to an old custom used by the citizens
of India in the ysland of Coius, yt old men being past Threescoore years of
age should of the City be carried in Triumph, and so in sight be slain?
Because after that age they being unprofitable their Deaths in respect of
the want of Corn, may greatly proffyte the common wealth.

This Law all be it, it be in deed cruel, yet every Law does promise some
commodity to the common weal. Which I see the Claspians have done: For that
Region being plentiful of Men, and of Corn scarce. Their custom is, after
their Parents be passed Threescore and ten years, to shut them up and so
with Honger to kill them, which use as it is to cruel, Barbarouse, and of
no brutishe Beast used: So Death natural being come to our Parents ought
patiently to be borne, and think them to have passed the whoole course of
Miserye, and us to remain and abide the Troublesome assault of Earthely
cares: Yea and the rather, for that they dyed when Old age made them
combersome to the Common weal, and to theymselues by Life displeasaunte.

Do thou think the old men of Babylon were wont willinglye to yield
theymselues to Death, but because they acknowledged, that Death of old
folks, was moore proffitable to the Common weal then Life. And admytte thine
Auncestoure be not old (because to lament Death in Old age were worse then
the Follye of Melitides) but Young, Strong, Proffitable for his Familye,
necessary for counsel, and so in his best lust taken away? Thou will not
lewdlye say within thy self, Why tarried he so long? as one did who boasted
himself to be of our house of Cardani. This young Man his Father then dyinge,
in the presence of all Men Daunced, and being told by his familyer Friends
that he was dead, said, al to late: but the wicked wretch or one year passed,
was justly plagued, for after a long consumption he dyed, and fulfilled that
saying of Moses: Honor, thy father and thy mother that thou may live long
upon the earth: which I see the Gentiles also do. For Homer in his Eliades
does affirm those to live short lives that do not render their parents yt due
reward of education. Such is the counsel of true dealing: and surely these
unnatural minds, procedes from some devil, otherwise they could not be
giltye of so great a mischief. The nature of man is diuelishe: and so wicked,
as it would destroy all parents, neither can it govern it self, neither
does it contain in it self any curtesye, by mean whereof necessarilye in
short space it must be consumed. But as it is the part of an ungracious son
to hate the life of his parents, so it is y^ part of a wise son pacie^tly to
take their deaths, and to turn the same to his co^moditye, according to then
sample of ye good Physicians, who having medecins will not use poison: yet
having venom at hand after long trial of other things, will rather then
fail by venom cure diseases: So the wise man by well and discrete using of
evil, does make the same good. As first comes to memory the government of
household, the ensample of wisdom, and the desire of glory: in all which ye
reverence and respect toward the father does chiefly hinder thee, or
altogether let thee. The authority of fathers contains in it somewhat more
then service, and hinders the execution of great things, be it in wars,
learning or administration of the common wealth: for all things having evil
success, are imputed to the son, and al good to the father, whom if he
loves he cannot dissemble it, though he deserved it not, or if he love him
not, it shall be called his default or want of duty. And ye examples of them
that willingly have given place to their sons, in glory are so few, as the
honor that Antiocus did to his son Demetrius may be taken as a miracle. The
euente of worldly procedings have also made proof of this opynion: because al
such as have become excellent, either in arms, learning, or civil
gouernmente, were of those whose fathers in youth were taken away, as Julius
Caesar, Octauius, Augustus, Alcibiades, Cicero, Galenus, Aristoteles, yea what
had Alexander been if Phillippus had lived but one four years longer? for
had Phillippus ended the wars with Darius: being victorious he had gained the
whole glory, or if he had been victoryed, he could not have left to
Alexander mean and power of happy procedinge. As therefore to cowards and men
of no virtue, the timelye death of the father has ever brought hinderaunce. So
to noble minds: it is occasion whereby to show themselves as they be. This
must also be set before our eyes, that both life and death be the gifts of
God, and do evermore depend upon his providence. Therefore whosoever
reproves life or death, does in silence disalowe and complain of the divine
Judgment, because both the one and the other is meet and profitable. And
chiefelye if thou offend or did not love them, thou ought not to lamente for
having lost them thou hated: Or if thou lamente, otherwise it must be because
toward them thou were unnatural. But now thou art safe so as thou can
neither be appeached of impiety (if thou have not before procured their harms)
nor after be thought unfriendly, since against thy will or by mishap thou cannot
offend. How much better had it been for Priamus yt Hector and Politus had dyed
before him? who found himself so greuouslye perplexed with their miserable
chau^ces as he disdayned his own life. Was not Hector more happy in death for
Astianax the^ Priamus? because to avoid ye sight of Priamus misery, he sought
his own death, and so by dying left him miserable. All these were the acts of
good parents: but of the other, how many have been? whom though to hate were
ungodly, yet to love them is not necessary. Some have taken away the common
parent, as did Clitemnestra, who having killed Agamemnon was herself betrayed
by Orestes her common son. So Almenon murdered his mother Eryphiles for
having consented to y^ death of his father Amphiarus. These examples are
common, neither is it necessary to love such parents: for notwtstanding by
them we have our being, yet against their wills (as it seems) we keep it:
because they sought the destruction of them of who^ we came. Therefore
Licophron killed Periandrus his father, for being chief auctor of his mothers
death, and would neither take regard of his fame, neither speak unto him nor
suffer him self to be spoken unto. But how much more wicked be they ye seek
ye death of their own sons? of whom the ensamples are not so few as happelye
thou think. Mithridates murdered some of his own sons, and had he not
wanted power, he would not have left one of his children on live. Theseus
was also causeless the cause of Hippolitus death, and as they say Medea cut
her own children in pieces. Of more certentye ye same is told of Catelina,
who to the end he might be married a new, with poison killed his own son,
almost a man. Matheus Duke of yt Carthaginenses hanged his own son Carthalus
returning from victory, only because meetinge his father the^ in exile, he was
appareled in purple with the badge of victory. Should any other son of his
suruiuing him, weep or lament ye death of so cruel a father? nay rather a
malicious beast. Yet how much more vile was the act of Laodices wife of
Axioratus king of Capodacia? who having by that husband six sons with
poison murdered five, intendinge also to kill the sixth youngest of all, had it
not by the policy of kinsefolke been prevented. What beast does live so hard
hearted, as can bear the crueltye of such a mother? Cattes and Connyes by
reason of their excedyng great lust, do devour their young newly brought forth,
but other mothers among al ye brutish kind to destroy their own young, I
never read, nor though written it were, hardlye I durst believe. With like
bestialitye of mind did Euergetes Ptolomeus murder the two children he got
upon his sister Cleopatra the one of good years, the other very young. Of these
and such like parents to bewail the death, how great a folly were it? I my
self have seen, and so have many others, a gentlewomen, that to enjoy
unlawful love within xv. days with a sword slew her own husband, poisoned
her own son, and before their burial was married to her new love. But now
I see what thou would say. I mourn not for the death of suchan auncetor,
but for one yt was just, good, godly, and that dearelye did love me: but
how do thou know whether hereafter he will be such a one still? for all such
as killed their wives or children, were at the first also good: yet grew to
this madness after many years, which shows that their wickedness either came
with time, or else thoccasion grew by time. Therefore there is nothing so
universally incertaine, as the love toward children, brethren, wives,
kinsefolke, friends and masters. Craft covers many things, so does base
fortune, occasion and wisdom: all which when age grows on like unto stares
in the tree, are increased and detected. So old age being come, sometimes in
respect of power, but more often in regard of follye and vtilitye, old men
do for necessitye use the help and counsel of the^ they love not, and only
because of their own debilitye, which saves the giltles children from many
misaduentures at their hands, for whom they live continuallye a most miserable
life: Others do disherit their children, others consume their patrimonye, and
some seek new wives, breeding the sorrow that stepmothers most co^monlye
make. The iniurye of every of which joined with the combersomnes and
seueritye of age, is increased. And to conclude with one example of a wise man
among all those fools: let that of Cato C^nsorinus a man of excellent witre,
suffice thee, he having a son of good years, fell first to aduoutry, and
after marying a most defamed woman, thereby clearlye discredited the
reputation of wisdom, and former life, yea besides all this, ordained the
Nephewe of Clieus to be Coheyre with his son, at that time Preator in Rome.

Why should I then need to resyte Lysander, Tiberius, and the rest of those
old Monsters, that in age were not only wicked but also without Mercy,
when the integrity and Roman wisdom, through defaulte of age was worn away

Therefore saying the number of many brethren breeds pouertye, where great
abundaunce w^teth, impossible it is that any of them can do great things.
It must then be confesses, that y^ ^^athe of the father ought much to be lament
(...) sorrowed not at all. Much less ought the death of Brothers to make a man
sorrowful, it men would rightly way things as they are. And first it must
be considered (which is also to be thought of in the loss of children) when
alone, and without brethren thou be born, whether thou will lamente because
they were not borne? Truly sith I see no man so to do, I hardly think that any
will say it is worthy weepinge, to be borne with brethren* or if being a
child (...) diverse brethren, will thou now renew the sorrow of their death?
which I know also thou wi^t not because we love not y^ we know not, but we
lament for them we love. If then thou think neither those that are not borne,
nor those that are worthy to be mourned for, how much less the other that were
borne and lived a good time. For if to have brethren it be evil, then to loose
them is a pleasure: But if it be good (saying in all good things it is better
to have had some thing then nothing who doubts. But these that lived some
reasonable years, if they dye, are less to be sorowed for, then those that
never were borne nor known. Such is the condition of euilles, that what soever
is everlasting, is most displeasaunt, and in all such some rest is thought
pleasant. In a time of famine, is it not better to have two Loaves then no
bread at all? After long labor is not rest (he it never so little) better then
none? Does not one days liberty refreshe a man well that lies continually
in prison? Are not such as live in misery somewhat comforted, when they
remember that some part of their life was pleasauntly passed? Saying then it
is better to have had brethren, to have lived in their company, to have
sorrowed and reioysed with them, and therefore art more happy then they that
vttterlye have had none at all, who for all that do neither weep nor lament.

But false imaginacion and opinion, is the fault hereof whereby thou thinckest
that not only he, but also thy self should for ever live togethers: of which
hope worthylye deceived, vnworthilye thou mournest for thy brother what if in
thy choice, if were to live brotherlesse, or without one only brother who after
forty years should survive the? Whether would thou have a brother with such
condition or live without? Surely thou would have him unless to have brethren
thou think it evil. But if to chose the brotherlesse life: then would thou
not complain. Yet having the better choice thou do. What is the cause?
other then that now thou art unprepared to disgeste thy brothers death, but
when the choice was made thou were prepared. Thus death therefore is not to be
blamed but in opinion only it seems intolerable, and therein thou lamentest
the commodities received, (as there is no necessety) thou never think. But
(be it for the purpose) that this thy Brother was good and loved the much which
(as men say) is not common.

In Brethren hard it is: to find unfeigned love. Truly if thou have regard to
daily experience the most brothers be co^bersome quarrelous, ^^^^ous,
discencious, captious, and disdaynefull. The Poet was wont therefore very well
to resemble brethren to the winds, because they ever disagreed among them
selves, and lived not like friends or fellows, but as those whom discord did
best become. Chain did first show to Abel what brotherly love would after be.
Then Jacob deceived Esau: committing his eleven children into the servitude of
Joseph his brother: yea some of them they meant to have slain, forgetting not
only pity, but also their common parents, and the innocence of their age.
After their days Absolon killed Amnon, his brother. Abimelech the son of
Gedeon murdered his threscore and ten brethren, one only except.

No godly law, no holy Religion, no fear of GOD, from so wicked a deed
could withholde him. Neither are the examples of the Gentiles more merciful,
Atreus having murdered the three sons of Thiestes his brother, gave him
their flesh to eat, spoiled him of his Kingdom, and ravished his wife.
Etheocles and Polynues, Oedipi. Simulus and Rhesus did likewise one murder the
other, so did also Romulus and Remus, Iugurtha was not contented only to kill
his brethren Adherbales and Hiempsales: but also before they dyed, cut all
their flesh from their bones. Cambises having one only brother called
Smerdis a simple man and lyuinge in private life, by reason of a dream was by
him slain. So light a cause, can cause a brother to seek the life of a
brother. What did Antonius to G^ta? or Antipater the Macedonian King?
Phrahates who without cause slew his thyrtye brethren, and with them
Herodes his father by whom in the place of Pacorus latelye dead, he was
Crowned king. The Queen of Tilaea took for husband her brother Hiperio by
whom she conceived two children, the one called Sol, the other Luna, through
envy killed Hiperio, then cast Sol into the river Eridanus, and with sorrow
thereof dyed Luna. Cleopatra also (for women are not free from such wickedness)
to the end she might more safely aspyre to the kingdom of Egipte, flewe he
sister Arsinoes and her young brother of the age of fiftene years. If I
resighted every mischief that brothers have committed to brothers, this book
could not contain them. My self have known one man twice giltye of his
bretherns death: another the year before, was beheaded for having murdered
three of his brethren, but the death of two was apparauntlye known. There is no
thruste for Falernus more great, then the desire of wicked folk to commit
crueltye in their own kinsefolke. Yea sometimes this wicked violence is put in
proof among kinsefolke of one name. But among this sinful sort, thy
brother is none. Admit he be good, of honest conditions, modest, and
virtuous: yet what can thou look for more at him, then others? for if thou
seek good will? a friend can do it: if necessitye? thy son must be
preferred: if pittye? thy parents are better: if duty? thy fellows are
morefitte: if flatterye? thy servants do it best. Of all which number saying
thou patiently suffer death, the loss of thy brethren ought not more
impaciently to be borne. And hereof a most euidente token may be the great
constancye of the parents, at the death of their children: the like love of
whom is never seen, neither among brethren, nor among children toward
their parents. But thus thou do say, I loved my brother dearelye, and
honored him truly: but did he likewise love thee? Alexius was brother to
Isaac king of Germanye, and by him received as a companion in government: taken
of ye Turks: he redeemed him with great sums of money, notwythstanding al
which at his return he deposed Isaac from his kingdom, put out his eyes, and
kept him in continual prison. Thou may boldlye swear by GOD that thou
loved, and not be deceived, but how thou art beloved is hard to know. Titus
honored Domitianus, yet how many iniuryes did Domitianus do, unto Titus? and
(as it is thought) in the end, with poison he killed him. What can be more
perilous (chiefelye where is great inheritance) then to commit the
children to thy brothers tuition: a thing almost impossible, it is to love
truly both the brother and his children, or would thou have thy brothers
should love so, as they should forgette their children? Who knows whether
evil fortune shall rather take thy children, or thy good brother from thee?
For he lyuinge, either without peril thy children might not be left void
of angouerour, or not without iniurye committed to others.

Call to memory the example of Childebertus the French king, who by practice
got from their mother Clothilda, the two sons of his brother and slew
them, because (the lawful heirs of his brother lyuinge) he thought that
quietlye he could not possess the whole kingdom.

Many there have been seen, to commit more crueltye upon their nephews then
this: and common it is to take their patrimonyes from them, but the occasions
both of peril and iniurye are all at once removed. Lastly this is to be
noted, that nature as it deuideth inheritance, so does it depart conditions,
among brethren, If one be honest, an other dishonest, If one be noble of mind
an other of base courage, if one be industrious, another is slothful. If thou
hate thy brother, why lokest thou to be loved? if thou love him, love binds
thy judgment. And very like it is, that as in thee there is singular
honestye, so in thy brother is no less dishonestye, but thou see it not,
occasion wants. Thy brothers inheritance was well gotten, how well gotten?
nay rather won by deceit: But admit it be (as be it cannot) that thou
know thy brother does truly love thee, thou art childlesse, he has
children left behind him, account of them, and let them be in place of a
brother, in educatio^ of them shall be greater charity, and in keeping greater
reverence. But if neither thou nor he have children, and he that dyed is thy
only brother, if thou adopt children, they shall better serve then thy
brothers. Silver is lost and gould is found. But if this thou cannot do sooner
then thou would, yea against thy will thou thy self shall or long follow him:
and had he suruiued would percase skantlye have wept one tear for thee: and
if so he had done, was he not by so much wyser then thy self? If before him
thou would not have dyed, why do thou lament that he is first dead? Other
friends do live, other kinsfolk, and other companions. How many brothers and
kinsfolk in Christ do live, as mortal men and do dailye pray for thee. And
thine own brother is already gone to GOD, art thou sorrye that he has
gained liberty and everlasting life? Tho^cation of every sorrow is
patiently to be borne notwithsta^dinge, the necessitye of nanature, the
custom of others, and the variable condition of worldly things do work the
contrary Neither can there come any greater grief to men by death, then to be
berefte of children, yet although the same does happen to ye whole number of
any man's ofspringe and therewith all hope of other be removed, yet is his
condition not such as deserves either weeping, sadness, or sorrow. And now
let us more deplye consider whether ye life of him that is barren, or of him
that has children is more happy? The childles man has only to lament that
he has no child to leave behind him, which if in respect of perpetuity thou
foolishlye hopest: among so many thousands of men, do thou think thy
posteritye should remain, though the world were never to end? But that ye
world does end, besides that the laws have so determined, also al famous
Philosophers, (Aristotle except) have so agreed. And if thy life be not
continued for ever, what is that to thee? or if thy posteritye do always
remain art thou for that respect the happyer? when the Paripatetians conclude
that ye seed of the father is no portion of ye children, but y^ they are
whollye engendered of the mothers blood. Galenus thincketh y^ the veins, ye
synowes, and artires, are only made of the fathers seed, all the rest of ye
mothers blood: howsoever it be, no graund child is portion of his
graundfather. So subtle is this pleasure of posteritye, as in deed it may be
called nothing after a few years all memory of great graundfathers is worn
out: who is he almost that ever knew his great graundfather? But on the
contrary part, to so small a pleasure how great a care is joined, hereof comes
peril of life, charge in education, fear of honger, care in learning,
wantonness in childhoode, rashenes in youth, contumacy, disobedience and
disdain. All which in rich men and happy times, are so common, as are
accounted for necessary evils.

Now what hope can be in posteritye, when only charge and fear comes
thereby? People are oppressed, kings make wars, the Prince of Turks with fire
and swoorde wastes all, vile servitude of all evil the worst draws on, some
yield, some are hidden in hooks, on every side disorder, evil men are not
allowed, good subjects persecuted. Do thou then think that in times of such
calamitye, it is not care enoughe for thee to provide for thy self? but will
also be charged with an increased burden of necessary cares? what ca^ be more
wicked then this our age? When Cicero lost his daughter Tulliola, being to him
most dear, did repose the chiefest part of his consolation in ye affairs of
Caesar, yet he lived under a mild prince in a Cittye plentiful, Cicero
himself of Caesar beloved, frended of ye greatest, and wa^ted neither wealth,
honor nor reputacion. Then compare time with time, that security with this
private peril, the goodness and authority of Cicero with thine, the lenitye of
Caesar with the severity of other Princes? and then consider whether thou ought
to wish for children, when Cicero did not much sorrow ye loss of his? The
life of men without children is full of pleasure, full of lybertye, and full of
security, they have no cause to frare either iniuryes, servitude, disdain or
danger of others, in peace they are free, in wars not careful. And believe
me, yt in common calamities there is no greater care, then to think upon thy
kinsefolke. In time of plague, no place thou have to flee to, in time of war
thou may not remove: in time of famine thou art unprovided, whither to go.
Consider well these disco^modityes, and see whether they are comparable to the
want of children. But now let us return to our principal proposition: Why
complaynest thou thy want of children? when for thy child thou ought neither to
lament, who either feleth nothing, or is in joy: neither for thy self whose
condition is best, in respect thou art childlesse, sith thereby thou have
changed peril for security, toil for quiet, bondage for liberty, and yet
complaynest? This other day I hard certain poor old women complaining, and
wyshing the death of their children, and had it not been better for them to
have been childlesse then to become in such myserye as to wish the death of
their own children? Mark well the prayers of poor people, consider how
careless they are of their children, and so shall thou find, I tell none
vntrothe. But thou art rich? no sure, they are only rich that do dwell in
commonweals. And though thou live now under a king, his successor may
be a tyrante, one only night may make this change. And in a common weal
while thou fear not one, thou must lie in wayghte and take heed of many.
If thou want riches, there can be no comfort in children. Every man most
assuredlye is poor, and no man rich: where is no security, how can you be
happy? yet this is one most certain condition of mortal men. That as some are
subject to the wars of diverse: under one all is wholye at his devotion.
Remember Heliogabalus the emperor, yt sought togethers ye children of al Italy:
what did Astiages commit upon Harpagus? or what did Cambises to the Persians^
and chiefelye to Prexaspes: Such is the condition of men, as better it were to
live in fear of war by sondrye Princes, then of one that may at his will
command all. One Octauius Augustus was a good Prince, because in civil wars
mercifullye enough he shed the Romayne blood, but what beasts did
continuallye succeed him? As Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, Claudius? What mischief
could be more hardlye suffered then these monsters? But admit thou live in
happy times, yet of them do I receive no proof, considering I wrote this
book, to serve my self in hard chances, not only in respect of the vain
opynion of some mortal men, touching private adventures: but also that unlooked
for euentes might more patiently be borne: which though they be not worse
then other that are private, yet by reason of their sodennes do commonly
trouble men most. Yet since without mine assente this Book may come to hands
of posteritye, I may happelye be reproved for having attributed to much
blame to some one time, and dispayred of better, wherefore let the blame of
times be left to their place, and (as meet it is) our talk be turned to
comfort. Thy son is dead: what can more easelye be recovered? none age but
the last, no sickness except the consumption that hinders child getting:
which being so we ought not to be so careful of children as of our selves.
Aristotle concludes that at threscore years of age or threscore and ten a man
lives to get children, yet is it manifest, that some have gotten children
after fowerscore years, and though favor and force were decade. And among
diseases both the gout and consumption do suffer generation. These only are
thought insufficient to get children, y^ wants their stones, or are deprived of
their virtue? Or else those whose veins behind their ears be cut. For such
men as says Hipocrates be all barren.

How well therefore does Nature provide y^ what a man most dispaireth of, the
same by quick occasion is supplied. There is nothing that can moore easlye or
sooner come or happen to man then the riches gotten of thy father: because thy
winninge of Glory and Friends asks long time: but a child is gotten in a
moment. What loss can then the death of thy Son be? and though it were the
greatest, yet because so easlie and of every man may be supplied, it ought not
to be accounted of. But being poor to get riches is very hard, For as the
saying is.

Now riches are not geeuen, but where, as riches do habound. But thou shall
see a man now childles and old, yet or thou see him next he is become rich:
If any member be cut of, it grows not again, if the father dye, or borther,
their lives are never called back, if thy fame be perished, hard is thy
reputation recovered: but the loss of children is so easlye, shortly, and
fully supplied: as in this respect only is not worthy any comfort, no though
thou were assured he were thy son in deed. And how incertaine that is (O
Lord) who knows not, thy belief must do it, belief is therein needful.

Only ye fidelity of thy wife, does make him thine, other assurance have thou
none. But if a man do happen to mourn for the death of an other man's child,
for by conjecture, Bastardes dye sonest, by reason they were gotten with fear,
and most unquietness of mind, then look what Laughter yt provoke? But now
thine own Child (a thing unknown but only to his mother) is taken away what
part of him was thine? his soul? I never found any so wicked as would be of
that mind, his body? how can that be when he is made of his fathers seed?
which is the superfluous noryture of the third concocktion: as the donge
first, the urine second, if whatsoever comes of superfluity be ours, then so
shall worms and Lyce be ours and worthy our love Remember how much seed in
times past thou have consumed in waste, either upon harlots or upon thy wife
being with child: all that is lost and thou complaynest not, what is more in
thy son then the effusion of thy seed? will thou then so much lament a vile
and disdained thing, whereof is no reason. If thou respect the beginning thou
shall find that thou lamentest none other then a little unhappy excreme^t,
which being lost in dreams (as often it happens) thou carest not at all, but
what matter is it how it be lost? I marvel the less of Aristippus, that
disdayned his son so much as he cast him away. Other likewise I hear
distroyed them, as Lauis did Oedipus: Priamus, Paris, Neither do thou think
this custom only of kings observed, but also of private men: which law by
Romulus of infamous memory and happy success in Italy first was ad nulled.
Hereupon were erected almose houses, y^ children should no more be brought up
by wild beasts. But this perhaps thou will say: My son was now become
like unto me, I had spent much money care, and pain upon him, and so was likely
to have been noble, but these complaints were more meet for mothers: because if
thou lamentest thy loss of money, the^ had thou more need to be cured of thy
couetise, then comforted for loss of thy son: And hereof be most assured
that children do not take three manners and conditions of their Parents, and
they will follow the conditions of none less then of them: which is the
reason why the children of pore men are more like to their parents, then the
children of the rich, because pore men are both fathers and masters of their
childrens life: but rich men not so. Why shouldeste not thou then make an
other man's child thine?

For he is most like the in conditions that is of thine own bringinge up:
Quintilianus tells how Alexander had certain imperfections of Lionida his
Tutor, which he kept still being come to man's estate. For though we eschew
the immitation of vices, yet in virtues we seek to follow them.

Therefore if he that is dead was loved for virtue, we commend thy meaning, but
yet (O Lord) how pleasant, how happy is that life where unto from this obscure
darckenesse thy son is gone, yea how sweet was that travail? Neither do I
think it nedeful to declare those joys and pleasures which our souls having
forsaken these earthly pleasures do possess: for while the soul is laden with
that heavy burden it co^prehendeth immortal things with the mortal. Scantly
it can be expressed how much force, dignity, and glory the soul being at
liberty has. For the conceiuyng (and not the teachinge whereof) all be it a
man in this life, be never so excellent, he is notwithstanding imperfect,
because he is only a man complete that understands which the soul being
closed within the body cannot do. Therefore what marvel is it yt the soul,
so slowly and painfullye departs from the body? Likewise with great labor
and much difficulty a man is from his mother brought forth to this vale of
misery. In consyderacion of all these the bitterness of sorrow for thy sons
death should be the less, wayinge the glory which he now has and the
reputacion of his youth together with the weary abode he made in his mothers
womb. Nature has ordained, that al great increase of felicitye is attained
through hard labor. With the same reason shall thou be comforted, if thy
son be an infant and thine only son (I omytte to tell what he may hereafter
be) but now he has hit ye mark for which he was borne. For is there any other
end whereto we were born then death? as the body for the soul, and as sleaping
for watching, so was life given unto us for death, wherefore as sleep is
necesary for all men, some more and some less, so is life for the Souls
wherefore if thou want mean to get an other son, then choose thou some other
one of thine affinity, and bring him up in learning, and honest disciplyne
and hardly shall thou find such a son made by his parents. If such a one by
education thou make, thou gainest thanks of God, whose children we al be and
of thy country which is mother to al men. Neither in duty shall thou find him
inferior to other children. It is not my meaning to wish the death of children,
but that patiently men should bear it, neither will I that the child of an
other should be preferred before our own: but rather that thy son be so
brought up as he may deserve to be preferred before others, yet if we consider
succession, we shall find that excellent Masters have hadd notable scholars,
noble fathers, vile children. And to omit all others. Socrates was not esteemed
of his sons, but by Plato his scholar was praised to the skies. Did not
Theophrastus commend Aristotle more then Nichomachus. The ancient examples do
show that the scholars have proved not only more worthy then sons, but also
more thankful what son was ever so favorably to his father, as would yield
him the glory due to himself, as Plato would have done to Socrates. Besides
that men of notable virtue have not only wanted children but also never sought
for any. As Thales, Zeno Plato, Ape^les, Diogenes, Galenus, Virgilius, and
Homer and to some they have come as it were against their wills as to
Alexander and Julius Caesar. And no marvel y^ noble men have seldom virtuous
children. Surely I think for some great respects it comes to pass, that of
some noble parents, vile children should descend, which was very well and
pleasantlye witnessed of Spartianus, whose words are these, Remembering with
my self O Dioclesian Augustus, that almost none of these great men, have left
any son very good or proffytable. It appears then suffyciently that worthy
men, have either died without children or have been without. And first let us
begin at Romulus he left no children. Neither hadd Numa Pompilius any that
could proffit the common weal, What had Camillus? were his children like him?
What had Scipio. What had the two Catoes that were called the great? Then what
should I speak of Homer, Demosthenes, Virgilius, Crispo, T^rentius, Plautus,
with diverse others? What of Caesar or Tullius, to whom alone it had been
better to have been childelesse. What of Augustus? who though he had the choice
of all, could not adopt one good,

Traianus was also deceived in the election of his heir. But omitting adopted
children let us speak of babes begotten by Antonius pius, and Marcus the
gods of the common wealth. What man hadd been more blessed then Marcus had
he not left behind him his heir Commodus? Or who had been more happy then
Seuerus Septimius, had he not gotten Bassianus? What do we learn other by
these ensamples, then that Children do not take their minds of their Parents,
but of God, otherwise they should be like to them, Nor in deed we cannot call
them ours, but children of God the common father, and they ought to be
embraced for their virtue, not virtue for them, which if men in worldly
procedinges did mark, they should be like to Gods and lead a blessed life.
But nature has labored somewhat to deceive us in the Love of children: that is
to say, y^ every man do so much care of that, as for that, we fail not to
forget y^ love of our selves our country, of god and that (which is most) our
children and al. So dotingly we do love our children: as we seem rather to hate
the^* We bring the^ up not in virtue, but in injury not in learning but in
lusting, not in fear of god, but in desire of riches, not to live long, but to
ye performance of foul delites, yet was it not nature y^ made this default, of
folish care, and of imoderate love, to who^ she gave a certain modest desire of
honger and thirst to every creature, so far as was nedeful. Yet though
imperfection of mind, only man without honger eats, and drinks without
thirst, and without necessity does use every sort of delighte. And in like
sort does he love his children so much, as not only he suffers them, but for
them the fathers will also do evil, and attempt al wickedness, and thincketh them
of his own making. But assuredly they are not, but ^ee the works of God,
who gave them mind, life, form, force, manners, wit, and increase,

And of these the Father made nothing. Then leave I say to lament for that is
none of thine, he that made yt has called it again unto him, to whose
Commandment yt is boothe just and Godly it should obaye. And if thou
desire to know whether this Love be Natural, or like unto other desires, an
imperfection of mind Behold other living things, who after education do never
know their own, no nor love them. But if this were a gift of Nature, it should
by reason of pitye, and necessity, rather be in children toward their
parents, then in parents toward their children, which example Nature as it
seems did not forget in brute beasts: for among birds, ye Stork. Among four
foted beasts, ye Dormouse, does feed his aged parents. But after the first
educatio^, of love borne to their parents no sin is extant, but men (by study
as it were) does pass other living things, through the imperfection of mind
esteming himself to much. The pity of brute beasts comes altogether, when
both of education and love thend is one, duringe which time the old beasts be
weaker, labersome, lean, careful, and miseserable, as to all men it does
appear. Surely it seems a great madness to torment thy mind continually with
this nedeles care of posterity, for besides that, this desire is neither
reasonable nor necessary, some man may iustlye marvel, why it is so common,
but the answer there unto is not douted of. If first thou do show me the
cause why so many men became covetous, ireful, and subject to desires of lust.
And all these besides they be vices, not natural nor reasonable; are also
dishonest. Yet thonly love of children after educatio^ though it proceeds
neither of nature nor reason: yet is yt honest. But I have perhaps in so
apparent and firm matter for wise men spoken more then was requisite. And have
used reasons true, though subtle and short. Therefore let us come to longer
speech, and arguments more plain, lest I seem not so much to prove, as to
deceive, thy son therefore being dead: consider first, whether he was well
reported or accounted wicked? For many times the son of a good father, is
seen to prove an evil man, by reason the homely vices are hardlier discovered
then y^ external: besides that, love byndeth judgment. Whereof a fable is
come forth, how the Cuckovv in old time, for her young birds, contended in
singinge with the Nightingale and hers: appointing the ass to be their Judge,
whose sentence was y^ he knew not which of them did sing most swetly, but well
he was assured the Cuckovves did most plainly and distinctly pronounce their
notes. So ye children of every one are not only best loved, but also the evil
by the evil are most allowed of. In which cases, as we have also seen me^ of
right good judgment, mete it is yt we should not only lament but also rejoice.
And in au^cie^t time they did much more then this, for both Manlius Torquatus
against his son Decius Silanus, pronounced so cruel a sentence as with a cord he
hanged himself. And M. Scaurus finding his son among others fleinge, being
only giltye of fear, did force him to return to his enemies and be slain.
Likewise a woman of Lacedemon, killed her son for his sloth, and returning
from ye wars, of whom this noble verse was written.

Thou dastard knight, Damatrion, thy mother here have slain.
That do both her, and Spartayn blood: with covverdice distayne
Such and more wicked sons being bereft of life do thereby sease to offend
their parents and kinsfolk, yea are also themselves saved from greater infamy.
Some sons have not forborne to co^spyre ye death of their fathers. As
Blandenius Zesides, who slew his mother, and Euander that at the persuasion of
his mother Nicostrata murdered his own father, and for that cause was banished
Italye. Such mo^sters, as they are being left alive, are causes of many evils:
so Paris was ye subuersio^ of both Priamus house and country: notwithstanding,
when he dyed, Priamus weped. So folish are men's cares, yt they wish they wot
not what, excellinge (as they think) ye Gods in wisdom, and reprove those that
in their ignorance shall procure their good. For if thy son were wise, honest,
godly, and noblye minded, having hope of children yt may support thine
vnweldiage. What is wanting in the graund children? and if none be, a fond
thing it was to hope yt he would not, nor could not do. But how soever it be,
greater is y^ danger of them that are worse then death, then hope of those he
has, to prove better. And misery, vilety, shame, continual grief and disdain
are al more evil then death: death is common to all men, but these to few,
who also are all subject to death. Were it not better by dyinge to prevent all
these injuries, then to have thy desire so dearlye bought? For necessary it is
that who so will live old must suffer many evils. There is almost no mortal
creature living long, but at sometimes before he dies, does hate his life
whereto put the saying of y^ Poet.

Although vnvveldyage, when life does wear away,
None other ill did bring vvithall, but that, (as men do say)
By living long full often we see: which we would not behold.
Truly if such desire thou have of children, if thy son died thou being
old, thy time to follow is next: if in thy youth then have thou hope enoughe
to have more. Finally Sorrow is a womanishe thing, and not fytte for men.
Therefore the Licians were wont to constrayne mourners to wear women's
garments, to the end their garment might agree with the mind, And surely not
without occasion, because among all people, the more vile they be the more
beastly they lament. As women first, next children, and then barrennous men,
the greatest number of whom be effeminate. Contrariwise me^ the more valiant
they be, the more they oppress their grief and so^er drive their Sorrow away.

This sort of Sorrow goes to the infernal God and as it is his custom in
many others, so does he use to call them nearest to him, that most do
honor him. But if at the beginning thou drive him away, and suffer not thy
mind to be infected full far shall he be from thee: But behold how comelye
and honest a thing yt is that a man of good years, being well counsayled by
others, should in women's weed, beastely weep, wayl, cry out, and lament.

O gentle wit. But though he does none of all these, yet inwardly to torment
himself with sadness is the part neither of a wise nor valiaunte man: but of
one that searches rather the reprehe^cion of others, then knows what is
seemly.

How much better were it for him often to remember Vmbresomnum Homo?

What could have been better said? So subtylle and fugitive is the life of
man, as of al other things, seeing shadow is most subtle and sleep most
deceivable and incertaine, what shall the shadow of sleep be? And yet
notwithstanding this is the life and glory of man. One other wrote thus.

As the generation of leaves is, so is also man's: for in deed what
dissimilitude is there? leaves do fall by force of Son, showers, wynd,
hayle, yea (and if all fail) by themselves: Euenso the life of man, believe me
thou haste received none iniurye at all, Death is the gift of God, and God
doothe wrong to no man. If condemned by voices of assente thou be deposed
from Aucthoritye, thou would think that it were meet to bear it with
pacient mind, though that iniurye cannot want suspicion, reproach, and
falshode.

And now when thou fear none of these, dare thou disalowe the Sentence of
God? And do thou not remember that which Leontius Neapoles, the Bishop,
tells to have happened in the life of John, Patriarche of Alexandria. To
whom when a certain man had offered seven pounds of Gold to pray for his
only Son who a month paste, was with a Ship and great riches drowned,
after a few days obtained of y^ Patriarch his desire. And while in y^ mean
space he continued in sadness, he dreamed one night y^ the Pattriark appeared
unto him saying. Lo according to thy prayer y^ thy son might be saved so he
now is, because he is dead, but if he had lived, from wicked life and
da^pnacio^ after death he could not have been preserved, god only knows what is
expedient for us when we are ignorant our selves and know not what is to be
desired. Wherefore it is convenient that we do not only receive comfort, but
also rejoice at the death of our neighbors, of whom if thou desyrest to
continue any memory though often times also thou want their company, it shall
be both to the and thy posterity continued by his noble tombs, pictures,
statues, verses, orations, dedications, institutions of eternitye and
Sacryfyces. Is yt not more honest and pleasant to confyrme thy self to these
comforts* to commend his glory to mortal men? then with wepinge and wailynge
to kyl thy self? Yet as to them that are endewed with virtue, and acknowledge
the felytitye of souls these are superfluous, so to them of manners more
frail, such kind of comfortes are not unseemly. For Augustus hanged in his
bed chamber the picture of his graundsonne being a child of him dearlye
beloved, and so often as he came unto that chamber he never failed to kiss
the picture. Alexander did set up certain images to Fabius Quintilianus not
with tears but with a solemn oracion (containing the commendation of his
son) did burye him. What did John Mesue who in his fathers name falsely
turned the title of his book? So did also Zoar and Aristotle write books to
their sons. So did Cicero and Plato in their disputacions call upon their
brothers and friends, not in mourning garments and weping, but with monuments
everlasting honored the same to their posterity. But now with reasons (I think)
sufficiently it is proved, that the death of children is neither to be so
lamented nor evil. Let us now proceed to tell how manfully our elders were wo^t
to bear such mishaps. Octauianus Augustus having within twenty months
lost.ij. of his nephews was not moved so much as he refrayned to sytte daily
in ye Senate. Demosthenes the.vii. day after ye death of his only daughter put
on his white garment, was crowned, and sacrifyced an ox, More valiantly did
Dion, he being in counsel of the common weal, and informed that his only son
had fallen from the house top and broken his neck, gave order to his friends
for his buryall, and notwithsta^dinge proceeded in his busynes begone. Like
hereunto did Antigonus, he saying his son slain in battle, gave none other
sign of sorrow but said. O Alcionen later then thou ought thou art now dead,
for so manfully assayling thy enemies, thou doeste not greatly esteem my
warnings nor thine own weldoinge. The constancy of Pericles can be inferyor to
none of these, for when within eight days, he had lost his two sons.
Paralus, and Xantippus, young men of singular wit did notwithstanding put
upon him his white garment, was crowned, made oracions to the Athe^encians, and
coming from his house when his children were dead, with merueilous constancy of
mind gave counsel and uttered reasons of ye disciplyne of war. So upon a time
Anaxagoras his scholemaister being in disputacion, word was brought of his
sons death, whereat he paused a little, but by and by confessing he had
begotten a mortal creature, proceeded in disputacion.

When Paulus Emylius, had taken in hand the Percian war, he prayed the Gods
that if any calamity were coming to the Cittye of Rome, that they would
rather lay the same upon his house, which either through his prayer or hap was
performed And when of his four sons he had adopted two into the family of
Scipio, within few days after he lost the other, neither did he with less
patience bear this, then valiantly he wished the other. Tynnichus also a
Spartayn left his posterity, a monument of worthy ensample. When Trasibulus his
son in the wars against the Argini, was slain, in this epigram, is declared
the nobility of his mind. It seems well that covverds vvepe, when they be
brought to grave
But thou my son a Spartayn true, no vveping tears shall have.
He has as me thinks followed the saying of Papimus.

A noble death does parents please, and God such souls do love.
The valiant minds do gayn increase, when life do so remove
We see that some have not only in the death of their children witnessed their
greatness of mind, but also did procure it, and thereof proceeded great
proffyte, When Brutus openly punished his two sons, what terror think you
was it to his Citizens? what desperation to his enemies? what admiracion to
his neighbors? So as the example of that valiant deed, was not only the
occasyon of great increase to the empire, but also, for fortye years after it
continued in liberty not so much for fear of the payns, as for emulacion in
virtue.

What is by thensample of Abraham upon Isaa^ showed other then that men
should so love their children, as in them to put no trust at all: but ever to
honor God so, as we may forget our children, and such are worthy great
reward: For which his careful obedience he is made father of many nations,
neither shall his seed at any time decay. This was a greater argument of
courage then that of Brutus, for he murdered the gyltlesse and left the
children of others his heirs, the other in sleinge, became childles. He by
the hands of an other commanded his enemies to be slain, this man murdered
those that obeyed. But let us return to ensamples of sufferaunce, and a shame
(it were) that Women should for fortitude exceed men. Among whom what may be
said of Tomyris queen of Mesageta. who having her son slain in battle,
(where in her enemy Cirus also dyed) without tears made great feasts, the
hole army likewise slain* Also Cornelia mother to the Gracchi of a great number
of sons, having only C. and T. left, yet when they were in a time of
sedicion, most cruelly slain (besides calling only to memory their father, and
their own worthy acts) did not otherwise make any show of sorrow. Argilion y^
mother of Brasidas the Lacedemonian king, hearing her son was slain, did
neither mourn nor lament but asked if nobly and worthily he dyed. Gyrtias
likewise a woman of Lacedemon when her son was brought home almost dead, and
his friends lamented she said. Non Silebitis inqua^, declaring of what blood he
was descended, she said one body has overthrown other in fight, yet after
being recovered and grown to man's state was slain in battayl, which being
told unto his mother, she answered saying, was it not expedient y^ goinge to
the wars he should ^^ea others, or be slain himself? but more wyllinglye I
receive knowledge of a death worthy of me and his predecessors, then if in
sloth and idleness he had lived. One other woman more valiantly bare the death
of her son, promissing in the fyeld saying, let cowardes complain, for I
will without tears and meerelye burye my son. And a another, a woman also of
Lacedemon, having lost in wars her five sons, standing upon the walls of
Sparta and listinge for the euente of the battle, when she saw a man coming
asked what was done? (he thinking she had asked of her sons) aunsweared, they
are all dead: whereat the woman offended, said, it is not (that) ill luck I
ask, but how speedes our country, then he telling y^ the victory was gotten
by the Lacedaemonians, the woman said with al good will I receive knowledge of my
sons slaughter. In old time such was the nobilitye of mind, both in men and
women, as well for courage as counsel. But now enoughe or rather as I think to
much have been said as well of them, as also appertains to death. It is not
therefore needful to speak of friends, kinsefolke, or wives, saying of them
the plentye is great, the conditions uncertain, and the necessitye little:
yea the cares and disquiet of wives, do almost counteruayle the sorrow of
their deaths. And though wives were not shrewed nor combersome, yet can no man
at any time long want a wife, sith one may be taken after an other. And albeit
yt wives were all good, all friends faithful, and all kinsefolke kind, yet
saying the death of a brother, a son and a father is patiently to be borne,
a follye it were to lament them, or call such doubtless matters in question.
But rather resolve with thy self, that death is the end of evil to fools,
and to wise men the beginning of all good. And as says Menander.

Whom God does love: in youth he dies. FINIS.
Of Comfort the third Book.
MVche longer then was determined, and more at large have I discoursed that
kind of comfort which to sorrow and death does appertain: not only because
I think y^ occasion of grief which grows either of pryua^e death or loss
of friends is little, or lightlye borne: but also that in these days men do so
much desire riches and auctoritye, as till death does even at hand draw on,
they take no care at all. Each man in imagination allows himself long time
of life, disdayning death as a thing not known in this, but an other world.
But riches, and present authority, are on every side sought for, as joys
which he everlasting* Yet not contented with* this, they also reprove,
condemn, and despise the quiet life of such as are not with like madness
delighted. For the chiefest care such men do take, is that of al other most
wise and happy: neither of which (in judgment of those that disdain them)
can be allowed. Then when these wealthy men perceive that the others are not
greatly grieved, forthwith they fall to hate and persecution. So as although men
could willinglye suffer their bace estate: yet being driven into any kind of
necessity or calamity, straight ways they lament and complain: so as by
confession of them, for great desire of riches, the rich men are allowed of and
praised for the wysest sort of men. But saying the estate of time and worldly
procedinges are not ever alike, we mean not to speak much of that calamitye
which these ambicious men do think y^ greatest, but of that miserye which may
so truly be called: for such kind of men do labor to continue after death,
and glory in their own happiness. As the Poet writing upon the tomb of a
certain happy man said.

Upon my corpse pour forth thy wine, O friend that comes this way,
And on my tomb with pleasant hand, thy precious spices lay.
No gulf of grief my grave shall be, but spring of lasting blis,
I am not dead but changd my life, lo such my fortune is,
My former joys are not decayed, but as they were before,
If ought or naught I bear in mind, yet blessed for evermore.
O merye man, how aptlye has he nothing said, for this presumption to
continue felicitye after death, is a thing altogether vain, and forsaken of
the very authors thereof. For well we see that after death, the glory of
riches does in short space decay. Not only because great nombers do daily
aspyre to this praise: but also riches it self deserves no glory at all. And
among so many thousand thousands as in their time was famouslye rich, yet few
of them have come to our knowledge. Gilias, Cressus, Mydas, Pythius, Meander,
Erictonius, Sysiphus Tantalus. Of the Romans that had been bond men,
Amphion, Menecrates, Heron, Demetrius, Pallas, Calistus, Narcisus. Of
Frenchmen, Drusus, Caecilius, Sylla, Lucullus, Liuius, M, Crassus. Of Kings,
Salamon and Ptolomeus, were all reported for notable rich. But Gylias became
famous for liberalitye, Cresus and Crassus, for their misfortune, Sylla and
Lucullus for their victoryes, Mydas through Silenus. The Romans that had been
bond men by the abuse and riot of Rome: Salamon for wisdom, Tantalus for
wicked life, Meander and Pythius for their bountye to the Persian kings. C.
Caelius for his Testament: Ptolomeus for princely majesty, Erictonius and
Sysiphus through Poets liberty L. Drusus for his magnificence. So as none
almost for only riches gained glory: although they were such me^ as might
easylier attain to fame for virtue, then so great riches. To what use that
after death riches should serve no man knows, nor can imagine. And although
that after death they did yield glory to thee, and use to others, yet the same
is to thee nothing at all. Rather ought thou remember to pass in to those
parties, whether thou can carrye nothing besides thy virtue and vices of
mind, When soever therefore thou shall dye, will come to memory not thy riches,
but thy sinful offenses, not thine honor or auctoritye, but thy hope and
faith of Salvation. For at that instant (I omit thy former myseryes) all
things shall be subverted, and to thy sight the hole world shall be turned to
the first Chaos. And as ye land does seem to move in y^ sight of such as sail
in the ship (and yet in deed does not) but it is the ship yt remoueth and
not ye land: so in the hour of death shall the whole world seem to be
subverted, when thou shalt for ever take leave of earthlye life, never again
to see thy worldly friends, nor thy riches wherein thou so much delighted.
Therefore if after death thou hopest of any life, why do thou not consume
thy time in virtue? or if none? yet why seek thou not thine own quiet? sith
for other life thou lokest not, nor hopest to return again to this. But
happilye it may be said that this sorrow is sweet (as it is to rub a
soore) A pleasure it is to be rich, to govern, to be praised and to oppress
others, and this is ye uttermost mark of man's felicitye. O foolish
imagination: but let that pass, so thou disprove not others of sounder
opynion. Yet (if without offense I may so do) let me ask why men like unto
children do build houses that will by and by fall down? why do they vainlye
travail, not only in body, but also in mind? Yet let us a while convert our
speech to other matter (for I am enforced many ways to degresse from our
purpose) and let us first declare why my former book became so long: and
therewythall show that for all calamityes (if any seem intolerable) there is
one remedy. It was therefore with great diligence approved y^ death is not to
be nombred among the evils: for seeing the mean to come thereunto is open to
all men, none (but such as willinglye are) can iustlye be called unhappy.
Tiberius suruayinge his pryso^ers, was asked by one of them how sone he
should dye? answered* I am not as yet reconsyled unto thee. A true answer
surely in respect of the matter, but tyra^nous if y^ consider the meaning. And
this was one other cause why my last book was ye longer. For against al sorts
of myseryes three special remedies we have, Death, Wisdom, and Fortune. They
are commonly constrained to use y^ help of death, that cannot take commoditye
of ye other too, being fallen into those calamities which seem the greatest.
Wherefore Damidas the Lacedemonian seemed discretelye to aunsweare one saying
unto him, that unless the Lacedaemonians were reconsyled to Philippus, they
should be in great hazard (for at that time the Lacedaemonians were the
kings enemies, who had won Peloponesus:) O cowardly man quoth Damidas what
can be intolerable to us if we fear not to die? In like manner a boy of
Lacedemon being taken by Antigonus, and sold in services meeete for free men,
did willinglye yield himself to take pains, but when he was employed to vile
works (and among y^ rest, to emptye vrinals) he refused to do it. For which,
when his master did sore threate^ him, he forthwt climed upon the top of the
house, and said, now shalt thou know whom thou have boughte, and
therewithal cast himself down headlonge. So Crassus being taken prisoner
and fearinge dishonor, with his ryding rod he struck out the eye of a
barbarous soldier, who moved with ire forthwyth did slay him. A common
experience it was in ye old time, by willing death to eschew long or shameful
kinds of dyinge. And if I should write the names only of such as in the
reigns of Nero, Caligula, and T^berius, did willingly kill themselves, the
historye would be to long, or if I rehearsed the number, no man would believe
me. Now whilst we speak of these voluntarye deaths, it comes to memory,
that not long since in the Cittye of Venis there lived a certain Apoticarye,
he for some great offense being condemned to dye, desired to speak with his
brother, who in kissing him delivered certain poison which he brought in his
mouth closed wtin a nut shel, by force whereof, after a few hours he dyed:
whereby he saved himself from longer sorrow, and eschewed the reproach of
dishonorable death. We read y^ some men to avoid extreme sickness, have
voluntarily ended their lives: of which number was Pomponius Atticus, a famous
man extremelye tormented with a grievous disease, and at length fynding some
rest, pyned himself for not falling into his former pains. In like manner dyed
Corellius Rufus to avoid the pains of the gout. But our Laws do not permit
any man to procure his own death: and for good reason: For that nothing
should be intolerable to a Christian man (only extreme tormente) which the
Law does not allow, yet by law is permitted. Now let us prove y^ besides this
intolerable sorrow (and y^ not altogether except) there is nothing that can
make a man discouraged, and that all men being wise, are equallye happy and
unhappy. So as I may think with Socrates, yt if all men's cares and euilles
were by one assente laid togethers on one heap, and equallye divided to
every man alike, after we had seen the greatness of others greeues, we would
choose to take upon us our own, rather then to abide the chance in division:
because each man knows his own evils, and is ignorant how great the greeues
of others be, which is the reason why each man thinks himself most unhappy.
In discourse whereof two things may be objected: the one, y^ this book can
only profit those that be learned: and also without this, the learned by
readinge of Cicero, chiefelye his books, De Finibus bonorum, his Tusculane
questions, his Paradox, and De Senectute, Plutarchus, Petrarchus and Boethius,
with diverse others, shall find no small remedy in all calamities. And how shall
the simple and unlearned sort (as is the most part of the people and many
gentlemen also) take profit of this book? So as in comfortinge the learned I
shall seem presumptuous, and for y^ unlearned superfluous. But I need not
fear to be herein accused, because (as at the beginning. I (...) other books
were made for others ^se, but this only for my self, which though it cannot
compare with the eloquente of Cicero, the grauitye of Plutark, the subtiltye of
Petrark, or Philosophye of Boethius, yet is well lyked of my self, for that
reason I alleged at the beginning in children, y^ every one loves his own
work. Yet have we erred? who knows it not? but those errors are tolerable
which harm not others, and proceeds of nature. The other whereof I must
accuse my self, is, that some will happilye say, that when a man enjoys
health, he may easelye counsel the sick: which is as much as to persuade
with vain words, that in works we do not perform, and therefore in speech
only do make a show of virtue. Of which blame Cicero, Plutarchus, Petrarcha
and Aristotle himself do excuse me, because they extolled magnanimity and yet
in aduersitye did not show it, and chiefelye Cicero, who of all others
declared himself most bace and abject of mind. The others endured no great
aduersitye, for besides a little time in banishmente they lived rich and
favored with Princes, and that worthilye. Also it is not requisite that all
good men, though they be ^aliau^t of mind, with peril of their persons should
put their valor in proof, the one is a trial of fortune, the other of virtue.
Neither is it ever necessary that such as say well, should also (...) for
truth sometimes is maintained by wicked (...). But although by dissembling I
might escape these reprehensions: yet where I say that for allaye of mine own
grief this labor is taken in hand, hardlye it is allowed in reason that
they that (...) always lived in prosperity, can (...) others comfort in
aduersitye. For if a man would so do, yet were there small good liekly to
follow. This book shall therefore gain the more (...) with others, that I my
self have been in my (...). And although (as erst I said) every man may praise
virtue, yet is it not the part of those y^ be (...) to direct a life
contrary to their own words. How can we lead the like life, either in
fortitude or patience, or declare y^ same to others, if we have always lived
in prosperity? Therefore should I omit y^ greatest and most necessary part of
this book, If I leave untold, y^ (as I think by divine de^^nye) I was
begotten, borne, and brought up, in great misery, and so have almost til this
day lived. For such as do persuade others to sustain great pain, if they
themselves have done the like, thereby they procure their words both credit and
auctoritye to be the rather believed of others. So did (...), Pho^ion, Socrates,
Plato, Cato, all the Prophets and holy men, yea y^ author of al good JESUS
CHRIST. Yet have I not mdured these worthy men because I would^ seem to
contend with them is virtue, but rather follow their order of life. And the
more barely I was borne, y^ more may others (if they will) hope to excel my
(...) in aduersitye. You shall therefore first understand, that in y^ time of
pestilence I was conceived, my mother as (I think) vndeliuered became partaker
of my misery and was forced to fly. The 8. day of the (...) of October, in
the year of Gra^^. 1501. half dead came* I into this world, when all men
dispayri^g of life by virtue of a bath made of vine I was recey^^d: within three
months next after I lost two of my brethren and one sister, the plague
continuing in our Cittye. The sickness spreadinge more abroad in Pa^^a, sodeinly
of y^ same death died my foster father. Afterward I was bouldly and charitably
r^c^yued into y^ hands of Isiodo^^^ Resta (...) man and friend to my father,
where (...) few days I fell sick diseased with the drop^^e (...) of the liver,
yet nevertheless preserved either through the ire or merryed of GOD, I know
not on^ kind of (...) was afterward vnapproued, (...) I attained eyghte
years of age. At which time I became servant to my father till I (...) the
age of ninetene. O Lord even thus I passed the flower of my youth both without
delight and study. At length perceuinge that by force I might not compel my
father, entreat him I could not, and to deceive him I thought it dishonestye:
for love of learning I intended to have entered into Religion. My mother then
saying her want of children, entreated my father to put me to schole, where I
reme^bringe my time already lost, and the shortness of man's life, earnestly
applied my self to study, ever in fear lest my father hearing some evil
report should take me away. And there as one never in schole before, I was
not a little troubled with hardness of the latin tongue. Yet among all these
labors my father did grant me leave to study the Science of Geometry and
Logic, wherein although he helped me only with a few good lessons, books and
liberty, yet through study at spare times I did attain unto them. Then
absence increasing my fathers good opinion, the plague being great he dyed,
having newlye begone to love me. At that time y^ cruel wars began in our
country, being poor and void of all other help, through great care and
diligence of my mother I was sustained, when my small patrimonye suffised not.
For such as it was, I did consume it in the office of (...) University.
Neither had I any other (...) then Chesse play to procure my self a lyuinge.
So being from one misfortune to another transported, I settled my self in ye
town of PAVIA* where by practice of Physic (though poor lie) I sustained
my self and my familye, as one (that besides I had nothing) was indebted by
reason of my vain office. Then by my mothers letters was I called home to my
country, where I found nothing well ordered, nor no friend, my cos^^s sued in
law against me, and in our College of Physicians I was repulsed, being
suspected a bastard because my father did so evil entreat me. Neither can I
boast of any favor found in the Physicians of Padoa, where having twice
deserved to have been made Doctoure, I was notwithstanding iniustlye denied
my grace, and at last through the earnest suite of the Podestate, scantly
granted. A shameful act, if mine own evil fortune, and not their leudenes
did offer me so great iniurye. Then dispayring of all good, I fell into y^
sickness which we call Consumption, a sickness (as the Physicians say)
incurable. And yet (whether through good prayer or for other purpose preserved)
after seven months, without help of Physic and beyond al expectation I
escaped Consider now what cares, what sorrow and vexation my mind endured:
when on the one side mine own great poverty, and on y^ other my mothers
unwieldy age was considered. Besides this, y^ frowardnes of my friends, the
wrong as I thought of Physicians, the threatening of a great man, the despair
of health, lack of friends, and want of abydinge place, did altogether molest
me. I wanted wherwt to live: labor I could not, and to beg I thought it
shameful, Amids so many calamityes whereinto vnfrendlye fortune, the hardness of
my father, y^ mislyking of kinsefolke, and the mysery of the time had cast me,
through good counsel I eschewed (at least wise) y^ presence of my myseries by
returning to the City, where many friends did comfort and help me, and
through Gods grace sodeinlye I escaped my sickness. Afterward to meet with
mysorder of sickness I used abstine^ce, against the affliction of fortune,
patience, against poverty, sparing, against suite, diligence, against
repulses, y^ study of learning. And always from the beginning till this time,
this book (though not then written yet conceived did greatly comfort me. Thus
returned to my country I found my mother in health. Before which time, eue^
til this day having suffered many myseryes (perhaps to others intolerable)
by disdain I overcame them al. First I was releued and defended by my good
Patron the reverend bishop Phillippus Archintus both for virtue and
learning, a wise and worthy man. After, through commendacion of that
excellent Prince Alphonsus Auolus, (to whom I dedicated my book De
eternitatis Archanis) I was by procuremente and singular favor of Franciscus
S^o^dratus the noble Senator, chosen into the order with the good lyking of
every honest man, being then almost fortye years of age. Such has been y^
course of my life, crased with continual and great calamityes. Whereunto what
my study has helped you may conjecture. As for greater gifts of fortune I
did contemn them, with like mind that I suffered all offered iniuryes.
Wherefore to the continuance of my life and recovery of quiet, I have not
obtained of God any thing more profitable, then patience: for by virtue thereof
amids my greatest myseries, I found favor and help in them of whom I never
had any good deserved. For Franciscus Bonafidus a good and faithful Physician,
so stoutlye defended my cause against the wrong of the Physicians of PADOA, as
no brother for a brother would have done more.

Great assistaunce did I also find in Franciscus Cruceius a most vprighte
Lawyer, my suite dependinge in the Cittye of Mylan: Who was also the occasion
why in diverse sayings, teachinge, wrytinge, and inuentinge, I bestowed much
travail. And albeit a mind vnmolest may best do all other things: yet
have I found that invention requires a quiet mind, which may appear by
diverse and sondrye my Books. etc.

But of my self perhaps I have to much spoken, not in mine own
commendation, but for examples sake. For what praise can base parentage be,
the displease of my father, friends, and Countreye, my health hindered, my
fortune vnfrendlye, mine estate poor, and next to beggerye: who so therefore
does think me to have spoken all this for glory, which tends rather to
shame, must needs condemn me of great follye. And he will think me
utterly unwise, who so ever judges me to have spoken these things for
ostentation, which are rather matters to be ashamed of it (leaving our
purpose) we yield to the common opynion of others. But it was mine intent by
one example to teach these three things. First y^ without a conscience gilty
of evil, no man is miserable. Secondly, y^ the valiency of mind does greatly
help, not only to contentacion, but also to procure the mutacion of fortune.
Lastly y^ the reading of this book was profitable both to persuade unhappy
men with pacient mind to suffer adversity, and those that be happy in their
own opynion, to be modest and continent. Besides yt (as is already said)
though me^ do want this or such like books to read, yet shall they in their
myserye be deprived of all comfort? surely no. For so should we take upon us a
thing almost divine. Because this only is necessary to save thee from
mysery, y^ thou persuade thy self thou art not miserable. Which rule in one
word may be taught and learned of every man. And whosoever shall not conceive
this reason which is auaylable to persuade ye wise, then let them read this or
some such book as necessary. But the simple sort, and common people, believing
this rule, need not these reasons which our law of life does also approve. But
such as would instruct others, may receive of this Book some profit, though
I untaught have written it only to my self, and being used to demonstrations,
have believed what follows death: yet yt here on earth should be neither
felicitye nor misery, only by reason of aunciente writers I could not prove.
I thought therefore expedient not only to reduce their sayings together, but
also to add thereunto what soever I could. Wherefore to begin at the
discommodityes of pouertye, seeing the burden of them seems to some
intolerable, and as Menander affyrmeth. No burden is more heavy then
pouertye, And on the contrary part Riches have always been had in price. The
saying of the Poet is yet unchanged.

Now wealth does vvield the world, and wealth does worship gayn
Yea wealth does vvyn the friends at will, the pore each vvher co^playn
But now let us not at all adventures, but orderly as we can (because it
contains many points) enter into our matter. First we must prove that the
poor man is no less happy then the rich. Secondly that poverty is no
impediment to glory. Thirdly that there is nothing more hurtful to a poor man then to desire to become rich. Fourthly that after death riches does
neither profit the dead man nor his posterity. And to y^ first part this I
say, that in a poor common weal the felicity is more then in the rich, there
is ever found less hate, less ambicion. and less disorder. Titus Liuius
tells that albeit the common weal of Rome, was at the beginning afflicted
with sundry sedicions, yet among so furious a people besides words nothing was
done, so as without judgment was executed. Tiberius Gracchus was the first
man that without law was put to death, six hundred twenty and one year,
after the buildinge of that City, even then newly attained to some riches.
Plinius witnesses how great commendacions the ambassadors of the
Carthaginences (being enemies to the people of Rome) did give unto the Romans
for their mutual love. But after that riches grew to estimacion in Rome,
nothing continued in assurance, nothing vndisquieted the people without
concord, the Senate without aucthority, slaughter without respect, government
without law, wicked life without controlment, common persons without
reverence, youth without bashfulnes, old men without gravity. Al things were
profaned and mixte, with the dregs of slaves and strangers From hence sprung
up y^ fruit of al mischief, whereby it appears plain, that miserye follows
the footsteps of rich commonweals, and quietness proceeds from poverty. The
Lacedaemonians likewise while they lived almost in beggary were glorious and
happy.

In witness whereof we find that when the king of Persia did send certain
ambassadors to Lacedemo^, they were there through fury of the people robbed and
slain. There was in Lacedemon a temple of Talthibius, Agamemnons crier, a
sanctuary for ambassadors, which upon a time not yelding to the sacrifycers any
lucky prophesies (for that was taken for a religeon) it moved the penitente
Lacedaemonians that instead of the ambassadors slain, as many (that is to say
too) should offer themselves, to death. Then Sparthius and Bulis offered
theymselues departing thence to Lacedemon, before they should come to Xerses
son of Darius, (who before had sent the ambassadors) they came to Hidernes y^
kings Liutenant, who entertayning them courteously, after he knew the cause of
their coming, and the greatenesse of their minds, persuaded them rather to
choose the Kings favor, then death, for Xerses would make them rulers over
all Greece, and that he him self was one of his Lords, whose State he willed
them to consider and if they would follow his counsel, they should not refuse
the kings frendshippe.

Then aunsweared they, Thou knoweste not Hidernes how joyful a thing the
pleasure of liberty is, where of thou ever seruinge a king had never proof,
but if once thou might taste thereof, thou would prefer it before all
the kingedomes of Percia. Such felicitye hadd these men in their Commonweals,
either of poverty, or at the lest wise with poverty. And yet was the life of
the Lacedaemonians (as before I said) hard, by reason of their use in wars,
notwithstanding, by the benefyte of pouertye (having no money at all) so
dear to them was liberty, as they esteemed it above a kingedome.

But omyttinge to speak of Commonweals let us inquyre of private Life, where
in is greater Pleasure, greater Quiet, then in kingdoms, neither can a King
be assured of friends, neither can he feel the chiefest sweet of Venus
joys, being in dout of desembled love. For well you know the chief and
greatest delight of that pleasure is, to love and be loved. And how can he know
himself beloved, when fear of power or hope of reward do make the willinge
suspected. It is no marvel th^rfore that so many do declare themselves
unthankful to princes, for they cannot be accounted as friends, that either
for hope, fear, or daily reward, be entertained. Therefore Philippus
reproved his son Alexander, because with giving he thought to gain the good
will of people. Albeit the life of princes is most noble, yet wanting love and
friendship, by no means can be accounted happy, because they are to seek of
such benifyts as do nearest approach the happiness of mortal men. But let us now
consider that although in these things they were equal to pore men, whether
then the life of Princes, or common persons, were more pleasant. The poor man
rising earlye, after his hands be washed, resorteth to his labor, where having
a while exercised him self (besides the help of his hongry supper the night
before) with his fellow in labor, where, with hongrye Sauce they savor all
sorts of meat, what soever comes to hand seems pleasant, delicate, and
precious. In dyning time, they common of pleasant matters, and tell what hope
he has of time to come. This company breeds no discention, this diet
causes no sacietye, no disdayn, no suspicion. The diner ended, after pawsinge
a while, they return to accustomed labor, wherein they get good appetite to
supper. There being met, they want no mirth, gentill ieastes, and pleasante
tales according to the quality of the guests, Then to bed they go, whereunto
preparing themselves, the shining stars do stir them up to look to
heaven, and remember that at length they shall come into that most blessed
country, promising in mind (if any thing were sinfully done) thamendment of
their offenses. Thus wearied with long labor by day so sone as he comes in
bed, suddenly he falls in to sound sleep. In such a sort lyuinge, the simple
man gayneth healthy and long life, neither troubled with repentance of passed
time, nor fear of that will after follow. When holy days do happen he rests
his weary bones. Then wandreth he at will, and if ought therebe in town
pleasant or worthy sight, he may without offense see it.

He veweth the suburbs, the green fields and men dowes, he meets his
companions and takes each where his disport. He minds no displeasing
immaginacions, he ioyeth in life, and lives prepared for death. And if happily
he be learned, may be some what the more accounted happy.

But the Princes life is clear contrary. He having shaken of his yesterdayes
surfyte ryseth up, his mouth not well in taste, but on the one side offended
with unsweet savor of his own stomach, on the other distempered with evil
rellesse, Then assemble on every hand his Guard, soldiers, servants,
parasytes flatterers, and suitors, his men (...) about him, they exclaim, cry
out, and complain, because all things are out of good order. The porters keep
back the importunate people, and some perhaps they promise liberty to pass in.

And if the prince be of good disposicion secretly he examineth his affairs,
which fynding to be infynite in number, he lotheth his own life. For some
things he dispayreth to bring to pass: and some things he has great care
of. Now he blames y^ infidelity of some persons. Now he accuses the sloth
of others, now he fyndeth fault with some men's couetise.. Now he forecasteth
some necessary matters. Now he hears prayers. Now he harkneth to suytes
wherein y^ more attentive he is, the moore is his trouble, and care of mind, so
at last he refers all to his Counsel. Thus you se that as to a prince
nothing is displeasaunt, so does he nothing with pleasure. When diner time
comes, then is he solemplye served with Dishes, Platters, Cups, Carpets,
Wine Sallets, Sauce, meat, bread, Dainties of strange devise and all sorts of
princely provision, But being thus settled at meat, either he has no company
at all or having, they be commonly inferiors, and forced therefore to be
placed far beneath him, who though outwardly merrelye disposed, yet inwardely
laden with many cares. And as the Poet says. VVythin whose fearful face
the palenes did appear, of great and grievous love. But now to return to a
king who fed with delicate daynties and clothed in rich (...) glutted with
yesterdayes cheer) does neither (...) his meat, nor take pleasure in sight of
any things he can behold. But clothed with all delicacye, he leans back
looking round about, and at (...) chooses some one meat that least does
offend him. And admit he could take delight in eating or drinkinge, should
that much pleasure him? surely no: Because all he does is joined with
suspicion. He fears his meat, his drink, his stole his Chair, his
Trenchour, his napkin, and knife for in every of them may (...) secret ^oyson
What pleasure can eatinge be, beset with so many suspycions? Were it not better
to Suppe with simple sallets, roots, and fruit, then with all these rich
dishes and dangerous delicates? what can be worse then suspicion, where
peril may also lurk and fear is never away? which Dionisius by good ensample
proved, For when Damocles had long flattered him (as parasites do always
follows Tirantes) for proof of such felicitye he caused Damocles to put on
his princely apparel placed him in his own princely chair, and set before
him all the pomp, joys, and riches of Sira^usa: which done by a small threde
he hanged over his head a sharp sword naked, which Damocles saying, he durst
not stretch out his arm, nor make any mocio^ to (...) himself of those
delicates which were set befoo^^ him but finding himself on every side beset
with fear, he prayed Dionisius to deliver him from this royal feast, where he
learned so much as never after he desired to become a king. Moreover to
speak of a princes life when he has royally and su^ptuously di^ed, and all
his dishes with great ceremony taken away, incommeth ieasters, iuglers and
minstrels: some they craftily flatter, some they back bite, and some they seek to
disgrace: some fall to laughinge, and some to mopping and mowing, while others
do sound the instruments. In every of which actions, y^ more kyndly a man
plaieth the para^^te, the more he is allowed of. Duringe these doings the
prince with feigned cheer, museth on other matters, more waightye: and happelye
occasioned by some aduertisementes written unto him, to counsel be goes:
where (...) matters be called in (...) Neither pleasant to be hard nor good in
the execution. Because some are unjust, some evil, and some perilous. Such
displeasant imaginacions a king has, now he fyndeth offense, now he
discouerethe treasons, now feels ingratitude, now he reuealeth suspicion now
he discovers error, and evil procedynge of ministers, and now he fyndeth
y^ in fydelity of princes. His mind thus molested, he sigheth and soroweth
hoping to remove the memory of such imaginations, perhaps he hunteth, rydeth,
or beholds others ryding. Whither forth^^ the people run, and bring that to
mind which he would willingly have left unthought of. Then after speech of
sundry matters, to supper he goes, whereof he fyndethe the like annoye that
his (...) did offer him. At length to bed, where before sleep he museth of
many displeasant matters, how many men are* or must be executed, though not
altogether justly, yet necessarily, What practices are made, what fear, what
envy, what injury, what war, what spoil, what subversion of Cities, what
suspicion of death, and last of all desires either not to be, or else to enjoy
a more quiet life.

And thus from one fancy to an other, he turns and tosseth his mind, yet in
the end finds all things so confuse, as nothing is assured or parmane^t and
thus he desires to sleep, which is not easlye had his stomach being
ouercharged with a surfytinge supper. And admit he does sleep, in sleapynge
he meets unquiet ymaginacyons, fearful dreams and visyons. Though his bed
be rych, soft and delycate, yet his rest often times hard and short. What life
is this then sinful of cares and anxitye of mind. And as Antigonus answered
his son Demetrius telling him, that more mildely he behaved him self
toward his subjects then stood with his honor? O son (quod he) thou
knoweste not that a kingedome is nothing else then a glorious servitude. So
Tymo^ion the most happy of all the Grecian Dukes, said that princes were the
ministers and servants of many. Besides all these cares which kings are
combred wtall, such as are Tyrants be occupied with incest rape, murder of
innocents, poison, threatninges, violence, torments, and sacrilege, yea fear
and suspicion are on every side at hand. As many there be whom a tirante
fears as are those that live in fear of him, which the verse of Laberianus
against Caesar the Dictator does well set forth, saying. Of force he must
fear many: whom daily many fear. What guard is so vigila^t as can defend him:
He suspecteth his wife, his children, his paramour, his cupbearer, his barber.
A misery sure to great to be wished to enemies, or y^ most wicked persons.
But now I see much has been said of felicity though confusely. Let us
therefore at length more inperticuler touch every on. And first I say y^ life of
a poor man is longer, more healthy, and strong, then y^ which rich me^ have,
neither do I think y^ and do dout thereof. Only three men I do remember ye have
passed the age of a hundred years, and all they almost beggars, one was a
Carpenter, the other Apothicarye, and the third a ploweman. How can his life
belong that lives in lust, idleness, and surfytyng, whereof richmen do
scarcely eschew any one How diffring therefore be the orders of men's lives the
one in abstinence and exercise, the other in banqueting and evil rule. Ever
continuinge in ydlenes or preposterous labor, watching by night and slepinge
the day? Hereof comes dropsies, consumptions, and goutes to richemen: But
what poreman almoost does complain of them? The complexion of their faces
doothe often times also show what life they lead. A poor man other whiles
has moore beautiful Chlydren then has the rich man, and in having them as
fortunate. They many times are barren or have children very weak and sicklye:
but poremen never want, yea rather are ouerburdened. And the reason there of
apparent. For children are made of their parents feed, which being
plentiful gives the child a lively spyryte and strong body, both which are
increased by labor. In noble personages it is far otherwise: if they mete
seldom they make many children, but weak ones: if they mete often none at
all. But poor people have many children, or not, yet some, and those strong.
For which cause Licurgus ordained a good law, y^ when women were with child,
they should be enforced to labor. Besides all this pore men have liberty, whereof
princes possess little. Poremen do visit every place, but princes may not, and
where they go, great preparacion is made. So nothing is done suddenly, but long
thought upon. A prince is enforced, to tarry y^ leisure and flouth of his
servants, to bear with their errors. In summer notwithstanding all provision
he is annoyed with duste. In winter he shonneth the cold, and yet do feel it.
But the poor man in summer exersiseth him self in the shadow: and in winter
with labor drives the cold away, and that with pleasure. The richman
carefully defends his own Lands, but the poor man beholds all, and the
seldomer he has liberty to se the greater pleasure he has in saying. Neither
do thou ymagin I say otherwise then I think: my self have never wished any
thing less then to have gardens in the suburbs, for the reason abouesayde,
that other men's for their rarenes do more delight and to have them mine own
were nothing profitable, All men do study to live, which lyuinge the poor man
by labor does get, his Nature is strong, his body vncorrupt. But happelye
thou wylt prefer art before nature. I yield to thine opinion. We see that art
though not exquisyte, does also help pore men, but to rychmen art is an
hynderaunce. And some things which pore men account vile and bace, are with
rych men had in great price. As lettyse, apples, grapes, and radish And
contrary wise rych men make none account of partrydge, hares, peacockes, and
plouers, which pore men esteem for excellent delycatees. What choice is there
in things, when it is only change, that breeds the dyfference? Cicero
tells that Suppynge with Lentulus he surfyted of sweet Beetes. The like
reason there is to prove that a poor man sleapeth more soundly then the rich.
And as men say.

The grassy flag, the silk more soft
does yield the sleapes with great delight:
But stately beds in towers alofte,
the richmans rest with fears, affright.
The rich man troubles his mind with cares. The pore man cares only by labor
to get his living The richmans cares are earnest and manifold, how to keep his
wealth, how to bestow it, and which way to account with his receivers. The pore
man cares only for himself, The rich man is enforced to keep others, whereof
grows so great sorrow as somtymes we read y^ they have not only la^guished,
but also killed themselves. The poor man with loss of goods is neither so
tormented as he kills himself nor so desperate as to occasion others to lay
hand upon him. One only fear the poreman has, which is, lest he lack
wherewith to live. And yet what a number of helps has he? Friends, aliaunce,
kins^olke, good men, and hospitalles, Neither shall thou almost find any
(unless they be dishonest) y^ can want any thing. For whosoever gets by art any
thing, ought not from day to day spend all, but ever keep somewhat in store,
which rule observed, there is no danger of beggary.

Thus we see the wantes of pore men many ways supplied. And among the rest a
poor man in time of famine may live by seruinge the rich, who are subject
to such inconuenients as can not be eschewed as Imposicion of Princes,
subtilty of servants, craft of heirs, deceit of enemies and men unknown.
Whereof came the Satyr.

Some hourding up great heaps of gold, not knovving how to use the^,
Like sacred stuff does store up wealth: so folly does abuse them,
But who needs to marvel or think I have alleged a feigned reason, when I
my self have seen an hundred men by sundry means through their riches to
perish without fault. Others have been poisoned by their familiers, others slain
with the sword others hanged, some robbed by the way, as was Curtius in our
city, and Aluisius Donatus in yt town of Saccensi. But of such as have
perrished through honger, in my life I have scarcely seen four, and they not
with out fault. For ensample whereof yt were superfluous to resite any
histories, the proof thereof being daily seen. Therefore among so few richmen,
seeing so many for riches do miscary, and among so many poor men so few do
perrishe for honger: is not in that respect the condition of rich men much
worse then y^ state of the pore? The rich man provides shift of apparel and
household stuf, not only needful, but also burdenous, which asks care,
kepinge, and daily reparacion. And yet god knows no gold is more wholesome to
drinck in the^ glass, neither is Silver more cleanly then stone, nor brass
more mete to boil in then the pitchers of earth. Garments the more simple
they be, y^ more wholesome and less burdenous. A man comethe into this world
naked, he needs a garment but no burden. The Romans, and Lacedaemonians,
were at the beginning so basely appareled, as that kings had them in
admiracion. As touching nedeles garments what should I say other then as
Socrates said, beholdinge the wares to be sold in the fair: How many things
are there I need not? He accounted them next to the Gods that wanted fewest
things. The gods have no want to be supplied, and all things super fluous is
troublesome, chieflye in apparel. Duste do decay it, water does rot it, the
thief does steal it, thy friend do wear it, the walls do rub it, wearinge
does make it threede bare, thy neighbor does borow it and seldom restore it
so good as it was lent. What is this apparel, other the^ a troublesome and
burdenous brauerye: If thou regard their beautye, painted clothes be best, or
if thou respect the ambicion. that shall hereafter be declared.

But let us consider whether love be more toward the poor or the rich. A
poor man is simple and truly loved, the richman is either feared or honored.
And if happily he be loved none assurance he can have thereof. But percase it
may be said that a richman is more sure from injury? surely no A poor man may
best be revenged, for nothing he has to lose, nor that he fears to forgo.
The rich man careful both of life and living suffers many injuries. It is
magnanimity of mind and no worldly goods yt makes a man to live in security,
yet perchance you say: A rich man may most safely offend others. But how? A
poor man perfourmeth his offense alone in person: but the rich man having
committed offense (though none other peril were) has fellows in offendinge
and ever fears to be by them detected. He has also champio^s and ministers
to whom he is indebted which I thinck the Poet knew speaking of Domitianus
whom for his cruelty he called Nero saying in this wise. But would to God
he rather had, his time consumde in toys.
Then cast such care on cruel deeds, or sought such wicked joys,
When noble states he pluct a down, and men of worthy fame,
His subjects love forthwith he lost, and gaynd eternal blame.
But when in blood of simple souls, he bathde his bloody hand,
Without renenge he felt the smart, and could no longer stand.
Such guerdon God does give, to men of cruel mind
that seek the lives of harmless folk.
Then I pray you what has a rich man better the^ a poor? Life, health,
children, meat, sleep, friends, liberty, security, delight, quiet. garments,
vte^siles, love, rest, with all other things more desired. It is therefore no
marvel that Horacius said. Happy is he whom God has provided
suffycientlye vvhervvith to live.
He lives in best estate that possesses so much as may mainteyne him to
live, which as Aristoteles says is so much as is needful, for a man's own
person and his woman's. The Prophet does witness the same saying: O Lord geeue
me neither riches nor pouertye. And if nedely I must decline from the mean,
Riches are moore peryllous then poverty. For poverty is relieved by industrye
and art, but there is no remedy against the discommodityes of Riches. Also
the fall from riches is great and without recovery, but poverty diffreth little
from sufficiency where of to live. In pouertye a man hazardeth only his body,
but in vsyng riches both body and Soul is adventured. Finally if pouertye be
removed all inconveniences that it does bring be also taken away. But such
as love riches, they fallinge do notwithstanding keep still their
imperfections both of body and mind. Poverty therefore undoubtedly is more
happy and more assured then riches, yea and more fyt to attayn to glory. For
who but poverty did first find out the arts as says. Theocritus, O
Diophante^, Pouertye is the only mistress and inuenter of labor and art.
Surely unless I be deceived rich men were never partakers of this praise.
And when these Arts were invented, such as had been in estimacion were also
pore. And first to begin with Philosophy ye flower of all knowledge, the
Princes thereof were pore men. Socrates, Plato, Aristoteles, and Cleantes, who
all night drew water, and al day studied Philosophy But this is the less to be
meruayled at y^ Socrates (as Seneca says) being in the market and seeing a
cloak to be sold, taking leave of his friends said: feign would I buy that
cloak, if I had monye wherewith to do it. The praise of his death and also all
they that enuyed his glory do witness he was almost a beggar. Plato became
rich by his second voyage into Sicilia, Aristoteles long time lived pore, and
almost an old man was enriched by Alexander.

I think it Needelesse to tell others as Homerus and Virgilius the Lanternes
of Poetrye, the one a beggar, the other a poor man. The whole route of
Gramarians and Orators were such kind of men, Pompilius, Andromicus,
Orbilaus, Valerius, Cato, Laenius, Julius Higinius. The Epistle of Plinius
Caecelius reports that Quintilianus was meanelye furnished with wealth.
Iuuenalis mocking Statius the Poet says he begged.

Unless perhaps some tragedye, he has in store to tell for honger let him
pyne. But now a days that rich men can gain glory in schools I doubt not.
Let us therefore talk of arms wherein they are no more happy then in
learning: What say you to Paulus Aem^lius, who being dead had not left whereof
to make his wife a dowrye. Also Marius and Sextorius were Romans of base
condition, yet on the one depended the safetye of Rome, on the other some
whiles great peril. What riches had Camillus the terror of the war? Or
Scipio Affricanus that for debte had lain in prison, if Gracchus had not
helped. Arator Cincinatus, Calatinus Fabritius that fought with Pirus, Valerius
Publicola, Menenius Agrippa, Q. Aemilius, Aristides, Photion, Meltiades, Cimon,
Spartacus, Viriatus, all y^ Dukes of Lacedemonia, and as chief of them
Lisander were all called from base condition. And whom can you allege against
these? the desperate Alexander or Caesar the subuerter of his country, or
rather Sylla with his proscriptions. There is no doubt therefore but that in
the judgment of the discrete, poor men are to be preferred. But now a days
through persuasion of parasites, princes do not train up Captains, but
rather bye them. Men are not advanced for virtue but riches and parentage.
Whereof it grows that gouerners, maiestrates and chiefetaynes, are not
appointed for desert, but through favor of nobility. And though thereof they
get no good, yet this co^moditye they gain, y^ through custom and ye
smalnes of y^ number that is advanced, rich men only do possess all
dignities. But counselors cannot err? And would to God that Princes we no
more deceived. For truly they do well in preferringe nobility, yet therwithal
to consider that those are worthyest honor, whom virtue commends. The one is
sufferable, but the other intolerable: when neither virtue nor good parentage,
but false flatterye is the only way to advancement. And such kind of men
commonly are void both of virtue, learning and honestye. But now I confess
we have a little to far digressed from our purpose. For more speedye end
of this Book let us consider what is the occasion of glory, saying poor
men in discipline of war, learning, and invention of arts, do gain
reputation: whether rich men are admitted to glory in the arts them selves?
when in deed they never knew them. But admit that riches are more precious
then pouertye? Alas what myserye can come from the gods greater then the desire
to have them: which the more we get, the more it increases. It is labor
without end and not unlike the turning of Sysiphus stone. Who (as Poets feign)
for reueling the secrets of heaven is forced to remain in hell, and there
continuallye to carrye a heavy stone to the top of a steep hill, which
forthwith falls down, but he without ceasinge does follow, and on his
shoulders does bring it up again: Even so to get riches is nothing else then
to toil they body in continual travail, and exercise thy mind in
innumerable cares. But admit thy luck be good: what happiness can it be in thy
life if thou cannot use the wealth thou do possess? as Horatius writes.

Exceeding care of coin, does mortal men begile,
and love of worldly pelf, all other joys exile.
And if liberallye and bountifullye thou will use them, what a madness were that
with so long labor to become rich, and so suddenly to consume all. The women
called Danaides being condemned to hell for their detestable murder, do
suffer there none other tormente, then continuallye to draw water. And admit
goods were with labor to be gotten? whether do thou desire them for thine
own use, or thy posteritye? when in the mean time thou neglectest thy quiet,
and pleasure of thine own life. Thou shortnest thy days, and hinder thy
health. Some me^ I have seen live a nigardlye life, only to the end to make
theymselues asumptuous tomb, and honorable burial. Which folly and
superfluous care Socrates laughed to scorn, when lying at the point of death
he refused a rich cloak which Apollodorus did offer unto him. For surely
there is among mortal men no vayner care, then the pomp of funerals, which I
think thou will confess and flee to the co^modityes of inheritance. Thou
seek to leave thy son rich, what heir can be better? yet in the mean
space thou labourest, thou carest, thou watchest, thou hazardest infamy, thou
offerest wrong, and chargest thy conscience, to the end thy son may spend,
consume, devout, and keep hauock. Whereby he becomes proud, slouthful,
mad, and in every respect for his riches the worse. But besides these euilles
(alas) how many enemies are gotten by seekinge of riches? oftentimes also men
do want a son, or having one, he proves such and of such conditions, as they
repent that ever they begot him. And sometimes we see that great inheritance
is cause of their destruction, which happens most often to the children of
Princes, who committed to the gouernmente of others are by them berefte both
of kingdom and life: as was Tryphon appointed to the tuition of Antiochus, by
whom it was by practice reported, that the child was greatly diseased with the
stone, and that he must in any wise for his only remedy be cut: which
done Tryphon not passinge the age of ten years, through the only grief of
his wound, and not otherwise grieved dyed, Cicero in his Oration for Sextus
and Roscius, does show what disco^modityes his great riches did bring wtal: and
among the rest (though the greatest) he was accused of murder. But seeing
among men of mean possessions, we see these practices dailye put in ure: it
is no marvel to hear that fathers have spoiled their sons, sons have
slain their fathers, and brothers have sought the life of brothers, only to
inherit worldly kingdoms. So as the saying of the Poet is well verifyed.

That faith did never long in Princes court abide. But to what end serves the
power of men's riches, yea though it be well gotten? what pleasure do thou
take to have about the number of servants and companions? what secret foes
art thou forced to keep, changing liberty for ambition? For a rich man in
deed is none other then a Peripatitian god, that is to say confyned by laws:
a servant, yea an improfitable servant. O foolish imagination of man, to
yield himself to so many labors, to muse on so many cares, to attempt so
many mischiefs, that loses so many pleasant days, only to make his son
rich. Not unlike the Moyles which fat and fair, are without use of sense,
constrained to serve in yoakes, and obey the bitte, yea sometimes do suffer
iniurye of the poor flees. But the children of poor men being wise, virtuous
and strong, have liberty to walk at will, disbordened of all kinds of care.
Being attained to ripe years they hunt, they fish, they hawk, they play and
wander where they think best. Is not this liberty to be preferred before K.
Cresus riches? But among such as have by inheritance come to great riches, the
most of them have consumed all. Neither can I think y^ couetise fathers on
their death beds, do feel greater tortormente, then to remember y^ those
riches: which with long labor they have gotten, shall be by their prodigal
sons in short space consumed, on strompets, dycinge, paracites, and
flatterers of court. I my self have seen a man whose father and gra^dfather
in fiftye years had gotten to the value of a thousand pounds, all which he
consumed in less then three years. The son of Ruinus having received from
his father a rich inheritance, fell into such a fransye as he lost both life and
gooddes. How many ways are laws offended? how many rebellions happen? how
many treasons? whereinto such as live in mean fortune do seldom fall. Besides
this, who has not a greedy heir, a son, a brother, or a brothers son y^
will not with one farthinge redeem thee? Yet such is the madness of men as
with loss of their own quiet they labor to make them rich. Therefore
saying riches does procure neither glory nor felicitye to our selves or our
posteritye: there is nothing worse then not having riches to desire them,
or go about to get them. But saying we^ mean not to persuade any thing
Rethoricallye, but rather according to the Philosophers examine whatsoever may
on either side be objected: me thinckes it may be said that every man
seeks riches, but no man wysheth for pouertye. Which reason albeit by diverse
arguments may be refuted, and happly truly, yet in this work there is nothing
more allowed of, then y^ simplicity of mind, so as reason should not proceed
of will, but rather that Will should follow Reason. To return therefore to
our purpose I say y^ whatsoever is by any creature required either for
commodity or necessity, y^ same creatures do naturally desire them. In which
desires brute beasts directed only by natural sense, do not transgress the
law of necessitye: But man having liberty of sense and reason to persuade
with himself, does eat, drink, and sleep, more then either commoditye or
necessity does require. So as though eating, drinking and sleeping, be things
natural, yet superfluously taken, do work effects contrary to nature. In like
manner are riches to be desired, not in abundance, but so much as suffyceth to
live: whatsoever is required more, is not only not good, but also contrary to
nature. And how can yt be good which is contrary to nature? This exceeding
desire of riches does not therefore proceed of imperfection of nature. Al men
naturally do desire riches, as meat or drink, not because excess of them is
natural, but because in them somewhat is natural, yt is to say, so much as
suffiseth wherewt to live. Which sufficiently we get, either by industry, as
those yt are learned in arts: or by revenue as gentlemen: or by consent as
friars: or by devotion of others as Courtiers and beggars: As therefore without
eating and drinking we cannot live, so is it lawful to desire riches. For to
have nothing, nor know which way to get, is contrary to nature. And yet as
saciety and dronkennes be not only evil, but also unpleasant, so is also
riches and auctority. But notwtstanding it may be objected that those
co^modityes which poor men are partakers of, as labor, exercise, industry,
patience and abstinence, may be enjoyed by them that be rich: and the choice of
both being in the rich man, he shoulld be the more happy. For if willinglye
we want pleasures, in wanting them is either none evil, or justly cannot so
be called. Yet whosoever thus thincketh does greatly err. Because a man being
brought up in delicacye, his mind becomes effeminate, his body tender,
and unfit to suffer travail. Nature accustomed to sundry meats, do make
dilicate digestion. And if any man so brought up do change his diet to poor
men's fare, he shortly becomes diseased, full of obstructions, and subject to
consumption. Or if they fall to travail, either by co^pulsion, or for
ambition, they grow unhealthy, sick of agewes, and in short space die. If any
of these fine eaters do apply themselves to earnest study, they commonly dye
in youth: as did Ioannes Picus Mirandola. A thing impossible it is, that a man
borne to great riches should become in learning excellent: unless at the
first he lived a poor life, or in his youth fell into some frensye. But
contrarywyse in the praise of pouertye it may be said as Dionisius said to
Aristippus, y^ poor men did beg of the rich, seek their houses, and live
of their lyberalitye. Yet if thou respect the necessity of things, it shall
appear that the necessitye of poor me^ is greater for the rich, then the
necessity of y^ rich for the poor. The rich man needs a Physician, a
barbar, a mulyte^^ a plowman, a cook: and which of them needs a rich man?
Notwythstanding the ambitious minds of men do make such to seem to govern
over poor men. Also the emulation in worldly glory, do make poor men seem to
have more need of the rich, then the rich of them. Yet if we respected
only necessitye, then should the rich have more occasion to seek out the
poor, then they to seek for them. Neither can any man doubt, but that
rich men do dailye for necessitye use the industrye of the poor: And if the
rich man's goods be needeful for the poor man's use, it is scarcelye once in
they care. Also the rich only for riches do gain reputacion, and in that
respect only thought meet for honor and auctoritye. But far otherwise it
is in the common weal of Venis, and was in Rome while it remained in glory:
far otherwise it was in Lacedemon, where pouertye was accounted a praise.
Far otherwise in Athens, where Photion, Aristides, Cimon and Miltiades:
continued long time in glory and aucthoritye. But in Cittyes evil governed
where might is holden for law, virtue for simplicitye, and riches for decree:
rich me^ are preferred before the wise and virtuous. Neither do I think
meet y^ any poor man (be he never so good) should desire auctoritye. For as
Socrates said, have thou nothing whereof to repent thee? But if I would rehearse
the discommodityes of auctoritye, I might easilye prove that the felicitye of
pouertye were a singular virtue. Yet mean I not to persuade y^ riches well
used in a good common weal were hurtful: for that were to absurd. Hitherto by
true (though subtle reasons) we have taught the discommodityes which riches
does bring wythall. But remembringe that at the beginning I determined not to
prove any thing by short and subtle arguments, I will proceed in playner
speech. And therefore I say that nature like unto fire issuinge out of the
ground, has advanced al things some more and some less, and some most of
all, and being at the highest, vanishes and decays away: so the race and
dignitye of man, being grown to the greatest honor and glory, a while
stayinge there, does declyne, and at length is clearly quenched. For where is
now any branch of Alexander, of Darius, Antiochus, Ptolomeus, David, Caesar,
Antigonus, Maethridates: or any other of these ancient kings? who so
attayneth to that high estate of glory, let him not forget himself, but say:
Lo now y^ end of human glory is at hand. Then who forcasteth not what cares
and sorrow are likely to follow? what say you to Charles the fifte, though he
governed mightily and happilye from Ethiopia Hispania and Italia, to the
co^fynes of Dalmatia and other Nations unknown, (wherein he showed more virtue
then might be hoped for in any man) in consulting dailye how to govern so
many nations, in trauaylinge to hold them in obedience, what man would say he
was happy? when sometimes he remembered how Solimanus did threaten the confynes
of the Empire, sometimes he museth how the Islands of Beleares and the kingdom
of Spain were perturbed. Some times he doubted the inconstancye of the Italian
Princes. Sometimes he feared the weakness of Cycillia and Pulia, against the
Turks. Sometimes he bethought him of the Princes of Germanye, and how his
Nauye sent to see was tossed with Neptuns ire: Some fled to Hongaria, and
some to Illerico: And will you call this man most happy? whom so great cares,
and so many fears did dailye tormente? Surely for my part I wish my self
rather a Religious manne of Carthusia, though their lybertye does not far
differ from prisonners. If then Charles being so great and mighty a Prince was
always accompanied with cares, and so far from felicitye: will thou say
that Fraunces the French king might be called happy, or rather Solymanus?
which of them lived not in fear? which of them tasted not of evil fortune?
And though perhaps till this day they never felt any thing greatelye
evil, yet by ensample of others have they feared the worst.

Polycrates that in his whole life never feeled any mysfortune, before he
dyed, by the Persian King was brought to the gallowse and hanged. Darius the
King (whose Empire was thought equal to Gods) before death was depryued, and
lived in myserye. Look upon Syphax, Perseus, Mithridates, Pyrrhus and
Cambyses. To great a follye it were to number all Kings whom Fortune has
laughed to scorn.

In our age we have seen the subuertion of four kingdoms, Pannonia,
Egipte, Gallia Sicalpania, and Pulia. Such is the alteration of times, that
Princes are constrained to become either unfortunate, or miserable, in keepynge
their Kingdoms they live in myserye, unfortunate if they leave them.

O Lord how liuelye did Lucanus describe the life of Kings saying.

O safe estate of life,
The pleasant days which poor men pass, a bliss above the rest,
to Gods almost unknown.
But thou not beholding what is with in Princes, like unto men that gaze upon
the outward pictures and monuments of Tombs, do judge them only happy,
who in deed of all other mortal creatures are most unhappy. This must also
be co^sydered when you co^plainest only of pouertye, how many there are so
unhappy, as in respect to them, thou may be accounted happy. How many be
sick? how many deaf? how many blind? how many in prison? how many in
exile? how many condemned? how many enforced to adventure their lives? then
all which no doubt thou art more happy. Besides all this, if thou compain
only of pouertye (unless thou would become a king) there is no cause to
complain. Behold how many do live miserably in Cities: how many beg in the
Subberbes: how many in vyllages do pass their lives almost without any thing,
yet burdened with children and familye. And nevertheless constrained to pay
^ribute of y^ little, which with extreme labor they have earned. But (alas
poor Christian people) now am I fallen into that speech which never erst I
thought. So as in seeking to acquit others of care, I am my self cast there
into. But do thou desire to understand plainlye that in riches is no
felicitye? then behoulde those people which inhabit the country, and glory in
their small riches, thinckinge themselves happy, because they see none of
their neighbors to possess more then themselves, who are not rich. But if
the self same men do resort to the Cittye, where they see others that for
riches do excel them, then they lamente, complain and account themselves
poor. But is this poverty? surely no: nay rather may be called envy. Who
is he that possesses a thousand. Crowns, that may iustlye be called poor?
and dwellinge in the country with that wealth, will not account himself a
Prince? yet if he happens to come to the Court, where no man almost has
five hundredth Crowns, forthwyth he believes and calls himself poor. But
if it should come to pass (as it did in the time of Noie) that all money,
provision, cattle, and other commodityes were drowned with water, I think
then that no man would persuade himself to be injured by pouertye. How is
it then, that now having somewhat thou complaynest? which declares plainlye,
that no pouertye but envy does moleste thee* And what can be worse then this?
why do thou not desire the treasures of Kings and the riches of India?
unless it be in respect they are far from thee* But how many Countries
and people has pouertye preserved and governed, as Sythia, Asia, the
Assyrians, the Medians and Parthians. Also Alexander possessing nothing but
bodies and weapon, conquered all Asia. Likewise the poor common weal of Rome,
subdued the proud Frenchmen, the valiant Italians, the pitiful Gretians, the
rich Asia, the crafty Carthaginenses, and the disdainful Jews. All which was
done by poverty. The Persians, the Perthians and Germaynes, being like unto
the poor Romans, did in despite of their power defend and keep their
liberty. But so sone as Sylla grew to greatness, and by him riches set in
reputacion, like unto yse against the Sun, al liberty and glory decayed
away. The^ began sedition, civil wars, with slaughter of familiars and friends.
So as in short space through envy of barbarous nations, yt whole empire came
to utter destruction. Neither do I think y^ private riches be better or more
profitable, for by the^ oftentimes men become ambitious, slouthful and full of
cares, which the Poet pleasantly describes in Mydas, when he had obtained of
Bacchus that all he touched should be goulde. Saying.

Amazed at this mischief nevve, now rich and yet in vvo,
His wished wealth lo now he lothes, that erst he loved so,
No store can honger stanch, dry thurst his throat torments,
Thus vvorthilye amids his gould, his former vvishe repentes.
So great is the mysery of rich men, that amids the desire of riches they
perish. There is nothing contenting to the rich man, but that which accords
with his couetyse mind. For he to increase his riches hazardeth his soul, his
reputacion and friends. Who can think that either life or fame is gotten by
riches, and for the most part riches do not long remain with any man, and
never descend to the third degree? And seldom shalt thou see the grandchylde
of a rich man, dye in abundance. I marueyle not therefore why so many worthy
men disdained to become rich. And first of al (omitting al Christians) let us
begin at Crates the Theban, who y^ more fitlye to study Phylosophye, sold his
goods and cast the money into y^ sea. More discretely did Apollonius and
Tyanius, who selling their goods which were in deed great, did give y^ same to
their Cittize^s, reserving to themselves nothing at all. Zeno Citticus being
rych, was impoueryshed by shypwrak, and afterward studying Philosophy, said y^
when his ship peryshed his voyage was most fortunate. But Diogines deserved
double glory because he did not only pacie^tly suffer poverty, but also therein
lived a glorious life. For being asked by Alexander what he wanted, answered
nothing: though by bountye of that noble king, he might have received great
riches. Therefore Alexander was wont to say, if I were not Alexander, the^
would I be Diogenes. So well did this noble king know the felicitye that grew
upon the disdain of riches. Likewise Photion after he had received one
hundred talentes, would neuermore be releued by Alexander, though in deed* he
were so poor as for want of a servant, was forced himself to draw the water
wherein he washed. Socrates refused the great rewards of Alcibiades. And
Artaxersis seeking the friendship of Hipocrates and Epaminundas, y^ one for his
excellencye in Physic, y^ other for his company, did present them with
great gifts: and yet by that mean could not win them. For the liberalitye of
the king, did not syrmount the disdain they had of riches. The treasure of
Pyrrhus could not corrupt the fidelitye of Fabritius, who preferred honest
pouertye before the riches of kings. Such was the nobilitye of these men's
minds (though for want of Christianitye not to be nombred among others) yet
in respect of generositye, meet examples for our consolation. Do not
therefore lament for thy poverty, (...) call to mind that saying of Plato.
Who so would become rich, must leave the desire of riches.

A man increases his riches, by y^ decay of others, and so a rich man is
either wicked or the heir of one that was wicked, as S. Hierome writes.

The next calamitye to pouertye, is exile. Wherein assuredlye it is imagination
only that makes a man miserable. For who so marketh the lives of many, shall
find that they have spente some part of their lives in straung Countries, as
Plato, Berosius, Galenus and Dioscorides. Some others their whole lives, as
Zeno, Citticus and Crautor, who thought their foreign habitation pleasante,
because it was volu^tary. The like desyer had a Citizen of ours: he in
threscore years not further travailed then the Subberbes of ye Town, was for
a miracle showed to the Prince, who did command him that never after he should
pass those bounds. The poor old man misliking this commandment, desired
leave to travail in his age, which in youth he had forgotten to do: Which
suite being denied, the selye old fellow of very sorrow fell sick and dyed.
What can be greater follye then to neglect yt is good, or wish that is evil.
And surely travail cannot be evil which so many princes, kings and Emperors
have taken in hand. Who will the^ lament there of, when it is perforce. For what
so ever is well done though by enforceme^t, yet is it not evil. But call to
thy consideracion how many commodities commethe of travail. As experience of
forrayne customs knowledge to eschew misaduentures, sight of Cities, Seas,
Mountains, Ryuers, woods, variety of airs, and ye nature of so^dry living
Creatures. Also the practice of arts, and sciences, the difference of men's
wits with many other miracles by travail are daily learned. So as I nothing
marvel at diverse excellent Philosophers that consumed their Lives in
continual travail. And among the rest I call to mind ye great Alexander
that trauayled more to excel Traianus who envied his glory, then for the
desire he had to conquer the whole world or keep the same in subjection.
Antonius, as he was soft of sprite, so did he travail countries rather for
experience, the^ for desire to conquer. But to return to private persons. I
say that all such as have invented any excellent knowledge, were those that
lived in traualye Homer commended his friend Vlixes for nothing more, then for
having trauayled sundry countries. And have not al excellent men been driven
to exile? Demosthenes, Cicero, Aristides, Thusidides, The mistocles, Alcibiades
Codrus, Theseus, Eumolpus, Trax, Aristoteles, Camillus, Corialanus, Marius,
Datanus, Trisibulus, Dion, Anniball, Demetrius Phalerius. And some other that
willingly banished themselves as Cono^ the Athenian into Cyprus. Iphicartes
into Thracia, Chares into Bigeo, Timotheus into Lesbia, Zenephon in to Eleus.
What needs more words? Say then as Socrates said that the whoole world, is a
wise man's country, and a wise man while he is in the world is never from his
country, and not to be in the world cannot be. It is the part of every wise
man to eschew death, imprisonment, and exile and yet of these three, is not
exile the least?

And if death be not evil, what evil can it be to lack our country? When it
was told Diogenes y^ the Synopenses had condemned him to exile, he answered
saying, even so do I condemn them to dwell for ever in Pontus, and wtin the
confines of Euxinus. Did not Camillus of such hard fortune receive the occasyon
of his noble victory.

And where were ye books of wise men made more often then in banishmente?
Ouidius Naso being in exile wrote his books De tristibus, De ponto, in Ibin
Triumphus Caesaris and De piscibus. So as it seems that in eight years
exile, he performed more then in those fyftye and four, which before he had
lived in Rome. Plato wrote the greatest part of his books, while he lived
from his own country: For when Socrates dyed, he was about the age of
twenty and seven years. Truly whosoever lives in his own natural country
an industrious life, does gain great envy, and y^ more if he be basely
borne. Where was Christ worse entreated then in Nazereth being there borne,
yet hated, disdayned, afflicted, and at length in Jerusalem slain. So it
seems true and that no man can be a Prophet in his own country.

Thus we see that exile is not only good, but also glorious, chiefly to a
wise and learned manne. Neither ought any to mislyke of that which has
forthered many. Would God all men knew how profitable a thing it is to
travail, and chieflye for such as dwell in those countries where riches do
rule as Law, power take place of Order, or Tyranny in any sort is put in
practyse.

Wherefore I say that exile is neither evil nor to be nombred among those
things which have of evil any resemblance. But exile does not so much offend
these, as iniuryes do torment others, affirmynge with the Lacedaemonians, that
who so receives one injury does occasion an other, But who ever thincketh
injuries ought to be revenged does greatly err. For in so doing no end of
iniuryinge can be taken, when one injury reuengeth another. Who so offers the
first must he not revenge the second? He therefore does most well, that
offers the first injury, and next to him, he that seeks revenge, deserves
blame, because the third iniurye, of necessity must follow.

And how can he patiently suffer wrong, that unprovoked willingly offered the
first injury. What can therefore be bette, then to refrain from doing injuries,
and call to memory the sayings of Plato, that a wise man, dyfferethe as far
from a common person, as a common person from a child.

For children do revenge every injury yea though against the iniuryous will it
be offered, most like unto Beasts, upon whose tails if (though unawares thou
tread) suddenly they byte without consydering whether wyllingly thou did it or
not. But far otherwise ought Men to revenge those injuries which willingly
are offered. If then a wise man do not revenge those wrongs which by mishap do
happen unto him: is he not therein more worthy then the common person void of
all wisdom? how much were it better to observe that divine precept. Michi
vindictam et ego retribuam.

That wise men have so done, no man doubts. Amongs whom we read that
Socrates being stricken upon the Shynnes and advised by his friends to seek
revenge answered. If an ass have stricken me shall I therefore be so foolish
as to call him in question? And when Xantippe his wife in a rage took his
cloak from his shoulders, his fre^des perswadinge him to revenge he said,
this is done only to occasyon you to look upon us, and say here is Xantippe
and here is Socrates.

Diogenes receyuinge a blow said. Nesciebam qua^do michi cum galea e domo sit
pro deundum. Crates also being stricken on the face by Nicodromo Citaredo, made
none other revenge, but wrote Nicodromo his name upon the place he was
stricken, and in that sort showed to the hole cittye the injury offered unto
him: because to offer injury without cause is a greater reproach, then to
receive it. The one by offringe wrong shows himself plainly wicked, and an
euylle man, the other is giltye of nothing mysdone. When it was told to
Antistines that Plato had spoken evil of him he made this answer.

It is the part of a prince to hear evil when he does best. But Plato
being told that Zenocrates, did slander him, said first, he could not believe
it: and after better proof answered saying. I can not think he would have
thus spoken without cause. What could have been said more wiselye or more
safelye. A christian king stricken on the right cheke, ought to turn the left.
And S. Paul says, that if thou do good, to those that speak evil of the:
thou heapest burning coals upon their heads. There is nothing more wicked
then ingratitude, nor more cruel then to oppress innocents: either of which
faults he commits that offers injury to his benefactors. Let us now follow
the law of Nature, and consider when any injury is offered, whether safely, or
with peril the came may be done.

For what can be moore foolish then to seek revenge, when safelye it can not
be performed.

So did Pausanias revenge himself upon Philippus, but for his labor was
hanged. So did Andreas Lampugnanus wreake his ire upon Galeazeus Sforsa: but
thereby he wrought the destruction of himself his son, and his brother, besides
many discomodities of his country. But how many have been punished and put to
death, before they, had performed their intent to revenge? as were those that
conspyred ye murder of Phaleris, and that wrought treason against Nero. The
multitude of ensamples do make me leave them untouched. Who does therefore
being never so simple commend ye peril that revenge brings? which though
performed does more hinder thee. then him to whom it is offered, and sometime
before performance does undo both the and thine Is then revenge good when
safely it may be executed? Surely at no time. Because the pleasure of revenge
is when there in a man may declare courage and magnanimity of mind. And as the
Poet says. Shevve not thy force on yeldinge foes, let proud men be oppressed. Me
thinckes therefore that Aristides deserved praise For when Cleomines had said a
man must do good to friends, and evil to Foes: Aristides turned the words,
saying. A man must do good to his friends and seek the reconsiliacion of his
foes. The glory gotten by forgeuing of foes, who^ thou may oppress is greater,
then the pleasure of revenge. The man y^ does good for evil is like unto God.
For he that defends and does well to all men does most nearelye follow God.
And how great a sign of noble mind it is to forbear revenge y^ ancient
examples do bear witness, wherein Julius Caesar gained so great praise, as no
man more. He having overthrown Pompeius and his army Commanded that none
should be hurt that were not present in the fyelde against him.

He spared M, Mercellus his mortal enemy. He set at lyberty Petreius the
chieftaine of his foes. Afranius, Vero, Korfinius, L. Lentulus, L. Domitius. He
took mercy upon the Son of Cato a notable Enemy. He touched not Sextus
Pompeius. the younger Son of the great Pompeius, at whose death he weeped

He pardoned Ligarius at the suite of his Friends and Brethren, though he
were an apparaunte offender, and many ways gyltie. He spared Cicero and freely
pardoned al other Princes that were in the battle Pharsalica. He set up
the Pictures of Pompeius and fynallye gave so many signs and Monumentes of
mercy as Cicero both before the victory, and after his death affirmed his
Quarrel the better: saying that Pompeius defendoure of his country might more
iustlye be conde^pned for his crueltye to Enemies, then Caesar in respect of
the great Mercy he used. In like manner did Octauius his successor proceed.

For when Liuius the Historiographer had percyally written against him, he
used none other Revenge but called him a Pompeian, Likewise when Asinius
Pollio, had in his Book praised Cassius Brutus, Affranius and Scipio, he
sought no revenge against him. Besides all this, he received into his House
Tymagines who in wrytinge had defamed Octauius, Liuia and her daughter. For
all which doing he used none other Revenge then these words. Fruere mihi
Pollio fruere.

But behold how nobly Andrianus Caesar did mytigate his ire? He being made
Emperor and meetinge his Enemy said. Thou have escaped. Declaringe that as
befoore he wanted power to be Revenged, so now in aucthoritye he would want
will, and therefore did acquit him of fear It is also to be considered that
there is nothing that increases aucthoritye more then to forgive.

And therefore PELECRVS the Lacedemonian, Complayninge to his Brother that he
was not so Beloved among the Cyttyzens as he was: he aunsweared Pelecrus,
saying the cause thereof is that thou can not suffer injuries. It is likewise
greatly to be noted that who so ever has aspired to authority or greatness,
they have born with many injuries, because they ye revenge might be resembled to
the fable of Praxitelis. Who being (as men say) of Nature angry, and
beholdinge himself in a glass, espied there a visage evil favored and
deformed: and therewithal more moved, increased his collerick and angry
countenance which plainly appeared wtin the glass, but in the end he brake
the glass, in every piece where of he found a face much deformed. Whereby
Praxitelis had experience that in seeking to revenge himself of one
discontentacion, he occasioned many: Even so if thou murder one man, thou
make his friends and familye all thine enemies. Thus in seeking to acquit thy
self of one foe thou gettest many, yea sometimes for so doing thy name
grows odious, and thou condemned for an evil man. Fynallye who so is
accustomed to revenge, minds none other thing, which reason and experience
does well declare. Alexander the great (in whose chamber while he lived, good
fortune slepte) knowing the unfriendly hearts of the Athenienses and other
people of Grecia, who under the ensign of Darius made war against him, did
notwithstanding seek any revenge: which greatness of mind, Darius, and other
understanding, of enemies they became subjects and faithful friends. But if
contrariwise he had used revenge, the whoole number of the Grecian youth yea
all India and Peloponesso had revolted and been destroyed: so as of Alexander
he had in short space become a poor obscure Prince. Far unlike to him did
king Pirrus proceed, who being a famous Captain, yet folowinge Revenge,
left his doings imperfyte and dyed in mysecye. JULIUS CAESAR in private life
and toward reconciliacion to his Enemies, being greatly slaundered by
Caius Caluus and Catullus did, notwithstanding write first unto Caluus and
pardonned Catullus.

What greater Ennemy had he then Clodius that defiled the honor of
wedlock? Being apprehended he would not only not condemn him, but also
save him from perjury. But Marius did far otherwise, he thyrstinge for the
blood of enemies and followinge Revenge had evil end, and was the
destruction of himself and all his.

What has been seen more worthily done then that act of Fabius? who contrary
to al right, was forced by the people to receive Minutius master of his horse,
as his companion in the empire, who doing diverse things contrary to Fabius
desygne, did (notwithstanding forgetting the injury) ioyn with Minutius
against Hanniball, and to save him from peril used al care and cunning, which
afterward wrought such effect as the people confessed how unworthily they
had abled Minutius to be his equal, which Minutius also upon his knees
confirmed prayinge Fabius to take into his hands y^ hole authority and Empire.
Such be the rewards of noble minds, that can forget al iniuryes. So dydd not
Cicero when with staunderous speech he persecuted Clodius, but for so doing
was himself bannyshed. And in seekinge to banishe Antonius out of the common
wealth, he there by hindered himself his friends, his country, and all good
men.

But is it not a thing worthy to be noted, that we disdain the injuries of
brute beasts, and revenge the wrongs offered by men? Also we patiently
suffer the displeasure of time, and can not beat, the offenses of men? But in
the one Ambicion wants: in the other is mean to Revenge which I grant:
and yet in the Iniuryes of men, it is to be considered, that man is, will thou,
Nyll thou, thy Companion in life: And many times (though thou marcke it not)
by the provoked.

What does it then move thee to suffer iniurye? Is it Harm or Loss, by
revenge it cannot be recovered. If Harm, thou seem to Sorrow that thou
art honest, or that thou would be so thought. Seeing it is the property of an
evil man to do injury: and the property of a good man to dysdayne it. Also when
any man does sclander thee, disdain thee, stryke thee, or hurt thee, consider
whether the same be willingly done or not? Be: cause an vnwyllinge offense may
hurt, and yet be none Injury at all. Cresus was commended for pardoning
Adrastus when he had killed his son* because Adrastus meaning was to have
shot at the Bore, and not to have slain the Child. But if wyllinglye the
offense be offered, examine thy self if thou have geeuen cause, for then is
it none iniurye, but deserved punishmente.

And if thine enemy has hurt thee, think with thy self whether thou
would have done the like to him if thou might, for then it was none Iniurye
but contencion.

The end of all strife is when ye one yeldeth. And therefore a boy of
Lacedemon being deadly wounded and Comforted by his Friends, saying that or
long they would revenge the injury done unto him, aunswearede, that in no wise
they should so do, because the hurt he received. he intended to his Enemy,
if his intent had taken place.

But let thy mind be void of evil, free from hate and displeasure, then
consider the qualitye of the offense and the state of the offender, whether it
be so small as is not to be regarded, or the man so mad or vile as is to be
disdayned: because to be revenged upon any such Injurious occasyons, or men,
is both dishonorable and wicked. But admit the offense be not such, do
thou not remember that it is the propertye of a good man patiently to suffer
injuries, not for fear, but through Fortitude. So Phocion being by the
Athenienses, condemned to death, his Friends askinge what he would have
said to his son? answered, tell him that in any wise he forget this injury
here offered unto me. Aristides also unjustly remaining in exile, prayed the
Gods that the Athenienses might be so happy as never after to think upon
him. Also call to thy consyderacion that against all Injuries three Remedies
there are, that is to say, Revenge, Oblyuion, and disdain.

Of which three who doubts but Dysdayne, is both the best, and most
assured? Because disdain through the courage of mind wherewith it is
accompanied, is not like unto obliuio^ joined with reproach, neither perilous
in respect of new injuries, as is a revenge, which brings therewith boothe
peril and repentance, and in the mean time, the desire of offending does not
molest thee but art there in most like unto God. For such as contempne
iniuryes are most happy and lykeste to God, and such men they are, or must
be that would become happy. For seeinge no man lives free from injuries, and
the greater in auctoritye he be, the more followed with slander evil report,
and injury, it is expedient that every man do determyne himself to bear them.

Neither is it lawful for any mortal man to use revenge. Who has been more
slaundred the^ kings, and emperors, whose power is greatest?

Who, or what is of greater force then God and Nature? and yet they delighte
not in Revenge. Shall man then be like unto Bears, pursuynge the Bees, seek
for revenge? God forbydde. For although we might in life revenge all Iniuryes:
what good were that after Death, or what care should we then have of
iniuryes? It is all one whether with sufferance of Iniurye, or not after Death
we be remembered. Who so therefore living seemed to contempne iniuryes, by death
he is free from the peril which Revenge might cast him in to. Wherefore there
is nothing better then an inuysyble mind, which like unto a man placed on
the top of an high Tower, in dysdayne casting down stones upon the heads
of his Enemies, does make light of all Iniuryes (and as yt were) dysdayne
them. For as women, for lack of magnanimity can not bear offenses: so men (as
they are men) may take what Revenge they think best Then make thy choice which
of them thou will be like, But happily thou will say some worthy men have
been revenged. For Caesar commanded Faustus Silla and Affranius, to be slain.

Likewise Antonius revenged him self upon Cicero and Alexander and upon
Calistines, carrying him abroad when his Eyes were put out, and in the end
shut him up into a cave with a Dog. But alas (good manne) this was no
Revenge, though some say that Antonius being of Mind moore abiecte then a
Woman did like unto his other doings commit this act, and therefore had
an end aunswerable to his deserving. But as for the other they minded
nothing less then Revenge, for the respect of their doings was securitye,
which in like case by our Laws is sufferable. For if Afframus had gotten
liberty, he would neither have kept Promise nor lived in quiet, Also
Faustus Silla, was by Law guilty. Pompeius freende and for his fathers
Tyranny odious to the people of Rome.

So as being a necessary Friend for Pompeius, he could not have lived in
quiet. But if he had, for the Malice borne to his Father been slain, the
same should rather have been done upon Cato, who (as was well known) after
that Caesar conquered the Germans, did persuade y^ Senate to have him
delivered into the Enemies Hands, because he had fought contrary to the
truce taken. But Sylla when easly he might have slain him, he would not.

So Alexander being settled in his Empire among the barbarous People, did not
condemn Calistines, for Mallyce, but Securitye because through his words
he could hardelye keep the Persians. And the Macedonians began to disdain
him.

Full well knew Antonius that if Cicero had escaped, he would never have
lived in quiet, because being all ready once Pardoned, he notwithstanding
did follow him with Hate vnreconsiliable, and if the Death of CICERO had
been sought for Revenge, either a live he might have been tormented and
kept, or else executed with more crueltye. It comes also to mind, that
Injuries have not a little proffyted Some men and therefore Ouidius says.

A wrong somvvhiles we see: does help the vvronged vvight. It happens
often times that we take Compassion of them we love not: either for the
malice we bear them that offered the Iniurye, or through belief that the
Injured is condemned, rather by power of his Enemy then his own offense. And
by such means it is well known that many have escaped great peril.

Among which number Valerius Maximus tellethe how Gabinius through the
Sclaunder of Sisenna, and Flauius, for the Injury of Valerius were delivered,
and Cotta only for suspicion of wrong found the same favor. In which
cases if none iniurye had been, no hope had remained. It is also to be
considered, that the occasions of Sclaunders are so common, as nothing more.
The People do backebyte the learned, the Learned dysdayne the unlearned, the
Just do condemn the wicked, the Wicked do laugh to Scorn those that be
good, the Mighty do Envy the Mighty, against whom they provoke Servant
and Subjects by sclaunderous Speech, Robberye, Practice, and untrue dealing.
Were it not better with noble mind to disdain all Injuries, then thus
continuallye to live tormented in mind. Lucius Murena was praised, because he
took Cato under his Gown and saved him from Death, that not long before had
accused him.

Publius Pulcher being by the three Lentuli accused of inceste did
notwithstanding afterward save one of them from perrill. Marcellus being
haynously accused by the Siculi did not only forgive them, but also received
them into his own tuition. So Menedemus bestowed many Benefytes upon
Alexinus of whom he had been great lie injured. How wisely said S. Gregorius,
that who so can not bear iniurye, does show by his impacience that he is not
good. The king Archelaus, when upon a time one cast water upon him, being
persuaded by his friends to revenge: answered, saying, I know he would not have
cast yt upon me, but some other. By which answer he saved y^ offender from
hurt, and him self from the importunity of his friends.

A notable example remains in memory of the servant of Antius Restio, who
being long time kept in prison, and by his masters commandment often
times burned with hot yrons, yet afterward following him in ye triu^phe
triumuiral did notwithstanding all their injuries save himself from peril, when
comodiously he might have been reue^ged and also rewarded. Such wisdom has
not only been performed by private men, but also by hole Cities. For Dionisius
the younger both at the plays of Corinthus and also before he was sent into
exile might have been by them of Syracusa slain, whom befoore time he had
most Tyrannouslye used. But they with disdain did let him pass.
Likewise did the Romans, when Silla had resigned the Office of Dictator,
and lived in private state: notwithstanding he had grievously offended the
people, yet did they suffer him to pass without hurt, thinking that revenge is
to be used upon mighty men, and those that bear rule, and upon those yt were
by law or assent dismou^ted from authority courteously and co^passionately to
entreat the^, was a sign of a good man.

Therefore there is no greater argument of felicity, no redier way to glory,
nor better mean to quiet, then to disdain injuries.

Behold the dogs which be of many other beasts the most improfytable, yet are
much more made of then either Oxen or Horse, only because they suffer all
injuries their masters do offer unto them.

If thou Stryke them, they fawn. If thou drive them away from thee, they
return unto thee: if thou chide them they flatter. Finallye he is much worse
then any beast, that cannot disdain iniuryes. No brutishe beast is mindful
of offense done unto him. Therefore that man that seeks reueng is not wise,
loved of God, nor long happy. If thou suffer a while thou shall see thy
wrongs revenged by nature, by chance, or by some other mean. And him whom
with extreme care, travail, and hazard of thy self thou sought to offend,
shall be without thine evil or myserye destroyed. The lives of all evil men
that do perturbe the quiet of ye good, are short: or at least wise that
happiness of small continuance. If therefore forbearing iniurye no man is
miserable, then is it better for all men whether they can or not, not to be
revenged: because it is manifest that before revenge of iniurye no man is in
mysery. The offense that men in these days do think the greatest, is the
infidelity of wives. But in so dishonest a matter not to trouble the ears of
good men I mean nothing to speak, notwithstanding I call to remembrance yt
Pompeius for adultry cast of his wife Metia, and for the like fault did P.
Caesar put away Pompeia, both excellent men, and among the Romans
inferior to none for auctoritye, deserte and wisdom. All which
notwithstanding either ye importunacy^ of adulterous, or the wantonness of
women, did make their beds defiled. Septimius Seuerus, and Antonius the
Philosopher had dishonest wives, yet can thou not find any better, or more
worthy men in that common weal When a friend of Antonius did wyshe him to put
away his dishonest wife, he aunsweared saying: even so I may do and therewtall
loose her dowrye: which dowyre was the Roman Empire, because Faustina was
daughter of Pius Antonius the Emperor. Therefore though Antonius witti^gly, or
Seuerus unwittingly kept their aduoulterous wives, I cannot think it was
prejudicial to their reputation, virtue or felicitye. Neither do thou think
that this blot does blemish the reputation of common persons more the^ these
most noble personages: for seeing the fault is in others, the dishonor cannot
appertain unto thee. Therefore a Cittize^ of Sparta finding an adulterer a bed
with his evil favored wife said, alas unhappy man what necessity has driven
the to do this deed? To cruel it were to impute that to thine own follye,
which by no pollicye can be prevented, as though thy virtue and estimation
were stained by y^ default of another. Yet now a days this reproach is cast
upon the man. So did not Salethus Prince of Crotona, who made an ordinance
more hard then the Law Iulia, which was that cockould makers should be burned
quick. Supposyng that none offense was more wicked. Yet when afterward he
himself had defiled his brothers wife and was taken, he made so wise an
Oration, as he people were content to punish his offense with exile only.
Notwythstanding, knowing the greatness of the fault, willinglye he cast himself
into the fire, and was burned. Thus we find he desired not pardon (though his
words were to such effect) but rather sought to show yt none offense could be
so great but might deserve to be pardoned. Therefore this iniurye comes not
of the wives defaulte, but the imperfection of time: wherein we being vxorious,
the reproach is cast upon men, and the perjury upon God: neither shall this
plague cease till yt (as men say) Polipus have eaten out himself, and the power
of Mahumet has stayed their slander.

But of iniuryes we have now enoughe said, let us therefore speak of other
calamityes, among which imprisonment seems the chief.

In prison is darckenes, uncleanness, lack of company, fetters, and
fynallye (as it seems) all sorts of myserye: which provoked Boethius to cry
out saying.

You mourning Muses reach, vvherof I should endight,
And bathe* my face in bitter tears, vvhervvith my vvoes I wright.
Alas (good friend) what is this life other then an imprisonment of mind, much
worse then that of the body, and would God this quiet might chance to me,
which so many worthy men have desired. Amongst whom Demostenes yt excellent
Orator to the end he might be enforced to keep the house, cut of the one side
of his bearde. Where is truer contemplacion then in solitary life? what place
is more fit for study, then where is quietness? neither did Boethius write any
work better, then y^ he invented in prison, did not Aesopus long time lurk
wtin a tub? and Democritus willingly inhabit the dens of dead men? studying
and wrytinge? And ye more their eyes were darckened the more their minds were
lightened, Plato tells y^ Anaxagoras while he remained in prison wrote the
book De Circuli quadratura, To whom could imprisonment be more grievous, then
to Socrates when the end was death, the time long and incertaine? yet
nevertheless he slept swetely, studied Philosophye, and wrote Verses. So as
Socrates gave more light to the prison, then the prison gave darcknes to
Socrates. PAVLVS the Doctoure of the world sent the greater part of his
epistles from prison, as to the Ephesians, to Timothe and Philemon. For like
reason is servitude patiently to be borne, seeing nature has not more
liberally bestowed her gifts on the master, then the servant: They are
equallye wise, equallye beutifull, equallye healthful, and finally in body and
mind therein excels his servant. And for quietness of mind the servant
has the advantage. For he seeks only to content one, which is his
master, for which doing he is provided for, of meat, drink, apparel,
and all other necessaryes. But a master must not only be careful of
himself, but also of others. Every loss is hinderance to the master, but to
the servant not so. Therefore if it were lawful, more men would commit
themselves to servitude, the^ desire to become free. Who so does consider well,
shall see, that when we think our selves most free, we serve masters more
severe: as Princes, God, necessities, laws, and pleasure, which be also
common to servants, yet there withal they have food, apparel, and houses,
which ye masters have not. It is the less maruayle why some bondmen have
refused to be made free, as did Melissus a Gramarian of Spoleta.

Surely it is a goodlye pleasure to eat at other men's tables. Would God it
were as honest. And do thou think the favorites of Princes are other then
servants whom ambition has deceived? besides which, their estate is more
perilous and more unhappy. Neither is servitude any hinderaunce to glory,
for Plato, Xenocrates, Calcedonius, Diogenes, Phedrus, Epitetus, and Esopus the
fabler, did al live in servitude. Besides them diverse Gramarians, Sibonius,
Aphroditius, Taberius, Crotes, Antonius Gnipho, Phosius ye excellent player,
and Manlius in Astronomye, a singular Poet. What should I say of riches? and
shall I again resight those monsters of the Romayne pleasure Drusilanus and
Menecrates, yea the seats of Kings have been by bondemen possessed. Tullius
one of the aunciente kings, was a bondsman. And so was Oedipus and other. The
kings of Syria and Palestina in our age chosen out of this sort of men. But
let riches rule and bear the sway, yet let us resight known examples of many
such as servitude and the patronage of a good master have aduaunsed, for ye
virtue of the master depends much upon ye wisdom of the servant. And
some servants have not only gained liberty, but also deserved to become
heirs to their masters. Neither shall thou find upon the aunciente
monumentes, more records of love of wives, children, and brethrene, then
ensamples of servants devotion toward masters, and masters toward them.

The like perswatio^ may make for thy comfort, if thou live without glory:
which kind of life is the more tolerable if thou remain in servitude,
whereinto Ulysses (as Plato says) being werye of his former life did willingly
cast himself. There is no happiness y^ can happen to man greater, the^ either
not to desire glory, or not to have it. Who so does ye one, lives in great
quietness of mind, ye other enjoys great security. For is y^ glory of this
world other the^ a sweet poyso^ for me^? whereof if thou taste, thou becomest
blind and senceles. Hereupon grows vain labor, peril and care, which way to
keep and get friends, authority and riches. Envy also like unto a shadow
inseparable does follow glory, which in a moment fades away, and the rest of
thy life the more unpleasant. How many worthy me^ have given the glory of
their own deserts to others? Socrates being victorious in battle, gave all the honor praise and reward to Alchibiades. But who can therein excel Plato?
he commended for his learning, did yield all the praise to those y^ had taught
him: as Socrates, Tymeus, and Permenides. Surely there is no greater glory
then the contempt of honor. Who so is not ambitious gets no glory: why
seek thou that, y^ to have thou ought not? if thou be ambitious, thou
accusest thy self: and yet ambition were no vice, if glory might lawfully be
desired. I cannot resight the number of all such as have honored virtue, and
yet contempned the praise. And yet in deed even at this day also, who so
lyuinge vertuouslye does lurk, may be called good and happy. What does the
ambitious man gain other then set to sale al* his imperfections. And whosoever
ever does mark it well, shall find that every man has more defects, then
customs worthy commendation. To prevent the peril of this conde^pnation there
is no way so sure as to lurk and live unknown.

The like commodity brings ignorance whereof notwythstanding many do
complain. Who so seeks knowledge, finds care and labor, as the Prophet
says. I tell not that Paul has preached, that this worldly wysedom is
enemy to God. Let us consider what is commonly gained by learning, profit is
disdayned, the soul hazarded, the body consumed, thy children and substance
neglected. The learned do get great envy and shortneth his life, and all for
knowledge, or rather to be thought to know. For art thou more wise then
Socrates, Plato, or Aristoteles? Socrates did glory that he knew nothing.
Plato doubted of many things. Aristotiles speaks so obscurelye, as one
would think he knew little. Alas how many have been hindered with being
thought learned? Among the rest, y^ small knowledge of mine, have been to my
disadvantage, for thereby I have been oftentimes rejected, evil handled and
oppressed, and would God that either I had been such a one as they thought me,
or yt they had thought me such a one as in deed I was. Hereof grew against me
so many undeserved evil reports, al which I disdayned, persuading my self
that one man excelled an other, in that he was better. Like unto al other
things does yt opinion of learning bread slander and diverse other
inco^uenients: as we see by Alexander, Achillino, Tiberio of Bononia, Petrus
Leo, and Marcus Antonius of Verona. For Achillinus was poisoned, Petrus Leo
cast hedlonge into a ponde. Tiberius and Antonius occasioned to shorte^ their
own lives. So we find that this wisdom is accompanied with many
discommodityes. How much better had it been for these learned men to have
lived by some craft or industrye? what man have thou known both learned and
fortunate, yea whom has not learning hindered? Socrates was slain,
Anaxagoras kept in prison. Plato soulde, and put in peril of his head,
Aristotiles sent into exile, where either willingly or not greatly against
his will he dyed. Demetrius Phalerius banished and condemned. Demostenes
poisoned himself, Easimes sent to exile, and so was Solon. Licurgus depryued
of his eyes, and after banished with many perils of life. Ioannes Scotus
stabbed in with daggers by y^ hands of his companions, Cicero betrayed and
slain, Varro co^fyned, and who was not molested and disdained? Budeus a
notable man of our age, did also iustlye complain, what and how many
persecutions did Erasmus suffer? were the Prophets and wise me^ in the law of
Moses more happy? surely no. The cause is learning, which who so has not,
let him not desire it: who already has it, must think to have boughte a
jewel of great pryse, and kept with more care and peril. But to much have we
spoken of these matters, for few or none shalt thou find that complain of
ignorance, saying willingly they deceive themselves.

Now as touching sorrow it self, which worthily seems intolerable, Let us
consider it comes chiefly of three causes, that is to say of sickness, folly,
or enforceme^t. How soever it be, or whatsoever grief we feel, either it is
not great, or not long, and seldom it happens to honest men: but if it do,
must of necessitye be endured. Whosoever falls into sickness either willingly
or against his will, would he not be ashamed that women should excel him in
patience and sufferaunce of grief? for women in bearing of children do endure
most extreme pains, yet notwithstanding do not refrain the company of men,
and such as be barren, do not desire any thing so much as to have children.
The grief which women suffer in childing, is of all other the greatest, and
nearest to death: yea many of such grief do dye in deed. No gout, no ache, no
collicke or other tormente is comparable to this pains. Notwithstanding how
great soever they be, they leave not to live in delight, and (as wont they
were) approve the joys of Venus short without the desire of well doing. There
is no grief so great, that a resolute mind will yield unto. Possidonius the
Philosopher extremely sick, said unto Pompeius being come to visit him, y^
the greatness of pains should never make him confess that sickness was evil.
Neither in deed can that be evil which is without us, therefore the grief
of the body if it do not ouercomour mind, cannot be said to be ours. How well
did that servant which ^^ue Asdruball declare it: For he being greuouslye
tormented for the murder of his master, did notwythstandinge in countenance
show the joy he felt for having revenged the iniurye of his master. I
remember that when Antonius Cribellus was condemned by public assent to be
torn in pieces, in preparinge himself to be executed, said, yt there was no
torment so great as could cause him confess the companions of his offense,
yet affyrminge there were such, but he would never bewray them. What marvel
was it then though Pompeius so manfully held his finger to be burned in the
candell before the king Genthius, seeing that thereby the king might perceive
there was no hope to wreste out any intelligence at the Ambassadors hands.
With like patience did Sceuola burn his hand before the king Porcenna.
Neither have there wanted women, y^ have deserved such glory. The mother of
Hircanus the Jew being offended by Ptolomeus her son in law, wylled
Hircanus not to leave of his enterprise: but rather revenge the death of his
father whom Ptolomeus had slain. Epicharis Liberta more noble then many men,
for no torment could be constrained to confess her offenses or her companio^s
in offendinge. Quintilia a little personage suspected for the conspiracye
against Caligula, being racked with great torment, confessed nothing, whereby
she was set at liberty as giltlesse, and received reward as innocent. What
should I speak of Barbara Agatha a Christian, with diverse other vyrgins? ye
number of whom is hardly to be believed, and their constancye so marvelous, as
they seemed not only patiently to have suffered torments, but also to have
wyshed for them. But this virtue proceeds of our Christianitye. Let us
return to natural reasons. There is no rest so welcome, as that which
follows great travail, nor death so much desired, as where sickness has
been most extreme. The end therefore of all grief, either by recouerye, or
death is pleasant. It is also to be considered, that all such as suffer
great torments, being persuaded of the immortalitye of souls, ought thereby
(though none other reason were) to be comforted. And such as believe of none
other life, are sure that death is y^ end of all myseryes. Therefore if thy
grief grows upon deserte, deseruinglye thou ought to bear it, for thereby
thou do decrease thy grief, and save thy mind from due tormente, neither
ought thou to punish thy body and mind both at one time, saying thy soul
is afterward to receive his chastisemente.

The same or more profitable reason may be made for sickness, then sorrow:
for what can be intolerable in sickness, if sorrow be away? yea hardlye it
can be thought how many commodityes it brings. In sickness we learn how
we be, how frail the condition of life is: how incertayne, and subject to
the power of others. Thereby we are taught to be mindful of an other life,
and that we ought not to do that to an other, which we would not have don to
our selves. Therefore we become more temperate and continente, yea to some
sickness have been cause of long life, amendment of fame, and increase of
virtue. If sickness were not, a man should become more hard hearted then the
Tiger, and more cruel then the Lioness. Macrobius thincketh that sickness
does more often happen to those whom God loves, then those whom he hates.
Seneca supposed that he is most unhappy that never feels adversity, and that
he is most miserable that is most happy. Saint Paul says, whom God loves
him he chasteneth. The nature of man is unbridled, and were it not like wheat
well sifted, would become as savage as the wild beasts. When the soul
loves the body then is it more noble and perfect, because then it comes to
his own nature being vnbourdened of the body, which hindered the sight and
perfect knowledge. It is therefore the less marvel that those that be most
weak of body and of shortest life, be of best indgemente, and most apt to
know. No man has all gifts, if thou have stoore of virtues of y^ mind, thou
art of necessity the more sick of body. Then whether would thou rather
have a strong body and a wit like unto beasts, or a weak body with an
excellent sprighte? Some brutishe beasts there are also as much or more
subject to sickness as men, as the Lion and Goat: for which cause those
that do use to sell Goats, do not warrant them for sound, as they do other
cattle, but as Varro says, this day he is well and drincketh, and like
enoughe he may so continue. And albeit these beasts be never but sick, yet
wantinge reason, do play and take disporte: But man to his own sorrow is
partaker of reason, whereby he calls to consyderation his myseryes. Yet is
it worthily to be noted, that seeldome times we see honest men troubled with
outward greeues, and those that be temperate are not often offended with inward
miseries But some men do think deafnes and blyndnes more intolerable then
Sickness, though the same seems little to hinder the felicitye of man.

Homerus being blind, excelled all the Poets both Latyne and Greek.
Tymolion being blind, governed the people of Syracusa. Appius Claudius brake
the dishonorable peace, which the Romans had taken with Pirrus, and therein
declared he saw more then all others having eyes. Hannibal having one only
eye, conquered almost all Italy, and excelled all captains both Carthaginences
and Romans (Scipio only reserved) John king of Beemia was also blind, yet
a valiant and wise captain. He knowinge him self ouermatched with the power
of his enemies, manfully did charge them, to the end that if he could not
get the vyctorye, yet he would not be accounted cowardlye. One blind man not
long before our age, was so cunninge in music as excelled all other in those
days, and was therefore greatly esteemed, and by princes enriched. The blind
man has also his delights, as banquettinge, venery, music, and learning:
and (if he were not so borne) he is blind but some part of his life. He may
also se dreaming and therefore Aristoteles says, that the virtue of saying
rests not in the eyes, but in the brain, because if the sight were in the
eye, then the eyes being put out, the man in dream should se nothing as does
he that was blind borne. But if a man from his birth did never see, then
has he (...) to complain according to the common saying. That the eye sees
not, the heart rueth not. For in that we know not, we neither delight nor find
offense. Al be it we see many things we take pleasure in, yet of them that do
discontent us the number is great.

One only perfyte eye we have, which is the spyryte and that more lively is in
the blind, then in them that can see, by reason the outward eyes is there
unto a hynderaunce. For which reason we find that the blind men, both in wit
and memory excel all others. And as they say of Tyresia.

For God ^ris face did hyde, and (...) within the breast he set. Meaning that
the blind man did in mind see the most. And therefore in old time such
men were honored for prophecyinge things to come When Antonius the holy,
comforted Didimus the Philosopher, he said unto him, let it suffice, that
still thou enioyeste thy celestial eyes, though the other be lost. Diodorus
the Stoike a companion to Cicero was blind, yet in Philosophye, Music, and
Geomatrys, excellent.

Caius Drusus was so cunninge in the Laws Civil although he were himself
blind yet helped he many that could see. Some say Democrites for the envy his
Citizens did bear him, put our his own eyes. Asc^epiades the Philosopher in
his blindenes, was wont to play, saying the want of syghte was nothing else
but as though a child should do some thing to an other whereby he might
find a want.

But among other commodities blyndenes does make death the moore tolerable.
Because death is feared for nothing so much as that we loose the comfort
of light and come into darckenes, when if thou be blind before thou shalt
feel the less alteracion, and that which tormenteth others most in dyinge,
thou shall as it were dye unawares. Some perhaps there are so gross as will
discommonde old age, forgettinge that who so is now old, has been in times
paste young. But for trial here of let Sephalus or Spurinna be called in
question, of whom we may enquire, whether old age not abused be better then
lustye youth. The virtue and strength of Iacobus Philippus Sacchi who^
Franciscus Sforza did those to be prince of the Senate does sufficiently show.

Wherefore sith in all these Calamities aforesaid nothing is evil, let us
consider whether in common miseries we ought to lament? as in plagues famine,
and destruction of countries, which because they are common, do seem the
moore patiently to be suffered. But if they were evil, would be of all
other most intolerable, because they are most hardlye amended. We see
therefore that the discontentacion of men, growethe rather upon opinion then
cause. And seeinge it is universal, let us follow the golden age, in which
time was more fidelitye, more friendly conversation, more easy life, y^ men
better minded, and their manners the less corrupt; that their fortune was so
evil. In that age they lived only upon fruit, if they had gotten bread* they
accounted themselves happy: but thou that want neither bread, wine, bed
nor other provision, doeste notwithstanding complain. It is envy therefore no
pleasure, superfluity, no necessity that does torment us For if our desires
were reasonable, we should at all times have like wishes. And knowinge with
how few bace things nature is contented, we should not find so unfortunate
end of our doings. But saying in that miserable time men lived so contented,
this can not be said any myserye at all. For he is only in misery, y^ is
enforced to hate his own life, yet in common calamities no man hates his own
life but most patiently bears all aduersityes. For nothing seems
dishonorable, that is common. Every euylle of man's life does consyste in
reproach, death except: And every thing that is good, in glory. The reason
thereof is, that (as at the beginning I said) very good or evil was not to be
found among mortal men. But to return to the purpose, our country perishes,
and there in our friends, kindred, reputacion and substance. I grant, but do
thou account those only thy neighbors that inhabit thy country? Surely we
are al disce^ded of one line, and if we look back to our grandfathers and
great great grandfathers our affinitye is much. It is good manners y^ gets
friends, and virtue y^ wi^neth reputacion, which if thou want, it is not
reputation but rather ambicion and craft. In pouertye thou haste many
Companions, so as for thine error thou need not be ashamed, for want of company
thou cannot be weary. And in pouertye as erst I said, there are many ways to
relief: as hospitalles, kinsfolk, charitable persons, and all good men. Also
the vniuersalitye of the misery takes away al reproach. And though many through
sloth and lothenes to labor, do fall into beggary, yet a mind industrious
and armed with virtue, is seldom subject thereunto. Albe it the hole cittye
of Siracusa was taken, spoiled and sacked, yet Marcellus preserved Archimedes.
Also when Megara was taken by Ptolomeus, and after by Demetrius son of
Antiochus, yet Stilpho the Philosopher was saved, and at the kings hands
received both honor, and reward, for the one desired his company, the other
became his scholar. When Rhodus was besieged by Demetrius, Protogenes the
painter, being found in ye suburbs, was by him honored, though the other
cittezens remained scant in surety. Virtue is always accompanied with Nemesis,
who sufferethe none to beg, saving men from common calamities. Socrates
remained in Athens healthy, when y^ plage was there at the greatest. Crates
escaped harm at the saccage of Thebes. A man of great virtue ought not to
hazard himself in common calamyties. Now remains it only somewhat to say of
many miseries assembled togethers. And as Diogenes said, I am he upon whom
all misfortune is cast: no house I have, no town, in exile, a vagabond, and
beggar. Yet to counteruayle all these miseries, he thought the virtue of mind,
of force enough. If therefore being old, thou art sick, pore, and banished,
whether does ye increase or, divide thy miseries. Calamities are not according
to this number, but the greatness to be measured. It comes to pass in these
as it does in greifes of y^ body, one Calamity drive than other away. Exile
takes away the dishonor of misery, when thou live among people unknown.
And as erst I said there is nothing (save death) that a man desires more to
eschew. Whether had thou rather be Philota when he was persecuted of
Alexander, having youth, beauty, strength, great, birth, and riches, then in
servitude, sick, and in thine old estate? Truely^ the condition of man is like
unto a garment which the more rich and beautiful it be, the more a sport does
disgrace it, and the less beauty it has, y^ less hurt the garment there by
receives. It is also to be considered that no man is al his life in miserye
for sleep causes forgetfulness of sorrow, and is as pleasant to men in sorrow,
as to those that be most happy. Also the delights of our senses be to al me^
almost alyke common, as taste, venery, sight, heari^g, and smellinge. So all
things that be delectable to man, do not togethers decay. If therefore at one
instant all mortal men did sleep, then for that time none should be more
happy then other. But we are most assured not only to sleep, but also dye:
and as long to live we cannot, so how far we are from death is to us unknown.
Wherefore to bear every thing resolutely, is not only the part of a wise man,
but also of a man well advised, saying y^ there is nothing in this life, that
may justly be said to be against us. Therefore Homerus feigned Aten the Gods
of Calamitye, to barefooted, as one that could not touch any thing sharp or
hard, but walked lightly upon the heads of mortal men. Meaning that Calamity
durst not come nere any, but such as were of base mind, simple, and subject
to effeminacy. But among such as were valiant and armed with virtue, she durst
not come. Wherefore lift up thy mind to heaven where an everlasting and most
pleasant life is prepared for thee. Men in this world are like trees, some
slender, some great, some flourishing, some bearing fruit some witheringe, some
growinge, some blown down, and some fruitful, which in one harueste time are
brought togeathers and laid upon one stacke. Neither is there afterward
seen any difference among them, what they be or have been, al at one time be
cut down never more to grow again. Even so al pride, ambicion, riches,
aucthoritye, children, friends, and glory do in short space grow old, and
perish, neither does it make matter whether thou were Irus or vile Galba,
Antaxerles or noble Hercules. Only honestye and virtue of mind does make a
man happy, and only a cowerdlie and corrupt conscience, do cause thine
unhappiness. Because the worste that the good man can fear, is the best that
the evil can wish for: which is the destruction of the Soul in death. But
as he ought not to hope thereof, so should not the other fear it. For God the
eternal father has sent us into this world as children and heirs of his
kingdom, and secretly beholds how we fight and defend our selves, against
our senses, y^ world and the Devil. And who so in this battle, valyantly
fights, shall be called and placed, among the Princes of heavenly kingedome.
And who so slothfully or cowerdly behaueth himself, as a slave in featnes,
shall for evermore be bound.

This worldly stage was purposely prepared, that God the father might secretly
behold us. Such foolish children then, as in his sight wantonlye,
slouthfully, and sediciouslye, live, should they not think he does behold
them? Whenso ever therefore thou haste taken that last leave of Life, thy
soul like unto a lover embracinge his death, shall enjoy that swetenes and
security, which we can neither write of, nor conceive. For since these worldly
lovers (amongst whom be many mislykings without assurance or eternity) can
scarcely express their joys in love: Happy, yea thrice happy is this heavenly
lover, who forgettinge all others, with his one love is united. For within
this kingdom he loves and lives in the sight of him, that can do all
things, and therefore like a good son to his father is ever ready to do his
pleasure.

FINIS.

