(...) THE ANSWER TO THE PREFACE OF THE RHEMISH Testament.

By T. Cartwright.

AT EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY RObert Walde-graue, printer to the Kings Majesty.
1602.

Cum priuilegio Regio.

(...) Th'answere to the preface of etc.
To the six first sections page 1. 2. and 3.
THE true religion being like the heavenly bodies which never change: the
Popish religion resembles the earth, which as the potters claye is ready to
receive any form, according as the wind and weather, times and seasons of the
^eare, winter or summer, spring or fall will set upon it. Hereof it is that they
which sometime did so deadly hate the instruction of the youth, in the grounds
and principles of religion; that they could not hear the word of Catechism
with patient ears: now in fear of a general falling from them through
opinion either of their blockish ignorance or sluggishe negligence; are
constrained both to write and teach their Catechismes. Out of the same fear it
rises, that they which hitherto could not endure the holy scriptures to be
red of the people, in their mother tongue: now least they should utterly
fall from the hope of their gain, through a vehement suspicion of juggling and
playing under the boarde with the people: and constrained to profess a printe
of that, which they sometimes burned, and praetend allowance of that, which in
times past they condemned. Howbeit th'euidence of the truth having these
Church robbers upon the rack: see notwith-standing how hardly they are gotten
to confess the truth, and how they lysp it, rather then speak it out. For
here they confess that the Armenians, Gotthes, Italians, French and English
men, had either some part or the whole of the scriptures translated into their
own tongues. But they will not grant it of the Slauoies; which notwithstanding
is most evident, not only by the words of Jerome, who affirms that he gave
to his own nation a translation most diligently amended: but by certain of
their own Doctors, from whom th'euidence of Ieromes words Hosius d^ Saecro
verbo Vernac, legendo. Alfonsus d^ Haeres. lib. 1. c. 13
does wring forth the confession of the truth in this behalf. But what
needs all this niceness; when it is evident that in the elder and purer
times, the scriptures were translated into innumerable, yea to all tongues
usual amongst men. In the latter times of popery, Chrysostom. in Ioh. homil. 1
Theodoret. de corrig. Graecorum affect. lib. 5.
it is not showed, that there were such translations especially in England:
where the Jesuits do foolishly conclude, that there was a translation in our
tongue allowed, because the counsel provides that none should be permitted,
but that which was allowed by the Diocesane. And if there were any; yet it being
kept close prisoner, that it could neither come to the people, nor the people
to it: it is all one in this question, whether there were none, or no use of
them. And if they both were, and were used: yet for so much as, by their own
confession, they were permitted to wring out of the peoples hands the
translation whereby the Popish Church was besieged: it is evident, that you
permit it not either in reverence to the holy scriptures, or love to the
people; but rather as desperate enemies, which had rather kill with it, then
that the head of your gainefull errors should be stricken of by it. And it
fares altogether with you in this point, as with men which having a natural
hatred of cheese, or some such food, in such sort as the very sight or touch
of it does offend them: yet being effamished, are content for the safety of
their lives even to eat it. For abhorring from the scriptures in time of your
peace: when it comes that you and your state is plunged by such as you call
baeretickes; you are glade to bite or nibble upon the scriptures, if happily
you can get any thing to serve the praesent need. But tell us (go^d sirs) is
the reading of the scriptures by the people, like unto Strawberies, that are
good only in some season of the year? is it physic when men are sick and
not meat when they be whole? is it triacle to drive out poison, and not
praeseruatiue to keep from it? has it strength to put the enemy to flight,
and has it none to hinder his approach? finally is it good to weed, and not to
plant? The contrary whereof is rather true. For if it be able to heal a sick
man, it is much more able to keep him whole which is already in health: and
if it be meet to give light to the simple, when the heavens are ouercast with
the mist and cloud of haeresie; it is much more forcible to show the way, when
they are not so clouded. It is therefore a sottish distinction which the
Jesuits use, in making the peoples reading of the Scripture dangerous in time
of peace, and profitable when the enemy (by haeresie) has made a broyle. How
beit admitting that the peoples harvest of reading the Scripture, is only in
foul weather: how comes it to pass, that you have not welnigh forty years
long, wherein the gospel after a dead winter has been green and flourished
again in our country, and wherein the Haereticall translations (as you call
them) have filled the land: procured that this sickle of your translation,
might be in the hands of the people; thereby to get them so much grain, as might
have fed them in this dearth of Masses, and other such swill and swaddes as you
were wont to fill them with? Wherefore the people may well see Tranquillus.
that as unto Vitellius, the dead citisen was always of good savor; so unto
you, the dead and carcased souls are of pleasant smell. But let us come unto
the grounds of this difference of the peoples reading of scriptures, which
they have set in the forefront of the praeface. The first is, that it is not
absolutely necessary for all manner of men to read them. It is absolutely
necessary that all men should use all good means and helps, whereby to know
Christ more perfectly: but reading of the scripturs (which al do testify of
him) is a good mean and help thereunto: wherefore it is absolutely necessary.
And to this stayre of clyming up to the knowledge of Christ by reading, does
our S. Christ lift up his hearers; when he wills them to search the
scriptures. For he Ioh. 5. 39.
does not will them only to hear the word preached, but to use all manner of
instruments, whereby they might dig out the hid treasure of the knowledge of
himself. And the circumstance of that place, does argue, that he had in that
particular exhortation, a more special regard to the reading of them, then to
the other more excellent exercise of having them preached. For when of the one
side, they believed not the Sermons of our Savior Christ, and of the other
side, it was dangerous to refer them over to the Sermons of the Scribes and
Pharisees malitiouslye blind in that mystery: there remained only that with
invocation of the name of God, they should read the scripturs; to the end that
by conference of them with the Sermons of our Savior Christ, they might find
and feel the truth of them. And as this place proves that the peoples
reading of the scripture, is a good help to those that believe not after they
have hard the preaching: so the example of the Act. 17. 11.
men of Baerea, declares that it is also necessary for those that believe;
that they should be able by conference of the scripture, to confirm
themselves in the faith whereinto they are entered: whereof let the reader
further look, what is both objected and answered in that place. And if it were
a safe and a sure thing for the Jews, not yet believing in our Savior Christ,
to search and read the scriptures: how can it be dangerous for Christians,
that have already believed him to read the scriptures, which bear testimony
of him? And if it be commendable, that those that were novices in Christianity
and plants of a day old, should search and read the scripture: how much more
ought the reading of the scriptures be committed unto their trust, which
(through the covenant of grace) were from their mothers womb borne Christians.
Gal. 2. 15


Secondly it is absolutely necessary for all men, to use all those aides
whereby they should the more perfectly know what is the will of God; Deuteronomy. 6.
thereby to frame themselves to the obedience of the same. Hereof the law
commands, that every one should not only have the law sounding like a
trumpet in his ears: but also that it should be as a ring upon his finger, as
a bracelet upon his hand, as a frontlet before his eyes: that is to say,
always in sight. For which cause he commanded further, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. 8. 9*
that the law should be written upon the frontiers of the land, upon the gates
of the City and Town, and upon the posts of every man's private house. Now
if it were then thought good to the wisdom of God, that the people should in
passing by, read the law graven, or painted upon pillars, gates and doors,
where they could not consider of it so gravely and stayedly: how much more was
it his good pleasure, they should read the same sitting in their houses: where
having the book before them they might more ripelie and deliberatelie conceive
the sense, and receive the fruit thereof. Further the Apostle Coloss. 3. 16.
commanding that the word of Christ, should dwell plentifully or richly
amongst those that are of the Church; does thereby give commandment, that they
should use all lawful means of familiar acquaintance with it. Unless
therefore it be denied (which cannot be of them that grant it sometimes
expedient) that the reading of the Scriptures, is a lawful exercise in the word
of god, for the obtaining of greater wealth in the same: it is manifest, that
it is commanded of the Apostle. If commanded, then also absolutely necessary.
Moreover it is commanded to try 1. Ioh. 4. ^.
the Spirits, whether they be of God or no: But that can not be without some
further knowledge of the word then we receive of the spirits them selves, that
is to say, the ministers speaking either in the spirit of error or truth:
wherefore it follows, that the whole knowledge that a faithful man ought to
have, hangs not of the mouth of the minister, but ought to have a supply of
private reading, and meditation of the law at home. Again the King, who of all
other for the multitude Deuteronomy 17. 19. Iosu. 1.
and weight of his business, in the affairs of the common wealth, might seem
to be freed from this exercise of private reading, and to content himself with
the sermons in the temple: is commanded to read the book of the law
diligently: where other men that are neither so full of business, nor have so
many whose welfare depends of them, can not be exempted from this exercise
of piety. And if it be necessary for the King to read in the word, that he
may rule well; it is necessary that the subjects should do the same, that they
may obey well. And if it be needful for him to read, that he command not
through the pride of his heart things that are unlawful: there is the same
necessity for them, least in too great baseness of mind, they shall obey man
rather then God. Last of all, reading of the scriptures Iosu. 8. 34 Nehe. 8. 2.
Reg. 23 2. Act. 13. 15 and 15. 21. Col. 4. 16
publicly in the Church, being not only a laudable and approved custom of
the Church under the law, but commanded also in the gospel: does declare that
that which was continually profitable unto the whole Church together, can not
but aedifie every one a part in his house. As for their reason to prove it not
necessary, for that through man's malice or infirmity, the scriptures are
pernicious and much hurtful to many: It is very childish. For by the same boult
they may shut out preaching as well as reading considering that through either
infirmity or malice, many and the most part oftentimes of those that hear,
get a greater condemnation unto themselves. So also the Sacraments shall be
banished, which by many are received to judgment. Finally, so it 1. Cor. 11
should be dangerous for the people to meddle with Christ himself: as Luke. 1.
one that is set for the rising and fall of many.

And to this manifest and sounding voice in the Scriptures, does the echo of
the elder Churches answer: which teach that the people should learn Orig in
Levit. hom. 4. Chrysostom i^ Genesis homil. 29.
the Scriptures without book: that they should not only hearken unto the
reading of the Scriptures at the Church, but also take the Bible when they come
home, and that reading of the Scriptures performs that to the soul, that
meat does to the strength of the body: that all men ought, by daily reading
the Scripture Hieron i^ c^p 10. Ecclesiast. August. in Psalm. 33. c^n^. 2.
get wisdom: that they should read the Scriptures, for that they were written
to the end we should be comforted. Wherefore it is not the Churches divine
wisdom, but the Popish Synagogues deuilishe craft, to forbid that at any
time, which both the Scriptures, and purer Churches have not only permitted
the use of to the people, but straightly charged them therewith. And it is not
unlike the subtle practice of the Philistimes, the most deadly enemies unto
the Lords people: who to keep them always in slavery, permitted no use of
weapon unto them, a few excepted, whom they (forsooth) would show grace unto.
So 1. Sam. 13
the divine wisdom of your Church, is to hinder the servants, that they
should not know their masters will: to hold from the betrothed maid, that
she should not know her faith and duty to her spouse. Where also it is to be
noted, that as the authority of Gods word is in no account with them: So
neither the Council of Trent (otherwhere matched with the authority Upon Act
15.
of the evangelistes) nor the supreme authority of the Pope is so sacred
amongst them, but that for lucre they are boulde with both of them. For in
steed that they praeciselie command, that none may read any translation
whatsoever, without the Curates testimony of his ability thereunto: they have
without repeal of Council, or Popes decree, put their translation in men's
hands with no note of discretion which we understand; but who will give most.
You may not think much therefore if we for Truths sake make light of your
Trent council, when you for gain infringe it.

To the three next sections, page 3. and 4.
If (as has been showed) all ought to read the Scriptures, then all ages, all
sexes, al degrees and callings, all high and low, rich and poor, wise and
foolish have a necessary duty herein: of which particularities, neither
do the Scriptures nor ancient writers keep silence. For the Scripture
declares that women and children, and that from their infancy, that Joshua ^
2. Tim. ^. Psalm. 49 Prove.
noble and ignoble, rich and poor, wise and foolish exercised themselves in
the holy Scriptures. And Theodoret Theodoret. de corrig. Grae. affect lib. 5
lyketh well that the points of religion which the Church taught* were not
only known of Doctors and masters, but of Taylers, Smythes, Weauers and
other artificers: not of men only but of women, and the same not only
learned, but laboring women, sewsters, servants and handmaides; not of
Citizens alone, but of Countrie-folke, Ditchers, deluers, neatheards and
gardiners, disputing even of the holy Trinity, etc.

And being commanded to be talked of both within the house and without, Deuteronomy. 6
both lying sitting and walking: a man would think that therein is commanded
the exercise of it in all places, both table and bench, both boat and barge.
And it is too great ignorance to make that difference of place in this matter,
which was not made under the Law: when in all manner of places it is not
only lawful, but commanded to talk of the Law. And seeing to the clean, al
things are clean, the boat and boat-man, the rudder Tit^^ 1
and the rower: it is too palpable a darkness, to think that the Word 1.
Tim. ^
should be profaned by those things, which by faith and prayer it sanctifies.
Wherefore it is most false, that the Bibles were then only in Monasteries,
Colleges, Churches, Bishops, Priests, and some devout principal laymens
hands. For Chrysostom exhorts all the people and Epist. ad Coloss. hom 9
Hieron. in Psalm. 133 In Matthew. homil. ^. and concione 3 d^ L^zar^
secular men to get them Bibles, at the least* the new Testament. Ierom also
says (...) married men, Monks, silly women were wont to conte^d, who should
learn more scriptures without book. But Chrysostom is bold, and affirms it
more fit and profitable for the lay people to read Gods word, then for Monks,
Priests, or any other. And if private reading of the Bible were urged so sore,
when (through the travail of writing,) it must needs cost much: how much more
then is it now to be pressed, when (through the benefit of printing) it is so
easily and lightly obtained. It is false also, that either they sung in an
unknown language, or without knowledge of the sense in some profitable
measure: which had been liker unto the prating, prattling and parating of birds
tickling the ears of fond men; then to any Christian melody, pleasant in the
ears of the wise God.

After, like men fighting in the dark, they stryke themselves instead of the
enemy. For they are forced to bring forth Jerome, exhorting men and women to
the reading and meditation of the Scripture, t^^reby to walk comely in their
several callings. Themselves therefore which drive men from reading of the
Scriptures, are causes why neither ^irgines can meditate of chastity, nor
wives of faithfulness, Prince how to rule, nor subject how to obey: seeing
these duties are evidently to the understanding of the simplest, laid forth
in holy Scripture: And if then the inferiors taught not their superiors: it was
because that as they excelled their underlings in age and dignity; so they
went before them in knowledge and understanding of the word. But because
Popery is such a time, wherein (as Solomon says) the Eccl. 10. 4.
servants ride and the masters go on foot: that is to say, wherein commonly
the Bishop can byte, but not bark: the Pastor can milk but not feed: the
Priest can mum, but cannot speak it is needful that in such a case, the waters
should go against the stream and the scholar should teach his master, the
sheep control his Pastor, etc. Yea in the learned and lightsomest times
that ever were, and in personages of notable mark, it has sometimes come to
pass, that not only women Luke 2. 38 Luke 24. 10 act. 18. 26. 2. Reg 5 13
Chrysostom. in Coloss. hom. 9 August. d^ tempor. sermon. 56.
have instructed men: but even the sheep the shepherds, the scholars their
master, the servant their Lord. And Chrysostom and Augustine will have every
one to learn, as they may teach one another. Against which as also against the
peoples reading of Scriptures, neither Jerome nor August. have a word. For
Jerome in the same epistle exhorts to the reading of the scripture, only he
reproves them which trusting unto the strength of their wits, and to their
own study, seek not the necessary help of a teacher, the principal means
which God has ordained to bring men to sound knowledge of the truth. And how
far Jerome was from the Jesuits judgment, it appears otherwhere: when he
says, that the Scripture is termed the Scripture of the people, because it is
red unto Hieron. in psalm. 86
all people that all may understand. Likewise he sharply reproves such as
contemned those that red the Scripture and mused of them day and night, as
chatters and unprofitable: which is the very popish spirit that reigns in
these days. The same answer serves for Augustine, who reprooueth not men for
reading of the Scripture, but only for that in reading them, and finding
difficulties which they cannot avoid: they forthwith condemn the word, in
stead that they should repair to such as are able to undo their knots. Which
thing is not only clear upon the place, but confirmed by other sayings
Where declaring it not to be enough to hear the word in the Church only, he
exhorts al in their private houses either August. de tempor. sermon. 55
to read, or to get some to read for them. And again, that nothing abides,
but that which a man has lay de up in the treasure of his conscience, for
health of his soul by reading, praying or doing good works, and that we must
always pray and read. And if they wrote this, when the malady of arrogancy in
divine matters was not so great as now it is: how much more would 2. Reg. 22.
11. 18. 19 Romans 7. 7 9. 10
they have wrote it in these days; considering that the use of the Scripture,
is to beat down the pride and arrogancy of the mind: whereas the Jesuits
conclude clean contrary, that because men are more proud now then
heretofore, the Scriptures should be withdrawn more now then then; esteeming
that pride gayneth by reading of the Scripture: therein like to those whom
Augustine sharply reproves, August. in Psalm. 130
which hearing that they must be humble, will learn nothing: thinking that if
they learn any thing, they shall be proud.

To the 4. next sections, page 4. 5. and 6.
The moderation of Nazianzene is necessary, but helps you nothing at all.
For it makes a distinction, first generally between Doctor and Scholar, and
then of the Doctors office, varying his teaching according to the difference of
one Scholar from another: which we confess; and not between Scholar and
Scholar, as you praetend. And therefore following your sense of Nazianzene,
which is that the people should not meddle with the Scriptures, but the
Minister alone: your selves are guilty of the conspiracy of Korah, which
permit to some of the people the reading of the Scriptures, which (out of
Nazianzene) you pretend to be the several of Bishops and Ministers. We grant
it is often profitable for the common people not to be curious: and so is it
also for the Pastor, in matters that breed quaestions rather then aedifying to
God which is through faith in Christ. Howbeit commending his sister for her
cunning in I^funeb. orat. de Gergoniae
the Scriptures both old and new: it is manifest, that by curiosity, he
means not to draw them to carelessness of reading and meditating of the
Scriptures. Augustines words, as they make not for you, considering that the
simplicity of faith, reaches it self to the believing, (and consequently
understanding) of the whole Scripture, and every part thereof: so to fit them
for your purpose, have you shamefullie gelded the^. For you have left out the
pronoune this, which marreth al your market. Augustine having before, out of
the scriptures confuted certain which held that there should be no resurrection
of the flesh, concludes with this exhortation: that they should be nourished
with this simplicity of faith, which he had proved out of the Apostles and
Christ's words: with which simplicity, both himself and all other was, and
ought to be contented. After he shows the cause of their error, for that
being little ones in knowledge, they had neglected the first principles and
grounds of their religion, as it were the milk whereby they should have
grown to the strength of partaking of sounder and harder meat^. Al which does
nothing bar them from the reading of the Scriptures; in every book chapter and
almost verse, whereof, there is as well milk for babes, as strong meats for
those which are grown. And as in the most champion and plain grounds of the
books of Scripture, there are some mysteries (as hillocks) higher then the
rest of their fellows: so in the greatest and steepest hill thereof, there is
sooting whereby with labor and travail, with much reading and often prayer,
we may come to that height of it, wherein we may see and discover so far of
the land of Canaan, and the kingdom of heaven, as our places and callings,
sexes and ages do require. And as there is no book in the Scripture so
mystical and deep, whereout a good teacher will not deliver doctrine fit
as well for the unlearned, as for the learned: so is there no good scholar in
the school of Christ, which out of the hardest books, cannot draw some thing,
as well for his confirmation of that which he has learned, as for his entrance
into the knowledge of that, which he is yet to learn. And as when a man has
learned Arithmetic, the way is open and easy to Geometry, both which make
easy stairs to clime up to Astronomy: even so the people having laid the
grounds of Religion well, and red diligently the easier and plainer books of
the Scripture; shall have also a plain and a paved way, even in the deepest
mysteries, and profoundest books of the Scripture. Hereof Solomon says, that
all the words Prove. 8. ^
of wisdom are open and easy to every one of understanding. Where because by
a man of understanding, he means every one that is godly; as by the fool,
the wicked: it is manifest, that he declares that all the words of God are
easy, and open to al Gods people. Whereof Genes. 18
also comes that it is said, that Psalm. 25
God reueleth his secrets and hid counsels, to all that fear him. Seeing
therefore the people may as well come to the reading of the Scriptures with the
fear of God, as the Ministers themselves: it follows that there can be no
hardness or difficulty of any place of Scripture, which shall more withhold the
sight of that which is needful for them in their place and calling, then which
is necessary for the Ministers in theirs. Christ says that whosoever John. 7,
17
will do the will of God, the same shall know his doctrine. Seeing therefore
the people and unlearned, may have as settled a purpose to do the will of God,
as well as the Pastor or learned: it is evident, that their labor and travail
in reading of the Scripture, shall be more frustrate for their estate, then the
Ministers for theirs. Likewise there being a certain promise, that those which
abide in the word which they have believed, shall know Ioh. 8. 31 32
the truth: it cannot be, but that the people doing that as well as the
Minister, shall for their proportion, be partakers of the promise as well as he.
Hitherto belongs the plain and most usual words, the phrase and manner of
speech most frequented, the comparisons and similitudes most familiare, taken
out of the shops, and out of the fields, from husbandry and houswiferie, from
the flock, and from the heard, from the plowe, and the mow. For
notwithstanding that it had been easy for the Lord by his learned Prophets and
Apostles, and our Savior Christ especially, to have flien up into the heavens,
and to have gone down to hell, for comparisons to set forth his doctrine with:
yet we see how he cree peth as it were upon the ground, in taking that which is
before men's feet to clear his doctrine with. Wherefore? but that thereby he
would notify unto the sons of men, that he wrote the Scriptures for the
capacity and understanding of th'vnlearned. Last of al when the whole body of
the Scripture, from the head to the foot thereof, is termed a light and
lantern, they Psalm. 119 Proverb. 6 2 Pet. 1 2. Cor. ^
must needs be the children of darkness, which breath and bluster darkness
and obscurity continually against them. And therefore if it be hidden to any,
it is hidden to those whose understandings the God of this world has blinded,
that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should not shine unto them.
This judgment of th'easines and facility of the Scripture, have the ancient
fathers. Origin says that they In Exo^u^ hom. 9
are shut against the negligent, and open to those which knock and seek.
Another, that Chrysostom. in 2. Thessal. 2 hom, 5
all is clear and plain in holy Scriptures: whatsoever is necessary for us
is manifest. Another, that the Lord has spoken by his Hieron. in Psalm. 86
Gospel, not that a few, but that all should understand it: that Plato wrote
his wrytings, but not to the people, but to a few, scarce three understanding
him. Last of al, Cyrill says, that the Scriptures are profitably Contra
Julian. lib. 7 medium circiter lib
recommended unto us in an easy speech that they should not go beyond the
capacity of any. Wherefore it is no Catholic, but the Pelagian judgment,
that the August. co^tra Iul. lib. 5. cap. 1
Scripture is hard and fit for a few learned men. Your own Pope says, that
they are like a flood wherein the lame may wade Gr^gor. mag. Epist ad Leand. in
expositione Iobi
and th'elephant may swim. And if all the Scripture carry this light with
it, it is clear that every book does the same. Wherefore also the book of
the Canticles of Solomon, entreating of our spiritual conjunction with our
Savior Christ, and that in most chaste, and yet familiar speeches: it is meet
for all ages. We aggree that there may be a profitable discretion, of reading
one book before another, and of reading one twice before another once. But
for so much as the whole scripture is a letter sent from the almighty to his
creature: there is no just cause why the Greg. epist 84
book of the Canticles, etc. should be plastered up, that young men and
children should not read that part of the letter, as well as the rest. And
howsoever Ierom in that place seem to allow the Jews devise which they saw,
what time the veil was before their eyes: yet the same Jerome in another
place, where he speaks of th'education of a young maid of seven years
old, says, let her learn without book, the Epist. ad Gaudent.
Psalter: and until she come to be mariageable, let her make the treasure of
her heart, the books of Solomon, the Gospels, Apostles, and Prophets. Unless
therefore you will deny, that the Canticles are amongst the books of Solomon;
you shall be constrained to confess, that Jerome would not have the tender
ages shut out from the reading of them. Joseph. 2. lib. contra Apion
Here the testimony of Josephus is notable, who affirms that if any asked
any of the Jews concerning the law: they were as well able to tell him, as
their own names. And as for your argument, that the people should be no more
loath to be ordered by their Pastors, in the reading of the Scriptures, then in
the use of the holy Sacraments: it is absurd. For the Lord commanded the
father of the householde, to teach his children at Deuteronomy. 6
home, and by some opening to sharpen and set an edge of the doctrine of the
law, that it might cut the deeper into their hearts: yet did not he suffer,
that the householder should minister the Sacrament in his house. And your
selves, which grant unto certain lay persons, leave to have the use of the
Bible: do you think it lawful also, that you may credit the^ with the
administration of the Sacrament? Howbeit (indeed) you deal with the people
much a-like, both in holding them from the reading of the Scriptures, and in
excluding them from the Sacrament of the Supper: not only in that they
receive but once a year, but that even then they receive no Sacrament of
Christ, but an Idol of your own brain. When therefore you have answered the
trust you profess in the Sacraments; men may commit somewhat the more unto
you, in the stewardship and dealing out of the scriptures. There is no such
place of Ambrose in that book: If there were, yet the answer is easy: that
the Bible is called the Priests book, as they are called the pillars of the 1.
Tim. 3
truth: for that they were more continually to occupy themselves in the
reading of them. But that he meant not thereby to shut out the people from
reading thereof: it appears in that he says, That he cares not much for
his Ambrose sermon. 35 Look Ambrose upon the psalm. 118. sermon. 7. in verse. ^
belly, which is earnest in the food of reading: That that is the refection
that makes a fat soul. Also that the reading of the Scripture, is life. We
do not think, that you do so much envy the people the reading of the
Scriptures, as that thereby you seek your vantage: that your vile filthy
merchandise of Masses, and Diriges, Pardons and Indulgences, having no light to
show them by, might be vented abroad: which would lie rotting at home upon your
hand, if men might be suffered to bring any light with the^ into your
pack-houses. But seeing you object envy against your selves, let us hear how
you answer it. You compare your accusers herein to the Devil, surmysing an
evil and an envious eye in God, that forbad our parents the fruit of one tree.
You do well, if you be able to show that God has forbidden the people to read
the Scriptures. Which because you cannot, the accusation returns upon your
selves: it being as Satanicall to forbid that which God has bidden, as to bid
that which he has forbidden. And because it pleases you, to compare the
restraint of the Scriptures, with the inhibition of eating of the forbidden
tree: hearken of how contrary a judgment Irenaeus is unto you in this point:
who alluding to this place of Genesis, exhorts all men to eat of every
divine Scripture. You take a sure Irenaeus lib 5. ad medium circiter libri^
way, to keep the Church from knowledge falsely so named, whilst you will let
them know, neither good nor bad: not unlike to those parents, which to be sure
that their children shall not surfeit, keep them altogether from meat. You
would have them wise to sobriety. Therefore (belike) you bannish them from
the acquaintance of the scripture the mistress of all wisdom and sobriety.
Where read you that the Scriptures, are compared to knyues in the hands of
little children? They are indeed compared with a sword, in the Ephesians. 6
hand of a soldier: whereby it is easy for them to know, that your meaning
is to betray them, into their spiritual enemies hands, which have taken their
weapons from them. And if some mad men or quarrellers in the camp abuse them
to their own and others destruction: yet the law of not bearing sword in
field, will never be just. In stead therefore that you should have generally
commanded that all soldiers should wear swords, but such as (in respect of
franzie or quarrelling with their fellows) are specially restrained: you make
your proclamation, that no soldier shall we are weapon, but with special
license thereunto. Is this your skill and discretion in warfare? But thus at
least you provide, that dogs and hogs should not come unto them: so do
you also, that neither sheep nor lamb should touch them. Thus the usurpers
are kept from them, but the true owners also enjoy them not. Herein you bewray
a contrary spirit, to that wherewith our Savior Christ was conducted. For he
oftentimes preached in the hearing of known dogs and hogs, that is the Scribes
and Pharisees, obstinatlie set against him: least for their sakes the children
should be defrauded of their bread. And you of the contrary side, defraude the
children of their appointed portion, least the dogs should happily snatch at
it. Besides this, do you think, that the discretion of dogs and hogs from sheep
and lamb is so easy unto you, as it was unto our Savior Christ, and his
Apostles? Can you tell who divide the hoof and chaw the cud, who are clean,
and who are unclean, who read in the simplicity of heart, and who with
pretense? Here therefore you mutter that, which Harding your companion
speaks plainly: that the common people are dogs and hogs: and indeed your
argument is none at all in this place, unless by hogs and dogs, you mean all
those, from whom you steal away the reading of the Scriptures. As for your
description of dogs and hogs out of Chrysostom, to be heretics and carnal
men: it makes not so much to take the Scriptures away from the common people,
as from the learneder and richer sort. For heresy makes her nest oftener in
the breast of the learned, and of those that read the Scriptures in the
learned tongues, then in the common peoples heads. And the rich are more
often laden with carnal lusts, then the poorer sort: so that if Chrysostom
or Tertullian prove any restraint of reading of Scriptures, they prove it
directly against your practice, which lay the scriptures wide open to all the
learned, and as it was in Queen Mary's days (if we will remember) to those
that might dispend by year a certain land: that is, to those from whom
either you durst not hold it* or of whom you hoped to have gain through
special license accorded unto them. You say truly, that no man can understand
the Scriptures but by the Spirit of Christ. Whereof if you would have
concluded any thing for your purpose: you ought to have showed, that the Spirit
of Christ is appropriated to the learned, or at the least oftener accompanies
them, then it does the unlearned. The contrary whereof being true, that God
reuealeth his secrets (for the most) unto the simple and unlearned ones, and
that Matthew. 11 1. Cor. 1.
not many wise men, nor many noble men are taught by this Spirit: it is
evident, that if any should be shut from the reading, and other exercises of
the Scriptures, the same are especially the learned, and not the ruder, the
nobler and not the baser, the richer and not the poorer sort.

To the three next sections, page 6. and 7.
Mark (good reader) the blasphemy of these wretched caitiues, that esteem so
vilelie of the holy Scriptures, as if there were no better nor more honorable
use of them amongst the people, then to make choice of the reading of them,
rather then to be much occupied about stage plays, cards, and dice. These men
(no doubt) could be well content, that the people should rather sit down and
pill strawes, then they should take any book of holy Scripture into their
hand. Pharaos profaneness from hence forth shall not be spoken of, in respect
of the uncircumcised lips of these beastly Jesuits. For he which held the
people from exercises of godliness, in respect of doing some profitable work,
tending to the fortificatio^ of the land: but these are content, that sports
and plays, and that of the basest sort, and of worst report, as cards, dice,
and stageplayes, shall keep the people from reading of the Scriptures; so that
they be not much given unto them. And yet notwithstanding if (as you praetend)
they engender heresies, amongst the people: it should appear that they should
be as well occupied in the one as in the other: both of them being ready and
beaten ways to everlasting damnation. But a liar (they say) has need of
memory. For, if (as you have alleged) Chrysostom calls carnal men dogs and
hogs: these delicate ones, given so much t^ cards, dice, and stage plays
being carnal: it follows by your discourse, that Chrysostom was of this
judgment, that the most seasonable time for the people to read the Scriptures
in, was when they were dogs and hogs: then which what can be more unworthily
spoken of the good Bishop. But mark also (good reader) the brazen impudency
of the Jesuits, whereby it will not be hard for thee to see, how all
conscience in them is even seared away, as it were with a hot-iron. For
Chrysostom disputes of a necessary and continual use of reading the
Scripture, by the people: and therefore does not so much speak against the lets
of certain times, as when they were given to stage plays, etc. but meets
with the ordinary and continual impediment, as the care for house, wife, and
children. For which purpose he alleges The Apostle, that the Scripture was
written for our correction. Which if the Jesuits will restrain to the
correction of excess in dicing and carding, etc. their cogging and iugling
cannot be hid from any. In the third homily of Lazarus, he does not object
th'excuse of pastime: but declares that for to deliver themselves from the
duty of reading the Scripture, one would say, that he has matters to plead,
another that he has public affairs, a third that he has his handie-craft to
awaite upon, another that he has his wife, his children and family to
maintain and take care for, and generally every one could say, I am a man of
the world, it belongs not to me to read the Scripture, but to those which
having taken their farewell of the world, dwell in the mountains and live a
continent life. To whom when he had answered, that they had therefore more
need to read the Scriptures: he concludes, that both they and he that lived
amongst men, as it were in the midst of the seas, have always need of the
perpetual and continual solace of the Scriptures. And yet reckoning up the
manifold uses of reading of the scriptures by the people, he concludes thus.
Wherefore it is necessary, that we should incessantly, fetch our armor at
the Scripture. Again, he compares in the same places which are here quoted,
the books of Scriptures, to th'artificers instrument, wherewith he gets his
living, which he will not gage: and as he makes his works with his tools, so
we by the Scriptures must correct our depraved minds. And a little after, The
reading of the Scripture is a great munition against sin, but th'ignorance
thereof is a downe-fall, and a deep hell: this begets heresies. Again, It
cannot now be (I say) it cannot be, that any can obtain salvation, unless he
be continually occupied in reading of the Scripture. There would be no end of
writing, if we should lay open all that Chrysostom has in this behalf, to
prove that he herein praescribed physic for the general disease of all
Christian people, and not for a special malady (as it might be the sweating
sickness) that haunted that people, whereof he had the government. Also for
all times both in prosperity and adversity, even vncessantlie; And not Homil.
3 de Laz.
only in those wherein (through abundance) they waxing wanton, gave
themselves to dicing and carding, etc Wherefore your distinction of a teacher in
the School, and Pulpit-man, has no place here: as indeed it is foolish,
and has no place otherwhere. For the doctrine in school, is and ought to be
the same, that is in pulpite, and that in pulpite as exact, absolute, and
necessary, as that in the school. The difference is, that in the school has
not annexed the goade and prick of exhortation, as the other has. For you may
not imagine Chrysostomes pulpet, so loose and so profane as yours is, to
speak at all random, without any girdle of truth about your loins. Our women
(God be praised) although they are well able, to set such Doctors as you are to
school: know their places, and keep silence, content to teach their children
at home: which if you cannot brook in them: or ever it can light of them, your
condemnation must first pass upon the head of S. Paul, who commands to be
teachers Titus. ^. 3.
of good things unto their daughters, and of Bathsheba who taught Prove. 31
the wisest child that ever was among the sons of Adam, Christ excepted. The
example also of Eunice who taught Timothe from his very infancy 2. Tim. 1. 5
and 3. 15
in the Scriptures, is notable to teach that neither women must forbear
teaching, nor very babes to learn. And if always learning, they are always
ignorant: in what degree of ignorance, shall yours be found, that never learn
any thing at all. They read the whole Bible, seeing all is inspired of God,
and all profitable, and 2. Tim. 3
therefore the moral parts. But yet praefer those that be doctrinall, or as
you speak dogmaticall; as both the foundation of all good manners, and the
rule whereby they may judge of the example of life, whether it be good or
bad, worthy of praise or dispraise. And it pittieth them, to see the
blindness that is yet in your eye: which deemeth that to be so crooked, which
to all sound judgment is straight: that is to say, that the causes should
go before the effects, and the rule before that which is ruled by it. And as
Saint Paull in the duty of teaching, Act. 26*
could not acquit the faith and trust put in him, but by teaching the people
the whole counsel of God: so they think not themselves discharged in the
duty of learning, unless to the uttermost of that they may, they endeavor
to learn what is the good pleasure and perfect will of God toward them.
Neither doubt they, but Romans 12*
that they use more reverence and true humility in coming to the high
mysteries you speak of, then you do in turning your backs unto them. And
they are well assured, that they are fitter to wonder at, and to advaunce the
incomprehensible breadth, length, height, and depth of them, which have waded
so far in them as the Bowies and marks of holy Scriptures do teach them:
then you, which never wet your neb in them. And if they read the harder books
of Scripture, oftener and more diligently, then they do the easier: a wise
Schoolemaister which takes pleasure in his Scholar, would commend them.
Neither has it been heard of, that the Scholar was ever reproched, for his
greater diligence in his harder lesson, but of such three halfpennie vshers, as
you be: which are loath your scholars should learn too fast; but here one
word, and there another: here a line, and there a line; least in their
dexterity and forwardness of learning, your inabilitie and untowardness of
teaching should appear. The clasped and sealed book, to us which come not in
the strength of our own wits or merits, Apoc. 5
but in the victory of our Savior christ, who has unsealed them for us, lie
so far forth open, as therein we are well assured to read so much, as will
serve for our certain direction unto the kingdom of heaven. But in you, which
bring of your natural powers, and vaunt your selves of your merits; It is
true that the Prophet says, Esai. ^^
that neither can your learned read, because all is unto the^ as a sealed
letter; and your unlearned being offered the reading, they refuse to read it,
and think themselves discharged because they have no learning. And wherefore (I
pray you) should the Epistle to the Romans not be read of artificers and
women: to both which sorts (amongst others) it was first written, and why
should that be baulked more, then others, by the simpler sort: which has a
special testimony, that both it, and all other the preachings and writings of
the Apostle, are tempered as well to Romans 1. 14
the capacity of the foolish and unlearned, as of the wise and understanding
men. If there be nothing in that Epistle, for the ign oranter sort to learn:
then has Saint Paul made a desperate debt, which now being dead, he is never
able to pay. As for Saint Peter's words, they make no more against the peoples
reading of his Epistles, then against any other part of the Scripture: the
whole whereof, he affirms to be perverted of unlearned and unstable men. In
which kind if you judge all the vnlearneder sort of your people to be: you foam
out your own shame, and manifestly verefie the proverb, such Doctor, such
Scholar. For our people we cannot hold them for unlearned, which have learned
Christ; nor unstable which by faith are founded and rooted so steadfastly, that
all the wind and weather, waves and floods that can beat against the^, are not
able to remove them from the truth, which they have learned in the Scripture.
We acknowledge with Augustine, their wonderful depth: which would afray no man
from reading of them, if you had faithfully reported Augustines words. Who
affirms Confess. li. 12. c. 14.
that the ouermost of them, smyleth upon the little ones, and a little after
adds, let us come therefore together, to the words of thy book, meaning
Gods. In the other place quoted by you, he shows that if a man of the
sharpest wit and greatest diligence, from his childehood should give himself to
the study of them, continuing in them until crooked age, as if he should live
the years of Methusalah: yet he might always profit further in them. Which
is manifestly against you, for being bottomless, he shows August. epist. 3.
that notwithstanding no man can sound them, yet that his endeavor to search,
is not in vain, but is joined with daily profit, especially in things
necessary to salvation: which he affirms not to be so hardly come unto. Yea
himself confesses, that even in his very first entrance to the christian
faith, hered August. Confess. lib. 8. cap. 12. et 7. cap. 9. Chrysostom. in
proaem. in epist. ad Romans
the Epistle to the Romans (which you would wrest out of the peoples hands)
with great fruit. And Chrysostom upon this Epistle, teaches that the people
did not understand Saint Paul's wrytings, not because they were unlearned, but
because they would not have his writings continually. Ierom Epist. 13. 4.
speaks of the hard shell of the Scripture, as Augustine did of the depth: to
whet the diligence and industry of men, to greater and more continual travel
to be taken in the study of them: even also as does the Scripture it self,
which does not will Matthew. 24. 15.
the disciples upon the hardness of a place to give over the reading thereof,
but to ad further diligence and care to understand it. Where the Jesuits do it
clean contrarily, to terrify men from them. And therefore Jerome says they
shine and are very bright even in the Ibid.
very shell of them, although the marrowe be sweeter. Likewise he exhorts all
to crack the shell, to the end to eat the kernel. And in the very next
Epistle writing to a Matrone, he says, Therefore let the divine Scriptures be
always in Hieron. ad Celantiam
thy hands, and let them incessantly be turned or rolled in thy mind. Beside
that if all the Scripture were so shelly as you (out of Jerome) praetend: where
is the milk and honey for children, that are Heb. 5. Psalm. 19
called (as has been shevved) to the reading of them. They have no teeth to
crack the shell, yet they depart not empty, nor return not hungry from them.
Wherefore Augustine says, that God has so tempered the Scriptures, that by
August. d^ doct^ri. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 6.
manifest places he might provide against famine, and by those which are
obscurer, he might cleanse the loathsomnes of our stomak in exercising our
selves about them: noting thereby, that men would grow to disdainfulnesse of
the Scripture, if with the easier Scriptures, they should not join the study
of the harder. Finally, if before the lawful exposition of the Scriptures,
whole thirteen years are required, only to run the course of reading the
Scripture: we suppose verelie, that such an expositor will never be found in
Popery; although he be sought with a candle: where the chief garland and
crown of divinity, is not given to him that has been most conversant in the
old and new Testament, but to him, that can quite himself best in Duns and
Dorbel, in Lombard and Gratian, and such other unwholesome Nourses as these be,
at whose breasts, the popish divines do suck their first milk in Theology.
And to what end should they bestow thirteen years, before their entrance to
the Ministry, and the most of their time after they are entered in the study of
the Scripture: if they may bring no other interpretation of any place, then
that which they have received of their forefathers. As for the interpretation
of every part of the Scripture, by the Apostolic tradition; further then by
tradition (as appears afterward) is understood the written word of the
Apostles: there is no manner of mention in any writing, that carries credit
with it. But of interpretation, the discourse will follow after more at large.

To the three next sections, page 7. and 8.
We are well content that our Religion should be condemned of them, that
condemn the reading of the Scriptures: and as if they had to do with a hand
or foot ball, delight in the taunting terms of tossing and tumbling of them.
And we wait patiently Judas epist.
until the Lord come to give judgment of all these blasphemous speeches,
which wicked sinners speak against him, in his word. The trial of the cause
by the outward fruits, receives many exceptions. First, of four sorts of
grounds sown by the seed of the Gospel, there is but one fruitful; the rest
being not bettered by the preaching thereof, are worse then when they remained
in their Popish ignorance, or other fallings from the truth Wherefore to
praeiudice the fruit that the good ground yeldeth, by the barrenness and
unprofitableness of the other three sorts which have received the seed as well
as it: is not aequal, nor upright judgment. Secondly, this offensive and
apparent wickedness, even in the hypocritical profession of the Gospel,
proceeds of the negligence of the governors of the Church and commonwealth,
which loosing the coarde of both Church and commonwealth discipline, suffer
wicked men to spit out the poison of their hearts, which the wholesome severity
of commanded correction, would keep sealed up in them. And therefore our
Savior Christ, is not afraied Matthew. 24. 12.
to confess franckly that for the abundance of iniquity appearing in them
that made profession of the Gospel: the love or zeall of many, even of those
which sometimes were forward in the same, should wax cold. Now, to lay that
fault upon the Religion, which cleaves unto the governors: is likewise an
vn-aequall and uneven judgment. When in the commonwealth and Church of
Israel, every man did what he lusted: who knows Judge. 17. ^.
not, that there were heathen commonwealths, wherein many unlawful things, by
law and lawful punishments were restrained. Yet we suppose the Jesuits are
not so forsaken, that they will thereof conclude, that the heathnishe people
were better then the people of Israel: and that the religion of those Gentiles,
was better then the religion amongst the Jews. Thirdly, it ought to be
remembered that although sin reigned in Popery: yet it appeared not; there
being no light of the law of God to show it by: for that the candlelight of
knowledge, was clean put out. Where in the preaching of the Gospel, by the
beams of truth shyning so bright, that which in Popery was holden for no
sin, is now known to be sin: and that which seemed under it, a little
sin, the Gospel shows it to be very great. To judge therefore our mote,
and gnat (which the light of our doctrine shows) bigger then their beam and
Camel, which the night of their ignorance would not suffer to be seen: is
not to hold an even hand, and to go with a straight foot to the judgment
which is required. Further, it has been an old practice of the Devil,
against the professors of the Gospel, to charge them with disordered manners:
and therefore it ought to offend no man, if it be now renewed, by the
adversaries of y^ truth. And although our witness in heaven, and witness in heart
might well content us; whilst by your slanderous speeches, you do (as it were
blowing in the duste) raise it into your own eyes, to make you blinder: yet
we dare be bold with all the faults of the professors of the Gospel, (mo
manifoldlie then ought or would have been, if we had walked according to the
light that we have seen) to compare with such black Mores as you be which
beside teeth and tongue, that is to say, vaunts and brags, have no white about
you. For what either virtue in men, chastity in women, or obedience in
children, etc. can there be amongst you: which having learned no such thing in
the schole of the word, where they are only taught, know them not. Your men
may have the virtues that Turks and Jews have, your women and children the
chastity and obedience that is found amongst the^: they may fight manfully
for their country, they may keep their bodies from outward pollution, they may
do the things that their parents command them, etc: yet is there here neither
true virtue; nor undefiled chastity, nor humble obedience: as those which are
not done for Gods cause, but either in servile fear, vain-glorie, filthy
lucre, or some such by-respect. Whereupon we read that Seres a heathen and
idolatrous Eusebius. d^ praeparat. Euang. ex Bardisan^ Chalde^.
people, had through severity of discipline neither fornicator nor adulterer
amongst them. In which point with some others, how Angellike we are in
respect of you; there is occasion to speak afterward. It is a disorder, if
women do teach their husbands, children their parents, etc, which you saying,
and saying again to be amongst us, neither do nor can prove it. But it is a
greater confusion, when neither husband can teach his wife, nor parent his
children, nor old the young, nor Priest the people. When the seer is blind,
and the Ambassador dumb, and finally when the guide of the way knows not
the way himself: which how true it is in your kingdom; we leave it to be
esteemed of all indifferently. Singing of Psalms, hymns, and 1. Cor. 14. 26.
Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. Beda Histor* Ang^. lib. 5 cap. 12.
spiritual songs, the Scripture recommendeth unto us. Bid witnesses also,
that diverse books of Scripture were translated into English meetre. If any
man abuse this sacred and holy exercise to wantonness; the same shall bear
his condemnation. But to meet with such an evil, by taking away the good
altogether: is like unto those unskillful physicians, that rid their pacients
of no disease, unless they take their lives from them.

In the last of these 3. sections, are Scriptures and Doctors, idely and
foolishlie alleged, to prove that which no man denies; that Haeretickes abuse
the Scriptures, now thrice in this praeface repeated: by the conclusion, that
therefore either the Scriptures should not be translated, or being translated
should not be imparted to the common people; is naked and desolate of all
proof: unless it be proof, that because heretics shroud themselves in the
woll of the Scriptures, therefore Catholics may not warm themselves with their
fleece: or that because they draw poison from them, therefore we may not suck
honey at them: or finally for that they climb into the Lords armorie, to arm
themselves against us; therefore we should not enter by the door to prepare and
appoint our selves against them. And if haeretickes impugning the truth out of
the Scriptures, have such force to banish them from the common people: why
should not the confutation of haereticks by the Scriptures, bring them home
again to the peoples hands. If ever therefore there were doting disputers
these are their brethren.

To the two next sections, page 8. and 9.
It is an old practice of Satan, to bestir himself, and to open the mouth of
all his helhoundes against the godly and learned travels of those, which have
labored in this work of translating the holy Bible, or any part thereof.
Hereof Jerome complayneth, Hieron. ad Dom. and R^g. in Esd. and Nehem. and in
paralip. Erasm. Epist. ad Mossella^um.
in many places of his prefaces and Epistles: that he was tong-rent and raild
upon miserably. The same complaint is renewed of Erasmus, who was bayted by
Ley in England, Natalis Bid in France, Stunica in Spain, and infinite other
unlearned Monks and Friars. And therefore it ought not to seem strange, if the
worthy labors of Master Beza and other learned men of ours, and other
Countries have also their currs, to bark at them. As for us, albeit we are not
of that sort of men which love our own, and (as the Dolphins do their young
ones) have in admiration our works and writings: And further also confess,
that our translations are not so exact in all points of perfection, but that
time and study may better them: yet how falsely they are charged, by the
slanderous pens of these wrangling Jesuits, appears at large by the
learned and substantial defense made for our English translation, unto the
unlearned and trifling quarrels against the same. And if it appear to the
indifferent reader, that our translation which (no dout) for pure love they
bear to their cuntry and countrymen, they judge the worst of all others: is
free from those corruptions wherewith the Jesuits have sla^dered it: the good
reader may easily know, what to judge of our translations in other Languages,
Latin, French, Italian, etc. And herein let all men mark their equity, and
by their fidelity in their judgment of Master Caluins and Bezas translations,
affirmed by them to be as new and delicate, as Castalions, or worse then it:
esteem what trust they deserve in other their accusations, for either they
have never red them, or else partly their ignorance, and partlye their furious
malice against them, has so bewitched the^, that they can put no difference
between a swelling and swaged speech, between an honest homelye style, and
that which is pricked and pranked up by choice and exquisite words, sought
rather to tickle the ears of dainty fools, then for the fit delivery of the
sense the holy Ghost inte^deth. Finally between that which goes upon a plain
sandall, fit to go far for the publishing of the gospel: then that which is
mounted upon moyles and pantofles, meet to keep it at home, amongste a-fewe,
whom that courtlynes and curiosity of speech does delight. And if they will
purge themselves from a manifest and impudent slander herein? let them note the
places, wherein Calvin and Beza departing from Castalion, have either rioted as
he does, or in licenciousnes of speech have gone beyond him. Now where they
charge us to disauthorize, or to make doubtful diverse whole books of
Canonical Scriptures, allowed by the uniuersall Church of God, a thousand
years and vpwardes: their limitation Cyprian de Symb. Apost. Eusebius. hist.
eccles. lib. 6 cap. 25. Hieron. in prolog. Galeat. cap. 7. and in praefat. in
lib.
leuing unto us, the most ancient fathers and Councels which lived the best and
first five hundred years after Christ, rejecting the same books which we do;
argues a guilty conscience, constreyned to confess the truth which they
condemn. A strange impudency therefore, which neither Solomon: and prafat. in
Iarem. and praefat. in Dan. and ad Domni. and Rogat. in Esram, and Nehemiam.
and ad Laetam. Epiphan. lib. d^mens. and ponder. Council. Laodic. can. 59.
able to answer our manifest reasons, nor to bring any of theirs, nor yet to
match in any sort our authorities: not withstanding blare out their tongues,
crying and barking still, that we disauthorize the Canonical Scripture. Their
quarrel against Master Beza is answered in the proper place: That against the
tenth article of the Creed in meeter, is utterly unworthy of any answer. for
the meeter always requiring a paraphrasis, or some compass of words: the poet
could not more fitly have expounded the forgiveness of sins then by noting our
salvation by faith alone: according as the Apostle, of the remission of sins
out of the Psalm, concludes the justification by faith without works. The
other corruption of Christ's soul descending into hell, after his death argues
no contradiction amongst our selves, but a small remnant of the infection of
Popery in that author: which is so malicious and stubborn a leprosy, as for
the approved trial of their clensing from it, they have commonly need to be
shut up from pulpit and pen, some reasonable time: and as they say in the French
proverb: The monks Cowle is not easily put of in many years, what consent of
judgment there is amongst us in that behalf, the later editions which have left
that Creed clean out, may somewhat declare.

To the four next sections, page 9. 10. 11.
What compassion have you had of your country men, which have kept back the
wheat of Gods word from them so many years and ages, vvherevvith they should
have been fed to aeternall life. And your compassions now, what are they but
(as Solomon says of the Prove. 12. 10.
compassions of the wicked) most cruel. Wherefore it is certain, that as the
curses of Gods people have hitherto pearsed your souls, and run them thorovv
for engrossing into your hands the grain of life: so now they will be as
sore and sharp against you, for selling them such mustie, mildred, blasted, and
by all means corrupted grain. Neither is your impiety less now in poisoning
them, then it was before in staruing them. Wherefore you partly persuade us,
that you have done this work in fear and trembling: seeing in so open
corruptions, and so manifold and manifest wrestings, it was hard for you not
to see eft-sones hell opened before your eyes. As for your childish translation
of numbering word for word, and as it were syllable for syllable, rather then
to give sense for sense, and to translate rather by weight of sense, then by
tale of words; although also, it shall appear that you have kept your self to
neither; yet have you no defense in Jerome for it. For although by the words
you allege, may well be gathered out of him a straighter Iawe in turning the
Scriptures, then in turning other writters: yet having showed in the same
Epistle, that his use in translating Hieron. ad Pammach de optima gener. inter
pr^t^ndi.
was not to number but to weigh words, that he followed the words so far as
they were not strange from the custom of speech, that he translated not
words, but sentences; he adds, that it is no marvel, if this were done in
translating profane and ecclesiastical writers, seeing that the seventy
interpreters, th'Euangelistes and Apostles had done the same, not yielding
word for word. And after in the same Epistle he says, that the care of
th'Evangelists, was not to hunt after words and syllables, but to set down
the mind or sense of the doctrines. And therefore shows by diverse examples,
where they in words neither aggree with the 70. interpreters, nor yet with the
Hebrew. Amongst other, the example that he cites out of Saint Mark is notable:
where our Savior Christ's words being only Tabitha Cumi. i. Rise maid:
th'Euangeliste translating it, to make the sense more full, interlaceth I say
to thee. And if the Jesuits tarry to hear, where Jerome himself uses this
liberty in translating the Scriptures: we send Ad Pammach. and Marcellinum.
them to another Epistle of his, where they shall find him defe^ding himself
in his liberty of tra^slating Naschqu Bar which being word for word, kiss
the son, he translated adore the son: least Nolens tra^sferre putide,
sensum magis, sequutus su^.
(as he says) if he had turned otherwise, he should have turned it evil
fauoredlie. Which we write, rather to show how far Ieromes judgment in
translating, differed from these apish Jesuits, then that we esteem that
the other translation which he shunned, was so hard orrough, as he judged it.
And therefore it was elegantly said of the Emperor, I hate alike as departing
aequally from the mean, both Antiquitaries Suetonius in Octauio Augusto.
and affectors of novelties. The first place recited out of Augustine, makes
nothing to the purpose. For as the style of the Scripture, as it were the
garments and habit thereof, is neither new fangled, nor exquisitly labored by
perswasible words of man's wisdom: so is it not foul and sluttish; but it is
arrayed from top to toe as an honest and chaste matrone, avoiding as well
barbarousnes and rusticalnes of the one side, as curiosity and affectation of
the other. In the other place there is no such thing found as they talk of,
albeit that also should make as little to the purpose as the other. And if the
old writters speaking and writing unto their people, did speak and write
barbarously, that they might be the better understood of them: what is that,
to make it a rule in translating. If Jerome in correcting the old translation,
so tempered his pen that amending it, where it changed the sense of the text,
he left the rest to remain as they were: It follows not because he suffered
them to stand, that therefore he allowed of them throughout: considering that a
man will not use that boldness in correcting another man's work, which he
would do in his own, nor put out every phrase, and every manner of speech,
which he himself could better. Besides that it is a harder matter then you ar
ever able to perform, to shevve that this old translation wherein these
venerable barbarismes and solecismes are found, is the same that Jerome
corrected. In none of the other places alleged out of Augustine, is there any
thing to maintain this babishnes of translation: but rather contrariwise, when
he affirms that some bind themselves too much unto the words, which
translations he holds for insufficient. Also that when the phrases are not
translated, according to the custom of the ancient Latinists: although
nothing be taken away from the understanding; yet they offend those which are
delighted with the things, when a certain pureness is kept in the signs of the
things, meaning the words. And what his judgment is in August. lib de vera
relig. cap. 5^.
this cause, he does other where plainly and clearly set down: when he
says that the Scripture is to be declared according to the propriety of every
tongue. Indeed he says that sometime the vulgar speech is more profitable:
but his reason is far different from yours. For it appears when he
praeferreth August. de doctr. Chr. lib. 2. c. 11.
those Barbarismes it is for the better commodity and capacity of the people to
whom he spoke or wrote praferring rudenes of speech; only to that pureness,
which either brings new words to offend the ears of the reader: or else
makes the sense doubtful or obscure. In which respect he affirms, that to
August. in Psalm. 138.
let his speech fall the easilyer to the understanding of his people, he had
rather say, ossum, which is no true speech then os, which is the proper and
true language. Beside that it is more evident by their barbarismes in other
speeches then in the texts of Scripture: that they so speak sometime, because
they met with no better, nor more choice words. Seeing therefore a good pure
Latin speech, is now better understood, then the old rotten and rustie
words: there is no cause, why they should not now be abolished, if ever they
had any use heretofore. And if it please the Jesuits, to confer the style of
these days, sithence the Gospel (after a long winter of ignorance) began to
flower again, with the style of those which wrote 200. years hence: we
suppose that they will accord us, that there is as great difference, as was
sometime between the Dorickes and the Attickes in Greece, or is now between
the court and country with us, yet we think that the Jesuits will not
therefore, rather choose to stamber and stut with their fore-goers, then to
speak clearly and purely with the present age: sure we are, that they have
done their best to the contrary. Wherefore it is evident, that you can bring
nothing to defend your sottish speech of hell of fire, for hell fire: for
against the spirituals of wickedness in the celestials, for docible of God, etc.
nor yet for your doubtful and dangerous speech, of the sin of the spirit, for
the sin against the spirit, with a number more of the same late. And yet have
you not kept the law your selves have made, for you have translated eighteen
years, Luke 13. 4
where both the Greek and old Interpreter, which you propound to follow so
superstitiously, have ten and eight years. If here seeing your folly, you
amended it, why have you not corrected it in places of greater importance, and
having corrected the old traslatour in another place of some moment, Romans 13.
9. where for restored you have turned comprised, why have you not performed the
same in other of greater weight. Not to speak of Lindanus your brother in this
impiety, who speaking of the truth of the matter retained by the old
interpreter, more then the truth: yet notwithstanding, confesses the often
slips of improprietie in speech, and other babishnes of him in translating.
Now as by your unlearned translation, you have greatly embased the pure mettle
of the holy word; so by your corrupt annotations wresting and writhing, haling
and pulling the translation, either to a diverse or contrary sense of that
which the words give, you have made it no better then filthy dross: So that
it may be verified of your work which Ierom says: you make of the Gospel of
Christ, the gospel of Hieron. in Epist. ad. Gal. cap. 1.
man, or that which is worse the gospel of the Devil. If you had given your
people your translation alone: we dout not, but they should notwithstanding all
your declinings from the native pureness of the word, have found relief in it
against extreme famine, which your unfaithfulness has thrust them into. Which
thing you well perceiving durst not upon the peril of quenching your
kitchin-fire: put forth your single few of translation, without y^
Cooloquintida of your annotatio^s; thereby to bring certain death to all those
that should taste of them. Wherein let the indifferent reader compare our
confidence, we have in the goodness of our cause, in either nakedly delivering
the Scripturs without any annotations at al, or else with few and short
directio^s. Rather to open the file and course of the Scriptures, then to
praeiudice the reader, either with recommending ours, or condemning the
adversaries judgment. Let him (I say) compare it with the fearful dout, that
the Jesuits have of theirs: which durst not commend their single translation,
unto the conscience of the reader, unless (beside the load and charge of their
margent notes) they had added almost at the end of every chapter a iag of
annotations, wherein they recommend their own, and condemn our doctrine:
thereby (at unawares) testifiing against themselves, that the words of the holy
Ghost speak nothing for them, unless they be twitched aside, with the wrinch and
wrest of their annotatio^s. We having found Christ in the Scripturs, cannot be
to seek in the true Church: you that hold not the head, it is no marvel, if you
have not laid hold of a filthy and dead caryon, in stead of the lively body
of Christ, which is his Church. We which follow the light of the scripture in
all questions that can be moved of religion, and not in those only which you
idely and rouingly allege out of August. have promise of resolution 2. Tim. 3
^. Petr. 1
in all our doubts. But you which blasphemously make the Scripturs to give no
more light, to the decision of diverse points in religion, the^ a haircloth: do
miserably run your selves and others, to the condemnation whereunto you are
ordained. In which way, although you would drag Augustine with all your might
and maine; yet will not he keep you company, not only for that he has
nothing for you in the place which you allege, but that he has the clean
contrary unto you: who affirms that in the Scriptures we are to seek the
Church, by them to August d^ unit. eccles. cap. 3.
discuss our controversies; and after he says, that all should be removed
whatsoever is alleged of either side against other, saving that which comes
out of the canonical Ibi. cap. 16.
Scriptures. And again, we desire not to be believed, because we are in the
Church of Christ, or that Optatus or Ambrose or innumerable Bishops of our
profession have commended it unto us. Howbeit as through the whole book it
shall appear, how small consent of the ancient Church, you have in the
principal demandes hanging betvveene you and us: so it shall appear a little
after, that there is a more certain rule of the understanding of the
Scriptures then you assign: and that although the former judgment of the
Church of Christ* sithence the Apostles time, is able to keep us from falling
dangerously in the principal and fundamental points of our religion; yet
that they cannot free us from error in every question, that may be moved of
it: not to speak of the faint proofs that sometime they used even in great
mysteries of our religion, wherein notvvithstanding (touching the matter it
self) their judgment is sound and Catholic.

To the next section page 11.
After that by hiding and burning the Scriptures, by threatening and murdering
of men for reading of them, they cannot attain to the causing of such a night
of ignorance, wherein they might do all things without controulment: there
remained one only engine, which Satan (with all his Angels) having framed and
hammered upon his lying forge, has furnished them of. This engine is the
defacing, and dis-authorizing of the Scriptures, as it were the taking from
them, their girdle or garter of honor, by a false surmise of corruption of
them, in the languages wherein they were first written. Which abominable
practice being attempted in the old testament by Lindanus, (whom some term
Blindasinus) is now assayed in the new by the Jesuits, who of others (for
their deadly hatred of the truth) are not called unfitly Iebusites. First
therefore, or ever we come to their particular arguments, whereby they would (as
it were) cover the head and majesty of th'authentical copies in the Greek to
bring them to subjection unto the old translation: we think it not amiss, to
set down the general doctrine, that no one oracle or sentence of God can fall
away. Whereby it will be evident that the holy Scriptures, both in the old and
new testament written in their original tongues, cannot either by addition,
detraction or exchange be corrupted. Whereunto the consideration of th'autor of
them, ministers a substantial proof. For seeing they are of Psalm. 111. ^
God, all whose works remain for ever: it follows that all the holy
scriptures, being not only his handiework, but as it were the chief and master
work of all other, must have a continual endurance. And if there be not the
least and vilest creature in the world, which either has not heretofore, or
shall not hereafter (by the mighty hand of God upholding all things) be
continued: how much less is it to be esteemed, that any sentence of God, wherein
a greater glory comes to him, and greater fruit to his people then of many
of those creaturs, which (for these two ends) he does so carefully continue,
should perish and fall away. Secondly they all are written generally for our
instruction, and more particularly for admonition and warning, for comfort and
consolation, etc: unless we will say that God may be deceived, in his purpose
and end wherefore he ordained them: it must needs be, that it must continue
whatsoever has been written in that respect. For if it or any part thereof fall
away, the same cannot according to th'ordinance of god either inform us
against ignorance, or warn us against danger, or comfort us against
afflictions, or finallye do any other duty unto us, which we have need of,
and they were prepared for. Thirdly, if the authority of th'authe^tical copies
in Hebrew, Chalde, and Greek fall: there is no high court of appeal, where
controversy (rising upon the diversity of translations or otherwise) may be
ended: so that the exhortation of having re course unto the law and to the
prophets, Esai. ^
and of our Savior Christ asking Luke 10 Hieron. epist ad Ma^cel. and epist ad
Suniam and Fretel. and ad Damasum, and praef^in 4. Euang and praef. in
paenitent. Ambros. de Spirit. sanct, lib. ^ cap. 6 August. de doctr. christiana
2. lib. cap, 11 and lib. 11. contra Faust, Manich. and opist. 59
how it is written, and how read thou: are now either of none effect, or not
sufficient: whilst these disgracers and disgraders of the Scripture have
taught men to say, that the coppies are corrupted, and the sense changed. Nay,
not only our estate is worse then theirs under the law, and in our savior
Christ's time: but worse the^ theirs which lived some hundred years after
Christ, when the ancient fathers exhorted in such cases, that men should make
suit unto the original Scriptures, to have an end of their controversies. Yea
their own Gratian out of Augustine (falsely alleged for Jerome) sends us in
deciding of differences, not to the old translator, but to th'originals of the
Hebrew in the old and of the Greek in the new testament. They use quarrelously
to surmise against us, that we abridge the privileges of the Churches of our
days; because we accord them not to be so ample in every point, as they were
when the Apostles lived. But vvo unto the Churches of our days, if the
Scriptures be (as the Papists would bear us in hand) corrupted, if the
Charters and records, whereby we hold the inheritance of the kingdom of
heaven, are rased or otherwise falsified, if we have not wherewith to convey
our selves to be children unto the heavenly father, and Priests unto God in
Jesus Christ; further then from the hand of such a Scribe and Notarie as both
might err and has erred diversely. Hieron. in 6. c. Es. August. de ciuit dei.
lib. 15. c. 13
These evidences were safely and surely kept, when one only nation of the
Jews, and the same sometimes (a few excepted) unfaithful, bare the keys of
the Lords library: now when there be many nations, that have keys unto th'ark
or counter wherein they are kept; it is altogether incredible, that there
should be such packing, or such defect, as th'aduersarie does wickedly suppose.
Again, if the Lord have kept unto us the book of Leuiticus, and (in it) the
ceremonies (which are abolished, and whereof there is now no practice) for that
they have a necessary and profitable use in the Church of God: how much more is
it to be esteemed, that his providence has watched over other books of the
Scripture, which more properly belong unto our times. Last of all, (passing by
other reasons which might further be alleged) let us hear the Scripture it
self, witnessing of it own authority and durablenes to al ages. Thus therefore
Moses writes of it; the secret and hidden things remain Deu. 29. 29
to the Lord our God: but the things that are reueiled are to us and our
children for ever: Psa. 119. 152
David also professes, that he knew long before, that the Lord had founded his
testimonies for evermore. But our Savior Mat 24. 35 Mar. 13. 32 Math. 5. 18
Christ's testimony is of all other most evident; that heaven and earth shall
pass, but that his word can not pass; and yet more vehemently, that not one
jot or small letter prick or stop of his law can pass until all be
fulfilled. Now as for the common objection of diverse books mentioned in
the old Testament, where of we find none so entitled in the canon thereof: it
is easily answered. That either they were civil and commonwelth stories,
whether the reader is referred, if it like him to read the stories more at
large, which the Prophets (to a sufficiency of that they wrote the^ for)
touched shortly: or else they are contained in the books of the kings; which
are manifestly proved, to have been written by diverse Prophets in their
several ages wherein they prophesied. In the former kind whereof, if we reap
not that fruit, which they did which lived in the days, wherein the reader
was set over unto them: yet we reap a more excellent fruit, which is a certain
knowledge of a more special providence and care of the Lord, for the preserving
of the Scriptures appering evidently, in that all those falling away, the books
of the canonical Scripture do still remain. Hereof we have a notable example
in the books of Solomon; whereof those falling away, that he wrote of natural
philosophy, and other by knowledge, the profitablest books that ever were
(the Canon only excepted) those alone which perteined to godlynes, have been
safely kept for the posterity. Which is so much more to be observed, as there
being infinitely more in the world, that effect the knowledge of natural
things, then do godlynes: have not yet with all the care of keeping them,
been able to deliver them from this whole and perpetual forgetfulness,
whereunto they are fallen, as if they had never been written. Where of the other
side his holy writtings hated, of the most part, and carelessly regarded of a
number: have notwithstanding as whole and full a remembrance as they had the
first day the Lord gave them unto the church. And seeing there are now more then
1500. years, wherein there is not only no book, but no sentence of any book
of Canonical Scripture fallen away: what cause is there why we should think
that in the time which was under the law, whole books fell away so thick and
threefolde. For as for books of the new Testament imagined of some to have been lost, their reasons whereupon their imagination leans, are so faint that
they are not worthy the naming* Of all which matter, it is evident, that not
only the matter of the Scripture, but also the words, not only the sense and
meaning of them, but the manner and frame of speech in them, do remain. 2.
Tim. 3
For seeing the Scripture remains, which wholly both for matter and words is
inspired of god: it must follow that the same words wherein the old and new
testament were written and indicted by the hand of God, do remain. For how
great difference, there is betvveen the things both words and matter, that
have passed through the Act. 9 Act. 17 1. Cor. 15 Tit. 1. 12
mouth or pen of God, and those which come from a mortal man: may appear by
the sayings of the Poets, taken up of the holy Ghost. For not vvithstanding
the Poets use the same words and sense, which the Scripture uses: yet were
they neither the words nor the sense of God, but of the Poets, until they
had passed by the golden pype of the Lords mouth. Whereby it came to pass,
that those sayings which were before profane, are now most holy: even as the
stones and timber which in the quarrey and forest were common, were after holy
when they were laid in the building of the Temple. If therefore words, the
same in letters and sillables with those the holy Ghost uses, are not words
inspired of God, because they were neither written nor spoken of him; his
Ambassadors and public notaries: how much less are the words of the old
translator, diverse from them of the holy Ghost, inspired of him, seeing they
never passed either by pen or mouth of his. And albeit the old translator
(which he is far from) should always give sense for sense, and weight for
weight: yet should not his translation (which so should be y^ truth of god) be
therefore the word of God: considering that the title aggreeth only to that
truth of God, which has also the frame of his words. And therefore the Apostle
makes a manifest difference between the wholesome words of our Savior 1.
Tim. 6. 3
Christ, and the doctrine that is according to godliness. And our Savior Christ
in saying that thy word is the truth, Ioh. 17. 17
does manifestly establish a difference between gods word and his truth;
otherwise he should say, thy truth is the truth, or thy word is the word:
which were no declaration of his meaning, but only an unnecessary repetition.
Wherefore it is truly verefied of these men, which the Prophet says: that
they have forsaken the fountains, Ierem. 2.
and dug cisterns. But let us examine the pith of their reasones, which have
moved them rather to draw from the riuen and leaking cask of the old
translator, by the which many things have entered, to the emparing the sweet
wine of the Scripture: then from the staunch and whole vessels of the Greek
copies, which preserve it from all corruption.

To the first reason.
These men are worthy to go always in their old clothes, that make the age
of the translation, the first and principal commendation thereof. Whereby it
should appear, if they could have come by the translation that Ierom amended,
they would have tunned their drink out of that, rather the^ out of this: as
that whose head was hoarer. And if this be a good reason, why should not the
translation of Symmachus, Aquila and Theodotion be preferred, which are
auncienter then he. Yea why should not the 70. before them all, be much more
preferred; as those that were used oftentimes of the Apostles, and commended
highly of the ancient fathers. But as gray hears are then only honorable,
when they are found in the way of righteousness: so the age of the old
translator, is there only to be respected and reverenced, where both for
propernesse of words, and truth of sense, he has wisely and faithfully
translated. And so far we hold him worthy to be preferred, before other
interpreters. But if antiquity commended the old translation unto you for
that it was above 1300. years old: the Greek coppies being more ancient then
it: and having been used above 1500 years, should (ye wisse) have had the
right hand of the old translator.

To the second reason.
It is false. For it is not the received opinion, Look Jerome upon these
places and compare them with the old translator. Genes. 1. 2 Esai. 1 12 30. and
5. 2 Gal. 1. 16 and 2. 5. and 5 8. Ephesians. 1 14 and 4. 19. etc
neither is there any probability of it, considering that Jerome in the old
and new Testament, both translateth otherwise then the old interpreter, and
often controwleth him. Hereof the testimony of Erasmus, (a man that had as
quick a nose in Ieromes doings, as whosoever:) is notable, who flatly affirms
that this translation is neither Cyprians, nor Hilaries, nor Ambrose, nor
Augustins, nor Ieromes; seeing his reading is diverse from it, and that it is
Look also afterward, for other examples. Eras. epist. N. amico ex ani^o
dilecto Erasm^i^ Scholijs ^^ epist. Hieron. ad P^mmach. libro 1. aduersus
louinian.
much less, that which he corrected; seeing there be found in this which he
condemns, not only as touching the words, but also as touching the meaning.
And in another place he says, that Jerome manifestly condemns the former
translation, which we yet (for the most part) do use. Jerome (although
without cause) scurgeth the old interpreter, for translating (...), Sobriety:
which (says he) should have been translated chastity. And this he does in
two or three places. Now a man would not think, that Jerome was so vn-aduised,
as to have given his adversary this advantage: that he might reply against
him, that it was his own translation, or that which he corrected, and therefore
that he was driven to a hard shift, which could not defend his cause but by
denial of him self. But that this translation is not Ieromes, Pr^fat ad co^^er.
^^ter. ^esta^e^ ^.
let the reader look the discourse that Munster has made hereof. Howbeit if
this were granted them which they were never able to prove: what have they
gained thereby? for it follows not, that if either it were truly translated,
or faithfully corrected by Jerome: that therefore it is now true, and void of
corruption. The fountain of the Scriptures is so walled by the providence of
God, so close sealed and covered; that by no, either negligence or malice of
men, there can any such thing fall into it, to troble the clear and sweet
water thereof: but as for the writings of men, they have no such privilege,
neither are they laid up in any arc of the durable wood of Cittim, but that
they may be, and are corrupted, as the daily experience does declare. Whereof
it is good to hear Ieromes own testimony. I do not think, that the Lords
words are to be corrected; but I go about Hieron. ad Marcella^ tom. 2. epist
vlt.
to correct the falsenes of the Latin books: which is plainly proved by the
diversity of them, and to bring them to the original of the Greek (from the
which they do not deny but that they were translated) who if they mislike the
water of the most pure fountain, they may drink of the myrie puddles. And in
the same place where they have alleged, if we must believe the Latin copies,
let them Hieron. ad Damasum in ^raf. in quatuor Evangel. tom. 3
tell us, which. For there be (in a manner) as many diverse coppies as books.
But if they think, that the truth is to be sought out of the greater part; why
do we not return to the original in Greek, and correct those things which
either have been unskillfully translated, or of ignorant presumptuous persons
foolishly amended, or of negligent writers added or changed. Now if the Latin
translations before Ieromes time, were in 300. years so manifoldly corrupted;
how much more, may we think that Ieromes translation, has in 1300. years been
impared and imbased; especially when as in diverse of these hundredth years,
there has reigned such blindness and barbarousnes as never the like: and when
as it was coppied out (for the Monach^ indocti^r* more unlearned the^ a Monk.
Hieron* in prafat. in 4. Euang. Ludouicus Viues lib. ^ de cause. corrupt. ^rtiu^.
most part) by vnclarkly Monks, whose vnlearnednes is come into proverb. Of
this corruption of books, the reader may further see both in Ierom, and others
of later times. Wherefore it is evident, that either this translation is not
Ieromes, or else it is corrupted and changed, and that more materially, then
themselves are able to alledg of the Greek coppies. Wherefore if you fly from
the Greek, for that there is some alteration from the original: there is no
cause why you should run to this translation, so diverse and repugnant to
Ieromes: unless it be for that which Jerome says, that you had rather drink of
the myrie puddels of the Latin translations, then of the pure fountain of the
Greek coppies.

To the third reason.
The antecedent being vn-true, the consequence of Augustines commendation of
it, can have no truth. And if it were the same translation, that Augustine
commends: yet Augustines praise is such of it, as does not free it from
faults, nor lifts it up (as you do) into the place of Canonical Scripture.
For speaking of his translation of the Gospels only, he affirms that it was
August. epist. 10 August. Epist. 8. and 10
almost faultles. And in another place, speaking of Ieromes translation of the
old Testament: he says, that if there were any dark places Jerome was like to
be deceived in them, as other before him. Beside that it is known, that
Augustine does not always follow this translation: yea that having seen
Ieromes, he August. lib 18. cap. 43 de ciuitaete Dei.
still preferred the elder translation to Ieromes that was newer: and affirms
that the same was not his alone, but the Churches judgment of those times
wherein Ieromes translation came abroad.

To the fourth reason.
Although your speech being used of the most part, being faint and short to
prove that it alone should now be used: yet even this is very false: first you
are constrained to confess, that the Greek fathers used it not: which argues
plainly that they had it not in that estimation, which you have it. For then
they would have caused it to be translated for the use of their own churches;
if they had esteemed it trewer then the Greek coppies. Secondly the most
ancient Latin fathers do not follow it, as Tertullian, Cyprian, Hilary, who
have scarce a footstep of it: albeit it was (likely) in the church in their
times, before Jerome corrected certain places in it, Ierom often dissenteth
from it, often also confuteth it. There remain Ambrose and Augustine, who
although they use it more then the rest: yet do they often forsake it, and
used it not (as you do) seruily. This is yet Hierome. Ambrose Augustine Look
the places before noted. Gregor. magn* epist ad leandru^ in exposit. Job: cap.
5 Exposit. Iobi 20. c. 24
more evident, in that the ancient fathers, and even those that used them most,
send men (when there is controversy of Latin books) to the originals of
Hebrew and Greek. Yea in the very diocese of Rome, long after the time of
these fathers: the Pope himself does witness, that not only he, but the
Apostolic seat used both the new and old translation in Latin. Now if the
Apostolic seat in Gregory's time (who made too great account of this
translation) used both, and (in the book of the Psalm.) refusing Jerome
followed the old translation: there is no liklihood that the authority which
this had before his time, buried the authority of the other translation. And as
the elder expositors have not used nor expounded it, without controulment: So
the later writers whereof some have been pillars in your sinagogue, have been
bold manifoldly to cross this translation of yours. For besides Bid,
Burgensis, and Armacan: of late days Lyra, Iansenius and others, have left the
ferular in the old translators hand. As for the Church service, it was so (in
the primitive Church) in the Latin tongue, as the people by reason of the
Roman Empire understood it. As touching your Popish service, full of
Idolatrye and superstition, as we care not what translation it follows; so we
judge most corrupt the most commodious.

To the fifth reason.
It might as well have commanded, to eat accornes, after corn was found out.
And as for this Trent conuenticle being assembled by the Pope the archenemy
unto our Savior Christ, and holden of a sort of blind Bishops, sworn to
speak no truth but that he (the enemy of truth) should allow of: we esteem it
no more, then the godly fathers did the council of Ariminum and Ephesinum the
second: especially seeing that many councils before it, better, wiser,
learneder, and more troubled with heretics difficulties of tra^slations, never
so concluded. Secondly being here ashamed of the Trent conclusion, they mollify
it, as though they In Martins praeface before his discovery, number 35.
held it for a good translation: where both the council concludes, and the
Jesuits hold it for th'authenticall Scripture, which they do neither of the
Greek, nor of the Hebrew. Thirdly, let them tell us how they will reconcile the
Trent conclusion with Pope Leo the 10. his authority. Who approved Apolog.
Erasmi aduersus Stunicam Platina in Damas^.
Erasmus translation, as Damasus had Ieroms. Last of al, admitting it were the
best translation: yet that is no cause why the original should not be rather
translated.

To the sixth reason:
Further then it has been corrupt by popish Monks, which were (for some
years) th'ordinary Iaylers to keep it within the prison of their cloisters:
we accuse it not of partiality to popery, whereunto it could hardly be
partial, when popery was not, But sure we are, that the Greek is less
partial. Secondly they might translate with purpose not to hurt the truth, and
yet fail of the purpose: as appears manifestly in the example of promeriting
of God, not only barbarously, but falsely translated. As touching the
sincerity, gravity, and majesty of it, compared with other translations of
later years: the matter is before the Judge, where our no, is as good as your
yea. but if it were, as you say: yet your tra^slating it, in passing by
the original of the Greek, can by no means be excused: but only by this, that
not able to clime up into the Scriptures in the Greek and Hebrew tongues; you
were compelled to seize upon the Latin, which is the honestest excuse that
you can make.

To the seventh reason page. 12.
Praecisenes in translation is worthy to be commended, but superstition is
worthy no praise. And if the Latin phrase serve the Greek, and answer unto
it better sometime then The English does: that argues no more the goodness of
the translation, then it proves The English to be better then the Latin
translation, because the English phrase frames often better with the Greek,
then does the Latin. Of this praecisenes they bring two examples, wherein
commending the old translation they condemn ours. The first is for that we
translate Tit. 3. (...).
14. to maintain to good works. Your Greek stomachs be very quasie, that
cannot brook this translation. Tell us (I pray you) how will you translate yt
Demosthenes contra Timoc. Bu^^us in commenta.
in Demosthenes, (...), but to maintain your right. Housoeuer you translate it
we care not, seeing Budaeus a man of singular skill in rijs, tueri and
defensitare (...)
that tongue, does so translate it, as we have done. In the other places Heb.
10. 20. we are charged for turning he prepared. Wherein, whether the old
translator have svvarued further from the Greek, it will not be so easy to
discern. For the Greek word does properly signify, to make new; which the
Latin word, that the old translator uses, does not express. for initio
does not signify, to make new, (for that does innouo) but to enter into. And
this defect of the old translator in this word, the Jesuits them selves do
bevvraye, which forsaking a proper English word, more expressing the old
translators initiabit, have followed M. Bezas translation, who translateth
dedicabit, which they turn dedicated, without acknowledgment of him by whom
they have (in that place) bettered their translator. The other cavil of
Traditions, Iustifications and Idol, is plentifully ansvvered, and further
shall be, as they fall out in the discourse of this book. But from this
praecise and exact following of the Greek, how far the old translator is, by
differing from it, by being contrary to it, by putting to that which is not in
the Greek, and taking away that which is in it: shall soon after appear.
Although if it were so precise, yet that is nothing to yours; which goes so
far from it, both in words and sense.

To the eight reason.
If Master Beza commend it, who knew so many faults by it: he has thereby
testified the softness and mildnes of his spirit, and his loving and
charitable affection, covering (so far as th'edifiing of the Church might
bear) the old translators wants and defects: and thereby lays naked the
proud, disdainful and quareling spirit of the trifling and caueling Jesuits,
childishly snatching and carping where there is no cause, and discovering their
own shame, in stead of disgracing others. Howbeit it is untrue, which they
here allege out of M. Beza. For he does not prefer the old translator unto
Erasmus, but defends him in certain places, where Erasmus (without cause)
does challenge him. And in the other place upon Saint Luke, his praise of him,
is not so full, as they pretend. For he says, that although he may seem,
very religiously to have turned these holy (...)
books: yet it appears, that he knew not the signification of these words,
much less the force and power of them. But if Master Bezas judgment be one of
the pillars, that must uphold this old translator, this it is in plain
words. It goes ^ften from the Greek, often it is absurd, often Beza in Epist.
ad noui Testam. annot. quae inscribitur Serenissimae Dominae Elizabethae
Reginae.
^tdoth add, the learned it never satisfied, the ^gnorant is brought into many
errors. Which notwithstanding he speaks not altogether, in respect of the
old translator; as in regard of either the negligence, rashness or malice of
those whose hands it has passed through. But if it were the best translation,
by M. Bezas judgment: yet it follows not thereof, that it has no fault, or
ought to be translated, before the Greek. It would undoubtedly be more credit
for your cause, to give better weight of reason, although the number were less.

To the ninth reason.
It were to be labored for, that there were in every several country, for
the use of the Church in it, one Bible translated into the language thereof,
and one Latin Bible generally for all the Churches, in whose Schools the
Latin tongue is the common interpreter: which (for their evidence and manifest
pre-eminence above all other translations) might have at the least the most
voices of them which are skilful in that matter, to recommend them to the
public use of every country, severally in their proper language, or jointly of
all the Schools in the Latin tongue, as is before mentioned. But that any
such tra^slations should be seated, with the original of the Greek or Hebrew,
(whereby they should not have the principal or royal Chariot, whereinto the
translations (how honorable so ever) should as subjects not once dare to
clime:) is in no sort to be suffered. And although these translations, were
(for the public use) to be only holden, and without weighty cause and great
consent not to be changed, or without great modesty not to be checked: yet
other inferior translations, might (for conference sake) have in private houses
and studies, their fruit not to be repented of. Which if it cannot yet be
obtained, men are therefore (for the measure of grace they have received) no
more to be discouraged, from their worthy labors of daily clensing the
corruption of translations: then Saint Luke was beaten back from writing the
most holy story, wherein he was prevented Luke 1.
of many, which undertook that which he only achieved. Neither is there any
more danger of dissentions, and endless reprehending by the diversity of
translations now, then was in the primitive Church. Wherein Augustine affirms
that the number of Latin interpreters, could not be numbered: yet August. lib.
de doctrina Christ. c. 11
was he so far from deeming that they bred diversity of doctrine, thar he
deemed them profitable, especially for those which wanted the original
tongues: for as much as that which was obscure in one, might be manifest in
another. Whereunto may be added, that diversity of translations was also
profitable for the learned, whose diligence of seeking for the Greek copies
was thus whetted on. It were a pitiful thing, if the unity of Christians
Ephesians. 4
(which the Lord has bound with so many bonds) should be broken by a
diversity of translation. And if there may be a diversity of expositions upon
one place of Scripture, without unloosing the knot of unity of faith and
doctrine: it is not to be feared, that the diversity of translations, shall be
able to cut in sunder the stringes wherewith Christian unity and concord are
tied. And if any will abuse, this diversity of translation to contention: yet
are the translations no more in fault therefore, then many other good things,
which being ordained for the nurcery of unity, are (through corruption of men)
abused to the contrary of that which they were ordained for. As for Cochlau^
words of Luther, whose enemy he was: they will not be taken of any indifferent
men. We gladly receive this testimony of our enemies the Jesuits, that we are
sworn to no man's judgment, how learned and loved so ever he be unto us.
Howbeit we make it no rule, either to condemn Master Beza where we depart
from him, or to justify the old translator, where we cleave unto him: but
show our judgment only, which we held at that time; which upon more light of
knowledge in the original, we are ready to reform. For with Augustine we
profess our selves of that number, which write in profiting and Augustine
Epist. 7
profit in writing. For the particular accusation of Cainan Luke 3. 36. look
for answer in the proper place. As for that Act. 1. 14. who be furthest from
the sense of the holy Ghost, may be considered Upon Act* 2. verse 4
of the reasones alleged there. But that neither we translating with the old
translator, women, nor Master Beza translaitng wives, are far from the Greek:
it would easily have been understood of all those which being not Greek borne,
had gotten any manner of denization in Greece. For it is well known, that the
Greek word which the Evangelist uses, signifies both a Hieron. lib 1.
aduersus Iouinianu^.
woman and a wife. And if they had not learned the use of this word, to be
indifferent to both in the Greek writers: yet they might have learned it in
Jerome a Latin author, who tells them expressly, that the Greek word
signifies both women and wives. Therefore whethersoeuer of these two
translations departs from the sense, yet is it evident, that neither
departs from the Greek.

To the tenth reason, and first to the proof in the first section.
The original copies of the new Testament, are (by this paradoxe of the
Jesuits) least beholden to Gods watchful providence, of all other writings.
For in all other learning the good liquor is best preserved in the first
tongue, as it were the first caske wherein it was put; and the water is always
sweeter and holsommer in the fountain, then in the streams that stream from
it. Whereupon it is holden by all learned consent, that it is better to read
Plato, Aristotle, Xenophon, Euclide, and Galen, in Greek then in any language
whereinto they have been turned, be the interpreter never so wise and
faithful. And therefore (in their works) the doubts which rise of their
meaning are voyded by their Greek Copies, as by their highest court which
takes knowledge thereof. Only in the art of all arts, and learning of all
learninges, which concerns men so deeply, as al other knowledge (in
comparison) is scarce as one hair to the whole head: the providence of God
has so slept, that therein the original as the gold is become silver, and the
old translator which would hardly go for good silver, is become the finest
and purest gold. The profane writers some hundredth years before the new
Testament, have been maintained in that pureness, that their translations, have
always remained in subjection and obedience of their first copies, from whence
they were drawn: only in the original of the new Testament, the watchman of
Israel has so not slumbered only, but slept also: that that which was sometime
the Lady and Dame of all, is now become tributarie to the old translator.
These are the golden co^seque^ces of the leaden Jesuits, which how brutish
they be, let the reader judge, of that which has been spoken in th'entrance
to this question. They might (with as much truth) have led the Lord himself
into captivity, and thraldom of the old translator, as to put down his
scepter which is the new Testament in the Greek tongue; by not suffering it
to be born up, in the presence of the old translator. But the old translator
himself, from whence has he received, the great wealth and riches supposed to
be in his translation? from the original: for what can they else answer? And
has they of Gods careful providence, been more upon the old translation, then
upon the original: more upon a man's word, then upon his own. If therefore
the original, have been sithence that time corrupted: how much more the
translation, that has been more the translation, that has been drawn from
it. It would require a book by it self, to set forth the judgment of the
fathers, directly fighting against the horrible blasphemy of the Jesuits:
which old fathers send men for resolution of all doubts, unto the original
of the Greek for the new, and the Hebrew for the old Testament. Jerome speaking
hereof concludes that the water of the fountain, is to be believed to flow
more Hieron. aduersus Heluidium Hieron. ad Li^tum
pure, then that of the river or stream. And again as the truth of the books
of the old testme^t, are to be examined by the Hebrew: so the books of the new
Testament, require the trial of the Greek: which sentence Gratian cites as
it were out of Augustine. Distinct. 9 ad veter.
Ambrose speaks in a certain place of the new testament, affirms Lib. 2.
cap. 6 de spirit. sanct. Augustine de ciuitate Dei lib. 15 cap. 13 August. in
Psalm. 38
that the authority of the Greek books, is to be preferred. Augustine says,
that we ought rather to believe that tongue, from which it is (by interpreters)
derived into another. And again, the former tongue expounds the later, and
it is made certain and plain in one, that was doubtful in another. And if it be
said, that the original was then a virgin, which is sithence defiled and
deflovvred: what reasons can the Jesuits allege, why the Hebrew and the
Greek, which kept their integrity 400. years together after Christ, amiddest
as bitter enemies, as ever they had, as troublesome and tempesteous times as
ever were sithence: should after, in time of less danger, and greater quiet,
loose not their beauty only but their chastity also. And we marvel that the
Jesuits are not afraid, to suffer this blot to fall upon their popish
government, which braggeth it self to be the pillar of truth, and yet has
had no better care to preserve the truth. But the abominable stinch of this
blasphemous opinion, will better appear by the Jesuits reasones: whereby
they have raked, and stirred up this dung of theirs. The first reason whereby
they bring up an evil report of the undefiled virginity, of the Greek
original: is that through multitude of heretics rising out of Greece it has
(as it were) lost her maidenhead. But they remember not, that as many clouds
of haeresie rose from thence, by occasion of vvorldly vvisdome, and humane
sciences, vvherinto they (excelling) leaned rather then to the simplicity of
the word: so there rose from that same corner of the world, great lights of
Catholic doctrine, whereby those mistie clouds were scattered. Neither was
the diligence of the heretics greater to deface them, then was the care of
the Catholics, to keep them undefaced. And seeing they convinced their
heresies out of the Scriptures, for so much as error is not confuted but by
truth: it follovveth that if the falsifying of Copies by heretics were proved;
yet the same could be but in part, not so much as in the narrow compass of
Greece, much less in the vvide circuit of the world, where the Greek copies
were spread, asvvell as in Greece. And notvvithstanding that there have been,
for many 100. years, weighty controversies betvveen the Greek Church and the
true, diverse also between you and it: yet neither do we accuse them, nor you
are able to show one place of the new testament, which they have attempted to
corrupt for their advantage, either in the proceeding of the holy Ghost, or in
your sole primate and universal Bishop or otherwise. This security from
incorruption of the Greek Copies, is greatly strenghtned by comparison of the
Lords safe conduct, given to the original Hebrew for the space of about a
1000. years, before the first coming of our Savior Christ. For howsoever
that is also charged to be empaired and embased either through malice or
negligence of those that were put in trust with the keeping thereof: yet the
contrary thereof is manifest. For men must consider, who put them in trust,
not man which looks only upon the present estate and face of men; but God
himself, which looks into the secretest Romans 3
kidneyes of the heart, to discern, not only such as they were at the time
wherein he committed his oracles unto them, but also what they should be a
thousand years after. Whereupon it will be easy to understand, that if the
Lord had espied any such unfaithfulness in them of keeping those evidences,
whereupon the happy and good estate, not of them only, but of the great
posterity of the Church depended, and whereby they should have both certain
and undoubted entrance and season of their inheritance; and finally, whereby
they might confer the promises made unto the Fathers under the Law, with the
full and exact accomplishment of them in the Gospel, he would have made other
choice of the Wardens of his books, then they were. And seeing the Law went
Esai 2 John 4
out of Sion into all the world: it went forth pure and undefiled, which
otherwise had not been the Law of God, but either of man, or man and God
together. But what trust the Jews discharged herein, may appear manifestly
in our Savior Christ's time, of all other the most corrupt, yet was there no
such corruption of the text brought Math. 5. 23
in, by either Pharisees, Sadduces, or any other the sworn enemies of the
truth. For seeing our Savior taking them up hotelie and sharply for corrupt
interpretations which was petilarimie in regard of their famous robberies that
should change the text of the scripture: it is evident that if there had been
any such church-robberie of raising the records, he would have made a scourge
of Scorpions to have laid upon their skins, for such insufferable
treachery. Yea when of the contrary part he exhorts the people to search
the Scriptures, such as they were then: he allows them for the John 5.
same, which the Prophets had by divine inspiration left unto the Church. And
this latter reason Origin uses to Hicron. in cap. 6. Esa.
maintain the perpetual virginity of the Hebrew Text. As for their trifling
In the preface number 44.
reasons brought against in their discovery of want and surplusage, they are
scarce worth the naming. They alledg Psalm 22. which they suppose to differ
from the Evangelists words in Greek: whereas the Massorites do witness, that
the most corrected copies have, They pearsed my hands and feet, word for word
with the Greek. And your own Genebrard Genebrard in Psalm. 21.
will not have the Jews charged with any falsification in this place They
further allege, Psalm. 68. where there is no manner of difference of sense, for
the Hebrewe having Christ received gifts for men: does in those words declare
manifestly that he gave them unto men. For otherwise they could not have been
to the use of men unless Christ had given. Howbeit in the very next verse there
is added that God does load us with gifts. So that the Hebrewe does not only
tell us, that Christ gave gifts, but that he gave them as Mediator, having
received them. Beside that it is known that the Apostles in alleging
testimonies, do not number the words but give the weight of the sentence, to
which nombring of words, when not so much as translators are always (as it is
said) bound to; much less were The Apostles tied unto it, which were no
translaters but expounders of the Scripturs. And all reasonable men will judge
it good payment if for four single pence, he receive a whole groate: or if
th'opportunity so serve, eight single halfpence. They proceed with the 40
Psalm, where in stead of the Hebrew, Thou have pierced my ear, The Apostle
has, Thou have prepared me a body. But they ought to have understood, that
there is first a Trope of the part for the whole, which The Apostle does
elegantly expres, when for the ear he sets down the body. Secondly, they
should know that there is a manifest Metaphore in the word pearcing used of
the Prophet, which being drawn from the law, prouyding that the servant which
would willingly give himself over to a perpetual and whole service of his
master, should so be served: signifies an inabling of the Prophet, for a
willing obedience to be given unto the Lord. And therefore this Metaphore is
elegantly expounded by The Apostle when he says, Thou have prepared and fitted
me a body, without the which our savior Christ could not have been the
servant of God, to any such purpose as he was ordained. So that if as David by
Christ, so Christ for David, must bring not a legal sacrifice, but his ears
bored through, that is, a body obedient unto the death: men may easily see,
that The Apostle did expound and make plain that, which was somewhat obscure
in the Prophet, whose sense (and not whose words) he alleged. Further they
allege, 2. Chron. 28. 19. Achas King of Israel, for King of Judah. As if they
ought to be ignorant, that the place where Achas was buried, was first the
place where the kings of Israel, that is, of the twelve tribes were buried, or
ever it was the place of the kings of Judah only. And if they had marked it,
they should easily have known both the Prophet Jeremy and Lame. 2. 2 Romans 9.
4. 17. and 10. 21. and 11. 7. 16. and 29. 10. and 3. 1. and 29.
The Apostle to contain Judah under Israel, and contrariwise Israel under Judah.
And the vulgar according unto the Hebrew in the last verse, reads, in the
sepulchers of the Kings of Israel. And as ignorance of the story of the
Scripture, deceived you here: so in the next the ignorance of the tongue
abuses you. For 1. Chron. 2. 18. that which you turn out of the Hebrewe, he
begat Azubah his wife and Ierioth: is falsely and ignorantly translated. For
ETH the particle, there is not a note of the accusative case: but is a
praeposition, and signifies that he begat of Azubah his wife, etc. as is
confirmed by other places, where it is so taken. As Genesis 44. 4 Ezech. 6. 9
for that out of 2. Reg. 24. 19. of putting brother for uncle, it argues you
utterly unacquainted with the Scriptures in any tongue, seeing the word brother
is general for all kinsmen both in the old and new Testament. Whereupon Genes.
13 Matthew. 12. 16. 47
Abraham is called Lots brother, as your vulgar printed by Plantine 1576.
himself reads; and so our Savior Christ is said to have brethren.
Whereupon it is evident, how free the Hebrew is from corruption: when
th'obiections against it are so frivolous as nothing can be more. And as this
is easy to conceive of all that know the Church (which unto that time was
alvvaies sealed amongst them) to be the pillar of truth: so it shall much 1.
Tim. 3
more be settled firmly in their breast, if the Jews careful mind and
endeavor of keeping the Hebrewe text fithence the time of their falling away,
be considered. Which appears not only in that the greatest testimonies
written by th'Apost. and Evangelists (for the proof of Jesus to be the Christ
do remain as they were alleged: but also by the testimony of th'auncient
Fathers 400. years after Christ, Hieron. in 6. cap. Es. August. de ciuita. Dei
lib. 15, c. 13 Hier. epist. 74. ad Mar cel. Look in his epistle of diverse
readings.
which bear witness to their innocence herein. Your own men are now as
much ashamed of you in this charge of th'Ebrewe Text, as Jerome was of some in
his time, charging the Hebrew as you do. Look Arias Montanus which defends
the Jews innocence in this behalf. Look Lucas Francis. lu eae Burg. an not
at in sa era Biblia. Look also his epist. ad Cardinal. Sirlet.
Burgensis, how he defends the Hebrew against the vulgar Latin, where he
cannot reconcile them. Read John Isaak a Popish Jew, against Lindan. Now let
them answer whether the Lords care be not as great to keep the new
Testament, as to keep the old: whether it be not as great to keep those
words which he spoke by his son, as it was to keep those Hebr. 1.
which he spoke by his servants. Finally, whether he keeps not his
wrytings, as safely by the Church, which is his friend, as he keeps it by
the synagogue which is his enemy. Last of al, let the good reader understand,
that this Popish allegation, is a very haereticall practice, and shameless
shift of the deceauers of Gods people. Hieron. aduersus Hell. bidium Hieron.
For thus Jerome charge Helbidius, that he quarrelled with the truth of the
copies, and did most foolishly persuade himself, that the Greek books were
falsified. The like practice used the monstrous heresy of the August. ad
Hieron. epist. 19
Manichees, of whom Augustine vvryteth thus. The Manichees not able to wrest
many places of the holy Scripture, whereby they are most evidently
convinced; affirm the same to be false: yet so, that they attribute the same
not to the Apostles which wrote them, but I know not to what other, which
afterward corrupted them. Which because they cannot prove, neither by the most
copies, nor by the most ancient, nor by the authority of the former tongue
(from which the Latin books were translated) they are confounded, etc. We may
be bold therefore to range you under the banner of heretics, which bear
their proper mark and recognisance.

But let us come to the particular places, supposed to be corrupted. Wherein
let the reader observe, first that to discredit nombers of the Greek Copies,
reading as we do, they bring but the authority of one only Doctor. For although
in the third place they allege the corruption, from the Tripartite story and
Socrates: yet it being known, that the tripartite story gathers that which he
writes out of Socrates: under two authors there is but one authority. Which
may also be said of the second places, where the authors alleged are not eye
witnesses, but hang al of the report of the old translator. And if in Gods
law, the witness of one man is not sufficient to take away a man's life: much
less may one man's witness take away the life and authority of Gods word, which
(without that witness) should undoubtedly be so taken. And if we should weigh the
old translator with such weightes; we might with far more right, dash out a
great part of your translator, in the old Testament: Even so much as he
differs and dissenteth Ire. lib. 3 cap. 25 Tertul. apolog. c. 18. 19 H^l.
psalm. 2 August de ^iuit. Dei lib. 15. c. ^^
in from the 70. interpreters. For there is a great consent of the old fathers,
that the interpretation of the 70. interpreters in greek was written by the
same spirit wherewith the Prophets wrote in Hebrew. Secondly it is to be
observed that in proouing the Greek copies in three places to be corrupted, by
the Greek heretics: they alledg for two of those places Latin writers and
Latin translators, such as were used in the Latin Church: so that if the
testimonies prove any thing of the corruption of the original; it proves it
more against the Latin, then against the Greek Church. For notwithstanding
that Marcion were Greek born: yet was not his heresy begoten in Greece, but in
Rome, after that his father (being a Bishop) had for his lewd behavior cast
him out of the Church, in his native country. And seeing Rome takes upon her,
to be the pillar of truth, and the Lords library: whatsoever can be proved of
the corruption of the original, shall by their own doctrine return to the
further discredit of the Latin, then of the Greek Church. Now touching the
first example of Marcions corruption: you do belie Tertullian, and that in two
sorts. For first Tertullian says not, that the truth is as it is in ye
vulgar. For Tertullian himself reads otherwise then the vulgar, after this
sort. The first man Tertu^ a^ resurrection^ carn^s.
of the earth earthy, that is slimie, which is Adam. The second man is from
heaven, that is the word of God, which is Christ, leaving out heavenly, which
the vulgar has Cyprian de zelo and li^or and aduersus ludaeos and a. libi.
and you strive for. And so his scholar Cyprian reads. Secondly you falsifye
him, for that he does not say (as you suppose of him) that the Greek text which
is now, is Marcions corruption. For so should he have accused himself, as well
as Marcion: considering that himself also departs from that which is in the
vulgar. Indeed Marcion had corrupted the place, by leaving out ( man) in the
second place; thereby to help his haeresie of the untruth of Christ's manhood. It
may also be gathered, that Tertullian liked not the word Lord; but esteemed it,
a corruption of Marcion. This is therefore now the question, whether Lord in
that place, be the true or heretical reading First therefore let them show us,
how this reading does maintayn (in any sort) the heresy of Marcion:
considering that the Greek has (with full consent) the second man, which
Marcion left out, vvherby the humanity of Christ is plainly established. And it
appears that the vulgar translation, has more color of that heresy, the^
the Greek reading. For he might have easier abused the vulgar, to prove that
Christ brought his flesh from heaven; then he can do the Greek. And as the Greek
reading is further from the heresy of Marcion, then the vulgar: so it is (in
diverse respects) more proper; both for the general analogy of the true
doctrine of the person of Christ, and for the circumstance of that particular
place. For first the Greek reading, contains a notable testimony of the two
natures of our Savior Christ, in the unity of one person; which the vulgar
does not so manifestly express. Secondly the opposition of Adam from the
earth, and of Christ the Lord from heaven: is much fuller and liuelier:
considering that he might have been both from heaven and heavenly, and yet have
been but a naked creature as the Angels. Thirdly the Greek copies did not
shun the word heavenly, which Marcion is supposed to have of purpose avoided:
considering that they call Christ heavenly. For in the next two verses the
Greek copies (with full consent) apply the word heavenly unto Christ. Therefore
the Greek copies shunned not this word heavenly in speaking of Christ: but
reserved it unto a fitter place. For having in the former verse called Christ
the Lord from heaven: in the verses following, he might (without danger) call
him heavenly: whereas if he had not sent that title of the Lord from heaven
before, he might have been thought to have been called heavenly, in respect of
the place, he came from, as the first man is called earthly in regard of the
earth from whence he was taken. Again seeing that Marcion did corruptly alledg
verse 45, as plainly appears by Tertullian, which corruption is not in the
Greek: there is no liklie-hood that one of the corruptions of Marcion should
continue in the Greek, more the^ the other. Moreover the Syrian and Arabian
paraphrasis, auncienter then was Marcions reading as the Greek copies do: it
is evident that either Marcion brought not in this reading ( of the Lord) or
else he brought it in long before he was borne. Last of all seeing the Greek
Fathers so read, Lib. de orthod. fide cap. 3
Damascene In (...) locu^
Chrysostom, Theophilact, Oecumenius, al which detested the haeresy of
Marcion: either this is no corruption, or else these learned men's noses were
stuffed, which could never smell the savor of any Marcionisine. And although
diverse ancient and other writers, accustoming themselves to the reading of the
vulgar translation, followed it in this point, because there is no manifest
repugnance in it, to any article of faith: yet that is no let, but that this
may be (as indeed it is) the truth, which is found in Greek copies, and not
that which is in the old translator.

In the second place Jerome alone is brought to discredit so many Greek
copies. Against whom (beside the great consent of the Greek copies) Basil.
lib. (...)
we oppose the Syrian and Arabian Paraphrasis, Chrysostom, Theophilact,
Oecumenius, and Basile, who thrice in one book does so allege it, as the
copies supposed to be falsified. And last of al, we oppose Jerome himself:
who for once alleging it thus for his benefit against Hieron. aduersus
Helbidium* and ad Eustoch de seruand. virginitate.
his adversary in that book, where the Papists themselves cannot deny, but
he abused diverse testimonies of the Apostle shamefullie, alleges it twice as
it is in the Greek copies, which they condemn. Let al men therefore judge what
a worthy proof this is, brought from Jerome to discredit these copies, which is
contraried of so many, and of himself: who after he was departed from his
heat of disputation, to set down what was more aggreable to the truth, then
what served best against his adversary, so reads as we read. Beside all
this, some Beza annotat. in hunc locum.
Greek copies read as the old translator does. And therefore it is false which
they say, that it is not in the Greek. The third pretended corruption,
stands only upon Socrates testimony; who affirms that in the Greek copies
to be an haereticall corruption. How so? What one word is there in the Greek
copies, that leans to the Nestorian haeresie? What light footing thereof can
you show? If you can show none, there is no likelie-hoode of haereticall
corruption: considering that Nestorius voice, differing far more from Saint
John's, then Jacobs did from Esaus, might even of a blind man have been
discerned. Secondly, the Greek reading, falls in far better with the
phrase and circumstance, then that which Socrates commends. For in the verse
before Saint John has thus, Every Spirit that confesses Jesus Christ to be
come in the flesh, is of God. Whereupon he infers the words in question,
that every spirit that confesses not Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh,
is not of God. Where it is evident not only that this does aptly answer in
opposition* unto the verse before: but that it keeps the frame and phrase of
speech, which is to amplify, and deeplier to imprint one thing in the memory
of the hearer, by denial of one proposition directly opposite unto another. As
in the 6. verse of the same chap. He that knows God, hears us, he that is
not of God hears not us. Again in the 7. verse, Whosoever loves is of God
and knows God; he that loves not, knows not god. Likewise 1. Epist. chap.
5. verse 10, and verse 12, etc. Thirdly, it is plain that he which says that
Christ came in the flesh, condemns him that dissolueth Christ: so that it
was to no purpose to change it so. Last of all, if we would examine your alone
witness in this case, by the same law that your companion examineth the double
Copus dialog. 1. page 154.
witness of Socrates and Sozomene, in the case of Paphnutius commendation of
the ministers marriage: we might utterly dis-able him, and throw him from
the bar. Who (to discredit the truth of this story) says thus. The thing
depends of Socrates and Sozomene, whereof the one was a Nouatian, the other
greatly extolled Theodorus whom the fifth Synod condemned. And a little
before, affirms it to have been a tale of th'Arrians, or of some unchaste
persons. Now if Socrates were not (as your man says) to bear witness in the
matter of Paphnutius: how comes it that you lift up his credit so high, as
not alone to counteruaile, but to praeuaile against so full a consent of the
Greek copies.

To the next section.
The Jesuits in knocking their heads against the original copies, have lost
even the common sense and understanding of a man. For to prove that we (in many
places) have left the Greek to follow the vulgar translation: they have not
brought so much as one place, wherein Master Beza has not showed that he
followed better ^ight, then that which he had of the old translator. In some
places many Greek copies, in every place some one or other Greek copy, and
that of singular note: beside the Syrian paraphrast auncienter then the old
translator. And if Master Beza being but one man, was able (by the provision
he had made of copies) to warrant his interpretation by one Greek book at the
least: it is evident, that if it had been possible for him to have gotten all
the Greek copies in his study; he should have been able to have performed it
more plentifully. Touching the first place Heb. 9. 1. It is false, that either
M. Beza, or we have followed the vulgar, who tra^slateth that place
doubtfullie. For his word former may as well aggree with the copies, which read
the first Tabernacle, as with the first covenant. And Master Beza shows
that both Photius the Greek interpreter, and the Syrian Paraphrast, as also the
Greek copy of Cleremont read as the copy which the vulgar followed. And
because both the discourse of the former chapter, and the direction of the
verse next going before, argues that this word former is referred to the
covenant. Therefore (for more plainness) we put covenant in small letter* Which
was so much more needful to be done, as certain readings join this word
with Tabernacle. And yet because we are entered into question of this place,
we will not fear to set down what we think in this case. Which is that
(saving ryper judgment) the consent of the Greek copies in the word (...) may
well and ought to be retained: not in proper signification, but in a Trope of
the part for the whole outward and ceremonial worship of God: even as the
writer of the Hebrews does afterward use it, where he says, that we Heb.
13. 10
have an altar, whereof they have no authority to eat, which serve the
Tabernacle: that is to say, which retain the ceremonial worship. Romans 12. 11.
they say, that the Greek has serving the ^^me, for serving the Lord. Wherein
they do nothing but dally with the truth. For many Greek and ancient
copies, have serving the Lord. So has the Greek Scholiast, Chrysostom,
Theophilact, Basil defi. nit. 6 9
and Basile. And the cause of this diversity Master Beza notes to have the
short writing by (...) which was taken of some for (...) where they should
have taken it for (...). Apoc. 11. 2. they affirm that the greek has, the
Court within the Temple, the La^^^e having (and truly) the Court without the
Temple. We answer, that that reading is found in Greek both scholiast and
copy. Wherefore herein we had more certain guides, then is the old translator.

2. Timoth. 2. 14. we read (but) as the old interpreter. But the old
translator and we both, read so without any word of that signification in the
Greek: only to lay open to the reader, that which the short speech of the holy
Ghost, might have made harder to be understood in our language. And therefore
this is mere dotage to bring this example, to prove that we have forsaken the
Greek to follow the old translator. And as for us; we have put our (but) in a
small letter, to note it an addition above the words which are in Greek, yet
needful to clear the sense unto the reader, and to make plain the Eclipse
that is in the Greek: whereas the vulgar has not de^t so sincerely, who has
put it in the same letter with the text. And besid that some of your copies
make no supplye of the Eclipse which is in Greek in those copies of yours,
where there is in any supply, it is fondly made by nisi; which is not an
aduersitiue answering to our but, which you allow of, but a note of exception.
And therefore we have bettered your translator herein.

They say that in James 5. 12. we have left the Greek and followed the Latin:
which is most false. For there is showed forth, for warrant of that reading, a
most excellent Greek copy, beside the Syrian paraphrast translating the Greek
before the Latin did. Hereby the reader may easily understand, that where our
translations aggreed with the old translator: it is ^ot in following him but
through warrant of the Greek copies, which are extant at this day. And that the
Thrasonicall Jesuits of the infinite examples, wherein they would make the
world believe, that we ^aue forsaken the Greek to follow the vulgar: are not
able to show, so much as one poor example.

To the next section page 13.
Least there should want any thing, wherein these enemies of God and of his
word, should not play their parts against the original Greek: they have
thought good to set upon it with a new accusation of superfluity: whereof
notwithstanding they cannot bring a word of reason, beside the bare authority
of Erasmus, whose naked testimony (without proof) against the Greek they are
content to admit: which notwithstanding they utterly reject, when (with good
and substantial reason) it comes against the old tra^slator. But let us see
into the authority. First it is confessed of the Jesuits, that the Greek
copies read the supposed superfluities, with full consent. And do they think
that such a consent of Greek copies shall not be able to weigh down the
authority of the vulgar translation, and ^rasmus allowance of it in this
place: where neither untruth of doctrine nor any vnsutablenes to that which
either goes before or comes after, is able to be showed. If you your selves
should lay in balance together, Erasmus which here makes for your vulgar,
and Valla that makes against him: we suppose that unless your extreme
poverty in this case draw you to do otherwise, you would give the better
weight to that skale, wherein you lay Valla: as one that dealt not so roughly
with Monckery and other your pedlary as did Erasmus. And as for the
pre-eminence and authority, that all the Greek copies have before the old
translator (those Papists excepted only which have made themselves driuels and
drudges unto him:) we refuse no man's weights, nor no man's judgment. Beside that
to disburden the Greek of this false surmise of superfluity: we have the
Syrian paraphrast, which in this point is not superfluous in that being long
before the vulgar, he bears witness in all these pretended superfluities unto
our Greek copies; as unto those that are most ancient. Now as for the place
Math. 6. for thine is the kingdom etc. If Erasmus had understood that it is
taken out of the book of Chronicles, written by the pen of the holy Ghost: he
would (no doubt) have taken heed how he had called this conclusion of the
Lords prayer, trisles. For it appears manifestly, that this sentence was
borrowed from the Prophet David, ^. Chro. 29 11.
with some abridgement of the Prophets words: which being then fit to set
forth the zeal and present touch of the love wherewith he loved the Lord,
was not so fit (without an abstract) for that prayer wherein our savior sought
all shortness possible. Secondly, that cannot be superfluous without the
which we should not have had a perfect form of Prayer. For when prayer stands,
as well in praising of God and thanksgiving, as in petitions and requests to be
made unto him: it is evident that if this conclusion had been wanting, there
had wanted a form of that prayer, which stands in praise and thanksgiving.
Last of all, if to give a reason of that which goes before be superfluous,
then this conclusion may be so. But we suppose that it will be a strange voice
in the ears of all the learned; to affirm that a substantial reason given of
any thing, should be judged reasonlesse, and the coupling up of the cause with
the effect in their surmised superfluity of this place. Romans 11. 6. is charged
likewise. Where it is no marvel although they judge the latter proposition
superfluous: seeing they are not able to bear th'enimity of the former, as
that which hangs their blasphemous opinion of merit; so that it can draw no
breath when it appears. Which because the Apost. would be sure to hang
thorowlie, he doubled his coard by a manifest opposition, frequented oftentimes
of the holy scriptures. And therefore with the same knife they cut off this
branche, that they may lop as superfluous boughs a number of sentences in the
Scriptur, especially in S. John And these men that account Logical reasoning
superfluous in The Apostle: how will they bear the holy ghosts rhethorick, in
repeating one thing in one place, by variety of words alone without any variety
of sentence: which is so custome-able a thing in the Proph. as ye Rabbis (for
avoiding of tediousnes) note ye whole rule (...)
thereof in five letters. And if they will not give th'Apost. leave to use his
Logic, without reproach of superfluity: they may (with better reason) deny
the Prophets that figure of Rethorick, which of all other they most delighted
in. Last of al, Erasmus testimony here (upon whom they only lean) is not
so full. For he does not condemn the place of superfluity but suspecteth it.
There follovveth Mar. 10. 29. where (with other things) wives being spoken of
in one verse, is not with them repeated in the next. Whereupon is concluded,
that in the former verse it is a superfluity. And if it were not, for
reverence of Erasmus learning, we might well say it were a fond conclusion.
For why may there not be asvvell a defect in the latter verse, as a
superfluity in the former: and rather a defect here, then superfluity there;
considering that in Luke, Luke 18. 29
there is a full agreement of all Greek copies, reading as Saint Mark does in
the former verse. But that this reason is neither proof of superfluity nor
defect: it is manifestly shevved by a like place. For The Apostle having nombred
and marked out diverse gifts and offices in the Church: in the two next 1.
Cor. 12. 28. (...)
verses making rehearsal of them again, leaves out two: of which
notwithstanding he might as truly affirm that which he ascribes to the other
as of any of them whatsoever. If therefore in a rehearsal the leaving out of
some things sent before, be an argument of superfluity: let them thrust out
these two ordinary offices out of the Church; and together with the whole
honorable train of the greek copies, which they will be easily entreated
unto: let them also condemn their vulgar translation. Nay more then that, let
them condemn (with the greek) their own vulgar in this very place of Saint
Mark: which having made mention of fathers in the former verse, makes no
more mention of them, in the verse following then of wives. And where they
would prove, that by these two pricks" in Robert Stephanus edition of the new
Testament in Greek, is noted a superfluity in the greek: we know not
whether we should ascribe it unto their blockishe ignorance, or to their
hateful malice against the truth. For do they think that Robert Steven and
Crispine, men of great judgment and learning, both so senseles, as to have put
that for the text of the Scripture, which by their note, they would
discredit with the reproach of superfluity: whose purpose was to shevve by
those notes, some diversity of reading in those places, which they so marked:
as it is manifest by the examples here alleged. In all which Master Beza
declares, that there is difference amongst the greek copies. But yet the
difference is not such, but both by the greater number of the greek copies,
and by their antiquity, manifestly confirmed by the Syrian Paraphrast, and
lastly by the good cohaerence and suit of one sentence with another: it may
easily appear that there is defect in the vulgar, and no superfluity in our
editions. As in Mar. 6. 29. how aptly is that threatening added against the
refusers of the Gospel, that it shall be easier etc. So in Matthew. 20. 22. the
similitude of Baptism with the death and afflictions of our Savior Christ,
and his Apostles, is not only elegant to declare, how they should be
overwhelmed with them, as the body is plunged in the waters: but also
comfortable exceedingly, to show that as the person baptized, lifts up his
head, after that he has bine sowced in the waters: so both he and his Apostles
should have a certain and most assured good issue, out of all their trobles,
and death it self. Of which comfort, lively set forth in this similitude,
which was not in the similitude of drinking the cup: the Church had been
deprived of, if there had not been either wiser heads or diligenter hands then
your vulgar had. Which being repeated in the 23. verse should not have been
judged a superfluity, seeing beside the use of repetition, to imprint it
deeplier in memory, there is a noble increase whereby it is declared, that they
shall assuredly suffer with him: that so calling them home from their
ambitious preasing after superiority over their fellows, they might think to
prepare themselves to troubles.

To the next section.
The Jesuits taking pleasure to prove the Lord an evil husband in suffering
thorns and thistles to ouergrow his most sacred and holy field, of
the original in the new Testament: alledg Master Beza, which prefers the
reading of the old translator in some places unto the Greek copies which he
had. Wherein first mark, that one sentence of Master Beza is snatched at
contrary to his continual practice, through every page in a manner: where he
conuinceth the old translator, of slipps and falls in translating. Secondly,
observe how fondly they would conclude that Master Beza justifies the vulgar
translation, because he says: that in some places his reading is sounder then
the reading which he found in his Greek copies. Thirdly, it ought not to be
passed by, how sottishly, they would conclude: that therefore the old translator
is in some places purer then the Greek copies, for that he is in some places
purer then those copies which Master Beza had. For they might well have
known, that as Master Beza had Greek copies which Erasmus had not, whereby
he was able to relieve the old interpreter against Erasmus, that charged him
to have forsaken the Greek: so diverse others may have other copies, which
neither Master Beza nor Erasmus have come unto. And therefore if the old
translator should have any thing better then the Greek copies, which Master
Beza had: yet thereof should it not follow, that it should be purer then all
the Greek copies. But this is the profane mind of the Jesuits, which would
rather put fault in the Greek copies, then either in the negligence, or
inabilitie of translators, to get such a number of copies, as might be able to
furnishe that work of translation thoroughly. Now of all the examples in the
new Testament that they could choose to justify the old translator against the
Greek copies: it seems good unto them to send us to Act. 13. 20. where we
nothing doubt but the old translator used the same Greek copy that we have in
full consent. But because there are not 450. years under the government of the
Judges: he changed the place of the praeposition (...) and set it so, as
the account of the 450. years should be referred unto the time which was from
the birth of Isaac, unto the time of the Judges. Wherein as we take his
judgment to be good and sound: so his means to show it, needed not to have
been so violent, by carrying the praeposition so far from his home: if
(according to the manner of all tongues) he had understood a commodious
participle. For (saving better and riper judgment) we would think that it may
well be thus read. After these things done in 450. years or there-about, he
gave etc. The like eclipse of speech, we read in another place of the Acts,
where it is said, that Joseph sent for his father Jacob and all his kindred,
standing of 75. persons. And again to you the promise was made. And Act. 7. 14.
Act. 2. 39.
so the account of the years is very certain. For adding to the 400. years
expired at their departure from Egypt, 40. years, wherein they were under
Moses in the desert, and 7. years, wherein they having made a great conquest
of the land, received their inheritance by Lot: there rises the number of 447.
whereto make a round number, as the Scripture does in diverse other places: the
Apostle added three years. For which cause, he says not praecisely 450.
years, but about 450. thereby marking out either the defect of the same number
of 50. if (seven only years of Iosue being taken to his account) the rest of
his years be gathered to the reign and government of the Judges, or the
surplus of the same number of 50, if the whole government of Iosue (compassed
in 17. years) be numbered. Such also is the forehead of these Jesuits, that
they dare cite Augustine in this case, as if there grew any thing in his garden
that can give the old translator such an incorruptible nature, as they pretend:
whose judgment against these scourgers of the holy Scriptures, has been
before showed. Who affirms also in the very chapter by them alleged, that
all Latin books whatsoever August. de doctr. chr. lib. ^, ca. 15
ought to be reformed by the Greek c^pies, if therefore the old translation,
was so highly commended of him, as they say; yet it is evident, that he would
not have him privileged against the Greek in such sort as he should not (as a
subject) appear before the Greek copies, as before his lawful and competent
Judge.

To the six next sections page 14.
In all these sections the Jesuits points of their swords are set against
themselves. For if to justify the vulgar translation they judge it expedient
to show the aggreement of it, with some Greek readings either copies or
fathers that followed their copies: then follows it that the Greek is of more
authority then the Latin; as that whose credit depends of the good report,
which the Greek will give of it. Whereof also it is brought to pass, that in
translating the vulgar rather then the Greek; you are like to those silly poor
men, that having not wherewith to buy new out of the merchants shop, go to the
huck-stars that have things at the second hand. Master Bezas reverence of the
Greek copies, which you have utterly cast from you, does herein appear: that
even where his judgment leads him otherwise, he notwithstanding leaves the
Greek reading, according to the uniform consent of the Greek copies: as Iam.
4. 2. where also we mislike not the vulgar for his translation, considering
that the Apostle (to make the envious emulation which follows more
detestable) Matthew 5.
does as our Savior Christ did, in the case of cruel and unadvised wrath,
call it murder: wherein also the Apost. does very excellently expound the
commandment of murdering. But in the other place of 1. Peter. 3. 21. you
falsely report Master Beza, who corrects the old interpreter, by a Greek
copy of great authority; and therefore corrects not the Greek. How
ridiculous they make themselves and their Gagneye in justifying the old
interpreter, which makes it a wonder, that a great deal of fire, should
consume a great deal of wood: all men (that have but their common sense) may
easily understand. Howbeit what good choice your vulgar has made of Greek
copies, where it has any that are now extant: it already appears manifestly
by your deep silence; against their reasons which have convinced the frailty
of his judgment that ways: and more shall in the censure of your translation
which pretends to follow him.

To the next section page 15.
Look for the answer in the last sectio^ of page 13. beside that they deal
unfaithfully here with M. Beza. For although he affirm that the old
interpreter might (in some places) have a better copy, then himself could come
unto: yet here he praeferreth the consent of the Greek readings. And indeed
it is most fit, for the circumsta^ce of the place. For telling afterward, how
often they wash, namely as often as they had come from any place of common and
civil meetings: it agrees better both with the shortness of speech which S.
Mark (above al other) follows, and with the doting superstition of the
Pharisees: to expound this by a diligent and exact washing, thereby declaring
that they did not only wash often, but washed with great endeavor of rubbing
one hand against another: least (happily) any uncleanness should stick unto
them: which sense also is confirmed of the Syriack paraphrast.

Unto the next section.
If your Latin interpreter be so near driven, as to borrow his justification
of the Latin fathers, which seek themselves throughout to be justified by the
Greek copies; it is evident, that the accusations against him, must needs
cleave still unto him; until such time as his proctours can get some Greek
copies, to clear him by.

To the next section.
And if the multitude of Latin copies, hurt the authority of your vulgar
amongst the Latin fathers, because (after it was set forth) there were many
other translations abroad in their hands. Why did they hurt it, unless it were
because the fathers esteemed other translations (in diverse points) better then
it? for they were neither so proud, nor so negligent, as to have left the old
interpreter in those places, wherein they esteemed him to have approached
nearer unto the truth: especially seeing your vulgar is said to have had Damasus
the Popes commendation, to whose voice you would bear the world in hand that
the fathers gave no less reverence, then to an oracle from heaven. If
therefore the Latin fathers, forsook the old interpreter, when he was fresh
and new, and therefore furthest from corruption. How much more would they if
they were now alive, in many places let him go peaking alone after he has
been so corrupted, as has been before declared, and is further evident, by the
multitude of Latin copies differing one from another, by Look the King of
Spaines great Bible.
far greater diversities, then the Greek copies do: so that if it were an
impossible thing to make choice of the truth of Greek copies, because of their
diversity: it is much more impossible, to pick out the truth of the old
translation, encombred with so many and great varieties.

Unto the next section page 16.
Thus then we may see, that all the soap, niter and scouridge, that the
Jesuits are able either to beg, to borrow, to steal, or otherwise to come by:
are not able to cleanse the vulgar translation, from the filth of blood, either
wherein it was first conceived, or which it has gathered, from some hundred
years by passing through so many filthy hands of unlearned Monks; from the
which the Greek copies, have had great freedom and rest: because until a few
years ago, wherein the Popish shauelings have been somewhat wakened, by the
professors of the Gospel: their unskillfulness in the Greek tongue, was so
notorious, that they caused it to come into proverb: It is Greek, it cannot be
red. yea we doubt not, but it is apparent unto all indifferency: that it is not
only cleansed from the filth thereof, but that the more they have labored to
rub and skoure it, the fouler it appears, to all that have not willingly
closed their eyes against the truth, which, that it may more evidently and
without contradiction be understood; go to you Jesuits, and after a vomit of
your dogged stomach discharged against the Greek copies, almost in a continual
untruth. Hear the most true and modest charge, that shall be objected against
the insufficiencies of your vulgar translation, in one kind alone. Where, far
be it from us, that we should take a vantage of that which may (probably) be
deemed, to have crept in, by the slip either of pen or print. For it were not
only a point of unfaithfulness, but of m^re folly, in such an infinite number of
foul corruptions, whereof the mower may (in a manner) fill his arm, laboring
in this field: once so much as to stoop after these slipps, before the other
were cut down. Although (even in them also) the love that popery is in with
error, may euidentlye appear: which counting them slippes of pen, have not yet
in so many years, and after so many impressions, caused them to be amended:
Whereby they bewray how they dote after lies, which will not farm out that,
which (in their vulgar translation) they are constrained to confess, to be
sowtage or kitchin-stuf: so much more intolerable, as some of these
corruptions are blasphemous: as in stead that the greek has, that Christ
committed himself unto him (meaning God) that judges justly: it has, that he
committed himself to him, that judges unjustly. For we had rather lay this
fault being so gross, upon the writer then upon the translator. And albeit the
Jesuits retain it dreaming of a sense to make this interpretation stand: yet
it is manifoldlie confuted and cannot be admitted without foul and gross
error. Yet Romans 12, they have left the old translator: which says not
defending your selves, and followed the Greek with us, which is not revenging
your selves. In these corruptions of the vulgar, which shall be laid forth: let
the reader understand that they are all convinced by the general consent of all the Greek copies which are known at this day, by the Syrian Paraphrast, by
their own interlineal, and by circumstance of the place in diverse places most
evident, in other some pregnant and apparent enough, to such as have any
singleness of eye to look upon them. Amongst the corruptions that stand in
addition, let that be for example, which is Luke 2. 18. And concerning those
things spoken by the shepherds. Where beside the superfluity, there is no
good sense. Secondly, John 2. 15. he made as it were a whipp: where is added as
it were: which beside the falsifying the story, can hardly have any tolerable
understanding. Again John 8. 19. if you know me perhaps you might know my
father. Where perhaps is da^gerously added, favoring the heresy of Arrius:
considering that our Savior Christ other-where also does praeciselie affirm,
that he that sees John 14.
him, sees the father. Hebrew. 3. 14. if ye keep the beginning of his
substance firm unto the end: where he has added his, not only to th'obscuring
of th'argument of The Apostle, but to insinuate thereby an advantage to the
Arrians, that christ had a beginning of his substance. And these may suffice
for a taste of addition. The detractions follow. Math. 6. the conclusion of the
Lords prayer is wholly left out. Mark 9. 38. because he followed not us, left
clean out. Mark. 13. 14. where is left out which was spoken by the prophet
Daniel. Also in the same chapter, neither do you meditate left out. 1. Cor. 4.
4. to my self left out. Diverse also of detractions, detract from the truth
which is in controversy. Math. 17. where it is said Elias shall come, there is
left out, first, for the maintenance of theirs and the Jews idle fable of
Elias, coming a few years before the worlds end. Romans 11. But if it be of
works now it is not of grace: otherwise, etc. Heb. 1. 3. by himself left out:
which is very effectual to exclude all man's merits with other means
whatsoever in the matter of our salvation, and therefore went to the heart of
their sinful sacrifice: and is proved that it ought not to be left out, by
the other member of the verse. Th'alterations are infinite almost, and those
often of weight. Math. 1. 20. born in her, for begotten in her. And in the same
verse and other-where, in sleep, for in dream. Mark, 3. 29. Gyltie of
aeternall sin, for aeternall judgment. Matthew. 26. 30. when they had said an
hymn, for when they had sung an hymn. John 6. 45. shall be teach-able of God, for
shall be taught of God. Romans 1. 13. hateful unto God, for haters of God. Romans
14. 5. Let him abound in his own sense, for let him be persuaded fully in his
own mind. 1. Cor. 15. 51. we shall all indeed rise again, but we shall not
all be changed; for we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed. Of
Hieron. Minerio. and Alexan.
which reading of the vulgar Jerome denies, that there is any warrant in the
greek copies. Gal, 3. 1. the old has that that Christ was proscribed, which
is a law word, signifying a man whose substance (for debt or some crime) is
set to public seal: where th'Apost. sets forth, that Christ was (by Saint
Paul's preaching and administering the Sacraments) so pourtraied and painted
before their eyes, as if he had been crucified amongst them. Gal. 4. 7. heir by
God, for heir by Christ: as both the phrase of the Scripture, and the
circumstance of the place conuinceth. And often in advantage of their Popish
doctrine, as John 14. for this the holy Ghost shall bring to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you, to further the Churches vn-written verities,
it has he shall suggest whatsoever I shall say to you. For the merit of
works. In stead of Ephesians the 2. God has created us unto good works, it
has in good works. And Hebr. 13. in stead of, with such sacrifices God is
delighted. It has is promerited. Luke 10. For whatsoever thou spe^dest more:
it has, whatsoever thou shall supererogate. Luke 1. for looked on the low
estate of his handmaide: it has the humility of his handmaide. And in the
same place, for had freely graced, it has full of grace. Collos. 2. 23. In
superstition for in will worship, thereby to make way to th'inuentions of their
own brain. Ephesians. 5. (For multiplication of sacraments) in stead of a great
mystery it has sacrament. And Luke 22. 20. For this cup is the new Testament,
it has this is the cup: thereby to avoid th'euidence of the figurative speech.
Heb. 5. 11. Which cannot be expounded, for which is hard to be expounded;
thereby to defend the popish opinion of the sin against the holy Ghost. Heb.
7. 25. To save for ever, for to save wholly or throughout. Heb. 9. 14. By the
holy spirit, for by the eternal spirit, in favor of their wicked opinion that
our Savior Christ is high Priest only in regard of his humanity, and not in
regard of his divinity, with numbers of others the just treatise whereof would
require a whole book.

Unto the two next sections
Notwithstanding these swynish Jesuits, tread the pearls of the Greek copies
under their filthy feet, and that either without any manner of reason at
all, or else with so small reason, as will hardly justify them to be reasonable
creatures: yet can they not bear that Master Beza should (with great
probability and likelihood of truth) so much as suspect the Greek copies. For
they are not able to show one only place that he has corrected, contrary to a
whole consent of the Greek copies. They may condemn without reason, he may not
suspect, with great probability thereof. They may set in the text what
pleases them, contrary to the authority of all the Greek copies: he may not
utter his opinion in his scholies and annotations upon the text. They cannot
bear to be charged, with their praesent error. But he must bear the blame of
slippes and errors, which have past and now are reformed. Wherefore either
their hatred is so great against the Greek copies, that they cannot abide
Master Bezas modest and shamefast reprehensions of them, unless he would flatly
condemn them, as they do: or else their equity is so little, that they can see
a mote in his eye: when they perceive not the beam that is in their own. And
if the places were so many, wherein M. Beza pronounces the Greek to be
corrupted, that they would make the reader to wonder: you have done very
foolishly, which (in the great store you pretend) have repeated the most places
twice, and that of Cainan, thrice at the least in this book: bewraying thereby,
how (in great want of ability of accusing him justly) the will and desire to
accuse, was out of all measure. Yet speak we not this, as taking upon us
Master Bezas defense, without all exception. For we have showed Acts. 13. how
the Greek copies do well aggree with the truth: so we hope that the same
might be performed in other appearances Look verse. 14. how Jerome reconcileth
these places which the Jesuits think irr^conciliable in his quaesri^ns upon
Genesis.
of contradiction, even in the two most difficultest places of all other, which
are in the 7. of th'Acts. And touching that of the 75. souls beside Jacob, it
accords well with the number which Moses particularly reckons up Genes.
46. where (beside Jacob) are mentioned 75. persons. Neither does S. Steven
affirm that 75. persons came into Egypt: but declares Look Tremalius and
Iunius in their anno. tat. upon Genes. 46
in that number the whole family of Jacob was, before he came to Egypt: that
when men knew, that it came in so many years to no greater a sum then to
75. persons, reckoning also the 4. wives of Jacob, and two sonns of Iehuda that
were dead: they might the more clearlie see the wondrous and miraculous
blessing which followed before their departure from Egypt. The Other place which
seems likewise irreco^ciliable, concerning Abraham's verse. 16.
buying of a piece of ground at Sichem of the sonns of Emor: is as clear as
the sun at noone days: If this place of th'acts be compared with the places of
Genesis 12. 3. 4. and 33. 19. 20. for in the former of these places it is
evident that Abram had built an altar unto the Lord in the very self same
place, which Jacob (in ye latter of these chapters) is said to have bought, for
100. pieces of money. Now if Abraham would not bury his wife in that land,
wherein he was a stranger, but in ground bought with his own money: much less
would he build an altar to serve the Lord with, but upon a purchase thereof
made. It appears therefore, that S. Steven might (with as good right) call it
the place which Abram bought, as that which Jacob bought; both of them having
bought the place. Neither can it seem strange unto any, that Jacob purchased
the same again, that his grandfather had bought before: if they remember that
the fathers were often injured and deprived of wells and Genes. 26
other things that they had gotten, especially amongst a people, who (in all
kind of impiety and in-iustice) were now come almost to the top. And that it
was Saint Steuens meaning, to note out Abraham's purchase, rather then Jacobs;
it may partly appear in that he makes no mention of a certain price paid for
the ground; which notwithstanding is twice praecisely made mention of in the
purchase of Jacob. And Genesis 33. 19 Ios. 24. 32.
if the places were of that difficulty, that we were not able to clear them:
yet (for our parts) we had rather confess our own ignorance; the^ to charge a
full consent of Greek copies, with an untruth. And although it should be true,
which Master Beza suspecteth some-where of the Greek copies: It follows
not, that the truth or any part of the truth, is fallen from the Greek
copies: considering that the corruptions suspected of him, are not such; but by
either circumstance of the place, or conference of other places of Scripture,
the repair may be made.

Last of all, where they assign such contrariety, between the testimonies
cited according to the 70. interpreteres in the new Testament, and the Hebrew
text in the old; that either we must be driven in cleaving to the Hebrew of
the old, to forsake the Greek of the new; or in cleaving to the Greek in the
new forsake the Hebrew in the old: they declare themselves to be very
trifelers, and to abuse their reader impudently. For they know, that we are
able to justify every place cited out of the 70. by the Apostles and
Evangelists, to be agreeable with the Hebrew, and (in some diversity of words)
to have the same sense; at the least to have no sense repugnant, to that in the
Hebrewe: which is manifest by this, that where the 70. differed in sense, there
they leaving the 70. whom they so desirouslie followed (for support of the
Gentiles acquainted therewith) follow the Hebrew text. And as this is manifest
by experience, so is it observed Hieron. pro log. 15. lib. in Esai.
expressly of Jerome.

To the next section page 17.
Doubt not (good reader) but the Jesuits are like to bruste for anger, to
understand that we are so well praepared, to prove both that the princely
garments are not worn upon the Greek originals, for the space of above 1500.
years, wherein they have passed from hand to hand in the horrible deserte of
this wicked world: and that both the bread and apparel of the old translator,
setting out some hundredth years after it, if ever it were clad and vitailed,
in any passable measure of a translation: yet that now it is so patched and
so peeced, so hoary and so moldy, that any man (that asks counsel of the
Lord) may easily see, that neither it comes so far as the Jesuits do
praetend, neither has food and raiment, able to feed or cloth the children
and heirs of so great a King. And where having no more shamefastnes in their
forehead, then they have hair on their bald pates: they have taken this
boldness to say, that the Greek is not so corrupt as we say, although the old
translator be less corrupted then the Greek: unto whom what may we answer
better, then that which our Savior Christ answered unto the Devil confessing
him to be y^son of God: hold your peace. Mark. 1.
For beside that the truth cannot bear any praise of such foul mouthed
enemies as these be: their praise (inferior to the Devils in-trueth) is always
to the same end that his, that is wholly tending to the destruction of the
truth. The Greek is not so corrupt as we say. O impudency: as if there were
any, that has called down the royal value of the original Greek, as you have
done. Though (in comparison) we know it less sincere and corrupt, then the
vulgar Latin. O noble commenders of the Greek copies. Could you have set them
lower then in placing them under the vulgar? You might as well have set the
heavens under the earth: considering that the Greek original being borne in
heaven, your vulgar sprung out of the dust. How does also this aggree, with
your own saying: which affirm that you have forsaken the poynting of the
Latin to follow The last page of their preface.
the poynting of the Greek. And if the Greek has kept the true poynting, why
should it not keep the truth of words. And if your Latin have lost the true
pointing (without the which he that reads the Scripture is like him that
rides without a bridle) why should it not rather be said, to have lost the
truth of the words and sense, then the Greek which keeps the truth in
poynting.

To the next section.
The principal cause that has made you, take arms against the John. 8. 47
Greek copies: is that you are not of God, and therefore cannot abide the
words of God. Thereupon it comes, that the old translation as it is further
from the word of God, smacketh you better then the Greek copies do. And
although you may sooner get water out of a flint, then any relief of your
cause from the Greek copies: yet if it were possible, for truth to help to
maintain a lie, it were yet impossible for you to like of it: and therefore
although we are assured that you had great advantage out of the vulgar, which is
a great cause, that makes you stand so close unto it, and no advantage at all
out of the Greek (as partly has and further shall appear) yet we know that
you have a further fetch in preferring the handmaide unto her mistres: which is
thereby to undermine all authority of the holy Scripture, that (it being
ouer-throwen) the Popes decrees might ride on horseback; which cannot take
breath, as long as the authority of the holy Scripture remains. And if it be
as you say, that the Greek serves your turn better then the vulgar: you bear
us witness (at unawares) that the small estimation which we have your vulgar in,
proceeds not of any fear, that we stand in, lest he should hurt our cause.

To the next section page 18.
It were (doubtless) unworthy the name of a translation, that should be
inferior to the vulgar. Howbeit we charge not the old translator of Popery, and
impute not all the corruptions in the vulgar to the translator: but rather to
the enemy, which sow tares in his field: albeit as (has bine said) he might
some-where prejudice the truth, not thinking of it. As for the testimonies
both here and in the former section, they are discussed in their proper places.

To the next section.
We grant they are word for word at in the Greek. And therefore unless we
show that Popery leaning upon them, falls to the ground, and that it is not
only stayed by them, but destroyed of them. We will willingly confess, our
selves most unworthy either of the defense of so good a cause, or of the
places which we ocupy in the Church of God. In the mean season your beggary is
too impudent which take that for granted, wherein you have been always (in the
face) resisted. And if we would trifle out the time, as you do; we could for
five or six sentences which you bring, as seming to smyle upon you, allege
five or six hundredth, which do so apparently frown upon your Popery, as at
the very sight of them it falls down dead. If you had any general councils
or any other ancient fathers of the west part, beside Cyprian and Primasius
to warrant your phrases by: we dout not, but you would have made them speak:
which handle the matter so cunningly, that the dumb in your cause, and
sometime those which are eloquent against it, are notwithstanding (for want of
others) compelled to speak for it. As for the two fathers alleged: let the
reader look the answer in the proper place.

To the next section page 19.
As the Philosopher said of his work, that being set forth, it should (...)
for the hardness and darkness thereof (as it were) be vn-set forth: so may it be
verified in a good part of the Jesuits translation; that being translated, it
remains, partly for the sottish superstition of keeping of words rather then
sense, and partly for th'unnecessarie new fanglednesse of foreign speech, as
it were vn-translated. So is your translation as little Catholic, as may be: as
that which is so proud, so scornful and disdainful, that none of the ruder
sort, can have any acquaintance with it: whereas a good translator will endeavor
to deliver to his reader, the meaning of his author which he tra^slateth, with all light and plainnes of speech possible. What are the sacred words and
speeches, for retaining whereof you are fallen into this servitude? If you had
translated the Greek you might better have pretended this. For we acknowledge
the pens of The Apostles and Evangelists to have been sacred: which we cannot
acknowledge, not you cannot show in the old translator. Unless your Council of
Trent coming so many years after the old translator, was able then to make
that sacred, which had not been so before.

To the next section.
But let us hear their examples. The first kind whereof is, of Hebrew words
retained in the Greek text, and by the same reason to be contained in all
translations. But this argument turns not all together so round as you
think. For it may well be, that these words of Amen, and Alleluia etc. were
well known by The Apostles preaching to the Churches in that time. Wherefore
the use of them then, when they were well and generally known, was more
justifiable then now, when they are not so. 2. Cor. 1. 20
And for the word Amen, first we have The Apostle, which gives the just weight
thereof in a Greek word, Matt. 5. 18
whereunto our yea answers. Secondly the old translator uses it as an
indifferent thing, either to translate it into Latin, or to let it remain, as
he found it in the Greek text. Here therefore the drudgerie of the Jesuits is
manifest. For notwithstanding they esteem it not meet, that Amen should be
translated: yet because the vulgar has translated it, they have also thought
good to follow him therein Thereby tying themselves faster unto the vulgar, then
the vulgar did tie himself unto the original. Howbeit in retayning of the
Hebrew words, which the original does use, they should (for us) have passed
without blame if by contrary practice of that which they profess, they had
not differed as much from themselves, as from us: yet deceive themselves in
that they think they may keep Corbana as well as we keep Hosanna, Raca,
Beliall. For Saint Luke has translated Corbana, Gazophylacium: which is in
our tongue a treasury, and terms Luke 21. 4
it also the place of the gifts of God. Which interpretation when none of
The Apostles or Evangelists give, in the words which we have retained: it is
evident, that they have not that vvarrant of reteyning this which we have of
those: much less to keep Parasceue, which they ought as well to have translated
into English the tongue which they write in, as Saint Luke (forsaking the
Hebrew and Syriack words) used the word that was proper unto the tongue he
vvrote in. And therefore you impudently face down the truth, when you say
that Parasceue is as solemn a word for the sabbath even, as Sabbath is for the
Jews seventh day. Neither is there more cause, to leave it vn-translated, when
we are not able, with like shortness of our speech, to attain the full
signification: then to leave it unturned, when the shortness of our speech,
affords a sentence in a smaller compass of words then does the original.
And if this be a sufficient reason, to hold the translators hand, because there
are three words in Mat. 1. 19.
the translation of Parasceue, above that which is in the Greek: why have you
translated (...) put to open shame. Nay, how comes it to pass, that
without all warrant of the Greek, or circumstance of the place, beyond the
mark of the vulgar translation, which you propounde unto your selves, and that
in text Act. 8.
letters, you translate (...), they took order for burial. We know therefore
that your Dirigie groates, and Trentall money, will make you lavish and rauill
in your translation, as much as your servile mind makes you dumb and mute in
other places, where you might better speak. In the rest also, your comparisons
are foolish. For if we have retained certain words in their original, because
our speech fitteth them not so well: it follows not therefore that you might
do that, where it is at hand and ready to serve the Greek, or Hebrew word.
Or if we have sometimes not used the benefit and wealth of our tongue: does it
follow therefore, that you may so do? And if we seeking to translate all the
Greek words, have left some untranslated, because the English phrase either
did not afford it unto us, or else stood at that time far from us: does it
follow, that you should retain those words in a strange tongue, which our
tongue does afford you, the translation of which, we have found out unto your
hand, and which has confirmation, by the common use and practice of our nation
for many years together. Briefly, whereas our people by the grace of God, in
knowledge of the word, through the means of a lightsome and plain
translation, have been delivered out of Egypt: in steed that you should have
added light where it is wanting, and plained that which is rough: you have
endeavored, by your clouddy and hacked speeches to bring in again all
confusion and ignorance of God, and of his truth. And if your dainty stomach
could not brook the feast of the sweet bread; yet was there no cause for you,
to accuse it of falsehood seeing sweet bread, and unleavened bread (with us) are
all one. The translation also printed at Geneua, has unleavened bread. But
nothing tastes you but Azymes, and that because the people cannot chaw these
crusts of yours, or bones rather, which of purpose you set before them, that
they may depart hungry from your table. Your interpretation of (...); is
false, without all manner of proofs, framed out of your cruel and unmerciful
judgment, of throwing all into hell which die without baptism: as if they
were not planted in the house of God, before they be baptized: where ye true
use of baptism is toward those, which we understand either by their own
confession, or by the covenant, to be already planted in the house of God. As
for the meaning of the Apostle, it is evident: that he would have none drawn
to the ministry of the word which is lately come to the profession of the
Gospel: and therefore your fantasy of a neophyte that has been an old
scholar in the school of Christ (for so you must mean) implies a manifest
contradiction, and is all one, as if you should say, he is a new old plant, or
a new old scholar. For in those that were not gathered from heathenish
religion to the fellowship of the Gospel, before the years of discretion: the
same day that they became true scholars, they became true plants, and
contrariwise. Wherefore to be a young scholar, is the same thing in effect, as
to be a young plant: where Neophyte, to a bare Englishman is nothing at all, no
more then depositum, exinanited, exhaust: the foolerie and beastlines whereof,
is evident to all men, seeing our speech is able to yield the just valuation of
them. And if our showing the glad tidings, be not significatiue to our nation,
much less is your Euangelizing: which scarce one amongst a hundredth does
understand. And if you had learned that the doctrine of Christ under the
Gospel, is not set forth sufficientlye by the Greek word, without a Trope of
synecdoche, or as they call it (...) or and (...) you might easily have
known, that the same Trope being understood in our glade tidings, would have
reached the Greek word, and whatsoever is signified by it, sufficientlye. For
(...) was a Greek word before the Gospel came into the world: and is used of
Greek authors, to signify all manner of good news, and nothing else. And
therefore the word can properly signify no more now, then it did then. But the
Evangelist chose that word especially to note, that where men are desirous to
know good tidings they should bestow both their ears to understand this
doctrine, which is only worthy of that name. And if our translation liked you
not, as you have translated (...) Gospel: so you might have translated (...)
to Gospel, and (...) Gospelling, with more understanding of our people, and
with as full attainment of the signification of the words unless you will
confess, that you have failed in turning (...) the Gospel. Lastly, if so much
of the signification is lost, unless it be turned Euangelize: how comes it,
that you, Math. 11. 5. have translated it, the Gospel is preached. Here
therefore your drudgerie to the old interpreter, is again manifest, for
notwithstanding you hold it ill turned unless the Greek word be retained: yet
because the old translator turns it otherwise; you stick not, contrary to
your judgment, to turn it as he does: so have you no judgment of your own, and
the old translators judgment (who by turning it now one way, and now another,
signifies an indifferency of translation) you utterly overthrow. But that
which follovveth, is more absurd: that the people must be deprived of the
natural translation of the words, through your sottish desire of keeping of
Latin words, which the vulgar used: which these lying spirits calling first
the Latin text of the Scripture, after by and by call it, the very words of
the Scripture: as if the Scripture translated into the English tongue, were
not as much the Scripture, as that which is translated into the Latin. For
your poenance, you must do poenance: considering that Luke 17. 4. you turn the
same word which you translate do poenance, be poenitent. The same whip
comes to you, for your aduent: which in one and Mat. 24. 27
the same chapter and sense, turn it coming and aduent both. We are content
you keep your Priest, and your Chalice to your selves. Albeit you greatly
forget your selves, which maks your Priest here, to come of the Latin word;
whom othervvhere, Upon Act. 14. 22.
you vvoulde feign drive from the Greek.

To the next section, page 20.
We need not travail much to lay forth the shame of these men, who themselves
show their own nakedness. Let their first example here be considered: and so
let all men judge, whether a most plain sentence of the holy Ghost, be
shamefully obscured: and not obscured only, but made senseless. For the
Hebrevve phrase being rendered, it is plain, that that which they turn
spirituals of wickedness, ought to be turned spiritual wickedness. And if they
had any care, that the people should have been made wary, against this
spiritual craftines: they would have said, in the heavenly places or things,
as the text considered in the circumstance would best bear, rather then to
say, celestials. But it should appear that beside their peevish affecting of
obscurity, th'ignorance of the Hebrew phrase in the former part of this
sentence, and th'ignorance of the sense in the latter part: drove them upon
this vvitlesse translation. The same ignorance of the Hebrew tongue, caused
them to use some like dotage in the next example. For if they had known, that
it is ordinary and usual for the Hebrews to understand the verb
substantive: and had further learned, that the verb simple, has (as the place
and circumstance requires) the signification of the compound: they should
easily have understood, that this translation, what is between me and thee,
had not passed the measure of a simple and plain translation. The next example
does likewise bewray, their ignorance in all good law of translation. For it
is well known to children, that every tongue has a proper composition: in
such sort, that he that will make the composition of one tongue, aggree with
the composition of another, utterly corrupts the tongue, which he will
conform. And is all one as in a body, which is disfigured and deformed by
displacing of the several members thereof. In Hebrew he that says, MARA
MALE, and not MALE MARA, is easily known, not to speak the tongue of Canaan.
Bread white in our speech would offend patient cares, white bread in the
French language would be as offensive. And if so small a change, and as it were
the remoouing of a word to the next house, be so foul: how much more, is it
not to be abidden, that the word, whose natural place is in the beginning,
should be set in the end: as if it were removed from one end of the street to
the other. And if there could be any profit in this dotage: yet have not you
observed it. For where the Greek has Mat. 12. 20
in one verse, a reed bruised, and flax smoking: you have in the former
followed the order of the Greek, and say a reed bruised; but in the latter you
have left the order of the Greek, and kept the natural order of our speech,
saying smoking flax, not flax smoking. And although it be no answer here, to
say that they followed their old translator, seeing rather they ought to have
followed the full consent of the Greek copies, if such an imitation had been
needful: yet they are easily stripped of that answer. For sometimes they
leave the order of the old interpreter, and follow the Greek: as Math. 4. 4.
they say as the Greek bread alone, and not as the vulgar alone bread. Which
also they do not in phrase only, but in whole sentences: as Math. 4. they
forsake the vulgar, which says, walked in darkness, and take the Greek which
says, sat in darkness. And in Romans 12. in stead of that the vulgar has, not
defending our selves, they have cleaued to the Greek, which is not revenging
your selves. Neither can they say, that this was the slip of a pen of the
writer, for beside that there is no resemblance of the words, they are shut
from that, in that that Jerome so reads. And other sometime they forsake the
order of the Greek and Math. 4. 6.
vulgar both. For where both the Greek and vulgar have, to his Angels shall he
give charge of thee: they have turned Ibid. ver* ^
it, he will give his Angels charge of thee. And again, where both Greek and
Latin have into an hill high very: they (as it should seem) ashamed of this
their apish and sottish imitation, have translated it, as we do, into a very
high mountain. So it appears, that as they are utterly ignorant of all good
order of translation: so they keep not themselves to their own crooked rule,
but when and where it pleases them. And as they make themselves ridiculous in
the profession of a superstitious observation of the order of words: so are
they not only often ridiculous, but sometime impious in the sense, which their
servile observation of like number of words, draws them unto. Take for
example one of the most comfortable places in all the scripture, which by their
sottish translation (in sparing a word) Romans 8. 33 34.
they have turned into deadly poison, and bitter wormwood. For unto this
question, who shall accuse against the elect of God? They have added for
answer, God which justifies: as if god should accuse his elect. And to another
question, who is he that shall condemn? They ad for answer, Christ Jesus that
died, etc. Clean contrary to the meaning and phrase of the Apostle: also
contrary to their meaning; but yet their words can bear no other sense, where
the Apostle keeping the Hebrew phrase, left out the verb substantive; which
being always in that phrase understood of it self, is not so in our tongue;
unless it be expressed. Now yt we se their perverse imitation of words, is
not religious, but superstitious, and sometime impious, sometime observed, and
sometime not, at their pleasure: it will be also easy, to see in diverse
examples, that they riot and play the wantons in their translation. Albeit it
has already been performed, and that in three or four of those examples,
which they have alleged, to testify their great frugalitie in translating:
yet there are others whereby the same is convinced. (...) prohibebat.
As Math. 3. 14. where the Greek has he utterly forbade him, and the vulgar
forbad him they leaving both the Greek and the vulgar, translate stayed him,
and in the same chapter verse they translate praesented, and yet 8. chap. 16.
offered: the old translator having obtulerunt, in both places. Mark. Romans 12.
9. 49. they translate victimae. Hebr. 5. 1. they translate sacrifices, and
Hebr. 13. 16. they turn hosts: the word with full consent of the Greek
copies, being one, and the same in all. Ordinarily they translate prepuce and
prepuced: yet Act. 7. 51. they say uncircumcised. Mark. 10. 42. they translate
ouerrule Domin^ntur.
them, contrary to the meaning of our Savior, contrary to Saint Luke which
uses the verb simple, as of the same value as the compound, and contrary to
their own vulgar, who uses an indifferent word, which has not so great
excess of rule adjoined with it: thereby to help the Lordship of their clergy.
To stand upon the rest of their examples, whereby they glory in their own
shame, would be so small profit of the reader: especially considering that the
places of any importance, are other-where debated, some of them being
ridiculous as a word done, hell of fire etc. yet can we not pass over, one
open impudent, wilful and sausie corruption, which they have used throughout
their whole translation: which always in stead of the Lord have set (and that
text-wise) our Lord, contrary to the faith both of all the Greek examples and
the vulgar translation: having therefore taken from, and put to: you have all
the curses standing at your doors, which are threatened, against falsifyers of
the public records of the church: whether they be considered as they are in
deed, or as they are in your opinion. For notwithstanding you have laid up the
vulgar translation, in the holy ark of the Lord, hurling out from thence the
original, as it were the two tables, written by the finger of God; when such
dealing may serve your turn: yet bear you so little reverence unto it, as that
in a matter of small importance, which can neither hinder us, nor help you, you
have put out, and put in at your pleasure. And although the former fault, may
happily be imputed to your oversight yet the latter of adding, wherein you
fall so often and continually, can argue nothing else, but a challenge of
maistership and Rabbinisme in the Church of Christ, and of a chair advanced so
high, as that the chair of our Savior, may scarce seem to be a footstool
unto it. And if you could show but one such boldness of ours, through-out the
translation of the whole body of the Bible: we would cover our faces, and
our answer should be in silence. We see easily what a small gale of vvind,
has driven you upon these sands. Only for that we according to the most
accustomable phrase of the Scripture, do so speak: you have chosen to Heb. 7.
14.
speak otherwise then the Scripture, rather then you would speak as we do.
Ywisse you see it otherwise in us; which bank not your phrase of speaking,
wheresoever the text of Scripture does offer it us. You have made the wall
of your separation from us, high otherwise: and you might have made it higher,
with much less appearance of your contempt of the word. Saving that the Lord
would thus discover you: to a hateful abomination of your malapertnes, in
handling his word. Beside that, as you have divided your tongues, from the
tongue of the holy Ghost; so you have divided it, from your own hearts. For
neither in deed, nor by your own doctrine, can you say our God, or our Lord:
which stand in a continual mammering, whether he be lovingly affected toward
you or no. You have presumed further herein, then durst your good masters and
betters. For the whole university of Louaene, translating the Bible into
French, as you do the new Testament into English: kept themselves Le Seigneur.
herein praecisely to the old translator, turning the Lord, and not our Lord.
Where if the weight of authority be asked after: the university of Louane, is
of better mark then the university of Rhemes: the Doctors and Divines of
Louane, then the Nouices and Questionists of Rhemes: the whole university of
Louane of greater credit, then one small College of the university of
Rhemes. And if to all these we had (for answer) only returned; in such and such
places, we translate thus and thus, not as the Jesuits do; as they say that
they translate not as the Protestants do: we fear not, but al indifferent
judgment will be constrained to give the praeheminence of a true and plain
translation unto us, especially in respect of theirs. As even in the next
example, where the Greek word is different, either to the holy Ghost, or to
the wind; forasmuch as it is most evident by undoubted arguments, that the wind
is to be understood: we hold it for a grace of our translation, which has
appropriated the speech to the meaning of the Scripture. And therefore we may
justly condemn their translation; which, where one thing is intended and
marked out of the Scripture, uses that word, which is common to both
significations. Albeit we know neither general speech of the whole land, nor
particular language of any several shire: where the word spirit, does signify
wind. So that if it were a virtue for your translation, so to hault of both
sides, that the certain meaning could not be known: yet have you not here,
attained unto it.

To the next section, page 21.
That the Greek never favors you, it shall evidently appear, that there is
no corruption used of Master Beza in either of these verses: let the reader
look in their several places. To the rest we answer nothing: as we do not
unto the next section, nor the next to it. For first, it is known to all the
world, that in both the Epistles to the Hebrews, and Saint James: we
acknowledge the holiest and highest authority that can be. Secondly, it shall
appear in the place, that we keep the bounds of modesty, in abstaining to
name the writter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, whose name the holy Ghost
has concealed. Thirdly, not sticking to name Saint James Epistle in our best
translations, General: it is well known, that both that title, is not given
of the holy Ghost, but of the scholiast, which took it of Eusebius, and is not
given, for a mark of further degree of holiness above other Epistles, but only
to note the difference of the other Epistles, written with greater restraint of
person or place. Where these latter Epistles of Saint James, Peter, John, and
Jude, were directed to the Jews, scattered in diverse countries and provinces,
whither they had been carried captive: and therefore are called general.
Beside that it were good for you, not to be bold with Eusebius in the title of
Catholic: Eusebius. lib. 4. histor. eccles. c. 22. 23.
unless you will match Saint James most holy Epistle, with the Epistles of
Denis Bishop of Corinth, which Eusebius calls Catholic, as he does Saint
Iameses. Eusebius therefore was not a fit Eusebius. 2. lib. hist. eccles. ^. 23.
author for this: especially, if you had remembered, his rash judgment of Saint
Iameses Epistle. To the three next sections, we answer nothing.

In the last, let (hardly) the reader judge how they help his understanding
every way, which make plain places rough, darken that which is lightsom, by
disorder of sentences, by unwonted phrase, by words fetched from far
countries, which their own country does affoard them off. And finally, by
doubtful speech, inclyning as well to that, which is not the meaning of the
Scripture, as to that which is. And the way which is so plain and lightsome,
that they can never make rough nor dark by their translation: they do by their
annotations utterly pervert. And therefore we comfort our selves with this
saying of the Apostle, that you shall proceed no further, 2. Tim. 5. 9.
for as much as your madness shall be known to all men.

FINIS.

