The cunning Age.
OR

A re-married Woman repenting her Marriage,
Rehearsing her Husbands dishonest carriage.
Being a pleasant Dialogue between a re-married Woman, a Widow, and a young
Wife.

To the Tune of The Wiuing Age.


Widow. Good morrow, kind Gossip, why whither so fast?
I pray stay a while, I know there is no haste,
And let us chat a while o^ some things that are past;
I hear say you are marrie^ since I saw you last;
O this is a hasty Age,
O this is a hasty Age.

Mar. Woman. It Is true, I am married, which has been my bane,
But if that I were now a Widow again,
I so would continue; but grief is in vain,
I must be contented to sing this sa^ strain,
Oh fie on this coozening Age,
Oh fie on this etc.

Wid. Oh, do you so quickly your bargain repent
And yet you th^ught long e're about it you went?
If marriage bring trouble in time I Will prevent
All future unquietness, and be content
To shun such a coozening Age,
To shun etc.

Mar. Woe. Oh, woe is me, Gossip that e're I was borne,
I married a Boy, that now holds me in scorn,
He romes among Whoores bo^^ ^u^ning and morn,
While I sit at home, like a creature forlorn.
Oh, this is a coozening Age,
Oh, etc.

Wid. Oh, who would imagine that such a young Lad,
That scarce was worth twelve pence with all that he had,
Should wed a rich woman, and use her so bad?
I trust I shall never be so doting mad,
^o match in this coozening Age, etc.

Mar. Woe. The grief that I suffer can hardly be told,
Among Whores and Knaves he consumes my gold,
And if I reprove him, he tells me I scold,
I dare not dispose of mine own as I would.
Oh fie on this doting Age,
Oh fie on this doting Age.

Wid. Well, by your example I warning will take,
With no S^ip-iacke boy a match I will make;
Two Suitors I have, but I both will forsake,
For some that are fond, as they brew let them bake;
I Will take heed of this cunning Age,
I Will take heed of this cunning Age.

Mar. Woe. Well, do so, good Gossip, and so Fare you well,
(...) ^oo^ly new husband will curse me to hell:
(...) John, (God be with him) my neighbors can tell,
^id n^uer in's life gi^e me mouthfull of ill.
Oh fie on this doting Age,
Oh fie on this doting Age.

Wid. There is an old Proverb. that often has bin tried,
Set a Beggar on horseback, to the Gallows heel ^ide,
So, (...) a young Boy, he is so poft up with pride,
They Will marry rich Widows, to scoff and (...).
Oh this is a coozening Age,
O this is a coozening Age.

FINIS.
John Cart.

The Second Part. To the same Tune.


Married Woman. BUt stay, who comes yonder? it is well y^ I tarried:
My kinswoman Katherin, (...) lately was mary'd,
She had better gone to the Church to be buried,
With her (...), (...), things are otherwise carryd,
She curses this coozening Age,
She curses this coozening Age.

Young Wife. What Cousin and neighbor, are you met together?
It Is well that I happened so luckily hither,
I long have desired to talk with you either;
Come, stand not in the street, let us go travel somwhither
Oh fie on this coozening Age,
Oh fie on this etc.

Both to the young Wife. Well, how do thou like of thy Husband, good Kate?
We hear of a certain thou art married of late
With a wealthy old widdower, to better thy state,
Who loves thee as dear as the Tur^le his ma^e:
That Is rare in this cooz^ning Age,
That Is rare etc.

Young Wife. Oh woe's me, Cousin that ever 'twas done,
A beggarly slave my affection has won;
He (...) of his riches, whereof he had none,
But five little Children, four Girls, and a Son,
Oh fie on this coozennig Age,
Oh fie on this etc.
When he came awooing he borrowed a Cloak,
(...) (...) his fingers, my love to provoke;
(...) (...) a word of his Children he spoke,
But now we are married, I find that he is broke,
Oh fie on this coozening Age,
Oh fie on this etc.
Besides, he is so ielous, that if I but look
On any Yong-man, he will be sworn on a book,
That I make him Cuckold by hook or by crook;
This doting suspicion no woman can brook
Oh fie on this doting Age, etc.

Mar. Wom. It seems then, good Kate, we are both alike sped.
Ill fortune had we, with such Husbands to wed:
For if all be true that here thou have sed,
I would either we, or our Husbands were dead.
Oh fie on this coozening Age,
Oh fie on this coozening Age.

Wid. Your speeches will make me still willing to tarry,
Since UUiddowes and Batchelors both do miscarry
Yet it is said in London, that when we do bu^y
Our Husbands, next month we are ready to marry
Oh this is a lying Age,
Oh this is etc.
Nay more, to abash us, the Poets o'th times,
Do blazon us forth in their Ballads and Rimes,
UUith (...) (...) satyricall lines,
As thoug^ we ^a^ ^^^e some notorious crimes.
Oh this is a scandalous Age.
Oh this is etc.
I ^woul^ (...) Poet could get in my clutch^s,
He were (...) (...) ballads against y^ (...) (...)
There is (...) (...) (...) that sorely us (...),
The (...) (...), (...) (...) upon Crutches,
Does roar out the Wiuing Age,
Does ^oare out etc.
But it is no great matter let Knaves say their word,
^n^ swe^l with (...) envy until they do burst.
I (...) you so long, I shall make you be cursed,
I could fin^ in ^eart to stay still, if you durst:
Oh now comes the parting Age,
Oh now comes the parting Age.

FINIS.
Printed at London for John Trundle


