GEOGRAPHIE DELINEATED FORTH IN TWO BOOKS* CONTAINING The Sphericall and
Topicall parts thereof, By NATHANAEL CARPENTER, Fellow of Exceter College in
Oxford.

THE SECOND EDITION CORRECTED.

ECCLESIAST. 1. One generation comes, and another goes, but the Earth
remains for ever.

OXFORD, Printed by John Lichfield, for Henry Cripps; and are to be sold by
Henry Curteyne. Anno Domini, M. DC. XXXV.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM, EARL OF PEMBROKE, LORD CHAMBERLAIN to the
Kings most excellent Majesty, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and
Chancellor of the University of Oxford.
Right Honorable,
THis poor Infant of mine, which I now offer to Your Honorable acceptance,
was consecrated Yours in the first conception: If the hasty desire I had to
present it, makes it (as an abortiue brat) seem unworthy my first wishes, and
Your favorable Patronage; impute it (I beseech You) not to Self-will but
Duty; which would rather show herself too officious, then negligent. What I
now dedicate rather to Your Honor, then mine own Ambition, I desire no
farther to be accounted Mine, then Your generous approbation: wishing it no
other fate, then either to dye with Your Dislike, or live with Your Name and
Memory. The general Acclamation of the Learned of this Age, acknowledging with
all thankful Duty, as well Your Love to Learning, as Zeal to Religion, has
long since stamped me Yours. This arrogant Desire of mine, grounded more on Your
Heroicke virtues, then my private ends, promised me more in Your Honorable
Estimation, then some others in Your Greatness. The expression of my self in
these faculties beside my profession, indebted more to Love, then Ability,
setts my Ambition a pinch higher then my Nature. But such is the Magnificent
splendor of Your Countenance, which may easily lend Your poor Servant so much
light as to lead him out of Darkness; and, as the Sun reflecting on the
baser earth, at once both view and guild his Imperfections. My language and
formality I owe not to the Court, but University; whereof I cannot but expect
Your Honor to be an impartial Vmpier, being a most vigorous Member of the
one, and the Head of the other Corporation. If these fruits of my Labors
purchase so much as Your Honors least Approbabation, I shall hold my wishes
even accomplished in their ends, and desire only to be thought so worthy in
Your Honorable esteem, as to live and dye

Your Honors in all duty and service to be commanded NATHANAEL CARPENTER.

The Analysis of the first Book.
Geography, whose object is the whole earth, is either Sphericall, which is
twofold either Primary, which considers the Terrestrial Sphere either as it
is Natural wherein are to be considered two things: the Principles whereof it
consists, to wit, Matter and Form. Chapter 1. Proprieties arising out of them;
which again are either Real: such as are assigned in respect of the Earth it
self: which are either Elementary: as the conformity of all the parts
concurring to the constitution of the Sphere. Chapter 2. Magneticall; which
are either Partial as the Coition, Direction, Variation, Declination: Chap. 3.
Total: as the Verticity and Revolution: Chap. 4.

Heavens: wherein we treat of the Site, Stability, and proportion of the Earth
in respect of the Heavens. Chap. 5.
Imaginary: such as are the Circles and Lineaments of the Globe, of whose
Invention and Expression. Chap. 6.

Artificial: in the Artificial Sphere representing the Natural unto us:
which is either Common or Magneticall. Chap. 7.
Secondary, which handles such matters in the Sphere as secondarily arise out
of the first. Such are Measure of the Earth, with the diverse manner of
Invention. Chap. 8. Distinction which are either Spaces considered Simply in
themselves, in which sort they are divided into Zones, Climates, and Parallels.
Chap. 9. In respect of the Inhabitants: which suffer manifold Distinction.
Chap. 10.
Distances which are either Simple: wherein is considered the Longitude and
Latitude of places. Chap. 11. Comparatiue: wherein two places differing either
in Longitude or Latitude, or both, are considered. Chap. 12.



Topicall Libro 2o.


OF THE SPECIAL Contents of each Chapter of the first Book according to the
several Theoremes.
CHAP. I. Of the Terrestrial Globe, the Matter and Form.
1 IN the Terrestrial sphere is more Earth then Water. page 8 2 The Earth and
Water together, make one Sphere. page 10
CHAP. II. Of the Conformity of parts in the constitution of the Terrestrial
Sphere.
1 The parts of the terrestrial sphere do naturally conform and dispose
themselves, as well to the Production and Generation, as to the continuance and
preservation of it. page 14 2 All Earthly bodies incline and approach to the
center as near as they can. 16 3 Of two heavy Bodies, striving for the same
place, that always prevails, which is heauiest. 22 4 Hence it comes to
pass, that the Earth enioyes the lowest place, the next the Water, and the
last the Air. ibid. 5 The Center of the Earth is not an Attractiue, but a
mere Respective point. 25. 6 The same point is the center of Magnitude, and
weight in the Terrestrial sphere. 26 7 Every point or center of a weighty
body, is moved toward the center of the terrestrial Globe by a right line. 27
8 A heavy point moving toward the center, will move faster in the end, then in
the beginning. 28 9 The motion of a magnitude toward the center, is not
merely natural, but mixed with a violent motion. 29 10 The lines wherein the
centers of two heavy bodies are moved downewardly, being continued, will meet
in the center of the Earth. 31 11 Two heavy body: of the same figure and
matter, whether equal or unequal, will in an equal time, move in an equal
space. 32 12 The Terrestrial Globe is round and sphericall. 33 13 The Rugged
and unequal parts of the Earth, hinder not the sphericall roundnesse of it. 36
14 The Water concurring with the Earth in the Globe, is also sphericall. 38
CHAP. III. Of the Partial Magneticall affections in the sphere of the Earth.
1 The Terrestrial sphere is of a magneticall Nature and disposition. page 46
2 The magneticall motion is excited in a small and vnperceiuable difference of
time. 49 3 The motive quality is spread spherically through every part of the
magneticall body. 49 4 The motive quality of the magneticall body, is strongest
of all in the poles, in other parts so much the stronger by how much they are
situated near the poles. 50 5 Magneticall bodies move not uncertainly, but
have their motions directed and conformed to certain bounds. 52 6 The Magnet
communicates his virtue to iron or steel, if it be touched with it. 55 7 The
Magneticall Coition is strongest of all in the poles. 56 8 The South part of
the Loadstone turns to the North, and the North to the South. 57 9 The
contrary motion in magnets is the just Confluxe and Conformity of such bodies
to magneticall union. 59 10 If any part southward of the magneticall body be
torn away or diminished, so much shall also be diminished of the North part.
50 11 The Magneticall variation has no certain Poles in the terrestrial
Globe. 63 12 The point of Variation, as of Direction, is only Respective not
attractiue. 65 13. The variation of every place is constant not variable. 66 14
The variation is greater in places near the poles. ibid. 15 The magneticall
Declination is answereable to the Latitude, not in equality of degrees, but in
proportion. 69 16 The magneticall declination is caused, not of the attractiue,
but of the Disponent and Conuersiue virtue of the Earth. 70 17 The Magneticall
Declination has a variation. 71
CHAP. IV. Of the total Motions Magneticall.
1 The sphere of the Earth by her magneticall vigor, is most firmly seated
on her Axell, whose ends or poles respect always the same points in the
Heavens without alteration. 72 2 It is probable, that the terrestrial Globe
has a circular Motion. 76
CHAP. V. Of the site, Stability, and Proportion of the Earth in respect of the
Heavens.
1 The terrestrial Globe is the center of the whole world. 99 2 The position
of the Earth in the center of the world may be reconciled, as well with the
diurnall motion of the Earth, as the Apparences of the Heavens. 110 3 The Earth
is firmly seated and settled in her proper place. 115 4 The Earthly Globe
compared in quantity with the Firmament, and supreme orbs of the Planets, has
no sensible magnitude. 118 5 The terrestrial Globe compared with the inferior
Orbs has a sensible magnitude. 121
CHAP. VI. Of the circles of the Terrestrial Spheare^
1 A circle though imaginary in it self, has his ground in the nature of the
terrestrial sphere. 123 2 The distinction of a circle into a certain number
of parts has no certain ground in the nature of the terrestrial sphere, but
only in conueniency. 124 3 By Astronomicall observation to find out the
Meridian. 127 4 To find out the Meridian magnetically. 129 5 By the Incision of
a tree, the Meridian may be found out. 131 6 The Meridian being found to find
out the Equatour. 137 7 Without the help of the Meridian to find out the
Equatour. 138 8 To find out the Equatour magnetically. 138 9 The Equatour is an
immovable circle, whose Poles never vary from the Fixt-Poles of the Earth. 140
10 How to know the number of degrees in a lesser circle answerable to the
greater. 147 11 The sensible and Rational Horizon in the Earth, are much
different: in respect of the Firmament all one. 151 12 The sensible Horizon may
be greater or less, according to the Nature and Disposition of the place. 153
13 the Eye may be so placed on the Earth, as it may behold the whole
Hemispheare of the Heavens, and yet no part of the terrestrial sphere. 154 14
From the Horizontall circle is reckoned the Elevation of the Pole in any place
assigned. 155 15 How to find out the Horizon for any place assigned. 156 16
How to find out the Horizontall plain. 157 17 The distinction of Horizons.
ibid.
CHAP. VII. Of the Artificial Representation of the Terrestrial sphere.
1 Of the parts whereof the Globe is Geographically compounded. 163 2 The use
of the Artificial Globe is to express the parts of the Earth, so far forth
as they have a diverse situation, as well one in respect of the other, as the
Heavens. 166 3 Of the direction of the artificial Globe. ibid. 4 Of the ground
and fabric of the Artificial plain Chart. 168 5 Of the ground and fabric
of the Geographicall Planispheares with their several distinctions. 175 6 Of
the magneticall Terrella. 182
CHAP. VIII. Of the measure of the Earth.
1 The common measures by which the quantity of the Earth is known, are miles,
and furlongs. 187 2 Of the invention of the circumference of the Earth. 188 3
By the elevation of the Pole, or observation of an Eclipse or some known
star the circuit of the Earth may be known. 189 4 By observation of the
noone-shadowes the measure of the earth may be found out. 190 5 The opinions of
Cosmographers concerning the measure of the Earth are diverse, which is chiefly
to be imputed to their error in observing the distances of places
experimentally, according to Miles, Furlongs, and such like measures. 192 6 How
by the known height of some mountain the diameter of the Earth may be found
out. 197 7 How to find out the plain and convey superficies of the Earth. 198
8 Of the number of square miles contained in the Earth. 200
CHAP. IX. Of the Zones, Climates, and Parallels.
1 Of the temperate and intemperate Zones. 204 2 The t^rride Zone is the
greatest of all: next are the two temperate: the cold Zones are the least of
all. 207 3 The Zone wherein any place is seated, may be known either by the
Globe, or Geographicall table, or else by the tables of Latitude. 208 4 The
Zones and Climates agree in form, but differ in greatness, Number, and
Office. 211 5 The I^^ention compared one with the other, are not all of the
same greatness. 212 6 The inclination of the Climates. ibid. 7 The distinction
of the Climates. 213 8 Of the diversity betwixt the Ancient and modern
Geographers, concerning the placing and number of the Climates. 214 9 How to
find out the Parallel for each place. 217
CHAP. X. Of the distinction of the Inhabitants of the Terrestrial sphere.
1 Of the inhabi^ant^ of a right, oblique, and Parallel sphere, with their
properties and distinctions. 220 2 Of the Amphi^cij, Hetero^cij, and Periscij,
with their properperties. 226 3 Of the Perioecj, Antoe^j, and Antipodes, with
their Accidents: 228 4 How the Perioecj, Antecj and Antipodes, are
distinguished in respect of the celestial Apparences. 231
CHAP. XI. Of the Longitudes and Latitudes.
1 Places enjoying the same longitude, are not always equally distant from the
first Meridian; and contrariwise. 235 2 The difference of Longitudes begetts
the difference of times. 235 3 Of the loosing or getting of a day in the whole
year in a voyage about the earthly Globe. 236 4 Of the Invention of the
Longitude by an Eclipse of the Moon. 240 5 Of the Invention of the Longitude
by a Clock, watch, or Houre-glasse. 242 6 By the distance betwixt the Moon
and some known star, to find out the Longitude. 243 7 By the difference of
the Suns and Moons motion, to find out the Longitude of places. 246 8 The
expression of the longi^^de by the Globe or Map. 247 9 The Invention of the
Latitude. 249 10 By the Meridian height of the Sun to find out the Latitude.
249 11 By the Meridian height of a known star to know the Latitude. 250 12
The expression of the Latitude on the Globe or Map. 252 13 Of the Magneticall
expression of the Latitude. 252
CHAP. XII. Of distances of places compared one with the other.
1 Of the Invention of the distances in longitude of two places under the
Equatour in the same Hemispheare. 254 2 Of the Invention of the distance of two
places in the same Hemispheare without the Equatour. 255 3 Of the distance of
places differing only in longitude, in diverse Hemispheares. 260 4 Of the
invention of places differing only in Latitude, either in the same or diverse
kinds of Latitude. 261 5 To find out the distance of places differing in
Longitude and Latitude by the square root. 262 6 How to perform the same by
the tables of Signs, Tangents, and Secants. 264 7 To find out the distances of
places by resolution of the sphericall Triangle. 266 8 Of the Invention of the
distance by the Semicircle. 271 9 Of the expression of the distance on the
Globe or Map. 273
To my Book.
PArue, nec inuideo, sine me (Liber) ibis in Aulam, Hei mihi quod Domino non
licetire tuo.
Go forth thou hapless Embrion of my Brain,
Vnfashion'd as thou art; express the strain
And language of thy discontented Sire,
Who hardly ransomed his poor Babe from fire,
To offer to the world and careless men
The timelesse fruits of his officious pen.
Thou art no lovely Darling, stamped to please
The looks of Greatness; no delight to ease
Their melancholy temper, who reject
As idle toys but what themselves affect.
No lucky Planet darted forth his Rays
To promise love unto thy infant-dayes:
Thou may perhaps be merchandise for slaves.
Who sell their Authors wits and buy their graves:
Thou may be censured guilty of that blame,
Which is the Midwifes fault, the Parent's shame:
Thou may be talk for Tables, used for sport
At Tauerne-meetings, pastime for the Court:
Thou may be torn by their malicious phangs,
Who nere were taught to know a Parents pangs.
How easily ca^ ^roud Ignorance out-stare
The co^eliest weeds thy poverty can wear;
When all the Sisters on our Isis side
Are of^ sworn servants to aspiring pride,
And our r^^owned Mother Athens groans
To see her garden set with Cadmus sons:
Whose birth is mu^uall strife: whose destiny
Is onl^ to be borne, to fight, and die.
Prometheus is chained fast, and cannot move
To steal a little fire from mighty Jove
To people new the world; that we may see
Our Mother teeme with a new progeny;
And therefore with thy hapless Father prove
To place thy duty where thou find love.
When thou arriu'st at Court thou long may stay
Some Friends assistance to prepare thee way;
As in a clowdy morning I have done
When envious Vapors shut me from the Sun.
When all else enter, see thou humbly stand
To beg a kiss from thy Moecenas hand;
If he vouchsafe a look to guild thy state,
Proclayme him Noble, thy self fortunate.
GEOGRAPHIE: THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the Terrestrial Globe, the matter and form.
1 GEOGRAPHIE is a science which teaches the description of the whole Earth.

The Nature of Geographie is well expressed in the name: For Geographie
resolved according to the Greek Etymology, signifies as much as a
description of the Earth; so that it differs from Cosmographie, ^s a part from
the whole. Forasmuch as Cosmographie according to the name, is a description of
the whol^ world, co^prehending under it as well Geographie, as Astronomy.
Howbeit, I confess, that amongst the ancient Writers, Cosmographie has been
taken for one and the selfsame science with Geographie; as may appear by
sundry treatises merely Geographicall, Ptolom. geogr. l. 1. sec. 1.
yet entitled by the name of Cosmographie. This Science (according to our
approved Ptolomie) is distinguished from Chorographie four ways. First,
because Geographie describes the whole Sphere of the Earth, according to its
just quantity, proportion, figure, and dispositions, which the principal parts
of it have; as well in respect of one another, as of the whole Terrestrial
Globe: so that it only undertakes the chief and most noted parts, such as are
sines, creekes, nations, cities, promontories, rivers, and famous mountains.
But the Chorographer separatly handles the lesser parts, and matters of
smaller moment, such as are hillocks, brooks, lakes, towns, villages, and
Parishes, without any respect at all to the places adjoining, as conferring
them with the Sphaericall fabric of the whole Earth: Which by the same Author
is well illustrated by an example, drawn from the Painters Art: For we see
that a Painter, desirous to draw out and represent the head of any living
creature, will first draw out the lineaments of the first and greatest parts;
as the eyes, ears, nose, mouth, forehead, and such like; only caring that they
may challenge a due and just proportion and symmetrie one with the other, not
regarding the lesser particles and ornaments in each of these, wanting perhaps
space competent to accomplish it. But if the same Painter would strive to
express only an eye, or an ear, he might take space enough to design out
every smaller lineament, color, shadow, or mark, as if it were natural: for
in this he cares not to make it correspondent to the whole head, and other
parts of the body: So happens it to the Geographer, who willing to delineate
out any part of the Earth, (as for example, our Realm of England) he would
describe it as an Island, encompassed round with the sea, and figured in a
triangular form, only expressing the principal and greater parts of it. But
the Chorographer undertaking the description of some special and smaller part
of England; as for example, the City of Oxford, descends much more particularly
to matters of small quantity and note: such as are the Churches, Colleges,
Halls, Streets, Springs; giving to each of them their due accidents, colors,
lineaments, and proportion, as far forth as Art can imitate Nature. Neither
in this kind of description needs there any consideration of the places
adjoining, or the general draught of the whole Island. The second difference
between Geographie and Chorographie assigned by Ptolomie, consists in this;
that Chorographie is commonly conversant in the accidental qualities of each
place, particularly noting unto us, which places are barren, fruitful, sandy,
stony, moist, dry, hot, cold, plain, or mountainous, and such like proprieties.
But Geographie less regarding their qualities, inquires rather of the
Quantities, measures, distances, which places have as well in regard one of the
other, as of the whole Globe of the Earth: assigning to each region its true
longitude, latitude, clime, parallel, and Meridian. 3ly, Geographie and
Chorographie are said to differ, because Geographie stands in little need of
the Art of Painting, for as much as it is conversant the most part about the
Geometrical lineaments of the Terrestrial Globe, clayming great affinity with
the Art called of the Greeks, Ichnographie; whose office is to express the
figure and proportion of bodies, set forth in a plain superficies. But
contrariwise Corographie requires, as a help necessary, the Art of Painting;
forasmuch as no man can fully and perfectly express to the eye the true
portraict of cities, towns, castles, promontories, and such other things, in
their true colors, liuelyhood, and proportion; except they be skilled in the
Art of Painting. So that this part is by some likened to that Art which the
Greeks call Sciographie, or S^enographie. Fourthly, and lastly, Geographie is
distinguished from Chorographie, in that the former considering chiefly the
quantity, measure, figure, site, and proportion of places, as well in respect
one of the other, as of the Heavens, requires necessary helps of the Sciences
Mathematical, chiefly of Arithmeticke, Geometry, and Astronomy, without
which a Geographer would show himself euery-where lame and impotent, being not
able to wade thorough the least part of his profession: whereas a man
altogether unpracticed in those faculties, might obtain a competent knowledge
in Chorography. As we find by experience, some altogether ignorant in the
Mathematics; who can, to some content of their hearers, Topographically, and
Historically discourse of Countries, as they have read of in books, or observed
in their travail. Notwithstanding all these differences assigned by Ptolomie,
I see no great reason why Chorography should not be referred to Geography; as
a part to the whole; forasmuch as the objects on which he has grounded his
distinction, differ only as a general and a special; which being not
opposite, but subordinate (as the Logicians use to speak) cannot make two
distinct Sciences, but are reduced to one and the selfsame: at least the
differences thus assigned, will not be Essential but Accidental. Wherefore my
scope in this Treatise shall be to join them both together in the same, so
far forth as my Art and leisure shall be able, to descend to particulars; which
being in Chorographie almost infinite, will not all seem alike necessary in the
description of the universal Globe of the Earth. The name of Geographie thus
distinguished, we define it to be a Science which teaches the Measure and
Description of the whole Earth. It is properly termed a Science, because it
proposes to it self no other end but knowledge; whereas those faculties are
commonly termed Arts, which are not contented with a bare knowledge or
speculation, but are directed to some farther work or action. But here a doubt
seems to arise, whether this Science be to be esteemed Physical, or
Mathematical? We answer, that in a Science two things are to be considered:
first* the matter or object whereabout it is conversant; secondly, the manner
of handling and explication: For the former, no doubt can be made, but that
the object in Geographie is for the most part Physical, consisting of the
parts whereof the Sphere is composed: but for the manner of Explication, it is
not pure, but mixed; as in the former part Mathematical, in the second rather
Historical; whence the whole Science may be alike termed Mathematical and
Historical* not in respect of the Subject which we have said to be Physical,
but in the manner of Explication. For the object of Geographie (as we have
intimated) is the whole Globe of the Earth: where we are to observe, that the
Earth may be considered 3 manner of ways: First, as it is an Element, out of
which mixed Bodies are in part compounded: In which sense it appertains to
Natural Philosophy, whose office is to treat of all natural bodies, their
principles and proprieties. Secondly, as it is supposed to be the center of
heavenly motions, and so it is undertaken by Astronomers. Thirdly according to
its Sphaericall superficies, as it is proposed to be measured or described, in
which manner it is the subject of Geographie, so far forth as the parts of it
have a diverse situation, as well in regard one of another, as in respect of
the Heavens. Which restriction, although agreeing well to some part of it, will
hardly square with all the rest: because many things herein are handled besides
the Earths natural site or position, as hereafter shall be taught. For which
cause we have rather defined the subject of Geographie to be the Earth, so
far as it is to be measured and described, as wanting one word to express the
whole manner of consideration.

2 Geographie consists of 2 parts, the Sphericall, and Topicall: The Sphericall
part is that which teaches the natural constitution of the Terrestrial
Sphere.

The common and received division of this Science amongst Geographers, is into
the General or universal part; and the special. Which division, I dare not
utterly reject; being strengthened with the authority of ancient and approved
Authors. Yet seems it more aptly to be applied to the Historical part, then to
the whole Science, as we shall after make apparent. In the mean time the
division of it into Sphericall and Topicall parts, seems to be preferred in
reason: Forasmuch as the Terrestrial Globe, which we suppose to be the subject
of the Science, is proposed to us under a twofold consideration; first in
regard of the Mathematical lineaments and circles, whereof the Sphere is
imagined to consist; out of which we collect the figure, quantity, site, and
due proportion of the Earth, and its parts: Secondly, of the places
Historically noted and designed out unto us, by certain names, marks, and
characters. The former receives greatest light from Astronomy, whence some
have called it the Astronomicall part: The later from Philosophy and
Historical observation, being (as we have said) a mixed Science, taking part of
diverse faculties.

3 The Terrestrial Sphere is a globous or round Body, comprehended within the
superficies of the Earth and Wate^.

Some have nicely distinguished betwixt a Sphere and an Orb, that a Sphere
is a round massy body, contained in one surface, which is conuexe or outward
as a Bowl. The other concaue, or hollow, in manner of an Egge-shell emptyed.
But this distinction seems too curious, as sauouring to much of Scholasticall
subtility, because the name of Orb and Sphere are many times promiscuously
used, without difference, amongst good Writers. This Sphere which we make the
subject of our Science, we call Terrestrial, not because it consists merely
of Earth; (the contrary of which we shall hereafter show:) but because the
Earth is the chiefest in the composition; whence by a tropicall kind of speech,
the whole Globe may be called Terrestrial.

4 The handling of the Terrestrial Sphere is is either Primary, or Secundary.
The Primary consists in such affections as primarily agree to the Earth.

The Geographicall Affection may be considered two ways; either simply and
absolutely in themselves; or eomparatiuely as they are conferred and compared
the one with the other. As for example, the circles of the Sphere, such as are
the Parallels and Meridians, may be considered either absolutely in themselves;
or comparatively as they concur to the longitude, latitude, distance, or such
like accidents, which arise out of the comparison of one Circle with another.

5 The Terrestrial Sphere primarily considered, is either Natural, or
Artificial. The Natural is the true Globe in it self, without image or
representation.

6 Herein again are to be considered two things; First, the Principles and
constitution of the Sphere; Secondly, the Accidents and proprieties: The
principles whereof the Sphere is composed are two; viz: Matter and Form.

7 The Matter is the substance whereof the Sphere is made, viz: Earth, and
Water.

My meaning is not in this Treatise to handle the nature and propieties of
these two Elements, Water, and Earth, farther then may seem necessary for the
Geographicall constitution of the Terrestrial Sphere, leaving the rest to the
Natural Philosopher; because it is supposed that few men undertake the study
of this Science, without some insight in the other. And to speak truth, this
begins where the Natural Philosopher ends. Yet because some light in each
learning is necessarily required* and all men are not willing to seek farther
into the grounds of Natural Philosophy; it will not seem altogether
impertinent, to lay the foundation farther off, that the building thereon
erected may stand surer and stronger. Wherefore taking some beginning from the
matter of the Earthly Globe, we have distinguished it into Earth, and Water,
as those parts whereof the whole Globe is not essentially compounded, as one
entire body in it self; but rather co^ceruated and compacted together, each
part retaining its own nature and proprieties, without any proper mixture. To
express more fully the constitution of this Sphere, we are here to
distinguish betwixt the first and second matter. The first matter was that
universal chaos, or mass, out of which, all bodies both Celestial and
Elementary were made and formed, as we read in the first of Genesis. Which
whether it be the same with Aristotle's Materia prima, as some have imagined, I
leave to others to dispute. The second matter of the Globe is either Proper or
Accidental. The proper we call that whereof the Globe of the Earth most
properly consists, such as are the two Elements of Earth and Water. The
Accidental matter is understood of all other bodies, contained in the
superficies of the said Sphere, as Stones, Metals, Minerals, and such like
materials, made of a Terrestrial substance, and engendered in the womb of the
Earth. Concerning the Earth and Water, which we make the most proper and
essential parts of the Sphere, we will set down these two Theoremes.

1 In the Terrestrial Sphere is more Earth then Water.

The Theoreme may be proved by sundry reasons drawn from Nature and
Experience. Whereof the first may be taken from the depth of the waters,
compared with the whole thicknes of the Earth. For the ordinary depth of the
Sea is seldom found to be above 2 or 3 miles, and in few places 10 furlongs,
which make a mile and a quarter. And albeit some late Writers have imagined the
observation to be understood only of straight and narrow Seas, and not of the
maine Ocean: yet granting it to amount (...) 10, 20, or 30 miles, it cannot
reach to so great a quantity, as to come near the greatness of the Earth. For
the whole circle of the Terrestrial Sphere being 21600 English miles,
(allowing 60 English miles to a degree of a greater circle) we shall find the
Diameter to be about 7200 miles: Whose semi-diameter, measuring the distance
between the center and the superficies of the Earth, will be 3600 miles. And
if any man suppose some of the quantity to be abated, because of the Sphericall
swelling of the Water above the Earth, whose Circle must be greater than that
of the Earth: We answer; first that this may challenge some abatement, but not
come near any equality of the Water with the Earth. Secondly it is to be
imagined that the surface of the Sea, howsoever as it is painted in Globes and
Charts, it seem for a great part empty and unfurnished of Islands; yet this for
the greatest part, seem rather to be ascribed to man's ignorance, and want of
true discovery, because many quillets and parcels of land lie yet unknown to
our Christian World, and therefore omitted, and not figured in ou^ ordinary
Mappes. So we find a great quantity of Earth which lay hid and unknown
without discovery, in the daye^ of Ptolomy, which caused him to contract and
curtaile the Earth in his Geographicall descriptions. Which defect has been
since that time supplied by the industrious travails and Nauigations of later
time: such as were of Portugals, English, and Hollanders, especially of
Columbus the Italian, who (as one wittily alluding to his name) like Noah's
Dove plucking an olive branch from this Land, gave testimony of a portion of
Land as yet unknown, and left naked unto discovery. And no question can be
made, but a great quantity of land, not yet detected by our European
Nauigators, awaites the industry of this age. To which alludes the Poet in
these Verses: Seneca in Medea. Act. 2.
Venient annis secula seris,
Quibus Oceanus vincula rerum
Laxet, and ingens pateat tellus,
Typhi^que nouos detegat orbs,
Nec sit terris vltima Thule.
In after-yeeres shall Ages come,
When th'Oecean shall unloose the bands
Of things, and show vast ample lands;
New Worlds by Seamen shall be found,
Nor Thule be the utmost bound.


Another reason to prove the Earth to be greater in quantity, may be drawn
from the mixture of Earth and Water: for if these two Elements should meet in
the same quantity, and challenge an equality; questionless the whole Earth
would prove ouer-moist, ^lymie, and unapt for habitation. Which any man may
easily observe by his own experience. For let a portion of Earth, and another
of Water be mixed together in the same quantity, the whole mass will seem no
other than a heap of mire or slime, without any solid or consisting substance.
Moreover the Water being no other than a thin and fluid body, De genesis and cor.
hardly containing it self within its own bounds or limits (as Aristotle
teaches us) must needs require a hard and solid body, whereon to support it
self, which body must of necessity be greater in quantity.

2 The Earth and Water together make one Sphere.

It may be probably collected from sundry places of holy Scripture, that in
the first Creation, the surface of the Earth; being round and uniform, was
overwhelmed and compassed round with Waters, as yet unfurnished of living
Creatures. Secondly, it appears that Almighty GOD afterward made a separation
betwixt the Waters and Dry-Land. This separation (a^ far as reason may be
admitted as Judge) seems to be effected one of these two ways: Either by
giving super-naturall bounds and limits unto the Waters, not suffering them to
invade the Dry-land: or else by altering the superficies of the Earth, casting
it into inequall parts, so that some-where, some parts of it being taken away,
empty channels or concauities might be left to receive the Waters; other-where
by heaping up the parts so taken away, whence were caused Mountains and
eminent places on the earth. The former of these ways seems altogether
improbable; forasmuch as it is very unlikely to imagine, that God in the first
institution of Nature, should impose a perpetual violence upon Nature, as
hereafter in place more convenient shall be demonstrated. Wherefore taking the
later as more consonant to reason; we shall find that the Water and the Earth
separated and divided, make not two separate and distinct (...) Globes, but one
and the same Sphere; forasmuch as the concauities and hollowgapings of the
Earth, are euery-where choked and filled up with Water, whose superficies is
Sphaericall; and therefore helps, together with the Earth, to accomplish and
perfect this Terrestrial Sphere. To confirm which opinion* these reasons out
of common experience may be alleged: The first is drawn-from the parts of
Earth and Water; For we may euery-where observe, that a portion of Earth, and
another of Water being let fall, will descend in the same right line toward the
same center: whence we may evidently conclude, that the Eearth and Water have
one and the selfsame center of their motion, and by a consequence conspire to
the composition of one and the selfsame Sphere. Secondly, to a like Arch or
space in the Heavens, is found answerable alike Arch in the Terrestrial Globe,
whether it be measured by the Earth or Water: which could not happen, were
they not accounted parts of the same Sphere. The third reason may be drawn
from the Eclipse of the Moon, wherein the part of the Moon shadowed and
obscured, is observed to be one Sphaericall or round-figure. This shadow, by
the consent of all Astronomer's is caused by the Terrestrial Sphere,
interposed betwixt the Sun and the Moon, intercepting the Sunbeams, which
should illuminate the Moon; and the shadows imitate the opacous bodies,
whence they arise: But in the Eclipse we find only the shadow of one body or
Sphere, and therefore according to the ground of the Optics, we may conclude
the body whereof such a shadow proceeds, to be but one and the selfsame
Sphere.

8 The Form of the Terrestrial Sphere, is the natural Harmony or order,
arising from the parts working together.

We ought here to remember what we said before; that the Earth and the Water
concur together to make one Terrestrial Sphere: wherefore the whole being
accounted one coacernated and collected Body, made of two other; we are not to
expect an Internal, Essential, and Specificall Form, such as Aristotle
recounts amongst the principles of a Natural Body: but only such a one as in
it self is External and Accidental; yet concurring (as it were) Essentially
to the constitution of the Terrestrial Sphere, whose Fabric and first
composition, cannot well be understood without it. Some have imagined the whole
Globe of the Earth to be informed with one Internal and Essential Form;
which opinion seems to have much affinity with that of Plato's, concerning the
Soul of the World: Not that Plato and his followers were so absurd to defend,
that the World with all his parts was animated with a true vital Soul, in the
nature of a living Creature: but that all the members of it were united
together, quickened, and disposed by a certain Energeticall power or virtue,
which had great resemblance and representation of the Soul of man. Which
assertion seems to be restored and embraced by our late Magneticall
Philosophers, whose opinion we shall discuss and examine hereafter in place
convenient. In the mean time, grounding our discourse on known principles; we
can admit no other Form in the Sphere of the Earth, then the mutual Harmony,
order and concent of the parts, concurring together, and working the perfection
and perpetuation of the whole. A fit resemblance whereof we may observe in an
artificial Clock, Mill, or such like great Engine, wherein every part duly
performing its own office, there will arise and result a natural Harmony,
whch not unaptly may be termed the Form of the whole Engine. Why the World
should not consist of an Internal and Essential Form, sundry reasons have
been alleged by our common Philosophers: First, because Nature never
attempteth any thing in vain, or without a determinate end; But the particular
Forms of special Bodies (say these Philosophers) are sufficient for the unity
and conformation of this Terrestrial Globe: so that to grant an universal
Form of the whole, were to multiply causes without any necessity, and make
Nature the Mother of superfluity, which to all Philosophers seems most absurd.
Secondly, if this were admitted; the whole Sphere of the Earth would be as
one continuate Body, whose parts should (as it were) suffer a fellow-feeling
one of the other. Thirdly, it were a difficult matter to assign, to what kind
such a Form might be reduced, whether Animate, or Inanimate. If Inanimate,
whether it were simple, or compound. If Animate, whether Vegetative, Sensitive,
or Rational; under the which are couched many great difficulties, as yet
vndisclosed. Whether these reasons be of any great force to overthrow the
adverse opinion, I leave it to further inquiry: intending here a Geographicall,
not a Physical Discourse.

CHAP. II. Of the conformity of parts in the constitution of the Terrestrial
Sphere.
1 IN the former we have treated of the Natural constitution of the
Terrestrial Sphere, as well in Matter as Form: It is needful in the next
place to treat of such Affections and proprieties as nece^sarily arise out of
such a Constitution.

2. Those Affections or Proprieties are of two sorts, Real or Imaginary;
Real I call such as agree to the Terrestrial Globe by Nature* Imaginary, such
as agree to it by virtue of our understanding.

3 Again the Affections Really or Naturally agreeing to the Terrene Sphere,
are assigned either in respect of the Earth it self, or in respect of the
Heavens.

4 These Affections are said to agree to the Earth in respect of it self,
which may be expressed and understood without any comparing of it with the
celestial Bodies.

5 These again are twofold; either Elementarie, or Magneticall. Elementary I
term such as have commonly been known or observed by ordinary Philosophers.
Here is chiefly to be considered the conformity of the Terrestrial parts, in
the making and constitution of the whole Sphere.

In the former Chapter we have showed, that the Form of the Terrestrial
Sphere, is nothing else but the concinnity and apt conspiration of the parts
whereof the whole is compounded. This conformity being diverse and manifold, as
well in regard of the parts conforming themselves, as the manner; of the
conformity, we shall particularly and distinctly treat of, so far as
appertains to a Cosmographer. Here by the way I cannot but tax some defect in
most of our common Cosmographers, who taking the Sphaericall roundnes of the
Earth for a granted supposition, are nothing curious to search into the first
grounds and causes of this rotundity, whereby it first became a globous Body;
and afterward retains in it self a Natural vigor or power (if any violence
should be offered) to restore her self to her former right and perfection. All
which are very pleasant and profitable, to give an industrious Learner some
satisfaction. To explain this before we descend to particulars, we will lay
this ground and Theoreme;

1 The parts of the Terrestrial Sphere, do naturally conform and dispose
themselves, as well to the production and generation, as to the continuance and
preservation of it.

The form of the Terrestrial Sphere, albeit (as we have showed) it be
External in respect of the whole Globe: yet may we call it natural; forasmuch
as it issues and arises from the natural disposition and inclination of all
the parts. To understand which clause the better, we are to consider that a
thing may be called Natural two manner of ways: first in regard of the
primary intent of Nature; as the nearest and immediate end or scope to which
she is directed. Secondly, in respect of her secundary intent or purpose, as
that which must of necessity follow the former. True it is that every Terrene
Body, according to Natures first intention, seeks and works it is own
perfection and conservation. Nevertheless according to her secundary Intent,
it concurres to the perfection and good of the whole universe; which we shall
plainly see in a stone or clodd of earth; which separated and removed from
it is mother, the Sphere of the Earth, by his descent and falling downwards,
seeks first his own conservation, by reuniting it self to the Earth whence it
was taken: Secondly, of the whole Globe of the Earth, which by this union and
addition, no doubt, is made more complete and perfect. This conformity of the
Terrestrial parts, out of which arises the Earths Sphaericity; I call the
natural inclination they have to move and settle themselves in such a site or
position, as may bring forth a Sphaericall consistency: so that if it were
possible (as what cannot be to Gods Almighty power?) that the whole Globe of
the earth were dissolved and rent into little pieces; yet were that vigor and
motive inclination remaining in the parts, whereby they might settle and
conform themselves to the same Sphaericall nature, and composition which it
formerly enjoyed. For all the parts thus supposed to be distracted, would (no
question) meet together and conform themselves to the same point or Center;
and so equally poising themselves, would restore the same Sphere so dissolved.
So that we here note a double inclination and motion of earthly bodies; first
by a Right line, of the parts tending toward the Center; the other Sphericall
of the whole Sphere, whereof the first in nature preceedes the composition of
the Sphere, the other follows. But this latter motion I leave doubtful, till
place convenient.

6 The conformity of the Terrene parts is twofold; Primarie, or Secondary. The
former is that whereby all earthly bodies are by a right line carried and
directed to the Center of the Terrestrial Globe.

As in an Artificial Sphere or circle, drawn by a Geometrician, their
principal parts are expressed, to wit, the Center, Ray, and circumference: so
in the Natural Globe of the Earth, these three, as it were Naturally and
Really discover themselves unto us. For first there is set a fixed point, to
which all heavy bodies move and conform themselves. Secondly, there is set the
line or Radius, in which such bodies are carried and conveyed. Thirdly, the
confluence of all these parts, begets the roundnesse and Sphaericall form. To
begin first with that which is first in nature, we will take these grounds.

1 All Earthly Bodies incline and approach to the Center as near as they can.

This proposition so far forth as it concerns the two Elements of Earth and
Water, is confirmed by common experience, and therefore needs no long
demonstration. For we see plainly, that not only these two do incline (as much
as may be, all obstacles being removed) to the Center of the Earth; but also
all mixed bodies compounded of them, being ouerswayed with the most predominant
element, do challenge to themselves the same motion. I say not that all these
Terrestrial bodies drive and mee^ in the Center (for that were impossible,
that all this massy Sphere should be contracted to one point) but that all
the parts have a mutual inclination to approach as near the Center, as the
necessity of the place, and the concurrence of them amongst themselves will
suffer. By these Terrestrial Bodies which inioye this motion and inclination,
we understand first the two Elements of Earth and Water, with all other bodies
arising out of their mixture. To these I may add the Air, which by reason of
his affinity with the Earth and Water, and natural co^formity to the same
Center, we may well term an earthly body. It is commonly reported that the
Air is l^ght, and therefore carried upwards, not inclining at all to the
Center of the Terrestrial Globe; as the parts of these two Elements are. But
this assertion, although bolstred up, both with antiquity and authority; I take
either to be false, or misunderstood, and that I speak no more herein than I
can prove; I will produce some reasons (strong enough, as I think) to persuade
that the Air is a heavy body, having a due inclination and conformity to the
Center of the Earth: First therefore will I produce this experiment. When a
Well or deep Trench is dug up in the earth, I would willingly demand
whether the Air descends to fill up this Trench or concauity; or else a void
space is left unfurnished of any natural body to fill it? If they admit the
latter, they will consequently bring in again that vacuum, or void space which
Arist. and all sound Philosophers have long since proscribed the confines of
nature. If they affirm the former, that the Air descends to fill up this
empty space, I will ask again, whether this descent of the Air be violent or
natural: If they say Natural, they admit our assertion, that the Air
naturally descends toward the Center, and so by consequence that it is heavy
and not light by nature. Neither according to our Peripateticall-Philosophy can
we ascribe more than one motion to the Air, because it is a ground generally
received among Aristoteleans: that One simple body can claim but one simple
motion: much less one simple form, as that of the Air, can produce two
opposite and contrary motions, such as are Ascent and Descent of the same body.
If they chance to light on the other member of our distinction, and say that
the motion of the Air in this sort is violent, it must needs follow, that it
must have some external cause or principle whence it should proceed; because
all such motions proceed from external causes. But here no such cause can be
assigned: For the cause would be either the Earth which is so made hollow, or
the emptiness, or vacuum, or at least the other parts of the Air. That it is
not the Earth, may be proved; first because no Philosopher has ever showed any
such Attractiue power to reside in the Earth, but rather the contrary; because
the Earth and Air by most have been thought opposite in nature, and repugnant
one to the other. Secondly, because Philosophy teaches, that no agent can
work upon a separate and distinct patient, except there be a meeting of the
Agent and Patient in some mean* But here in this supposition, the Earth is
imagined to draw and attract the Air, which as yet it touches not. That this
external cause is not the Vacuum or Emptiness, is plain; because it was
never granted to have any being or existence, much less any causality in
nature. Some perhaps will say, that not the vacuum it self, but the euitation
and avoiding it, is the cause of the motion. I deny not but this may in some
sort be interpreted a cause, but the doubt is not answered: For we seek not a
Final but an Efficient cause; and a curious searcher into Nature, will hardly
rest in a mere final cause. For the final cause, so far forth as it is a
cause preceding the effect, can no otherwise be conceived than in the
intention of the Agent: then must enquiry be made again what the Agent should
be, and so will the problem rest vncleered. 1. Because one parcel of the
Air could not move another, except the same were first moved it self, and so
a new Agent must of necessity be found out. 2 The Agent and the thing moved or
Patient, ought to be two separate and distinct bodies: But the parts of the
air meeting together, become one continuate body. No shift is there left for
these Philosophers but one distinction, wherein they distinguish betwixt the
Universal and Special form, The Air, as they affirm, according to his
Special form, asc^nds upward from the Center of the Earth: yet by the
Universal, for the conservation of the whole universe, it may sometimes suffer
a contrary motion, as to move downward toward the Center. In which distinction
they suppose they have cut the throat of all contrary reasons. But who so
understands himself, shall find it but as a weak reed, to hurt his hand
which rests on it: for a second enquiry will be made, what this universal
form should be. For by it they understand of necessity either an Internal
form or Nature; or an External resultancie and harmony of the parts, such as
we have described in the first Chapter of this book. If they understand this
latter, it cannot any way be a cause of this motion; because it follows and
arises out of this motion concurring with the rest, and no way preceeds it:
whereas on the contrary part every cause is to go before his effect: Secondly,
this universal form or nature compared with the special, there would arise a
Subordination, and not a Coordination, or opposition; forasmuch as the special
is subordinate to the general or universal. But subordinate causes can
produce no other than subordinate eff^^ts. But here we see the effects or
motions to be quite opposite the one to the other; in as much as the motion of
Descent in the Air (which they ascribe to the universal form) is clean
opposite to the motion of Ascent, ascribed to the special nature. Thirdly,
these Philosophers urging the necessity of Nature to preserve the Universe, are
much deceived in the manner and means thereof. True it is that all Earthly and
heavy bodies are directed and disposed to the conservation of the earthly
Globe. But every such body (as we have showed before) seeks first the
safeguard and preservation of it self, and secondarily by the safeguard of it
self the preservation of the whole. For how can any part, when it neglects its
own safety, endeavor the preservation of the whole: since the whole is but one
compounded of many parts. And therefore can it not be avoided, but that the
disorders and disharmony of one part* should prejudice and destroy the whole
frame. If they turn to the other part, and grant this universal form to be
Internal, many reasons stand opposite. For first I would demand, whether this
universal form be simple or compounded. It cannot be simple, because it
would always produce one simple and uniform effect: but experience has
t^ught the contrary; because we shall not always find the air to descend,
but sometimes to move obliquely to the left or right hand, backward and
forward; as when it enters into the house by a door or window. On the other
side, it cannot well be called a compound form; because all forms the more
universal they are, the more simple they are to be accounted: because the
special includes more composition than the general. Moreover, all compounded
substance arise out of simples, which are to be esteemed first in nature.
Secondly, I would ask whether this universal form be vna numero, the self
same individual in all the parts and bodies; or diverse, according to the
diversity of the said Bodies. It cannot be one and the self same in all
bodies, because, according to the opinion of Aristotle, the whole universe is
not one continuate body composed of essential parts; but rather a heap or
mass collected and digested out of many bodies. Secondly, the form being thus
one individual, would be singular or special, not universal. If they
affirm that this form is diverse according to the diversity of the bodies, it
cannot be the cause of this motion or descent in the Air. For this motion (as
they suppose) is destined and appointed to no other end, than to comfort Nature
in her distress, when she stands in fear of rupture or dissolution. But how
can this form being bounded within the limits of the Aeriall superficies
perceive or feel this exigence of Nature in other Bodies? Whatsoever they can
say in this, is altogether uncertain, and not warranted by any sound
demonstration. A second reason for the natural descent of the Air, may be
drawn from a possible supposition; from which we may enforce a true
conclusion. Let us suppose a portion of Air by some violence to be carried
above his proper orb; as for example, to the space which by our common
Philosophers is ascribed to the Element of Fire, near the concaue superficies
of the Moon, I would here demand whether this portion of Air thus transposed
would ascend higher, or descend lower, or rest still in the same place? It
could not ascend higher; first because in this wise it should be moved farther
out of his own place, whereas according to the principles of Philosophy, all
bodies transposed from their proper places, have an aptness or inclination to
return again to their proper seats, and not to roue farther off. Secondly,
this granted, the Air should invade the place of the fire and so the Elements
should suffer a confusion; which Aristotle holds absurd. Thirdly, there cannot
be imagined in that higher orb any point or center, to which it should direct
his motion; and therefore there is no such motion found; or it must be very
irregular. If on the other side it were granted, that such a portion of Air so
separated, should descend; I ask again, whether they hold this motion
natural or violent: It cannot be a violent motion, because it is directed to
his own natural and proper place; and this motion in the Elements, is always
accounted natural. Last of all, it cannot rest still in the same place,
because all bodies forced out of their places (all obstacles being removed)
must needs return unto their proper place. Wherefore no other starting hole is
here left to our opposites, but that they grant a natural motion, and so
consequently yield to our assertion. A third reason may here be drawn from
the condensation of the Air. It is a received opinion amongst most
Philosophers, that the thin and subtle parts of the Air will naturally
mount upward; but the thicker and condensated parts, pitch and settle
themselves downward: Which observation, if it be true, will yield us this
conclusion. That the Air is by nature heavy, and therefore moves downward,
toward the center of the Sphericall Globe of the Earth. Which I will
demonstrate out of these Principles, 1 That that body, which by addition of
parts or condensation, is made more heavy or ponderous, must needs have some
weight in it self. This may easily appear, because the mixture of lightness
with heaviness will not intend and increase the ponderosity, but slack and
diminish it. For the chiefest thing which remits or diminishes any quality, is
the mixture of his contrary, as we see the quality of cold to be abated and
weakened if it entertain any mixture of heat: 2 The thickning or condensation
of any body is made by addition and coaction of more parts into the same space
or compass. As if the Air or any such like body were thickened, it would
confine it self to a more narrow room then before, and so consequenly the
narrow room would contain more parts then before. Out of which we conclude,
that forasmuch as many parts pressed together in the same space, make the whole
mass more ponderous; these parts so pressed together, must needs have some
weight in themselves. Which may further be illustrated; because the intention
of the quality commonly follows the condensation of the subject: Which may
easily appear in red-hot-iron, which burns and scorcheth more than flame or
coals; because every part has more degrees or heat. Now where more parts are
closely pressed together, the heat must needs be more fervent. I have dwelt
longer on this subject, because I would not seem to broach a new opinion
without sufficient reason. To conclude all, and come as near the received
opinion as I can; I will say, that the Air may be considered two ways; first
absolutely in it self; secondly in comparison of heavier bodies, to wit, the
Earth and Water. In the first sense I grant no absolute lightness in the Air;
because out of his natural inclination, it tends as near as it can to the
center, as all other lower bodies. But if we consider it comparatively in
respect of other heavier bodies, we may call it light, that is, less heavy or
ponderous. So that by lightness we understand no absolute lightness, but a
privation. The sum of all we have hitherto proved, is this; That all terrene
bodies, as Earth, Water, Air, and other mixed bodies which concur to the
composition of the Earthly Sphere, as near as they can, settle and conform
themselves to the center of the Earth; which site or position of them to the
center, is their true and natural place, wherein they seek their preservation.

2 Of two heavy Bodies striving for the same place, that always prevails
which is heauiest.

3 Hence it comes to pass that the Earth enioyes the lowest place, the next
the Water, and the last the Air.

The increment or increase of any effect, must necessarily arise from the
greater vigor or efficacy of the efficient cause, as both Reason and
Philosophy well teach. Now (as we have showed) all heavy bodies naturally do
descend downward, out of a natural inclination they have to attain the
center: but where there is a greater weight or constipation of ponderous parts
in the same mass, there must needs proceed a greater inclination: Supposing
then the Earth, Water, and Air, being three weighty bodies to incline and
dispose themselves to their uttermost force to enclose and engirt the center of
the Terrestrial Sphere; it must needs be that the Earth being the most
compact and ponderous, must obtain the pre-eminence; next to which succeedes
the Water, then the Air, being of all other the least ponderous. Yet we deny
not but the Water and Air being settled in this wise, are in their natural
places; which to understand, we must repeat what we said before, that Nature
has a twofold intention; the one primary, the other secondary. Indeed if we
consider Natures primary or special inclination in the bodies themselves, we
shall find them (as we said) immediately directed to the center as near as
might be: but the secondary intent of Nature was, that the bodies should so
settle and conform themselves, as that each of them should obtain a place
according to his degree of massinesse and weight. Out of this may be answered
a certain objection which some have produced, to prove the Air to be
absolutely light in his own nature. Experience teaches us (say these men)
that a bladder blown up with wind, or an empty barrel being by force kept
under water* the force and obstacle omitted, will suddenly ascend to the top;
and that a man ready to sink in the Water, will not so easily sink down
while he can hold his breath: all which effects they ascribe to no other
cause, than to inclination of the Air to move upwards from the center. But
indeed this motion, howbeit agreeable to the universal nature and consistency
of the Sphere, is notwithstanding in respect of the Air it self, unnatural
and violent; because this ascent of it is not caused by the form of the Air,
but the interposition of a heavier body striving for the same place, and so
reuerberating it back from the place, whereunto it tended. For here is to be
imagined, that the bladder or empty barrel drowned in the water, claims and
inioyes for the time that place or distance, which otherwise so much water
should occupy; to wit, so many inches of feet from one side to the other. No
marvel then that obstacles removed, the Water being most ponderous and
weighty, receives his own right; and (as it were) shoulders out the Air, and
violently drives it off to his own habitation. Whence many have imagined that
this motion is proper and natural to the Air, when of it self it is merely
violent, and enforced by the interiection of another body more weighty and
ponderous than it self.

7 this conformity of the Terrestrial parts, two things are to be observed: 1
The center it self: 2 The parts which conform themselves unto it. The Center
is an imaginary point in the midst of the Terrestrial Globe, to which all the
parts are conformed.

The Fathers of the Mathematical Sciences, have labored to derive all their
doctrine from a point, as the first and most simple principle whereon all the
rest depend. Not that they imagine a point to be any positive entity in it
self; but because it is the first bound of magnitude, whence all terminated
quantities take their original. The first princ^^le we may call it, not of
natural constitution, because a thousand points collected, could not be so
compounded, as out of it should arise the least magnitude; for (as the
Philosopher has taught us) continuate and diuisible things cannot be made out
of such things as are merely discontinuate and indivisible, but because it is
the first Mathematical principle or beginning of termination and figuration.
This point, although it have euery-where an use in Geometry, yet nowhere more
remarkable then when it becomes the center of a circle: which center we ought
not to imagine a mere Geometrical conceit, but such as finds ground in the
Natural constitution of the Terrestrial Sphere. For seeing all terrene
bodies are carried in a right line as by a Radius to one point, from every part
of the circumference; we may observe a center as it were designed and pointed
out by Nature it self in the Globe: Some have here distinguished betwixt a
point Physical, and a point Mathematical, as allotting the former Latitude,
and sensible existence; but making the other merely Indivisible. But if the
matter be rightly understood, they are not two points, but all one,
distinguished only by a diverse name of conceit or consideration. For we
consider first a point as it is existent in a sensible particular body, and so
we call it Physical. Secondly we abstract it from this or that body sensible;
but always conceit it withal to be in some body, and in this sort we term
it Mathematical: for the Mathematician abstracts not a Quantity or
Quantitatiue sign from all subjects; for so being an accident, he should
conceive it abstracted from its own nature; but from this or that sensible
body, as wood or stone. Such a point ought we to imagine the center of the
Earth to be, not participating of any latitude or magnitude, albeit existent in
some magnitude. I am not ignorant that some Writers have taken a Physical
point for a small and insensible magnitude, in which sense the Globe of the
Earth is called the center of all heavenly motions. But this sense is very
improper; and besides in this example is to be understood a point Opticall, as
such as carries no sensible or proportionable quantity in regard of the sight.
Taking then the center of the Earth to be a point fixed in the midst of the
Earthly Sphere, as we have described, we will further describe the nature of
it in two Theoremes.

1 The center of the Earth is not an Attractiue, but a mere Respective point.

An Attractiue point I term that, which has in it a virtue or power to draw
and attract the Terrestrial parts or bodies, in such sort as the Loadstone
has a power to draw iron or steel. But a Respective point is that, which the
Bodies in their motions do respect and conform themselves unto, as the bound
or center to which their course is directed. Which may be illustrated by the
directive operations of the Lodestone (which we shall hereafter handle) by
which the Magneticall Indix or needle points directly Northward: not that in
the North is fixed any Attractiue virtue or operation, which might cause that
effect; but because the Magneticall Instrument is directed toward such a point
or center. That the Center of the earth has no Attractiue force, may be
proved, 1 Because it cannot in any probability be thought that an Imaginary
point having only a privative Being and subsistence, should challenge to it
self any such operation. For all positive effects, proceed out of positive
causes, neither can it be imagined that this Attraction should grow out of a
mere privation. Secondly, should this be granted, that the motion of Earthly
parts should be from the Attractiue virtue of the Center; it would follow
necessarily, that this motion should not be Natural, but violent: as
proceeding from an external cause, which all ancient and modern Philosophers
deny.

2 The same point is the center of Magnitude and weight in the Terrestrial
Sphere.

That the same point in the Terrene Globe, should make the center both of
Magnitude and Weight, may seem very plain: 1 Because we are not to multiply
things and Entities in our conceit, without any necessary consequence drawn
from Nature or Reason; enforcing us thereunto. But what reason could ever
persuade any man, that the Earth had two Centers, the one of Weight, the other
of Magnitude, but only a bare Imagination, without proof or demonstration.
Secondly, if this were granted, that the Center of magnitude were removed some
distance from the other; then consequently would one part of the Earth
ouer-poize the other in ponderosity, and so the whole Sphere would either be
shaken out of its place, or dissolve it self into its first principles. Both
of which being by experience contradicted, our assertion will stand sure and
undoubted. In the mean space, we deny not but that some little difference may
be admitted in regard of the unequal parts of the Earth; but this must needs
be so small and insensible as cannot be cacullated, or cause any alteration.

8 The Terrene parts conforming themselves to this center, may be considered
two ways: either Absolutely, or Comparatively. Absolutely, as every part is
considered in it self.

9 A terrestrial part considered in it self, undergoes the respect either of
a Point of Magnitude; as a point, when any sign or point in it self is
considered in regard of his conformity to the center.

A Point, albeit existing still in some magnitude (as we have showed) may
notwithstanding be abstracted from this or that body, as serving for the
center of any body, whose natural inclination and conformity to the universal
center of the Earth, we may in the first place handle, as the Rule by which the
motion and inclination of the whole magnitude ought to be squared.

1 Every point or center of weighty body, is moved toward the center of the
Terrestrial Sphere by a right line.

A Right line is the measure and rule almost of all Natural actions: which
albeit it be familiar in almost every operation; yet most of all in the motion
of the Earthly bodies tending to the center of the Earth. Why Nature in this
kind should chiefly affect a Right line, sundry reasons may be alleged: 1
From the End which Nature does propose it self, which is to produce the work
which she intends, the readiest and shortest way; as Aristotle testifies of
her in the 5 of his Metaphisickes. Now it is manifest that a Right line drawn
betwixt the same points, is always shortest, as Euclide shows in his
Elements; where he demonstrates that two sides of any triangle being counted
together, are longer then the third. The better to understand the working of
Nature, we shall observe in the motion of a heavy part to the center, a double
scope or end; first, that the said part of a terrestrial body, should be
moved or separated from the place to which it is by violence transposed.
Secondly, that this body should be restored home, and united to the Sphericall
substance of the Earth, in which it must chiefly seek its preservation. That
these two ends are best and soonest compassed by a right line is most manifest:
For first a sepaparation from the place to which it is moved, is more quick
and expedient by a right line; forasmuch as crooked and circular lines, turn
back as it were into themselves again. Also the union and conjunction of a
part with the Sphere of the Earth, is most indebted to a right motion, because
(as we have declared) the way is shorter. Secondly, it may be alleged, that
Nature is an uniform and necessary Agent, restrained to one only bound or end,
and therefore can neither strengthen, weaken, remit or suspend the action, but
works always by the same means, the same effects; whence it is that she
chooses a right line, being but one betwixt two points; whereas crooked lines
may be drawn infinite, and the motion directed by crooked lines would prove
various and opposite to the prescript of Nature* Moreover should we imagine
that nature at any time wrought by a crooked or circular line, it might be
demanded, from what Agent this obliquity should arise? not from Nature it
self: because (as we said) she works always to the utmost of her
strength, having no power to remit or suspend her actions. But a crooked motion
arises from the remission or slacking of the Agents force, and turning it away
from the intended end, which only finds place in Free and voluntary Agents.
Neither comes this Deflexion from the medium, or Air; because it can have no
such power to resist. Thirdly, if the motion were not performed in a right
line, it could have no opposite or contrary; because (as Aristotle teaches) To
a circular or crooked motion, (...) de caelo cap. 4.
no other motion can be opposite or contrary in respect of the whole circle;
but only in regard of the Diameter, which is always a right line. By this it
is plain, that a weighty point considered in it self abstractly, cannot but
be carried to the center in a right line: which right line, really and
Physically points out unto us a Radius or Beam drawn from the center to the
circumference, to show that the God of Nature in composing the earthly globe,
both observed and taught us the use of Geometry.

2 A point moving toward the Center, will move swifter in the end, then in the
beginning.

This has been plainly observed by experience, that a stone let fall from a
tower or high place, will in motion grow swifter and swifter, till it approach
the ground or place whereon it falls. The reason may be given from the Air,
which resist so much the less, by how much the body descends lower toward
the Earth or center; because when it is higher, the distance being greater, the
parts of the Air will make more Resistance. The reason rendered by Aristotle of
this Resistance, is, because in the beginning of the motion, the stone or heavy
body finds the Air quiet and fixed: but being once set on motion, the higher
parts of the Air, successively move those which are under, being driven by the
violence of the stone so falling, and prepare, as it were, the way for his
coming. This reason may in some sort content an ingenious wit, till a better
be found out.

10 So much for the motion of a heavy point or center: it remains that we
treat next of the motions and conformity of Magnitudes to the center of the
Earth: wherein we consider not only the Center or middle point, but the whole
mass of the magnitude, whose motion and conformity shall be expressed in this
Theoreme;

1 The motion of a magnitude toward the center, is not merely natural, but
mixed with a violent motion:

This may easily be demonstrated; because no point of any magnitude is moved
to the Center naturally, but the middle point or center of the magnitude: For
although the Center be moved in a perpendicular line, which makes right angles
with the Horizon; yet the extreme parts are moved in lines parallel, which
cannot possibly make right angles with the Horizon, or meet in the Center;
which may be shown in this Figure. Let there be a Circle as ABL. This done,
we will imagine a certain magnitude hanging in the Air, and tending to the
Center C, which is signified by the line PEN. It is certain that the Center of
the magnitude E, will move and conform it self downward toward the center of
the Earth by the line EC, which motion will be natural, as that which is
derived to a center from a circumference by the direct Radius, which is the
Rule of all natural motions: But the other parts without the center of this
magnitude, cannot move but in so many lines, which shall be parallel the one
to the other: as for example, the point N must needs move in the line NG, and
the point P in the line PF, which being of equal distance, will never concur
in the Center, and therefore cannot be esteemed natural rays of the circle;
whence we may collect, that the motion of these parts is not natural, but
violent: for if any should imagine the motion of these parts to be natural,
then should the point N move to the center of the Earth by the line NC, and the
point P. by the line PC; and so by how much the more any weighty body should
approach the Center of the Earth, by so much it should be diminished and
curtailed in his quantity: so that in the Center it self, all the parts should
concur in an Indivisible point, which is absurd and contradicts all reason.

11 Hitherto have we spoken of the conformity of all Earthly and weighty bodies
to the Terrene center, as they are taken Absolutely. It now remains that we
speak of these bodies as they are taken comparatively, being compared one with
the other.

This discourse properly belongs to an art which is called Staticke and
Mathematical; whose office is to demonstrate the affections of Heaviness and
Lightness of all Bodies out of their causes. The chief sensible Instrument
whereon these properties are demonstrated and shown, is the Bilanz or
Balance. But these specialties we leave to such as have purposely written of
this subject: amongst which the most ancient and chief is Archimedes, whose
heavenly wit ouertooke all such as went before him, and out-went all such as
followed. Enough it will seem in this Treatise to insert a proposition or two
Staticall, to show the Conformity of two magnitudes, and their proper Center,
moving downward toward the Globe of the Earth, and it is Center.

1 The lines wherein the centers of two heavy bodies are moved downward, being
continued, will meet in the Center of the Earth.

A heavy point or Center (as we have demonstrated heretofore in this Chapter)
is moved toward the Center of the world in a right line, which is imagined to
be a Ray of the whole Sphere derived from the circumference to the Center,
and therefore it is impossible they should be parallel or Equidistant, but
concurrent lines. But because the whole distance betwixt us and the Center is
very great; it must needs happen that in a small space the concurse of
perpendicular lines is altogether insensible. For if two perpendicular or heavy
points moved in a line, should be distant one from the other the space of 10, a
100 or more feet; because this distance is very little in respect of the
semidiameter of the Earth: the angle of concurse must needs be very little, and
by consequence those two rays or lines, measuring the descent of two heavy
Bodies, will seem altogether Equidistant. Yet that there is such a
concurrence, Nature and Reason will easily consent. Hence we may detect a
popular error believed of the vulgar, that the walls of houses standing
upright are parallel and of equal distance; when contrariwise it is plain
that such walls are erected by a perpendicular, and measured by perpendicular
lines, which being drawn out in length will meet in the Center of the Earth.
The like may we pronounce of a deep Well, whose sides or wall are erected
perpendicularly; and therefore should it reach as far as the Center, it must
needs follow that the sides growing nearer and nearer as they approach the
Center, would in the end close or shut up into a Pyramide, whose Base should
be the mouth of the Well. Likewise if a Tower should be erected to the
Heavens, it would be strange to imagine, how great and broad the upper part of
it would be in respect of the bottom. Hence again it may be inferred, that
any p^uement leuelled by a perpendicular is not an absolute plain, but rather
the portion or Arch of a sphericall superficies, whose Center is the same with
the Center of the whole E^rth. But this roundnesse in a small distance is no
way sensible: but in a great pauement of four or five hundred paces leuelled
perpendicularly; it will make some show of roundnesse: whence it must needs
follow, that an extraordinary great pauement measured over by a right line,
cannot be called level or equally poized, forasmuch as it is not every where
equally distant from the Center of the Earthly Globe.

2 Two heavy bodies of the same figure and matter whether Equal or Unequal,
will in equal time move an equal space.

This proposition being invented by one Johannes Baptist de Benedictis, is
cited and confirmed by John Dee, in his Mathematical Preface to Billing slie's
Geometry; Which corrects a common error of those men, which suppose the
lighter bodies generally not to move so fast downward to the Center as the
heavy. The demonstration of this Theoreme, being drawn from many Staticall
principles, which we cannot here conveniently insert, we are enforced to omit:
as intending not the search of these matters any farther than they direct unto
the knowledge of Geographie. Yet were it no hard matter to give ^ more popular
expression of this reason out of the proportion betwixt this weight of the
heavy Body, and the Resistance of the Medium. Because the Greater Body, as it
is carried down-ward by a greater force and violence; so on the other side it
meets a greater impediment, being not able so soon to divide the Air, as the
Lesser: Likewise the Lesser body falling with less force, yet is more apt to
divide it then the other. Whence both set the one against the other, there will
be no disparity in the time and motion.

12 Of the primary conformity of the Terrestrial bodies in the constitution of
the Terrestrial Sphere, we have treated: It now seems needful that we
descend to the secondary, which is the inclination of all the parts, to make a
round Sphere or Globe.

1 The Terrestrial Globe is round and Sphericall.

This Proposition is of great use, and one of the chief^^^ grounds in
Geographie. The ground of the Sphericall figure of the Earth, is the right
motion of heavy bodies to the center. For this right motion (as we have
showed) does express one Beam of the circle, by whose circumuolution is
pro^uced the circumference of i^, which we call Secundary conformity of the
parts of the Earth; in so much as it grows Mathematically (as it were) out of
the first. For this Sphericall figure of the Earth, sundry sound reasons are
urged by Geographers: First, that the Earth is round according to its Latitude,
that is, from North to South* Secondly, according to its Longitude, that is,
from East to West, and therefore must it needs be abso^utely Sphericall* The
first part is showed, that it is round from N^rth to South; for if a man
travel from North to South, or contrariwise from South to North, he shall
perceive n^w stars in the Heavens to appear and show themselves, which
before h^e could not see: which can be referred to no other cause then the
Sphericall conuexity, or swelling of the Earth. As for example* The star
which is called Canopus, which is a notable star in the ship; appears not at
Rhodes, or at least from high places. But if you travel forth Southward from
Italy into Egypt, to Alexandria, the same star ( Proclus observes) will
manifest it self to your sight the fourth part of a sign above the Horizon.
L. de Sphaer.
From whence we may draw a sound proof, that there is a Sphericall and
gibbous conuexitie, which interposeth it self betwixt Rhodes and Egypt. In
which place, the people who inhabit that part of Egypt, which borders upon
Arabia, which are called Troglo^ites, of their dwelling in caves, cannot see
any Star of the Great Bear. Whence we may conclu^e, that the Earth from the
North to the South, is round and Sphericall. For if otherwise the Earth were
plain, all the Northern stars would appear to the inhabitants of the
Southern Regions; and on the other side, all the other Southern
constellations would be seen of the Northern inhabitants, which sense and
reason altogether contradict. Secondly, that the Earth is round according to
its Longitude betwixt East and West, may be proved by two reasons. The first
is taken from the rising and setting of the Sun, Moon, and other Stars,
for as much as all they do not arise or set with all Nations at the same
hours. For with the inhabitants of the East, the Sunrising is sooner; with
the Western inhabitants later; and that in such proportion, that every 15
degrees measured out by the Suns diurnall motion, adds or subtracts one whole
hour in the length of the day. This is found by experience and testimony of
Cosmographers, that the Sun rises with the Persian, inhabiting toward the
East, four hours sooner then to the Spaniard in the West. Sundry other the
like examples may be alleged; all which we must needs impute to the
Sphericall roundnesse of the Earth, proportionally increasing betwixt East and
West. The other reason to confirm this last point, is drawn from the
Ecclipses of the Sun and Moon, which would not appear in diverse places, at
diverse hours, if the Earth were plain or square. We see plainly that
Ecclipses of the Moon appear sooner to the Western people, but later to the
Eastern. As (according to Ptolomie) in Arbela a town of Assyria (where
Alexander overcame Darius the last King of the Persians) was there observed an
Eclipse at the fifth hour of the night, Lib. 1 geog. cap. 4.
which selfsame Eclipse was seen in Carthage at the second: which to any man
appears plainly in this figure here inserted. In like manner an Eclipse of
the Sun at Campania which was observed betwixt 8 and 9. was (as Pliny
reports) seen in Armenia betwixt 10 and 11 of the clock. Lib. 2. c. 72.
Whence may be gathered that this difference of appearance arose from the
roundnesse of the Earth, interposing it self betwixt these two places. Another
reason to prove the Spericall figure of the Earth, is drawn from the Eclipse
of the Moon, wherein the obscured point is described by a Sphericall figure,
which must needs argue, that the body which causes the shadow, is also round.
For as the Optickes teach us, the shadow is wont to follow and imitate the
opacous body whence it proceeds, and all men confess that the Eclipse of the
Moon is made by the interposition of the Sphere of the Earth betwixt the Sun
and Moon, intercepting the beams of the Sun, which should illustrate and
lighten the Moon. The third reason may be taken from the absurdities which
would follow, should we admit any other figure besides. For granting it to be
plain (as some of the Platonists have imagined) it would necessarily follow in
reason; 1 That the Elevation of the Pole would be the same in all the parts of
the Earth. 2 That there Would be the same face and appearance of the Heavens
in all places. 3 That the Sun and Moon, with other stars, would in all
places arise alike at the same hours. 4 That all Ecclipses would appear to
all places at the same hours. 5 That the same quantity of days and nights
would be at all places. 6 That the shadows would be every where alike; and
one Region would not be hotter or colder then another; all which would plainly
stand opposite to reason and experience. As many or more would prove the
absurdities of those, that ascribe to the Earth any other figure then
Sphericall. Which I willingly pass over, as not willing to fight with
shadows, and faigne an opposition, where I scarce find an adversary. These
reasons are sufficient to prove, that the whole mass of the Earth is
Sphericall. Diverse other popular arguments may be drawn from the final cause
to countenance this Assertion. For no other figure can be assigned to the
Earth, which can more uphold the order of Nature, or speak the wisdom of the
Omnipotent Creator. 1 Because such a Figure would best beseem the Earth, the
seat and dewlling place of all living Creatures, which is most capable:
because otherwise the God of Nature would seem to do something in vain, and
without cause: Forasmuch as the same capacity might be confined within
stricter bounds. Now it is apparent to all Mathematicians, that amongst all
those figures which they call Isoper^^etrall, a Circle is the most capable, and
amongst the rest, those which appro^ch nearest unto a circle. And as we
esteem of a circle described in a plain surf^ce, so must we judge in solides
of a Sphere. Which profitable Geometry of Nature we shall find instilled
into most living Creatures, who by a certain Natural Instinct, without the
use of Reason, make their Nests and resting-places of a Sphericall Figure, as
most convenient, and of greatest capacity; as experience shows us, in the
Nests of Birds, and Bee-Hiues, wherein the cells are fashioned round and
Sphericall. 2 We shall find the holy Scriptures consonant to this opinion in
diverse places; but that it might seem impiety to use those sacred helps in a
matter out of controversy, and needing no such Demonstration.

2 The rugged and unequal parts of the Earth, hinder not the Sphericall
roundnesse of it.

It is thought by ignorant people, that the Earth is not round, because of the
rugged and uneven parts of the superficies of it: For some-where it swells with
great and high mountains, rocks, and hills; Other-where it seems indented,
and (as it were) trenched into valleys, and concauities; all which seem to
detract from a true Sphericall superficies; because in such a one, every line
drawn from the Center to it, should be equal one to the other. Indeed that
the Globe of the Earth is not Absolutely and Geometrically round, as an
Artificial Sphere, is confessed by Eratosthenes, cited by Strabo in his 1
book of Geographie* whence Pliny in his ^ book, cap. 21. says, Lib. 1.
that the Earth and Water make one Globe, not so absolutely round as the
Heavens, but much different, (...) also Strabo confirms. This proposition
depending on these 3 reasons which follow, will show that this Inequality, how
great soever it seem to the sight, is altogether insensible, and bearing no
proportion with the huge vastness of the whole Earth. The first is taken from
the perpendicular hight of the greatest and highest mountain, which is seldom
or never found to exceed 10 miles, (although few Mathematicians will grant so
much) whereas the whole Diameter of the Earth contains no less th^n 7200
English miles; so that these hills compared to the thicknes of the Earth are but
^s 10 to 7200: which indeed has no sensible proportion. The second is taken
from the Eclipse of the Moon, which being caused by the shadow of the
interposed Earth, is described by a Sphericall figure, without any unequal or
rugged parts, which no doubt, would appear, if these parts challenge any due
proportion* or sensible quantity, in respect of the whole Earth. Thirdly, some
have illustrated this by a round bowl, or ball, whose external surface,
although unequal, and indented here and there with scotches, other-where
swelling with knobs, will notwithstanding being interposed betwixt the
Sun-beame and a wall, or such place, give a round or Sphericall shadow in the
same wall or plain, in regard of the little quantity of these small parts in
respect of the whole Body. In like sort must we imagine the mountains and
unequal parts in the face of the Earth, to be no otherwise then as so many
warts or pimples in the face of man, which cannot alter his du^ proportion or
symmetry of the parts.

3 The Water concurring with the Earth in the Globe is also Sphericall.

It is a proposition agreed on by Archimedes, and almost all the ancient
Mathematicians of any note, that the superficies of the Water, or any other
liquor, standing and subsisting quietly of it se^fe, is Sphericall; whose
center will be the same with the center of the whole Earth, which we are here
to handle, because it appertains to the making up of the Terrestrial Globe;
although we shall have occasion hereafter to speak specially concerning the
Water in Hydrographie, in the second part of this Treatise. The reasons to
confirm this assertion, beside those that in general prove the Sphericity of
the Terrene globe are diverse: 1 It is observe that Passengers in a Ship,
lanching out into the deep from some Haven, will first perceive the Towers,
Buildings, Castles, Promontories, and Trees standing on the land, in their
perfect figure and greatness: sailing farther off, they will observe them on
the lower part, little and little diminished, until such time as the tops only
of the houses and trees will be visible. In like sort they which tarry on the
Land, will first espy the top and mas^ of a Ship approaching, which sight will
be perfected more and more, as the Ship draws toward the land, and at last
all parts of it will show themselves; which accident can be cast upon no other
cause, then the Sphericall roundnesse, and swelling of the water; which, if the
distance be great, interposeth it self between the station on the Land and
the Ship wherein Passengers are conveyed, which experiment is expressed in this
Diagramme here annexed. Certain Platonicks, of which the chiefest is Patricius
a late Writer, would ascribe this experiment to the impediment of the sight,
caused partly by the distance which cannot perfectly represent the object,
partly by the interposed vapors arising in the Sea; partly by the quiuering
light which is spread by the refraction of the Sunbeams in the water. I deny
not but these causes may somewhat hinder, and cause that the true and perfect
species of a body cannot always visit the sight. Yet will it be evident that
this is not all, but that the Sphericall roundnesse of the water will prove a
greater impediment where the distance is any thing greater. But for one of
Patricius his shifts concerning vapor arising out of the Sea, (to which
Clauius seems also to consent in his Commentary upon Johannes de Sacrobosco)
it makes more for our assertion then his. For that which is seen in a thick
medium, according to the doctrine of the Optics, seems greater in quantity,
and by consequence nearer, and so higher then would otherwise appear: as we
see by experience, that the Sun sometimes is seen of us before it ascend
above the Horizon, because of a refraction of it is beams in a thick matter.
Wherefore it were rather to be imagined, that a tower seen at Sea, or a ship
from the land, through these thick and gross vapors, should appear higher,
and seem nearer then if it met not with such vapors. Secondly, what is urged
concerning the trembling light, caused by a refraction of the Sunbeams in the
water, is of no force: For although such a light might cause an impediment or
hinderance to the sight; yet would not this decrement or hinderance be by
degrees and in such proportion as we find it to be correspondent, to wit, to
the distance interposed. And much wonder it is that Patricius (as my learned
Friend Mr R. Hues observes) being, as it seems very well read in the stories
of Spanish nauigations, should not be convinced out of the Navigation of
Magellane, who taking his journey toward the Southwest parts, passed by the
Magellane straights, now called by his name, and so returned by the Cape of
Good Hope into Spain, to which we way add the voiages of Drake, Candish, and
many others. The second reason is urged by Aristotle in his 2d book de coelo,
and has its ground in Archimedes lib. 1. de Aqua-vectis, which is formed in
this sort. The nature of the water is to affect and flow to the lower place,
whence it must necessarily be inferred that it must be round, for otherwise
it should not always obtain the lower place. The reason of the consequence
shall be expressed in this figure; for if we ascribe to the water a plain
superficies, let it for example be ADB, and from the center of the earth C let
there be described a circle, to wit, EGF, then let there be drawn CD, a
perpendicular line to AB, and let AC and BC be joined together. Now because the
right line CD is less then CA, or CB, as will appear evidently by sense; it
will be plain that the point D will be in a lower place then the point A or B,
because D is nearer to the Center; for as much as DC is but a part of a beam
of the circle whereas AC and CB evidently exceed that quantity or proportion.
Another reason there is, commonly drawn from the roundnes of drops cast on the
sand, as also from water in pots, whose superficies seems to swell above the
brimmes; but this reason, as we shall prove in place convenient, is rather
against this assertion then for it; because indeed, we affirm the water to be
round* but so as it claims the same Center with the Center of the Terrene
Globe; and therefore cannot be sensible in so little a portion, as a drop, or
pot of water. This proposition being sufficiently proved by these two reasons;
it is needful in the second place that we answer certain objections cast in
by the said Patricius against our assertion. Every surface of the water (quoth
Patricius) is either only plain, or only round, or both plain and round, or
neither plain nor round: First that it is not both plain and round, seems
very evident, for so it should admit of contrariety: Neither can one part be
plain and another round, because the water is an uniform and homogeneall
body, not consisting of such unequal parts: that it should neither be plain
nor round seems more impossible, because f^w or none have dreamt of any other
figure. Lastly, that it is not round only, he labors to confirm by sundry
reasons and experiments. First, he testifies of himself, that sailing in the
Sea, he plainly ^aw in the morning before Sunrising, the Mountains of
Corsica; which afterward, as soon as the Sun was risen, vanished out of his
sight. Whence he concludes, that this proceeds not from the roundnesse of the
Earth, but from some other cause. But this argument to judicious men will seem
very weak, 1 Because it depends altogether on the authority and credit of
Patricius, whose assertion I take to be no better then another man's denial.
2ly were this argument every where sound, yet would it prove no other thing,
but that this effect were not to be imputed to the Sphericall swelling of the
Earth. Whence cannot be drawn any general conclusion, that the Earth or
Water is not Sphericall. We deny not in the mean time* that other causes
sometimes concur, which may hinder or take away the sight of objects from
those who sail on the Sea. The second experiment, Patricius describes in this
manner. At a certain Town called Coma^lum (says he) there is a very great
poole; through which poole or lake some 3 years ago, it was my chance to be
carried in a boat. The bottom of the water almost all the way in all the
journey appeared to be less then 2 foot in depth from the top. The way
increasing, at first the lower parts and foundations of houses, then the tops
and princely pinnacles began to vanish from our sight: at last having scarce
passed 6000 paces, a Tower 72 foot high began to appear, as it were cut off by
the middle, and from the middle part upward appeared visible; but after 10000
paces it was taken out of sight: I would here ask the Geographers (quoth
Patricius) whether in so short a distance, wherein the bottom for the whole
space surpassed not two foot in depth, the water could ascend to 72 foot? Had
it been my chance to have gone with Patricius over the lake, I might perhaps
by observation of this experiment, have given a more probable conjecture of the
cause. Nevertheless being unacquainted as well with the place, as the truth of
his observation, I may perhaps guess somewhat at his error. First then,
whereas he auerres, that passing along for the space of a 1000 paces, a Tower
of 72 foot high, seemed cut off by the midst, which at 10000 vanished out of
sight. I confess that in so short a space the swelling of the water
inter-posed, could not be so great as to hinder the sight, and be the cause of
this effect: wherefore some other Accidental cause must be sought out. For
the finding out of which to come as near as I can, I would make inquiry,
whether this passage of the Boat was directly forward from the Tower on the
Water, no land inter-posed: or Indirectly side-wise, in such sort, as the
shore might be placed betwixt their sight and the Tower mentioned: The former
no ways can be imagined; for as much as it not only contradicts the grounds of
our received Philosophy; but also of Patricius himself: for giving the Earth
a plain surface, or Angular, or any other form, it were impossible that in so
short a distance, such an effect should happen out of the figurature of the
water. If the passage were oblique or indirect, in such wise as the shore
might any way inter-pose it self betwixt the Boat and the Tower, it were easy
to imagine how such an experiment should happen: for the land by which the Boat
might be carried, might have an ascent by such Degrees, as the Tower at 1000
paces might be for the half of it obscured, and at last be altogether taken
out of sight. This reason then of Patricius, seems rather to be ascribed to
the Land then the Water. The third reason of Patricius is drawn from the
Homogeneity of the Water. If the water (says he) have a round superficies,
the parts of it would challenge the like figure, because in homogeneall bodies,
the same reason is to be given of the whole, and of the parts: But the parts
of the water are not Sphericall, as may be proved by diverse instances: 1
Because water in the mouth of a pot, seems not to have any such Sphericall
roundnesse: for although at the brinke it seem to be restrained above the
pot, yet no such swelling appears in the middle. 2ly That rivers are kept in
by their banks, which otherwise would flow abroad. 3ly That rivers, when by
the melting of snow, they swell so great, as they can hardly be contained
within their banks, do not seem higher in the middle, then in other places.
4ly If any man from one side of the river to the other, leuels at any mark, he
may surely hit it: which he should not do, if there were any Sphericall
swelling in the midst, which might hinder the sight. 5ly and lastly it seems
so unlikely, that the water should rise in the midst, that it is more probable
it should be more hollow; in that we plainly observe that all filth and rubbish
carried from the banks into the river, is wont to settle and swim in the
midst. Notwithstanding all these arguments of Patricius, our ground is yet
unshaken; 1 Concerning small drops, and water in the mouth of pots; it is found
to be round and Sphericall, though not exactly: the reason whereof we shall
declare hereafter. This roundnesse, I confess, serves not any way to the
confirmation of this assertion, because the Sphericity and roundnes which we
auerre to be in Water, has for its center, the center of the whole Earth: and
therefore in so small an arch or section, as the breadth of a pot, or a drop of
water, cannot possibly have any sensible appearance or existence. And we must
needs confess, that this experiment was very fondly urged to this purpose by
some of our Geographers, and such as stands not with any demonstration. Which
granted, sufficiently answers all the reasons last urged by Patricius, except
the last. For as much as he requires in the Water, a sensible appearance of
this roundnesse in every river or little parcel of water, which cannot be
admitted. Touching the last thing which he urges, that all the rubbish and
filthy matter, is from the banks carried into the middle, whence he would
infer* the middle to be hollow and lowest; we can answer diverse ways: 1 That
this experiment is not always certain, because every man may oftentimes see
the contrary; to wit, that such filthy rubbish rather uses to cleave to the
banks of the river, then to float into the midst. 2ly That if any such thing
happen, it is because of the torrents which run violently from the banks into
the midst, carrying with it such things as are light, the steepness of the
place being greater, the current wider or swifter. But nothing here can be
concluded to prove the water according to his natural force, to be either
plain or hollow in the midst, which this Adversary undertook to demonstrate.

CHAP. III. Of the Partial magneticall affections in the Sphere of the Earth.
1 HItherto have we discoursed of such affections of the Terrestrial Sphere
as are Elementary, and known heretofore to ancient Philosophers: It follows
in the next place that we treat of Magneticall affections, to wit, such as
follow the magneticall nature of the Earth.

Of the virtue and propriety of the Lodestone* many have written, but few
sought out the true nature. The invention of it is attributed to a certain
heards-man, who having his shoes shod with iron* and an iron-pike in his hand,
resting himself on a quarry of Lodestone, could hardly remove himself from
thence. But this seems rather a pleasant Poetical invention, then a true
History, having no good Author to avouch it. But to let pass the first
Invention, being a matter rather indebted to chance then industry; no small
difficulties have discovered themselves in the invention and finding out of the
causes of Magneticall properties. Somewhat, I confess, has been written of
such magneticall affections as have been most known; such as is the virtue
Attractiue, by which it draws to it self iron, or steel; as also the virtue
Directive, by which a needle touched with the Magnet, directs and conformes it
self North and South. The rest of Magneticall proprieties I find in ancient
Writers, as little known as their causes; and if any matter herein were
broached, it was merely coniecturall, and depending on no certain
demo^stration: neither had we any certain or satisfactory knowledge of this
thing, until such time as it pleased God to raise up one of our Countrymen D.
Gilbert, who to his everlasting praise has trodden out a new path to
Philosophy, and on the Loadstone erected a large Trophie to commend him to
posterity. This famous Doctor being as pregnan^ in witty apprehension, as
diligent in curious search of natural causes: after many experiments, and long
inqui^y, found the causes of most magneticall motions and proprieties hid in
the magneticall temper and constitution of the Earth, and that the Earth it
self was a mere Magneticall body challenging all those proprieties, and more
then have expressed themselves in the Lodestone. Which opinion of his was no
sooner broached, then it was embraced and well-commed by many prime wits,
as well English as Foreign. In so much that i^ has of late taken large root,
and gotten much ground of our vulgar Philosophy: Not that in the maine scope
and drift of it* it contradicts or crosses all Peripateticall principles, or
the most part of such grounds as have hitherto borne the stamp as well of
Antiquity, as of Authority: But that it has brought to light matters of no
small moment, which never found any ground or footsteps in our ordinary
Philosophy. This new Philosophy I dare not commend as euery-where perfect and
absolute, being but of late years invented, and not yet brought to mature
perfection: yet would it savor of little ingenuity or judgment in any man,
peruersely to deny all such Magneticall affections in the Earth as are grounded
on plain experiments and observation, since no Philosophy was every way so
exact, but required experience daily to correct it. I intend not here an
absolute discourse of Magneticall Bobies and Motions, but leave it to their
search whose experimental industry is more suitable to such a subject. Only
I will show some general grounds appertaining to the constitution of the
Terrestrial Globe, which I hold necessary for a Geographer. Wherefore ere I
curiously distinguish these Magneticall proprieties of the Earth into other
several kinds, I will set down this Theoreme, as a ground or foundation of
that which follows.

1 The Terrestrial Sphere is of a Magneticall nature and disposition.

A Magneticall Body by some is defined to be that which seated in the Air,
does place it self in one place natural, not alterable. This situation is
supposed to agree to all the Stars* especially to the great Globes of
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and the Sun; as also to such as give their attendance
on them, lately detected by the Trunk-spectacle; to wit, those two Stars
which move about Saturn, the four which move about Jupiter, the two which
circle about the Sun, as Venus and Mercury; and lastly the Moon, which
encompasseth the Sphere of the Earth. But to let pass those other Globes, as
farther off, and therefore less subject to our search: our discourse shall
only touch the Earth whereon we live, which we shall prove to partake of a
certain Magneticall virtue or inclination: which to show more openly, we must
understand, that all Magneticall Globes have some parts of their bodies which
be also Magneticall, which being divorced from their proper Sphere, and
meeting no obstacle, will settle themselves to the natural situation of their
peculiar Orbs. Which we may plainly perceive in the Sphere of the Earth,
wherein we shall find two Magneticall minerals; whereof the one is the
Lodestone, attracting iron or steel; the other the Iron or steel it self:
either ofthese two* artificially hanged in the Air, or placed in a little boat
on the water, all incombrances being removed, will conform and settle their
parts and Poles correspondent to the poles and parts of the Terrestrial
Sphere, as North and South. This has been found in all parts of the Earth by
such as have traveled round about her, as Drake and Candish, whose Compasses
were always directed Magnetically in all places which they passed: which we
cannot ascribe to any other cause then the disponent faculty of the Earth's
Magneticall Sphere, as shall appear hereafter by demonstration. Moreover it
has been observed by such as sail Northerly and Southerly, that the
Magneticall Inclinatory needle, in every elevation of the Pole is conformed and
disposed to the Axell of the Earth, according to certain angles answerable to
the latitude of the Region, as we shall show hereafter. This diversity of
conformity must necessarily arise, either from the Magneticall instrument in it
self absolutely considered, or else from the Harmony and correspondency it has
with the Terrene Globe. It cannot be the first; because it should be the same
in all places and Regions of the Earth, which is contrary to experience, and
our supposition. Then must we needs derive it from the Magneticall disponent
virtue of the whole Globe of the Earth, from which virtue the whole Earth may
be called Magneticall. Nay if we truly consider, these Magneticall affections
primarily agree to the Earth, as the mother of all Magneticall bodies; but
afterward secondarily are derived into the parts; because (as Gilbert relates
it) the cause of magneticall motions and affections is the magneticall form of
a Sphericall Globe; which form first agrees to the whole Globe of the Earth,
and so is derived to all his homogeneall parts. These parts are called
Homogeneall, not in regard of their Matter and quantity, but in respect of
their Magneticall nature, and communion, which in every part is conspicuous. If
any man should wonder why the Earth should be called Magneticall in regard of
this mineral, which seems one of the least and scarcest substances whereof it
consists; we may many ways answer, First, that although the surface of the
Earth seems for the most part composed of other materials, more convenient for
the use of living Creatures which dwell therein: yet may infinite rocky mines
of Magnets be couched lower toward the center, which strengthen and consolidate
the Earthly Globe* Secondly, we must not imagine the Magneticall substance of
the Earth, to be all one kind of stone, but various: for somewhere it is hard
and solid as the true magnet it self and the iron which is nothing else but a
metal decocted out of the Lodestone; (for iron O^^e differs little or
nothing at all from the Lodestone it self) somewhere again, this substance
is more thin and fuid, being less concocted as some kind of clay, and
certain vapors arising out of the Earth, which be magneticall: which being
brought to a harder and more massy substance, will have the same affections
and motions with the Loadstone it self. This assertion of the Earth's
magneticall nature, we shall confirm more evidently hereafter, where we shall
prove both the Poles, the Meridian, Parallels, and other circles, to be not
bare Imaginary lines, as some have thought (but to be Really grounded in the
magneticall nature of the Earth, and are to be showed in any round Loadstone,
wrought and placed conveniently with instruments thereunto applied.

2 The Magneticall affection of the Earth is twofold, either Radical or
Derived The Radical disposition we call that which is the first root and
ground of all other magneticall motions.

3 The Radical virtue or inclination is again twofold, either Motive or
Disponent. The Motive is that by which all magneticall bodies are inclined and
stirred up to the motion.

In the Reasonable soul of a man, we have two faculties which show
themselves; a motive, and a directive or disponent power: whereof the one
stirs up the motion, the other regulates, conformes, and directs it: The
former is the Will, the later the Discourse and Judgment. This distinction of
faculties, howsoever more evident in the soul, finds place in all Natural
agents: in which a Philosopher ought to distinguish betwixt that which gives
them a power to move, and that which limits, determines, and (as the Schoolmen
are wont to speak) modificates the action. Amongst others the magnet-stone
seems most to partake of these two powers, as that which amongst all natural
agents (in Gilberts opinion) seems most to have resemblance with the soul of
a man: so that by an apt Trope it has been called of many, the Magneticall
soul of the Earth; for hence we may well perceive one virtue or inclination,
which ^^useth the magneticall needle to move out of its place; another by which
it is apt to conform it self North and South, as also to observe certain
angles correspondent to the latitude of the place, as shall be demonstrated in
due place. Of the motive power we will produce these Theoremes.

1 The Magneticall motion is excited in a small and vnperceiuable difference of
time.

This proposition may be showed out of evident experiment, wherein every man's
sight may be a witness. For if an Iron-needle touched with the Loadstone, be
placed within the Sphere of the magneticall virtue of the stone, it will
presently move it self, notwithstanding the interposition of solid bodies,
which made Gilbert to imagine this motion to be effected by a mere spiritual
and immateriall effluxe, which may well be compared to the light, which
nevertheless it surpasses in subtility: for the light is moved from East to
West so quickly, that many have thought this motion to have been in a moment or
instant of time. But this quicknes of motion may much more be imagined in the
Magneticall virtue, being of a more subtle and piercing nature, as may be
gathered from this reason, to wit; That the light is always hindered by the
interposition of a thick and opacous body; but the virtue Magneticall finds a
passage through all solid bodies whatsoever; and meets with no impediment.

2 This Motive quality is Spherically spread through every part of the
Magneticall body.

Here again may we find a great resemblance betwixt the magneticall virtue
and the light; for as all light Bodies, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars, cast
their beams every way into an orbicular form: so this Magneticall vigor
casts it self abroad not only from the center toward the superficies, but from
the superficies outward into the Air or Water, where this magneticall body is
placed, and so makes up a Sphere; but yet with this difference, that if the
body be mere and perfectly Sphericall, the Orb of the magneticall virtue
will end in a perfect Sphere, as we see the magnet G to confine his virtue
within the Circle BF. But if it be a square, or any other figure not
Sphericall, it imitates a Sphere as near as the body will suffer, in that it
spreades it self euery-where from the center by right lines; yet will it be
confined in a square figure correspondent to the body, whence it proceeds, as
we see the virtue of the square magnet A, to cast his beams into the square
figure LD.

3 The motive quality of the Magneticall body is strongest of all in the Poles,
in other parts by so much the stronger by how much these parts are situated
near the Poles.

We suppose out of the principles of Magneticall Philosophy, that a Magnet
has two Poles, whose use we shall show hereafter. These Poles are found by
experiment to have more force and vigor in them then other parts, and all
other parts to enjoy more or less force, by how much nearer or farther off
they are situated to their Poles. The reason is ascribed by these Writers to
the disposition of the Magneticall vigor in the body of the Load stone, as
shall appear by this figure following in Gilbert, expressing the great
Magneticall Body of the earth. Let the Sphericall superficies of it be HQE,
the Pole E, the Center M: HQ the plain of the Equinoctial; from every point
of this Equinoctial plain, the vigor Magneticall is conveyed and extended to
CFNE; and to every point from C to E the Pole: but not toward the point B, so
neither from G toward C. The vigor is not strengthened in the part FHG, from
that which is GMFE; but FGH does increase the virtue in H: so that there can
arise no vigor so far from the parallels to the Axel -- tree above the said
parallels, but internally from the parallels to the Pole. So we see that from
every point of the Equinoctial plain, the force is derived to the Pole E. But
the point F has only the vigor from GH, and the point N from OH: but the Pole
E is corroborated and strengthened from the whole plain of the Equinoctial
HQ. Wherefore the vigor magneticall in this Pole is most eminent and
remarkable, but in the middle spaces; as for example in F, the magneticall
quality is so far strengthened, as the portion of the Equinoctial plain H,
can give. But Dr Ridley in his late Magneticall Treatise, in the 6. Chapt.
seems to oppose this Demonstration. For although he acknowledges that the
vigor is strongest of all in the Poles; yet (says he) if trial be made
what the Pole will take perpendicularly; and also what the parts above 34
degrees will lift up, it will appear to be half as much perpendicularly; so
that the Pole does not take up as much, as this and the other part does on the
other side. But the decision of these differences I leave to such as are more
experimental then my self, being destitute of those helps and instruments
which they enjoy.

4 It behoues us in the second place to speak of the Disponent vigor of
Magneticall bodies* The Disponent force we call, that faculty by which
magneticall Bodies are disposed or directed to a certain site or position.

1 Magneticall bodies move not uncertainly, but have their motions directed and
conformed to certain bounds.

This Proposition is confirmed by manifold experiments. For magneticall bodies
are never found to move uncertainly, and at all adventures, but conform
themselves to certain Poles; and make certain angles proportional to the
latitude, as we shall show hereafter in particular. The reason of which
experiment we can draw from no other cause, then the first institution of
Nature in all Natural agents, which we would have directed to certain ends,
that nothing in her Commonwealth might seem idle or unnecessary; wherefore
she gives all agents not only a power to work their ends; but also shows
them the way, squares and regulates the means which direct unto the end.
Nowhere is this directive power more remarkable, then in magneticall bodies,
especially in their Direction and Variation, motions treated of hereafter in
place convenient; to which for a further confirmation of the Theoreme, we
refer the Reader.

9 The Radical faculty of the magneticall body being somewhat spoken of,
as well in their motive, as disponent virtues. We are in the next place to
speak of the derived motions, which arise out of these faculties.

6 These motions magneticall are either partial, or total. The partial we
call that by which the parts of the Earth are magnetically moved and conformed
as well one to the other, as to the whole terrestrial globe.

7 The magneticall partial motions are Coition, Direction, Variation, and
Declination. Magneticall Coition is that motion by which magneticall bodies are
joined and apply themselves one to the other.

For the knowledge of this magneticall motion, we need go no farther then the
Iron and Steel, which we shall observe to move unto the Lodestone, and
cleave unto it, if so be it be placed within the Sphere of his virtue. This
motion is commonly called Attraction, but improperly, as is observed by D.
Gilbert. 1 Because Attraction seems to suppose an external force or violence,
by which one thing is carried and moved unto another: but the Coition is
merely natural, as proceeding from the internal form of both the bodies. 2
Attraction supposes the force of moving to be only in the one party, and the
other to be merely passive, and not actiuely concurring to this motion;
whereas in the magneticall coition, both parts are mutually inclined by nature
to meet and join themselves one to the other. Not that the force of motion in
both parts is always equal: because one magneticall body is greater and
stronger then the other, and then the one part seems to stand still and draw
the other unto it, although there be in this part so resting an inclination to
the other; which mutual inclination of conjunction in magnets, we may easily
see in two magnets of equal quantity and virtue, which being set at a
convenient distance, will so move, that they will meet in the midway. Some
have gone about to parallel this Attractiue force of the Lodestone with the
Attractiue force of Ieat or Amber, which we see by a natural virtue to draw
unto it self little strawes, and other such like matter. But he that truly
understands the nature of a magneticall body, shall find a great disparity:
First, because the Ieat or Amber which are comprised under the name of
Electricall bodies, draws unto it by reason of his Matter: whereas otherwise
the cause of the Magneticall Coition is to be sought in the form, as being
too subtle a thing to spring from a material substance. Secondly, Electricall
bodies draw and attract not without rubbing and stirring up of the matter
first; and presently fail, if any vapor or thick body should be interposed.
But in a magneticall motion we find no such matter, because it requires no
such preparation or rubbing of the stone, nor is hindered by interposition of
solid bodies, as we prove in this place. Thirdly, the Lodestone moves and
prouokes to motion nothing else but other magneticall bodies; but the
Electricall will draw any little thing as straw, hair, dust, and such like.
Fourthly, the Magnet will lift a great weight according to his virtue and
quantity; but Ieat the smallest and lightest things. Lastly, the Electricall
bodies, as Gilbert well confirms by experiments, draw other bodies unto them
by reason of a moist effluence of vapors, which has a quality of joining
bodies together: as we see by the example of two sticks in water at a
certain distance, which will commonly move till they meet together. But the
magneticall coition cannot be other then an act of the magneticall form. Of
the cause of it many Philosophers have freely spent their uncertain
conjectures, rather out of a fear to be esteemed ignorant, then of confidence
to be accounted learned. Most run upon the form of the mixed body, which grows
from the composition of the four Elements; but this opinion is very feeble,
and cannot go without crouches: for since all mixed forms grow out of the
temperament and disposition; they add nothing to the thing compounded, but
diversely modificate what was before in the simple Elements; it cannot be
imagined how such an affection as this should be only found in the magnet,
and no other mixed body. Indeed we ascribe this affection to the form as the
immediate cause; but by this form we understand not the form of the mixture,
resulting out of the mixture and temperature of the four qualities; but the
magneticall form of all globous bodies, such as are the Sun* Moon, Stars,
and this Terrestrial Sphere whereon we live, whose natures received the
stamp in the first creation for the preservation of this integrity. He that
shall seek for the original of all forms of this kind in the mixture and
constitution of the four Elements, shall labor much, and find little, and
neither at last be able to content himself, or instruct others; except we
suppose a man sufficiently taught when he hears ordinary matters expressed in
exoticke and artificial terms. For my own part, I content my self with a
rule of Biel the Schooleman; That when an immediate effect proceeds from an
immediate cause, we ought not to search farther why such a cause should
produce such an effect. Euey man being demanded why the fire is hot, is ready
to fly to the form of fire, and allege this as the cause: but should he
inquire further, why the form of fire should be the cause of heat, he might
perhaps puzzell a whole Academie of Philosophers, and never prove himself the
wiser. For the further illustration of this motion, these Theoremes will seem
necessary.

1 The Magnet communicates his virtue to iron or steel if it be touched with
it.

Experience teaches that any iron-instrument, touched with the Lodestone,
receives instantly the same virtue Attractiue. But the manner how this virtue
should be communicated on so slight a touch, has been controuerted. The
common Philosophers have imagined, that certain little parts of the Loadstone
are separated from it in the touch, which cleaving to the iron or steel, cause
this Attraction But that this virtue cannot be communicated by any corporal
process, or any such little parts cleaving to the iron, is not so easy to
imagine: for first it seems impossible, that with a bare touch, these parts
should be separated from the magnet, or at least should be so fast linked to
the iron. Secondly, these parts being so little and insensible, cannot have so
much vigor as we see an Iron will have at the touch of the Lodestone.
Thirdly, the Loadstone can work upon the iron notwithstanding any body
interposed, which is an evident sign that the iron it self is of a
magneticall temper. Wherefore to show a reason of this effect, we say; That
Iron is a metal excocted out of the Lodestone; which albeit it retain in it
self the virtue of the Lodestone, yet by reason of the liquefaction, is
altogether languishing, and as it were buried; but upon touch of a Lodestone,
is stirred up to his former vigor: for the magnet insinuats his Incorporeall
influence into the iron, and so rectifies and animates that force which was
almost dead.

2 The magneticall Coiton is strongest of all in the Poles.

This may easily be demonstrated by an experiment: for if the iron needle
which is proposed to be Attracted, and the Poles and Center be placed in the
same right line; then this Coition will be to a perpendicular, as in A and B,
to wit, the Poles in the Diagramme: but in the middle space they will obliquely
respect and point: and by how much farther off from the Pole it is, by so much
is this virtue weaker: but in the Equator it self it becomes merely parallel
without any inclination at all. To know in what proportion this force is
increased or weakened, we must put another ground; That the force of this
coition is increased proportionally as the chords of a circle: for by how much
the least chorde in a circle differs from the Diameter, so much the forces
Attractiue differ from themselves. For since the Attraction is a Coition of one
body with another, and magneticall bodies are carried by a conuertible nature:
it comes to pass that a line drawn from one Pole to another in the diameter,
directly meets with the body, but in other places less, so that the less it
is converted to the body, the less and weaker will be the coition.

3 So much be spoken of the magneticall Coition: It follows that we speak
of Magneticall Direction, which is a natural conversion and conformity of the
magneticall bodies to the Poles of the Earth.

It is manifest that a magneticall body so seated, that it can move without any
impediment, will turn it self in such wise, that the one Pole of it will
respect the North Pole of the Earth, the other the South, which motion we call
Direction. This we may plainly see in a Mariners compass, whose Lilly
always respects the North point. If a compass be wanting, the same may be
showed in a little corken-boate, which being put in the water with a lodestone
in it, will so turn and convert it self, that the Poles of the Lodestone
will at length point out the Poles of the Terrestrial Globe. The manner how,
shall be disclosed in these Theoremes.

1 The South part of the Lodestone turns to the North, and the North part to
the South.

To confirm this assertion, some have produced this experiment. Let there be
cut out of a rock of Lodestone, a Magnet of reasonable quantity. Let the two
poles both North and South be marked out in the Lodestone, the manner of
which, we shall perhaps teach hereafter: then let it be put in a corken little
boat on the water, so that it may freely float hither and thither: It will be
evident that that part which in the rock or Mine pointed Northward, will
respect the South, and contrariwise the South part will respect the North; as
we may see in this figure: Let the Magnet as it is continuated with the Mine
or Globe of the Earth be AB, so that A shall be in the North pole, B the
South-Pole. Let this Lodestone be cut out of this rock or Mine* and placed on
the water in a little timber boat, which shall be CD: we shall find that this
little dish or boat will turn it self so long, until the Northpart A, be
turned to the Southpart B: and on the other part, the Southpart B, be converted
to the Northpart A: and this co^formity would the whole rock of Lodestone
claim, if it were divided and separated from the Globe of the Earth. The
reason why the magnet in the boat on the water, turns, windeth, and seateth
it self to a contrary motion to that it primarily received, whiles it was
joined to the bowels of the Earth, and united to the body of the great Magnet,
is; because every part of a Lodestone being separated from the whole, whereof
it is a part, becomes of it self a perfect, complete, magneticall body, (as we
may say) a little Earth, having all the properties of the great Globe, as
Poles, Meridians, Aequators, etc. And therefore according to the nature of
magneticall union, spoken of in our next Theoreme, will in no wise endure to
settle it self as it did before; but deemes it a thing more natural, and of
more perfection, to turn his aspect a contrary way, to that which he inioyed
at his first constitution. Here may we note a great error of Gemma Frisius,
who in his corollary upon the 15 Chap. of his Cosmographicall Comment* on P.
Appian, affirms; that the Needle magnetically effected, would on this side the
Equator, respect the Northpole; but being past the Line, would straightway
turn about, and point to the Southpole: An error (as Mr Hues says) unworthy
so great a Mathematician. But Gemma Frisius in some ^ort, may be excused; for
as much as the grounds of magneticall Philosophy, were in his time either not
discovered, or most imperfectly known, and the uncertain relations of
Nauigators were reputed the best Arguments: and how easy a matter it is for a
Trauailer in this sort to deceive a Scholar, who out of his reading and
experience can show nothing to the contrary, let every man judge.

2 This contrary motion here spoken of, is the just confluxe and conformity of
such bodies to magneticall union.

This is demonstrated by Gilbert in this manner. Let the whole magneticall body
be CD, then C will turn to the North of the Earth B, and D unto the South part
A. Let this magnet be cut in twain by the middle line or Equator, and the
point E will tend to A, and the part F, will direct it self to B: for as in
the whole, so in the parts divided, nature desires the union of these bodies.
The end E willingly accords with F; but E will not willingly join it self
with D, nor F with C, for then it would have C, against its nature, to move
toward A the South, or D in B* which is the South. Separate the stone in the
place of division, and turn C to D, and they will conveniently agree and
accord; For D will turn it self to the South as before, and C to the North;
and E and F joint parts in the mineral or rock, will now be most sundred.
For these magneticall parts concur and meet together not by any affinity of
matter, but receive all their motion and inclination from the form; so that
the limits, whether joint or divided, are directed magnetically to the Poles of
the Earth, in the same manner, as in the divided body.

3 If any part Southward of the magneticall body be torn away or diminished,
so much shall be also diminished of the North-part; and contrariwise if any
part be taken away in the North-part, so much shall the virtue of the
South-part be diminished.

The reason is, because the Magnet having eminently in it the circles which are
in the Earth, is separated or divided by a middle line or Equator, from which
middle space the virtues are conveyed toward either Pole, as we have before
showed. Now any part being taken away from the North or South part, this
Equator or middle line is removed from his former place into the midst of the
portion which is left, and so consequently both parts are less then before:
For although these two ends seem opposite, yet is one comforted and increased
by the other.

9 Of the motions of Coition and Direction we have handled. It follows that
we speak of the motions of the second order, to wit, Variation, and
Declination.

10 Variation is the deuiation or turning aside of the directory Magneticall
needle from the true point of North, or the true Meridian toward East or West.

In the discourse immediately going before, having treated of the magneticall
body, we have imagined it to be true, and pointing out the true North and
South points of the Terrestrial Globe; which certainly would be so, if the
substance of the Earthly Globe were in all parts and places alike, equally
partaking the Magneticall virtue, as some round Lodestone; neither should we
find any variation or deuiation at all from the true Meridian of the Earth: But
because the Terrestrial Globe is found by Nauigatours to be unequally mixed
with many materials, which differ from the magneticall substance, as furnished
with rockie hills, or large valleys, continents, and Islands, some places
adorned with store of iron Mimes, rocks of Lodestone, some altogether naked
and destitute of these implements; it must needs fall out, that the magneticall
needle and compass directed and conformed by the Magneticall nature of the
E^rth, cannot always set themselves upon the true Meridian, that passes right
along to the Poles of the Terrestrial Globe; but is forced and diuerted toward
some eminent and vigorous magneticall part; whereby the Meridian pointed out by
the magnet, must needs vary and decline from the true Meridian of the Earth,
certain parts or degrees in the Horizontall circle; which diuersion we call
the Variation of the compass: so tha^ variation, so far as it is observed by
the compass, is defined to be an Arch of the Horizon, intercepted betwixt the
common intersection with the true Meridian, and his deuiation. This effect
proceeding from the Inequality of magneticall virtue scattered in the Earth,
some have ascribed to certain Rocks or mountains of Loadstone, distant some
degrees from the true Pole of the World; which rocks they have termed the Pole
of the Loadstone, as that whereunto the magnet should dispose and conform it
self: which conceit long ago invented, was afterward enlarged and trimmed
over by Fracastorius. But this opinion is a mere conjecture, without ground:
for what Nauigatours could he ever produce that were eyewitnesses of this
mystery? or how can he induce any judicious man to believe that, which
himself, nor any to his knowledge ever saw? The relation that the Friar of
Noruegia makes of the Friar of Oxfords discovery, recorded by James Cnoien in
the book of his Travels, where he speaks of these matters, is commonly
rejected as fabulous and ridiculous; for had there been any such matter, it is
likely he would have left some monuments of it in the records of his own
University, rather then to have communicated it to a friend as far off as
Noruegia. Moreover the disproportion in the degrees of variation in places of
equal distance, will easily correct this error, as we shall show in due
place. More vain and frivolous are all the opinions of others concerning this
magneticall variation: as that of Cortesius, of a certain motive virtue or
power without the Heaven; that of Marsilius Fici^us of a star in the Bear;
that of Petrus Peregrinus, of the Pole of the world; that of Cardan, of the
rising of a star in the tail of the Bear; that of Bestardus Gallus, of the
Pole of the Zodiac; that of Liuius Sanutus, of a certain magneticall
Meridian; of Francis Maurolycus, of a magneticall Island; of Scaliger, of the
he^uen and mountains; of Robert Norman, of a respective point or place: All
which Writers seeking the cause of this variation, have found it no further off
then their own fancies. More probable by far, and consonant to experience,
shall we find their opinion, which would have the cause of this variation be
in the Inequality of the magneticall Eminencies scattered in the Earth. This
Inequality may be perceived to be twofold. 1 in that some parts of the Earth
have the magneticall minerals more then other parts; for as much as the
Superficies of some parts is solid Earth, as in great Continents: 2, Because
although the whole Globe of the Earth is supposed to be magneticall, especially
in the Internal and profound parts: yet the magneticall virtue belonging to
those parts, is not always so vigorous and eminent as in some other parts: as
we see one Lodestone to be stronger or weaker then another in virtue and
power: but of those two, the former is more remarkable, which may be showed by
experience of such as have sailed along many seacoa-stes: for if a sea-iourney
be made from the shore of Guinea by Cape Verde by the Canarie Islands, the
bounds of the Kingdom of Morocco, from thence by the confines of Spain,
France, England, Belgia, Germany, Denmark, Noruegia: we shall find toward the
East, great and ample Continents; but contrariwise in the West a huge and vast
Ocean: which is a reason that the magneticall needle will vary from the true
point of the North, and inclines rather to the East; because it is more
probable that these Continents and Lands should partake more of this
magneticall mineral, then the parts covered with the Sea, in which these
magneticall bodies may be scarcer, or at the least deeper buried, and not so
forceable. On the contrary part, if we sail by the American coasts, we shall
rather find the variation to be Westward: as for example, if a voyage be made
from the confines of Terra Florida, by Virginia, Norumbega, and so Northward,
because the land butteth on the West: but in the middle spaces, near the
Canary Islands, the directory needle respects the true Poles of the Terrestrial
Globe, or at least shows very little variation. Not for the agreement of the
Magneticall Meridian of that place with the true by reason of the Rock of
Lodestone, as some have imagined: because in the same Meridian passing by
Brasile, it falls out far otherwise: but rather because of the Terrestrial
Continents on both sides, which almost divide the Magneticall vigor, so that
the Magneticall needle is not forced one way more then another; the manner
whereof we shall find in D. Gilbert expressed in an apt figure, to whom for
further satisfaction I refer the Reader.

1 The Magneticall variation has no certain Poles in the Terrestrial Globe.

It is but a common received error (as we have mentioned) that there is a
certain Rock or Pole of Lodestone, some degrees distant from the true Pole
of the world, which the Magneticall needle in it is variation should respect.
This Pole they have imagined to be in the same Meridian with that which passes
by the Azores, whence they have labored to show the reason why the Compass
should not vary in that place: which they explain by this Figure. Let there be
a circle describing the Sphere, E AF, the Horizon OF, the Articke Pole A, the
Antarticke ^. The Pole or Rock of Loadstone placed out of the Pole of the
Earth B. Let there be placed a magneticall directory needle in H; it will
(according to their assertion) tend to the point B, by the magneticall Meridian
H B; which because it concurres with the true Meridian B A, or H A, there will
be no variation at all, but a true direction to the North Pole of the Earth.
But let this magneticall needle be placed in the point D, it is certain,
according to this opinion, that it will tend to the Pole of the Loadstone B, by
the magneticall Meridian D B. Wherefore it will not point out the Pole of the
Earth A, but rather the point C; because these two Meridians come not into one
and the selfsame. Hence they have labored with more hope then success, ^o
find out the longitude of any part of the Earth, without any observation of the
Heavens: which I confess might easily be effected, if this conjecture might
stand with true observation. But how far this conceit swarues from the
experience of Nauigatours, one or two instances will serve to demonstrate. For
if the variation had any such certain poles as they imagine, then would the
Arch of variation be increased or diminished proportionally according to the
distance of the places. As for example; If in the compass of an hundred miles,
the Compass were varied one degree, then in the next hundred miles it would
vary another degree, which would make two degrees. But this has often been
proved otherwise by diverse experiments of Nauigations, mentioned by Gilbert,
and F. Wright. I will only produce one or two. If a ship sail from the
Sorlinges to New Foundland, they have observed, that when they come so far
as to find the Compass to point directly North, without any variation at all;
then passing onward, there will be a variation toward the North-East, but
obscure and little: then afterward will the Arch of this variation increase
with like space in a greater proportion, until they approach near the
^ontinent, where they shall find a very great variation. Yet before they come a
shore, this variation will decrease again. From which one instance, if there
were no other, we might conclude; That the Arch of variation is not always
proportionable to the distance: which granted, quite overthrows that conceit
of the Poles of variation. Beside this, if there were two such magneticall
Poles, there can be but one common Meridian, passing by them and the Poles of
the Earthly Globe. But by many observations collected and observed by Ed.
Wright and others, there should be many magneticall Meridians passing by the
Poles of the world: as in the Meridian about Trinidado, and Barmudas; the
Meridian about the Westermost of the Azores: lastly, the Meridian running
amongst the East Indian Islands, a little beyond Iaua Mayor, the magneticall and
true Meridian must needs agree in one. Now for as much as all these magneticall
Meridians pass by the Poles of the earth, there can no cause be assigned why
the magneticall Poles should be said to be in one rather then another; and if
in any, then in all. Whence it must needs follow, that as many magneticall
Meridians as you have to pass by the true Poles of the world* so many pair of
magneticall Poles must you have, which will be opposite to all reason and
experience.

1 The point of Variation, as of Direction, is only Respective, not Attractiue.

It was supposed by the Ancients, that the Direction and Variation of the
Loadstone was caused by an Attractiue point, which drew and enforced the lilly
of the Compass that way: which error took place from another common-receiued
opinion, that all the other motions of the magnet were reduced to the
Attractiue operation: but the error was corrected by one Robert Norman, an
Englishman, who found this point to be Respective, and no way Attractiue.
Whose reason or demonstration is not disapproued by Dr Gilbert, although in
other matters he sharply taxes him. His experiment is thus. Let there be a
round vessel, as we have described, full of water; in the middle of this
water-place an iron-wier, in a convenient round cork, or boat, that it may
swim upon the water, even poyzed: let this iron-wire be first touched with
the lodestone, that it may more strongly show the point of variation; let this
point of variation be D, let this iron-wire rest upon the water in the cork
for a certain time; It is certainly true that this iron-wire in the cork, will
not move it self to the margent or brinke of the vessel D, which certainly it
would do, if the point D were an attractiue point.

3 The variation of every place is constant and not variable.

This has been ratified by the experience of Nauigatours, which in the
selfsame Regions have never missed the true variation which they have
assigned them before. If any difference be assigned in variation to the same
Region, we may impute it to their error which observed it, arising either
from want of skill, or convenient instruments. Neither can this ever be
changed, except some great deluge or dissolution happen of a great part of
land, as Plato records of his Atlanticke Islands.

4 The variation is greater in places near the poles of the Earth.

This proportion is not to be taken universally, but commonly for the most
part; yet would it have truth in all places, if all other things were
correspondent. It is observed that the variation is greater on the coasts of
Norway, and the Low Countries* then at Morocco, or Guinea. For at Guinea the
magneticall needle inclines to the East, a third part of one Rumbe of the
Compass: In the Islands of Cape-Verde, half; in the coasts of Morocco, two
third parts: In England at the mouth of Thames, according to the observation of
D. Gilbert, and Ed. Wright, though some deny it, one whole Rumbe; in London the
chief city of it, eleven degrees and more, which we also find, or thereabout,
in Oxford. The reason is, because the magneticall motive virtue is stronger in
the greater latitude increasing toward the pole: and the large Regions of land
lying toward the Pole, prevail more then those which are situate farther off.

12 Thus much for the Variation. The Declination is a magneticall motion,
whereby the magneticall needle conuerts it self under the Horizontall plain,
toward the Axis of the Earth.

What we have hitherto spoken of Direction and Variation magneticall, was such
as might be expressed and showed in the plain of the Horizon, by the Directory
needle equally poyzed, when it is set in any point of the Horizon. But this
Declination whereof we are now to speak, is the motion of an iron-wire or
needle, first equilibrated, and then stirred up by the loadstone, upon his own
Axis, from that point of the Horizon, the other end of it tending toward the
center of the Earth: where we may, for the better expressing of the motion,
note two things: 1 That the magneticall wier, set in a convenient instrument,
if it be carried from the Equator to the Pole, or from one Pole to another:
will by little and little turn it self round, and make a circumuolution about
his own Axell. 2 That by this conversion and circumuolution about his axell,
it will according to diverse places and latitudes, make diverse Angles in diverse
places; both which are included in this motion of Declination, and are
warranted by experience made by an Inclinatory needle applied to a Terrella, or
round Loadstone; as also by the experience of Nauigations on the great Sphere
of the Earth. To explain which motion, there are curious instruments formed
and invented by Dr Gilbert, and Dr Ridley, which the curious in this kind, to
their greater satisfaction may peruse. In the mean time we will here content
our selves with one figure following, borrowed from their more copious
invention; wherein we shall find enough to express the manner of this motion.
In this Figure let ABCD be the Terrella or round magnet representing the
Sphere of the Earth: A the North Pole, B the South, A^B the Axell, CED the
Equator: AKB, and ALB the Meridian circles meeting in the Pole. AC, and BD the
Meridian or right Horizon, having in it the two Poles: FG and HI two parallels.
The Loadstone being thus designed in his outward Poles, as it is according to
his natural eminency stored inwardly* Let the Needles be placed (being before
touched) on the Limb ouer-against the Poles, AB, and we shall observe them to
respect them directly, co^curring in one straight line with the Axell of the
Earth: Then set the same Needles in the Limb over -- against the Equator CD,
and they will dispose and settle themselves in a parallel site to the Axell of
the Earth, and incline neither to one Pole or other: Hence may be collected by
plain consequence, that there is a semicircle betwixt each of these four
needles. Now to find the quadrants of these, apply Needles in the Limbeat 33
degrees distant from the Equator on each side of him, and they will make right
angles with the axell of the same, where these eight needles have 8 quadrants
between them, that is, four semi-circles which will make two whole circles,
one on each side of the Equator. But if you place the needles in the midst
between the Equator and the Poles, they will respect the axell but obliquely
as in all other parts, except in the eight places beforementioned. From hence
may we learn what we proposed: first that the Declination is a conversion of
the magneticall wire or needle upon its own axell: secondly, that this wire by
this motion so excited, if it be moved on any Meridian North or South, will
apply and conform it self according to certain angles, to the Axell of the
Earth. Thirdly, there will arise this corollary, that the magneticall needle
about the round Magnet, makes two circles. Concerning this declination we
will insert two especial Theoremes.

1 The Declination is answerable to the latitude not in Equality of degrees,
but in proportion.

It is manifest out of that which we have spoken, that this motion of
Declination supposes two motions; The one of Conversion, whereby the needle is
turned round on his own Axis: The other a Progressiue motion, whereby the
center it self of the Inclinatory Needle is carried forward upon a Meridian
from North to South, or contrariwise. These two motions supposed to proceed and
begin together, cannot possibly meet in such Equality, as that the degrees of
Declination directly answer in Equality to the degrees of latitude, which is
demonstrated by this Figure here inserted. Let the magneticall body be A, this
body while it shall be moved above the Earth from GD the Equinoctial toward
the Pole B, will be turned upon his own Center, and in the middle of the
progress of the center from the Equator to the Pole B, it will be directed to
the Equator D in the middle between the two Poles. Therefore the middle must
needs turn faster on his own center, then the center it self turned
forward; that by this conversion it should directly respect the point D:
wherefore this motion will be swifter in the first degrees, to wit, from A to
L, but in the latter it will be slower from L to B, in respect of the Equator
from D to C. Now if the Declination were equal to the latitude, then the
magneticall wier should observe and follow the faculty and peculiar virtue of
the center of an operative and attractiue point. But reason and experience
teaches, that it observes the whole body and mass, with all the external
limits of the Earth and Lodestone; the whole virtues and forces of both
concurring, as well of the conuertible wier, as of the whole Earth:
Nevertheless from this experiment the skillful in Magneticall Philosophy,
have found out a proportion whereby the latitude of places may instrumentally
be found out by the degrees of Declination.

2 The Magneticall Declination is caused not of the Attractiue, but of the
Disponent and Conuersiue virtue of the Earth.

There is nothing more admirable in Nature, then the order and situation of all
bodies in their places, most convenient for each ones conservation. For the
obtaining of which harmony, (as we have taught in our second Chapter) it is
endowed with a proper motion convenient, to place and seat it self, both for
the preservation of it self, and the whole Universe. This natural Inclination
is nowhere more eminent and cospicuous, then in the harmony of magneticall
bodies, which are (as it were) the sinews of the Terrestrial Globe. These
motions some have imputed to the Attractiue force, but very erroneously, as we
have proved already of Direction and Variation, and shall here demonstrate
concerning the Magneticall Declination: for first, if it were caused by any
Attractiue force approaching it would follow of necessity, that a Terrella or
round Sphere; made of a solid or perfect loadstone, would more turn and
wrest the magneticall needle, then if it were made of a weaker and more
imperfect substance: also that a needle touched with a stronger stone, should
show a greater Declination then that touched with a weaker. But experience has
found the contrary, because the Declination will be all one, be the stone
stronger or weaker. Moreover a Loadstone armed with an Iron-Nose (as they
term it) put upon the Meridian in any latitude, will not lift up a piece of
iron more perpendicularly, then if it were naked and uncovered, although it
will lift up much greater and heavier waights; which experiments are sufficient
to confirm our assertion, that this Declination is caused only by the
disponent and conuersiue virtue of this Terrestrial Globe.

3 The magneticall Declination has a variation.

That in the magneticall Direction there is found an Irregularity or variation,
has been sufficiently warranted by Artificers Instruments. The like
Irregularity is in the motion of Declination, which makes magneticall
Instruments and experiments more subject to error and imperfection. The
variation of Declination is defined to be an Arch of the Magneticall meridian
betwixt the true and apparent Declination. The cause hereof is only to be
sought in the unequal temper of magneticall parts in the Earth. For as in the
Direction, magneticall bodies are drawn and wrested from the true meridian, by
the eminent and more vigorous force of the Earth, one side ouerruling the
other: so the magneticall needle (the conversion somewhat increased) declines
sometimes beyond his natural site and conformity. This may cause an error,
but not of any great moment: sometimes when there is no variation or Direction
at all in the Horizon, there may be a Variation or Declination; to wit, either
when the more eminent and stronger parts of the Earth are placed just under the
Meridian; or when these parts are more impotent then the general nature
requires; or else when the Magneticall vigor is too much increased on one
side, and diminished on the other as we may behold in the vast Ocean.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Total motions Magneticall.
1 Having passed the Partial motions magneticall, we are next to speak of
the Total motions, which more nearly agree to the whole Earth, such as are
the Verticitie and Revolution.

2 The Verticity is that whereby the Poles of the earthly Sphere, conform and
settle themselves unto the Poles of the Heaven.

1 The Sphere of the Earth by her Magneticall vigor, is most firmly seated
on her Axell; whose Ends or Poles respect always the same points in the
Heavens, without Alteration.

That which in a little Magnet or Lodestone is called Direction, in the vast
Globe of the Earth is called Verticity. To understand which, we must conceit,
that the Earth has naturally two Poles, unto which the meridionall parts do
direct not only magneticall bodies near the Earth, but her own massy
situation and firmness; and settles her self so strongly by her magneticall
virtue passing through the Meridionall parts to the Poles, as if she were tied
by many strong cables to two Herculean pillars, not subject to alteration: And
if it should happen by any supernatural power, that the situation could be
changed: she would (no doubt) by her magneticall vigor and verticity, return
and restore her self to her former position, as all magneticall needles will
do to their proper site and conformity Of this Verticity needs no more to be
spoken, then has been already said in the point of Direction; because the
former is a representation of the latter, and depends on the same
demonstration. Out of which ground we may evidently conclude, that the Axell
of the Terrestrial Globe remaynes always inuariable: By which we may refute
the opinion of Dominicus Maria, who was Master to Copernicu^; who out of
certain imperfect observations, was induced to believe that the Poles of the
World were changed from their true and natural situation: I have observed
(says he) looking on Ptolomies Geographie, that the elevation of the Pole
Articke almost in all Regions, as it is put down in Ptolomie, differs and
fails in one degree and ten minutes from that which we find in our time:
which cannot be ascribed to the error of the table, because it is not
probable that the whole series should be depraved according to this equality
of number. Wherefore it must follow of necessity, that the North pole should
be moved toward the vertical circle: which mystery not known of the Ancients
for want of former observations, has showed it self to our times, being
enriched not only with their, but our own experiments. According to this
opinion of Dominicus Maria, the North pole should be elevated higher then it
was, and the Latitudes of Regions should be greater then they were. But to
this opinion we will oppose the opinion of Stadius, which holds that the
latitudes of Regions have been decreased and diminished from that they have
had in Ptolomie, without any such regular Increment or Decrement; which he
labors to confirm by many observations: as for example, the latitude of Rome
as it is set down by Ptolomie is 41 degrees parts: but by newer observation it
is found to be 41 degrees, parts: out of which we may well conjecture, that
Ptolomies observations were not always exactly true, being for a great part
such as he had received from Hipparchus, and not examined himself: as may be
seen in the latitude of many Cities in Europe, where he missed sometimes 2,
sometimes 3 degrees. Wherefore no judicious Geographer would upon such
imperfect observations and uncertain conjectures bring in a new motion of the
earth to overthrow that magneticall. Harmony and consistency corroborated with
so many and sure demon^trations. This may serve to answer a certain Ten^nt of
Vasquez the Jesuit, and some others; who imagine the Center, and by
consequence* the Pole of the Earth, to be moved up and down by a certain
motion of Liberation. The argument on which they would ground their assertion,
is taken from the Center of Gravity, in this manner. The whole mass of the
earth (say they) is so settled about the Center, that it is equally poized: that
is as much as to say, that the parts are endowed with an equal weight. Now
such Bodies as are so equally poized by the addition or diminution of any part
on either ^ide* will be straightway t^rned from that ^i^e* which they had
before in Aequilibrio: as is daily confirmed by experience of a Balance, and
other such mechanicke instruments. Wherefore in the Terrestrial sphere, the
Center and Poles should in this wise be changed and altered, and the whole
suffer a kind of starting or Libration. For it is manifest by daily
observation, that some things in the superficies of the earth are fallen off,
and carried into another place: as Men, Beasts, and Birds, which move from one
place unto another. Nothing is here of more moment then the motion of the Sea,
by which the parts of the water by continual ebbing and flowing, suffer such a
sensible change of Addition and Diminution, that no man can imagine how the
parts of the Earth about the Center should always be equally counterpoyzed,
but the weight on one side should be predominant unto the other, and so drive
the Center from his former place. This Argument Blancanus, De Mundi fabr. part.
3. cap. 2.
another late Jesuit, leaves altogether unanswered; either imagining it too
strong, or out of a combined faction of their own society, unwilling to
contradict his fellow. And indeed should we consider the sphere of the earth,
no otherwise then according to his Elementary constitution: this reason would
hardly admit of a solid answer: For howsoever in the vast frame of the Earth,
the addition or subtraction of some parts would make but an insensible
difference: yet can it not be denied, but the least weight whatsoever added or
subtracted, would turn it from its Equall-poyze: Nevertheless, this I hold
too absurd for a Christian to believe, for as much as it contradicts the sense
of holy Scriptures, Psalm. 104.
which auerre the earth to be so settled on her foundation, that she should
not at any time be removed, or shaken: which motion (as shall be proved in
the second Theoreme) I take to be understood of such a Trepidation of the
Center and the Poles, which by a metaphor are termed the foundation of the
earth, and not of the circular motion, as some have labored to wrest it.
Wherefore nothing is here left us to satisfy this doubt: but to have recourse
to his magneticall verticity, whereby the poles of the Earth endowed with a
magneticall vigor, and ouerswaying the elementary ponderosity of the earthly
parts, are (as it were) so fast bound to respect the same points or poles in
the Heavens, that the Center can no ways be shaken, or moved out of his place.

3 The Magneticall Revolution is a motion by which the whole globe of the Earth
is moved round.

Aristotle in his 1 book de coelo makes 3 kinds of simple motions, out of
which he labors to deduce the number of simple bodies. The first is the
motion from the center, such as is of Fire and Air, and all light bodies: the
second to the center, such as is of Earth and Water; the third is round about
the center or middle, which he ascribes to the Heavens: so that if this ground
were true, the Earth could challenge to it self no other then the right
motion; whereby the parts of it being separated from the whole, return to it
again. But this opinion although popular and plausible, has been
contradicted, as well by ancient Philosophers as modern: for by long
experience and diligent observation, they have found the earth to be endowed
with a star-like vigor, whereby she may, having all her parts united together
by reason of her gravity unto the Center, and her place made sure by her
magneticall poles, move naturally upon her own poles, at least if so be she
claim no other motion. This opinion first blosomed (as far as I can gather)
in the School of Pythagoras, was cherished by Heraclides Ponticus, and
Ecphantus, two famous Pythagoreans: to which afterward joined themselves
Nicetus Syracusanus, and Aristarchus Samius; all which have undertaken to
defend that the Earth moves circularly, and that this circumgyration of the
Earth causes the rising and setting of the Sun, as well as of other stars,
although in the manner they have not expressed themselves alike, having inioyed
as yet scarce the first dawn of knowledge. But all this while Philosophy
contented her self with the acquaintance of a few choice friends, not daring
to prostitute her treasures to popularity. But when it happened in after times
that she was taught the language of the vulgar, and spoke to the understanding
of each mechanicke, she soon contracted some stains, and squared her self
rather to please the most then the best. Thus the multitude as a vast torrent
prevailed against the learned, and cast into exile the inventions of the
Ancients, which their ignorance was readier to censure then understand. Yet
were not the seeds of this Philosophy quite extinct, but as forgotten for a
time; until there arose Copernicus, a man of incomparable wit, who quickened
and revived it, to his everlasting praise and our profit: I would not here be
mistaken, as though I strongly apprehend these grounds, and reject all the
principles of our Peripateticke Philosophy: I only inueigh against their
preiudicate ignorance, which ready to lick up the dust under Aristotle's feet
with a supercilious look contemn all other learning, as though no flowers of
science could grow in another garden. I confess this opinion of the Earths
circular motion to be subject to many and great exceptions, and opposed by
strong and weighty arguments drawn probably from the book of God, the
touchstone of sincere verity; yet I hold it too strongly fortified to be
invaded by popular arguments drawn from seeming sense, and bolstered up with
names and authorities. For mine own part, I confess not absolute subscription
to this opinion; yet could I not conveniently leave it out, because having
undertaken to insert this Magneticall Tract; I would not willingly mangle it in
any part, but show it whole and entire to the view of the judicious; who herein
may use their Philosophical liberty, to embrace or reject what they please. If
these grounds seem true, they will find acceptance; if otherwise, it cannot
indamage Truth to know her adversary. Wherefore I think no man will take it
amiss that I insert this following Theoreme.

1 It is probable that the terrestrial Globe has a circular motion.

Copernicus ascribes three motions to the sphere of the Earth, whereof the
first is in the space of 24 hours about her own axell; making the day and
night, and is therefore called the Diurnall: The second is yearly, wherein the
Center it self of the Earth is moved from West to East, describing the circle
of the Signs. The third is a motion of Declination performed in an annual
revolution; reflecting against the motion of the Center; for the Axis of the
Earth is supposed to have a conuertible nature, whereas if it should remain
fixed, there would appear no inequality of day and night, Spring, Autumn,
Summer, or Winter: I will not here curiously distinguish the differences;
limits, and periods of these three motions, but leave it to the skillful
Astronomer, to whom properly it appertains: it is enough for me to show it
probable that the Earth should challenge to it self a circular motion, in
prosecution of which I shall labor chiefly to establish that first motion
which is of the Terrestrial globe about her own axis, which is the easiest
both to believe and understand. That I may the better express the grounds of
this opinion, I will labor to prove these two points. 1 That this opinion is
consonant to reason. 2 That it no way contradicts the sense of the Holy
Scripture. The former assertion we will again divide into 3 articles. 1 That
the motion which we seek to establish in the Earth cannot without much
absurdity be granted to the heavens. Secondly that it no way contradicts to
nature of the Earth it self. Thirdly, that the arguments produced against this
opinion, are not so strong, but may be answered with probability. First
therefore finding the daily rising and setting of the Sun, Moon, and other
Stars to arise from some motion, we are to seek out the true subject of
this motion. It is agreed upon by all that this subject must be the Heavens,
which are carried in 24 hours from East to West, or the Earth which must move
in the same time from West to East. For the first we must take a^ granted of
those which defend the opposite opinion these two grounds 1 That the subject of
this motion (if it be a heavenly body) is the first moveable and supreme
sphere of all the celestial machine; because all the rest have assigned them
their several motions. 2 That of two bodies circularly moving upon the same
Center, in the same space of time, that which is greater in quantity must needs
have the swifter motion; as we see the spokes of a wheel to move faster near
the circumference, but slower in those parts which are joined to the Center.
This granted, we shall find the greatest of the first and supremest orbs to
be so incomparably vast in proportion to the Earth, and the motion of it
according to this magnitude to be increased to such a swiftness, as must
needs transcend all fiction and imagination. For besides the two Elements
placed by the Peripa^etickes betwixt the Earth and the Celestial bodies, to
wit, Air and Fire, which challenge no mean distance betwixt their concaue and
conuexe superficies: who knows not how many distinct and strange
concamerations of Orbs and circles are placed and signed ou^ betwixt the Moon
and the first Moveable? Aristotle has reduced all the Orbs to eight. whereof
seven were allotted to the seven Planets, but the eight to the fixed Stars,
which he supposed to be fastened as so many nails in the same wheel. But
Ptolomie perceiving this number to be insufficient to satisfy his
observations, was enforced to add a ninth to increase the number. Yet this
contented not Alphonsus, but he must make up ten. And although this opinion
prevailed a long time in the Schools of Philosophers, as most exact and
absolute; yet came it far short to satisfy the search of two latter
Astronomers, Clauius, and Maginus; who to add something to Antiquity, have
found out another orb, and so the whole tale is become eleven: and much it is
to be feared that the big-swolne belly of this learned Ignorance, will beget
more children to help the Mother, because all the former have proved lame and
impotent: God send her a safe delivery. To return to my purpose; all these
orbs thus ranged and concamerated in order, cannot but have each of them a
great and extraordinary thickness and profundity: being to carry in them such
huge and vast bodies, as the Sun and Stars, which are of themselves mighty
Globes, for the most part greater then the Earth, as Philosophers have found
out by diverse Mathematical instruments, and expressed in Tables. Also because
amongst the Planetary Orbs we shall find them cloven into many partial and
lesser Orbs, as Epicycles and Excentrickes, the first of which must in reason
surpass the thickness of the Diameter of the Planet. The profundity of all
these Orbs is measured by their Diameters, which we shall find to surmount
each other in extraordinary proportion. For the Diameter of the Earth is 1718
German miles. The greatest distance or elongation of the Moon being new, 65
semi-diameters of the Earth; the least is 55 semi-diameters. The greater
elongation of the Moon in the middle space is 68; the least 52 semi-diameters
of the Earth. Notwithstanding it is very probable, that the Orb of the Moon
is yet of more thickness and profundity. To pass over Venus and Mercury, and
come to the Sun, we shall find his distances from the Earth in his greatest
Excentricity to be 1142 semi-diameters of the Earth. Mars, Jupiter, and
Saturn, are yet farther off from the Earth, and their Orbs endowed with a
greater treasure of thickness. The distance of the Firmament wherein are
placed the fixed Stars, is by the best Mathematicians thought
incomprehensible, and not measurable by man's industry: in so much that
Aristotle holds the Earth no other then as a point, if it be compared with the
eighth Sphere, which he supposed to be the highest and first Moveable. To
let pass the ninth Sphere; the tenth, which was vulgarly thought the first
Moveable, if it be valued according to the proportion of the rest, would have
his conuexe superficies moved so fast in one hour, that it would overcome so
much space as 3000 greater circles of the Terrestrial Globe; for as much as in
the conuexe superficies of the starry Firmament, it would contain more then
1800. And who can be so sharp sighted to see the profundity and thicknes of
this orb* containing in it stars innumerable; whereof some are apparent to
each man's eyes, others lying hid by reason of the distance, whereof many have
lately been discovered, by reason of the Trunk-spectacle lately found out: so
that it may be a probable conjecture, that all these stars are not placed in
the same Orb, or at least that this Orb is far greater and deeper then the
ordinary current of Astronomers have imagined it to be. To these eight Orbs
here deciphered, should we add the Caelum Chrystallinum, the Primum Mobile,
the Idol of our common Astrologers; and another, which Clauius and Maginus have
invented; what bound should we set to the greatne^ of the Heavens, or the
swiftness of their motions? how far beyond all rouing imagination or
Poetical fictions should it transcend, as thatwhich neither Nature could ever
suffer, or the wit of man understand? a motion a thousand-fold swifter then the
flight of a bullet from a piece of ordinance, I had almost said, then thought
it self: For if a man cast his imagination on some mark or degree in the
Suns parallel on theTerrestriall Globe, and so instantly transfer it to
another, and so to a third, passing over at each time the distance of 100
miles; he would find the Sun to be far swifter in his motion, and to have
ouer-passed him incomparably in his course: were the Sun placed in the
superficies of the Earth, and his course no greater then one of the greater
circles of the Terrene Globe, he should by their own computation, finish his
course in 24 hours; and so run 21600 miles in that time, which makes 900
miles in one hour. And if this motion seem so swift, that it could hardly
have credit among ordinary capacities; what should we think of this motion,
which is imagined infinitely swifter? If Ptolomie feared lest the Globe of the
Earth should be dissolved and shattered in pieces by a far slower motion; of
what should we imagine the heavens to be made, which can suffer so portentous
and incogitable a whirling? Here the common Philosopher stands astonished, and
rather then he will be thought to know nothing, he will say any thing: why
(says he) should we not believe it? since the Heavens in their motion find no
Resistance, whereas all other bodies are slacked by the medium or Air by which
they are to move. If in the Heavens were any such let or hinderance, it would
be either in the Agent or Mouer; or in the Patient or body moved: Not in the
mouer, because (as Aristotle has taught) the Heavens are moved or turned round
by an Angel, or Intelligence, fixed to his Orb, of a spiritual and
immateriall substance, which in a body meets no opposition. Not in the body
moved: because of it is own Nature it is prone and inclinable to this motion.
But this reason is like a reed that hurts his hand that leanes on it: for
first, what indigence or necessity in Nature is observed so great, to be the
father of such Intelligences? What serious judgment can ever imagine the Angels
to be like gally-slaues chained fast to their galleys, or turne-spit-dogs
laboring in their wheels? To what use shall they serve? not to stir up and
begin the motion; for why should we debar the Heavens from the privilege
ofall other Bodies far less excellent, whose motions challenge no other
cause or beginning then their own form and nature: Not to Regulate and
confine this motion; for Nature which begins any action or motion, is able of
her self to set limits and bounds unto it, without the help of any external
agent. Finally not to continue this motion; for as we are taught in our
Philosophy, Every Natural Agent, if it be not hindered, still acts to the
uttermost of his power, and therefore needs no external coadiutor to continue
his action: for otherwise we might suppose the Heavens to grow weary and faint
in their intended course. Secondly, whereas they say there can be no
Resistance in the body moved, they contradict their own grounds: for it is
agreed by all, that the higher Orbs do turn and wrest about the lower: I
would willingly ask, by what kind of action, either by a vertuall influence
or emanation, or else by a corporal touch and application: The former is
improbable, and (as far as I can gather) not auuouched by any; and were it
so, it would seem ridiculous; for why should we rather ascribe this effect to
an unknown influence of an external body, then to the vigor of his own
form and nature. For if one orb in this sort can move another, why could it
not move it self, being more present to it self then any other; If they say
by a corporal application of bodies and their parts. I see not how they can
avoid this Renitencie and reaction, which always does suppose some resistance:
for how can one solid and hard body be imagined to heave and push another
forward without some reluctance in the patient? because the inferior Orb
having of it self a proper motion, this must needs be violent, as supposing a
forcing and wresting of Nature from her proper course, whereof it is not hard
to show a sensible demonstration; because the Orb naturally directed one way,
is turned and directed another way at the same time: which both motions
concurring in the same body, must needs offer violence one to the other.
Moreover the immunity from corruptible qualities granted to the Heavens, which
is the ground of this opinion; has been muh talked of amongst the
Aristoteleans* but never warranted by any certain demonstration: we see (say
these Philosophers) the Heavens to have remained since the beginning of the
World, without any sensible alteration and change: and therefore must all the
Elementary and corruptible qualities be excluded. To disprove this, I need go
no farther then the last Comet, which Mathematicians by the parallax found to
be in the heavens. And whereas otherwise they seek a sensible alteration in
other parts, they deceive themselves: for as in the earth whereon we dwell,
howeuer the parts interchangeably corrupt and engender daily, yet the whole
Globe will apparently remain the same, keeping it is integrity: so may it
happen to many of the superior Globes, whose parts daily corrupted and renewed
again (although, for the great distance, to us insensible) the whole Globe
remains still perfect in his perfect Sphericity. I cease any further to
invade another Province, and therefore descend to a second argument, to prove
this extraordinary, violent, and swift motion in the heavens to be improbable.
It is ordinarily observed in other Orbs of the heavens, that the higher the
Orb is placed, the motion is slower; as for example, the Sphere of the Moon,
which is next the Earth, is carried about in 27 days. Mercury and Venus are
slow enough in their course, as the former in 80 days, the latter in 9
months: the Sun in a year; Mars in 2 years; Jupiter in 12; Saturn in 30.
Also those Astronomers which give the fixed stars a motion, would have them to
finish their course, according to Ptolomie, in 36000: but if we will believe
Copernicus, in 25816 years: so that the higher and greater the circles be, so
much slower will be the motion: what injury were it then to the concord and
harmony of Nature, to impose upon the highest Orb of all, such an unmeasurable
strange motion, which might strike the most S^raphick^ Angel into admiration?
To these may be added other Arguments in Copernicus, which albeit they be not
demonstratiue, will make the matter more probable. First, that Nature in all
things is a compendious and short worker, and uses not many helps for such
things as may be performed by fewer: and therefore need we not to use the
help of so many Orbs and concamerations to square our observations, which
will find more steady footing in this one ground once granted, of the Earth's
circular motion: Secondly it will seem more consonant and agreeable to Nature,
that the highest and uttermost Sphere of all, which bounds and engirts in all
the World besides, should rest quiet and immovable, then to suffer such an
intolerable motion, as might endanger the whole Fabric. Lastly, I may add
this one, that this diurnall motion, granted to the first Moveable, can in my
judgment hardly stand with the regularity of heavenly Bodies, if we express
it no otherwise then the ordinary sort of Astronomers. For a regular motion is
defined, to be that whereby in equal times a body is moved through equal
places. But this Diurnall motion received from the first Moveable, concurring
with the Suns annual motion, will exclude this equality. For first it is
granted, that the Sun in his motion from the Equator, to the Tropicke,
according to sense, runs ^uery day in a distinct parallel: for although
every minute he declines somewhat from the Equator toward the Tropicke, yet
the difference is not sensible: so that we may well every day assign a
parallelll-in^ to the Sun's motion. Secondly, they must grant that these
parallells are diminished, and grow less and less toward the Tropicke, from
the Equator. Thirdly, that (as we have foreshewed) of two bodies moving in
the same time on the same center, that should move faster, which is greater: so
one body moving in diverse unequal circles, in equal time, it must of
necessity follow that it must needs move faster, in that which is greater:
here we may conclude, he moves faster in the Equator, then in the Tropicke,
because in the one he is carried in a greater parallel, in the other a less,
and yet in the same period of time, as we may see in this Figure following.
Let the Sun be in the point of the Eclipticke A, it is manifest that he will
sensibly move for that day in the parallel AP. Then let him be moved by his
periodicke motion, into the point of the Eclipticke B, it will for that moment
move in the parallel IBO. Last of all, let it be in the point of the Equator
C. his parallel will be HCL. It is manifest out of our former grounds, that
he will be moved slowest in AP. Faster in IO. Fastest of all in HCL. Which
swiftness and slownesse in the Suns motion makes it irregular. Some have
thought to salve this by saying that this motion is Regular because in equal
time, the Sun goes proportional, not equal spaces, which Aguillonius holds
in his Opti^ks. But this shift is frivolous; because it takes not away the
objection, why the Sun should move faster and slower* For the Heavens being a
natural, not a voluntary agent; and according to these grounds finding no
hinderance or impediment; must always work to his utmost power, and so cannot
slack or increase his action, or motion, that it should move faster or slower.
Hitherto have we showed that this Diurnall motion cannot without some
absurdity be granted to the heavens: in the next place we are to show, that it
no way can cross the Natural disposition of the Earth it self, which we
shall demonstrate in this manner. If this circular motion should cross the
disposition of the Earthly Globe, it would happen either immediately in respect
of the mere Nature, which the Logicians call a priore; or else in regard of
certain properties, which follow necessarily the Nature of it, which they
term a posteriori. If they say it happens a priori in regard of the mere
Nature* they must necessarily have recourse to the proprieties and accidents
for a demonstration: For the Internal forms of all things being in themselves
insensible, cannot be discovered unto us but by their external proprieties*
But if probable conjecture may here find any place, I see no reason why the
earth being found to be of a magneticall temper, should not challenge the same
which other magneticall Globes far greater then the Earth, possess; to wit,
a circular revolution about her own Poles; which Kepler and Galileus have
observed as well in the Sun, as Jupiter* and in like matters to judge alike,
seems more warrantable, then to faigne a dispa^ity, which Nature never
grounded, or observation found. But this, as a matter of small note, I easily
pass over, following the footsteps of our Adversaries, which seek to
demonstrate the Earth's stability out of the external effects and proprieties.
If then this Revolution contradict any propriety* it must be of necessity
either in regard of the Quantity and Magnitude; or else in respect of the figure
and quality, or of some Motion, or of the si^e and position; for I find no
other propriety of any moment which can enter into this consideration: First,
that the Quanti^y can no way thwart this circular Revolution, is manifest,
because it would happen either in that it were too Great, or too Little. It
cannot be by reason of the greatness; because the great globes of the Sun and
Jupiter, manifold greater then the Globe of the Earth; are by late experiments
of the Trunk-spectacle, found to move about their own* Axell in a small
portion of time: the like have others deli^ered of the Mo^n^ and Venus* It is
not then the Mass or quantity which can hinder it in the Earth; neither on the
other side can it be the smalnesse: for bodies smaller are found as apt, or
rather apter to receive a circular motion, which they will not deny me; and
therefore cannot this be prejudicial to the motion of the Earth. In the next
place the figure of the Earthly Globe cannot hinder this motion, because by all
sound Philosophers, being acknowledged to be Sphericall, it cannot but be
deemed most apt to receive Revolution; in so much as some have hence labored
to draw an argument for the Earths circular motion, as deeming this Figure to
be given to the Earth for no other end or use. Thirdly, no Quality in the
Earth can resist this circular motion; for this quality (by the consent of all)
would be the natural heaviness or weight of the Earth: But this heaviness takes
not away the natural Revolution: 1 Because Gravity or heaviness is nothing
else but the inclination of the parts of the Earth, returning to their natural
place, having been sequestered from it: but these parts having once regained
their proper places, move no farther, nor are in those places esteemed heavy,
or weighty: whence it is commonly said amongst the Peripatetickes, Nihil
grauitat in suo loco, nothing is heavy in his own place, which may easily be
demonstrated out of Staticke principles, whereby we find heaviness and
lightness to be given to the bodies according to the medium, and their
massinesse and solidity in respect of one to the other. 2 If this heaviness
be opposed to the circular motion then either immediately by it self, or
secondarily by some concomitant accident. It cannot be the first, because
gravity is a quality; but motion; an action; which for ought my Philosophy has
taught me, are not opposite* If by reason of some accident; then (no question)
because it is contrary to lightness or leuity, which seems requisite to such
a motion: We willingly yield this natural gravity of the parts of the Earth to
stand opposite to the motion of Ascent or moving upward from the Center; but
nevertheless it is not any way contrary to the circular motion: 1 Because
contraries are always supposed to be in eodem genere, in the same kind: but
the motion of heavy bodies to the Center, and of the Earth about the Center,
are not in the same kind, the one being a right motion, the other circular;
neither can the weight of the Terrestrial mass add or diminish any thing in
regard of the circular motion, because a Sphericall and a right motion cannot
either directly concur, or directly oppose one the other. 2 We may urge out
of the 4 Chap. of Aristotle's 1 book De Calo, That no ci^cular motion can admit
of contrariety: which he confirms by a demonstration, which we forbear here
to insert, being loath to roue too far from our present matter. At length we
will prove that this orbicular motion given unto the Earth, cannot overthrow or
thwart any other motion of the Earth: for if this were so, it would happen for
one of these two respects; Either because the Earth has some motion or other
contrary to this; or else because diverse motions cannot be in the Earth. The
first cannot be true, for that we have spoken before; because the right motion
they find in the Earth, cannot be judged contrary to the Sphericall; neither
can the later be admitted as an undoubted truth; for howsoever Aristotle sets
it down for an Axiom, that one simple body has but one simple motion, yet
being absolutely understood without any limitation, will be found by
experience false: for it is manifest out of the experiment of the new
Perspicils, that the Bodies of the Sun and Jupiter, simple in nature, (if we
believe Aristoteleans) have at least a double motion, the one upon their own
Poles less then Diurnall, the other of their Centers, which are moved from the
West unto the East, upon other Poles familiarly known unto Astronomers. The
Peripatetickes here seek an evasion, by distinguishing the motions of the
Planets into a proper or natural, and Accidental or mutuaticious: but this
answer comes not home to this present question. First, because these two
motions of the Sun and Jupiter will easily be proved to be natural and
without violence, or restraint: Secondly, because in this answer they suppose
the Heavens to be cut and divided into diverse Orbs, Sections, and
Con^amerations, which later Astronomers upon better experience have derided, or
at least omitted as Hypotheses or suppositions, to settle Imagination, rather
then real, or true grounds. If they would understand this Principle of
Aristotle, to wit* That one simple body should challenge one simple motion: of
a motion of the same kind it might perhaps obtain some credit. But the right
motion of the parts joining to the whole, and the Circular motion: also the
Circular motion of a Planet about his own Axell, and the Circular motion it
self about the Earth, are found to be diverse kinds, and therefore no way
incompatible in the same subject. Moreover what infallible argument can
persuade us, that the Globe of the Earth is a mere simple Body, such as
Aristotle describes unto us in his Philosophy? Either this imaginary
simplicity must be sought in the Real Existence of the Earth, or else in our
mental Abstraction. The former they cannot auerre, because not only the
Elements themselves, by their own confession, are impure and corrupted: But
the whole Globe of the Earth seems to consist of diverse mixtures, and
Heterogeneall bodies, which apparently exclude such simplicity If they would
have it rather to consist in the Abstraction or separation of the mind, which
may divide and distinguish between the true nature of the Earth, and his
Accidental Natures; I shall not contradict: although it seem ^ather grounded
on imaginary conjecture, then experience: That the Earth of it self
distinguished from the waters, should have any such simple Nature. If we
follow reason and experience as our Guides, we shall observe in the
Terrestrial Globe a twofold constitu^ion; The one Elementary from the parts
whereof it consists, out of which it cannot challenge any motion, but the
right, which is of the parts separated from the whole, agreeing to the Earth*
Water, and all other heavy bodies thereof consisting. The other magneticall,
wherein all other bodies are united in one Magneticall form of the Earth. In
which sort the whole Globe of the Earth may be termed a Homogeneall substance;
for howsoever the matter and the Elements whereof it consists* seem
Heterogeneall and diverse one from the other; yet since in this Magneticall
Nature, there is a Harmony and Communion, well we may call it a Homogenity of
the Form and Nature; not of the Matter and Quantity, as common Philosophers
commonly use the word: So that every part or Element whereof this Terrestrial
Sphere is compounded, may claim his own motion, and properly; yet all
conspiring in one universal form of a Sphericall Body, may notwithstanding be
turned round with a Sphericall motion. In the last place we are to prove that
this Circular motion granted unto the Earth, can no way oppose or endanger the
natural site or position of the Earth: If the situation or position were
feared to be changed, it must needs happen one of these ways; either that
the Center of the Earth should be moved out of his place: or that the parts
should be separated and distracted one from the other; or that the Poles
should be changed and altered: The first cannot touch our assertion; because in
this place we affirm not, that the center of the Globe is moved out of his
place; but that the whole Earth in the same place is turned round upon her own
Center. For the opinion of Copernicus, which holds the Center of the Earth to
move round about the earth, we shall censure in our next Chapter* In the
second place, the parts of the Earth by this motion cannot be separated or
disunited one from the other: first, because all the parts are united to the
whole by their natural gravity; that if by chance they should be separated,
they would naturally return back unto their own place. Secondly, this motion
is supposed Natural and not violent, which in so great and massy a Body, can
make no sensible Alteration. Lastly, the Poles of the Earth by this means,
cannot be moved out of their places; because by a certain Magneticall
verticity (as we have formerly showed) the same Poles of the Earth always
naturally respect the same points of the Heavens, as if they were bound unto
two firm Pillars indissoluble. Hitherto having proved the Circular motion of
the Earth; neither to be given to the Heavens without some absurdity, and yet
no way to contradict or oppose the Nature of the Terrestrial Globe; we are in
the third place to examine the reasons usually urged against this Assertion.
The first reason is drawn from sense. If there were any such Sphericall motion
(say they) how comes it to pass, that it cannot of us be perceived? an
Argument worthy such Philosophers, as measure all rather by seeming sense, then
Demonstratiue reason; who cannot observe on the sea in a calm, that the ship
wherein he is carried will seem to rest, or at least to move slowly* and the
clifts and shores to move unto the opposite part? What then should we think
of the motion of the whole Terrestrial Globe? which has less cause to be
perceived, then that of a ship? The Bulk of a ship in respect of the Earth is
small and of no quantity; the other being huge and massy: The motion of the
ship merely violent, enforced by the winds; of the Earth natural and
uniform, stirred up of his proper and natural inclination, so that if any
such motion be in the earth, it were impossible to be perceived by sense:
Secondly, they urge against us, that in Homogeneall Bodies, there is the same
motion of the whole, and all the parts: But every part of the Earth (as
experience teaches) is moved downward toward the Center, and therefore the
whole can have no other motion: To this objection we have partly answered
before; yet to give further satisfaction, we will add something more: It is
one thing to speak of the whole Terrestrial Globe and Sphere; another of the
several parts and Elements whereof it consists: If the whole Sphere be
understood, we ascribe unto it no other motion but the circular, which we
here labor to establish. The parts, whereof this Terrestrial Sphere consists,
may be considered two ways; either as they are united in the whole by a
Magneticall form, or disioyned and taken by themselves: In the former the
parts of the Earth are supposed to move in the same motion, by which the whole
Sphere of the Earth is moved; because the whole and all the parts taken
together, are the same, and subject to the same circular revolution.
Notwithstanding this, any part several and disioyned from the whole, has a
right motion downward toward the Center, by which it returns to its true
natural union. This inclination of the parts agrees not with the whole Earth,
neither unto any part united and conglobated to the whole; but only to a part
separated from his place; so that the whole, may notwithstanding in his place
enjoy a circular motion. Now to come more nearly home unto their Arguments
drawn from the Homogeneity of the Earth, we answer as before, that there is a
twofold Homogeneity: The one of the matter and quantity; the other of the
Magneticall form and Nature of the former: we may conclude out of the right
motion of all the parts, the disposition of the whole, so we understand it in
a good sense: first that every part is here to be understood, not in, but out
of his proper place: Secondly, that by the whole, we ought not to understand
the whole Globe with all his parts, conformed in one Sphericall frame; but all
the parts indefinitely taken; for if we should understand of the whole Globe,
their Argument will in no way hold true: If according to the later, we might
well grant them their Conclusion, yet can it not oppugn our Assertion: Because
it will follow out of the Natural inclination of every part, that all the
parts severally taken, have such a disposition of returning to the Earth, being
separated there from: Yet will not this by any necessary inference be proved
to agree to the whole Globe of the Earth; but rather will it follow
contrariwise, that the whole Sphere of the Earth is moved circularly, and
therefore every part with, and in it, is moved with the whole in the same
motion. A third argument which is thought greater then all the other, is drawn
from two experiments: The first is, that a stone or Bullet let fall from a
higher place to the ground, will perpendicularly descend to the point of the
Earth right under: Secondly, that two Bullets imagined to be of equal weight
and matter, being discharged from equal pieces of ordinance, with the like
quantity of powder, the one toward the East, the other toward the West, will
reach an equal distance in the Earth; both which would seem impossible if we
grant this supposition of the Earths circular revolution. For in the former
case, the Earth sliding away swiftly during the fall of the stone, would change
the point marked out for another: And in the second, for the like cause, the
Bullet shot toward the East, being prevented by the swiftness of the Earth's
motion, carrying along with it the Ordinance out of which it proceeded, should
return back over the shooters-head; and contrariwise that Bullet shot toward
the West, besides his own motion, by the motion of the Earth the other way,
should be carried so much farther, as the Earth is removed from the place
where it was first discharged: Both which experiments seem to cross this
circumgyration of the Terrestrial Globe, which our magneticall Cosmographers
labor to confirm: But with them to give an answer to these and the like
experiments, we must distinguish the parts of the Earth into three sorts; some
are hard and solid parts, adjoined to the Globe, as stones, mineralls, and
what else in the bowels of the Earth is united to it, or at least necessarily
adherent to the outward face of it. Some other parts there are of a thin and
fluid substance, as the Air and other vapors in it, derived from the Earth; A
third sort there are of such parts as being in themselves solid, are
notwithstanding by some violence separated from the solid globe, as stones
cast into the Air; Arrows, Bullets, and such like, discharged from the hand
or Engine: For the two former we may easily imagine them carried with the same
circular motion, which we assign unto the whole, being no other then the parts
of it depending from the whole mass: For the third sort (whereof consists the
difficulty) we cannot imagine them so moved round, as if they were wholly
separated from the Communion of the Earthly Sphere; for howsoever there seems
a separation according to matter and quantity, yet retain they the same
magneticall inclination to the whole mass, as if they were united to it; and
therefore such solid parts are moved with the same uniform and natural
motion wherewith the Earth it self is turned; so that in solid bodies so
separated from the superficies of the Earth, of an Arrow or Bullets shot, we
must imagine a twofold motion: The one Natural and uniform, whereby they are
moved as homogeneall parts according to the revolution of the whole Sphere:
The other violent by force impressed from the Agent: The right motion
proceeding from the strength of the shooter, cannot cross or hinder the
Natural, because the one being right, and the other circular, admit no such
proportion, as that one should hinder or further the other: Neither can these
motions well be termed contrary or opposite, which are in diverse kinds: To
explain this matter farther, we will add this Diagramme; Let the whole orb
of the earth be imagined to be LQM; whose center is A, the thickness of the
Air ascending from the Earth O Q. Now as the orb of this fluid substance of
the air asce^ding uniformly is moved round with the Globe of the earth, so
must we imagine the part of it marked out by the right line OQ to be carried
round with an unalterable Revolution. Wherefore if any heavy body should be
placed in the Line OQ; as for example P, it will fall down toward the center
by the shortest way in the same line OQ: which motion downwards toward the
center, can neither be hindered by the circular motion of the Earth, nor yet
Mixed or compounded with it: It cannot be hindered: because (as we have showed)
a Right motion and a circular being not in the same kind, cannot properly be
reputed contrary: Neither for the same cause can they be mixed or compounded:
Wherefore this motion will be no other then one simple and Right motion, never
varying from the Line OQ: which being once understood, it is no hard thing to
imagine a Bullet or stone forced by equal strength from Q toward L, and from
Q. toward the point M, to observe always a like distance notwithstanding the
Earth's cir^ular Revolution. Having hitherto showed this Sphericall motion of
the Earth to be possible, and no way to contradict Nature, we are in the next
place to show it to be no way opposite to the sense of holy Scripture. This
opinion of the Earth's circular motion, has suffered much wrong by a certain
persuasion of some men, that it contradicts the Text of Holy Scripture. Some
precise men* more ready to urge, then understand what they allege, will
condemn without examination, and stick to the plain l^tter, notwithstanding
all absurdities, denying the conclusion in despite of the premises. To these
have associated themselves another sort, more to be regarded, as more learned;
the Critickes (I mean) of our Age, who like Popes or Dictatours, have taken
upon them an Universal authority to censure all which they never understood.
Had these men contained themselves in their own bounds, they might
questionless have done good service to the Commonwealth of Learning* But when
the servant presumes to control the Mistrisse, the house seems much out of
order. To seek for a determination of a Cosmographicall doubt in the
Grammatical resolution of two or three Hebrew words, (which some have gone
about) were to neglect the kernel, and make a banquet on the shells. But
howsoever, we hope to make it appear, that the Scripture understood as it
ought to be, is so far from favoring their opinion, that the words
themselves can hardly admit of such a sense, as they would fasten on them. But
ere we descend to the examination of particular places of holy Scriptures
alleged in their behalf, we will show this opinion to be much different
from that of Copernicus, as somewhat more moderate, and able to suffer an
easier reconcilement with the holy Text. For the places alleged of sacred
Scripture, which seem to oppose our Assertion, either seem to prove the
circular motion of the Heavens, or the rest, and stability of the Earth. But
this opinion holding a Mediocrity betwixt both, neither takes away the motion
from the Heavens, neither oppugnes such a Rest or quietness in the Earth, as
the Scriptures understand. For first, albeit we take away from the Heavens the
diurnall motion, and give it to the Earth: yet we grant to the heavenly Orbs
their several motions, allowing no part of it to be absolutely void of
motion, Secondly, we must understand this in a fourefold sense; as opposed to
four kinds of Motions. First to the progressiue Motion of the Center of the
Terrestrial globe from place to place. Secondly, to the separation or
dissolution of the parts one from the other, by which the Globe may loose his
integrity. Thirdly to the Translocation of the Poles, whereby the Poles
inclining to one side or another, may be imagined to change their position.
Fourthly, to the Diurnall Motion. In the first sense we give a Rest and
stability to the Earth, because the Earth, howsoever moveable, we place in the
Center of the world, as we shall prove in the next Chapter. In the second
sense we also grant it; because all the parts of the Earth being of a heavy
nature, fall naturally downwards* and unite themselves unto the whole, to
decline such a dissolution: In the third acception we likewise allow such a
stability: because the Poles of the Earth (as we have showed) by their
magneticall inclination, always respect the same points in the heavens, and
can from thence by no means remove themselves. Only in the fourth and last
sense we exclude a Rest, allowing only a diurnall Revolution from West to
East in twenty four hours. The first argument alleged against us is taken
out of the 1 Chapter of Ecclesiastes: Vna generatio (says Solomon) abit, and
altera aduenit, quamuis. Terna in saeculum permaneat. Wherein by the word (...)
which some interpret (Stat*) they would infer a perpetual stability of the
Earth. A childish consequence, which a grave Divine might well be ashamed to
urge: every man of common understanding may plainly perceive that Salomons
scope in this Chapter was, to show the vanity and uncertainty of all things
under the Sun: which as a special argument amongst others he amplifies from
the success^ie mutation and changes of men living on the Earth: in that one
generation goes away, and another comes, but the Earth keeps her integrity,
and remains in the same state. This Constancy then, or remaining of the earth,
we can in no wise oppose to any circular motion, but to the changes and
uncertainty of men in their generations; in which sense our most learned
Linguists understand it. Would not this seem to any man a ridiculous
argumentation, if any man should thus dispu^e: One Miller comes, and another
goes, but the Mill remains still: Ergo the Mill has in it no motion? Or in a
River, one generation of Fishes is produced, and another is decayed; but the
River remains the same, Ergo the River remains still unmoved? Let any man go
no farther then the plain words whereon these Grammarians stand, he will
easily find out another interpretation. For the word (...) derived from (...)
signifies as much as to persist, subsist, or to endure, being opposite to (...)
which signifies as much as to stagger or start aside from his place, or
position: so that nothing from hence can be inferred to contradict the
Sphericall Revolution of the Earth in her proper place, upon her own Poles,
which we only maintain. A second reason they draw from the Psalm 104,
Fundauit Terram super bases suas, ne dimoueatur in saeculum. verse. 5.
out of these words, (...) wherein, (as one would persuade) no less then three
arguments are couched in three bare terms: But these arguments will (I fear)
prove as little as the former. For first the word (...) signifying as much
naturally as to found or seat in a place or frame, is not altogether, without a
Metaphor given to the Earth, because Almighty God has so placed it upon her
own center Poles and Axell, that she cannot be moved out of it: Likewise
(...) implies no other then a seat or place, being derived from the word (...)
which signifies no more then to perfect, establish, or make ready: The third is
(...) from the word (...) which can signify no other then to incline, to nod,
slide, fall, or turn aside out of his place: All which can suffer no other
paraphrase or Interpretation then this, That Almighty God has set the Globe of
the Earth so strongly fixed in her proper frame, that no power can be so
strong to dissolve this Fabric, or turn her out of her appointed place:
which exposition of this place of Scripture, Copernicus himself would easily
grant, as no way opposite to the triple motion he labors to establish* Here
are these three arguments drawn from three words, suddenly shrunk into
nothing. Another reason which I take to be stronger then the former, some have
taken out of the 19 Psalm; where speaking of the Sun, he uses these words.
In them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun. 5 Which is as a bridegroom
coming out of his chamber* and rejoices as a giant to run his course: 6 His
going forth is from the end of the Heavens; and his circuit unto the ends of
it: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof. Out of which words the
Heavens should seem to challenge the motion, which we have given unto the
Earth. To this we answer two ways: First, that although this may oppugn
Copernicus his opinion, that the Sun stands still in the midst as the
center of the World; yet may it well stand with our Assertion, who allow the
Sun his several motion in the Eclipticke: whether those words of the Psalm
be to be understood of the Suns Diurnall or Periodicke Motion, is not so
soon decided: the Scripture not specifying expressly either. 2 we may answer
with the Copernicans; That the Holy Ghost in these or the like places speaks
(...): being willing to descend to the weakest of men's capacity, and not to
trouble men's conceits with such matters as to vulgar judgments might seem
unlikely or improbable. The like Analogy of speech may we find in the first
of Genesis, where the Moon is called one of the greater lights in regard of
her appearance, being notwithstanding one of the least. These may suffice to
show the opinion of the earths circular motion to be probable: I promised no
more, and I hope I have performed no less. I never held it an article of my
faith, to defend the one, or oppugn the other; and therefore leave every man
to his own free judgment, to embrace or reject what he please.

CHAP. V. Of the Site, Stability, and Proportion of the Earth.
1 OF Terrestrial affections which agree in respect of the Earth it self, we
have hitherto spoken: We are now to treat of such as agree to it in respect of
the Heavens. These are chiefly three; 1 The Site, 2 The Stability. 3 The
Proportion.

2 The Site is the local position of the Earth in respect of the Celestial
Bodies.

It might seem a hard and almost impossible task for any man to reconcile
that which has been spoken in the former Chapter concerning the Earths
circular Revolution, with the grounds of common Geographers, which hold the
Terrestrial Globe to be settled and fixed in the Center of the world. The
reason is; because such as hold the circular motion of the Earth, (whereof the
chief is Copernicus) would have the Sun to stand still, as the fixed Center of
the Universe, and the Earth to move round about him betwixt Mars and Venus,
which seems clean opposite to the former opinion. I must confess that
Copernicus his opinion entirely taken and understood, stands altogether
opposite to these our grounds: yet may that motion of the Earth which we have
established in the former Chapter (for ought I yet know) be well reconciled
with their opinion, which hold the Earth to be the Center of the world. For
the circular Revolution we gave to the Terrestrial Globe, was not a motion of
the Center of it, from one place to another, as that of the Stars which move
round about the Earth; but rather a turning of it self in its own place, upon
her own Poles and Axell-tree, in such sort as the wheel of a mill, or such a
like engine fixed in one place is turned upon his own Axell: So that the motion
we there understood was only the Diurnall motion of 24 hours, making the Day
and Night. The other two motions mentioned by Copernicus, may be found out in
the Heavens, and left to Astronomers. The reasons why I entirely embrace not
Copernicus his opinion, are chiefly two. First, because it seems too harsh
and dissonant in nature, to make one and the selfsame body subject to so many
motions, especially such as by common Philosophers is denied all motion.
Secondly, because the other motions granted to the Earth must needs suppose it
to be placed out of the Center of the world; the contrary of which we shall in
this Chapter, God willing, sufficiently demonstrate. The motion therefore most
called in question, and most likely to be found in the Earth rather then in
the Heaven, is the Diurnall Revolution performed in 24 hours from the West to
East: which (as we have proved) being given to the Heavens would be far
swifter then nature can well suffer: wherefore with more probability may this
motion be taken from the heavens, and given unto the Earth: The other without
any absurdity at all may be granted in the Heavens: Since no repugnancy is found
in nature, but that every heavenly body may be furnished with some motion: and
therefore Copernicus might have granted the Sun and fixed Stars their
several motions as well as the rest, which would have seemed far more
probable then to have endowed the Earth with a Triplicity of motion. These
things being thus opened, I will set down their Theoremes.

1 The Terrestrial Globe is the Center of the whole world.

To understand aright this proposition, we must consider that a Center may be
taken two manner of ways: either Geometrically, or Optically: In Geometry it
is taken for an imaginary point, conceived in a magnitude deuoyde of all
quantity, yet bounding and termining all Magnitudes: Optically it is usually
taken for a small and insensible Magnitude; because to the fight it may seem
no other then a Point; In which last sense we may call the Earth the Center:
For although the Earthly Sphere is endowed with a great and massy substance,
yet (as we shall hereafter demonstrate) in respect of the Firmament this
greatness would vanish into nothing. For if a man standing in the Firmament
should behold it, it would seem no other then as a small point. This being
declared, we will produce these reasons to prove the Earth to be the Center of
the Universe. The Center, I say, not of all heavenly motions (for some Stars
are moved upon their own Center) but of the whole heavenly machine being
collectiuely taken as one Body The first argument is of Aristotle, taken from
the gravity or natural inclination of all heavy bodies to the Center. The
Earth (says he) being a heavy and massy body, must needs seek the lowest
place, which is farthest off from the Heavens. But this can be no other then
the Center or midst point of the whole world. Which argument by others is
more subtily urged in this manner. Suppose the whole mass of the Earth were
cut and divided into many parts, equal the one to the other, of the same
weight and figure: which parts so divided were placed in diverse places under
the concaue Superficies of the Moon, that they might be freely left to
themselves to move according to their natural inclinations: It is most
certain that all their parts being of the same nature, weight, quantity, and
figure, would descend with the same motion, and in the same equal time, to the
same place; which could in no wise happen, except they should concur in the
Center of the world. But this reason, for ought I understand, is only probable,
and not backed with any necessary demonstration. For it proves not thing else
but the Earth to be the Center of all earthie and heavy bodies, and not to be
absolutely placed in the exact middle of the world. Another reason not much
unlike the former, is drawn by some from a final cause, and the natural
harmony of the parts of the world, one with the other: The Earth (say they) is
of all other bodies, the most vile, and sordid: Therefore it is agreeable to
nature, that it should be placed in the middle, equally distant from each part
of the Heavens, that one part might not seem to complain of this unpleasing
vicinity more then another: But this reason takes as granted to matters, as yet
not decided. First, that the Earth, amongst all other bodies, is most vile and
sordid, depending on the ground of Peripateticks, that the heavenly bodies
suffer no corruption, a thing sooner spoken then proved. Secondly that pure and
impure bodies, the most excellent and most vile in nature, are always most
distant, as in nature, so in place: which is a peremptory assertion without
ground. A third reason more probable then the former, is drawn from the
apparences of Stars above the Horizon: It is manifest that the Stars above
the Horizon appear always to be of one, and the selfsame magnitude, and
quantity, whether in the vertical point, or in the East, or the West, or any
other place: whence we may collect that they differ equally in distance from
the Earth, and by consequence the Earth is seated in the middle of the world:
for if it were otherwise, that the Stars in some place should be nearer, in
other farther of^, they would some-where seem greater, otherwhere lesser,
according to the grounds of the Optics. This reason, howsoever popular, seems
to admit a twofold exception. First, because it implies that a man standing on
the superficies of the Earth is equally distant from all places and parts of
the Heavens, whereas the heavens in the Horizon are farther distant, by reason
of a whole semidiameter of the earth interposed. Secondly, all Stars arising
in the East, or setting in the West, ordinarily seem greater then in the
Vertical point, by reason of vapors ascending and interposed. Whence we
cannot well gather the Earth to be seated in the midst from the like
appearance of the Stars when experience teaches the contrary, that they seem
not always of the like magnitude. Concerning the first, we answer that the
Semidiameter of the earth interposed betwixt the Superficies and Center, is in
it self greater. But this (as we shall prove) in respect of the Heavens is so
little, that the sense cannot gather any difference in observation of the
Stars, but that they should always appear of the like magnitude. Concerning
the second, we must needs acknowledge that vapors ascending about the Horizon
by an Opticall Refraction, make the Stars seem greater then other wise they
would do. But the reason may be understood in this sort: that whether a ^an
be placed in the same Horizon where the Sun is when he rises, or under that
Horizon where the Sun is now, under his Meridian, or under that horizon where
he is setting, he will appear to be of one and the selfsame greatness
without any sensible difference. Whereas therefore they speak of the
appearance of Stars, they would have them taken as abstracted from all
impediments of sight or interposed vapors, and so the reason may obtain her
force. The fourth reason why the earth should be seated in the midst, alleged
by Ptolomie, and others, is this: wheresoever any man stands on the Surface of
the Earth, six signs of the Zodiac will show themselves, and the other six
signs will lie hid; and by consequence half the heavens will appear, the
other half will be under; which is an evident reason that the Earth is in the
midst, for otherwise it could not so happen. The former is confirmed by
Ptolomie, Alphraganus, and the best Astronomers: the consequence may be
inferred out of natural reason. This argument will sufficiently hold upon this
supposition mentioned before, and to be proved hereafter: That the Earth
having no sensible magnitude in respect of the Firmament, no sensible
difference can show it self betwixt the Sensible, and the Rational Horizon.
Besides these reasons, which make the matter more then probable: others are
produced by Ptolomie demonstratiue, ^ot admitting any evident or probable
exception or evasion. The first is this; If the Earth be placed out of the
Center of the world, it must have of necessity one of these three Sites or
positions: Either it must be in the plain of the Equinoctial: or at least it
must be placed, not only without the plain of the Equinoctial, but without
the Axell-tree: That is, to express it plainer; It must either be placed
beside the Axell-tree, yet equally distant from both the Poles; or else it must
be on the Axell-tree, and so consequently nearer to one Pole then the other:
or thirdly, it must needs be beside the Axell-tree, yet nearer to one Pole then
another. If the first position were admitted, these absurdities would of
necessity follow. First, that in a right Sphere there would happen no
Equinoctial, but only in that Horizon which passes by the Center of the
world: for example sake; ^et there be imagined a Sphere, BDCE, whose Center is
A: let the Equator be DE: the Axel-tree of the world BC: and let the Earth be
in F, the right Horizon HG not passing by the Center of the world A: which
shall be parallel to the Axis BC: since the Equator cuts the Horizon in right
angles; It is most manifest that not only the equatour, but other parallells of
the same will be unequally divided of the Horizon: for as much as it passes
not by the Center or the Poles of the world: wherefore it must needs follow,
that the days must continually be unequal to the nights: which contradicts
all experience; because in a right Sphere the days are always found to be
equal to the nights. Secondly, out of this position it would follow, that no
man in a right Sphere should behold the half or hemispheare of the heavens,
but either a greater or lesser part, as may be demonstrated out of the same
Diagramme, whereas sense can testify that six signs of the Zodiac are
always conspicuous above our Horizon, and the other six always hid: only
excepting that Hor^zon which passes by the Center of the Earth, wherein the
Mediety of Heaven is conspicuous. Thirdly, the same Stars in a clear air
should not always seem of the same magnitude; for if the earth be placed in
the Equinoctial plain, and beside the Axis of the world toward the Zenith or
Meridian; the Stars which are in the Meridian will appear greater then in
the East or West, because they are nearer. But if it be placed near the Nadir
or midnight point, they will appear greater in the East or West, then in the
Meridian: if it should be placed toward the East or West, the Stars would
either seem greater in the East then in the West, or contrariwise, greater in
the West then the East: all which plainly contradicts experience. Moreover it
would hence follow out of this last, that the fore-noone would not be equal to
the afternoon, for as much as the Meridian circle passes by our vertical
point, which in this case cannot be in the middle of the hemispheare, but will
decline more, either to the East or the West. Fourthly, it must needs follow
that in an oblique Sphere, either there will be no Equinoctial at all, or at
least, if there were any, it would not be in the midst betwixt the two
Solstices of Summer and Winter; which is against all common experience. To
explain which assertion, let there be a Sphere ABCD, whose Center shall be
E: wherein we will conceive the equatour to be BD: the two Tropicks IL, and
XH: the Axell-tree of the world AC: Now if the Earth should be placed in the
plain of the equatour, out of the Axis of the world, as in F let there first
be an oblique Horizon ZFY, cutting all the parallells into unequal parts, and
the Axis in those parallells which are without: it is manifest that in the said
Horizon there will be no Equinoctial; because the Horizon equally diuides in
two halfes only that parallel which is described by P, which nevertheless the
Sun never comes unto, as never going beyond the Tropicke XH: Let there be
another oblique Horizon OFM cutting the Axell AC within the said parallels in
N: It is manifest by reason, that there will happen an equinoctial in the said
Horizon when the Sun shall describe the parallel by N: because this parallel
is by the Horizon divided into two equal parts. But this can in no wise
happen in a middle space and time betwixt the two Solstices, for as much as the
Equator only is equally distant and removed from either Solstice. It is also
manifest* that the Sun residing in BD the equator, there can be no
equinoctial, but either after or before: which is absurd and opposite to
observation. Fifthly, it will be inferred out of these grounds, that no Horizon
shall divide the Heavens into two equal parts besides that which concurres
with the equinoctial circle, as BD, and such as are drawn by BD. Wherefore
all people should not behold the one half of the heavens. Sixthly, out of this
opinion would necessarily be concluded, that the excess of the greatest and
longest day above the equinoctial day, should not be equalized by the defect
of the shortest day, by how much it is exceeded by the equinoctial day: which
is against all common experience; the consequence shall appear by
demonstration. Suppose A to be the Articke Pole: then will PG be the excess
of the longest day XP above XG the Equinoctial day. But KQ is the defect
wherein the shortest day IQ, is exceeded of the Equinoctial day IK. All these
absurdities are avoided, if we put the Earth in the Center E. for so in every
oblique Horizon, as in SR, will be an Equinoctial, the Sun risiding in the
Equator. 2 The Heavens will be divided into two equal halfes, and PG the
excess of the longest day, will be equal to KV, the defect of the shortest
day: whence we may conclude the first part of this argument, that the Earth is
not besides the Axis in the plain of the Equinoctial. Concerning the second
position: if we should place the earth in the Axis of the world out of the
plain of the Equinoctial, as many, or more absurdities would of necessity
follow: for example sake, let it be imagined in P: First then no Horizon beside
a right would cut the Heaven into two equal parts or halfes, and consequently
the Zodiac. But this is proved false by experience (as we have showed) because
six signs of the Zodiac are always above and conspicuous, and the other six
under. Secondly only under a right Horizon would there be an Equinoctial,
because only such an Horizon equally diuides the Equatour into two halfes, as
may be seen in the former figure, in which the Equatour is conceived to be
BD: the right Horizon AC. the oblique YZ, cutting the Equator in F into two
unequal parts: Now if it should happen that in any oblique Horizon, there
should be an equinoxe, it could no wise be in the middle time betwixt the two
Solstices, but would be much nearer to the one then to the other; as if the
Earth were placed in N, betwixt the Tropicke XH, and the Equatour BD, there
would be an equinoxe when the Sun passes in the parallel by N. which
parallel is far nearer to the Summer Solstice, then the Winter Solstice. But
if the Earth were in G, there would happen an equinoxe just in the day of the
Summer Solstice; all which are most absurd, and most repugnant to common sense.
Thirdly, this granted, the whole order and proportion of increase and decrease
of days and nights, would be confused and troubled. It is agreed on by
consent of all Cosmographers, that every where without the right Horizon, there
is such an order and proportion of the increase and decrease of the days and
nights, that twice in a year the days are equal to the nights* to wit, in
the mean, or middle betwixt the longest and the shortest day, that the longest
day is equal to the longest night, and the shortest day to the shortest night.
That the excess of the longest day above the Equinoctial day, is so much as
is the defect of the shortest day in regard of the said Equinoctial day. All
which and many more such Apparences would be interrupted, were the Earth
placed any where else then in the Center E; as will appear by the Scheme. For
the Earth being placed in E, every oblique Horizon, as SR, will divide the
Equatour BD, into two equal hemicircles, so that so much shall appear above
as lies couched under, and so that day will be equal to the night. In like
sort the Tropicks HX and IL will be divided into two unequal parts, yet so as
the Alternate segments shall be equal, to wit, PX and VL, also TH and VI, as
it is demonstrated by Theodosius, lib. 2. prop. 16. Whence it comes to pass
that the longest day XP is equal to the longest night LV, and the shortest day
IV is equal to the shortest night HP. Finally, PG, the excess of the longest
day XP above the Equinoctial day XG, is equal to KV the defect of the
shortest day under the Equinoctial day IK, which is showed out of the
similitude and equality of the Triangles TEG, and VEK. Now of the contrary
parts, if the Earth should be placed in the Axis without the Center E, as in P,
beyond all the parallells, no equinoxe can be in an oblique Sphere (as we
have showed) but always the days will be longer or shorter then the nights.
But if the earth be placed in the point G, by which passes the last of the
parallells, there will be one only equinoxe, and that in the Solstice in an
oblique sphere in all other parts of the year the days would either be
longer, or else shorter then the nights. But if the Globe of the Earth be
seated within the parallells in the point N, there would be two Equinoxes in a
year, wherein the spaces of days and nights should increase and decrease.
Nevertheless these increments and decrements should neither in number nor in
greatness be equal to the increments and decrements of the nights, as may be
gathered very easily by sense, comparing the two Triangles, DNG, and QNK,
because that more and greater segments of parallels are comprehended in the
Triangle LNK, then in the Triangle PNG. Fourthly, if the Earth should unequally
respect the Poles, and were not placed in the Center, the shadows of Gnomons
erected which make right angles with the Horizon, should not be cast directly
forward in one right line in the time of the Equinoxes: the Sun exactly
placed in the East or West: as for example: let the earth be A, seated in the
plain of the Equinoctial circle BC and let there be a Gnomon erected on the
plain of the Horizon, which is represented by the circle BC: It is manifest to
sense that the sun setting in C, the shadows will be cast in the opposite
part toward B. Likewise the Sun rising in B will cast his shadow toward C.
But AC and AB, concur in one right line, which plainly demonstrats unto us,
that the earth is seated in the plain of the Equinoctial. But if it were
placed out of it toward either side, as in E, if a Gnomon be set up on the
Horizon as OF, we shall see that the Sun rising in B in the time of the
Equinoctial, the shadow will be directed by the line EG, likewise the Sun
setting in C, the shadow will make the right line EH: But these two right
lines being produced, will cut one the other in the point E, and therefore
cannot concur in the same right line, whereof ordinary experience witnesses
the contrary. Fifthly, if the Earth were thus placed, it would follow by
necessary consequence, that two signs of the Zodiac diametrally opposite,
should not be seen by a Dioptricke instrument: which is against experience
which witnesses that the rising and setting of the Sun, may be seen by one
right line: also the rising in the Summer Solstice and the setting in the
Winter Solstice, to answer to each other in one right line in every Horizon:
which could not be performed unless the Earth were in the Equinoctial plain
and the Center. Let there be a^ Horizon BDCE, the Equator BC, the Axel-tree of
the world DE, the Tropicke of Cancer FG, of Capricorn HI. Let the Earth first
be placed in the Center A: here may plainly be perceived that the
Equinoctial East B, and the Equinoctial West C, answer and concur in the
right line BC: also that the East point of the Summer Solstice F, and the West
of the Winter Solstice I, to concur in the same right line FI* also the
Winter East point H, and the Summer Western point G, to answer mutually one to
the other by the same line GH. Which Appearance is confirmed of all Astronomers.
Now let the Earth be set in the Axis out of the Equatour in K: It is manifest
to sense that the contrary will always happen: For the Winter point of the
Sun setting I, by a right line drawn from the Earth will not directly answer
to the Summer point of rising F, but to the point L. Likewise the Winter point
of Sunnesetting G, will answer to the point M, and not to the Winter rising H.
Whence we have sufficiently demonstrated this second position of the Earth
beside the Center of the World to be inconvenient, and no ways to be
defended. For the third position that the earth should be so removed out of the
Center, as that it should neither be in the Equinoctial plain, nor yet in the
Axell-tree. We need produce no other confutation, then what we have said
before of the other two positions. Because out of this, the same or greater
absurdities would follow, then of the other, as any man may easily understand
out of these demonstrations we have before recited. The second demonstratiue
reason, wherewith Ptolomy would confirm the Earth to be in the Center is
drawn from the Eclipse of the Moon in this manner. If the Earth were not in
the Center of the World, there would not always happen Eclipses of the Moon,
when the two greater lights are diametrally opposed, but sometime they would
happen when these great lights are not residing in opposite places of the
Zodiac; which is false, and against experience; for all Astronomers have
witnessed, that eclipses of the Moon then only are seen, when the Sun and
the Moon stand directly opposite the one to the other: because then is the
earth directly interposed. Now let the Center of the world be A, in which if
the Earth be placed, it is manifest that it then happens when the Sun and
the Moon are exactly opposed, and the earth interposed directly, which in this
case cannot otherwise happen: But if the Earth be placed beside the Center of
the world, as in B. These things may fall out, that the two Luminaries may
reside in two opposite points of the Zodiac, and yet cause no eclipse; because
the Earth is not in the same Diameter by the which they ^^e opposed. Also the
Moon will sometimes suffer an Eclipse, when she is less distant from the
Sun then a semicircle. In a word, this eclypse is in places opposite. A
semicircle will then only be seen when the Diameter of opposition shall pass
by the Center of the Earth, and the world; all which are manifestly repugnant
to experience and observation. Out of this demonstration of Ptolomy, Clauius, a
later Astronomer in this sort draws the like conclusion. Let there be observed
two diverse eclipses of the Moon in diverse places of the Zodiac: Now because
each Eclipse hapened when the Sun and the Moon were opposed the one to the
other, in one Diameter (as Experience and Astronomicall supputations warrant)
it must necessarily be concluded that the earth should be in each of those
Diameters, and so by consequence in the common section of them both: Since then
all the Diameters of the world concur, and cut one the other in the Center:
it must needs follow that the Earth should be in the Center and midst of the
World. Diverse reasons there may be drawn to prove this assertion. But these
demonstrations of Ptolomy, as I have set them down enlarged, and explained by
our later writers, may seem sufficient, especially in a matter of few called
in question.

2 The Position of the Earth in the Center of the World may be reconciled as
well with the Diurnall motion of the Earth forementioned, as the Apparences of
the Heavens.

That this proposition may the better be understood, we are first to set
down in a Scheme, or Diagram, both the number and order of all the heavenly
Orbs, conceived according to our grounds. Secondly, we must show in particular,
how this ranging of the heavenly bodies is capable of all the motions, and apt
to satisfy the apparences. In which parts I will not too nicely descend to
Astronomicall curiosities, being too many and subtle for a Geographer to
discuss. Only I will give a taste, to satisfy such as suppose no middle way
can be trodden out betwixt Ptolomies stability of the Earth, and Copernicus his
three Motions. I might seem perhaps presumptuous beyond my knowledge, to
reject and pass by the draughts and delineations of Ptolomy, Alphonsus, and
their followers, which are commonly defended and in use: or that other of
Copernicus, supported with the authority and credit of so great an Astronomer:
or that of Tichobrahe more corrected then either, and to prefer my own, being
an Embrion, or half fashioned. To this I answer. First, that I only expose
this Scheme following to the view of the judicious, justifying it no farther
then will stand with Astronomicall observation. Secondly, I herein arrogate
little or nothing to my self; for as much as I have digested, and compounded
it out of the observations and experiments of late Astronomers, and only
collected together what they scattered; The Scheme it self is expressed in
this manner; wherein to begin from the lowest: The Center is the Globe of the
Earth, to which we have given a Diurnall motion from the West to the East upon
her own Poles, whose Revolution is made in 24 hours: About the Earth as the
Center of the whole world, the Moon is carried in her circle, which amongst
all the Planets, is found more nearly to respect the Earth, as well in place
as nature. Next succeeds the Sun, as the leader of all the Planets, which
carried round about the earth in an Annual circuit, describes the Ecliptic
circle: about the Sun as the proper Center, are all the Planets moved except
the Moon. The two immediate companions of the Sun are Venus, and Mercury,
which so compass him about, that the Earth never comes betwixt them and the
Sun. The other three Planets, as Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, howsoever they
enuiron the Sun as their proper Center, yet so as within their circles, they
comprehend the body of the Earth: The Planet Mars, because he is found by
Astronomers, to move sometimes above, sometimes under the Sun, is understood
to move in such a circle, which on the opposite side shall cut the circle of
the Sun: yet so as Mars and the Sun can never meet in one point: Forasmuch
as Mars, as well as the other Planets, is supposed to be carried in an Epicycle
about the Sun, and to keep an equal distance from him howsoever moved:
Neither is he ever found under the Sun, but about the time of the opposition,
as Astronomers observe: whence a cause has been given, why Mars should
appear greatest at the time of Opposition. These five Planets, to wit,
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, may be considered according to a
double motion: The one is proper and natural, wherein they are moved about the
Sun, as their proper Center: The other Accidental, and as it were by a
consequence of Nature, whereby in their circuit moving about the Sun as their
Center, they must of necessity, by a consequent site of the place, be carried
about the Earth. For the Sun placed in his Eclipticke line, so compasses
round the Earth, that with him he is supposed to carry the Epicy^les, wherein
these Planets are moved round a-about him. Whence we find the motion of these
Planets about the Sun, as their own Center, to be regular, but about the
Earth irregular: which proceeds from their Excentricity in respect of the
Earth. Above all the Planets we place the Firmament, or Starry Heaven, having
a very slow motion, not to be finished in many thousand years, and this
motion is on other Poles then the Poles of the world, to be sought out in or
near the Poles of the Eclipticke. This Heaven would Aristotle have to be the
first moveable, and therefore gave it a very swift motion, which is the same
which we call Diurnall, and have given to the Earth. But it seems more
consonant to nature, that the slower motions should agree to the higher bodies:
and the swifter to the lower, that there might be a proportion, betwixt the
time and the space of motion: It remains that we probably show that out of
their suppositions, the Celestial Apparences may be as well or better salued
then by the ordinary grounds. The Apparences which are most called in question,
concern either the Motion, or the Places, and Positions. All the rest are
either of less moment, or at least are thereunto reduced. Every motion which
is found or thought to be found in the Heavens, is either the Diurnall, or
Periodicke. The Diurnall Motion (as we have already showed) belongs to the
Earth, which according to our grounds is supposed to move from the West unto
the East in 24 hours, Which may answer to the Motion of the first moveable
Sphere; which according to Aristotle, is the Starry Firmament, and thought to
move from the East to the West. The Periodicke Motion, is either a slower
Motion, to be finished not under many thousand years, or else a swifter
Revolution of the Planets. This slow motion the common Astronomers would have
towfold: The one from the West to the East on the Poles of the Eclipticke: the
other a Motion (as they call it) of Trepidation, from the South point to the
North and backward again: but one slow Motion of the sixth Stars upon the
Poles of the Eclipticke, granted to the Firmament, will (for ought I see)
satisfy both. The reason why they put two distinct Motions, is, 1* Because they
have observed the Stars of Aries, Taurus, and the rest of the Zodiac, not
to be seated in the same place wherein they were anciently found; but to be
moved certain degrees from the West toward the East. Whence they would
conclude a Motion to be from the West unto the East. 2. It will stand with no
less experience, that the foresaid Stars of the Firmament have moved
themselves from the South toward the North. To pass over the r^st, the
Polestar, which in Hipparchus time was distant from the Pole about 12 Degrees,
is now observed to approach almost three degrees. These two Motions, should
they be esteemed in the account of Astronomers might seem deficient.
Notwithstanding we may probably conjecture this to be no other then one, and
the selfsame Motion upon the Poles of the Eclipticke: Whence it may come to
pass, that the fixed Stars are not only carried from West to East, but also
by reason of the obliquity of the Eclipticke line, incline more and more daily
to the Pole of the World whence they may again return. For this motion from
the West to the East, is of the primary intent of nature, wherein the Stars
move in circles parallel to the Eclipticke: But from the North to the South,
as by the necessary consequence of the position and obliquity of the Zodiac:
because it cannot be avoided, but that it should either incline to, or decline
from the Pole. If they should object (as many do) that this progress is not
proportional in respect of the time according to the calculation of the
Astronomers. We answer. 1. That this difference is so small, that it should
rather seem to be imputed to the negligence or ignorance of such as took
these observations, then to any diversity of motion. For who knows not in
these days of ours, wherein this art is arrived at a far greater perfection,
diverse Astronomers in observing the same Star at the same time, to differ much
the one from the other: Whose knowledge notwithstanding, is fortified with the
experience of the Ancients, and invention of new Instruments. What then shall
we think of those, which distant so many ages in time, and using diverse and
unlike Instruments in their observations, have differed in matters of so small
moment: chiefly in seeking out the period of this long and slow motion, which
by reason of his slownes, since the time it was known to man, has not ran
the fifteenth part of his circle. For my part, I shall rather ascribe it to the
error of their observations, then multiply Orbs without a greater cause.
First, because (as we have said) the difference is so small, and almost
insensible 2. Because we have been taught by our Astronomicall histories,
what kind of Instruments were then in use, which to later Astronomers have
been thought too rude and unfit to make such subtle observations. Lastly,
concerning the Site and Position, no less reason may be given out of our
Hypothesis, then the common way. For by placing the five Planets to run in
their Epicycles about the Sun, may we give a reason of the inequality of
their distance from the Earth, wherein an ingenious mind in our common grounds
can hardly give himself sufficient satisfaction.

3 The stability is an affection whereby the Terrestrial Sphere is firmly
settled in his proper place.

The Stability, or firmness of the Earth which we here understand, 1. No way
denies or contradicts the motion of the parts of the Earth, whereby being
separated, they return to their proper place. 2. Neither the circular
Revolution of it on her own Poles and Axell, whereof we have formerly spoken.
But either such a motion whereby the parts of it may be severed one from the
other, and so the whole Mass dissolved; or whereby the Center of the Earth may
be moved out of his proper place; or at least such as might move the Poles of
the earth from their true verticity, whereby they should not respect always in
the Heavens the same points or poles. Which kind of stability from motion we
will establish in this Theoreme.

1 The Earth is firmly seated and settled in her proper place.

This Theoreme may be proved as well by reason, as authority of holy
Scripture: From reason it is demonstrated in this manner. If the Earth should
not be settled in her proper place, this would of necessity happen; either by
dissolution and separation of the parts one from the other: or by removing the
poles out of their fixed places: or else by motion of the Center from one place
to the other. The first cannot be admitted; because (as we have before taught
in the second Chapter of this book) All Terrestrial Bodies are endowed with
an inclination or ponderosity to approach as near as they can to the center of
the Earth; so that by this coherency and conformity, the whole earth is
ransomed from any such mutability. Neither can the whole Sphere be dissolved
without an especial miracle: And if so it should happen, the parts would
return again, and conform themselves to compose the same Sphere. Likewise
the second way; The earth cannot loose her stability, because (as we have
shown in our former Chapter) the earth has her two Poles magneticall made
fast unto the Poles of the world, as if they were bound firmly to two great
pillars, never to be shaken. Finally, The Center of the Earth cannot be moved
out of his place any wise, because, as we have demonstrated in the Chapter
before, without the disturbance and inuersion of the whole frame of Nature the
Earth can have no other place then the Center or midst of the whole world.
Some have alleged as an argument that principle of Aristotle: That one simple
Body can have but one simple Motion: and therefore the earth challenging to it
self a right motion to the Center, cannot also have a circular or round
motion, and so of necessity must rest unmoved in her proper place. But this
reason, as I have showed, is weak to prove this assertion. First, because this
principle of Aristotle is not grounded on certainty, but contradicts
experience, as I have elsewhere showed. 2. This right motion to the Center is
not to be ascribed to the whole, as the immediate subject, but to the parts of
it separated from the whole; so that nothing will hinder, but that the whole
Globe may have a motion proper to it self on his own Poles. But to let this
reason pass as weak; all those arguments alleged by the common Astronomers,
and Philosophers against the circular motion of the Earth prove indeed no other
matter then this stability which we establish: but if racked any farther come
short to satisfy. For authority of Scripture, many places are urged to prove
this stability; whereof we have a pregnant place in 104 Psalm, wherein David
magnifying the Creator, says That he laid the foundation of the Earth so
sure, that it should not be moved at any time: To which may be added many other
Texts, but that I hold this one sufficient in a matter which few men call in
question. We are in the third place to treat of the proportion of the Earth,
with the heavenly bodies.

4 The Proportion is that wherein the quantity of the Terrestrial Globe is
compared with the quantity of the Heavens.

We must here remember a distinction before touched, that the Globe of the
Earth may be considered two ways; either Absolutely in it self, or
Comparatively in respect of the heavenly Bodies. If we consider it absolutely
in it self, we shall find that the Earth has a vast and huge magnitude, and
not any ways to be compared to a point; because it is a body, and therefore
subject to division, whereas a point is conceived as an indivisible
signeadmitting no parts at all. S^condly, because the magnitude of the Earth
many times taken, will measure the greatness of the Heavens, as we may
observe by Astronomers who measure the magnitude of the greatest Stars by
Diameters and Semidiameters of the Earth: whereas a point of it being a
thousand times multiplied, will never beget a magnitude or measure of the
quantity of any Body. Thirdly, the Stars are not as mere points in respect
of their Orbs, because they sensibly are seen, as parts of these Orbs. But the
Earth is greater then some of the lower Stars, as the Moon: Whence we may
with good grounds auerre, that if a man were placed in the Moon, he might
behold the Earth far greater then the Moon being observed by us in the Earth.
Wherefore no man can deny but the Earth in it self has a great vastness. But
if we consider this greatness in respect of the Heavens, we shall find this
vast greatness to shrink almost into nothing, and become as a mere point
without sensible magnitude. But this is not altogether general without
limitation; because the heavenly bodies are distinguished into the higher and
greater, such as are the Firmament with the four higher Planets, such as are
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and the Sun: or the lower and lesser, such as are
Venus, Mercurius, and the Moon, which difference in place and greatness
admits a great diversity in this proportion, as we shall show in these two
Theoremes.

1. The Earthly Globe compared in quantity with the Firmament and superior
Orbs of the planets, has no sensible magnitude.

This Proposition is supported not only by the authority of many and grave
Authors, as Aristotle, Ptolomy, Pliny, Alphragan, and others: but by diverse
strong reasons drawn from experience and observation of Astronomers. The first
argument shall be this which is most popular. The Sun and many other Stars
in the Firmament, are found out by Astronomicall Instruments to be manifold
greater then the Globe of the Earth: yet appear they in respect of the heavens
but as a little point or portion. Then must the Earth, being in comparison far
lesser, be deuoyd of all sensible magnitude or proportion. Secondly, if the
Earth had any notable quantity in respect of the Heaven, then must the Diameter
of the earth have as great a quantity in respect of the Diameter of the Sky;
for there is the same proportion of the Diameters which the circumferences have
one to the other, as is demonstrated in Geometry. Now if the Diameter of the
Earth has any notable magnitude in comparison of the Diameter of the Sky,
then the Stars which be over our heads, be nearer unto us by a notable
quantity, then when they be either in the East or West. For it must needs
follow that the Stars placed in the vertical point, are nearer by the
Semidiameter of the Earth, then when they are either in the Eastern or
Western point, as we see in ^his figure here set down ACDB, wherein I make E
to be the Center of the Earth, AEB the true Horizon, and OF the Semidiameter of
the earth. Now if the Semidiameter FE have any sensible proportion, then must G
the vertical point be nearer to F. then either A or B. supposed to be the
East and west points; because EA, or EB, are the whole Semidiameter of the
Celestial circle, whereof FG is only a part. But contrariwise there is no such
diversity perceived in the magnitude of the Stars, but that they appear
still to be of one and the same greatness, except by accidental
interposition of vapors and gross bodies: wherefore it must of necessity
follow, that their distance is all one in all parts of the Sky, and by
consequence the Semidiameter of the earth has no sensible diversity in
distance. Thirdly, hence would arise another reason no less forcible then
this; that if the Semidiameter of the Earth had any comparison or proportion to
the Semidiameter of the Sky, the Horizon that we have on the upper part of the
earth, should not divide the Sky into two equal parts; for as much as the
part which is couched under the Horizon, would always be greater, and the
other lesser, as in our former Diagramme: if OF have a notable quantity in
compa^ison of EA: then will the line CFD, being the Horizon on the top of the
earth, differ notably from the line AEB, being the Diameter of the World, and
the Horizon to the Center of the Earth: and so shall not the Horizon CFD,
divide the world into two equal parts, but the upper part shall always be
lesser then the lower, which crosses ordinary experience: for we may see in
long winter nights, that those Stars which are in the East Horizon, in the
beginning of the night, will be in the West at the end of twelve hours: and
contrariwise, those Stars which did set in the West, when those others did rise
in the East, shall rise again when the other shall set. Fourthly if the earth
had any sensible greatness in respect of the Heavens, then were it impossible
for any Sun Dial to be regular and observe due proportion. For we see the
shadows to move as duly and orderly about the Center of Dials and such
instruments, as if their Center were the very Center of the world: which could
never happen if these two Centers should differ notably in respect of the
Sphere of the Sun: to express it the better we will set this Figure, which
represents the three notable circles in a Dial, which are described by the
course of the Sun in three notable places of the Zodiac, to wit, the two
Tropicks, and the Equinoctial. Herein the uttermost arch BLC represents the
Tropicke of Capricorn, and is described no greater then the quarter of a
circle, because the Sun placed in the Sign, shines unto us but six hours. The
Equinoctial is set as half a circle, because the Sun being in it, appears
unto us 12 hours, and is here noted out by EIF. The Tropicke of Cancer
contains 3 quarters of a Circle, because when the Sun is in it, there are
eighteen hours from Sunrising to Sunset: and that circle is GHK. The Center
of the Dial is A, and the Style which gives the shadow DA, whose top being D,
does describe those portions of circles with such exactness, as if the Dial
were set in the very Center of the Earth, and the distinction of the hours
shows it self no otherwise then if the Center of the Dial were the same with
the Center of the world. To these arguments I may add, that if there should
be a sensible greatness of the earth in respect of these superior Orbs,
either all or most of these absurdities would arise which follow their
opinions, who place the Earth out of the Ce^ter of the World, which we have
before treated of.

2 The Terrestrial Globe compared with the inferior Orbs has a sensible
magnitude.

Although the whole Earth compared with the Firmament and superior Orbs of the
Planets, seem no otherwise then a point: yet from this we must except the
Orbs of the lower Planets Venus, Mercury, but especially the Moon: Who are
found by observations of diverse skillful Astronomers to have a sensible and
notable greatness in respect of the earth, whereof a manifest argument may be
drawn from the Parallax or variation of the sight: wherein our observations of
the same Star at diverse places are not the same, though at the same time:
neither will such a Star to both places seem in the same point of the
Heavens; which could not possibly be, except we admit a sensible difference
betwixt the Rational and Sensible Horizon; and so grant the Earth, in respect
of such Orbs, some quantity and greatness. This diversity of Aspect, which
they call the Parallax may be seen in this Figure: let A be the Center of the
Earth, L the Moon, or other Star to be observed, EGD, the Firmament or Orb
of the fixed Stars: suppose then the eye to be in the fixed point M of the
sensible Horizon XMY the said Planet will appear in the point of the Firmament
S, according to Opticall principles, whereby all things are said to be seen in
the place directly opposite. Supposing again the Eye to be in the point P of
another sensible Horizon RPQ, the Star L will no doubt appear in the
opposite point T. Neither of which meets with the Star in the right place.
For imagining the Eye to be placed in the Center A, the place of the Star
would be V, which is his true place. These differences of sight could find no
place if the Earth were as a mere point and challenged no sensible Magnitude,
in respect of these inferior Planets: and yet experience of Astronomers has
sufficiently confirmed it. But this being a point very curious, and
appertaining to Astronomy, I leave it to their farther industry, whose
profession it undergoes.

CHAP. VI. Of the Circles of the Terrestrial Sphere.
1 ALL the properties which agree by Nature to the Terrestrial Globe, we have
handled. Here we are in the next place to treat of such, as agree by virtue of
our understanding: Of this sort are all the Circles conceived to be in the
Terrestrial Globe.

2 A Terrestrial Circle is a round line conceived in the face of the
Terrestrial Globe, dividing it into two parts.

A Circle is considered two manner of ways: either abstracted from this or
that sensible matter, in which sort it is supposed to be taught in Geometry;
to which properly appertains the knowledge of the Fabric and Measure of all
Magnitudes, especially of this, being amongst all, the most perfect and exact:
Or else a circle is considered so far forth as it has some ground in the
Nature of the Earth, at least by application of the Celestial Globe, and so it
comes into the consideration of Geography. For conclusions demonstrated and
proved in Geometry, are here to be admitted as principles supposed not
demonstrated a new: which Logic, if Clauius, Blancanus, and other such
writers had well learned, they would not have stuffed out their work with such
Heterogeneall mixtures, but have reduced every thing to his proper seat and
science. A circle as well by the Geographer as Astronomer is divided into four
quadrants, each quadrant into 90 degrees, all which make up 360. So that a
degree is the 360 part of a Circle, which I only mention as being of chiefest
use with us, yet supposed to be handled and taught in a higher science.

1 A circle though imaginary in it self, has his ground in the Nature of the
Earthly Sphere.

As in Logic men have invented certain Intentionall Notions, serving as so
many instruments to direct and regulate our understanding in the apprehension
of things: So in Cosmographie can there not be wanting such imaginary signs
and circles to confirm and aid our fantasy. And as in Logic such Notions
in themselves are merely imaginary and intentionall, yet may be termed real,
so far forth as they are grounded in the things themselves; so may we speak
of these circles conceived in the face of the Terrene Globe: which we are not
to conceive to be fictious and imaginary, as if they had no ground at all in
nature. For although there be no such circles painted on the face of the
Earth, as we find in an artificial Sphere: yet must we of necessity
conceive such real respects to be in the Earth it self: as when a Ship
sails over the Ocean, it cannot be said to leave behind any visible mark or
Character in the surface of the water; yet in regard it made a real passage,
it will leave a line conceiuable, signing out unto us the true passage. It is a
matter which has not a little troubled Cosmographers, to find out the
immediate and true subject or ground of these circles; whether they should be
immediately taken from the earth, or else in the Heavens. The ancient
Cosmographers have acknowledged no other ground of these Circles; then the
congruity and application of the celestial Globe, and his parts with the parts
of the Earth: but our Magneticall Philosophers more nearly searching into the
nature of the Earthly Sphere have found these Circles all (except the Horizon)
to wit, the Meridians, and Parallells, to be immediately grounded in the Earth
it self: whose opinion we cannot reject, as being supported by experimental
demonstration, as we shall show in particular.

2 The distinction of a circle into any certain Number of parts, has no
certain ground in the Nature of the earthly Sphere, but only inconueniency;
leaving our judgments free, to take such a Number as may best serve our
purpose.

Some Astronomers more curious then wise, have gone about to seek a ground of
this distinction of a circle into 360 parts out of the Suns course in the
Zodiac, a Circle (say they) by the opening of the Compass, being described
in a plain, is divided into six equal parts. Now because the Sun being the
rule and measure of all perfect motions, passes through one sixth part in 60
days, the whole Circle was divided into 360, for 60 multiplied by 6, will
produce that number. But this reason seems to infer nothing concerning any
natural ground, that this distinction shall find in the Earth, though it may
serve as an argument of Conueniency, the number 360 being fittest for that
calculation. Another reason very like the former, is drawn from the
conjunction of the Sun with the Moon, which happens 12 times in a year: and
because from each conjunction to that which follows are spent 30 days; Hence
it is that the Zodiac is first divided into 12 parts, which multiplied by 30
will produce 360. This reason likewise proves only thus much, that it is the
fittest number to calculate the Motion of the Sun in his Eclipticke: Not that
this division has any ground in Nature more then other* because being a
continuate quantity, according to Philosophy, it may suffer infinite divisions:
for it was in the beginning left free to Cosmographers, to choose what number
they pleased to express the parts or sections of a Circle: which they took
(as it seems) not merely from the motion of the Sun, but from their
conueniency, and commodity, finding this number most commodious for the
distinction of every Circle. The reason was, because no number could be found,
which suffered more parts and divisions then this. For as much as in 60,
whereof 360 by multiplication is produced, has exactly these parts
1.2.3.4.5.6.10.12.15.20.30. Likewise 360 has exactly
1.2.3.4.5.6.8.9.10.12.15.18.20.24.30.36.40.46.60.72.90.120.180. Of all which
parts there is so great use in Astronomy and many times in Geography, that
without it there would be small exactness. For as we see a yard measure would
little steed the Mercer or Clothier, except it were again divided into smaller
parts: so falls it out in the account of the Cosmographer.

3* Of the Terrestrial Circles, some are Absolute, some Relative: the Absolute
are such as are assigned without any respect to our sight; of which sort are
the Meridians and Parallells.

4. The Meridian is a circle drawn by the Poles of the world and the vertical
point of the place.

The Meridian Circle is so called of Astronomers; because when the Sun
(according to their suppositions) by the motion of the first moveable comes
into this Circle, it makes midday: and then has been running his course from
his rising to arrive there just so long as he shall be moving from thence to
the place of his setting. In this Meridian are placed the two Poles of the
Equator, which are the same with the Poles of the world; in this also are the
vertical point and the point opposite unto it, termed the Poles of the
Horizon, whereof we shall speak hereafter. So that so many Meridians are
imagined to be in the Earth, as there are vertical points: for howsoever we see
not many Meridians painted on the face of the artificial Globe, yet must there
be so many imagined in the real Earth as Zenithes and Horizons: so that it is
impossible for a man to move never so little from East to West, without
changing his Meridian: yet for more order sake have the Cosmographers reduced
the number of Meridians to half the number of the degrees in a Circle, to wit,
to 180, that every Meridian cutting the Equator, and other Parallels in two
opposite places, should answer to two degrees in the same Circle. By which it
appears, that every Meridian diuides the Terrene Globe in two halfes, whereof
the one is respectively termed of the East, the other of the West. But to
avoid all ambiguity of speech, we ought to consider that a Meridian is twofold;
either the true Meridian, or Magneticall Meridian. The true Meridian,
ordinarily so called, is that which directly passes by the Poles of the World;
of which we here treat, which indeed (as we shall show) is the only true
magneticall Meridian. But that which some have falsely called the Magneticall
Meridian, is that which runs by the Poles of the Magneticall Variation, and
much differs from the true; because (as we have taught) the variation is
diverse according to the diversity of place, and therefore cannot answer in any
certain proportion to the Poles of the Terrene Globe. The true Meridian
Circle, as it has manifold use in Astronomy, namely to distinguish midday,
and midnight, to measure the rising and setting of the Stars, etc. matters
not to be neglected of Geographers; so has it a more special use in
Geography: to design the longitudes and latitudes of the places, with their
distances, with many other matters treated of hereafter.

5* Concerning the Meridian circle we are to know two things. The Invention of
it, and the Distinction: The invention is whereby we are taught to find out
the true Meridian in any place assigned.

6* The Invention of the Meridian is again twofold: the one more Accurate,
which is either Astronomicall or Magneticall, the other Popular; the
Astronomicall way is performed by observing the celestial motion.

The Meridian may be found out the Astronomicall way in diverse manners by
Instruments devised for this purpose by ingenious Artificers, whereof some are
described by Gemma Frisius in his Cosmographie. But to avoid the cost of
curious Instruments, I will set down our way, depending on this Theoreme.

1 If two several Sunne-shadowes be observed, the one in the fore-noone, the
other in the afternoon of the same day exactly to touch with their ends, the
Circumference of the same circle described in a Plain, Parallel to the plain
of the Horizon: The line from the Center equally dividing the Arch of that
Circle betwixt the two shadows, will be the true Meridian circle for that
place.

This Theoreme, howsoever consisting of many parts, is notwithstanding easy
enough to be understood, being explayned by an ocular demonstration. Let there
be gotten a platform of wood or metal, and placed euenly that it may lie
parallel with the plain of the Horizon: In this plain let there be
described diverse circles from the same Center E. In this Center let there be
raised a Gnomon OF to right angles, so that the top of this Gnomon F, shall
every where be equally distant from the circumference of each circle described
in the plain, which may easily be known, because if it be equally distant
from any three points of any circles Circumference, it will also be equally
distant from all the rest alike, as Clauius has taught in the 4 of his
Gnomonicks. This platform being thus ordered let the shadow of the Gnomon be
observed sometimes before Noone, until such time as it exactly shall touch the
circumference of one of those circles, as in EG. Again in the Afternoon, let
the shadow be observed, till with his end it meet the circumference of the
same circle, as in EH, which will happen so many hours afternoon, as the
other before Noone. These two points G and H, being diligently observed, let
the Arch of the Circle GH be divided into two halfes with a line drawn from
the Center E, which shall be ED. This line ED will be the true Meridian for
that place, on which when the shadow of the gnomon shall happen to fall, we
may assure our selves that it is full Noone.

7 The Magneticall Invention is performed by the Magneticall Directory Needle.

This way is subject to much error, and not so certain as the former, because
(as we have showed before) there are found very few places which admit not
some of Variation: yet because it may be profitable to such, who have not the
Command always of the Sun, or sight of the Stars, I will insert this
Theoreme.

1 The Line wherein the Directory needle is directed from North to South, is
the Meridian for the place.

This may be showed in any Mariners Compass, or (...) Sunne-Dyall, whose
needle is magnetically touched. For b^^ing set euenly parallel to the plain
of the Horizon, it will show by the needle, the Miridian for that place in
every vertical point on the earth. For example in the Sea-Compasse in the next
page, experience will witness in every Region of the Earth, that the one point
signed out by the Lilly, will always turn to the North; the other opposite
part, will turn it self to the South; which two parts being joined together
by a right Line will show the Meridian for ^^at place: The Meridian (I say) not
always the true; for this Invention taken from the Magnet is not so exact as
the Astronomicall: for as much as few or no places are found, wherein the
Magneticall Needle admits not a Variation from the true points of North and
South: Nevertheless, this way is very necessary to be known: for as much as
the Sun and Stars are not always to be seen; at least in such place and
manner as may favor exactness of observation: Hence may be demonstrated in
particulars, what we observed before in general in our Magneticall Treatise
that the Circles of the Globe are not mere Imaginary Fictions, or bare
Respects, growing out of the Application of Celestial bodies (as some have
thought them) but grounded on the Magneticall Disposition of the Terrestrial
Globe.

8 Beside the Astronomicall and Magneticall Invention of the Meridian, there is
another way more popular, but less exact, which is without any observation of
the Heavens, or the Magnets operation.

Of the Invention of the Meridian circle, the true and exact knowledge (as we
have showed) is endebted to heavenly observation, or Magneticall experiment.
Nevertheless Nature is not so barren, but she has pointed out to an
industrious observation, some marks and foote-steps in other inferior bodies,
for the finding out of this profitable circle. Which ways, howsoever of less
Account then the other, and therefore of less use, are notwithstanding
pleasant to understand: because nothing delights more an ingenious mind, then
the contemplation of Gods working, in and by his creatures, which men usually
term Nature. To make a particular search into all Planets, Stones, Metals,
and other such Bodies, were to go too far out of my way, without a Guide. I
will give one only Instance of Trees, whereof I will insert this Problem.

1 By the Incision of a Tree, to find out the Meridian.

To perform this Problem, let there be chosen out some Tree in an open free
field, far from walls or other obstacles; in such a place as it has been
on either side freely enlightened and heated by the Sunnebeames: let the Trunk
of this Tree be very right and sound: let this Trunk be cut off by the
midst, in such sort that the section be Parallel to the Horizon, and the
vnder-part of the Trunk be left to stand in his former Natural situation:
Now the Section on the top of it being well plained, will as in a plain
discover diverse circles, which are Excentricke and not drawn from the same
Center, but on the one side nearer together; on the other further off: That
part then which shows the circles thicker and nearer together, points out the
North: The other wherein the circles are wider and further off, the one from
the other, designs out the South-point: betwixt both which if a right line be
drawn, it will be the Meridian for that place. Which experiment Blan^anus (as
he writes) tried in a Plume-Tree, but gives no reason for it. The cause I take
to be no other then the extension and diffusion of the sap or moisture, by
the heat of the Sun: which is more on the South Side then the North-side:
for as much as the Sun in our clime respects us on the South, never on the
North. Hence is it, that the circles which are nothing else but the
excrescences of the moisture, being more rarefied on the South Side, and
therefore requiring a greater place, are found to be greater.

9 Having showed the Invention, we are in the next place to treat of the
Distinction of these Meridian circles: A Meridian therefore is termed either
First or Common.

The distinction of Meridians into First and Common, has no footsteps in
Nature, but is a mere arbitrary Imposition of ancient Cosmographers. For no
reason besides Conueniency can be shown, why one Meridian should be called
First rather then another: yet cannot this Distinction be wanting to a
Geographer, for as much as some settled bound must be set, from which to begin
our account of Longitudes.

10 The first Meridian is that from which we begin to number the Longitude of
the Earth, from West to the East. In respect of which all the rest may be
called common or less notable.

The ancient Cosmographers, amongst whom Ptolomy was the chief, have set the
first Meridian in the Fortunate Islands, from whence they began their account,
passing Eastward through Europe and Africa, and so through Asia, to the
uttermost parts of India, until they returned again to the first Meridian,
passing through the Fortunate Islands; Some have doubted whether these Islands
called by Ptolomy the Fortunate Islands, be the same with the Canaries; because
(as our Countreyman Mr Hues has observed) the Latitude given by Ptolomy to the
Fortunate Islands, agrees not exactly to the Canaries; but rather to the Islands
of Cape-Verde. Notwithstanding this observation, I rather stick to the common
opinion, thinking it no unlike matter, that Ptolomy dwelling far Eastward, and
trusting to other men's observations, should err in this, as well as other
matters. The reason why the first Meridian should be placed here, rather then
elsewhere, is thought by some to be; because the Ancients supposed two
Magneticall Poles in the Earth, which should be the cause of the Variation of
the Compass. Now because in the Canary Islands, was found no Variation at all,
they thought it to be the place where the Magneticall and the true Meridian
should concur, as wherein were both the Poles, of the World, and of the
Lodestone: which made them to make it the first Meridian: But this reason I
take to be unlikely; because as I find it observed by latter Writers, in the
Canary Islands themselves there is found a Variation of the Compass, although
very little: the reason whereof we have showed to be because it is the
midst betwixt two great Continents, to wit, the one of Europe and Africa, the
other of America. Whose magneticall temper being almost equal, will not suffer
the magneticall Needle to move more one way then another: Moreover, I am
certainly persuaded (as far as I can gather) that this placing of the First
Meridian was appointed here before any certainty was known of the Variation of
the Compass. The more probable conjecture therefore is that Ptolomy here
placed the First Meridian, because it was the uttermost verge of land toward
the West, then discovered, never dreaming of a Western world afterward
detected and brought to light by Christopher Calumbus and Americus Vesputius.
Some of the latter Geographers striving to be more exact, have placed the
First Meridian in their Mappes out of the Canaries in the Islands of the Azores
called S. Michaels Island. So that the first Meridian of Ptolomy differs from
the place of these latter Cosmographers about 9 degrees: which is diligently to
be noted of such as begin the Science; because this variety not perceived,
will breed great error and confusion: yet is not the first of Ptolomy out of
use, but retained of many good Geographers. Every other Meridian in respect of
this, may be called Common, or less notable, because this is most remarkable:
yet may the rest compared amongst themselves be ranged in a certain order, as
the Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, and so along till we come again to the
First, being in all reduced to the number of 180, answering to 360 Degrees as
we have taught. So much for the Meridians.

11 The Parallels are equidistant Circles passing from the East to the West
directly.

I have defined the Parallel Circles in a larger sense then former Geographers
usually have taken it in: as willing under this general name, not only to
include the Parallels commonly so called, but also the Equatour: because I see
no reason why the Equatour being every where equidistant from each other
Circle, should not suffer this acception. The common sort of Cosmographers,
under this name, would only comprize the minor Circles, which are conceived to
be equally distant and correspondent to the Equinoctial Circle, so that all
should be so called in respect of the Equatour, to whom they are said to
answer, not in site and position; for as much as they decline from the middle
of the Earth to the North and South: but in Comparison and Proportion; for as
the Equatour is drawn from East to West, and diuides the whole Sphere of the
Earth into the North and South Hemispheares: So the other also divide the Globe
of the Earth, though not into two equal parts as the Equatour, but unequal.
These Parallels many ways are distingushed from the Meridians: first, because
the Meridians are drawn directly from North to South: but the Parallels from
East to West. Secondly, the Meridians, how many soever they are imagined to
be, concur and meet all in the Poles of the Earth: whereas the Parallels
howsoever drawn out at length, will never concur or meet in any point.
Whence it must needs follow that all Parallels and Meridians in the Globe must
cut one the other, and make right angles. These Parallels although infinite in
number, may be in the Sphere reduced to the number of the Meridians, because
they are drawn through the opposite points and degrees of the Meridian
Semicircle, which would make up the number of 180: but yet for Conueniency
they have not painted so many in the face of the Artificial Sphere; for as
much as so many lines and circles might beget Confusion. Wherefore Ptolomy and
the Ancients have distinguished the Parallels on both sides the Equator, North
and South, with such a Distance, that where the day should increase one quarter
of an hour, a new Parallel should be placed. So that the longest day of one
Parallel should surpass the longest day of another, for one quarter of an
hour. By which appears that the Parallels are not of one greatness, but by
how much nearer the Pole they are placed; so much less are they; and so much
greater by how much farther off from the Poles, and nearest the Equatour. These
Circles are of great use in Geographie, as to distinguish the Zone: Climats,
and Latitudes of Regions, to show the Elevation of the Pole, and to design out
the length and shortness of the day in any part of the Earth.

12 A Parallel Circle is of two sorts; either greater or lesser: The greater
is the Equatour or equinoctial Circle.

13 The Equatour is the greatest of the Parallels, passing through the midst
of the Earth, and exactly dividing them from the Poles into two equal halfes
or Hemispheares whereof the one is North, the other South.

This Circle is called the Equatour or Equinoctial of Astronomers; because,
that when the Sun passes under it, as upon the 11 of March, and the 13 of
September, it makes the Day and Night equal. This Circle of Astronomers is
esteemed the most notable, being the measure of the Diurnall and most regular
Motions* The La^ines have taken the name and appellation of this Circle from
the Day, as the Greeks from the Night: Wherein the Sense is no way varyed;
because the equality of the Day argues the like equality of the Night. The two
Poles of the Circle, are the same with the Poles of the Universal Earth: to
wit, the Articke or North Pole, and the Antarticke and Southern Pole: whereof
the former is always conspicuous in our Horizon, the other lies couched and
hid from our Sight. It is called the Articke-pole from the Constellation of
the little Bear in the Heavens, near to the which it is situated: in
opposition to the which the other is called Antarticke. It has manifold use in
Astronomy, copiously by Astronomers: And no less in Geography: for without
this Equinoctial Circle, no Description of the Earth can be absolute and
perfect, neither any City or Place. in the Terrestrial Globe or Map set in
his due and proper place. This Equinoctial Circle in regard of the Earth,
passes through the middle-most part almost of Africa, by Ethiopia, America,
and Taprobana: So that it exactly divides the Globe of the Earth into two
halfes, the Northern and Southern Hemispheares; so that these people which
dwell under the Equatour are said to inhabit the middle of the world, because
they incline neither to the North, nor to the South: having so much distance
from the Articke Antarticke-Pole of the Earth. Moreover, by this Circle (as we
will declare hereafter) are noted out unto us the East and West part of the
Sphere, no way to be neglected of Geographers.

1 Concerning the Equatour, two things are to be observed: either the
Invention, or the Site and Position: The Invention is either Astronomicall or
Magneticall. The Astronomicall according to these Rules.

1 The Meridian being found out, to find the Equator.



This is easily performed by the help of the former Figure: for therein the
Meridian line being found out (as we have showed) let there be drawn by the
Center E of that Circle, the line AC, making right Angles with the said
Meridian: which line AC will be the true Equatour, and will point out unto us
the true East and West: as A the East and C the West. Whence it appears that
the two lines, to wit, of the Equatour and the Meridian do divide and cut the
whole Horizon into two equal Quadrants.

2 Without the help of the Meridian to find out the Equatour.

In the time of either Equinoctial in some Horizontall plain, in the
Sunshine, let there be erected a Gnomon: then in the day time, let there
be noted all the points by which the end or top of the shadow has passed: for
all those points in the time of Equinoctial, are in a right line; because then
the end of the shadow is carried in a line in the time of the Equinox in a
Herizontall plain: This line will be the true Equinoctiall-line: the cause is
given by Clauius in Gnomonicis. lib. 1. prop. 1. Corollar. 2. which depending
on many Geometrical and Astronomicall principles, as too far from my purpose,
I omit.

15 The Magneticall invention of the Equatour, is wrought by the Magneticall
Inclinatory Needle, according to this Proposition.

1 Wheresoever at any place of the Terrestrial Sphere, the Inclinatory Needle
shall conform it self in a Parallell-wise, to the Axell of the Earth, through
that place passes the Equinoctial Line.

As to find out the Meridian of any place, we are to use the help of the
Directory Needle: so to the finding out of the Equatour, and Parallels, the
Inclinatory Needle is most necessary: because the former respects the
Magneticall Motion of Direction, the latter of Declination: Now wheresoever we
shall see the Needle to conform it self in such sort as it may lie Parallel
with the Axell of the Earth, we may assure our selves that such a place is
under the Equinoctial Circle: The reason whereof, we have given in our 3
Chapter out of the Co^uertible nature of the Magnet, and here needs no
repetition: only we will insert this one figure wherein the line CD drawn
through the Centers of two Inclinatory Needles, lying Parallel to the Axell of
the Earth, A. B. will express this Equinoctial line which we here seek. For
the Magneticall Inclinatory Needle being set in a Frame or Ring made for such a
purpose, will under the Equator respect one Pole no more then another: but lie
level with the Plain of the Horizon: as under the Poles it will make right
Angles with the Plain of the Horizon. In the middle spaces betwitxt the
Equatour and the Poles, it will conform it self in such sort, as it makes
certain Angles with the Axell of the Earth, though not equal, yet
proportional to the Latitude; out of which an ingenious Artificer may deduce
the Parallels of any place, without any observations of the Heavens: as is
taught by Instruments invented by Gilbert, Ridley, and diverse others which have
undertaken this subject.

16 Of the Invention of the Equatour we have spoken: In the site we ought to
consider the placing of the Equator in respect of the world.

1 The Equatour is an immovable Circle, whose Poles never vary from the ^ixt
Poles of the world.

Whether the Poles of the Equator have been any times varied from the Poles of
the world, is a controversy which has exercised the greatest wits: Joseph
Scaliger trusting (as it seems) more to ancient History then Modern
experiment, seems in two Epistles not only to make a doubt, whether the Poles
of the Equatour have continued the same with the Poles of the world; but
super^iliously (as the manner of most critics is) rather out of conjecture
then Reason, to tax the common opinion of manifest error and absurdity. The
ground and original of this doubt grows out of the observation of the fixed
Stars, which have since the Times of the Ancients, been found to be moved out
of their places, or at least not to retain the same points in the Period of
the Suns Motion. The chiefest Instances are taken from the stars in the
Horns of Aries, which in Hyparchus time, which lived above 60 years before
Ptolomy, were observed to be not much distant from the Equinoxe, and before
him in the very point it self; but in our time removed about 28 Degrees off:
Also it is observed in the Cynosure or Pole Star, that in Hyparchus time it was
distant from the Pole about 12 Degrees, which we find in our time to be
scarce 3 Degrees distant. To salve this Appearance, Ptolomy invented a slow
motion of the Starry Heaven or Firmament, whereby the Fixed stars might be
removed farther off from the Equinoctial points in the Eclipticke, whence of a
consequence the Pole-starre should not keep the same position in respect of the
Pole it self, but vary his site according to the Motion: which opinion has a
long time passed without contradiction; till Copernicus out of new grounds
sought for this Motion in the Earth, to which he assigned no less then three
Motions. Since Copernicus, arose Joseph Scaliger, who contradicting the common
received grounds, and yet for ought I see, not trusting to the suppositions of
Copernicus, would bring in another opinion: to wit, that the Stars of the
Firm^ment are not moved from the point of the Equinoxe, but rather that the
point is carried away from the stars. The decision of this point I dare not
undertake, better becoming the learned and industrious endeauours of our
worthy Professors, M. Doctor Bainbrigge, and M. Henry Brigges, as best
suiting with their Learning and Profession: Ipse semipaganus, ad sacra vatum
carmen offero nostrum. Nevertheless as a Learner, for mine own satisfaction,
I would willingly enter a little into conference with this great and admired
Oracle Joseph Scaliger, to sound the certainty of his grounds. That the
Pole-starre (says he) was so far distant from the Pole as 12 Degrees, was no
true observation, but the error of Hyparchus, who afterward by his authority
deceived Ptolomy; and He, Posterity. The Reasons he alleged are, 1 Because
Eudoxus which was more ancient then Hyparchus, observed the same star to be in
no other place, then where now it is. 2 Because that greater light of
Astronomy, Copernicus perceiving the Equinoxes and Solstitiall points to be
moved, was enforced to invent other grounds; but because his demonstrations
depended only on the Apparences, he sought out this effect in the motion of
the Earth. If it were manners to oppose so great a Scholar as Joseph Scaliger,
I would ask a few questions, why we should not credit the observations of
Hyparchus, Ptolomy, and all posterity, as well as of Eudoxus: since Antiquity
without consent and approbation, is no great argument of truth. Nevertheless
if the matter be well examined, we shall perhaps find Antiquity to be more
firm on our side. The same reason (as I take it) may be given for the stars in
the Horns of Aries, as of the Pole-starre, because all the fixt-starres, by
the consent of all, are imagined to keep the same uniform site among
themselves in such sort, as the varying of some would disorder all the rest: at
least argue the like variety or change of all. Now to prove the stars of Aries
to have been varyed, many of the Ancients (as Master Hues has observed)
living in diverse times, have confirmed. The first star of Aries, which in the
time of Meto Atticus, was observed in the Vernall Intersection, in the time of
Thales Milesius was before it 2 Degrees; in Tymocharis age it was after it 2
Degrees 24 Minutes: In Hipparchus time 4 Degrees, 40 Minutes; in Abbumazars 17
Degrees, 50 Minutes; in Albarens 18 Degrees, 10 Minutes; in Arzachels 19 Degrees.
37 Min. in Alphonsus his time 23 Degrees. 48 Min In the time of Copernicus, and
Rheticus, 27 Degrees, 21. Min. In our time about 28. Against all these
Testimonies, if we should oppose the Testimony of Eudoxus and Sca^iger, we
should be thought very partial to prefer them before the consent of
Antiquity: Eudoxus though very Ancient, being but one, and the other one of the
last. If any should object, that Eudoxus spoke only of the Pole-starre, and
not of the stars, in the horns of Aries; I answer, as before, that the same
reason is to be given of them both; For as much, as if the Pole-starre in
Eudozus time moved in a Parallel, Equidistant from the Pole of the Equatour
(which he seems to contend) then must also the stars of Aries, which were
found once to be in the point of the vernall Equinoxe, move always in the
Equinoctial circle, and never vary from it; which is contrary to all the
Testimonies before alleged. Secondly, where he says, that Copernicus
perceiving this error, left a base discovery, without any Demonstration, except
only (...), I would know how Joseph Scaliger by any other means came to know
it? I always supposed it a principle amongst Mathematicians, that the (...)
had been the surest ground of Mathematical Demonstration: for every reason
which can be alleged, must of necessity be grounded on mere conjecture, as
forged in a man's brain without any observation of Nature; or else suggested
unto us from the things themselves. How little dependency is on the Former, let
every man judge: where it is as easy for every man to deny, as affirm; and
such fancies are better reserved in the brain, wherein they were first
hatched, then be suffered to proceed further. If we derive our Argument (as
we ought to do) from the footsteppes of Nature; we must draw it either from
the Form it self, or from some effect or propriety arising from it: The
former is impossible I may well say in any thing; because the first form and
nature, no ways discouers it self to our understanding, but by the apparent
Accidents: much less can this be hoped for in the Heavens, being as far
distant from us in space, as Nature. If then we are left only to the later,
what other ground can we have of our Argumentation, then the (...) or
Apparences: which kind of way, Scaliger in Copernicus strives to slight or
reject as weak or deficient: taking then this to be the only way to search
as near as we can into the truth of their matters, we will in the third
place show how far it may oppose Scaliger, and favor our Assertion. That the
first Star of Aries is more distant from the Equinoctial point, is a matter
which seems to be agreed on by all sides. This Appearance must necessarily
arise out of some Motion. This Motion must be sought either in the Earth (as
Copernicus would have:) or in the Heavens. That it cannot with any great
probability be in the Earth, we have showed in the third Chapter, where we
have proved it to have a Magneticall verticity, whereby it continually respects
the same Poles. The Arguments (I confess) are only probable: but this is an
opinion which Scaliger defends not. If we seek this effect in the Heavens,
it must of necessity (which Scaliger confesses) happen one of these 2 ways:
For either the stars standing immovable, the Equinoctial and Solstitiall
points must be moved, or else the stars themselves should move, as Ptolomy
defends. Here I cannot but remember a merry answer of that great Atlas of Arts,
Sir Henry Sauile in the like question. Being once invited unto his Table, and
having entered into some familiar discourses concerning Astronomicall
suppositions: I asked him what he thought of the Hypothesis of Copernicus, who
held the Sun to stand fixed, and the Earth to be subject to a Triple Motion:
His answer was; he cared not which were true, so the Apparences were solued,
and the account exact: since each way either the old of Ptolomy, or the new of
Copernicus, would indifferently serve an Astronomer: Is it not all one (says
he) sitting at Dinner, whether my Table be brought to me, or I go to my
Table, so I eat my meat? Such an answer would as well befit this question:
whether the first star of Aries should be moved from the Equinoctial point,
or the point from it, it is a matter should little trouble a Cosmographer; so
either way might indifferently serve to salve the apparent observations: But
how Scaliger upon this granted supposition, would make all whole, without
disturbing the order and form of Nature in the celestial Machine? what
Regular motion he would give the Sun, whose period describes the Equinoctial
points, which he makes moveable? what other Poles he would assign to the world
besides that of the Equator? is a matter of a more curious search, and besides
the limits of my subject: The full discussion of which points, as most of the
rest: Illis relinquo quorum imagines lambunt -- Hederae sequaces.

17 The lesser Parallels are equidistant lines answering to the Equator, which
divide the Globe of the Earth into two unequal parts.

18 These lesser Parallels are again of two sorts: either Named or Namelesse;
Named are such as are called by special names, and have more special use in
Geographie; such as are the two Tropicks, and the two Polar circles.

19 The Tropicks are Parallels bounding the Suns greatest declination, which is
either to the North, and is called the Tropicke of Cancer: or toward the
South, and is called the Tropicke of Capricorn.

The Tropickes have taken their names from the conversion or turning back of
the Sun; because the Sun declining from the Equinoctial circle either
North or South, proceeds in his course no further then this circle, and so
turns back: so that in the heavens they are as limits and bounds,
comprehending within them that space, without the which the Sun never moves:
Consonant to these Celestial Tropicks, are there imagined in the earth the
like, immediately placed under them: which are apparent, not only by
Application of the Celestial Globe, and his parts to the Terrestrial; but
also out of the Magneticall disposition of the earth, as we have already
showed: The Tropicke bounding the Suns greatest declination toward the North,
is called the Tropicke of Cancer; because the Sun arriving at that Tropicke,
is lodged in the sign of Cancer: The other is termed the Tropicke of
Capricorn; because the Sun touching that Tropicke, is in that sign: The
distance of these Tropickes, from the Equatour, is ordinarily put 23 Degrees,
and 30 Minutes; which is also the distance of the Poles of the Eclipticke, from
the Poles of the world. The Tropic of Cancer, as it is conceived in the Earth;
passes by the greater Asia, by the Red Sea, or Sinus Arabicus, and China, and
India: But the Tropicke of Capricorn, situate on the Southern side, runs
along by the most Southern coast of Afric, and that part of America which is
called Brasilia; Besides many Islands in the Indian Sea.

2 The Polar circles are Parallels answering to the Polar circles of the
Heavens, drawn by the Poles of the Eclipticke: These are of two sorts: either
the Articke compassing round the North Pole; or the Antarticke compassing round
the Antarticke or South Pole.

The Polar Circles, as they are conceived in the heavens by Astronomers, are
described by the Poles of the Eclipticke, carried by the diurnall motion about
the Poles of the world. Correspondent to these circles in the heavens are
imagined two circles on the earth, which we also call Polar; and if we
believe Gilbert, with other Magneticall Philosophers, they are primarily in the
Earth, as that which is the true subject of diurnall motion. These circles thus
described by the Pole of the Eclipticke, must needs challenge the same distance
from the Pole, which the Pole of the Eclipticke has, to wit, 23. Degrees, and
30 Minutes. The Greeks have taken the Polar circles, in another sense then the
Latins: for by these Polar circles (as it appears by Proclus, and Cleomedes)
they understand not such circles as are described by the Pole of the Zodiac:
but two other circles; whereof the one is greatest of all the Parallels, which
always appears above our Horizon; the other is the greatest of all those
Parallels which lie hid in our Horizon perpetually: The reason why the
Graecians took it in this sense, was; because by these circles they could know
and distinguish those stars; which always are seen and never set, as those
which are comprehended of the Articke circle; from those which always lie
hid and never rise; as such as the Antarticke contains: Whence it manifestly
appears, that the two Polar circles, as they are taken of the Graecians in all
Regions, are not of the same quantity and greatness, but are greater in
oblique Sphere then in a right: but our Polar circles are at all places alike
in their quantity. Of these, the one termed Articke in the Earth passes by
Islandia, the top of Norway and Finland, with many adjoining Islands, and the
Southern part of Green-land, as may appear by our ordinary Geographicall
Mappes. The other Polar circle called Antarticke, passes through the South
part of the world (as yet) undiscovered, except for some few parcels, as Terra
del Feugo, and Psiitacorum Regio, with somewhat more, lately discovered by the
Spaniards. The chiefest use as well of these, as other parallels, is to
distinguish the Zones and Climates in the Globe, whereof we shall have
occasion to treat hereafter.

21 The Namelesse Parallels are such as are not known by special Names, nor
of so great use in Geographie.

These namelesse parallels may be well understood by that which we have above
spoken: for howsoever they be not called by particular and special names, yet
are they all of the same nature: All these parallels beside the Equatour,
though infinite in number, may notwithstanding in the sphere be reduced to the
number of the Meridians; because they are drawn through the opposite points of
the Meridian semicircle; so that we might account 180: but yet there are not
so many painted on the face of the Artificial Globe; wherefore Ptolomy with
the ancients, have distinguished the parallels on both sides, North and South,
beginning from the Equatour at such a distance, that where the day should
increase one quarter of an hour, a new parallel should be placed: so that the
longest day of one parallel, should exceed the longest day of another
parallel by one quarter of an hour. Every one of these parallels, is supposed
to be divided into 360 Degrees, as all the rest of the other circles; yet are
we to note that the degrees and parts of a greater circle are greater; of the
lesser, less, according to the proportion of the said circle; the same have
the proportion that a great circle has to a less, so that the same degrees
and parts of a quarter circle, to the degrees and parts of the lesser; as may
be gathered from the first proposition of the second book of Theodosius: now
to know rightly this proportion, we must first find out the summary
declination for every region, which being once found, we may proceed in this
manner, by the doctrine of Triangles.

1 Let the sign of the Complement of the Declination of the lesser Circle be
multiplied by the whole Circle, and the product be divided by the total
sign, there will arise the number of Degrees of the lesser Circle, such as
whereof the greater consists.

The reason hereof is showed in Geometry, and therefore need we not to insert a
demonstration; for there we learn, that as the total ^inge is to the sign of
the Co^plement of the Declination of any Parallel, so is the Periphery of the
greater circle, to the Periphery of the Parallel* As for example, if we would
know what proportion the Equatour has to the Parallel, which passes by the
Vertical point of Rome; whose Declination is about 42 Degrees; I multiply the
sign of the Complement of this Declination, that is, the sign of 48 Degrees,
to wit, 74314, by 360; the product whereof is, 26753040; which I divide again
by 100000, and find 267 degrees, and * whence I gather that the Equatour to the
Parallel of Rome, or a degree of the Equatour, to a degree of the Parallel of
Rome, has the same proportion that that 360 has to 276, which is the same
that 4 has to 3.

22 Hitherto have we spoken of the Absolute Circles, such as are the Meridians
and Parallels: we are to treat in the last place of a Relative Circle, which
is conceived in respect to our sight: this Circle is called the Horizon.

23 The Horizon is a Circle which diuides the upper and visible parts of the
Terrestrial Globe, from the lower and invisible.

The name of the Horizon is taken from the bounding or termination of the
sight; because it is a Circle comprehending all that space which is visible of
us, distinguishing it from the rest which lurkes invisible: as if a man should
be placed in a high and eminent place of the Earth, and should look round
about him every way to the East, West, North, and South; He will seem to see
the heavens on every side to concur with the earth: so that beyond it, can be
seen nor heaven nor earth: which concurrence of the heavens with the earth,
will describe unto us the Horizontall Circle for that place assigned. But here
we are to note, that the Horizon is two fold; either the Rational or Sensible
Horizon. The Rational precisely diuides the Globe into two equal parts: But
the sensible or apparent Horizon, is no other then that Circle in the earth,
which is designed out by the sight, from which the name seems to be derived.
This sensible Horizon differs from the rational diverse ways; first, because
the rational diuides the whole sphere into two equal parts; but the sensible
into two unequal parts. Secondly, because the rational is always certain
and the same, in the same place, and of alike greatness; whereas the other is
greater or lesser, for the condition of the place or sight; for the
semidiameter of the rational, is the same with the semidiameter of the earth;
but the semidiameter of the other, seldom or never exceeds 60 miles on the
Earth. Thirdly, because the rational Horizon passes by the Center of the
Earth; whereas the sensible touches only the surface of it, in that point
where the Inhabitant stands: all which differences may be seen in this
Figure; wherein the Line CD represents unto us the sensible Horizon: the Line
AB the rational: The former is called Natural or Physical; because it comes
under the measure and apprehension of the sense: the other Astronomicall,
because it is of great use in Astronomy: in the resolution of the Horizon into
his parts, we ought to consider two things: first, the Poles of the Horizon;
Secondly, his Periphery, or circumference: The Poles are commonly called Zenith
or Nadir: The Zenith is the Vertical point, directly placed over our Head:
whereunto is opposite on the other side, the Nadir directly under our foot,
and therefore may be called the Pedall point. The parts or intersections in
the circumferences, are designed out unto us, by certain lines, discovering
the coasts in the Terrestrial Globe: These lines are called either winds or
Rhumbes: The winds with the Grecians were only 8. But the latter Nauigators
have increased them to the number of 32, whereof four were called Cardinal;
to wit, such as are directed to the four coasts of East, West, North, and
South: The other are Collateral, being placed on each side of the Cardinal
winds. The Rhumbes are Lines passing by the Vertical point of any place, as
you may see in the Compass going before: Now because one Rhumbe answers to two
coasts or winds; the number of the Rhumbes is but half the number of the
winds; to wit, 16. Here it is to be noted, that a Rhumbe differs from a
Wind; whereas a Rhumber is one line, pointing out unto us, two winds or
coasts: These Rhumbes as they are conceived in the Globe, were thought by
Nonnus to be the portions of greater Circles: But learned Mr Hues in his
book, out of undoubted principles, strongly confutes him. The grounds which
he takes are these: First, that all Meridians of all places pass the Pole,
and cut the Equatour and all his parallels at right Angles. Secondly, If our
course should be directly any way else, then toward one of the poles, a new
Meridian must succeed, and a new Horizon. Thirdly, that the Iron Needle being
touched with the Lodestone, shows the common section of the Meridian and the
Horizon, and on one side perpetually respects the North, on the other the
South. Fourthly, the same Rhumbe cuts all the Meridians atall places at equal
Angles, and every where respects the like coasts in the world. Fifthly, that a
greater circle drawn by the Vertical points (if removed from the Equatour)
cannot cut diverse Meridians at equal Angles. Sixthly, a greater circle drawn
by the Vertical point of any place, makes greater Angles with all other
Meridians then with that, from which it was first drawn: whence it is
necessary, that the line which shall be supposed to make Angles with diverse
Meridians (as the Rhumbes) should be bowed toward the Meridian. I know not
what would be more said against the opinion of P. Nonnus, who would have all
the Rhumbes to be portions of greater circles. To illustrate further the
nature and use of the Horizon we will insert these Theoremes.

2 The Sensible and Rational Horizon in the Earth, are much different; in
respect of the Firmament, all one.

Ptol. dict. 1. cap. 5. Alph. 6. diff. 6.
It may be gathered out of the suppositions of Ptolomy and Alphraganus, and
almost all other Astronomers, that no man being placed on the surface of the
earth can precisely see the half of it. For that Horizon which terminates our
sight, as we have showed, is a plain superficies every way circularly extended
in the Earth, in such sort as men placed, either in the Sea in a ship, or in a
great field or Country, would think the visible part of the earth to be
plain, whose ends would seem to touch the Heavens. Whence must needs come to
pass that such an Horizon cannot divide the Sphere of the ^arth into two
equal parts. For so much will be found wanting, as is measured betwixt that
superficies which touches the earth, and that which passes by the Center of
it, equidistant from the other: for this later only can divide the earth into 2
equal parts, Prop. 11. lib. 1.
according to Theodosius, and may well be seen in the Page 149.
former figure, wherein are expressed both Horizons, as well the visible as
invisible, touching the Sphere in a point on the superficies: as the Rational
passing by the Center. Nevertheless we must consider, that the quantity
intercepted betwixt these two Horizons in the Terrestrial Sphere, is of
little or no moment, compared with the whole frame of the Heavens: For since the
Heavens are so far distant from us, it will come to pass that if two
equidistant lines should be drawn, the one from the Eye, the other from the
Center of the Earth to the Firmament, they would according to sense, appear
one and the selfsame; by reason of the wonderful distance: as we see in a
long Gallery, whose walls have an equal distance the one from the other; the
walls will notwithstanding (according to Opticall principles) seem widest
where they are nearest, and to close and shut up at the ends, or at least to
concur nearer: much more must we imagine this to happen in the sight, if we
compare the greatness of the Firmament with the Sphere of the Earth, in whose
magnitudes we shall find a incomparable disparity. This will appear by the
Apparences: for we shall see the six signs of the Zodiac, conspicuous above
our Horizon, and the other six under it, hid from our sight: Also the Sun and
Moon, when they are diametrally opposed, almost at the same moment will
appear, the one in the East, the other in the West: at least the one will rise
soon upon the setting of the other: And (if we believe Pliny) the Moon was
observed to be eclipsed in the East point; the Sun at the same time being in
a sort above the Horizon in the West. Such an Eclipse could not happen without
a diametrall opposition of the two lights, and therefore can the Sensible and
the Rational Horizon have no sensible difference in respect of the Firmament.

2 The sensible Horizon may be greater or lesser according to the nature and
disposition of the place.

In this consideration we take no notice of the difference of sights, whether
they be weaker or sharper; but suppose an eye sufficient to kenne so far in
the Earth, as the place will permit: The difference then betwixt diverse
Horizons must be sought out in the condition of the place. A Sight placed on
the top of a high mountain, may see much farther then one in a low valley,
compassed about with hills; for as much as the Semidiameter of the sensible
Horizon, which is equal to the Rays or Lines drawn from the extreme parts
of the visible Earth, are much greater. The most indifferent judgment of this
Horizon, may be taken from the superficies of the Sea beyond sight of land:
for a man thereon sailing in a ship, may perceive the surface of the Sea as a
plain, on every side to bound the sight in a round circle, seeming together to
terminate the end of the Earth, and protension of the sight. What the
Semidiameter of this Horizon should be, has not been yet agreed upon by all:
Erastothenes would have it to be 44 miles. Macrobius 23. Proclus 250. Albertus
Magnus 125. These differences seem too great to admit of reconcilement: yet
taking into our consideration the disparity in account of miles betwixt the
Modern and Ancient Cosmographers; as also betwixt the Greeks and Latins: 2
the diverse placing of the sight ^ the various disposition of the places
wherein they took their observations, with other circumstances, we should
diminish much of admiration. But diverse others whose opinion is more approved
by modern Cosmographers, have defined it to be about 63 miles. The cause why
this Horizon should be so little in respect of the Rational which passes by
the Center, is the roundnesse of the earth interposed betwixt the sight and the
farther parts, which we have formerly proved.

3 The eye may be so placed on the Earth, as it may behold the whole
Hemispheare of the heavens, and yet no part of the Terrestrial Sphere.

This may seem a paradoxe with vulgar judgment; but it wants not a
demonstration drawn from Astronomicall and Opticke principles. To explain
which, we must suppose out of the grounds already granted, 1 That the Sensible
and Rational Horizon in respect of the Heavens, ought to be esteemed one and
the self same, by reason of the great distance and disproportion betwixt the
Earth and the Firmament. 2 That the eye of the beholder is in this sort
supposed to be in the Center; because in this consideration the distance
betwixt the superficies of the Earth, and her Center, is insensible. 3 That the
visuall Ray wherein the sight is carried, is always a right line. Now suppose
(according to our former figure) the Center of the eye wherein consists the
sight, to be in the point of the Terrestrial surface F, the distance (as we
said) betwixt F and E the Center being insensible, the eye is imagined in the
center: likewise the Horizons CFD, and AEB for the same cause in respect of the
Heavens are to be esteemed one and the same; because CA and DB have no
sensible difference. It is then manifest, that the eye so placed will behold in
the heavenly Sphere, all which is included betwixt A and B, to wit, the
Hemispheare AGB, bounded by the Rational Horizon AEB. Nevertheless in the
Terrene Globe it can see nothing at all: For either it should see only the
point F, wherein it is seated, or else some other point or part distant from
it: the former cannot be admitted, because the eye being there supposed to be
placed, should according to this supposition behold it self, which is against
philosophy: For granting the sense only a direct and not a reflexe operation,
it cannot be imagined how it should perceive it self. Finally, it cannot see
any point in the Earth besides; for then this point would either be placed
above the point F: but this cannot be; because F being supposed in the
superficies, admits of no point higher in the Sphere, or else under it: but
this cannot be, because CFD being a tangent line, and touching the Sphere in
F only: there cannot according to Geometrical principles be drawn any right
line from the point F, which can touch any point in the said Sphere, but all
will cut it, and so the section cause impediment to the sight, the Earth being
an opacous and round body.

4 From the Horizontall circle is reckoned the elevation of the Pole in any
place assigned.

The finding out of the elevation of the Pole is a matter most necessary for a
Cosmographer; as shall appear after, where we shall speak of the Latitudes
and Climates. It is defined to be an arch of the Meridian betwixt the Horizon
and the Pole. For the finding out of which many ways have been devised by
Artificers: The first is taken from the Sun, the second from the Pole-starre:
From the Sun it may be performed two ways. 1 At the time of the Equinoxe. 2
At any other time of the year. At the time of the Equinoxe it may be found out
by the observation of the Suns shadow at Noone-tide, in this manner: Let the
Meridian height of the Sun be subtracted from the whole quadrant, which is
90 degrees: there will remain the distance of the Zenith to the Equator, which
is equal to the elevation of the Pole. In the second place at any time of the
year to know the elevation of the Pole out of the Meridian height of the
Sun, it is necessary out of an Ephimerides, or any other way, accurately to
find out the place of the Sun in his Eclipticke for the day proposed,
together with his declination: for the declination of the Sun, the Sun
being in the six Northern signs, subtracted from the Meridian altitude; or
added, the Sun being in the six Southern signs, will precisely give the
height of the Equator: or (which is the same) the Meridian height of the Sun in
the Equinoctial: which being once found, we may work as in the former. By the
Pole-starre we may likewise find it out, if we observe it three distinct
times in the same night: for three points being given, every Geometrician will
find out the Center, which in this case must be the Pole. Many other ways
have been invented by skillful Astronomers, which appertaining rather to
Astronomy then Cosmography. I purposely omit.

24 Concerning the Horizon, two things are chiefly to be noted, the Invention
and the Distinction. The Invention is considered either as it concerns the
Zenith or Pole: or the Plain of the Horizon. For both which we will set down
these Rules.

1 The height of the Pole subtracted from the quadrant of 90 Degrees: the
residue will show the Zenith or distance of the Zenith from the Pole.

The reason is evident; because the height of the Pole, together with the
distance of the Pole and the Zenith make an arch, which is a whole quadrant: so
that the height of the Pole subducted, the distance will remain; as for
example, if we put the elevation of the Pole here in Oxford, to be 51 degrees
or thereabout (as has been formerly taught: Let these 51 degrees be
subtracted from 90, then will remain 38, which is the true Zenith for that
place.

2 A line which makes right angles with a plummet perpendicularly falling on
it, will design the Horizontall plain.

The practice of the proposition is usually showed by Artificers by a certain
instrument called a Level, which is made in a triangle form: from the vertex,
or head of which, a line with a plummet falls on the Basis. Now when it shall
be found to be so placed, that the line and plummet falling on the Basis,
shall make right Angles with it, and cut the whole Triangle into two equal
halfes: we may account the Base-line to be the plain of the Horizon: For of
this plain, such is the position, that it inclines no more on the one side
then on the other, but lies even: as we see in the surface of the water, when
it rests quiet without motion: for howsoever the water so resting (as we have
formerly demonstrated) is always sphericall, yet in a small distance in the
sensible Horizon, it may to sense be represented by a plain.

25 So much for the Invention: The Distinction of the Horizon is into three
sorts: for either it is a right Horizon, or oblique, or parallel.

26 A right Horizon is that which with the Equator makes Right Angles.

This distinction grows naturally out of the Respect of the Horizon to the
Equatour. For since the Equatour is one and the selfsame immovable circle;
and the Horizon is mutable and changed according to his diverse vertical
points, they cannot always keep the same situation in regard one of the
other. This they have reduced into three heads: for either it is Right or
Oblique, or Parallel. The Right is so called from the right Angles which the
Horizon makes with the Equator: wherein the two poles are always couched in
the Horizon, and the Equator passing directly over their heads, as is plain to
be seen in this figure here affixed: such an Horizon have these Inhabitants
which dwell directly under the Equinoctial line, in the very midst of the
Torrid Zone: such an Horizon agrees to a great part of Afric: to a part of
Peru in America: Also to most of the Molucco Islands, the Islands of Taprobana,
and S. Thomas: but no part of Europe is subject to such a Right Horizon. The
cause of this variation of Horizons is the natural roundnesse of the Earth:
For the earth being supposed to be sphericall, as we have before demonstrated,
it must of necessity follow, that the site of the poles should be changed
according to the diversity of the places. Also, because wheresoever we are
placed on the Earth (as we have showed) all impediments of the sight, as
mountains and valleys put apart, we can behold the Hemispheare of the Heavens,
which middle part being set down is divided from the part unseen, by the
Horizon it must needs be, that either both the poles must be in the Horizon:
and so make a Right Sphere: or at least one must be above and seen, and the
other hid from the sight, and so much as one is elevated above the Horizon,
must the other be couched under it* For otherwise we should see more or less
then a precise moity, or half of the Heavens: since the poles differ one from
the other the half of the whole Heavens: to wit, by the Diameter of the world.

27 An oblique Horizon is that which with the Equator makes oblique Angles.

Those Inhabitants are said to have an oblique Horizon, whose site and position
declines somewhat from the Equator, either to the North or South toward either
pole: yet so that the pole be not elevated so high as 90 Degrees: for then it
becomes a Parallel Horizon, as we shall show in the next. The representation
of such an oblique Sphere may be seen in this Diagram: wherein the Horizon
cuts the Equatour at oblique Angles, whence it is called oblique. Clauius
seems to add another reason of this appellation: to wit, because in such an
Horizon one pole is always elevated above, and the other hid* but this reason
seems too general, as that which agrees not only to an Oblique, but also to
a Parallel Sphere. From this Horizon, by Johannes de Sucrobosco, the Sphere
is called Artificial* because, as Clauius conjectures, it is variable, and
does naturally divide the Globe. For whereas the Horizon of the Right Sphere
passes by either Pole, it seems by it self (as it were) Naturally and
Directly to divide the Sphere: and this division is no way variable, as that
it should be more or less Right: but contrariwise in the oblique Sphere,
since one Pole is placed above, and the other beneath, it seems to be placed
out of his natural site and position. Moreover this Oblique Horizon is
variable according to the diversity of habitations, so that it may be to some
more, to others less Oblique: for so much the more Oblique must it be, by how
much the nearer it is placed to the Poles. The Inhabitants of an Oblique
Sphere are such as seated betwixt the Equator, and either of the Tropicks of
Cancer and Capricorn, or such as dwell betwixt either Tropicke and the
Polar-circle*

28 A Parallel Horizon is that which lies Parallel to the Equator, making no
angles at all with it.

Such a kind of Horizon those Inhabitants are said to have which are included
betwixt the Poles of the world, and the Polar circles; whose Horizon cuts not
the Equatour at any Angles at all, either Right or Oblique: but lies Parallel
unto it, as we see in this Figure here set down. Some have reduced this kind
of Sphere to an Oblique Horizon: in regard that in this site our Pole is
elevated above the Horizon, and the other depressed under: in which opinion
Clauius seems to second Johannes de Sacrobosco, on whom he comments. But this
is ridiculous; because the Sphere is called Right or Oblique (as we have
taught) from the Angles which the Horizon makes with the Equator: wherefore
that Horizon which makes no Angles at all, cannot be called either Right or
Oblique, but is necessarily distinguished from either. On this distinction of
Horizons is grounded the division of the Inhabitants of the Earth according to
three kinds of Spheres: of whose accidents and proprieties we shall more
fully treat hereafter in the dictinction of the parts and Inhabitants of the
Terrestrial Sphere, because such proprieties cannot so well be taught without
the knowledge of the Artificial Sphere, whose Nature and Fabric we shall
labor (God willing) in our next Chapter to unfold.

CHAP. VII. Of the Artificial Representation of the Terrestrial Sphere.
1 Having hitherto treated of the Terrestrial Sphere, as it is Natural or
real: we are in the next place to speak of the Artificial Globe: The
Artificial Globe is an expression or imitation of the Sphere of the Earth.

2 The Artificial imitation of the Earth is either Common or Magneticall. The
common is again twofold; either in the Globe, or in the Geographicall Map,
or Table.

3 The Geographicall Globe is a round solid Body, adorned with Lineaments and
pictures, serving for the use of Geographers.

Who was the first Inuentour of this Artificial Globe, it is not evident: some
think with Pliny, that it was found out by Atlas, and carried into Greece by
Hercules. Others have ascribed it to Anaximander Milesius; some to Musaeus, as
Diogenes Laertius: others to other Authors, amongst whom Architas Tarentinus is
not forgotten, as one that was esteemed the rarest Mathematician of his time.
But all these were out-stripped by Archimedes the Syracusan Mathematician, who
is said to have composed a Sphere of transparent glass, representing unto the
life the whole frame of the Heavens, wherein the Sun, Moon, and Stars with
their true motions, periods, and limits were showed to the sight, in such sort,
as if it were natural whereof Claudian the Poet elegantly wrote in these
Verses.

Claudian. in Epigrammat.
Jupiter in paruo cum cerneret aethera vitro,
Risit, and ad Superos talia dicta dedit:
Huccine mortalis progressa potentia curae?
Iam meus infragili ^uditur orb labor.
Iura poli, rerumque fidem* legesque Deorum,
Ecce Syracusius transtulit art Senex.
Inclusus varijs famulatur spiritus astris,
Et viuum certis motibus vrget opus.
Percurrit proprium mentitus signifer annum,
Et simulata nouo Cynthia mense redit.
Iamque suum voluens audax industria mundum,
Gaudet and humana sidera mente regi.
Quid falso insontem tonitru Salmonea miror?
Aemula naturae parua reperta manus.
In a small glass when Jove beheld the Skies,
He smiled, and thus unto the gods replies:
Could man so far extend his studious care,
To mock my labors in a brittle Sphere?
Heavens laws, man's ways, and Natures sovereign right,
This Stage of Syracuse translates to sight.
A soul within on various stars attends,
And moves the quicke-worke unto certain ends,
A faigning Zodiac runs his proper year,
And a false Cynthia makes new months appear:
And now bold Art takes on her to command,
And rule the Heavenly Stars with humane hand.
Who can admire Salmonean harmless Thunder,
When a flight hand stirs Nature up to wonder?
But this Sphere of Archimedes I take to be more then an ordinary Globe
commonly used amongst us, as may appear by the Poets description; so that it
may rather be likened to the Sphere, lately composed by Cornelius Trebelius,
and presented unto King James. The like whereof Peter Ramus says he saw two at
Paris; yet not of glass, but of Iron; the one of which Ruellius the Physician
brought from the spoils of Sicily: the other of which Orontius the
Mathematician recovered likewise from the Germane wars. But of such kind of
Globes having never yet had the happiness to see any, I intend no description:
In the mean time our common Geographicall Globes may well serve our turns.

4 In the Terrestrial Globe two things are to be considered: 1 The Fabric or
Structure.

2 The Use. 3 The Direction. In the former is taught the composition of the
Globe by resolving of it into it is parts.

1 The parts whereof the Globe is Geographically compounded are circles and
pictures.

To explain the true composition of the Artificial Globe, not Physically as
it consists of timber and metal, but Geographically as it represents the
Earth, we are to consider, that the parts of it are either External or
Internal: External I call those parts which are without the Sphere it self,
yet necessarily concur to the constitution of it. These parts are such as
concur to the making of the Stock or Frame whereunto our Sphere is set:
where to let pass the footing or lower board, (wherein in the old Globes was
engraffed a Mariners Compass, with a Needle magnetically touched, very
profitable for the direction of the Sphere) I will only speak of the great
Timber Circle, encompassing round the whole Globe: because it more immediately
concerns our purpose. This Circle represents the Horizon of the Natural
Sphere: In the Globe it is made but one, not that there is but one Horizon in
the whole Earth; because (as we have taught) the Horizon is varyed according to
the places: but because it is impossible to point and mark out the Horizons;
for all places being infinite as the Vertical points: yet may this one serve
for all places, because the Globe being moveable, may apply all his parts to
this circle. This Circle representing the Horizon, is divided into three
borders or Limbs: whereof the first which is toward the Sphere, contains
all the signs with the Planets thereunto belonging; every of which is divided
into 30 Degrees, which in the Timber Circle are described by set numbers and
marks. The second which is the middle-most and largest, contaynes the
Calendar, with the Golden number, and several names of all the Feasts
throughout the year. The third and last is of the 22 Winds, serving chiefly
for the use of Mariners, and may serve many ways for a Geographer to
distinguish the Coasts and points of the Earth. But of these three borders
distinguished in the Horizon, only the last has use in Geography; the other
two are in themselves Astronomicall, and placed in the Geographicall Globe
rather for ornament, then use. The Internal parts of the Globe are either
annexed or inscribed in the face of the Sphere. The Annexed part is that which
represents the Meridian, which is a Brazen circle: For as the External Frame
of the Globe contained the Horizon as one circle; so this Meridian is set but
one, although it be in it self various, according to the places to which it
serve. Neither without good reason is this Circle made of brass, because it
should serve for diverse uses, which require that it should be often changed
and turned to and fro, which being of Timber would miscarry. This Brazen
Meridian meets with the Horizon at two opposite places, cutting it at right
angles, that the Sphere included might be raised and set lower, as occasion
requires. The Meridian circle is again divided into 4 Quadrants, each of
which is again divided into 90 Degrees; so that on the one side the 90th
Degree must touch the Pole; on the other side the first degree; so that in all
there will arise 360 degrees, described in the Brazen Meridian. Through this
Brazen Meridian by the two Poles does pass a line or wier, which is called the
Axell-tree of the Globe, about the which the Sphere is turned, the ends of
which are commonly called the Poles; whereof the one representing the North
point is called the Pole Articke; the other showing the South, is termed
Antarticke. To this Meridian Circle in the Globe is commonly fastened a little
Brazen Circle, named Cyclus horarius or the houre-circle; but this rather
appertains to Astronomy then Geography, and therefore we will forbear to
describe it: somewhat more use have we of another Instrument fastened to the
Meridian, called the Quadrant of Latitude; for as much as it may serve to
measure the Distance betwixt any two places signed in the Globe: but in so
gross an Instrument little exactness can be expected. Now for such matters
as are inscribed in the Sphere it self, (to let pass ridiculous and idle
pictures used of Painters for ornament) they are either Lines and Circles
drawn on the face of the Globe: or else the pictures and delineations of
Countries and places, marked out in visible proportions; whereof the former
properly appertains to the Sphericall part of Geography; the latter to the
Topicall. The Circular Lineaments are again twofold: either Circles
necessarily appertaining to the constitution of the Globe; or else Lines
thereon drawn to be considered of Mariners, which we have before called the
Rhumbes. But these Lines also (as we have taught) appertain to the
Geographer, being as many sections of the Horizontall Circle; because they are
always imagined to proceed from a Vertical point wherein they meet. The
Circles painted on the Globe are either the Parallels or Meridians, whose
description we have set down in the chapter before: Amongst the Parallels the
most remarkable is the Equatour, which is made greater then all the rest, in
form of a bracelet, distinguished into degrees, and marked at every 10.
degrees: Next to this are the Tropicks and Polar Circles, represented only by
black Lines, yet framed in such sort, that they may easily be discerned from
other Parallels. Amongst the Meridians the most notable is the first Meridian
passing by the Canaries, and painted much like the Equatour, cut into diverse
sections and degrees, in such sort as we have described: For the Zodiac
which is usually pictured in the Terrestrial Globe, I hold it altogether
needless in Geography, and made rather for ornament, then use; for as much as
the periodicke course of the Sun, deciphered by the Eclipticke, appertains
rather to the Theory, of the planets, which is the hardest part of Astronomy.
The proportion of these Circles, Site, and Distance is taught before, and needs
no repetition, since it is the very same in representation on the face of the
Globe, which is really in the Earth it self. For the pictures and Topicall
description of the Earth, we refer it to the second and third part of this
Treatise; where we shall have occasion to speak of Countries and Regions,
with their several qualities, accidents, and dispositions.

2 The use of the Artificial Globe is to express the parts of the Earth so
far forth as they have a diverse situation as well one n respect of another,
as of the Heavens.

The use of the Artificial Globe is twofold, either general or special: the
General is expressed in this Theoreme: the Special shall be shown in diverse
special propositions hereafter as occasion shall serve.

5 This Direction is taught in the Rule. 1* The Meridian for the place being
found by the Sun or Compass. 1 Let the Globe be so set, that the North Pole
respect the North, the oppoposite the South. 2 Let the Pole in the Meridian of
the Globe be set according to the elevation of the Pole at the place assigned.

6 A Geographicall Map is a plain Table, wherein the Lineaments of the
Terrestrial Sphere are expressed and described in due site and proportion.

Some would have the name of a Map to be drawn from the linen furniture
wherewith it is endorsed; which is not unlikely, in regard of the affinity of
the words in Latin. But more significantly by others it is termed a
Geographicall Table or Chart: A Map differs from a Globe, in that the Globe
is a round solid body, more nearly representing the true figure of the Earth,
whereas contrariwise the Charts of themselves are plain, though representing a
Sphere, invented to supply the wants of a Globe. For whereas a Globe is more
costly to be procured of poor Students, and more troublesome to be carried to
and fro; a Map is more cheap to be bought, and far more portable: And
howsoever it be not so apt an expression as the Globe, yet are there few
matters represented in the other, which may not in some sort find place in
this. And certainly such is the use and necessity of these Tables, that I
hardly deem him worth the name of a Scholar, which desires not his Chamber
furnished with such ornaments. It is written of that learned man Erasmus
Roterodamus, that having seen 50 years, he was delighted so much with these
Geographicall Mappes, that undertaking to write Comments on the Acts of the
Apostles, he had always in his eye those Tables, where he made no small use
for the finding out of the site of such places whereof he had occasion to
treat. And it were to be wished in these days, that young Students instead of
many apish and ridiculous pictures, tending many times rather to ribaldry, then
any learning, would store their studies with such furniture. These
Geographicall Mappes are of two sorts, either Universal or Particular: The
Universal are such as represent the picture of the whole Earth. The particular
are such as show only some particular Place or Region. These particular Tables
are again of two sorts; some are such as describe a place in respect of the
Heavens, whereon are drawn the Geographicall lineaments by us described, at
least the chiefest: some again are such as have no respect at all to the
Heavens; such as are the Topographicall Mappes of Cities and Shires, wherein
none of the Circles are described. For the Universal and first sort of
particular Maps, there is no question but they properly appertain to
Geography: But the later deserve much less consideration, as being too
special for this general Treatise.

7 The Geographicall Map is twofold: eithre the Plain Chart, or the
Planispheare: The Plain Chart we call that which consistes of one face and
Right lines.

Such a Chart we find commonly set forth under the name of the Mariners
Sea-Chart: for howsoever it seems to have chiefest use in Navigations, yet is
the Nature and use of it more general: as that which not only expresses the
Sea, but the whole Terrestrial Globe: For as much as the Parallels, Meridians,
and Rhumbes, whereof primarily it consists, are circles common to the whole,
and not appropriated to either part.

8 In the Plaine-Chart we are to consider two things First the Ground. Secondly
the Inscription. The Ground is the space or Platform wherein the Lines are to
be inscribed: the Inscription teaches the manner how to project the Lines.

In the Chart two things are remarkable; to wit, the plain whereunto the Lines
are inscribed: Secondly the Lines or Inscription it self: so we are here to
handle two points: First how this Plaine-Chart should be conceived to be
produced out of the Globe; whereof it is a representation. Secondly what rule
or method we ought to use for the inscription of the Meridians, parallels,
Rhumbes, and other Lineaments thereunto annexed. Both which depend on these
propositions.

1 The Geographicall Chart is a Parallellogramme conceived to be made out of a
Sphere, inscribed in a Cylinder, every part thereof swelling in Longitude and
Latitude, till it apply it self to the hollow superficies of the said Cylinder.

This Theoreme seeming at the first obscure, consists of many parts, which
being once opened, will soon take light. First then to know the Groundwork
of this Parallellogramme thus defined, we must suppose a Sphericall
superficies, Geographicall or Hydrographicall, with Meridians and parallels to
be inscribed into a concaue Cylinder, their Axes agreeing in one. Secondly we
must imagine the superficies thus inscribed, to swell like a bladder, blowing
equally in every part, as well in Longitude, as Latitude, till it apply it
self round about, and all along toward either pole, unto the concaue
superficies of the Cylinder; so that each parallel on this superficies,
successively grows greater from the Equinoctial toward either Pole, until
it challenge equal Diameter with the Cylinder: and likewise all the Meridians
growing wider and farther off, till they be as far distant euery-where as is
the Equinoctial one from the other. Hence may easily be understood the true
Mathematical production or generation of this part: for first of a Sphericall
superficies it is made a Cylinder: and secondly of a Cylinder it is made a
Parallellogramme, or plain superficies: For the concaue superficies of a
Cylinder is nothing else but a plain Parallellogramme, imagined to be wound
about two equal equidistant circles, having one common Axell-tree
perpendicular upon the Centers of them both; and the Peripheries of them both,
equal to the length of the Parallellogramme, as the distance betwixt those
Centers is equal to the breadth thereof: In this Chart so conceived to be made,
all places must needs be situate in the same Longitudes and Latitudes,
Meridians, Parallels, and Rhumbes, which they had in the Globe it self:
because we have imagined every point betwixt the Equatour and the Poles, to
swell equally in Longitude and Latitude, till it apply it self to the
concauity of the Cylinder: so that no point can be displaced from his proper
seat, but only dilated in certain proportion. And this I take to be the best
conceit for the groundwork or platform of this Geographicall Chart.

2 Except the distances betwixt the Parallels in a Plaine-Chart be varied: it
cannot be excused from sensible error.

It has been thought by many Geographers, that the Earth cannot aptly
according to due symmetry and proportion be expressed in a plain superficies,
as it is in the Globe: for as much as that which is joined and united in the
Globe, being of a Sphericall figure, is in the Map extended and dilated to a
diverse longitude and latitude from that Sphericall delineation: and although
it has been generally conceited by many writers, that no due proportion could
be observed in a Sphericall superficies, without sensible error: yet most
exception has been made against this Chart here mentioned, consisting of one
face and straight lines, which in substance (if we consider the Circles)
differs not from the Nauticall Chart: of whose errors Martin Cortese, Peter
Nonnus, and many others have complained: which escapes are excellently opened
and reformed by our Countryman Edward Wright in his Correction of Nauticall
Errors. The reason or ground which drew these men to think that the Earth
could not be proportionably described in a plain superficies, proceeded from
the common proportion of the Lines and Circles on the Chart. For supposing the
Parallels cutting the Meridians at equal Angles, to observe an equal distance
euery-where one from the other; these errors and absurdities must of necessity
ensue. First, what places soever are delineate in the ordinary Chart, the
length of them from East to West has a greater proportion to the breadth from
North to South then it ought to have, except only under the Equinoctial: and
this error is so much the more augmented, by how much those places are distant
from the Equinoctial: for the nearer you approach the Pole, the proportion of
the Meridian to the Parallel still increases; so that at the Parallel of 60
degrees of latitude, the proportion of the length to the breadth is twice
greater then it ought to be; for as much as the Meridian is double to that
Parallel, and so in all the rest: whence as Edward Wright observes, the
proportion of the length of Friesland to the breadth thereof, is twofold
greater then in the Globe which expresses the true proportion; because the
Meridian is double to the Parallel of that Island. In like sort it is plain,
that in the Islands of Grock-land and Groenland, the length to the breadth has a
fourfold greater proportion in the Common Chart, then in the Globe; because
the Meridian is fourfold greater then the Parallel of those places.
Wherefore it cannot be conceited, that the manner of finding out the difference
of Longitude by the common Chart, can be any-where true without sensible
error, except only under the Equinoctial, or near about it; because in no
other place the Parallel is equal to the Meridian. In other places the error
will be sensible, according to the difference of the Meridian, and Parallel
of that place: whereas if the contrary were granted, it would follow, that two
ships sailing from North to South, under two several Meridians, would keep
the same distance the one from the other of longitude near the Pole, which
they had near the Equatour; which is impossible: because Meridians cannot be
Parallel the one to the other, but by how much they approach the Pole, by so
much they are nearer, that in the end they all concur and meet in the Pole
it self. Secondly this common Chart admitted, there would arise great errors
not only in the situation of diverse places, which appear to be under the
same Meridian, but also in the bearing of places one to the other. The reason
is manifest, for that the Meridian is a certain Rule of the site and position
of places: therefore whenever any error shall be committed in the Site and
Position of the Meridian, there must needs follow errors in the designation of
the Rhumbes, and other points of the Compass. And therefore every respective
position of place to place, set down in the common Chart, cannot be
warranted. A pregnant example we have in the way from India; for the
Promontory of Afric, called the Promontory of three Points; having of
Northern latitude 4 Degrees and a half, and the Island of Tristan, Acugna,
having 36 degrees of Southern latitude, are in the common Chart set under the
same Meridian: But the Chart shows the distance between these Islands, and
the Cape of good Hope to come near to 400 leagues; both which cannot stand
together; for if all the coast from the Promontory of Three Points, unto the
Cape of Good-hope be rightly measured, and the Promontory of Three Points lie
also under the same Meridian with those Islands, yet must the distance be much
less: But if it be not less, it cannot stand with reason that it should have
the same Meridian with the Promontory of Three Points, but must needs lie more
Westward. Thirdly, there must needs arise a greater error in the translating
Seacoasts and other such places out of the common Chart, into the Globe;
because they have only a respect to the Numbers of Degrees of Longitudes and
Latitudes found therein; so that not only errors appear in the Sea-Chart,
but also otherwhere thence derived. These and many more errors have been
detected in the common Sea-chart, which (as we have said) respecting the
circles, ought to be imagined one and the selfsame with the proiection of the
lines in a Geographicall table; which oversight Ger. Mercator in his universal
Map seems to correct: yet leaves no demonstration behind him to teach others
the certain way to draw the Lines, as Meridians, Parallels, and Rhumbes on the
Chart, in such sort, as these errors might be prevented, and the due
proportion and symmetry of places well observed. But our industrious Countryman
has waded through all these difficulties, and found out the true demonstration
of a proiection of these Lines to be inscribed in the Chart in such sort, as no
sensible error can show it self, from whose copious industry we will extract
so much as may serve our purpose, only contracting his invention into a
shorter method, having many matters to pass through in this Treatise.

2 The Distances of the Parallels in the Chart must increase proportionably as
the Secantes of the latitude.

It has been a conceived error (as we have showed) that all the parallels in
the Chart here mentioned, should euery-where keep the same Distances one from
the other, from the Equator to the poles; yet because no man (for ought I know)
has out of Geometrical grounds discovered the true proportion, beside my
forenamed Author; I must herein also follow his direrection as near as I can
in his own footsteps; because I would not any way prejudice his Invention.
First therefore we must consider in that Chart, because the parallels are
equal one to the other, (for every one is set equal to the Equinoctial) the
Meridians also must be parallel and straight Lines, and by consequence the
Rhumbes, making equal angles with every Meridian, must be also straight
lines. Secondly, because the sphericall superficies whereof the Chart is
imagined to be produced, is conceived to swell and enlarge it self euery-where
equally, that is, as well in Longitude as Latitude, till it accommodate it
self to the hollownesse of the Cylinder, round about: therefore at every point
of Latitude in this Cylinder so dilated, a part of the Meridian obtaines the
same proportion to the like part of the Parallel, that the like parts of the
Meridian and Parallel have to each other in the Globe without sensible error.
Now for as much as like parts of the wholes, have the same proportion that
these wholes have; therefore the like parts of any Parallel or Meridian of the
Sphere have the same proportion that the same Parallels and Meridians have:
For example sake, as the Meridian is double to the Parallel of 60 Degrees, so
a Degree, Minute, or other part, is also double to a Degree, Minute, or other
part of the Parallel; and what proportion the Parallel has to the Meridian,
the same must their Diameters and Semidiameters have one to the other: as is
taught by Geometricians. Now the Sign of the Complement of the Parallels
latiude or distance from the Equinoctial, is the semi-diameter of the said
Parallel; as in this Diagramme here inserted may easily appear: for AE the
sign of AH the complement of AF, the latitude of the Parallel ABCD from the
Equinoctial is the semi-diameter of the Parallel ABCD; and as the
semi-diameter of the Meridian or whole sign is to the semi-diameter of the
Parallel; so is the secant or Hypotenuse of the Parallells latitude to the
semi-diameter of the Meridian, or to the whole sign, as FK (that is) AK, to AE
(as is) GK, so is IK to FK: therefore in this Geographicall Chart, the
semi-diameter of each Parallel being equal to the semidiameter of the
Equinoctial or whole sign, the parts of the Meridian at every point of
latitude, must of necessity increase with the same proportion wherewith the
Secants of the Arch contained between these points of latitude and the
Equinoctial increase: out of which Geometrical grounds thus explained, will
arise a certain and easy method for the making of a table by the help of
Trigonometry, whereby the Meridian in any Geographicall or Hydrographicall
table may truly and in due proportion divide it self into parts, from the
Equinoctial toward either Pole: for taking for granted, each distance of each
point of latitude, or of each Parallel one from the other, to comprehend so
many points as the secants of the latitude of each point or Parallel
contains, we may draw out a table by continual addition of the secants
answerable unto the latitude of each Parallel, unto the sum compounded of
all the former Secants; beginning with the secants of the first Parallels
latitude, and thereunto adding the second Parallels latitude, and to the sum
of both these, adding the third Parallels latitude, and so forth in all the
rest: and this Table will show the sections and points of latitude in the
Meridian of the Geographicall Map; through which sections the Parallels ought
to be drawn: which Table we have lately set out by Edward Wright in his
Correction of Nauticall Errors, to whom for further satisfaction in this kind,
I refer the diligent Reader. Out of the same grounds we may also deduce the
Rumbes: for since that the Chart (as we have showed) is nothing else but a
plain Parallellogramme, conceived to be made of the extension of a Sphericall
superficies, inscribed in a concaue Cylinder, it must needs be that the Rumbes
make equal Angles with all the Meridians. Therefore if in the Chart a circle
be drawn, divided into 32 equal parts, beginning with the Meridian, passing
by the Center of that Circle, the lines drawn from the center of these
sections, will be the Rumbes for that place.

9 Of the Geographicall Plaine-Chart we have spoken; It behoues us next to
treat of the Geographicall Planispheare. The Planispheare is a table or map
of two faces, whereon the lines are proiected circularly.

Betwixt the Planispheare and the Plaine-Chart, a double difference may be
observed: 1 That the former consists altogether of right lines, as well in
regard of the Parallells as Meridians: whereas the later is composed of
circular or crooked lines, as well as right. 2 The former may well be
expressed in one form or front, as we may see not only in the Nauticall and
common Chart, which we have shown to be all one with the other in respect of
these Lines; but in many other common Maps, as namely those of Hondius, whereas
the Planispheare cannot be expressed without two faces or Hemispheares; whereof
the one represents the Eastern, the other the Western part of the Terrene
Globe: For herein we must imagine a Globe to be cut into two equal
Hemispheares, which are at once represented to our sight: of this Description
of the Earth by crooked Lines, Ptolomy in his 24 Chapt. of his Geography has
taught us two ways: whereof the first depends from the aspect of a Sphere,
turned and moved round, in which all the Meridians are described as right
Lines; but the Parallels as circumferences or crooked Lines. The other
Delineation takes his ground from a Sphere represented to the sight, not
moved, but resting still in his place, in which both Meridians and Parallels
are drawn circular. These two ways of Ptolomy (howsoever iudiciously invented
in those times, wherein a small part of the Earth was discovered, and Geography
very imperfect) have been by later Geographers much reformed and corrected.
Yet amongst the later have not all expressed themselves alike: some have
pourtrayed out of the Earth in fashion of a Heart; some according to other
figures: but in this (perhaps) as Painters, they have been more iudulgent to
fancy, then common use: others have gone about to express the Globe of the
Earth in Elipticke Lines, which the Machanicians call ouall. But we as well in
this as other matters, preferring choice before abundance, will content our
selves with one or two, which use has stamped more current, and experience has
found most useful: to which as a ground we will premise this Theoreme.

1 The Planispheare is grounded on a certain aspect of the Terrestrial
Sphere, wherein the Eye of the beholder is so conceived to be fixed in some
point of the Globe, that it may see the one half or Hemispheare.

Concerning the position of the Eye, two things are here remarkable: 1 Where
the Eye is supposed to be placed either above the conuexe superficies, or in
the concaue: some seem to place it above the conuexe superficies; of which
opinion Gemma Frisius seems to be, who would have the Eye to be set at an
infinite distance: others although not admitting of such an infinite distance,
deny not the Eye to be above the conuexe superficies: but neither way can be
warranted: Not the former, because of the impossibility of the supposition. For
to imagine the Eye to be set at an infinite distance, were to deny a sight or
aspect which they would have to be the ground of this projection: For no
object can be perceived, but such as is bounded and determined in a certain
and proportionate space. Neither can the later way pass clear without
exception; because to such a projection, such a sight is required which can see
the whole Hemispheare: for otherwise would it be imperfect, and want of the
perfection of the Globe: which contains two absolute and entire Hemispheares.
But now no place can be imagined without the Globe, wherein the Eye can be so
placed, as to see the one half or Hemispheare: for as much as it is impossible
from the opposite points of any Diameter, to draw two tangent lines which may
meet together, or cut one the other in the same point, but will be Parallel
the one to the other: wherefore we may conclude, that the Eye in this
projection cannot be imagined without the conuexe surface of the Sphere, but
rather in the concaue: How the Eye should be imagined to be in the concaue
superficies, may be in this sort explayned: we must suppose a great Sphere of
the Glass, or other such Diaphanous matter, inscribed with all his Parallels
and Meridians, in such sort as they are represented unto us in the Globe, the
Eye (according to opticall Principles) may be so placed near the Center of
it, as it shall be able to see precisely the one Hemispheare described with all
his circles, as we find it in the sphere. I say near not in the Center:
because the Angle of vision (as we find it taught in the Perspectiues) does
not extend to a right Angle, but is somewhat less: 2 we must inquire in what
point in the superficies the eye is placed. To which we answer, that the place
of the eye is of it self indifferent; because it may be imagined any where in
what point soever. Nevertheless we will only fasten on two especial ways
which are of most use, wherein the propositions following shall inform us.

9 This Planispheare is twofold: the first we term equinoctial, which
supposes the eye to be fixed on some point of the equinoctial circle; the
other Polar, wherein the sight is conceived to be fixed on the Pole of the
Terrestiall Globe: The ground and fabric of the former is taught in these
Propositions.

1 The eye conceived to be fixed on any point of the equatour, will design out
unto us a Planispheare wherein all the circles are proiected circularly, except
the Equator and that Meridian which passes by the said point.

This may easily be shown out of the Opticke principles, we will suppose for
example sake the eye to be placed in some point of the Equatour: which shall
be 90 degrees of longitude from the Equinoctial point: which kind of
proiection we have in many of our common Geographicall Maps of the earth. In
this manner of sight, if the terrestrial Hemispheare, which may only be
comprehended by it, be distinguished by this Parallells and Meridians ordered
and ranged by distances of equal Arches in such number as we please: It is
most certain that the Eye, seeing distinctly and separatly every one of these
Meridians and Parallels, will form to it self so many visuall Pyramides,
called by Geometricians Cones, which cones by this means will be Scalenes, and
will have for their Bases those Meridians and Parallels, the tops whereof will
meet together in the same point and eye of the beholder, which according to
this supposition is the Pole of the Meridian, which passes by the Canaries,
called the first Meridian, and representing unto us the Equinoctial colure.
Now because these lines are ^ut by the plain of the Meridian passing by the
Canaries, it follows out of the same grounds, that their common sections, and
that of the Meridian are the proportions of circumferences, which represent
unto us in this Plain the Meridians and Parallels seen in this manner of
sight. Notwithstanding that which is under the 90 degree of longitude, as
likewise the Equatour, cannot (according to Opticke demonstration) be seen,
but as right lines cutting one the other at Right Angles in the Center of the
same Meridian of the Canaries: The Theory being expressed we will in the next
proposition show the manner of proiection.

2 How to describe the Meridians and Parallels in the Equinoctial Planispheare.

To show the practice of this Theoreme, let there be drawn a circle ACBD, as
you see in this figure divided by two Diameters cutting on the other at right
Angles in the Center into four Quadrants, or equal parts: whereof each one is
again to be divided into 90 degrees. In this the line AB is imagined to
express the half of the Equatour, as the line CD of the Meridian; in which
the two points C and D design out the two Poles. Let a rule be drawn from
the Pole C by every tenth or fifth degrees of the half circle ADB, and let
every section of the Equatour and the rule be precisely noted. In like sort
from the point B let the Rule be moved by every fifth and tenth Degree of the
semicircle CAD, and let every several Interfection of the rule and the
Meridian CD be precisely noted. Then placing one foot of the compass in the
line CD (which must be drawn out longer, because in it the Centers of the
Parallels must be found out) let the other be moved in order to every
intersection of the Meridian noted out: and let so many circles be drawn as
intersections, which circles will be so many Parallels. The finding out of the
Centers where the steadfast foot of the compass ought to be fixed in drawing
of each circle, is a matter appertaining to Geometricians: who have taught a
way to bring any three points given into a circle, and to find the Center from
which it is described. Having thus described the Parallels, we must proceed on
to draw the Meridians in this manuer: let the one foot of the compass be
placed in the line AB, from which as the Center by every Intersection of the
rule, and the Equatour forenoted, let there be drawn so many circles as
intersections; which circles so drawn will be the Meridians. If any man desire
more curiously to be informed in the Geometrical Demonstrations, whereon this
Fabric of the Planispheare is grounded, let him read Gemma Frisius de
Astrolabio, Stifelius: but especially Guido Vbaldus, who has copiously and
accuratly handled this subject. Enough it may seem for a Cosmographer to show
the use of it, as we shall hereafter in Geographicall conclusions, supposing
the Fabric sufficiently demonstrated by Geometricians, to whom it of right
belongs.

10 The ground and Fabric of the Polar Planispheare, is taught in these
Propositions.

1 The Eye conceived to be fixed on the Pole will express in the plain of the
Equinoctial a Planispheare, wherein all the Parallels are described by circles
and Meridians by right lines.

This may likewise be optically demonstrated: For the Eye being supposed to be
fixed on the Pole, the sight will form to it self so many visuall Cones as
there are Parallels described in the Sphere. These cones being supposed
equally to be cut by the plain of the Equatour, will have for their Bases the
said Parallel circles represented in the plain of the Equatour, as so many
absolute circles; whereof the Equatour will be the greatest, and comprehending
within it all the rest. Likewise the Meridians in this kind of sight are
supposed to terminate the sides of these Cones, and therefore according to the
Optics ought to be right lines.

2 How to describe the Parallels and Meridians in the Polar Planispheare.

This proiection is easiest of all, as shall appear by this Diagram. Let there
be described a circle from the Center E which shall be ACBD: Let the circle be
by two Diameters AB and BC divided into four quadrants: each of which may
again be divided into 90 parts: every fifth or tenth of these 90 parts being
first marked out, so many Diameters may be drawn from either side to the
opposite part by the Center E: which Diameters so drawn will serve for the
Meridians. Then let any one of these lines be divided into 9 parts, and
diligently marked out, as the Semidiameter ED by FGHIKLMN: by all which marks
from the Center E, let there be drawn so many circles. These circles so
described will be the true Parallels: This kind of proiection, though more
unusual, yet wants not his special use in describing the parts of the earth
near the Pole, which in our ordinary kind of Tables proiected after the other
manner, cannot suffer so large and proportional a Description.

11 Having hitherto treated of the Common representation of the Terrestrial
Globe, we are in the next place to speak something of the Magneticall. The
Magneticall is a round Magnet called a Terrella.

This kind of sphere has been by Gilbert aptly termed a Terrella, or little
Earth, being the model and representation of the great and massy Sphere of
the earth whereon we dwell. Betwixt this kind of representation and the
former, great difference may be observed. First because the former is grounded
merely on Artificial Imitation, implying nothing else but a Respect or
application: whereas this magneticall Terrella not only represents externally
the Earth, but Internally out of its own Magneticall nature and vigor,
eminently contains and expresses all those motions and magneticall virtues,
which we have formerly showed to be in the Earth. 2 It skills not in the
former of what Material substance the Sphere consists, so the parts of it
answer in due symmetry and proportion to the parts of the Earth; but this
represents the whole as a Homogeneall part communicating the same nature and
substance with the whole sphere of the earth: In the Fabric of this
instrument we must consider, 1 the Matter: 2 the Form: The matter (as we
have already intimated) is a Magneticall substance which ought to be chosen out
of a most eminent Mine, having all his parts pure and unmixed, as possible we
can find in any Magnet. For though all Loadstones have the same inclination,
yet in many the vigor is so weak, or at least so hindered by the mixture of
some Heterogeneall matter, that they will not so well and sensibly perform
their office. The form of it is the roundnesse and politure, wherein Art should
show as much exactness as she can: such a Sphere may well be expressed in
this Figure, whereof we had formerly occasion to make use: wherein the
footsteps of this Magneticall vigor are sensibly expressed, no otherwise then
in the great Body of the Earth.



12 In this Magneticall Terrella two things are chiefly to be noted, 1 the
invention of the Poles, 2 of the Parallels and Meridians: both which shall be
taught in these Propositions.

1 To find out the Poles in the Magneticall Terrella.

To perform this conclusion many artificial ways have been invented, 1 By
the Inclinatory Needle: for being euenly hung in such sort upon the Terrella,
as may be seen in the former figure it will according to diverse points
diversely respect the Terrella in his site: wheresoever then we shall find it
to fall perpendicularly as right angles, we may assure our selves that that
very point is the Pole: which being once known, it will be easy to find the
opposite Pole, either the same way, or by measuring. 2 By the Vein or Mine of
the Loadstone: for (as we have showed in our fourth Chapter of this Treatise)
that part which was situated toward the North, will afterward direct it self
Southward, and contrariwise, the South point will respect the North, whence the
Poles may be discovered. 3 By a little boat, wherein the Loadstone being placed
on the water, will move round till such time as with one Pole he may point out
the North, with the other the South. Many other ways may be invented by
Mechanicians, perhaps more curious, to whose industry I refer my ingenious
Reader.

2 The circles in the Terrella are found out by the Magneticall Needle.

This needs no other ocular demonstration then we have taught in the fourth
Chapter, and may be conceived in the former Diagramme; First we see the
magneticall needle according to diverse points diversely to conform it self,
which has given way to ingenious artificers to find out the Parallels and
Meridians. The Parallels are found out by observing the Angles of declination
of the Needle hung over the Terrella which are found in proportion to answer to
the degrees of Latitude; which Dr Ridley in his Magneticall Treatise has
industriously calculated, as I have here inserted, to save others a new labor
of calculation. The Meridians are more easily found by hanging any directory
wier or needle over the Terrella; one end of which pointing toward the North,
and the other toward the South, will discover the Meridian line.

CHAP. VIII. Of the measure of the Terrestrial Globe.
1 HItherto have we handled the Terrestrial Globe primarily: in such
proprieties as absolutely agree unto its nature. In the second place we are to
handle such as secondarily arise out of the former. Here we are to handle two
chief points. 1 The Measure. 2 The Distinction.

2 The measure is that by which we find out the quantity of the whole Earth.

Good reason have we to call this the Secondary part of Geography; for as much
as these accidents and proprieties we here consider, arise altogether out of
the former. In the former Treatise we have divided the Natural Sphere of the
Earth, from the Artificial: But in this part, for avoiding of tedious
repetitions of the same things, we have joined them together: For howsoever
the measuring and dictinctions of the Earth be truly grounded on the nature
of the earth it self; yet can it not be well expressed and taught without the
material Instrument: we have therefore thought good to consider the measure of
the earth, before we come unto the Distinction, because it is more simple and
vncompound, depending on the lineaments and measure of one circle: whereas the
Distinction necessarily requires the conjunction and combination of diverse
circles, as Meridians and Parallels compared one with the other, as shall be
taught hereafter. Whether the great mass of the earth can be measured, or no,
seems a matter not agreed on by all; Some have held an opinion that it cannot
be measured, in regard of the infinite magnitude wherewith they thought it
endowed: which opinion seems derived from some of the Platonicks, who
ascribing to the Earth another figure besides the Sphericall, have cast
themselves upon uncertainties, and being notable to reduce the Quantity of the
Earth according to their own grounds to any certain measure, have denied it
to be measurable: But the ground of this opinion we have taken away before,
in proving the earth to be of a true Sphericall nature and therefore
circumscribed in certain bounds apt to be measured. Another conceit more
absurd then the former, is not only the common people, whose condition might
excuse their ignorance, but of such as would be esteemed learned* who contend,
that the greatness of the earth cannot be measured: the only reasons they
can allege for themselves are, 1 That a great part of the earth is
inaccessible by reason of steep rocks, high mountains, spacious and thick
woods, moorish fogges, and such like impediments. 2 That the parts of it are
for the most part uneven, and subject to no regular figure, without the which
no measure can be exact. The first cavil is of no moment; because whereas we
affirm that the Earth by man may be measured, we hold it not necessary that it
should be trauersed over by iourneyes or voyages. For as much as to the finding
out of the Quantity of the whole Terrestrial Sphere, it may seem sufficient
to know the measure and proportion of any little part in respect of the
Heavens. As for example, what number of Miles, Leagues, or Furlongs answer to
any degree or degrees in the Heavens: wherefore we suppose the Earth to be
measured over not with our feet, but with our wits, which may by Mathematical
rules be taught to march forward where our legs fail us: The second
objection only proves thus much, that the Earth partaking of so many unequal
parts and irregular forms, cannot in the measuring admit of so much
exactness, as if it were endowed with one uniform face: yet it is exact
enough to contenta Cosmographer, who measures not by feet and inches, but by
leagues and miles, in which we little regard such a needless curiosity.

1* The common measure by which the quantity of the Earth is known, are Miles
and Furlongs.

Here is to be noted that such instruments as serve for measuring are of two
sorts, either greater or lesser; the smaller are of diverse sorts, as a Grain,
Inch, Foot, Perch, Pole, and such like Some of these howsoever sometime
useful in Topographie, can have little or no use at all in the vast greatness
of the whole Earth. Wherefore the Geographer seldom descends so low, but takes
notice of greater measures, such as are Miles and Furlongs: where we may
observe by the way, that the usual measuring amongst the Grecians was by
Stadia or furlongs, amongst many of the Latins by miles: under which we also
comprehend Leagues: these miles are diversely varied, according to the diversity
of Countries, so that in some places they are esteemed longer, in other
shorter: which differences may be learned out of this ensuing Table.

The instruments of measuring the Earth are 1 Furlong containing 125
Geometicall paces or 625 feet. 2 Mile which is either 1 Proper containing 8
Furlongs or 1000 paces. 2 Improper, which is either 1 League, which is either 2
German mile which is either the 1 Old, containing 12 Furlongs. 2 Newer
containing 16 Furlongs. 3 Common of 24 Furlongs. 1 Common, which is 32 Furlongs
or four Italian miles. 2 Greatest, containing 5000 paces which is called the
Suenian, or Heluetian mile.



Howsoever this Distinction of miles may be many ways profitable especially in
the Topographicall part, yet shall we seldom make use of any other then the
common Germane mile, or the common Italian mile: To which as the most known,
the rest may easily be reduced.

3 The object here proposed to be measured is the Sphere of the Earth. The
Dimensions according to which it is measured, are either Simple or Compound.

4 The simple is twofold, either the Perimeter, or the Diameter. The Perimeter
otherwise called the circumference, is a great circle measuring the Earth round
about.

5 The Invention of the Perimeter of the Earth depends on these following
Propositions.

1 If two or more circles be drawn about the same Center, and from the Center
to the Circumference be drawn two right lines; The Arches of all the Circles
comprehended within the said right lines will be like and proportional one to
the other.

This Proposition being merely Geometrical, is taken here as a ground without
farther demonstration: whereof if any man doubt, he may have recourse to
Clauius Commentaries upon Johannes de Sacrobosco. This principle granted will
beget these two Consectaries.

1 As one degree is to the number of correspondent miles, or furlongs, so all
degrees of the circles to the number of miles or Furlongs measuring the
quantity of the Perimeter of the Earth.

2 Wherefore one degree or portion of the Circle being known by his number of
miles or furlongs, the whole Circumference may be found out.

The reason of this consequence every Arithmetician can easily show out of the
Golden Rule: The chief point then of the invention consists in finding out the
proportion of any proportion, as a degree, half degree, or the like, to the
number of miles or Furlongs answerable thereunto; for which purpose many
skillful Mathematicians have invented many excellent ways of great use and
delight.

1 By the elevation of the Pole, or observation of an Eclipse, or some known
Star, the circuit of the Earth may be found out.

By the Elevation of the Pole it is performed after this manner* let there be
observed two Cities, or other notable Landmarks placed just North and South
under the same Meridian. In these two Cities, or marks, let the Elevation of
the Pole be exactly noted. Then substract the Elevation of the Southern City
which is lesser, out of the Northern* which is greater: the residue contains
the distance of these places in degrees; which being experimentally known by
Miles, Halfe-miles, Furlongs or such like measures, will show the true
proportion betwixt a degree, and his number of miles: which being again
multiplied by 360, will show the whole circumference of the Earth. For example
sake, we will take two famous Cities of England, Oxford and York; which are
situated, if not exactly, yet very near the same Meridian. The elevation of
the Pole here with us at Oxford is 51 degrees and 30 minutes; at York it is 54
degrees 30 minutes, or near there about: subtract the lesser from the greater,
the distance betwixt Oxford and York will be three degrees; which distance
experimentally known in miles, will show the proportion: which we shall find
to be, (abating somewhat in regard of the crookedness of the way) about 180,
answering to three degrees of the Meridian: wherefore to one degree will answer
60 Miles, which being multiplied by 360, the whole circle will produce 21600,
the measure of the whole Earth. The like may be performed by an Eclipse in two
Cities lying under the Equinoctial circle: two land-markes being once noted
out, lying under the Equinoctial, let there be observed in both the same
Eclipse of the Moon, especially in the beginning: Now it being certainly
found out how many hours the Eclipse began in the one place before the
other, we must resolve their hours into degrees, which is easily done: for as
much as to every hour answers 15 degrees in the Sun Diurnall motion,
according to Astronomers. Now the distance between these two Cities or marks
(being supposed first experimentally to be known, will easily show the
correspondency betwixt the Degrees and miles, which is here sought. Another way
is taught by Possidonius, as easy as the former, which is performed by some
noted fixed Star, as Oculus Tauri, Arcturus, Spica Virginis, or any other; let
there be observed under the same Meridian in the Earth two places, whose
distance is experimentally known: in both these places let the Meridian
altitude of the Star be fully and perfectly observed: The difference of these
two Altitudes will be the number of degrees betwixt these two places: whence
we may observe how many miles, or other partsanswer to the number of these
degrees betwixt these two places. This way by Clauius is preferred before the
former; for as much as it requires not in any place the knowledge of the
Elevation of the Pole, which in any place cannot be certainly known, without
long and diligent search, and observation: As for Geographicall Tables, they
are not always at all times to be had, at least worthy credit.

2 By the observation of the Noone-shadowes the measure of the Earth may be
found out.

This way was invented by Eratosthenes a famous Mathematician: who by
observation of the Noone-shadowes, observed at the same time at two diverse
places, situate under the same Meridian, found out the circumference of the
Earth. The places which he chose for this purpose were Siene, and Alexandria,
situated under the same Meridian: the one inclining to the South, the other to
the North. The Distance betwixt these two places is supposed to be known,
whence he proceeded in this manner: First he erected a Gnomon at right Angles
on the plain of the Horizon: when the Sun was in the beginning of Cancer
called the Solstice, from which he imagined two Rays or Beams to be cast at
Noone: the one passing by Siene the most Southern part, the other by
Alexandria the most Northern: so that at Siene, the Sun being then in the
Solstice passed into the Center of the world; the place being supposed to have
been situate under the Tropicke: The other passed by the Vertex of the said
Gnomon: whence by proportion of the shadow to the Gnomon by a Geometrical
kind of working he found out the place between Alexandria, and Siene: which
demonstration, formoreeuidence we will here set down: Let there be in the
Earth described a circle passing by Alexandria and Siene; in which let A be
the place where Alexandria stands: B the place of Siene: the Gnomon or Style
erected at Alexandria, AD, The Sun-beame carried to the Center of the world at
Siena FBC, The Sunne-beame passing by the Vertex, or top of the Gnomon seated
at Alexandria EDG, casting his shadow AG toward the North: let the Gnomon be
conceived to be prolonged unto the Center C: Now for as much as in the
Triangle ADG, the Arch AG, without any sensible difference may be taken for a
Right line, having an insensible magnitude in regard of the whole Earth: and
the Angle A is a right angle, and the two sides AD, and AG known: the former
by supposition, being a Gnomon taken at our pleasure; the latter by any
measure, or at least by the known proportion of the shadow to the Gnomon,
according to the Doctrine of Triangles: the Angle ADG will be known; For
whereas the sides AD, and AG are supposed to be known, their Quadrants also
will be known, which being equal to the square made of DG, by the 47
proposition of the 1 of Euclide, the right side DG will easily be known: out
of these grounds by the doctrine of the Sines and Tangents is easily found out
the Angle ADG, and by consequence the alternate Angle ACB, which by the 27 of
the first of Euclide is equal unto it: for as much as the two Radii FBC and
FDG may be supposed to be Parallels in so small a distance as Alexandria and
Siene compared with the Sun: the Angle being known the Arch AB subtended to
the Angle C, will also be known, which is the space intercepted betwixt Siene
and Alexandria; and for example sake: if Eratosthenes (as some write) found out
the Arch AB, to contain in degrees 85, and experience had taught the length of
the Journey betwixt these Cities to have contained 6183 Furlongs: It would
appear by the Golden Rule that 360 degrees containing the whole circuit of the
Earth must proportionally answer to 252000 Furlongs.

1 The opinions of Cosmographers concerning the measure of the Earth, are
diverse: which is chiefly to be imputed to their error in observing the
distances of places experimentally according to Miles, Furlongs, or such like
measures.

How many Authors of great name and estimation have differed amongst
themselves, every man may inform himself out of this Table here inserted.
These differences we find diversely related: but of all others, which Authors
have set forth, Authors Furlongs Miles. Strabo and Hipparchus 252000 31500
Eratosthenes. 250000 31250 The circuit of the whole earth contains according
to Possidonius and the ancient Arabians. 240000 30000 Ptolomie. 180000 22500
The later Arabians 204000 25500 Italians and Germans. 172800 21600 I prefer
the judgments of Mr Robert Hues; For as much as it is not grounded on common
tradition, but industriously by himself derived out of the Ancients by
diligent search and examination, as by one, whose judgment being armed as well
with skill in the language, as the knowledge of antiquity, scorns to be
injured by translation. What should be the cause of these differences, is a
matter which has staggered curious searchers into Antiquities more then the
former. Every opinion being supported with the names and authorities of such
renowned Authors, might challenge a pitch above the measure of my Decision:
only I may not be thought over presumptuous to conjecture where I cannot
define, especially having so good a guide as my forenamed Author, to tread out
the way before me. Wherefore supposing as a ground, these Authors so much
differing about the measure of the earth, to have been in some sort led by
reason. The differences must needs arise out of one of these causes: either the
error or negligence of the obseruers, in trusting too much to others relations
without any farther search, or else the defect in the Mathematical grounds out
of which they derived their demonstration; or the diversity of measures used in
this work: or finally, from the misapplication of these measures to the
distances; whence may arise some error out of the experimental measuring of
places in the earth. In the first place it may perhaps be doubted whether
Aristotle defining the measure of the Earth to be 400000 furlongs, were not
deceived by relations: for as much as he avouches it, from the Mathematicians
of his times, whose authority and credit for ought we know, deserves as well
to be forgotten as their names. But this answer might seem too sharp in the
other: for as much as we find them registered for Masters in their science, and
such as could not easily be cosened by others impostures. Neither can we
imagine the second to be any cause of their error for the same reason:
because the ways these Mathematicians used in finding out the circuit of the
earth, are by writers of good credit commended to posterity, as warrantably
grounded on certain demonstrations, being no other then what we have showed
before, which admit of no Parallogisme: In the third place we ought to examine
whether the diversity of opinion concerning this matter proceeded from
diversity of the measures which were used in this work. Nonnius and P^^ceru^
would needs persuade, that the Furlongs whereby they measured the earth were
not the same: Maurolycus and Xilander talk of diverse kinds of paces:
Maurolycus labors to reconcile both, but without effect. First whereas they
would have diverse k^nde of paces, it cannot be denied: but in the mean time
we cannot learn that the Grecians ever measured their Furlongs by Paces, but
either by Feet, or Faddomes. A Faddome which the Greeks call (...) is the
measure of the extension of the hands together with the breast betwixt,
containing six feet: which is a kind of measuring well known unto our
Mariners, in sounding the depth of the Sea. This measure notwithstanding is by
many translated a Pace: by what reason, let any man judge. Xilander in
translating Strabo renders it an Ell: Secondly for a Furlong it contains
according to Herodoiu^ an ancient Grecian writer 600 Feet: which is also
testified by Suidas, being much later. A Furlong contains 100 Faddomes; every
Faddome four Cubits. A Cubit, according to Heron, a Foot and half, or 24
Digits. Now for the variety of Furlongs, it is true that Censorinus makes three
kinds. For either it is called the Italian consisting of 625 Feet, which is of
most regard in measuring the Earth; or the Olympian of 600 Feet: or the Pythian
containing 1000 Feet. But to let pass this latter, we shall find by serious
consideration, that the Italian and Olympian Furlongs differ only in name, and
are indeed the same. For the Italian containing 625 Roman Feet (according to
Pliny in his second book) is ^quall to the Olympian, having 600 Grecian Feet.
For a Foot with the Grecians exceeds the Roman Foot by a twenty fourth part: as
much as is the difference betwixt 600 and 625. Hence we see how little
certainty can be expected of such as go about to reconcile these opinions out
of the various use and acception of the measures. The most probable assertion
then is, that the error was grounded on this, that the distances of places,
mentioned by the foresaid Authors, were not by themselves exactly measured, but
taken up upon trust on the relation of travelers, wherein they might easily
be mistaken. For instance we will take Eratosthenes and Possidonius, as of
greatest credit, who are notwithstanding taxed for many errors in their
experimental observations: whereas it is clear that Ptolomy grounded his
opinion on the distances of the places, exactly measured, as is witnessed by
his designation of the Latitude of the earth so far as it was discovered and
known. Eratosthenes, for mistaking in the measure of distances, is much taxed
by Hyparchus, as we find in Strabo: For betwixt Alexandria and Carthage, he
reckons above 13 thousand furlongs, whereas by a more diligent enquiry there
are found to be but 9 thousand. Likewise Possidoniu^ is known to be
mistaken, in that he made the Distance betwixt Rhodes and Alexandria to be
5000 Furlongs, whereas out of the relation of Mariners, some have made it
4000, some 5000, as it is witnessed by Eratosthenes in Strabo; who
notwithstanding, says that he found by Instruments that it was not above
3750; and Strabo wou^d have it somewhat less, as 2640. Maurolycus, going about
to defend Possidonius against Ptolomy, brings nothing but friuo^ous reasons
unworthy so good an author. Out of all which has been spoken our former
Corollary will be manifest, that the diversity of opinions concerning the
circumference of the Earth, arose from the experimental mistake in the
distances of places, where they trusted to other men's relations, rather then
their own knowledge.

6 The Diameter is a right line passing by the Center of the Earth from one
side to the other* and measuring the thickness of it: the invention of which
depends on these Rules.

1 As 22 is to 7 so is the circumference of a circle to the Diameter: wherefore
the circumference of the Earth multiplied by 7, and divided by 22 will produce
the Diameter.

The exact proportion betwixt the Circumferences of a circle, and the Diameter
being the ground of the Quadrature of a circle, is a matter which has set a
work the greatest wits of the world: having notwithstanding as yet by no man
been brought to discovery, in so much as Pitiscus, and other good
Mathematicians, might well doubt whether ever it would come to light.
N^uerthelesse, where exactness cannot be found, we must come as near as we
can. The nearest proportion in numbers which any could yet light on, is as 22
to 7, which in so great and massy a body, as the Earth may pass without any
sensible or explicable error. Supposing then out of our precedent Suppositions
the whole circuit of the earth to be 21600 Italian-miles (which is the common
opinion now received) I multiply according to the golden Rule 21600 by 7,
whence will arise 151200, which being divided by 22 the Quotient will render
6872 11/8 which is the Diameter or thickness of the Earth: some less curious
are content to take only the third part of the circumference for the Diameter,
which will be 7200, which account is less exact, yet sufficient for an
ordinary Cosmographer: for as much as 328 miles, which is the difference, is of
no great moment in the measure of the whole Earth.

2 By the known height of some mountain without the knowledge of the
circumference of the Earth, the Diameter may be found out.

This is a way invented by Maurolycus, which proceeds in a contrary manner to
the former: because the former by the circumference first supposed to be known,
shows us a way to find out a Diameter: but this, first seeks out the Diameter,
by which we may find out the circumference: the practice is in this manner.
Let the circuit of the Earth be conceived to be BCD (as we see in this Figure)
in which let there be chosen an high Mountain whose Altitude AB may be known
by the rules of measuring altitudes: then from the Mountains top A, by the
rules of measuring longitudes must the whole space of Sea or Land be measured
so far as it can be seen: so that the visuall Beam AC, may touch the
Superficies of the Earth in C: let the space the^ which is seen in the Earth
be BC, which although in it self it be crooked and not plain, yet can it not
sensibly differ from a Plain, for as much as the Arch BC, is extraordinarily
little, if compared with the whole Earth. These grounds thus laid, we must
proceed by a Geometrical manner of argumentation in this sort, Here are to be
observed four right lines: whereof the first is AB, the height of the
mountain observed: the second is the visuall Ray AC: the third AD consisting
of the height of the mountain, and the Diameter of the Earth. The fourth BC,
the distance which is seen: for (as we have showed) it may without sensible
error be taken for a right line. Now for as much as AB, BC are known, their
Quadrates by the 47 proposition of the first of Euclide, will also be known,
which being equal to the square of AC, the square of the right line AC will
likewise be known. But the square of the right line AC, since it touches the
circle, will be equal to a Right Angle Figure contained under DA, AB,
wherefore the right angle so conceived will be known. But AB is the known
height of the mountain, wherefore the right line AD will easily be known; if
we divide the known right Angle contained under AB, AD: by the right line AB:
for the Quotient will give the right line AD; from which if we subduct AB, the
known height of the mountain: then will remain the Diameter of the Earth BD,
which was here to be performed: from this invention will arise this Corollary.

1 The Diameter of the Earth first supposed to be known, the circumference may
be found out in this manner: as 7 is in proportion to 22, so is the Diameter to
the Circumference.

2 Wherefore let the known number of the Diameter be multiplied by 22, and the
Product be divided by 7, the quotient will give the Circumference.

As for example according to our former instance: Let us suppose the Diameter
of the Earth to be 6872 8/11 this number being multiplied by 22, will produce
15120, which product divided by 7, we shall find in the Quotient 21600, which
is the circumference of the Earth.

7 The compound dimensions, according to which the Sphere of the Earth is
proposed to be measured, are either the Superficies or the Solidity.

8 The Superficies is again twofold, either Plain or Conuexe: the Plain is
the space included in the Perimeter.

9 The plain Superficies may be found out two ways: either by the
Circumference, or the Diameter: both which ways taught in these Rules.

1 If the whole circumference be multiplied in it self, and the product be
divided by 12 4/7 the quotient will show the Superficies included in the circle.

As in the former example we will take the Circumference of the Earth to be
21600 Italian-miles: let this number be multiplied in it self, and the product
thereof divided by 12 4/7, the Quotient will amount unto 9278180, which is the
plain superficies of the Earth.

2 If the Semi-Diameter of a circle be multiplied by the half part of the
Circumference: there will arise the measure of the Plain Superficies contained
in the Circumference.

The reason hereof is showed by Clauius in his Tract de Isoperimetris Proposit.
4. where is demonstrated, that a Right Angle figure comprehended of the
Semi-Diameter of any circle, and the half of the Circumference will be equal
to the Circle it self, of whose parts it is comprehended.

10 So much concerning the Plain Superficies: the knowledge and invention of
the Conuexe, may be performed two ways: either by the Diameter and
Circumference; or else by the Space contained within the Circumference,
according to these Propositions.

1 If the Circumference and Diameter be multiplied the one into the other, the
product will show the number of square miles in the face of the Terrestrial
Globe.

As for example, let the Diameter of the Earth containing according to the
common account 80111 9/12 furlongs, be multiplied by the whole circumference,
which is 252000, there will arise the Conuexe Superficies of the whole earthly
Sphere which is 20205818181 9/11.

2 If the space contained in the greatest circle in the Sphere be multiplied
by 4, there will be produced the whole conuexe Superficies of the Sphere.

How to find out the space or plain Superficies, is a matter taught before:
which being once found is easily multiplied by 4, and so will give us the
number sought.

11 The last and greatest compound Dimension, according to which the Earth is
measured, is the Solidity, consisting of Length, Breadth, and Height, or
Thickness: This may be found out two ways either by the Diameter, and
Conuexe Superficies, first supposed to be known: or by the knowledge of a great
circle without supposing the Supperficies to be first known: both ways shall
be expressed in these Propositions.

1 If the Semidiameter of the Sphere be multiplied into the third part of the
Conuex Superficies of the said Sphere, there will arise the whole Solidity of
the Earth.

This is demonstrated by Geometricians: For a solid Rectangle comprehended of
the Semidiameter of the Sphere, and the third of the Co^uex Superficies of it,
will be equal to the Sphere it self. As for example, if the Semidiameter of
the earth containing 40090 10/11 Furlongs be multiplied by the third part of
the Conuex Superficies containing, to wit, 67352727 3/11 there will arise the
solidity of the earth, which will contain 27002-3:06611570 3/11 Cubicke
Furlongs. That is the solidity of the earth will comprehend so many Cubes,
cantaining every side so many Furlongs, as there are unities in the said
number: For the Areae or spaces comprehended of Solid figures are measured by
the Cubes of those lines, by whose squares the Conuexe Superficies of those
lines are measured.

2 If the greatest circle be multiplied by of the whole Diameter: the product
will show the solidity of the Sphere.

This way is also demonstrated by Clauius in the same tract of measuring
Magnitudes. It may Arithmetically be deduced in this sort. If any Sphere
whatsoever has a Diameter of 14 Palms, and should be multiplied by 3 1/7,
the circumference of the greatest circle containing it will be found to be 44;
whose half being 22, if it be multiplied into the Semidiameter 7, there will
arise the Superficies of the greatest circle 154, which number if we multiply
by two third parts of the Diameter: that is by 9 there will be produced the
solidity of the said Sphere, to wit, consisting of 1437 Cubicke palms. In the
like sort may we work by miles or furlongs in measuring the whole
terrestrial Globe, which is a more convenient measure for the massy Globe of
the Earth.

CHAP. IX. Of the Zones, Climates, and Parallels.
1 OF the Measure of the Earth we have treated in our former Chapter. In the
next place we must speak of the Distinction of the Terrestrial Sphere,
which is either in regard of Spaces or Distances.

2 Spaces are portions in the Sphere bounded by the Parallel circles: such as
are the Zones, Climats, and Parallels.

3 These are again considered two ways; either in themselves, or else in
their Adjuncts or Inhabitants belonging to them.

4 A Zone is a space included betwixt two lesser and named circles; or else
betwixt a lesser circle and the Pole of the world.

The spaces into which the Terrestrial Sphere is divided, are either Greater
or Lesser. The Greater is a Hemispheare which arises out of one only circle by
it self, without the Combination of more. Such are chiefly of three sorts. The
first is made by the Equatour: which diuides the whole Globe into the north and
the South Hemispheare. The second is of the Meridian, whose office it is to
part the Earth into the Eastern and Western Hemispheares: The third of the
Horizon, which diuides the Sphere into the upper and lower halfes: But these
parts arising (as I said) out of one only circle, are handled before with the
circles themselves. In this place we are to speak of such parts, as arise out
of the Combination and respect of circles one with another. Such as are the
Zones, Climats, and Parallels. A Zone signifies as much as a girdle or band:
because by it the spaces in the Earth are (as it were) with larger bands
compassed about. The Grecians have sometimes given this name Zone to the Orbs
of the Planets, as Theon, Alexandrinus in his Comment on Aratus, in these
words, (...). There are (says he) in the Heavens seven Zones not contorminate
with the Zodiac, whereof the first is possessed by Saturn, the second by
Jupiter, etc. But this acception of the name is far off from our purpose. The
name, Zone, as it is with us in use, is by the Latin Poets rendered sometimes
Facia, sometimes Plaga: both signifying one and the selfsame thing: which is
as much as a space comprehended within two Named and lesser Parallels: or at
least betwixt such a Parallel and the Pole it self: because, as we shall
show hereafter Zones are of two sorts: These Zones are in number five; which
division has been familiar with our Latin Poets, as may appear by these
verses of Virgil. Quinque tenent coelum Zonae, quarum vna corusco*
Semper Sole rubens* and torrida semper ab Igne:
Quam circum extremae dextra laeuaque trahuntur.
Caerule a glacie concretae, atque imbribus atris.
Has inter, Mediamque, duae Mortalibus aegris
Munere concessae Diuum, etc.
Five Zones ingirt the Skies; whereof one fries
With fiery Sunbeams, and all scorched lies.
'Bout which the farthest off on either hand,
The blew-eyed Ice and brackish showers command.
'Twixt these two and the midst the Gods do give
A wholesome place for wretched man to live.
Which description of Virgil little differs from that we find in Ovid, in
these Verses. -- Duae dextra coelum totidemque sinistra
Part secant Zonae: quinta est ardentior illis:
Sic onus inclusum numero distinxit eodem
Cura Dei, totidemque Plagae tellure premuntur.
Quarum quae Media est non est habitabilis aestu:
Nix ^egit, alta duas: totidem inter vtramque locauit.
Temperiemque dedit mista cum Frigore Flamma.
Two Girdles on the right hand, on the left
As many cut the Skies: more hot's the fifth.
So God dividing with an equal hand,
Into so many parcels cuts the land.
The midst through heat affords no dwellers Ease:
The deep snow wraps up two: but betwixt these
And the other Regions, are two places set,
Where frosts are mixed with fires, and cold with heat.
But because this enumeration and description of the Zones set down by the
Poets, seems too popular and general, we will more specially divide them
according to the method of our times in this manner.

5 The Zones are either Intemperate, or Temperate: the Intemperate are again
twofold either cold or hot.

6 The Intemperate hot Zone is the space contained betwixt the two Tropicke
circles of Cancer and Capricorn.

How unaptly these names of Temperate and Intemperate agree to the Zones,
considered in their own nature, we shall speak in our second part: yet
because I thought it unfit to use other terms then the Ancients, I will not
coin new names. This Zone, or space included betwixt the two Tropicks,
circumscribes within it two great circles, whereof the one is the Equatour
running just in the midst, neither inclining to the North or South: The other
is the Eclipticke obliquely crossing it and meeting the two Tropicks twice in a
year, in the Spring and Autumn. The extent or breadth of this Zone then is
equal to the distance betwixt these two Tropicks, to wit, 47 degrees, which
make 2820 miles: because from the Equatour to either Tropicke we account 23
degrees, which added and resolved into miles, will make the said sum: within
the compass of this Zone is situate the greatest part of Afric, especially
that of the Abyssines (which common opinion with little probability, would have
to be the Empire of Prester John) also many Islands as Iaua, Summatra,
Taprobana, besides a great part of the South of America called Peruana: It was
imagined by the Ancients, as Aristotle, Pliny, Ptolomy, and many other
Philosophers, Poets, and Divines, that this Zone through extreme heat was
altogether uninhabitable: for which cause they called it Intemperate: The reason
of this conjecture was drawn from the situation of this part in regard of that
of the heavens. For lying in the middle part of the world, the Sun must of
necessity cast his rays perpendicular, that is to say at Right Angles. Now
according to the grounds of Peripateticke Philosophy the Idol of this age, the
heat derived from the Sun, arises from the reflection of the Sunne-beames
against the surface of the Earth. Wherefore the heat was there coniectured to
be greatest, where the reflection was found to be greatest. But the greatest
reflection, according to all Mathematicians, must be in this Torrid Zone, where
the Sun darts forth his Rays at right Angles, which reflect back upon
themselves. Which false conjecture was a long time continued by the exuberant
descriptions of Poets, and defect of Navigations: having as yet scarce passed
her infancy. But how far these surmises come short of truth, we shall
declare in our second part, to which we have reserved those Physical and
Historical discourses concerning the qualities and properties of the Earth.

7 The Intemperat cold Zones are those which are included betwixt the Polar
circles and the Poles: whereof the one is Northern, contained in the Arcticke
circle, the other Southern in the Antarcticke.

These two Zones are not made out of the combination of two circles, as the
former: but by one circle with relation to the Pole. The greatness and extent
of this Zone is about 23 degrees and a half: which resolved into Italian-miles
will produce 1380. The Northern cold Zone contains in it Groenland, Fineland,
and diverse other Northern Regions, whereof some are partly discovered, and
set out in our ordinary Maps, other some not yet detected. For the other Zone
under the Antarticke Pole, it consists of the same greatness, as we know by
the constitution of the Globe, having other such accidents correspondent as the
Northern, so far forth as they respect the Heavens. For other matters, they
lie hid in the vast Gulf of obscurity, this port having never yet (for ought I
know) exposed her self to the discovery of the Christian world. Whether these
two Zones be without habitation, by reason of intemperate cold, as the other
has been thought by reason of too much heat, we shall in due place examine.

8 The Temperate Zone is the space contained betwixt the Tropicke and the Polar
circle: whereof the one is Northern contained betwixt the Tropicke of Cancer
and the Articke circle: the other Southern comprehended betwixt the Tropicke
of Capricorn and the Antarcticke circle.

Why these Zones are termed Temperate, diverse reasons are alleged. 1 Because
the Sunbeams here are cast obliquely on the surface of the earth, and by
consequence cannot produce so much heat, as in those places where they are
darted perpendicularly, if we only consider the constitution and site of the
heavens: For as we shall hereafter prove, this may sometimes be altered by the
disposition of some particular place. 2 It may be called the Temperate Zone,
because it seems mixed of both extremes partaking in some measure the both
qualities of heat and cold: the one from the Torrid, the other from the Frigid
Zones. 3 Because in these Zones the distances betwixt Summer and Winter are
very remarkable, having a middle difference of time betwixt them, as compounded
of both extremes. These temperate Zones included betwixt the Tropicks and the
Polar circles are twofold as the circles: The northern temperate Zone
comprehended of the Tropicke of Cancer and the Articke circle, contains in it
the upper and higher part of Afric, stretching even to the mountain Atlas:
Moreover in it is placed all Europe, even to the Northern Islands in the
Articke Zone, and a great part also of Asia: the other temperate Zone lying
toward the South, is not so well known being far distant from our
habitation: and awaiting as yet the farther industry of our English and Dutch
Nauigators. The breadth of this Zone, as the other contains about 43 degrees
which is the distance betwixt the Tropicke and the Polar circle, which
multiplied by 60, will be resolved into 2580 Italian-miles.

1 The Torrid Zone is the greatest of all: next are the two Temperate Zones:
the cold Zones the least of all.

The Torrid Zone is found to be greatest as well in regard of longitude as
latitude, and is divided by the Equatour into two halfes: the next are the
Temperate; but the two cold Zones howsoever equal in Diameter to the Torrid,
are notwithstanding least of all: where is to be noted that every Zone is of
the same latitude from North to South, begin where we will, because it is
contained betwixt two equidistant circles: but all enjoy not the same longitude
from East to West, For the parts of every Zone by how much nearer they are to
the Equatour so much greater longitude will they have: by how much nearer the
Poles they are, so much the less longitude: for as much as the Parallels
toward the Poles grow always lesser and lesser. The invention of the quantity
of the Zones before mentioned, may briefly thus be performed. The latitude of
the torrid Zone is so much as the distance betwixt the Tropickes, which is
Astronomically grounded on the greatest declination of the Sun being doubled:
This declination being by Clauius and others found to be 23 degrees 30 scrup.
which being doubled will produce 47: which again multiplied by 60, and
resolved into miles, will amount to 2820: though the odd scruples of many
Authors are neglected. The latitude of the cold Zones is also drawn from the
greatest declination of the Sun: For the distance of the Pole circles from
the Pole it self is just so much as the declination of the Eclipticke from the
Equatour, to wit, of 23 degrees 30 scrup. to which answer according to the
former Rule 1420 Italian-miles. The invention of the latitude of the temperate
Zones depends from the subtraction of the distance of the Poles of the
Eclipticke, from the Equatour: that is from the greatest declination of the
Sun being doubled from the whole quadrant: in which subduction the residue
will be 43, to which will answer 2580 Italian-miles.

1 The Zone wherein any place is seated may be known either by the Globe or
Geographicall Table, or else by the Tables of Latitude.

By the Globe or universal Map we may know it by the diligent observation
of the four equidistant circles. For if we find it betwixt the two Tropicks,
we may without doubt, think it to be in the Torrid Zone: If betwixt the
Tropicke circle and the Polar, it will be in the Temperate. If betwixt the
Polar circle and the Pole it self, it must be in the cold Zone. By the Tables
of Latitude it may be found this way: Seek the latitude of the places given in
the Table, which if it be less then 23 degrees 30 scruples, the place is in
the Torrid Zone. If precisely it be so much in the Northern Hemispheare, the
place assigned is under the Tropicke of Cancer, which is the bound betwixt the
Torrid and the beginning of the Northern Temperate Zone: But if it be in the
Southern Hemispheare, it will be under the Tropicke of Capricorn: which ends
the Torrid Zone, and begins the South Temperate Zone: Every place having more
Latitude then 23 degrees 30 scruples, yet less then 66 degrees 30 Minutes, is
seated in the Temperate Zone, either Northern or Southern, as the places are
in the Hemispheare. If the place be precisely of 66 Degrees 30 minutes, it will
be justly found to be under the Polar circle, either Arcticke or Antarcticke.
Finally every place whose Latitude exceeds the number of 66 degrees 30 minutes,
is seated in the cold Zone either Southern or Northern. If it reach just to
90 degrees, it will be just under the Pole it self.

9 Of the distinction of the Terrestrial Sphere by Zones we have spoken: we
must in the next place deliver the Distinction of the earth according to
Climates.

10 A Climate is a space of the Earth contained betwixt two Parallels distant
from the Equatour toward either Pole.

Climates are so called because of their Declaration from Equatour; for as much
as they are to be accounted as so many scales of ascents to or from the
Equatour. Some have defined it from the use which is chiefly to distinguish the
longest time of the Artificial day: because at the point of every climate
truly taken, the longest day is varied half an hour: although this account
agree not altogether with Ptolomie, and the ancient Geographers before him, as
we shall show hereafter. This distinction of the Terrestrial Sphere into
Climates is somewhat a more subtle distinction then the former by Zones; for
as much as that is made by the combination of such Parallels as are principally
named and of chief note, as the Tropicks and Polar circles. But this
indifferently respects all without difference. This first beginning and
measure, as well of this as all other measures of the earth is the Equatour,
for that which is most perfect and absolute in every kind ought to be the
measure of all other. But yet we must understand, that although we begin
our account of the Climats from the Equatour; yet the Equatour it self makes
no Climate, but only the Parallels which are thereunto correspondent. For as it
is before showed, under the Equatour it self, the artificial days are all
equal in length, containing only twelve hours: wherefore beginning from the
Equatour betwixt that and the third Parallel, we count the first climate:
from the third to the sixth, the second Climate: and so all the rest, making the
number of the Climates double to the number of the Parallels; so that one and
the self same Parallel, which is the end, and bound of one Climate is the
beginning of the next; whence we see that to the constitution of every Climate
three Parallels concur, whereof two are extreme, comprehending the breadth of
the said Climate, and one dividing it just in the midst. A Parallel therefore
differs from a Climate, as a part from the whole, being one circle
correspondent to the Equatour, whereas a Climate is a space contained in three
Parallels. Secondly, as a Parallel is conceived to add to the artificial day
one quarter or fourth part of an hour; so a Climate makes half an hour; so
that by how much any Climate is distant from the Equatour, by so many half
hours the longest day of that Climate goes beyond the longest day of the place
under the Equatour. These Climates therefore cannot be all of one equal
quantity; because the Equatour is a greater circle, and comprehends the
greatest space in the Earth: so that it must needs follow that these Climates
near the Equatour being made by the combination of greater circles are greater
then those nearer the Poles. But because all Climates are made by the
combination of Parallels; we are to understand that there are three sort of
Parallels to be known in Cosmographie: The first are those which do
distinguish the latitude of places, taking their beginning from the Equatour;
and are in an ordinary Globe of Map distinguished, sometimes by 10, sometimes
by 15 degrees. The second kind of Parallels are those that make the Zones,
which are indeed some special named Parallels, as the Tropicks and the Polar
circles: The third sort are called Artificial Parallels; because they show the
distances of artificial days and nights, which are commonly noted in the
margent of a Geographicall Map, which last sort of Parallels are here chiefly
to be understood.

1 The Zones and Climates agree in form but differ in greatness, number and
office.

The Climates are so called (as we have said) because they decline from the
Equatour, and are spaces of the Earth containing two Parallells, in which the
longest day is varied by half an hour. These agree with the Zones in some
sort: for both of them are spread by the latitude of the Earth, and by
Parallel circles compass it about as so many girdles: Nevertheless they
differ one from the other. 1. In Greatness, because the Zones are greater, the
Climates lesser spaces in the Earth. 2. In Number, because there are only five
Zones, but many more climates. 3. In Office, use and effect, because the Zones
are to distinguish the mutation of the quality of the air and shadows
according to diverse Regions of the Earth: but the Climates are used to show
the greatest differences of hours in the day: to show the variation of the
rising and setting of the stars, for places under the same Climate have the
same quantity of days and nights, the same rising and setting of the stars,
whereas places seated under diverse climats have a great variation in the days
and nights, and a diverse rising and setting of the stars: for as often as the
longest or Solsticiall day of one place, differs from the longest day of
another by the space of half an hour, a new Climate is placed: wherefore
under the Equatour or middle part of the earth the days are always equal, to
wit, of 12 hours: which beginning from the Equatour, if we approach toward
either Pole, so far as the greatest artificial day amounts to 12, we may
assure our selves that we are come to the first Climate: and so forward still
the greatest day of our Climate will by so much exceed the greatest day of the
other. As the Climates differ one from the other by half hours, so the
Parallels by quarters, as we have showed: and shall more fully explain in this
Chapter.

2 The Climates compared one with the other, are not all of the same greatness.

Although the Climates are placed according to equal increase of days and
nights, yet suffer they a great inequality: For no clime is equal to another
in the same Hemispheare, but are still greater then other, by how much nearer
they are to the Equinoctial circle; for the latitude of the first Climate is
reckned to be about 8 degrees, which make 480 Italian-miles: but of the last
not so many minutes as quarters of miles.

11 In Terrestrial Climates, two things are to be understood; 1 The Invention:
2 The Distinction. The Invention teaches the manner how to find out in what
Climate any place lies. The finding out of any climate depends upon the
observation of the length of the day; for the length of the day being once
known, the Climate will also be found out by this Rule.

1 Double the hours above 12, and the Product will show the Climate*

The reason of this rule is intimated before; to wit, that the climates are
distinguished the one from the other by the space of half an hour of the
longest day: Now the days under the equatour are always equal, containing 12
hours in length: from which toward the Pole they are increased by degrees:
wherefore the number of the Climates must needs be double to the number of
hours above 12: as for example, if I should find out in what Climate England
is situated: I find the length of the longest day to be about 18 hours, which
is six hours more then 12; this I double, and it will be 12; whence I collect,
that England is situated under the 12 Climate: A more compendious way of
finding out the Climate of any place, is by a certain Table, wherein against
every Elevation of the Pole is set the just Climate: which Table we shall
insert hereafter. Here must be noted that this rule which we have taught is
to be understood of the Climates as they are absolute in nature, and not of
Ptolomies Climates: If any man would find out the Climates of Ptolomie, he
must first cast away three quarters of an hour, which is 45 minutes; because
his Climates, as we shall show, begin not immediately from the Equatour, but
from the latitude of 12 degrees.

12 Thus much for the Invention: the Distinction of Climates in Northern and
Southern Climates: both these again are of two sorts, either proper or
improper.

13 The proper Climates are those which are placed between the Equatour and the
point near the Polar circle: The improper are those from the Polar circle to
the Pole it self.

We must understand that the climates are considered two manner of ways, 1
Absolutely in respect of the whole Terrestrial Sphere. 2 Comparatively, in
respect of the known habitable part of the Earth: According to the latter
consideration the ancient Geographers have otherwise distinguished the Climates
then the new writers: whence arises a great difference and confusion amongst
them, in defining the number of the climates. For sometime they will have a new
climat put whenever the day increases a quarter of an hour: sometimes at
half an hour, sometimes at difference of an whole hour or day. But the doubt
is easily answered, and reconciled by our former distinction; for whereas they
put the difference of climates to be half an hour, it is to be understood of
these which are proper climates betwixt the Equatour and the Polar circle, for
it is certain that beyond this circle the artificial day increases, not only
by hours, but by days, weeks, months; so that another account must be made
of such climats then of the former. But it has been generally taken for those
climates of the Ancients: now the distinction of climates amongst the Ancients
is of two sorts. The first was of the Geographers before Ptolomy who placed the
uttermost bound Northward in the 25th degree of Latitude or Elevation, and so
made only seven climates. These 7 climates were all understood to be in the
habitable parts wherein they were marked and designed out unto us by names
taken from Cities, Mountains, Regions, and such like remarkable places, where
we are to conceive that climate as near as may be guessed to run through
the middle of any such Region, whereof it takes its name: But the better to
understand the Distinction of the climates, as well with the Ancient as Modern
Cosmographers, we will insert this following Theorem.

1 In the placing and Number of the Climates and Parallels, there is a great
diversity betwixt the Ancient and Modern Geographers.

This has been before mentioned: but for better distinction we have reserved
the handling of these differences to this proposition, which may serve as a
Carollary to the rest. First we take it as granted that Ptolomy so appointed
the Parallells (out of which the climates must arise) that he numbered 38 both
ways from the Equatour: to wit, 38 toward the South, and so many toward the
North. These Parallels he so distinguished, that 24 he numbered by quarters of
hours, four by half hours, four by whole hours, and six by whole months.
Hence is it that Geographers say, that a new Parallel is to be placed
sometimes whereas the longest day increases by a quarter of an hour;
sometimes where it increases by a half, sometimes by a whole hour, sometimes
by a whole month. The first is to be understood of those 24 Parallels which
were delivered by the Ancients before Ptolomy. The second, third, and fourth of
such as were unknown unto those Ancients before Ptolomy. To reduce all into
order we will set down this distinction. The distinction of the Climats is
either ancient or new. The Ancient was again twofold: either former or latter.
The former was that which was set down before Ptolomies times, wherein there
were assigned seven Climates according to the common opinion (though Mercator
grants but 5) These Authors placed their Northern bound in the 25 degrees or
elevation: The later distinction was almost the same, but somewhat corrected by
Ptolomy, who placed 9 Climates toward the North. The first passed by Meroe a
City of Ethiopia, where the longest or Solstitiall day is 13 hours. The
second by Siene in Egypt, where the longest day is 13: The third by Alexandria
in Egypt, where the longest day is 14 hours, the 4th by the Island of Rhodes,
where the longest day is of 14. The fifth by Rome, where they have the length of
the longest day 15 hours. The sixth by Pontus, where the longest day is 15
hours. The seventh by the mouth of Boristhenes where the longest day is of 16
hours. Nevertheless some have drawn the 6 Climate by Boristhenes in
Sarmatia, and the seventh by the Riphaean mountains. Ptolomy to this number
adds two more, and so reckons them that the 8 should pass by the Riphaean
mountains, and the 9 by Denmark where the day at longest is 17 hours. To
these Northern Climats they opposed so many toward the South, which they
called Anticlimates. These as it should seem in Ptolomi^s time were Imaginary
altogether, because few or no places were discovered at that time beyond the
Line. But to leave P^olomy and his old Authors, and examine the industry of
later Geographers, we shall find the Distinction of the Climates to be
twofold; either imperfect wherein they numbered only 19 Climates; or perfect,
wherein they accounted 46 or 48, of which 23 or 24 were Northern, and the
other on the opposite part, to wit, in the South. The perfect distinction of
the Climates is again (as later writers speak) either certain or uncertain.
The certain they call that wherein the Climates are distinguished and ranged
from the Equatour to the Polar circle: For since the Northern Regions are
now discovered beyond 70 degrees of the Elevation of the Pole, and a Climate is
defined to be a space comprehended betwixt three Parallels in the habitable
Earth: wherein the length of the longest day is increased by half an hour;
Therefore it must needs be, that from the Equatour to that habitable part of
the Earth, wherein the longest day is 24 hours (which is not far from the
Pole-circle) there should be placed 24 Climates. The uncertain distinction
they call that which is betwixt the Polar circle, and the Pole it self, which
may be termed Improper; because in these Climates the day is not increased by
half hours, as in the former, but first by whole Days, then by We^kes, and
last of all by whole Months: In so much that under the Pole it self they have
6 Months perpetual day, and so long again a continu^ll night. The Parallels
whereof the Climates are made, were set down by Ptolomie 38 (as we have said)
but the later writers have placed them so far Northernly, that they reach to
that tract wherein the Sun tarries above the Horizon a whole 24 hours, and
so have numbered 23 or 24 toward the North, and so many toward the South. The
cause of this diversity is because some draw the first by the mouth of the
Redde-Sea: others by Meroe: for the farther consideration of these climates
corrected by later Goegraphers, they begin their account from the Equatour it
self, which in this case is the best rule of certainty: because we hold that
whole tract of Earth to be habitable, as we shall prove in our second book.

14 A Parallel is a space wherein the longest day is increased by a quarter of
an hour.

Concerning the Parallels, little can be said more then were have opened in the
doctrine of the Climats: for (as we showed) the one cannot be well understood
without the other: only to avoid ambiguity of speech, we must consider that a
Parallel may be taken either for a Line or Circle, in which senfe we took
it in the fifth Chapter; where we divided them into Named or Namelesse: or else
for a space bounded by circles as we here understand it. The neglect of this
distinction has made some Geographers speak sometimes improperly. The
Parallel is found out by this rule.

1 Let the number of the longest day above 12 be multiplied by 4, and the
Product will show the Parallel.

The reason is given before in the doctrine of the Climates, because the
Parallel space, according to Latitude, is but half the Climate: so that as in
finding out the climate for any place we ought to double the hours of the
longest day above 12: so here we ought to quadruple them, which is to multiply
them by 4: As for example at Rome we find the longest day to be about 15,
which exceeds 12 by 3; which being again multiplied by 4, will produce 12,
which is the Parallel for the place.

2 The Parallels no where divide the Climats into two equal parts.

In the climates we are to consider two things, either their latitude or
breadth from North to South: or their longitude or extent from East to West. In
respect of the former we may hardly without sensible error call the Parallel
half the Climate, in regard the three lines whereof the climate consists, to
wit, the middle and the two extremes, are not always of like distance: but if
we consider the extent of the Circumference as is stretches i self betwixt
East and West, we must needs acknowledge much more: to wit, that of two
Parallels, dividing the same climate betwixt them, that that is manifestly the
greatest which is next the Equatour, and that is the least which is nearest to
the Pole: because the Circles which comprehend their Parallel spaces,
continually decrease toward the Pole: so that if we imagine two men to travel
round about the earth, the one in a Parallel nearer the Equatour, the other
nearer the Pole, in the same space of time; it must needs follow that he should
go far faster which is nearer the Equatour then the other near the Pole: for
howsoever Columella seems to make a Parallel to have in breadth 60 foot, and
to intimate by consequence an equality of the Parallels amongst themselves, yet
must this be understood of Parallels which are near one to the other nearer
the Equatour, which comprehend a great space of land, and admit no sensible
difference. Other matters which concern the Climates and Parallells, shall be
(God willing) unfolded in our Tables in the next Chapter, when we have spoken
of the Inhabitants, and such other adjuncts appertaining* without the which
this treatise will be imperfect, depending for a great part on such
circumstances as our method admits not in this place, but immediately follow.

CHAP. X. Of the distinction of the Inhabitants of the Terrestrial Sphere.
1 Having hitherto treated of the distinction of spaces bounded by circles in
the Terrestrial Globe, to wit, Zones, Climates, and Parallels; we are now to
treat of the Inhabitants, as such adjuncts as properly belong to such spaces;
so far as it concerns the constitution of the whole Sphere.

2 The distinction of the Inhabitants is twofold, either Absolute or
Comparatiue: Absolute as they may be considered in themselves without any
comparison of one with the other.

3 The former is again twofold: either from the Position of the Sphere, or
the differences of their Sun-Shadowes: According to the position of the Sphere
the Inhabitants may be said to have either a Right, Oblique, or Parallel
Sphere according to their Horizons.

What these three Spheres are, may appear by that which we have formerly
spoken concerning the distinction of Horizons in the sixth Chapter of this
Treatise, and therefore needs no farther repetition: we are in this place to
treat of the several accidents, and conditions of the Inhabitants. Out of the
distinction of the threefold Sphere will arise 13 manners of habitation: which
for more order sake, we will reduce into certain heads in this manner.

4 The people of a right Sphere are such as enjoy aright Horizon, whose
proprieties shall be declared in this Theoreme.

1 The Inhabitants of a Right Sphere in respect of the heavens have the same
accidents.

These accidents are chiefly four, 1 They enjoy a perpetual Equinoctial,
having their days and nights always equal the one to the other: because the
Sun never swaruing from his Eclipticke, has his course equally divided by
the Horizon. 2 With them all the stars equally set and rise; because all the
Parallels wherein the stars make their Diurnall Revolution are equally cut of
the Horizon. 3 To them the Sun is twice in the year vertical, that is
directly over their heads, and twice againein the year Solstitiall: The former
in the first degrees of Aries and Libra, the latter in the first degrees of
Cancer and Capricorn: which diverse propositions of the Sun, some later
Geographers have termed four Solstices: two higher and two lower. 4 Hence
comes it to pass that they yearly enjoy two winters, and two Summers:
likewise two springs and two Autumnes. Their Summer when the Sun is to them
vertical: their winter when it is seated in either of the Tropicks. Their
Spring and Autumnes while the Sun is passing through the middle spaces
betwixt both.

5 The people inhabiting an Oblique Sphere are such whose Horizon is oblique.
The proprieties belonging unto them are either General or Special.

6 The General are such as agree to all those which inhabit an oblique Sphere.

1 All the Inhabitants of an oblique Sphere agree in two proprieties.

These two proprieties wherein they agree are these. 1 To all the Inhabitants
without the Equatour under what Parallel soever, the days are equal to the
nights only twice in a year, to wit, either in the beginning of the Spring, or
the beginning ofthe Autumn. At other times either the days increase above the
nights as in the Summer, or grow lesser as in the winter. 2 To these
inhabitants some stars are perpetually seen, as such which are near the Pole
to which they incline: some are never seen, as such as are farthest off from
the said Pole: some rise and set, which are those which are in the middle space
betwixt both; which are sometimes visible, and sometime lie hid.

7 The special Accidents of an Oblique Horizon, are such as agree to special
places in the same Sphere.

1 The Inhabitants of an Oblique Sphere of five sorts, inioying so many
correspondent properties.

The first sort are of those, whose Zenith is betwixt the Equator and one of
the Tropickes, even unto the 23. Degrees, 30. Scruples of elevation of the
Pole: In such a sort, toward the North betwixt the Line and the Tropicke of
Cancer, are placed the inhabitants of Zeilan, the extreme part of the East
Indies, Hispaniola, Guinea, Nubia, with some part of Arabia foelix, and all
other places betwixt the Equatour and the Tropicke of Cancer in the Torride
Zone. Toward the South in the same Latitude, are placed the Brasilians, the
Peruuians, the Iauans, with many others. The Accidents which happen unto these
Nations are these, 1. They may see all the stars except a few which are near
the Pole. 2. Their days and nights are somewhat unequal, so that their
longest day, or longest night, is not always of the same quantity. 3. Twice in
the year they have the Sunne-verticall, but without the Equatour. 4. They have
two Summers, and two Winters, but not equally tempered. 5. The length of their
longest day reaches to 13. hours.

The second sort are such as inhabit under the Tropicke it self, whose
elevation of the Pole is equal to the greatest declination of the Sun, which
is 23. degrees, 30 Scruples. Under the Tropicke of Cancer is placed a great
part of Arabia foelix, East India, the Southern parts of China, the higher
parts of Egypt, and Siene. Under the Tropicke of Capricorn are placed the
people of Monomotapa, and Madagascar, with other places: The accidents
belonging unto them are these, 1. To them appear all the stars comprehended
in one of the circles, but none of the other. As for example, to those
inhabiting the Tropicke of Cancer, the stars included within the Articke
Circle always appear, but never those which are in the Antarcticke: likewise
to those which dwell under the Tropicke of Capricorn, all the stars appear
which are contained within the Antarticke Circle, but none of those included
within the Articke Circle. 2. By how much nearer the Sun approaches to their
Zenith or Vertical point, by so much are their days lengthened; and by how
much farther it goes off, by so much are they shortened: so that they enjoy then
their longest day, when the Sun directly passes by their Zenith. 3. To them
the Sun is vertical but once in the year: to wit, to those under the
Tropicke of Cancer, when the Sun enters into the sign; as to the other when
it touches the first Degree of Capricorn. 4. They have but one Summer and one
Winter throughout the year.

The third sort, are such inhabitants as dwell in one of the temperate Zones
betwixt the Tropicke and the Polar Circles from 24. Degrees of elevation, to
66. Degrees, 30. Scruples. Such inhabitants toward the North, are (as we have
showed) almost all the inhabitants of Europe, Asia mayor, and part of Africa:
as on the other side toward the South, the Chylienses, the farthermost
Africans, and those that dwell near the straits of Magellane. Their properties
are chiefly these, 1. Many stars are by them always seen, and many never
appear. 2. Their days notably differ in inequality. 3. The sun never
arriues at their Zenith, but is always on the South of those which inhabit
betwixt the Tropicke of Cancer, and the Articke Circle, and always on the
North side of such as dwell in the opposite temperate Zone. 4. They have in the
year but one Summer and Winter, but by reason of the diversity of places much
unequal: for where the elevation of the Pole is greater, the winter is much
harder; but where it is lesser it is more temperate.

The fourth kind of inhabitants, are those which reside under the Polar
Circle, (which is their Zenith) where the temperate Zone ends, and the cold
begins: where the elevation of the Pole is beyond 66. Degrees 30. Minutes, in
which Tract lies Noua Zembla, with many other Islands not yet well discovered in
the North: and perhaps as many more under the Antarticke Circle toward the
South, less known than the other. The accidents belonging to them are these,
1. Those which inhabit under the Arcticke Circle, see all the stars included
within the Tropicke of Cancer, but never those within the Tropicke of
Capricorn: Likewise, those which live under the Antarcticke Circle, see all
the stars within the Tropicke of Capricorn, but never those within the other
Tropicke of Cancer. 2. Their longest day at Midsummer is 24. hours, their
night then being but a moment: likewise their longest night, as at Mid-winter,
is but 24. hours, their day passing not a moment. 3. The Center of the Sun
every year twice touches at their Horizons. 4. The Sun at Noonetide is
always on the South of those which dwell under the Arcticke Circle, except it
be in the Summer Tropicke, when it is the Midnight, or Northern point:
likewise to those that are under the Antarcticke Circle, the Sun at noone is
always on the North side, except under the Winter Tropicke. 5. They have in
the year one Winter and one Summer: but the Winter far colder, and the
Summer slacker then in the forenamed places.

The fifth and last habitation, is of those which are included betwixt the Polar
Circle, and the Pole it self, from 66. Degrees and 30. minutes of ^leuation to
90. In which Tract, little is discovered Northward, and in the South climate
nothing at all. The special Accidents appertaining to them are these, 1. With
them a few stars are seen to set and rise. 2. They have an Equinox^ the
Sun touching the first Degree of Aries and Libra. 3. They of the North Zone
have more days about the middle of Summer, and more nights in the Winter:
likewise, they of the South frozen Zone, the contrary. 4. They have extreme
cold Winters, and in stead of Summer, a small remission of cold. 5. The signs
of the Zodiac to them preposterously rise.

8 The inhabitants of a Parallel Sphere are discovered in this proposition.

1 The inhabitants of a Parallel Sphere enjoy but one kind of habitation, in
respect of the Heavens.

A Parallel Sphere, I here accurately understand for that positure of the
Globe, wherein the Pole of the world is precisely placed in the Zenith, or
elevated to 90. degrees of Altitude: because only in such a site, the Equ^tor
and the Horizon agree in one, and lie parallel to all the rest of the
Parallel Circles: which places, whether it be at all capable of habitation by
reason of cold, we shall discuss hereafter in the second part: but out of
supposition admitting a place of habitation, these accidents will happen, 1.
The fixed stars which they see, are always seen so, that with them there is no
point of East or West; for the stars never rise nor set. But the Planets rise
and set, but not by their diurnall, but proper motion. 2. They have a
continual day of six months, and a night also as long, the Sun rising
continually in the first degree of Aries, and setting in the first of Libra. 3.
The Sun in the Equinoctial points, for all the time that he is above the
Horizon (as all the other stars) is turned round about in manner of a wheel.
4. The Equatour serves in place of the Horizon, and the Equatour is every where
equidistant from the Pole 5. They have one Winter and one Summer, the former
exceeding cold, the latter less warm then ours.

9 The second distinction of the inhabitants of the earth is taken from their
Noone-shaddowes.

The Sun in diverse parts of the earth diversely spreads his shadow, because
the Gnomons or Opacous bodies by which the shadows are made in the earth, are
in diverse places diversely opposed, or objected to the Sun: for whereas the
Sun so runs in his Eclipticke Circle betwixt the two Poles, that though his
passage be in an oblique Circle, yet he never comes so far as the Poles
themselves: it necessarily must be, that sometimes he should shoot forth his
beams perpendicularly, as when it is in the vertical point of a place;
sometimes Obliquely, as when he declines either one way or other from the
vertical point; sometimes in parallel wise, for as much as in some places of
the earth, the Sun cleaving as it were to the Horizon, casts out his beams
parallel and equidistant to the plain of the Horizon. The right or
perpendicular* beams of the Sun, falling on the superficies of the earth at
right Angles, are turned and reflected into themselves, and so make no
shadows at all. But the oblique beams, in that they are not reflected into
themselves, must of necessity produce shadows, yet in diverse manners; for
those Sunne-beames which obliquely project themselves on the plain of the
earth, so as they come not from the Horizon it self, will make such kind of
shadows as shall proportionally agree with their Gnomons, or Opacous bodies,
and such whose magnitude may in a manner be designed out, and certainly
measured by the sight. But on the contrary part, the beams which are esteemed
parallel to the plain of the Horizon, finding no solid obstacle or let,
shoot forth infinitely, making no Angles on the superficies of the earth, and
can have no proportion at all with their Gnomons, that the shadow may be any
way designed by our eyes. But here we are to consider, that the shadows
chiefly to be considered, are the Meridian or Noone-shaddowes, which take their
distinction from the diverse incidency of the beams, which the Sun casts
forth at noone. According to this manner.

10. The inhabitants of a place in respect of the shadows are either
Amphiscij, Heteroscij, or Periscij. The Amphiscij are those, whose
Noone-shaddowes (but at diverse times of the year) are ^ast both ways; that is
to say, North and South.

Amphiscij signifies as much as people of a double shadow: such are they which
inhabit betwixt the Equatour and the Tropickes, where the elevation of the
Pole equals not 24. degrees: These men have the Sun twice every year in
their Zenith or vertical point, and then they make no shadows at all; and
therefore they are called Ascij, or without shadows. But when the Sun
passes from their vertical point toward the Northern signs, then at noone
it will cast the shadow toward the Southern coast: But contrariwise, coming
from the Zenith toward the Southern signs, the shadow will be darted toward
the North, which is evident out of the Opticke principles; because the shadow
is always found to be opposite in place to the Sunne-beames, the Gnomon, or
dark body interposed.

11. The Heteroscij are those, whose Noone-shaddowes turn only one way, that
is, either toward the North, or toward the South.

These Nations inhabit in a, temperate Zone, betwixt the Tropicke and the
Polar Circles, whereas such as dwell in the temperate toward the North, betwixt
the Tropicke of Cancer and the Polar Circle Articke, have their noone-shaddowes
cast Northward. But those on the other side of the Equatour* dwelling betwixt
the Tropicke of Capricorn, and the Antarcticke Circle, cast their shadows
Southward: Of the former sort are Grecians, Italians, French, Spaniards,
Germans, Polonians, Suedians, Danes, English, and the rest inhabiting our
temperate Zone: which gave occasion of that speech of Lucan the Poet,
concerning the Arabians coming into Thessaly, in the war of Hanniball and
Pompey; Ignotum vobis Ar^bes venistis in orbem,
Vmbras mirati nemorum non ire sinistras.
You Are come Arabians to an unknown land,
Wondering the shades nere take the Southward hand.
Which verses are in this sense to be understood; Poets are said to look and
turn their faces toward the West, so that the South must of neces^ity be
counted the left side: Now the place whereunto the Arabians came, being a part
of Thessaly, where such dwell who only cast their shadows one way, to wit,
Northward; but Arabia their natural Country, being supposed to be included in
the Torrid Zone, where the shadows were said to be cast both ways, they are
said to wonder: The reason why our shadows at noone are cast always toward
the North, and the others toward the South, is related before, to be because
the shadow does always occupy or possess the place opposite to the Sun,
or light body.

12 The Periscij are such in habitants whose shadows are moved round about
them in a circular form.

In some places of the earth the Noone-shaddowes take not their beginning from
our heads, but of one side, and are extended forward to the plain of the
terrestrial Horizon, and so moved round about the Opacous body, as about a
Gnomon: whence they are called Periscij; which is as much to say, as men having
shadows moved round about; such is their habitation which are included in
the Frigid Zone, circumscribed within the Polar circles, and the Poles: Here
the Sun never directly passes by the crown of their heads, but at one side:
so that they have the Pole for their vertical point, but the Equatour, as it
were, for their Horizon. These Periscij are of two sorts, for some are
contained in the Arcticke circle, the other in the Antarcticke, whereof both
are as yet undiscovered; especially the Antarcticke, being farthest off from
our climate.

1 The habitation of the Amphiscij comprehends 7. Parallels, of the Heteroscij
41. of the Periscij 6. Months.

Of the nature and accidents of these three sorts of people there needs no more
to be spoken, then we have delivered before in this Chapter; Nevertheless,
for a recapitulation of our former doctrine in this and the precedent Chapter,
it will not be amiss to insert this table of Climates, set out by our exactest
Geographers; wherein is expressed (as it were) to our view the respect and
several accidents, which belong to these several inhabitants.

13 Thus much for the Inhabitants absolutely considered: The inhabitants
compared one with the other according to their position, are the Perioeci,
Antoeci, and Antipodes.

14 The Perioeei are those inhabitants which dwell in the two opposite points
of the Parallel circle.

15 The Antoeci are such as dwell under the same Meridian, but in diverse
Parallels equally distant from the Equatour.

16 The Antipodes are such as inhabit under one Meridian, but under two
Parallels equidistant from the Equatour, and two opposite points of those
Parallels.

A Table of the Climates belonging to the three sorts of Inhabitants: Page: 229.
Inhabitants belonging to several Climats. Climes Parallels The longest summer
day. Hou. Scr. Latitude and elevation of Pole. Scr. Degr. The breadth of the
Climats. Degrees. Scr The places by which the Climates pass. 0 0 1 12 0 12 15 0 0
4 18 4 18 The beginning from the Aequatour. 1 2 3 122 30 1 45 8 34 12 43 8 25
Sinus Arabicus or the Red Sea. Amphiscij. 2 4 5 13 0 13 15 16 43 20 33 7 50
Meroe an Island of Nilus in Egypt. 3 6 7 13 40 13 45 23 10 27 36 7 3 Siene a
Ci^ty in Africa. 4 8 9 14 0 14 15 30 47 33 45 6 9 Alexandria in Egypt. 5 10 11
14 30 14 45 36 30 39 2 5 17 Rhodes and Babylon. 6 12 13 15 0 15 15 41 22 4^ 3^
4 30 Rome and Hellespont. 7 14 15 15 30 15 45 45 29 47 20 3 48 Venice and
Millaine. 8 16 17 16 0 16 15 49 21 50 33 3 13 Podalia and ^he lesser Tartary. 9
18 19 16 30 16 45 51 58 53 17 2 44 Batavia and Wit^enberge. 20 17 0 17 ^^ 54 ^9
55 ^4 2 17 R^stoch. 11 22 23 17 30 17 45 ^^ ^7 57 34 2 0 Ireland and Moscovy.
Ieteroscij. 12 24 25 18 0 18 15 58 26 59 14 1 40 Bohus a Castle in Norwey. 13
26 27 18 30 18 45 59 59 60 40 1 26 Gothland. 14 28 29 19 0 19 15 61 18 61 53 1
13 Bergis in Norwey. 15 30 31 19 30 19 45 62 25 62 54 1 0 VViburge in Finland.
16 32 33 20 0 20 15 63 22 63 46 0 52 Arotia in Sweden. 17 34 35^ 20 30 20 45 64
6 64 30 0 44 The mouth of Darecally a river of Swede^ 18 36 37 21 0 21 15 64 49
65 6 0 36 Diverse places of Norwey. 19 38 39 21 30 21 45 65 21 65 35 0 29
Suecia, Alba Russia. 20 40 41 22 0 22 15 65 47 65 57 0 22 With many Islands 21
42 43 22 ^0 22 45 66 6 66 14 0 17 Thereunto adjoining, 22 44 45 23 0 23 15 66
20 66 25 0 11 Wanting special names, 23 46 47 23 30 23 45 66 28 66 ^0 0 5 And
Landmarkes. 24 48 24 0 66 31 0 0 Island under the A^tick circle. Here the
Climats are accounted by the mo^ths from 66 Degr. Menses 1 67 15 These Climates
are supposed to pass by Diverse Islands within the Artick circle, as

These names being originally Greek are taken from the diverse manner of
dwelling of one nation in respect of another. The Perioeci are called such as
dwell (as it were) about the Hemispheare in the same Parallel in two opposite
points: the one in regard of the other being Eastern, the other Western: so
that they are supposed to differ the one from the other 180 degrees which is
the semicircle: where we are to note, that these degrees are to be numbered, not
in a greater but a lesser Parallel, which is less then the Equatour. For they
which are under the Equator it self in 2 opposite points are to be accounted
rather Antipodes, although (for ought I see) the name might agree. The Antoeci
(as the name imports) are such as dwell one against another, having one
selfsame Meridian and equal distance from the Equatour, the one in the
Northern, the other in the Southern Hemispheare. The Antipodes (otherwise
called Antichthones) may popularly be described to be such as dwell feet to
feet one against the other: so that a right line being drawn from one side to
the other, will pass by the Center of the world* whence they precisely are
distant the one from the other 1800 in a greater circle: wherein they are
distinguished from the Perioeci, which are divided by the degrees of a lesser
circle: such compared one to the other are the Americans and the Eastern
Indians about the river Ganges; the Inhabitants of Peru and Calecute: those of
Peria and Summatra to England I find no other Antipodes but the Sea, or at
least some parcel of land in the South continent near Psittacorum Regio: Here
is to be noted that the former definition of Antipodes given by the ancients,
was only to be understood of the known habitable part of the Earth; because
such as dwell directly under the Equatour, or either of the Poles, although
they may be Antipodes agree not to that definition: by reason the former are
Antipodes only in opposite points of the Equatour: the other of the Meridian.
Whether there were any Antipodes or no, was made a question amongst the
Ancients, in so much that Saint Augustine in his book de ciuitate Dei, and
Lactantius in his third book of Institutions, seems stiffely to defend the
contrary: which opinion is supposed to grow out of their contempt or neglect of
Mathematical studies, in those ages wherein the zeal to religion was most
unnecessarily opposed to Philosophy, and the mistress forsaken of her best
hand-maides: which ignorance of the Ancients was so far derived to posterity,
that in the year of our Savior 745 one Boniface Bishop of Men's, was accused
before the Pope Zachary Virgilius Bishop of Salisburg, for heresy, in that he,
auerred there were Antipodes: The matter being first preferred to the King of
Bohemia, and an appeal made unto the Pope, it happened that the honest Bishop
for this assertion, was flatly condemned for heretical doctrine, and enforced
to recant his opinion: yet is it wonderful how such matters were thus decided:
for granting these two easy grounds. First that the earth is Sphericall, a
proposition proved in their time; 2 That every place, or at least two opposite
places in the Terrestrial Sphere may be habitable; it must of necessity
follow, that such Antipodes must be granted: which makes me to imagine that
Saint Augustine absolutely and grossly denied not the Antipodes; because in
setting down the premises and grounds of our opinion, he seemed to understand
them too well to deny a necessary induction, being a man of so great a wit and
apprehension: but questionless he thought that the Torrid Zone, which by most
of the Ancients in his time, was reputed uninhabitable and impassable, no man had
yet set his foot in those remote parts beyond the line: so that it seemed in
him not to arise out of ignorance of the constitution of the earthly Globe: but
out of the received opinion of the Torrid Zone, and the vast Ocean: the one of
which he held uninhabitable, the other impassable: from whence also sprang up an
argument, or rather an idle fancy, that the Antipodes could not be admitted
without granting another Savior, and another kind of men besides Adams
posterity: for if this conjecture had not taken place, the Pope (I suppose)
would never have proved himself so ridiculous a Judge, as to have condemned
Virgilius for heresy. As for Lactantius (howsoever otherwise a pious eloquent
Father) the weakness and childishness of his arguments, will to any
indifferent reader discover his ignorance in the very first rudiments of
Cosmographie. Here we may learn how far religion it self is wronged by such
who set her opposite to all her servants. But whatsoever the Ancients out of
their glimring reason have coniectured, our times have sufficiently decided
this controversy; wherein such Antipodes are established both by reason and
experience: which mat^er we shall reserve to our second book; wherein we
shall declare how far, and in what sense the Earth may be termed habitable.

1 Those which are to us Perioeci, are the Antoeci to our Antipodes: our
Antoeci the Periaeci to our Antipodes: likewise our Perioeci are the Antipodes
to our Antaeci.

This Proposition as a Corollary may by necessary consequence be deduced out of
the precedent definition, and be well expressed out of the constitution of the
artificial Globe, and needs no farther demonstration.

2 The Perioeci, Antoeci, and Antipodes are diversely distinguished in respect
of the celestial apparences.

The proprieties of the Perioeci are chiefly four. 1 They have the same
elevation of the Pole, and therefore the same temper of the year, and the same
length of days and nights. 2 They dwell East and West in regard one of the
other. 3 They have contrary times of days and nights: for when the one has
his Noone, the other inioyes his midnight: likewise when the Sun with the one
rises, it sets with the other. 4 They have the same Zone, Climate, and
Parallel; but differ by a semicircle* to wit, 180 degrees. To the Antoeci they
have likewise assigned 5 proprieties* viz. 1 They inhabit the like Zones, but
in diverse Hemispheares. 2 They have the same elevation of the pole, but not of
the same pole: because the one sees the pole Arcticke, the other the pole
Antarcticke, equally raised above his Horizon. 3 They have Noone and Midnight
just at the same times. 4 They enjoy the same temper of the Heavens* 5 They
have the seasons of the year contrary. For when the Southern Antoeci have
their Summer, the Northern have their Winter; and contrariwise: when the
Northern have their spring, these have their Autumn. To the Antipodes they
have allotted 3 Proprieties. 1 That they have the same elevation of the pole,
though not of the same pole. 2 They have the same temper of the year, and the
same quantity of days and nights. 3 They have all the other accidents
contrary: For when the one has Night the other has Day, when one Winter, the
other Summer; when the one the Spring, the other Autumn; and contrariwise.
These accidents and proprieties here mentioned, must be understood in respect
of the Heavens only. The qualities arising from diverse other Accidental and
particular causes in diverse places of the Earth, we shall differ unto our
second part*

CHAP. XI. Of the Longitudes and Latitudes.
1 THe distinction of the Terrestrial Globe according to certain Spaces,
being formerly explaned, we are now to treat of the Distinction of the said
Sphere according to certain Distances.

2 A Distance here we understand to be a direct line drawn betwixt two points
in the Earth: such a Distance is twofold, either Simple or Comparatiue.

3 The Simple Distance is taken from the two great circles, to wit the
Meridian, or the Equatour: which is either the Longitude or Latitude.

The division of Distances into the Simple or Comparatiue, is most necessary:
for it is one thing for a place absolutely taken in it self, to be distant
from some fixed point or other in the Globe: Another for two places to be
compared betwixt themselves in regard of such a fixed point: for as much as the
former implies only the distance betwixt two points, the other the distance of
two such points or places in respect of the third. These points, from which
such points are said to be distant, are either found in the Meridian Circle,
from which the Distance is called Longitude; or else in the Equatour, whence we
call it Latitude.

4 The Longitude is the distance of any place Eastward from the first Meridian.

To understand the better the Longitude, we must consider that it may be taken
two ways: either Generally, or Specially: In the former sense it is taken for
the Distance of the whole Earth, stretched from the West unto the East, and
contrariwise from East to West. The bounds or limits of this Longitude were by
Ptolomie and the ancient Cosmographers set no farther distant then the half
circle, containing 180 degrees; because the rest of the Earth lay at that time
undiscovered. The end of this space toward the East, was the Kingdom of
China, at the farthest part of all India, distant, as we said, from the
Fortunate Islands where Ptolomie placed the first Meridian, 180 degrees: which
being taken in the Meridian, and resolved into Miles, according to our former
rules, will give 10800 Italian miles: but this space delineated out by the
Ancients, was very scant and narrow in respect of the other parts since found
out, being added to the former. For beyond the bound set by Ptolomie in the
East, it is manifest that 60 degrees are found out and made known. An example
whereof we have in Scythia without the mountain Emaus, which is known to
extend it self 60 degrees Eastward toward the Kingdom of Cathay, discovered
by the Portugals: so that the breadth of the Earth Eastward is fully known so
far as 240 degrees, which being measured in the Equatour will amount unto
14000 miles. Moreover toward the West, beyond the Fortunate Islands, it is
known to stretch to the farthest border of America; so that 340 degrees of the
earth is fully detected, if not all the rest being only 20 degrees, which are
only deficient to make up the whole circle. Which we may the sooner credit;
because our times have brought forth (for ought any Authors have related) the
most excellent Nauigators of all ages, which have sailed the vast Globe of the
Earth round about, and left behind them a foundation whereon others might
easily build. But to let pass the General Longitude of the Earth betwixt the
East and the West; We must understand that the Longitude here mentioned is to
be taken in a more special sense, for the Distance of any place from the
first Meridian, being placed either in the Canaries, as the Ancients would have
it, or in one of the Azores according to the latter Geographers. This then must
be the bound from whence we must begin our account; The subject wherein the
number of degrees may be taken, may be the Equatour or Parallel. Whence by
some the Longitude of a place is defined to be an Arch of the Equatour or
Parallel intercepted betwixt the first Meridian and the vertical point of the
place proposed: so that by necessary consequence, such places as are subject to
the same Meridian, in the same Hemispheare, Eastern or Western, have the same
Longitude, which is the distance from the point of the West: but places
declining more toward the East have the greater Longitude; but nearer to the
West, les^e.

1 Places inioying the same Longitude are not always equally distant from the
first Meridian, and contrariwise places equidistant from the first Meridian
have not always the same Longitude.

The reason is evident out of that which has been often spoken before:
because the degrees of a greater circle are greater, of a lesser less,
according to the greatness of the circle. Now the Longitude of a place
measured in the Equatour, will answer to 60 Italian miles: but in other
Parallels less.

2 The difference of Longitudes begets the difference of Times: Those therefore
which exactly are subject to the same Longitude, have their Noone at the same
moment: but where the Longitudes are different, the Noonetides are also
different.

That the difference of time is varied according to the difference of Longitude
in diverse parts of the Earth, is a matter obuious to every man's understanding,
out of two premised grounds. 1 That the Earth is Sphaericall. 2 That the Sun
in his Diurnall course once in 24 hours compasses it round: whence it comes
to pass that places situate Eastward, see the Suns sooner then those which
are placed in the West, and that with a proportional difference of time, that
to every hour in the Sun motion is assigned a certain number of
correspondent miles: which is in some sort expressed in a Geographicall Globe
or Map, wherein we shall find described 12 Meridians, which divide the whole
compass of the earthly Sphere into 24 equal parts; in such sort that betwixt
each of the two nearest Meridians, are reckned 15 degrees, which make one
hour: by which we may more easily understand how soon the Noone-time happens
in one City before another: for if one City stands Eastward from another the
space of three of those foresaid Meridians, it is evident that it will enjoy
noone three hours before the other. The reason of this difference of times, is
the difference of Longitudes, wherein to every hour the Cosmographers have
allotted 15 degrees in the Suns Diurnall motion: so that 15 degrees
multiplied by 24 hours, which is the whole natural day, there will be
produced 360 which is the number of degrees in the whole circle,

3 If two men from the same place travel, the one Eastward, the other Westward
round about the Earth, and meet in the same place again: they shall find that
he which has gone Eastward has gotten, and the other going Westward has lost
a day in their account.

This is without difficulty to be understood, out of the change of Longitudes,
seconded by their travel, varying perpetually the quantity of the day: for it
is manifest, that he who from any place assigned saileth Eastward moving
continually against the motion of the Sun, will shorten somewhat of his day;
taking away so much from it, as his journey in proportion of distance, has
opposed and anticipated in the time the Diurnall course of the Sun: so that
daily gaining something from the length of the day, which must be elsewhere
recompensed. It must needs be, that in the whole circuit of the earth, it will
amount to 24. hours, correspondent to the whole circuit of the Sun, and the
compass of the earth, which will make another day: Likewise, if we suppose
another in compassing about the earth, to go Westward, it cannot be otherwise
imagined, but that seconding the course of the Sun, by his own journey; he
will daily add somewhat to the length of his day, answerable to his distance,
from the place wherein he began to follow the Sun in his course from East to
West. The daily addition to the length of the day, proportional to the
longitudes which he changes, (the Sun running a like course) must daily
diminish somewhat of the Diurnall course of the Sun, and so at his iourneyes
end, which was supposed to be the whole circuit of the earth, answerable to
24. hours in the Suns course, it will loose a whole day. To demonstrate both
these cases, we will imagine in supposition, that of these two trauaillers
going the one Eastward, the other Westward, the former should take away from
the length of the day, or the latter add to it for every 15. miles one minute.
Then by the golden Rule, if 15. miles either subtract or add one minute in the
length of the day, must 21600. miles, which is the whole compass of the earth,
according to the same proportion, either subtract or add 1440 minutes, which
make 24. hours, the length of the natural day. To confirm the demonstration
by popular experience, I remember I have read in the Hollanders discovery of
Fretum de Mayre, that coming home into their own Country, they found by
comparing their accounts with their countreymens at home, they had lost one
day, having gone Westward, and so compassed the earth round. Hence will arise
diverse consectaries not unpleasing to be scanned. One I will touch not much
dissonant from our purpose; That three men residing in the same place at one
time, shall notwithstanding all vary one from the other in the days of the
week, keeping yet an exact account: which to explain the better, we will
suppose a Jew, a Sarazen, and a Christian, residing in the same town together:
It may so happen according to our former grounds, that the Sarazen according to
the Law of Mahomet, shall observe his Friday, the Jew his Saturday, being his
Sabbath: and the Christian the Lords day, being the Sunday; yet so, as all
shall happen on the same day: all of them excluding any error in their
calculation. For supposition sake, we will place them all at one time all
together in Palestine on a Saturday; at which time, let us imagine the Sarazen
to take his journey Westward, the Christian Eastward, so as both of them in
their coasts compass the world, to meet again in the same place: The Jew all
the while we suppose resident in the same place: it will follow by necessary
consequence, that the Sarazen going about the earth Eastward, will loose one
day; the Christian iourneying Westward, will gain one day: the Jew remaining
in the same place, will neither gain nor loose. These three men then, meeting
together again after a year, two, or three, at the same place, must needs
make a diverse account; for one and the selfsame day, will be to the Sarazen
Friday, to the Jew Saturday, and to the Christian Sunday, if they exactly
calculate the time from their first meeting, to their return unto the same
place. Me thinks this, if there wanted other Arguments, were a reason
sufficient to convince some strait-laced men, who rigidly contend our Lords day
(which they erroneously term the Sabbath) to be merely moral, as grounded
on the Law of nature. If it were so, according to our premises before
demonstrated, this absurdity would ensue necessarily: That the Moral Law,
which they call also in a sort the Law of nature, is subject to manifold
mutation, which by our best Divines is utterly denied. The consequence will
easily follow, because it cannot be denied by any Christian, but that all
nations of the world issued from Noah's Arc, the Seminary of mankind, and
spread themselves from thence over the face of the whole earth, some farther,
some at a shorter distance: whereby changing the longitude with their
habitation, they must of necessity alter the differences of times, whereon they
seek to ground their Sabbath. Neither at this day can any man exactly and
precisely observe any one day, either as it was first appointed by Moses in the
Leuiticall Law, as it was instituted by Christ's Apostles afterward; by reason
of the manifold transportation of colonies, and transmigration of Nations from
one Region into another, whereby the times must necessarily be supposed to
vary. And if any more moderate should urge, that not the exact seventh day from
the first institution, bound us to observation; so one day in seven be
observed: it can hardly pass without exception, for as much as if any man, as
Magellane, Drake, or Candish, should travail the world about, a day must needs
be varied, as we have showed. Here I would willingly demand, whether such
trauailers returning home into their own countries, should celebrate the same
Lords day according to the institution of their own Church; or else as they
find according to their own account: If they observe the latter, they must
schismatically divide themselves from the Church, and keep a Sabbath of their
own, which in every man's judgment would be thought absurd, as the mother of
many inconveniences: If the former take place, then must the d^y be changeable
in his nature, and so one day of seven of them should not be observed. I speak
not this to cherish any neglect of the duty we owe that day, but rather to
prove it not merely to be grounded on the Law of Nature, as some would
persuade; but rather an Ecclesiastical constitution, derived (as it seems
most probable) from the Apostles, though not in practice in Christ's time,
wherein the Jewish Sabbath was not yet abolished: But I have dwelt too long on
this, and may perhaps incur sharp ce^sure, for wading too far into the
depth of Divinity: But my Apology shall be this, that albeit I have gone beyond
my present subject, I ^^ue not yet transcended the limits of my profession: I
serve no faction, and therefore dare adventure my language as free as my
opinion.

5 Concerning the longitude, two things are to be known, 1. The Invention. 2.
The Expression. The Invention proposes us the way and manner of the first
finding out of the longitude of places.

There are few things in nature which have more perplexed the wits of ingenious
Mathematicians, then the exactest way of finding out the longitude of places:
Not that the matter was over difficult in it self, but that they sought out a
way to perform this conclusion, not depending from the observation of the
celestial bodies and motions; a matter as yet never found out, and I fear me
impossible: Because they proposed to themselves one of these two ways to find
it out; either by some magneticall instrument, or else by industry of
navigations: neither of which can much profit. Not the former, because there
have never been any fixed points found in the Equatour, betwixt East and West,
as betwixt North and South have been observed: so that nothing can proceed out
of the mere nature of the earthly Globe, whereon we may ground any difference
of longitude: Neither is the second very beneficial, for that all voyages both
by Sea and land, are very irregular and uncertain, either by reason of sundry
impediments, as rocks, mountains; woods, contrary winds, and other dangers
turning aside the direct course of passengers from any direct way, or
observation; or else by the Ignorance of Mariners, which seldom pass so far
on discovery: and if they do, know not perfectly to delineate out their
journey, as a Cosmographer would expect, to any tolerable satisfaction.
Nevertheless, by Astronomicall observation, we have many ways left us for
the performance of this conclusion, as shall be taught in these following
propositions.

1 By an Eclypse of the Moon, the longitude may be found.

This conclusion is in this sort to be performed: First, it behooves you to
know, as you may by an Ephemerides, at what hour an Eclipse shall happen at
some known place, whereof you are well informed of the longitude: Then must
be observed by an Astrolable, or other Astronomicall instrument, at what hour
this Eclipse begins at that place, whereof you would willingly know the
longitude: If the Eclipse do begin in both places the selfsame time, you
may assure your self that these two places differ not in longitude. But if
there be a difference in the time, then must there be a difference in the
longitude, which to find out, you may in this sort proceed: Take the lesser
sum of hours out of the greater, and there will be remaining, either hours
or minutes, or both: If there remain hours, then multiply the same by 15; if
minutes, divide the same by 4; (for in this account as we have taught, 15.
Degrees make an hour) and add the difference so found unto the longitude, if
the Eclipse appear there sooner: but if later, subtract it from the longitude
formerly known. If there remain any minutes after the division, you must
multiply those minutes by 15; and so shall ye have the Minutes of Degrees. To
explain this the better, we will take this familiar example from some of our
later writers. The longitude of Paris was set down by Ptolomy, to be 23
degrees; now we may be informed by an Ephemerides, that a certain Eclipse of
the Moon begins there 3 hours after midnight; out of this I would willingly
learn the longitude of Tubing a town in Sueuia: In this town I observe by
some Astronomicall instrument, at what hour the Eclipse there begins, which
I find to be at three of the clock and 24 minutes after midnight. Then by
the subraction of the lesser number of time out of the greater, I find the
remainder to be 24 minutes, which divided by 4. which makes one degree, the
quotient will be 6. degrees: and that is the difference, which if you add to
the known longitude of Paris (because the Eclipse begins there sooner then at
Paris) it will amount to 29 degrees: whereby we may collect that the Longitude
of Tubing is ^9. degrees. To this rule for the most part are squared all
Cosmographicall Tables of longitude, but yet in this happen diverse errors: 1.
Because oftentimes in the Artificer there wants diligence in observing the
right hour and moment of the Eclipse. 2. The diverse. Epacts and latitudes of
the Moon are commonly neglected; wherefore some have thought it the best way
(if it were to be hoped) that diverse exact Astronomers should at diverse places
observe the same Eclipse, and so by conferring together according to the former
Rule, find out the longitudes of those places. But exact Astronomers cannot be
so easily found in every city, whereof we desire to know the longitudes; or if
there were such, they keep not always such correspondency in friendship;
neither is an Eclipse of the Moon always at command. Nevertheless, this way
is not to be despised, because where better ways are wanting, we must
content our selves with what we find.

2 By a Clock, Watch, or Hour glass, to find out the longitude of a place.

This conclusion is to be performed in this manner; You must get you a watch or
clock, apt to run (if you can) 24 hours; this watch must you, by the help
of an Astrolabe, rectify and set just at such time as you depart from the
place where you are, as bound to any other place, whereof you desire to inquire
the longitude: during which time, your diligent care must be to preserve your
watch in motion without intermission: being at last arrived at the place
whereof you inquire the longitude, you were best to stay till such time as the
Index shall precisely point out some perfect hour: At the same instant it must
be known by an Astrolabe, what hour it is at the place where you are
arrived; for if your Astrolabe and Watch should both agree in one, you might
assure your self that there is no difference of longitude betwixt the place
whence you came, and the place whereto you are arrived: For it is evident that
in this sort your journey has been either directly North or directly South
under the same Meridian. But if this differ either in hours or minutes, they
must be reduced unto degrees in such sor^ as we have showed in the former way.
Through which you may find out the Longitude which you desire to know: This
invention is by our Countryman Blundeuill ascribed to Gemma Frisius; although I
should take it to be more ancient: but whose invention soever it was,
certainly it cannot but commend the Author. Peter Martyr in his Decades,
seems to prefer this way before all the rest; nevertheless in this I cannot
assent to his opinion, being one I had rather trust as an Historian, then as a
judicious Cosmographer: because the way cannot but admit of great uncertainty:
in so much as a Watch or Clock will move inequally, being corrupted with rust,
especially on the Sea, which always abounds with moist vapors: wherefore on
the Sea, some have thought an Houre-glasse more convenient, which is true in
comparison of the Watch; but neither will the sands of an houre-glasse keep
always the like motion: If any certainty may be this way, it must be by the
help of the Automaton or perpetual moveable, of whose invention we may sooner
despair then of finding out this conclusion.

3 By the distance betwixt the Moon and some known Star, which is situate
near the Eclipticke, the Longitude may be found out.

This way was taught by Appian, illustrated by Gemma Frisius and Blundeuill, to
whose manner of explication, we have for farther illustration added a figure
of the Parallax whereon this invention is grounded. First then to show this
conclusion, we must first lay this ground: that the Distances betwixt the
Moon and other stars in the firmament are varied according to the difference
of places: In so much as two men living far distant in diverse places of the
earth, beholding at one time the Moon and some other known fixed star, will
not find the like distance betwixt them: whereof if any man doubt, he may be
informed by this figure. We will imagine O to be the place of the Moon, as
seated in the lower Orb; G to be the place of the fixed star, whose distance
from the Moon is inquired: E and F two stations and habitations of men
dwelling on the earth, whereof we may imagine the one to be in Europe, the
other in America: It will be manifest that the inhabitant situate in F will
behold the Moon in the point B; and the said fixed star in G: (because as the
Optickes teach us, all things are seen in the places opposite to the eye) so
that the distance betwixt the Moon and the said star, will be the Arch of
the greatest Circle BG of the other side: the inhabitants situate in E, will
behold the Moon by the ray EC in C. as likewise the said fixed star G in the
point G, by the ray EG: so that the distance betwixt the Moon and the fixed
star, will be in that station the Arch of the circle CG. Now by the first
common Axiom of Euclide, every man must grant that the Arch of BG is greater
then CG, the former being the whole, and this the part. Secondly, out of the
same ground, we may as easily collect that this distance betwixt the Moon and
some other known fixed star is varied proportionally, according to the
distances of the places on the earth, because so many places as there are, so
many diversity of aspects will arise, being increased or diminished, according
to the distances of places on the Terrestrial Globe: This conclusion thus
demonstrated, we must proceed to practice in this manner, as is taught by
Gemma Frisius: First, it behooves you to search out by the help of
Astronomicall Tables, the true motion of the Moon, according to the Longitude,
at that time of your observation at some certain place, for whose Meridian the
roots of those Tables are calculated. 2. You must know the Degree of Longitude
of some fixed star, nigh unto the Eclipticke, either preceding or following
the moving of the Moon. 3. You must seek out the Distance of moving of the
Moon, and the said star. 4. The distance once had, apply the crosse-staffe
to your sight, and so move the Cross to and fro, till you may behold the
Center of the Moon, at the one end, and the fixed star with the other. So
shall you see expressed by the Degrees and Minutes marked on the staff the
distance of the Moon and the said star correspondent to the place of your
observation: which being noted, set down also the distance betwixt the Moon
and the foresaid Star which was first calculated. Then subtract the lesser
from the greater, the residue will show the least difference: which being
divided by the moving which the Moon makes in one hour, you shall know the
time in which the Moon is or was joined with the first distance of the
foresaid star. Then having converted that time into degrees and minutes, the
rest will be performed either by addition or substraction of the Product
thereof to or from that Meridian: for which the Tables where by you first
calculated the motion of the Moon, were appointed and verified. If the
distance betwixt the Moon and the fixed Star of your observation be lesser,
then must you add the degrees and minutes to the known Latitude, so shall you
find the place of your observation to be more Eastward. If it be greater,
then substract the degrees and minutes from the known Longitude, and the place
of your observation in this regard will be more Westward. These rules are so
far true that the Moon be supposed to be more Westward then the fixed
Star: for if otherwise, your working must be clean contrary: to wit, if the
distance betwixt the Moon and the fixed Star be lesser, you must subtract
the degrees and minutes from the known Longitude: so shall the place of your
observation be more Westward: but if it be greater, then must you add the
degrees and minutes unto the known Longitude, and the place of your
observation shall be sound Eastward. This way, though more difficult, may
seem better then all the rest: for as much as an Eclipse of the Moon seldom
happens, and a watch, clock, or houreglasse cannot so well be preserved, or
at least so well observed in so long a voyage: wherea^ every night may seem to
give occasion to this experiment: if so be the air be freed from clouds, and
the Moon show her face above the Horizon.

4 By the observation of the difference in the Suns and Moons motion, the
Longitude of places may be found out.

To explane this proposition, we will set down three things. 1 Certain
Postulata, or granted Axioms. 2 The example. 3. The manner and practice: The
grounds or propositions which we take as granted of all Mathematicians are
these. 1 That the motion of the Moon is 48 minutes of an hour slower in 24
hours, or 360 degrees, then that of the Sun. 2 That by observation of the
heavens, and other Mathematical helps, an Artificer may know in any place
first the Meridian: Secondly the hour of the day: Thirdly the time of the
Moons coming to the Meridian. 3 The time of the Moons coming to the
Meridian may be known by an Ephemerides: These things granted, we will
suppose for example, that in London the Moon on some set day comes to the
Meridian at four of the Clock after Noone: 2* That in some part of the
West Indies, the Moon be observed to come to the Meridian the same day at 10
minutes after four. These grounds thus set down, the distance of Longitude of
that place Westward from London may be found out. The manner of practice is
thus to be wrought by the golden Rule. If the difference of the Suns and
Moons motion be 48 minutes of an hour in 360 degrees, what will it be in 10
minutes? The fourth proportional number will be 75 degrees, the distance of
Longitude of the place assigned from London, in West Longitude; from which
number the Longitude from London being subtracted, and the remainder from 360,
the residue will show the Longitude. If the Moon in the place assigned come
sooner to the Meridian, we must count so much in East Latitude. This way I
first found in Mr* Purchase his relation of Halls discovery of Groenland,
written by William Baffin since this Chapter came under the Press: the
expression of which, being as I suppose shorter and easier then in the Author,
I do owe for the most part to my worthy Chamber-fellow, Mr. Nathanael
Norrington, to whose learned conference, I confess my self to owe some fruits
of my labors in this kind, and all the offices of friendship. This manner of
invention, for mine own part, I prefer before all the rest, both for
certainty and facility and (as it should seem by Baffins practice) it is more
in use amongst Mariners then the former, howsoever less mentioned amongst
writers.

14 Thus much for the Invention of the Longitude: the Expression is the
imitation of the Longitude on the face of an Artificial Globe or Map; which
is directed by these Rules.

1 The place whereof we desire to know the Longitude being brought to the
Brazen Meridian, the degrees of the Equatour will show the Longitude.

This Rule may easily be explaned by these three precepts. First that you must
turn round the Globe on his Axell-tree, till you bring the place whereof seek
the Longitude under the brazen Meridian. 2 You must diligently and exactly
mark what degree the Meridian cuts in the Equatour. 3. You must number how
many degrees that point is distant from the first Meridian, and the number will
give you the true Longitude sought after This also may be performed without
turning of the Globe, if so be any other Meridian in the globe signed out shall
pass by the said place. For this Meridian will cut the Equatour in some degree
or other, which being numbered* as before from the first Meridian, will show the
direct Longitude: the like of which we have in the second case.

2 The Meridian running through any place of the Geographicall Table, will
point and design out in the Equatour the degrees of Longitude.

This may easily be taught by the former way performed on the Globe: as for
example, if I should inquire the Longitude of Paris the Metropolis of France,
in a Geographicall Map, I find a Meridian marked out which runs, if not
directly through yet very near the said City. This Meridian I trace along to
the Southern part, till I find it to meet and cut the Equatour. Then observe
I in what degree of the Equatour it makes his intersection, and I find it to
be 23 degrees 20 minutes, which is the Longitude of the place.

15 Having spoken of the Longitude, the Latitude comes in the next place to be
handled: the Latitude is the Distance of any place from the Equatour, either
North or South.

What we have spoken of the Longitude must also agree to the Latitude, that it
is taken sometimes absolutely and generally, sometimes specially: in the former
sense it signifies any distance or space between North and South, or
contrariwise from South to North. Amongst the Ancients was the bre^dth or
Latitude held to be about 80 degrees, so that the utmost bound or limit to it
Northward was called Thule, which commonly is supposed to be Island. But the
latter Nauigatours through their diligence have detected so much land that it
is found to stretch beyond 81 degrees toward the North, and 45 toward the
South, and much farther if we will believe the relation of Ferdinand de Quir, a
Spaniard, who boasts a more ample discovery of the South I^dies, then ever
before has been known. But howsoever, the Latitude here define is taken in a
more special and stricter sense for the distance of any place from the
equinoctial line, be it either toward the North or the South. The bound
therefore from which we begin our account of Latitude is the Equatour: but the
subject wherein it is measured is the Meridian: so that it is clean opposite
to the Longitude, for that was limited by the Meridian, and measured in the
Equatour. The Latitude of a place is always equal to the Elevation of the
Pole, as we shall show hereafter, and is divided into the Northern and the
Southern Latitude, whereof the one is from the Equatour Northward, the other
Southward.

16 Concerning the Latitude are to be considered the Invention, and the
Expression: the Invention is again twofold, Astronomicall or Magneticall.

17 The Astronomicall Invention of the Latitude is by observation of the
Stars, which is directed by these Propositions.

1 The Meridian Height of the Sun at the time of the Equinoctial subtracted
from 90 degrees, will show the true Latitude of the place.

The height of the Sun at Noone may be found by the Astrolabe, Crosse-staffe;
Quadrant, and many other Astronomicall instruments, but in taking the Meridian
Altitude, it is very fit and requisite that it be observed diverse times one
after another with some little space betwixt, to try whether it increases or
decreaseth; for if it does increase; then assure your self it is not full
Noone; if it decrease it is past Noone: having thus found out the Meridian
Altitude, you must subduct it from 90 degrees, and the residue will be the
true Latitude of the place, if so be it be observed at the time of the
Equinoctial, when the Sun enters the first point of Aries, or Libra as for
example here at Oxford I observe the Meridian height of the Sun about the
eleventh of March, and I find it to be about 37 degrees, or thereabout, which
I subtract out of 90, the whole Quadrant, and the residue will be 51, which is
the Latitude of the place. But if you would know the Latitude at any other day,
or time of the year, then must you proceed in this manner: having taken the
height of the Sun at Noone (as before) you must by the Table of Declination
learn the true degree of the Suns declination. 2 If such declination be
Northernely, then must you subtract it from the foresaid Altitude or height.
But if Southernly, you must add it to the Altitude: and by such addition and
subtraction, shall you have the height of the equinoctial above the Horizon. 3
This height of the Equinoctial above your Horizon, being as before subtracted
from 90, will be the true Latitude of the place assigned: as for example, the
15 of August I observe the Declination of the Sun to be about 10 Degrees,
the Sun being in 2 Degrees of Virgo: I find the Meridian height of the Sun
to be 48 degrees or thereabouts* Now because the Sun being in Virgo, has a
Northern Declination, I subtract 10, which is the number of the declination,
out of 48 the height of the Sun, and there will remain 38, which again
taken ^ut of 90, the residue will be about 52, the common received Latitude of
the place.

2 The Meridian height of any Star, the Declination subtracted, if it be
Northern, or added if it be Southern, being subtracted out of 90, will show
at any time of the year the Degrees of Latitude.

The former rule serves only for the day; because it is performed by the
observation of the Sun, but this latter may be more necessary for Mariners,
who now and then are enforced to inquire the Latitude of a place in the night
when the Sun shines not: wherefore they must fly unto some known Star, by
observation of which they may easily perform the same; according to the rule:
which differres nothing at all from that which we speak of the Sun out of
the Equinoctial, and therefore need no other exposition then a bare example:
let the fixed star you best know, be Arcturus, whose Meridian Altitude you
find by your Mathematical instrument to be 59 Degrees, and 30 minutes: then
shall you learn by some Table that this Declination Northward is 21 degrees,
30 minutes: now because his declination is Northward, you must subtract it out
of his Meridian Altitude, and you shall find the remainder to be 52 Degrees,
which is the Latitude for the place: as it is commonly taken, although I
confess it might be more exact: being observed here at Oxford, be found rather
51 Degrees and 30 minutes.

18 The Magneticall Invention is performed by the Magneticall Inclinatory
Needle.

The ground of this Magneticall invention is from the proportion betwixt the
magneticall inclinatory Needle, and the Latitude of the Earth: for as we have
proved in the 13 Proposition of the 3 Chapter; the Magneticall inclinatory
Needle will at every point of Latitude conform it self to certain Angles
with the Axell of the Earth proportionally to the Degrees of that Latitude:
upon which grounds Dr Ridley has invented a curious instrument to find out
the Latitude for any place assigned, and for this use has calculated Tables,
which we hope will be enlarged by our famous Professor Mr Brigges: for my
part, having never seen this instrument, such time as I shall have occasion to
acquaint my self with it.

19 The Expression is the imitation of it on the artificial Sphere: which is
again either Astronomicall or Magneticall. The former is performed by the
ordinary Globe according to this rule.

1 The point of any place or City first found in the Globe being brought to
the brazen Meridian, will show in the Degrees of the same Meridian the true
Latitude of the same place.

This may easily be showed in this manner by an example; If I would willingly
find out the Latitude of Oxford in the Globe. I first find out the place in
the Globe, which having found, I turn the Globe till I have brought the place
just under the brazen Meridian: then I note what degree it designs, and that
shows me the true Latitude of the place, which I find to be 52, or
thereabouts: but if you would find it in a Map or Chart, in which there is
no such brazen Meridian, you must take the Parallel of the place, or at least
the next unto it, pointed in the same Map: Then note what degree the said
Parallel cuts in the first Meridian; for that will show the true Latitude of
it by the right Parallel of the place, if not the next; so that by addition,
or subtraction, you may easily guess at it.

20 The Magneticall Expression depends from the Application of the Inclinatory
Needle to the Terrella.

The Magneticall inclinatory needle is said to conform it self in the same
manner to the Terrella or Loadstone, being artificially thereunto applied, as
it does to the great Globe of the Earth: so that no doubt is, but an imitation
of the Latitude A Table expressing the proportion of the Magneticall
Inclination to the degrees of Latitude, and Elevation of the Pole.
Eleuat. Poli. Inclination to the Horizon. 1.11. Eleuat. Poli. Inclination to
the Horizon. 1.11. Eleuat. Poli. Inclination to the Horizon. 0.1.11. 1 2 11 15
31 52 26 38 61 79 28 51 2 4 10 13 32 53 46 55 62 80 31 36 3 6 26 55 33 54 53 51
63 80 37 54 4 8 31 23 34 56 3 56 64 81 10 47 5 10 33 41 35 57 13 25 65 81 42 36
6 12 23 50 36 58 21 19 66 82 13 23 7 14 37 53 37 59 27 50 67 82 43 9 8 16 27 52
38 60 32 59 68 83 11 56 9 18 21 50 39 61 36 46 69 83 39 45 10 20 13 47 40 62 39
0 70 84 6 37 11 22 3 45 41 63 39 56 71 84 32 30 12 23 51 46 42 64 39 29 72 84
57 24 13 25 37 52 43 65 37 41 73 85 21 22 14 27 22 4 44 66 34 31 74 85 44 24 15
29 4 23 45 67 30 0 75 86 6 31 16 40 44 53 46 68 24 10 76 86 27 44 17 32 23 34
47 69 17 2 77 86 48 5 18 34 0 27 48 70 8 38 78 87 7 36 19 35 35 35 49 70 58 59
79 87 26 18 20 37 9 0 50 71 48 7 80 87 44 9 21 38 40 42 51 72 36 0 81 88 1 10
22 40 10 41 52 73 22 38 82 88 17 23 23 41 38 58 53 74 8 2 83 88 32 49 24 43 5
37 54 74 52 11 84 88 47 29 25 44 30 26 55 75 35 6 85 89 1 22 26 45 53 43 56 76
16 51 86 89 14 30 27 47 15 25 57 76 57 28 87 89 36 54 ^^ ^^ ^^ ^^ ^8 77 ^6 ^^
88 88 ^8 ^^ may be expressed on the little earth, or loadstone: for which use,
diverse curious instruments have been devised by magneticall Philosophers, to
whom I refer my Readers: because I (as I said) have little acquainted my
self with the use of such instruments.

CHAP. XII. Of the distances of places compared one with another.
1 OF the simple and absolute distinction of distances, we have treated in the
former Chapter: we must in the last place handle it comparatively; that is to
say, one place compared with another: whereof we are to consider the Invention
and Expression.

2 The distance is the measured space betwixt two places: which is, either
uniform, or various: uniform is in places different, either in Longitude
only, or in Latitude only.

3 Those places differ in Longitude only, which are situate under the same or
like Parallels, but diverse Meridians; or at least under opposite points of the
same Meridian.

Of place^ differing only in Longitude, there may be three cases: For 1. they
may be under the same Parallel, as the Island of ^^int Thomas, and Summatra,
which lie directly under the Equatour; or Noremberg and Hamberg, which having
very near the same Latitude, differ in Longitude, and lie in the same
Parallel without the Equatour. 2. They may be under the like Parallels, that
is, in points equidistant from the Equatour. As Siene in Egypt, under the
Tropicke of Cancer; and Beach in the South continent, under the Tropicke of
Capricorn. 3. They may be under the same Parallel and Meridian, but in
opposite points of the said Parallel: such as are the Perioeci, spoken of in
the 10. Chapter.

4 Places differing only in Longitude, whose distance is here proposed to be
sought out, are seated in the same, or diverse Hemispheares.

5 In the same Hemispheare, when both places have either Eastern or Western
Longitude. This again may have two cases; for either the places are under the
Equatour, or without it: in both which, the finding out of the distance shall
be opened in these Rules.

1 If two places under the Equatour in the same Hemispheare, differ in
longitude: let the lesser longitude be subtracted from the greater, and the
difference converted into Miles, and the distance will be known.

As for example, we will suppose of two places, whose distance is to be
sought out, the former to be the Island of Saint Thomas in Africa, the other the
Island Summatra in the East Indies, both situate directly under the Equatour;
and therefore differing only in Longitude. To express which, in this figure,
let the first Meridian from which the Longitude is to be measured, be ABCD: the
place where Saint Thomas Island is seated, K: and the place of Summatra, F. The^
subtracting AK, the Longitude of Saint Thomas Island, being lesser, out of the
Longitude of Summatra AE, the residue KE will show the distance in degre^s:
which being multiplied by 60, and so converted into Italian-miles, will show
how many miles the said places are distant the one from the other. As in this
present example, we find the Longitude of Saint Thomas Island to be 32
degrees 20 minutes of Summatra, to be 131 degrees: The lesser sum subducted
from the greater; to wit, 32 degrees 20 minutes, out of 131; there will remain
98 degrees 40 minutes: which being again multiplied by 60, will produce 5920
Italian-miles, the true distance betwixt the said places.

2 Of two places in the same Hemispheare, situate without the Equatour; the
distance may be known two ways: either by the resolution of the Sphericall
Triangle, or else by tables of the miles answerable to the degrees of Latitude.

The former way is performed in this manner: Let the Triangle of two equal
sides FBG in the figure before, be resolved; in which the two equal sides FB,
and GB are the complements of equal Latitudes; to wit, AF, and EG. The Angle
FBG is the difference of Longitude, which Angle, whether it be a Right Angle,
or Oblique Angle, will easily be known, if by letting a perpendicular line BY
from B to I it be parted into two Triangles FBI and IBG: for because those two
Triangles according to the grounds of Geometry are equal; the Arch IG in the
Triangle IBG being found out, the Arch also IF in the Triangle FBI will also
be known: which beingthus demonstrated, we must proceed in this manner,
according to the Golden Rule. As the Right angle BIG is to the complement of
the Latitude BG, so is IBG the middle difference of Longitude to IG the middle
distance: Pitiscus in his Trigonometry to this adds another manner of
demonstration, expressible by the precedent figure: let the perpendicular IB be
continued unto K, that BK may make a whole Quadrant. Now will the Triangle IHK
have Right Angles at I and K, at I by supposition, at K by his 57 proposition
demonstrated in his first book: because, If a greater circle of the Sphere
pass by the Poles of a greater circle, it will cut it at right Angles, and
contrariwise: wherefore the sides IH and KH must be quadrants: because, as he
shows in his 68 proposition of his first book; In a sphericall Triangle
having more then one Right Angle, the sides subtending those Right Angles are
Quadrants: Finally, because the Arches GH and EH, are the complements of the
Arches IG and KE: by the 9 definition of the first book* For as much as of any
Arch less then a Quadrant, the complement is that which wants to make it up 90
parts. We may by the help of the 57 proportion of his first book, seek out
the complement of the third side GH; which will be the Arch GI: which will show
us the problem which we sought, by reduducing it unto the Table of signs,
and Tangents, exactly se^ out by our forenamed Author and others. For an
example of this, we may take two famous cities of Germany, Noremberg and
Hamberg, which without any sensible difference have the same Latitude, but
differ in Longitude: For the Longitude of Noremberg is 31 degrees 45 minutes:
of Hamberg 32 degrees 30 minutes: the difference of Longitude then is 0 degrees
45 minutes. These things supposed to be known, we will imagine Noremberg to be
in F, Hamberg in G* and therefore AF, or EG will have 49 degrees 23 minutes: FB
or GB will have 40 degrees 37 minutes: FBG or AE will have 0 degrees 45
minutes: KE 0 degrees 22 minutes: EH 89 degrees 37 minutes: if we work by the
Table of Signs, Tangent^, and Secants, the knowledge whereof is required to
this Problem. But because the former way may seem difficult to such as are
not much acquainted with Trigonometry, some have set down ^n easier way,
depending on the use of a Table, wherein i^ calculated the number of miles
answering to every degree of every Parallel of the Sphere: in which working*
we ought to be directed by this Rule: If two places without the Equatour
differ in longitude only, subtract the lesser number out of the greater, and
multiply it by the n^mber of miles answerable to a d^gree of that Parallel,
and the product will give the distance. As for exampl^, if you would know the
distance betwixt London and Antwerpe, which have in a manner the same Latitude,
but differ in Longitude: I find them to differ in Longitude by 6 degrees,
which number being multiplied by 37 miles answerable to 51 degrees of Latitude,
these will arise to 247 miles, and 54 seconds of a mile.

A Table of Miles answerable to one Degree of every several Latitude.
1 2 3 4 5 6 D M S D M S D M S D M S D M S D M S 1 59 59 16 57 41 3 51 26 46 41
41 61 29 5 76 14 31 2 59 58 17 57 23 32 50 53 47 40 55 62 28 10 77 13 30 3 59
55 18 57 4 33 50 19 48 40 9 63 27 14 78 12 28 4 59 51 19 56 4 34 49 45 49 9 22
64 26 18 79 11 27 5 59 4 20 56 23 35 49 9 50 38 34 65 25 21 80 10 25 6 59 40 21
56 1 36 48 32 51 37 46 66 24 24 81 9 23 7 59 33 22 55 38 37 47 55 52 36 56 67
23 27 82 8 21 8 59 25 23 55 14 38 47 17 53 36 7 68 22 29 83 7 19 9 59 16 24 54
49 39 46 38 54 35 6 69 21 30 84 6 16 10 59 5 25 54 23 40 45 58 55 34 25 70 20
31 85 5 14 11 58 54 26 53 6 41 45 17 56 33 33 71 19 32 86 4 11 12 58 41 27 53
28 42 44 35 57 32 41 72 18 32 87 3 8 13 58 2 28 52 59 43 43 53 58 31 48 73 17
33 88 2 5 14 58 13 29 52 29 44 43 10 59 30 54 74 16 32 89 1 3 15 57 57 30 51 58
45 42 26 60 30 0 75 15 32 90 0 0

6 The distance of places differing only in Longitude in diverse Hemispheares
is found out by this rule.

1 Let the greater longitude be subtracted from the whole circle, and unto the
residue added the lesser longitude, there will arise the distance betwixt those
places.

As for example, Lisbone in Spain has in East longitude 13 degrees: and Cap
de Los Slanos in America, has in West longitude 334 degrees: to know the
distance betwixt those places, you must first subduct 334, which is the greater
Longitude out of 360 the whole circle, and there will remain 26 Degrees, to
which if we add the East longitude of Lisbone, which is 13 degrees, it will
make 39 degrees, which is the true difference of those longitudes: which being
multiplied by the Number of miles in the Table going before, answerable to the
latitude of the said places (if they differ only in longitude) there will arise
the number of miles contained in the Distance.

7 Distant places which differ only in latitude, are such as lie under the
same Meridian, but diverse Parallells: These are supposed to be either in One,
or in Diverse latitudes or Hemispheres.

8 In One, when both the places have either North latitude, or both South
Latitude: The finding out of which distances depends on these Propositions.

1 If the latitude of each place be toward the same P^le, subtract the lesser
from the greater latitude, and the residue convert into miles.

The reason may be explained in this Figure: we will imagine OF to be the
lesser, EG the greater latitude. There will remain an Arch of the Meridian FG:
which being multiplied by 60 (being part of a great circle, will make the
number of miles answerable, to that distance. For an example we will take two
Cities of England, Oxford and York. The latitude Oxford, we take to be 31
degrees 30 minutes: of York 54 degrees 30 minutes. The lesser latitude
subtracted from the greater, there will remain three degrees, which being
multiplied by 60, will render 180 Italian-miles, the Distance of thse two
places.

2 If two places in latitude only distant, be situate in diverse kinds of
latitude, add the latitude of the one to the other, and the whole sum shall
be the distance.

As for example, in the former Diagram, imagining as in the former case BD to
be the Meridian of those distant places, and AC the Equatour, we will suppose
the one place to be situate toward the North Pole, as G, the other toward
the South, as in H: then as appears by sense, will the distance be the Arch
of the Meridian GH, whereof GE, and EH, are parts, whereof it is compounded:
wherefore it must needs follow that those parts added together make the whole
distance: for example we will take Bellograde in Europe, and the Cape of good
hope in Africa, which have near the same longitude, to wit, 48 degrees 30
minutes: but they differ in latitude in such sort, as the former has of the
Northern latitude 44 degrees 30 Minutes; the other of Southern latitude about
35 degrees 30 minutes. These two numbers added together, will make 80 degrees,
which being multiplied by 60 will produce 4800 miles the distance of those
places.

9 Hitherto of the distances of places which are Uniform, that is to say, of
such as differ either only in longitude, or only in latitude: we are next to
consider of such distances as are various, wherein the places differ both in
longitude and latitude.

10 The Invention of such a distance, may be performed two ways, either
Abstractiuely by the resolution of Triangles, or else Mechanically by
instruments. The former again may be two ways, either by the Right-line
Triangle, or by the Sphericall: The invention of the distance by the Rigt-line
Triangle depends on these following Propositions declaring two ways of
invention.

11 The first is by a Rectangle Triangle barely considered by it self,
according to this Theoreme.

1 The square Root of the number made of the differences of longitude and
latitude of two places distant, will show the distance of those places.

The ground of this Proposition is taken from the 27 Proposition of the first
book of Euclide: where it is demonstrated that the square of the Hypotenusa,
or greatest side of a Rectangle Triangle is equal to the two squares made of
the two other sides: which being well vnders^ood, will lend an easy light to
this proposition. To perform which we must first take the difference of
longitude, which is imagined to make one side of this Triangle. Then we must
observe also the difference of latitude, which is supposed to make another
side. Then are we sure by the former Proposition of Euclide that the squares of
these two sides, are equal to the square of the Hypotenus^, or third side;
which is to be sought out, and expresses the distance betwixt those places:
wherefore we must first multiply these two sides in themselves, whence they will
become squares. 2. We must add them together. 3 We must out of the total
extract the quadrat root, which will show the distance: as suppose according to
this Figure, two Cities d^stant and differing both in longitude and latitude:
whereof the one shall have in longitude 21 degrees, in latitude 58: the other is
supposed to have in longitude 26 degrees, in latitude 52. Here first I subtract
the less longitude out of the greater, to wit, 21 out of 26, and the residue
will be 5, which I suppose to be one side of the Rectangle Triangle. Then
likewise I subtract the less latitude as 52 out of 58, the residue will be 6,
which I make the other side of my Triangle, which done, I multiply 6 in it
self, and it makes 36, which is the square of one side: Then I multiply 5 in
it self, and the product will be 25, the square on the other side. These two
squares added together by the foresaid Proposition must be equal to the square
of the Hypoteneus* orthird side 61, whereof the square root being extracted,
will show the side it self, which will be 7 7/25 which is the distance: If any
man desire to know this distance according to miles, he must reduce the degrees
of longitude and latitude into miles according to our former rules, before he
begin to work: because (as we have showed) the degrees of longitude being
measured in the Parallells are not always equal, the Parallels being
somewhere great^r, somewhere lesser. This way must needs be more exact, in
that a Mile is a smaller part then a Degree, and (as Pitiscus notes) the
Fractions which fall out in extraction of roots can hardly be reduced to any
proportion. Nevertheless this way of finding out the distance by a Right-line
Triangle, howsoever common and received, is very imperfect and subject to great
error, especially in places far distant: for as much as it supposes the
Meridians with the Parallels on the Globe to make true squares, whereas indeed
all the Meridians meet in the pole, and so by consequence cannot make true
squares: But yet this error is far less in a lesser distance; because in a
small space of earth, the roundnesse and conuexity of the Earth is insensible,
or at least of very small importance: so that this way cannot be altogether
unuseful.

12 Another is found out more exact then the former by the tables of Signs,
Tangents, and Secants. This is performed by finding out the numbers: whereof
the former is called Inuentum primum, or the first found number. The second
Inuentum secundum, or the second found number. The working of which Problem
depends on these rules.

1 Multiply the Right Sign of the difference of the longitude into the sum
of the complement of the lesser latitude, and divide the product of that
multiplication by the total sum, and then by the rules of Signs and
Tangents the Arch of that Quotient found out will give the first found number.

2 Multiply the right sign of the lesser latitude by the total sign, and
having divided the product thereof by the sign of the complement of the first
number, subtract the Arch of that quotient out of the greater latitude which
gives the second found number.

3 Then multiply the sign of the complement of the first found number into the
sign of the complement of the second found number, and having divided the
product by the Total Sign, Let the Arch of the quotient be sought out by the
Tables, which Arch subtracted out of the whole quadrant, will give the degrees
of a distance in a great circle.

To express the practice and manner of working according to our former Rules,
we will suppose the two cities, whose distance is here sought out to be
Jerusalem and Norimberge in Germany. Jerusalem has in longitude 66. degrees. 0
min. and in latitude 31 degrees, 40. minutes. Again Norimberge has in
longitude 28. degrees. 20. minutes, and in latitude 49 degrees. 40. min. The
difference of their longitude is 37. degrees. 40. minutes. The right sign whereof
is 36664: (for here we make 60000 to be the total sign, rejecting the two
last figures on the right hand in the tables of Regiomontanus.) Now you must
multiply 36664: into the sign of the Complement of the lesser latitude, which
is 51067: the product of which two signs being multiplied the one by the
other, there will arise 1872320488: which if you divide by the total sign
60000, the quotient will give you 31205, whose Arch is 31 degrees. 20 min. and this
must be your first found Number.

For the finding of the second Number, you must proceed in this ma^ners:
Multiply the right sign of the lesser latitude, which is 31498 by the total
sign 60000, and the produ^t will be 1889880000: which sum, if we divide by
the sign of the Complement of the first-found Number, which is 51249, we
shall find in the quotient 36876; the Arch whereof is 37 degrees, 55 min:
which Arch subtracted out of the greater latitude, there will remain 11
degrees, 29 min: and this is our second-found Number. These things thus
supposed to be found out, we must multiply the foresaid sign of the
Complement of the first-found Number, which is 58798, and the product will
arise to 3013338702, the Arch whereof is 56 degrees. 50 min: which being subtracted
out of the whole quadrant, viz: 90 degrees, there will remain 33 degrees, 10
min: of the greater circle. These 33 degrees if we multiply by 60, there will
arise 1980 miles, whereunto if we find the 10 miles answerable to the 10 min.
we shall find the distance betwixt these places to be 1990 Italian-miles.
This example is used by Appian, and wrought according to his own Tables, and
farther explained by our countryman Blundeuill in his Exercises. The same way
of working has been delivered by Clauius, Iunctinus, and others, although not
according to the same Tables. This was of measuring the distance by the Signs
and Tangents according to these Authors, may be warranted more exact than the
other, because it admits of smaller parts in the calculation; yet will it come
far short of truth.

10 Another way of finding out the Distances of places, differing both in
longitude and latitude, is by the Resolution of a Sphericall triangle.

This way of all the rest must needs be most certain: for as much as this kind
of triangle best expresses the sections of the Globe. The method of which
working I find nowhere better taught then in Pitiscus his Trigonometry: of
whose ingenious industry notwithstanding little use can be made, except the
Learner first acquaint himself with his principles, because in his
Geographicall Problemes, he briefly referres his Reader to his former grounds
and Axioms, accurately demonstrated in his former books: For mine own part it
might perhaps seeeme as absurd in this Treatise, to intermixe all his
preparatory demonstrations, being merely Geometrical, and without the limits
of my subject, as by leaving out so necessary a way to mangle my discourse.
Wherefore intending a middle way, I will (God-willing) in such sort set down
these propositions, that I may give some light to this excellent invention, and
refer my Reader to Pitiscus his Axioms for farther Demonstration.

14 The Distances proposed to be measured by Sphericall triangles, admit of two
cases: 1 When two places are so situate, that the one is under the Equatour,
the other without. Secondly, when both are without the Equatour.

15 The former again is threefold: For either the difference of longitude
betwixt those places is Equal to a quadrant, or Less, or Greater. The
several ways of invention on shall be directed by these Rules.

1 If the Difference of longitude be Equal to a quadrant, the distance will
also be a quadrant.

As for example in this present figure we will imagine the circle ABCD to be
the first Meridian: the places whose distance is sought out A and G: whose
Distance AG will be a quadrant. For A will be a pole of a Greater Circle BGD,
by the 56 prop. of the 1 of Pitiscus: wherefore all the Arches drawn from
thence to BGD will be quadrants by the same proposition. For a more familiar
instance we will take the Island Sumatra, which has in longitude 131 degrees,
but no latitude, being sited under the Equatour: and the city Buda the
Metropolis of Hungary, which has in longitude 41 degrees, in latitude 47
degrees; The difference of longitude is 90 degrees; for 41 being subducted out
of 131, there will remain 90, wherefore the distance betwixt those places will
be 90, which being multiplied by 60, will produce 5400 Italian-miles.

2 If the difference of longitude be less then a quadrant as AF: the Triangle
AEF here is to be resolved into his parts, according to the 4th Axiom of
Pitiscus.

As for example the places, whose longitude is here sought out, shall be A and
F; The Triangle here to be known is AEF; whose Resolution depends on our
Authors 4th Axiom. For the Difference of longitude is ABF; because the measure
of a Sphericall Triangle being taken in a great circle, is an Arch of a greater
circle, described from the Angular point, and comprehended betwixt the two
legs of the Triangle so far as a quadrant, as is taught in the 58
proposition of his first Book. For a more special instance we will take two
places; whereof the one shall be the Island of S. Thomas before mentioned,
which has in longitude 32 degrees and 20 minutes. The other Amsterdam in
Holland, which has in longitude 26 degrees, 30 minutes. The former we imagine
in A; the later in F. The Difference of longitude ABF will be 5 degrees, 50
min: Then the distance sought out must be AF: so working according to the
fourth Axiom of Pitiscus, we shall find the Arch AF, which is the distance, to
be 54 degrees, 19 minutes.

3 If the Difference of longitude be greater then a quadrant, as of the two
places of F and C, the Triangle to be resolved will be FCE, being a Rectangle
at E.

Here because the Triangle FCE has his two sides FC, and EC, greater then
quadrants, instead of it you may work on the Triangle AEF, adjoined to the
Triangle FEC: and the whole work will be dispatched: for by the resolution of
the Triangle AEF, you shall find out the Arch FG, which being added to the
quadrant CG, there will be produced the Arch FC, which is to be ^ought out. As
for example, we will imagine Heidelberge as it were placed at F, to have in
longitude 30 degrees, 45 minutes, in latitude 49 degrees 35 min: Then we will
suppose Summatra, as placed at C, to have in longitude 131 degrees, but no
latitude: The difference of longitude will be EC, of 100 degrees, 15 minutes:
and the complement AE 79 degrees, 45 minutes. Then working according to the
Rules of Trigonometry, we shall find the sign of the Arch FC, to be 6 degrees,
37 minutes; which being added to FC, being 90 degrees, will produce 96 degrees,
37 minutes, to which Arch there will answer 1449 German-miles.

16 The second Case is, when both places are situate without the Equatour: This
is again twofold: For either the two places are understood to be situate
toward the same Pole, or else one place toward the Northern, the other
toward the Southern Pole. Both which Cases shall be taught in these Rules.

1 If both places whose distance is sought, be situate toward the same Pole,
there will arise a Triangle, whose sides and Angles will be known by the
fourth Axiom of Pitiscus in Trigonometry the fourth Book.

As for example, in this present figure, let the two places given be FG, the
Triangle to be known, will be FBG, whose acute Angle will be at B. Let the
places given be as FH; the Triangle to be resolved and known will be FBH,
having a right Angle at H. Finally, if the places suppos^ed to be given, are as
FI, the Triangle to be known will be FBI, with an obtuse Angle at I.

2 If the one place be situated toward the North Pole, and the other toward
the South-pole, there will arise a Triangle, whereof the one side about the
Angle which is given, will be greater then a quadrant.

As in the former figure, let the places given be as G and K, also H and K,
also I and K: There will still fall out a Triangle* whose one side containing
the Angle given, will be greater then a quadrant, as BK: wherefore for the side
BK, you must take his complement to the Semicircle BF, that is, for the
Triangle GBK, you must work by the Triangle GBF: and instead of the Triangle
HBK, you must take the Triangle HBF: and for the Triangle IBK, you must work
by the Triangle IBF, according to the fourth Axiom of the fourth book of
Pitiscus, to which I had rather refer my Reader, then intermixe our
Geographicall discourse with handling the Principles of Geometry, which here
are to be supposed so many precedent propositions; which, expressed as they
ought, would transcend the bounds of my intended journey.

17 Of the Astractiue way of finding out the Distance of places, we have
spoken: The Mechanical depends on the use of Instruments and Mechanical
operation, whereof we will show one way in this Theoreme.

1 By the working with a Semicircle, the Distance of two places may be found
out.

This invention by Mr Blundeuill, seems to be ascribed to Edward Wright, yet
has it been taken up of foreign Writers as their own, and used in their
Charts and Mappes. The manner of operation is thus: First, let there be drawn
a semicircle upon a right Diameter signed out, will be the letters ABCD,
whereof D shall be the center, as you find it deciphered in this present
figure. The greater this Semicircle be made, so much the more easy will be
the operation; because the degrees will be larger. Then this Semicircle being
drawn, and accordingly divided, imagine that by the help of it, you desire to
find out the distance betwixt London and Jerusalem, which cities are known to
differ both in longitude and latitude. Now, that the true distance betwixt
these two places may be found out, you must first subtract the lesser
longitude out of the greater, so shall you find the Difference of their
longitudes, which is 47 degrees. Then reckon that Difference upon the
Semicircle, beginning at A, and so proceed to B; and at the end of that
Difference, make a mark with the letter E, into which point by your Ruler, let
a right line be drawn from D the center of the Semicircle. This being in this
sort performed, let the lesser latitude be sought out, which is 32 degrees in
the foresaid Semicircle, beginning your account from the point E, and so
proceeding toward B, and at the end of the lesser latitude, let another point
be marked out with the letter G: from which point let there be drawn a
perpendicular, which may fall with right Angles upon the former line, drawn
from D to E; and where it chances to fall, there mark out a point with the
letter H: This being performed, let the greater latitude, which is 51 degrees,
32 minutes, be sought out in the Semicircle, beginning to reckon from A
toward B, and at the end of that latitude, set down another point, signed out
by the letter I: from whence let there be drawn another perpendicular line,
that may fall with right Angles upon the Diameter AC, and here mark out a
point with the letter K: This done, take with your Compass the distance
betwixt K and H; which distance you must set down upon the Diameter AC,
placing the one foot of your compass upon K, and the other toward the center
D, and there mark out a point with the letter L: Then with your compass take
the shorter perpendicular line GH, and apply that wideness upon the longer
perpendicular line IK, placing the one foot of your compass at I, which is the
bounds of the great latitude, and extend the other toward K, and there make a
point at M. Then with your compass take the distance betwixt L and M, and
apply the same to the semicircle, placing the one foot of your compass in A,
and the other toward B, and there mark out a point with the letter N. Now the
number of degrees comprehended betwixt A and N, will express the true distance
of the two places, which will be found to be 39* degrees: which being
multiplied by 60, and so converted into miles according to our former Rules,
will produce 2340, which is the distance of the said places.

17 The expression of the Distance of two places may be performed either by the
Globe or Map according to these Rules.

1 The distance betwixt two places in the Globe, being observed by the quadrant
of Altitude, and applied to the degrees of the Equatour, or any great circle,
will show how many miles such places are distant.

The practice hereof is very easy, as shall be taught in this example: we will
for instance take Tolledo in the midst of Spain, and the Cape of Good Hope
in the South Promontory of all Africa: The space taken by a quadrant of
Altitude, or any thread applied to the Equatour, will be found to be about 82
degrees, which being multiplied by 60, and so converted into miles, will render
4920, the true distance betwixt these two places.

2 The distance betwixt any two places in the Chart, observed by a compass,
and applied to the degrees of a greater Circle, will show how many miles such
places are distant one from the other.

For an example, we will take the city Seuill on the Southmo^^ part of Spain,
and Bilbao on the North-side: the space betwixt those places being taken with a
thre^d or a compass, and applied to one of the greater Circles, will contain
about 6 degrees; which being multiplied by 60, and so converted into
Italian-miles, will produce 360: and so many miles those Cities are to be
esteemed distant the one from the other.

The end of the first Book.
GEOGRAPHIE THE SECOND BOOK.

CONTAINING the general Topicall part thereof, By NATHANAEL CARPENTER, Fellow
of Exceter College in Oxford.

GENES. 1. verse. 10. And God called the Dry-land, Earth; and the gathering
together of the waters called the Seas: and God saw that it was good.

OXFORD, Printed by John Lichfield, for Henry Cripps, and are to be sold by
Henry Curteyne. Anno Domini, M. DC. XXXV.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE PHILIP, EARL OF MOVNTGOMERIE etc. Knight of the most
Noble order of the Garter, and Steward of the famous University of Oxford.
Right Honorable,
THis Geographicall Treatise consisting of two parts, was in the very birth in
such sort consecrated to your inestimable Brother, as notwithstanding it so
far reserved it self to awaite your Honors favor, that Both may seem, as
to share a part, so to challenge the whole in my poor Industry. The Soul of
man which some Philosophers imagine, to be all in all, and all in every part,
seems to me no where better resembled then in your Generous Fraternity;
wherein the Soul of Heroical Magnificence, though Indiuided in it self, so
entirely communicates herself to either, that both may seem at once to enjoy
her presence while neither want. If this my bold attempt in presenting to your
Honors hands these unworthy labors, without any former reference, might be
interpreted intrusion, it were enough for Ingenuity to pretend, that your
generous love unto our poor College and the respective duty wherein the
College always stands obliged unto your Honor, commands my pen beyond
manners or ability. Your affection to our house, could no way express it self
ampler then by trusting our custody, with the charge of your choicest Jewel:
R. Ld. D.
A Gentleman of that towardly wit and sweet disposition, that Learning and
Morality commonly reputed the daughters of time, seem in him scarce beholding
to years, and to challenge a precedence before experience; in so much that our
ancient Mother marked out with all the Characters of age and declining
weakness, cherishing in her bosom this young darling, seems to resume her
youthful habit, and triumph over Time and Ruins. This happiness amongst
diverse others vouchsafed by your Honor to the place, for whose good opinion
the best part of mine endeavors stand engaged, has encouraged my hopes to
promise me your indulgent Acceptance of this slender piece, long since intended
and devoted, as my self, unto your service: In which confidence, fearing any
longer to trespass on your serious and high employments endebted to your King
and Country, I humbly rest

Your Honors in all duty and service to be commanded NATHANAEL CARPENTER.

A TABLE OF THE SEVERAL Contents of the second Book of Geography, according
to the special Theoreme.
CHAP. I. Of Topography and the Nature of a place.
1 THe Terrestrial Sphere is euery-where habitable. page 4 2 All places of
the Earth have suffered manifold mutation and changes, as well in name as
nature. page 6 3 Places having long continued without habitation, are seldom
so healthy and fit for dwelling, as those which have been in habited. 11
CHAP. II. Of the general Adjuncts of places.
1 The manner how to measure the magnitude of a Region by the Diameter, both
according to breadth and length. 15 2 Of the measuring of a Country by the
circuit of it. 17 3 The Measuring of a Country by the circuit is deceitful,
and subject to great error. 17 4 Those Regions are more exactly measured which
partake of a plain surface. 19 5 How Countries are bounded. 20 6 Natural
bounds are more certain then Artificial. ibid. 7 Equal bounds contain not
always equal Regions. 21 8 Of the quality of a Region. ibid. 9 Special
places are endowed with special Tempers and dispositions. 21 10 Of the
magneticall affections of a place, as Variation and Declination. 26 11 The
magneticall variation is of no use for the first finding out of the longitude:
yet may it serve to good purpose for the recognition of a place before
discovered. 27 12 The declination of a place being known, the latitude may be
found, yet not without some error. 29 13 Of the external Adjuncts of the Air
belonging to a place. ibid. 14 The disposition of the Air Adjacent to a place
depends chiefly on the Temperament of the soil. 30
CHAP. III. Of the Adjuncts of a place in respect of the heavens.
1 Places according to their diverse situation in regard of the Heavens are
diuersely affected in quality and constitution. 34 2 Of the division of the
Earth into the North and South Hemispheares. 38 3 Northern and Southern
places alike situate generally enjoy a like disposition. 39 4 The Northern
Hemispheare is the masculine, the southern the faeminine part of the Earth. 40
5 Of the diverse sections of the Hemispheares and the several qualities
belonging to them. 43 6 Of the East and West Hemispheares. 51 7 The Eastern
Hemispheare is happier then the other. 52 8 The difference of the East and West
cannot work any difference in two places, by any diversity of the heavens. 53
9 Of the subdiuision of the Eastern and Western Hemispheares. 54 10 Places
situate toward the East in the same latitude are better then those places
toward the West. ibid.
CHAP. IV. Of the manner of Expression and Description of Regions.
1 Of the finding out of the Angle of position by some dioptricke Instrument at
two or more stations. 57 2 At one station by opticall observation to find out
the situation of one place in respect of the other. 59 3 Of the manner of
translation of Regions into the Chart. 61 4 To set down the Meridians and
Parallels in a particular Chart. 62 5 How to set down Cities, Castles,
Mountains, Rivers, etc. in the Chart. 64 6 Of the fabric of the scale of
miles in the Chart. 65 7 The use of the scale of miles set down in the Chart.
ibid.
CHAP. V. Of Hydrography, and the absolute adjuncts of the Sea; of the figure
and quality.
1 Although the whole body of the water be sphericall, yet it is probable, that
the parts of it incline to a Conicall figure. 70 2 The water of the sea is
salt, not by Nature but by Accident. 75 3 Seas absolutely salt, are never
frozen. 79 4 The Water of the sea is thicker then the other Water. 80
CHAP. VI. Of the motions of the sea.
1 Of the ebbing and flowing of the sea and the causes thereof. 82 2 All s^a^
do not ebb and flow alike, nor the same at all times. 92 3 It is probable
that the sea is carried some-where from East to West, and some-where from North
to South, and contrariwise. 98 4 Of the violent motion of the sea caused by
winds. 101 5 To some certain places at certain times belong certain winds.
102 6 The violence of the winds makes the sea sometimes in some places
transcend his ordinary bounds. 103
CHAP. VII. Of the Depth, Situation, and Termination of the sea*
1 The ordinary depth of the sea is commonly answerable to the ordinary height
of the maine land above the water: and the Whirlepooles and extraordinary
depths, answer to the height of the mountains above the ordinary height of the
Earth. 104 2 The superficies of the sea is some-where higher then the
superficies of the Earth: some-where lower. 109 3 The sea in respect of the
Earth is higher in one place then another. 111 4 The Water is so divided from
the dry-land, that the quantity of water is greater in the Southern
Hemispheare, of land in the Northern. 115 5 The whole Globe of the Earth is
environed round with sea betwixt East and West. 116 6 It is probable that the
Earth is enuirnoed round with water from North to South: Of the North-west
passage, 117
CHAP. VIII. OfSea Traffic and Merchandice.
1 Navigations first taught by Almighty God, was afterward seconded by the
industry of famous men in all ages. 132 2 Navigations is very necessary as well
for the increase of knowledge as riches. 135
CHAP. IX. Of Pedography, Rivers, Lakes, and Fountains in the Earth.
1 All Rivers have their original from the sea the mother of rivers. 142 2 All
Rivers and Fountains were not from the beginning. 155 3 Many rivers are for a
great space of land swallowed up of the Earth: whereof some after a certain
distance, rise again. 156 4 Rivers for the most part rise out of great
mountains, and at last by diverse or one Inlet are disburthened into the sea.
157 5 Diverse Fountains are endowed with diverse admirable virtues and
operations. 159 6 Places near great Rivers and Lakes, are most commodious for
Habitation. 162 7 Of Lakes and their causes. 162 8 It is probable that some
Lakes have some secret intercourse with the sea under ground. 163
CHAP. X. Of Mountains, Vallyes, plaine-Regions, woody and champion Countries.
1 Mountains, Vallyes, and Plains, were created in the beginning, and few
made by the violence of the Deluge. 165 2 The perpendicular height of the
highest mountains seldom exceeds 10 furlongs. 169 3 The ordinary height of
the land above the sea in diverse places is more then the hight of the highest
mountains above the ordinary face of the Earth. 171 4 Mountains Countries
are commonly colder then plain. 172 5 Mountains since the beginning of the
world have still decreased in their quantity, and so will unto the end, 174 6
Of Woods and their nature. 178 7 Woods are not so frequent or great as in
ancient times. 179 8 Places moderately situate toward the North or South-pole,
abound more in woods then near the Equatour. 180
CHAP. XI. Of Islands and Continents.
1 It is probable that Islands were not from the first beginning, but were
afterward made by violence of the water. 184 2 Peninsula's by violence of the
sea fretting through the Istmus, have oftentimes turned into Islands, and
contrariwise: Peninsalas by diminution of the sea made of Islands. 189
CHAP. XII. Of Inundations and Earthquakes.
1 No universal Inundation of the Earth can be natural: the other may depend
from natural causes. 193 2 Particular alterations have happened to the bonds
of Countries by particular Inundations. 195 3 Certain Regions by reason of
great Rivers are subject to certain anniuersary Inundations. 197 4 Regions
extreme cold or extreme hot, are not so subject to Earthquakes as places of
a middle temper. 201 5 Hollow and spongie places are more subject to
Earthquakes then solid and compacted Soiles. 202 6 Islands are more often
troubled with earthquakes then the continent. 203
CHAP. XIII. Of the Original of Inhabitants.
1 All Nations had their first original from one stock, whence afterward
they became divided. 206 2 The first inhabitants of the Earth were planted in
Paradise and thence translated to the places adjoining. 208 3 The first
plantation of Inhabitants immediately after the Deluge began in the East. 213
CHAP. XIV. Of the disposition of Inhabitants in respect of the site.
1 The people of the Northern Hemispheare, as well in Riches, and
Magnificence, as valor, science, and civil government, far surpass the
people of the south Hemispheare. 221 2 The extreme Inhabitants toward the
pole, are in complexion hot and moist: Those toward the Equatour, cold and
dry, those of the middle partaking of a middle temper. 226 3 The extreme
Inhabitants toward the poles are naturally inclined to Mechanical works and
martial endeavors; the extreme toward the Equatour, to works of Religion
and Contemplation: The middle to laws and ciuility. 232 4 The people of the
extreme Regions toward the poles in Martial prowess have commonly proved
stronger then those nearer the Equatour: but the middle people more provident
then either in the establishment and preservation of commonwealths. 236 5 The
extreme Regions, in Manners, Actions, and Customs, are clean opposite the
one to the other: The middle partake a mixture of both. 239 6 The people of the
Eastern Hemispheare in science, Religion, Ciuility, and Magnificence, and
almost in every thing else, are far superior to the Inhabitants of the
Western. 250 7 The Western people have been observed to be more happy, and
able in Martial discipline; the Eastern in witty contemplation and
contemplative sciences. 252 8 The Eastern part of the Western Hemispheare was
peopled before the Western. 255
CHAP. XV. Of the Diversity of dispositions in regard of the Soil.
1 Mountaine-people are for the most part more stout, warlike, and generous,
then those of plain Countries, yet less tractable to government. 256 2 Windy
Regions produce men of wild and instable dispositions: But quiet Regions, more
constant and courteous. 273
CHAP. XVI. Of the dispositions of Inhabitants, according to their original
and education.
1 Colonies translated from one Region into another far remote retain a long
time their first disposition, though by little and little, they decline and
suffer alteration. 278 2 The mixture of Colonies begets the same Nation a
greater disparity and variety of the Nations amongst themselves. 278 3
Education has a great force in the alteration of Natural dispositions: yet so
as by accident remitted, they soon return to their proper Temper. 4 By
Discipline, Nations become more Wise and Politic in the preservation of
states, yet less stout and courageous. 283
The Analysis of the second Book.
^ General, which of a place generally taken, without any special division
handles the Adjuncts and proprieties: these agree to a place in respect of the
Earth it self: which are Internal or External: Common or Magneticall,
whereof Chapter 2. Heavens: which are General or Special. Chapt. 3.
Expression and Manner of Description of Regions, as well in the finding out the
Angle of position, as Translation of places formerly found out into the Globe
or Chart. Chap. 4.
Special, which contains the distinction of a place into Sea: whose
description is called Hydrography, in which we are to consider the Adjuncts of
the Sea, which are either Internal, which are inbred in the Nature of the Sea;
which again are either Absolute, such as agree to the Sea without any
comparison of it with the Land: Here we observe in the water of the Sea 1 The
Figure, and Quality. Chap. 5. 2 The Motion, Natural and Violent. Chap. 6.
Comparatiue, which concern the Depth, Situation, and Termination of the Sea.
Chap. 7.
External, which concern Sea-Trafficke and Merchandise. Chap. 8.
Land, which we term Pedography, whose Accidents are either Natural, which
are again divided into Perpetual, such as ordinarily agree to the earth:
these again are either Absolute, wherein we have no respect unto the Sea: Here
we consider the Nature 1 Of rivers, fountains, and lake^. Chap. 9. 2 Of
mountains, vallie^, and plaine-Regions, woody, and champion Countries. Chap.
10.
Comparatiue wherein we consider the Termination of the Sea with the Land.
Chap. 11.
Casual, which seldom fall out, such as are Inundations and Earthquakes.
Chap. 12.
Civil, which concerns the Inhabitants of any place, in whom we consider the
Original or offspring. Chap. 13. Disposition which is varied, either
accor^^^^ (...) 1 Site in respect of the Heavens. Chap. 14. 2 Soil. Chap. 15. ^





GEOGRAPHIE: THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Topographie and the nature of a place.
IN the former Treatise, by Gods assistance, we have treated of the Sphericall
part of Geographie: It will in the second place seem convenient to speak of
the Topicall part of it.

2 The Topicall part teaches the description of the Terrestrial Globe, so
far forth as it is divided into places.

The nature of Topographie, whereof we are to treat in this second part, is
discovered unto us, not only in the name, which promises a description of
places, but also in the differences set down by Ptolomy himself, betwixt the
Sphericall and Topicall part: the former of which he calls Geographie, and
latter Topographie; whereof we have spoken at large in the first Chapter of
our former book. Here only we will note this one distinction, that
T^^ograhie may be taken either more generally, or specially: Generally we may
take it so far forth, as it discouers unto us either the whole world and all
his parts, or at least some great and principal parts; such as is an Empire,
Region, Kingdom, or such like. More specially and particularly, it has
usually been taken for the description of a very small place, whose situation
in respect of the heavens is not noted, but of the parts one to the other: such
as are Cities, Burrowes, Towns, Castles, Lakes, and Rivers. The former
(whereat we chiefly aim) cannot well be performed without the use of the
Sphericall part: That latter we will more sparingly touch, being an infinite
task in the whole earth to descend to all particulars which come in our way:
yet shall we not altogether omit or neglect such circumstances in their due
places, so far forth as we can; leaving the rest to such Topographers, who
spend their stock in the description of some particular place or Region:
whereof this our Age has produced many deserving high commendations. This
Science was anciently adorned by Homer, An^^imander, Milesius, Haecataeus,
Democritus, Eudoxius, Dicaearchus, Euphorus, as we find in Straboes first
book: to which afterward succeed, Eratosthenes, Polybius, Possidonius, and
diverse others. Which part requires little or small knowledge in the Sciences
Mathematical, but challenges more affinity with the Physical and Political
part of Philosophy; and therefore is more subject to popular understanding
then the former, and may without it, afford some profit to the Reader.

3 The Topicall part is either general, or special: The general is that
which handles the general Adjuncts of a place.

4 A place is a superficial space of the Terrestrial Globe, fitted for
habitation.

To the constitution of a place (as it is here Topographically taken) there
ought to be a concurrence of two things, which we may call Matter and Form.
The Matter is the space contained; or superficial platform of the earth
whereon we dwell. The form is the capability or aptness of it for
habitation; both which concurring together are conceived to make a place, such
as we here Topographically understand: for here we understand not a place
Physically, for the receptacle of a natural body; in which sense the Heavens
and all the elements are said to have their natural places: Neither yet
Geometrically for a plain whereon a line or figure may be drawn: but
Topographically for the upper face of the earth whereon people or other living
creatures may inhabit. This place as appears by reason and holy Scriptures
was more ancient then habitation. For whereas in the first Mass the earth was
inueloped with waters on every side, affording no place for dwelling; Almighty
God is said afterward to have separated and parted the waters from the dry
land, making the one a Receptacle for Fishes, and such creatures of the deep,
the other for a dwelling place for mankind, and such creatures as breath upon
the land: yet has he so provided in his divine wisdom, that neither the
Inhabitants of the land can well want the Sea, nor the living creatures in the
Sea want the land. The one appears in that we are enforced to make use of the
sea, not only for ^ood and nourishment, whereof a great part consists of
fish: but also for our Traffic and commerce with foreign Nations, which is
better effected by Sea then Land-voyages. The latter is as easily showed, in
that the fishes of the Sea derive not only their composition, but also their
proper nourishment from the land: whereof we shall have more occasion to
speak hereafter. Now we are moreover to consider, that a place may be taken
in a double sense: first more largely for any place wherein a creature may live
for longer or shorter time. Secondly, more strictly for such a space of earth,
whereon mankind may conveniently reside or dwell. The former comprehends not
only the land, but also the water; for experience shows, that men in ships
may for a time reside and dwell on the back of the maine Ocean. But the latter
betokening a continuance of habitation, is only agreeable to the land: Which
sense howbeit it be more consonant to the common use of speech, yet for method
sake, we are enforced to use the former: understanding by habitation, not
only a place of convenient residence, but any other whereon a creature for a
time may breathe and live.

1 The Terrestrial Sphere is euerywhere habitable.

It was an ancient opinion (as we have formerly touched) that the earth was not
euerywhere habitable: namely, in the Intemperate Zones, whereof the one was
placed in the middle of the earth, the other at the ends: the former was
thought not habitable by reason of the extremity of heat; because the
Sunne-beames there fall perpendicularly, and so make a greater reflection; The
other for extremity of cold, by reason of the obliquity of the Sunne-beames,
causing little or no reflection: whence a second cause seems to be drawn from
the extreme drought of those places, which seems most opposite to man's
temper, requiring a reasonable degree of moisture. But notwithstanding these
reasons of the ancients, it must needs be confessed as an undoubted truth,
confirmed by experience of many N^uigatours, that those Regions by them
imagined unfit for habitation, are not only habitable, but in many places very
populous. Neither want there many reasons found out by latter writers, to
mitigate the rigor of this opinion: some whereof we have already touched in
our former treatise. First, whereas they urge the places under the Equinoctial
to be uninhabitable by reason of intemperate heat; we may easily answer, that
the days and nights are then always equal, containing not above 12 hours,
so that the space of either being shorter, the cold of the night may well
assuage the extreme heat of the day. Another reason is ordinarily taken from
the extraordinarily high mountains, commonly placed under the Equinoctial,
which approaching nearer the middle Region of the air, must of necessity
partake some what more of cold: which daily experience can witness, in that
their top ^ are covered with snow even in the depth of Summer. Thirdly, the
neerenesse of the maine Ocean to a great part of this Region, is a great cause
of this cold temper, because water is found to be by nature cold. Fourthly,
the set and certain winds by nature ordained to blow in the hottest times of
the year, may add much to temperature. Fifthly, the extraordinary Raines and
showers which those places suffer, which are under the Line, especially when
the Sun is vertical, are a great cause of the asswaging of the heat of the
Sun. Lastly, the custom of the Inhabitants being from their cradles inured
to no other quality or disposition of the air, will take away much from our
admiration. On the other side no small reasons may be showed, why, the Regions
lying near or under the Pole should not be so extremely cold, but that they
may admit of habitation. First, because the Sun being for six months
together above their Horizon, must needs impresse into the Air more heat then
otherwise it would do. Besides, the thickness incorporated (as it were) with
heat, must needs receive into it more degrees of it then a thinner and more
refined air, because the intention of the quality most commonly supposes the
condensation or thickning of the subject wherein it is. But no greater reason
can be showed in this point then the custom of the Northern inhabitants,
exposed from their infancy to no other temperament. If we should ask a reason
why we unmask our faces against the encounter of the greatest cold, being a
soft and tender part, not daring to uncover our other parts, what reason can a
man invent but custom? If any should ask why barbarous people living in far
colder climates then this of ours, go altogether naked, whereas the cold is
mother of many diseases amongst us who go always clothed; only use and
custom can yield an answer. These reasons make it probable enough, that no
place of the whole world is by nature made not habitable. Now that it is not
only inhabitable by nature, but also for the most part truly inhabited, will
appear as easily, if we trust the testimony of Nauigatours which have
discovered few or no Regions wanting some ^nhabitants. But that this
proposition may be more distinctly understood, we must know that the whole
world is divided into Sea and Land: for the Sea we may call it habitable in
that large sense before mentioned; to wit, that on it every where men in ships
may breath and live; which is plain out of experience of Nauigatours, who have
sailed round about the Earth from East to West, and have entered far toward
the North and South: where at least some times of the year, or other they
might find the way passable: For the land which is here principally
understood, we must note that it may be considered two ways; either for
every little quillet or parcel of land contaned in the superficies of the
Earth; or else for a certain Region of some indifferent greatness. In the
former sense, it were too much to affirm every part of the Earth to be
habitable; for as much as many places, as the tops of the Alps, or the sands
of Africa, properly admit of no habitation; yet in an improper and large sense
they may be called habitable, because on them a man may live and breath for a
certain space of time. But if by the parts of the land we understand some
reasonable greatness, no great doubt can be made, but that it is either
already inhabited by mankind, or can at least admit of habitation, as that
which not only for a time affords a man life and breath, but also some
convenient means of sustenance; for no country has ever been found so
indigent and barren of all vital aides, which is neither capeable of living
creatures in the land, fit for man's nourishment; or that cannot draw Fishes
from the Sea; or if this should fail, cannot afford Fruits or Herbage from the
ground: or in case all the rest were deficient cannot have passage by Water to
other Countries, whence to relieve their necessities. And no question but
nature has stored every Country with some commodity or other, which by
traffic may draw riches from other Regions, as by instances may more
particularly appear hereafter when we shall speak of particular Regions, and
their several accidents.

2 All places of the Earth have suffered manifold alteration and change as well
in Name as Nature.

I need not spend time to demonstrate this Assertion, for that every place of
the Earth has been subject to much mutation in the process of time, as well
in Nature of the Soil as of the Inhabitants, a few obuious instances in each
Country will easily certify: yet will it not seem amiss, I hope, to show
the progress, manner, and causes of this alteration, which would give no small
satisfaction. To discourse of all changes according to all times were a matter
infinite: We may refer all to two heads, to wit, the change of Names, and
the change of Nature. Concerning the former that most Countries have changed
their first and original names, is most evident to such as consult the Maps
and writings of our common Geographers: for few or none will discover unto us
any Region by that name, by which it was known in former times: in so much, as
great controversy and dispute has grown about diverse countries mentioned
by ancient writers, whereof the name should take its first original; but of
this change we shall speak hereafter. But if we consider the natural changes
of Countries, sithence the first creation we shall find them to have suffered
as well in the natural accidents, and disposition of the soil, as the temper
of the Inhabitants; concerning the former we may note a twofold alteration:
whereof the one is a progress from Imperfection to Perfection; the other
contrariwise, from Perfection to Imperfection. The first grows out of the
general Industry of mankind, which is wont to work every thing as near as
it can to his best ends and use, for his own good and propagation of his
kind: which we may best find in the first original of the world, the first
groundwork of civil society; for man being once expelled out of Paradise for
his own transgression, had left him notwithstanding for his lot the whole
world besides, which no question he found as in the cradle of Nature a poor
infant, as yet altogether unfashioned and vnshaped for humane habitation. For
who can imagine the earth at that time to be any otherwise then as a vast
Wilderness all ouergrowne with briers and bushes growing of their own accord
out of the Earth: Moreover what Fennes, Bogges, Marshes, and other such
incombrances could there be wanting to those places which never yet felt the
chastising hand of husbandry? All these incommodities, as mankind began to
multiply and propagate it self on the face of the Earth, were by little and
little removed, and the Earth reduced into a better form for humane dwelling:
because every man choosing out his own possession, began presently to till and
manure the soil with all heedfull industry. For if our first Parents being
placed in Paradise it self, the most pleasant and fertile portion of the whole
world, were nevertheless enjoined to dress and manure the Garden for their
better use and profit; what shall we imagine of the other parts of the Earth,
which (no doubt) a thousand degrees come short of this perfection: especially
knowing this curse to be laid on man by our Creator: That he should eat his
bread in the sweat of his brows; as though the earth were bound to open her
treasures only to man's pains and labor. And howsoever the diligence of
mankind has gone very far in adorning and fashioning the upper face of the
earth, yet has it not waded so far, but that many places in our times are
left altogether rude and vncultered, groaning under vast Wildernesses and
unprofitable deserts. For times past we might have for instance, gone no
farther then Britanie and Germany; both which Countries we shall find in
these days to differ as much from the days of Caesar, as Caesar judged them
to differ from the Roman Territory; which no doubt he preferred before all
parts of Europe. Notwithstanding this general inclination of mankind to
perfect their dwelling places for their better ease and comfort, we shall
find many ways whereby the parts of the Earth have degenerated, and proved
more unfit for humane habitation then in former times. The first which is the
greatest, and cause of all the rest, is that Curse which our Almighty Creator
cast on the whole earth for Adams sake, which afterward seems renewed and
increased in the general deluge, wherein all mankind suffered for their
sins a plague of waters. For as the estate of mankind immediately before the
Flood was far better then that afterward, so was the estate of Paradise
far better then that: So as we may note from the beginning of the world a
general defect and weakness of the Creatures, still more and more declining
from their original perfection granted in the first creation. So that many
great Philosophers have coniectured, not without ground, that the world from
the first creation has suffered the change of ages sensibly, and this wherein
we live to be the last and decrepite age, wherein Nature lies languishing,
as ready to breath out her last. But this opinion seems to be controled by
reason; for as much as we find not a proportional decrement and defect of
natural vigor in things, as well in man as other creatures. For if we
compare the estate of a man before the Flood, with the age of David long after,
we shall find a great disparity in the proportional decrement of the Years
and Ages of men: for as much as many before the Flood attained to 800, and some
as Methusalem, to 900 years: But in David time, the days of man's life (as he
himself testifies) are threescore and ten: and admit we understand this
speech of David to be meant only of his chiefest strength and liuelyhood, we
shall yet find a great diversity, because man is understood to be in his
greatest strength and vigor in his middle age; so that the whole age of man by
this account surmounts not 140 years. To which proportion of defect or
decrement our times can no way agree, because many men in our days come near
the same age, as we see by experience, which may be confirmed by diverse
instances, whereof we will produce only two: the one of a certain Indian
presented to Soliman the Turk, being of the age of 200 years: the other of
the Countresse of Desmond in Ireland (which Sr Walter Rauleigh mentions to this
purpose) who was married in Edward the fourth's time, yet was alive very
lately. But to this doubt I might answer, that this extraordinary difference
betwixt the ages of men, between the Patriarchs and David's time compared with
men, ages betwixt David's and our days, came from two especial causes: First
by the universal Deluge, which caused a general defect and decay of nature in
the whole earth, the like whereof has not since been found: Secondly, it was
(as it seems) much impaired by the Intemperance and luxurious diet of those
times, which added much to this general weakness of nature: for as much as
the children can have little or no natural perfection in themselves more then
is derived unto them by their parents. For nothing can give that to others
which it never had it self; whence it must needs come to pass, that the
posterity derived from luxurious and distempered bodies, should prove as weak
and impotent generally (if not more) then their Parents. Now why the people
soon upon the Flood should find their distemperature more noxious and
prejudicial to long life then the men of our age, a good reason may be given;
because the Earth long after the Flood had not fully received that natural
heat and spirit which it lost in the Deluge. So that all things arising out of
it, as Plants, Herbs, Fruits, and living creatures feeding thereon, proved for
a while more unwholesome and unnatural, then in some years after, when it had
somewhat revived it self by the heat of the Sun and the Star, and by
little and little returned to his own nature. The other cause of deficiencie
is more special, as not happening to all, but to diverse parts of the Earth,
and that more at one time then another: as the neglect of due manuring many
places, caused commonly two ways; either by contagion naturally incident to
diverse places, or by hostile Invasion and deuastation: of this latter arise
two maine effects; The first is the want and scarcity of Inhabitants, which
should dress and manure the ground to make it more fruitful and accommodate
to man's use. The second is their poverty and captivity; whereof the one makes
them unable, the second unwilling to effect any great matter for the benefit of
the Land. A good instance whereof we may find in the land of Palestine: which
in times past by God himself was called, A land flowing with milk and honey,
for the admirable pleasantness and fertility of the Soil: yet at this day, if
we will credit travelers report, a most barren Region, deuoid almost of all
good commodity fit for the use of man, in the ruins of which, sometimes famous
kingdom, every bleere-eyed judgment may easily read Gods curse long since
denounced; Which strange alteration next unto Gods anger we can ascribe to no
other cause then the hostile invasion of foreign enemies, which has almost
l^ft the land waste without the native Inhabitants; whence it could not choose
in a short time but degenerate from the ancient fruitfulness. The like may we
find in all those miserable Regions which groan at this day under the tyranny
of the usurping Turk: whence a proverb runs current amongst them: That
where the Turks horse has once grazed, no grass will ever aft^r grow: which
signifies no other then the barbarous manner of the Turks, having once
conquered a land, to lay it open ever after to deuastation: for being for the
most part warlike men trained up in martial discipline, they little or nothing
at all regard the use of husbandry: whence in short time a Country must needs
^urne wild and unfruitful. To these causes we may add the influence of
heavenly constellations, which being varied according to the times, produce no
small effects in the changes and alterations of the earth. The diverse
alteration in the disposition of the Inhabitants which was our second point, we
have refer^^ed to another place near the end of this tract, to which is
properly appertains.

3 Pl^ces having long continued without habitation are seldom so healthy and
fit for dwelling as those which have been inhabited.

This Proposition I have known to be warranted by the Testimony of many
experienced Nauigators: in so much as I presume few men can doubt of the truth
of it, who has either been a Traualler himself into far Countries, or at
least has read other men's discoueries. The only matter therefore we here
intend, is to produce certain causes of this effect, to give satisfaction to
such as make a distinction betwixt the knowledge of the effect, and inquiry of
the cause. The first cause which I can allege is the industry of mankind
inhabiting any Country (mentioned in the former Theoreme) out of which arises
a twofold effect. 1 The improuing of the Soil, by removing all such
impediments as otherwise would prove noisome to mankind, for whereas all
things growing of their own accord, are suffered to rot into the ground; in
like manner what other can we expect but Fennes, Fogges, and noisome vapors,
altogether hurtful to the welfare and life of man. 2 The profit of man's
industry is no less apparent in manuring the ground, and opening the upper
face of the Earth: which being composed of diverse substances, sends forth
many times certain hot fumes and vapors, which in many cold Countries
mollify the usual rigor of the Air, which most offends the Inhabitants. This
reason is given by my Countreyman Captain Whitborne for the extreme cold,
which some men profess themselves to have tried in New Foundland, which
nevertheless, according to many men's description, is known to lie far more
South then England: for the natives of the Country being for the most part
driven into the North part by the Europeans, who usually trade there for fish,
and they themselves living altogether on Fish from the Sea, or some wild beasts
on the land, as Bears, Dear, and such like; without any manuring of the
ground for herbage; The Soil by them is in a manner left altogether unmanured:
so that neither the soil can be well cleansed from noisome vapors arising
from the putrefaction of herbage rotting (as I said) into the ground, or left
free to send out such wholesome fumes and vapors from its interior parts,
which may warm the Air, and preserve mankind. 3 A third reason drawn from
men's Industries, that those Countries which have inioyed Inhabitants by the
continual use of Fires, have their Air more purged and refined from drossie
and noisome vapors, which usually arise out of a contagious soil, daily
infected by putrefaction: for scarce any nation has been known so barbarous
and ignorant which has not the invention and use of Fire: neither is any
infection of the air so pestilent, and opposite to humane constitution, which
the breath of fire will not in some sort dispell. If any man object the
distance of houses and villages wherein fire is used, which seem to claim a
small interest in the change of the air hanging over a whole Country: let him
well consider the quickness of motion and fluidity of the Air, passing (as it
were) in a moment from one place to the other, and he may soon answer his
own objection. All those reasons hitherto mentioned an inhabited Region owes
to man's industry, which we generally touched in the precedent Theoreme. The
second cause which is as a consequent of habitation, is the necessity of
breathing of people living in any Region of the earth, whereby may follow two
effects. 1 A certain measure of heat impressed into the air, as we see in
any room in a great throng of people, by reason of their breathing together in
one place. 2 The assimilation of the Air to humane bodies, by a continual
respiration. These alterations of the air, might perhaps to common
apprehensions, seem small and insensible. But he that considers how great a
quantity of air is requisite for a man's respiration, and the space and extent
of motion together with the multitude of Inhabitants in a populous Country,
would hold it no strange matter, that the breathing of men should breed such an
alteration of the air: we find by experience, that strong built houses being
left tenantlesse, will soon fall into decay, not so much for want of
reparation, as the foggy vapors and moisture, caused by want of Respiration.
The like whereof in some proportion may we imagine to be in a region wanting
Inhabitants, and deprived of this benefit of nature.

CHAP. II. Of the General Adjuncts of Places.
1 IN a place Topographically taken two things are to be considered. 1. The
Adjuncts. 2 The Description: The Adjuncts are such proprieties as agree to
special places.

2 Such Adjuncts agree to a place, either in respect of the Earth it self, or
in respect of the Heavens: Those which agree to a place in respect of the
Earth, are either Internal or External.

3 The Internal I call such as are inbred in the Earth it self: which are of
two sorts; either Common, or Magneticall.

4 The Common are in number three. 1 The Magnitude, or extent of a Country. 2
The Bounds. 3 The Quality. The Magnitude comprehends the Length and Breadth of
any Region.

Some man might imagine that I make a needless repetition of these
proprieties: for as much as many of them seem to have been spoken of before
in our Sphericall part. But I answer that I there handled no other matters, but
such as concerned the whole globous body of the Earth; but my intent here is to
treat of such proprieties, as particularly design out a special place. For it
is not one thing to speak of the Magnitude of the whole Earth, according to
all its dimensions; and to treat of the manner of measuring some particular
Region, marked out in the Sphere. We have defined the Magnitude of a Region
to be either of Length or Breadth: because (as we have taught in our former
chapter) it is a space contained in the surface of the Earth. Then can it not
according to Geometrical grounds, exceed two Dimensions: These two Dimensions
(as we have said) are length and breadth, whereof every plain figure, or
superficies consists.

5 The Magnitude of a Region may be measured two ways: either by the
Diameter, or the Circumf^rence. The Diameter is considered either in Latitude
or Longitude: of the Latitude, whence arises the Breadth of a Country from
North or South, note these Rules.

1 If the place whose breadth is sought, be distant from the Equatour, and be
wholly situate in the same Hemispheare, the lesser Latitude subtracted from the
greater will give the Diameter.

To put this Rule in practice, it behooues the Topographer, who would find out
the greatness of any Region, to observe two Latitudes: to wit, to measure the
Latitude in the most Northern point, where it is greatest: as also in the
Southern point, where it is least of all. This latter subducted from the
former, will give the Diameter or breadth from North to South: which may
easily, according to the Rules in the former book, be reduced into Miles, or
other such measures. For an example we need go no farther then our Island of
Great Britain: The Southmost part of which lying about Star-point in Deuon,
has in Latitude about 50 degrees: The Northermost point situate near the
mouth of the river Ardurnus in the farthermost part of Scotland, has in
Latitude about 60 degrees (to omit minutes) The lesser of these Latitudes
subtracted from the greater* the residue will be 10 degrees, which being
imagined in the Meridian which is a greater circle, are to be multiplied by 60,
and so converted into miles, which will be 600, the length of Brittany from
South to North.

2 If the place whose Magnitude we enquire, be under the Equatour, the
Southern Latitude added to the Northern will show the breadth from the North
to the South.

To illustrate this by an example, we will take the whole continent of Africa,
whose Southern Latitude about the Cape of Good hope, we ^^all find to be
near thirty Degrees, the most Northern Latitude about the straights of
Gibralter, very near the same rate: These two sums added together will
amount to 60 Degrees, which multiplied by 60, the number of miles answerable to
a degree in a great circle (because we suppose it here to be an Arch of the
Meridian) we shall have 3600 miles, the breadth of Africa from South to North.

4 The measure of the length of a Region betwixt East and West, admits of two
cases: for either the Country is supposed to be without the first Meridian, or
under it: both which shall be taught in these Rules.

1 If the Region be situate without the first Meridian, the lesser Longitude
subtracted from the greater, will show the Diameter betwixt East and West.

For an example of which we will take Cape de Barca, lying over against S.
Thomas Island in Africa, under the Equatour, whose Longitude is about 30
Degrees, and Melnide situate near the Equatour over against Sinus Barbaricus,
on the other side of Africa, which has in Longitude 63 Degrees. The least
Longitude, to wit 30, being subducted from 63, there will remain 33 Degrees;
which being taken in a greater circle, which is the Equatour, or a Parallel
very near (which admits no sensible difference) we multiply by 60, and there
will arise 1980 Italian-miles, but if the Degrees be taken in one of the lesser
Parallells, we must proceed according to the Table of miles answerable to
Degrees of Latitude in the former book.

7 Another Case is when the place is situate under the first Meridian: The
length and measure of such a Region is found out by this Rule.

1 Let the Western Longitude be subtracted out of the whole circle, and to
the Residue added the Eastern Longitude, the sum will give the greatness
and distance betwixt East and West.

For an instance we will take Groenland, supposed in most of our Globes and
Mappes, to be an Island which is set down directly under the first Meridian,
passing by the Azores in Kaerius his Globe: It has assigned it for Western
Longitude about 340 Degrees: for Eastern Longitude about 30 degrees. Then
according to our Rule 340 be subtracted from 360, the whole circle there will
remain 20, which being added to 30 the Eastern Longitude there will arise 50:
which being multiplied by 25, the number of miles answerable to the Latitude of
the place, being about 65, there will be produced 1250 Italian-miles, the
distance or length betwixt the East and the West part of Groenland:

8 Hitherto of the measuring of Countries by the Diameter, the other way is
performed by the circuit: which manner of measuring we will briefly censure in
these two Propositions.

1 The measuring of any Country by the Circuit of it, is very deceitful and
full of errors.

It has been a common custom amongst Nauigatours to judge of the greatness
of any Country, by sailing round about it: which kind of measuring is not
always to be rejected: for as much as in new discoueries sometimes no other
way can be had. Nevertheless this manner of measuring must needs prove very
uncertain for diverse reasons. First in regard of the motion of the ship, which
by reason of diverse and contrary winds, which must needs happen very
frequently, cannot always move with the same swiftness. Secondly because the
Sea it self (as we shall hereafter show) has in diverse places diverse
special motions and currents, as from the East to West; whence it must needs
enforce an inequality of motion in the ship. The third reason, which is greater
then all the rest, is drawn from the various Figuration of Countries, whose
greatness cannot be known by the circumference. Because (as Geometricians
teach us) two figures may have one and the selfsame circuit about them, and
yet the one shall extraordinarily exceed the other in greatness: as for
example, let there be imagined two Parallelogrammes; the one an exact square of
six foot; the other a long square of 10 foot in Length, and two in Breadth. The
one comprehends 36 square feet, the other 20, as will appear by multiplication
of their sides, the one into the other* in which numbers there is a great
inequality. Yet notwithstanding if we measure the circuit or circumference of
each Figure, we shall find them equal, to wit, of 24 foot, as will appear by
their figures here prefixed. For amongst those Figures called Isoperimetrall,
or of equal Perimeter, that is always to be esteemed the greatest, which is
the more Ordinate figure: which is that, which comes nearest to an equality
of Sides and Angles. But in Inordinate Figures (of which nature for the most
part are all Regions) infinite error may be committed, if we measure them by
circumnauigation: wherefore to measure a Country more exactly it behooves us
not only to know the Circumference, but also the Diameter.

2 Those Countries are more exactly measured which partake of a plain surface.

The reason of this Proposition is easily showed, because a plain Superficies
consists of right lines. But a right line (as Euclide witnesses) is the
shortest betwixt his own bounds: whereas between two points infinite crooked
lines may be drawn: whence it must needs follow, that more certainty and
exactness is to be expected in the measure of a Plain Country whose
Diameter is a Right line, then from a Crooked and hilly trey, Region, where the
Cord is crooked and gibbous. Whence some Mathematicians have demonstrated,
that more men may stand on a Sphericall Superficies, as a Hill or mountain,
then on a Plain, although both are found to be of the same Diameter* It may
be here objected, that the earth is every where crooked and orbicular, and
therefore no part thereof can be measured by a Right line: I answer that the
Earth is indeed Sphericall (as we have formerly proved) yet may some little
part or portion thereof be counted as a Plain; because such parts have little
or no proportion to the whole mass of the Earth. This conuexity therefore
being so little, may pass for a plain without any sensible error. Hence we
may gather that the Land cannot so exactly be measured as the Sea. For as much
as the land for the most part is uneven, varied with hills, Dale^, and other
inequalities. But the Sea every where plain and like it self, except the
rising of the waves and surges, which in so great a distance will make no
difference at all. Secondly, we may hence collect that of two Countries of the
same bounds and figure, that must be the greatest whose soil and superficies
is most varyed and crooked: because (as we have said) crooked lines betwixt
the same points are longer then right, and therefore measure the greater
Magnitude.

9 Thus much of the Magnitude. The Bound of a Country is a line compassing it
round.

This definition is very evident, in that every Region is Topographically
considered as a Plain or Superficies, whose bound is a line compassing it
round: for as a Line is bounded by a Point, so a Superficies by a Line, as we
are taught in Geometry. Now we must consider that the bounds of Countries may
be taken two manner of ways: First Geometrically, for the mere line, which
is imagined to go round about it: Seconly, Geographically, for the visible
marks and Characters* whereby the line is traced out unto us, such as are
Rivers, Cities, Hills, Castles, and such like. These marks whereby a
Topographer notes out unto us the bounds and limits of Countries, are of two
sorts; either Natural or Artificial. The natural are such as are derived
from nature without man's appointment, such as are Rivers, Creekes, Mountains,
Woods, and such like other matters, which bound the extents of Countries. The
Artificial bounds are such as depend upon some constitution or decree of a
man, which so divide one Country from another: the partition being often made
where no notable mark or bound is set by nature.

1 Natural bounds are more certain then Artificial.

The reason is because natural signs or marks which are set for bounds of
Countries are always the same, and (as it were) continued from the first
creation: and cannot be changed without some great Earthquake, Inundat^on, or
such like alteration in nature, which very seldom happens, and in very few
places: whereas on the contrary part, such bounds and limits, as depend upon
man's appointment, may be altered and changed according to the wills and
dispositions of men: as we daily see amongst us, that ancient lands and
inheritances are much questioned concerning their bounds and limits: as also
great controversy is made amongst Geographers concerning the bounding of
Countries and Territories, anciently known and defined by old writers: For
names and particular contracts betwixt men in a few ages, may easily slip out
of memory; especially when the possessours themselves (as it often happens)
strive to extinguish and raze out the memory of former ages, leaving behind
them no mark or sign to tell the world their wronged neighbors right, or the
limited fortunes of their own possessions.

2 Equal bounds do not always contain equal Regions.

This Proposition is plainly demonstrated before in this very Chapter: wherein
we have proved of two figures supposed equal in the circumference, that to
be the greatest, which more nearly approaches an Ordinate figure: which we
define to be that which comes nearest to an equality of Sides and Angles. So
that two Regions, the one round, the other square, may have an equal compass
about, and yet the former will be a great deal greater, in respect of the
space therein contained.

10 In the next place we are to consider the Quality. By the quality I
understand the natural temper and disposition of a certain place.

1 Special places are endowed with special tempers and dispositions.

That Almighty God, who created the whole world, has not, granted the same
gifts and indowments to all Countries, but has divided diverse commodities to
diverse Regions, seems a matter out of all controversy. For who finds not
by experience one Country hot, another cold, a third temperate: one fruitful,
another barren, a third indifferent: one healthie, another unwholesome. The like
diversity is also found in the inhabitants themselves, according to that common
proverb: Valentes Thebani, Acutiores Attici: whence this diversity should
arise, it is a hard matter to unfold; for as much as many causes herein
concur, sometimes to help, sometimes to cross one the other: yet will I
strive as near as I can to reduce them to certain Heads, by which a general
guess may be given to the particulars. The first reason may be drawn from
the situation of the Earth, in respect of the heaven and Stars therein fixed.
This may cause a diversity of disposition two ways; 1 By reason of the Sun,
and his general light and influxe: whence in the Earth are engendered the four
first qualities of Heat, Cold, Drouth, and Moisture, whereon depends a great
part of the disposition, not only of the soil, but also of man's body: for as
much as the one ordinarily borrowes his fruitfulness or barrenness of these
first qualities: and the other has his vital Organes (which are the ministers
of the Soul) much affected with them; in so much as some Philosophers have
undertaken to define all the differences of men's wits and intellectual
faculties out of the Temperament of the brain, according to these four
accidents. And what Physician will not acknowledge, all these Qualities and
their mixture to challenge an extraordinary pre-eminence in the disposition and
constitution of man's body, whose mixture is the first ground of health or
sickness. The second means whereby the Heavens may cause a diversity of
temper in diverse places, is from the special Influences of some particular
Stars and constellations incident to particular places: for it were blockish
to imagine that so many various Stars of diverse colors and magnitudes
should be set in the Firmament to no other use then to give light to the
world, and distinguish the times: since the ordinary Physician can easily
discover the Moons influence by the increase of humors in man's body: and the
experience of Astrologers will warrant much more by their observation: as
assigning to each particular aspect of the Heavens a particular and special
influence and operation. Now it is evident that all aspects of the Heavens
cannot point out and design all places alike; for as much as the beams
wherein it is conveyed, are somewhere perpendicularly, other where obliquely
darted, and that more or less according to the place: whence it comes to
pass that neither all places can enjoy the same Temperament, nor the same
measure and proportion. Yet we say not that the heavenly bodies have any power
to impose a Necessity upon the wills and dispositions of men; but only an
inclination: For the Stars work not Immediately on the intellectual part or
mind of man, but Mediatly, so far forth as it depends on the Temperament and
material organes of the body. But of this we shall especially speak
hereafter. Where (God willing) shall be opened the manner of this celestial
operation. By this we may understand how far the Heavens have power to cause
a diversity in Places and Nations. The second reason may be the Imbred
Quality, Figure, and Site of the Places themselves; For that there is another
cause of diversity besides the situation of places in respect of the Heavens,
may easily be proved out of experience; for we find that places situate
under the same Latitude, partake, of a diverse and opposite Temper and
disposition, as the middle of Spain about Toledo, which is very hot and the
Southermost bound of Virginia, which is found to be Temperate betwixt both:
All which notwithstanding are under the selfsame Latitude, or very near,
without any sensible degree of difference: also we sometimes find places more
Southward toward the Equatour to partake more of cold, then such as are more
Notherne, as the Tops of the Alps being perpetually covered with Snow, are
without question colder then England, although they lie nearer to the
equinoctial. Likewise Aluares reports that he saw Ice upon the water in the
Abyssines Country in the month of July, which notwithstanding is near or
under the Line. And Martin Frobisher relates, that he found the air about
Friezland more cold and stormy about 61 degrees then in other places near 70
degrees. Wherefore we must needs ascribe some effect and operation to the soil
it self: first in respect of the Superficies which is diversely varied with
Woods, Rivers, Marshes, Rocks, Mountains, Valleys, Plains: whence a double
variety arises: first of the four first Qualities, which is caused by the
Sunne-beames being diversely proiected according to the conformity of the place:
Secondly, of Meteors and Exhalations drawn up from the Earth into the Air:
both which concurring must needs cause a great variety in man's disposition:
according to that proverb, Athenis ten^e coelum, Thebis crassum: or that
bitter taunt of the Poet on Boeotians, Boeotum in crasso iurares aere natum.
For ordinary experience will often show that a thin and sharp air usually
produces the best wits; as contrariwise gross and thick vapors drawn from
muddie and marish grounds thicken and stupifie the spirits, and produce men
commonly of blockish and hoggish dispositions and natures, unapt for learning,
and unfit for civil conversation. Secondly, there must needs be granted to
special Countries, certain Specificall qualities, which produce a certain
Sympathy, or Antipathie in respect of some things or others: whence it comes
to pass that some plants and herbs, which of their own accord spring out of
the Earth in some Countries, are found to pine and wither in others: some
Beasts and Serpents are in some places seldom known to breed or live,
wherewith notwithstanding other Regions swarm in abundance: as for example,
Ireland, wherein no Serpent or venomous worm has been known to live,
whereby Africa and many other Countries find no small molestation. Neither is
this variety only shown in the diversity of the kinds, but also in the
variation of things in the same kind, whereof we might produce infinite
examples. For who knows not, which is a Physician, that many simples apt for
medicine growing in our land, come far short in virtue of those which are
gathered in other countries. I need amongst many ordinary instances give no
other then in our Rubarb and Tobacco: whereof the former growing in our
Country, except in case of extremity, is of no use with our Physicians: the
other as much scorned of our ordinary Tobacconists: yet both generally derived
from the true mother the Indies, in great use and request. But of this last
Instances are most common, and yet for their ignorance of the true cause, most
admirable. The causes of the former might in some sort be found out either in
the Heavens, or in the Elementary nature of the Earth. But some special
proprieties have discovered themselves, which cannot be imagined to owe their
cause to either, but to some third original, which the Physicians in their
Simples more properly term virtus specifica. If any man should demand why
countries farther from the course of the Sun should be found hotter, then
some which are nearer? Why the Rhenish wine Grape transported from Germany into
Spain, should yield us the Sherry Sack? Every ordinary Philosopher, which
has traveled little beyond Aristotle's Materia Prima, will be ready to hammer
out a cause, as ascribing the former to the Height or Depression of the soil:
the latter to the excess of heat in Spain above that of Germany. But should
we farther demand, 1 why Ireland with some other Regions endure no venomous
thing. 2 Why Wheat in S. Thomas Island, should shut up all into the Blade, and
never bear grain? 3 Why in the same Island no fruit which has any stone in
it, will ever prosper? 4 Why our Mastiffes (a serviceable kind of creature
against the molestation of Wolves, and such hurtful beasts) transported into
France, should after a litter or two degenerate into Curres, and prove
altogether unserviceable? 5 Why with us in England, some places produce Sheep
of great stature but course wool; other places small Sheep, but of very fine
wool: which being naturally transplanted, will in a generation or two so
degenerate the one into the others nature, that the greater sheep loose
somewhat of their greatness, yet improve their fleeces; as the other increase
their stature, but loose much in the finenesse of their wool? 6 Why many
places at the ridge of the mountains Andi in America cannot be passed over
without extreme vomitting and griping even unto death. 7 Why a River in the
Indies should have such a nature to breed a great long worm in a man's leg,
which oftentimes proves mortal unto the patient, with infinite the like
examples found in Geographers, concerning the nature and accidents of
Fountains, Herbs, Trees, Beasts, and Men themselves (as we shall show
hereafter) so much varied according to the disposition of the soil, what wiser
answer can an ingenious man expect then silence or admiration? for to make
recourse to Sympathies, Antipathies, and such hidden qualities with the current
of our Philosophers, is no other then in such sort to confess our own
ignorance, as if notwithstanding, we desired to be accounted learned: for
beside the difference of the terms wherein every Mountebanke may talk down a
judicious Scholar; I see no advantage betwixt a Clown which says he is
ignorant of the cause of such an effect, or of a iuggling Scholar which
assigns the cause to be a sympathy, antipathie, or some occult quality. I
speak not this to countenance supine blockishnesse, or to cast a block in the
way of curious industry. The former disposition I have always hated, and the
latter still wished in my self, and admitted in others. All which I can in
this matter propose to a curious wit to be sought, must be reduced to one of
these two heads: for either such admirable effects as we have mentioned, must
arise from some Formal and Specificall virtue in the soil, or from some
extraordinary Temperament made of a rare combination of the Elements, and their
secondary mixtures, as of Herbs, Stones, Mineralls, and vapors arising from
such, and affecting the Air: of both which we shall have some occasion to
treat in the particular Adjuncts of places; yet so, as I fear I shall neither
give my self content, or my Reader any sufficient satisfaction. But In magnis
voluisse sat est.

11 Hitherto of the common imbred Adjuncts of the Earth Topographically taken:
Next we will speak somewhat of the Magneticall Affections of a place: These
are in number two, viz: Variation and Declination.

We have in our former Treatise of the Magneticall nature of the Earth handled
diverse other affections, growing from the Magneticall Temper and disposition
of the terrestrial Globe: whence some man might here collect this repetition
to be altogether needless, or at the least imperfect, omitting many other of
the Magneticall Affections. To this I answer, that it is one thing to speak of
these Affections as they agree to the whole Sphere of the Earth: Another thing
to consider them, as they are particular proprieties, and marks of particular
places and Regions. In the former sort have we) besides the Variation and
Declination) handled many other affections of the Earth magnetically
considered. We here only speak of these two, as they are special marks and
proprieties of sqeciall places: which it behooues a Topographer to observe as a
matter worthy of observation in the description of any place. The use shall be
commended unto us in these two Theoremes.

1. The Magneticall Variation is of no use for the first finding out of the
Longitude; yet may it serve to good purpose for the Recognition of a place
heretofore discovered.

The reason of this we have shown in our former book; because the variation
seldom or never answers proportionally to the Longitude, as some of the
ancients on false grounds have surmised: whence no true consequence can be
drawn from the variation of a place to the finding out of the Longitude; yet
may it be of special use for the new finding out of such places as have
formerly by others been first discovered, so the variation were first by them
diligently and faithfully noted and observed: first because few places in the
Earth can exactly and precisely agree in the selfsame variation; but in some
Degree or minute will be found to vary. Secondly, if any two places should
be found to accord in the same Degree of Variation; yet comparing the
variation with the degree of Declination, we shall commonly find a
difference: for as much as places agreeing in variation, may notwithstanding
vary in the Declination. Thirdly, if two places should be equalized in both
(as we cannot deny it to be possible) yet the comparing of these two
Magneticall motions with other affections, as well in respect of the Earth it
self as of the Heavens, will give at least a probable distinction: of which
cases it is not hard out of the observations of our new writers and Nauigatours
to give particular instances. Concerning the first, we find the variation of
the compass at Cape Verde, to be just 7 Degrees; about the Islands near to
Cape Verde to amount only to 4 Degrees; whence a Seaman (if other helps
failed) may hereafter, as he passes, distinguish the one from the other, and
if occasion serve, correct this error. In the like sort might a man (otherwise
altogether ignorant of the place) out of former observations, in the same Island
of Cuba distinguish betwixt Cape Corientes and Cape S. Anthony; In that the one
has only 3 degrees of variatio^, whereas the other has 13: for an instance of
the second case we will take the coasts of Brasill 100 leagues distant from the
shore, and Cape Corientes beyond Cape bonae spei, which agree in the same
variation: to wit, amounting to 7 Degrees 30 minutes: which notwithstanding are
distinguished by their several declination: for howsoever the magneticall
motion of variation being of late invented, has not so particularly been
traced out in all or most places, yet must the declination of each place needs
be different; for as much as the former has 23 degrees of South Latitude, the
other none at all lying just under the Equinoctial: since the Latitude (as we
have formerly taught) is in some measure proportional to the Declination. For
the third, if any two places be found agreeing both in Variation and
Declination, as may be probably guessed of Cape Rosse in S. John's Island, and
the west end of S. John de Porto Rico: the Latitude being all one as of 17
degrees 44 minutes: and the variation admitting perhaps insensible difference,
to wit, of a little more then one degree: yet might this help conjoined with
former Travelers report, or some small observation of heavenly bodies, or
sounding the bottom of the Sea, settle our opinion and make a plain
distinction.

2 The Declination of any place being known the Latitude may also be found
out, although not without some error.

The ground of this Assertion we have formerly handled in the Treatise of the
Magneticall Affections of the Earth; where we have showed that the Declination
of the Magneticall needle is always answerable in some proportion to the
Latitude of the place: whence it must needs follow, that the declination any
where being found out together with the proportion, the Latititude must needs
be known. In this point I refer my Reader to D. Ridleye's late Treatise of
Magneticall bodies and Motions, wherein he by the help of M. Briges, has
calculated a certain brief table for this purpose. But that this manner of
Invention of the Latitude of a place, must needs admit of some error, cannot
well be denied; for as much as Gilbert, Ridley, and others, which have written
of this subject; have acknowledged this motion of Declination to be in many
places irregular, and not answerable in due proportion to the Degrees of
Latitude, which diverse friends of mine, well experienced in magneticall
experiments, have to their great wonder confessed.

12 This much for the Internal Adjuncts The External, I call such as are not
impressed into the Earth, but externally adjacent or adjoining unto it. Here
ought we to consider the Air adjoining to any place with his Qualities and
Proprieties.

13 The Ayrie properties of a place consist in such matters, wherewith the Air
according to diverse places is diversely affected and disposed.

In the Air we ought to note a twofold temper and quality, the one Inbred and
Essential: the other External and Accidental, ^he former, whether it be
heat joined with moisture, as Aristotle a^^irmes, or cold joined with moisture,
as some others, I leave it to the Natural Philosopher to dispute. The latter
being that to which our purpose is chiefly engaged, and that no farther then
may appertain to the Topicall description of a special Country. These
accidents being so various and many, we are enforced to reduce them to a few
general heads which we will couch in this our Theoreme.

1 The disposition of the Air adjacent to a place depends chiefly on the
Temperament of the Soil.

Those things wherewith the Aeri^ll Region is affected, are of two sorts; to
wit, either the Temperament consisting in the mixture of the four first
Qualities; or else the bodies themselves, as Meteors drawn up into the Air,
whereof these accidental dispositions arise. That both these chiefly depend
from the Temp^rament of the Earthly Soil of a certain place, many reasons
will demonstrate: first that Meteors, whatsoever they are, take their original
from the Earth, is plain. 1 Out of the name, which signifies things lifted up,
to show that a Meteor is lifted and drawn out of the Earth. 2 Out of the
material composition, which can no where else take this composition: For
either we should derive it from the Heavens, or from the Air it self, or
from the Fire: From the Heavens it cannot take original: because it is
corruptible, and therefore of no heavenly substance according to Peripateticke
Philosophy. Not from it self, because the air being supposed a simple and
uncompounded body, cannot admit of such mixture. Not from the Fire; first
because all Meteors partake not of fiery nature. Secondly, because fire cannot
well subsist, but of some matter whereon it may work, and conserve it self,
which can be no other then that which is of a glutinous substance: which we
no where find but in the earthly Globe, consisting of Earth and Water; out of
whose storehouses, the matter of all such pendulous substances in the air is
derived. These Meteors may be derived from the Earth into the Air, two manner
of ways. First, Directly and immediately, by an immediate ascent or rising of
exhalations from some one particular place into the Ayrie space right over it.
Secondly, Obliquely, to wit, when Vapors, or other such exhalations are by
some violence or other carried from one place into another: as wind, which
being engendered in one place, continually blows into another. Again, the
former may happen two ways: for either this rising of Exhalations out of the
Earth, is Ordinary, or Extraordinary: Ordinary I call that whereby the thin
parts of the water or Earth are continually spread and diffused through the
whole Region of the Air: for we cannot imagine otherwise then that at all
times and places, the Terrestrial Globe composed of Earth and Water,
continually sends and euaporates out some thin or rarefied parts, wherewith
the earth is affected. Whether this Rarefaction or Euaporation of the water be
the true substance of the Air it self (as some have probably coniectured) or
else some other body different from it, I will not here dispute. This much will
necessarily follow, that it proceeds originally from the Earth right under it.
This vapor being engendered from the water or moister parts of the Earth; is
much varied and tempered according to the place from which it arises: For the
matter of the Earth being various and diverse in disposition, as well in regard
of various veins of mineral substances, whereof it consists, as of the first
and second qualities thereof arising, must of necessity cause the Air about
each Region to be of the same quality. Whence a probable reason may be
shown; why of two places, although both like in respect of the Heavens, and
other circumstances, one should be hot, the other cold; one healthie, another
contagious; the one of a sharp and thin air, the other of a foggy and dull
temper: For no question but the mineral matter whereof the soil of the Earth
consists, being not every where Solid and hard, but every where intermedled
with a vaporous and fluide substance, must needs challenge a great interest in
the temperament of the Air, a^ that which is the first mother, if not of the
Air it self, yet at least of the accidental dispositions thereof. The
Extraordinary euaporations, I call such as arise out of the Earth by some
extraordinary concurse of the Sun, with some other Stars. These are many
times subject to sense, which happen not at all times and places: such as are
clouds, winds, and such like, which arise not naturally by their own accord
by a perpetual emanation, but are by some greater strength of the Sun or
Stars ratifying the parts of the earth or water drawn up to the Air about
it. Now for the Meteors Indirectly and obliquely belonging to any place,
amongst many other instances, we may bring the wind which blows from one
Region to another; which according to ordinary experience partaketh of a
twofold quality; the one derived from the place whence it is engendered; the
other from the Region through which it passes. Which may appear by our four
Cardinal winds, as they are with us in England, Belgia, and higher Germany.
For first our Eastern wind is found to be driest of all others, whereof no
other cause can be given, then that it comes over a great Continent of land
lying toward the East, out of which many dry and earthly exhalations are
drawn: so the Western wind is observed to be very moist, because it passes
over the hugie Atlanticke Ocean, which must needs cast forth many watrie and
moist vapors, which beget rain and showers: from the moisture of which
Western wind some have sought out an answer to that Problem: why hunting
hounds should not sent, nor hunt so well, the wind being in the West, as at
other times? For, say they, it is caused by the moisture of it, either in
making hinderance to their legs in running, or at least to their smell, being
very thick and foggy. In this Western wind we may also perceive much cold,
which is caused by the quality of those watrie vapors, through which it
passes, which being drawn from the water, are naturally cold. In our South
wind we shall find both heat and moisture: whereof the former arises from
the Sun, which in those Southern Regions near the Equatour is most
predominant; The latter from the natural disposition of the places because
before it approaches our coasts, it passes over the Mediterranean Sea, out of
which the Sun begets abundance of watery vapors, which mixed themselves with
the winds. Finally the North-winde is observed to be cold and dry. It must
of necessity be cold: because it is carried over diverse cold and snowy
places, most remote from the heat of the Sun. It is dry; because it passes
over many Islands and dry places, sending out store of dry exhalations: as also
because the Sun being very remote from those Regions, fewer exhalations are
drawn up, which might infect it by impressions of their watrie quality. These
instances may serve to prove our assertion: That Meteors, wherewith the Air is
usually charged, and by consequence, their qualit^es impressed into the Air, are
depending from the Earth, out of which they are drawn, either Directly from
the same Region which they affect; or Obliquely, from some other Region remote
from it. Howsoever, we observe, that the disposition of the Air depends from
the Soil, we cannot altogether exclude the Heavens, as shall be taught
hereafter in place convenient.

CHAP. III. Of the Adjuncts of a place in respect of Heavens.
1 WE have in the former Chapter spoken of the Adjuncts of a place in respect
of it Self. We are now to proceed to such Accidents as agree to a place, in
respect of the Heavens.

2 The Adjuncts of the Earth in respect of the Heavens are of two sorts; either
General or Special.

General, I call such as are abstracted from any special quality, or
condition of the Earth, or any place in the Earth. These accidents concern
either the Situation of the Inhabitants, or the Division of the places: both
which we have handled in our Sphericall part of Geographie: The Special are
such as concern the nature of the place in respect of the Heavens, not
Absolutely, but Respecting some special qualities or properties depending on
such situation; which more properly belongs to this part: For the unfolding of
which, before we descend to particularities, we will premise this one general
Theoreme.

1 Places according to their diverse situation in regard of the Heavens, are
diversely affected in quality and constitution.

This Proposition needs no proof, as being grounded on ordinary experience:
for who finds not betwixt the North and the South, a manifest difference of
heat and cold, moisture and drouth, with other qualities thereon depending, as
well in the temper of the soil it self, as the natural disposition of the
inhabitants. Only three points will here require an exposition: First, by what
Means and instruments the Heavens may be said to work on the Earth.
Secondly, how far this operation of the Heaven, on the Earth may extend, and
what limits it may suffer. Thirdly, how these operations are distinguished one
from the other. Concerning the first, we are taught by our ordinary
Philosophers, that the Heavens work on inferior bodies by three instruments,
to wit, Light, Motion. and Influence. By Light, as by an isntrumental agent,
it ingendreth heat in the Air and Earth; not that the light being in a sort an
Immateriall quality, can immediately of it self produce heat, being material
and elementary; But by attrition and rarefaction, whereby the parts of the air
being made thinner, approach nearer to the nature of fire, and so conceive
heat. This is again performed two ways; either by a simple or compo unded
beam. The simple Ray is weaker: The compounded inferring a doubling of the Ray
by Reflection, is stronger and of more validity in the operation: and by
consequence so much the more copious in the production of heat, by how much
more the reflection is greater: if we merely consider it in regard of the
Heavens, without any consideration of the quality of the Earth. By motion the
heavens may exercise their operation on the Earth two ways. First, by
attenuating and rarefying the upper part of the Air next adjoining, turning it
into Fire, (as some Philosophers would have it) whence the inferior parts of
the air communicating in this affection must needs partake some degrees of
heat; But this I hold to be a conceit grounded only upon Aristotle's
authority; who supposed the heavens to be a solid compact body: which will
not so soon be granted of many more modern Mathematicians. Secondly, the
heavenly bodies may be said to work on inferior things by motion; in that by
motion they are diversely disposed and ordered to diverse Aspects and
configurations of the Stars and Planets, whereby they may produce diverse
effects: so that in this sense the heavens are imagined as a disponent cause,
which does not so much produce the effects themselves as vary the operation.
Hereon is grounded all Astrology, as that which out of diverse aspects and
combinations of the Planets and Signs foresheweth diverse events. The third
Instrument, by which the Heavens are said to work, is the heavenly influence;
which is a hidden and secret quality not subject to sense, but only known and
found out by the effects. This third agent being by some questioned, would
hardly be believed; but that a necessity in nature constraines it. For many
effects are found in inferior bodies, caused by the heavens, which can no way
be ascribed to the Light or Motion. As for example, the production of Metals
in the bowels of the earth, the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea; whereof neither
the one or the other can challenge any great interest in the Light: For as much
as the former is far remote from the Sunne-beames: the other cease not to
move in his channel, when the Sun and Moon are both under the Earth.
Besides, who can give a reason of the excess of heat in the Canicular or
Dog-dayes, if he exclude this influence? For if we consider the Light of the
Sun, we shall find it greater at the time of the So^stice; the reflection
being greater approaching nearer to right Angles. If we consider the Earth,
we shall find no reason at all, why the heat should be more predominant at
this time then another. Then must we of necessity ascribe it to a special
Influence of the Dog-starre being in conjunction with the Sun. Many other
Instances might be here produced, but I hold it needless, being a matter
consented to amongst most Philosophers. The second point concerns the Extent
and limitation of this operation in inferior bodies: for unfolding of which
point, we must know that this operation may have respect either to the
Elements of Earth and Air, or else to the Inhabitants residing on the Earth.
For the operation of the Heavens upon the Elementary mass, experience it self
will warrant; yet with this limitation, that this operation is measured and
squared according to the matter whereinto it is received: as for example, we
shall find the Moon more operative and predominant in moist Bodies, then in
others, partaking less of this quality. Likewise the heat caused by the Sun
more fervent where it meets with a subject which is more capable. Whence it
comes to pass that one Country is found hotter then another, although subject
to the same Latitude in respect of the Heavens: for howsoever the action of the
Heavens be always the same and uniform in respect of the Heaven it self,
yet must the same be measured and limited according to the subject into which
it is impressed. For the Inhabitants, we are to distinguish in them a twofold
nature: the one Material as partaking of the Elements, whereof every mixed body
is compounded. The other spiritual, as that of the Soul. The former we
cannot exempt from the operation of the Heavens: for as much as every Physician
can tell how much the humors and parts of our body are stirred by celestial
influence, especially by the Moon, according to whose changes our bodies daily
undergo an alteration. For the humane soul, how far it is governed by the
stars is a matter of great consequence; yet may we in some sort clear the
doubt by this one distinction. The Heavens may be said to have an operation
upon the soul two manner of ways. First, Immediately by it self. Secondly,
Mediately by the humors and corporeal organes, whereof the Souls operation
depends. The first we absolutely deny; for the soul being an immateriall
substance, cannot be wrought upon by a material agent, as Philosophers
affirm: for the second, it may be granted without any absurdity: For the
operation of the soul depends merely on material and corporeal organes. The
Elementary matter, whereof these organes consist, are subject to the operation
of the Heavens, as any other Elementary matter. So that we may affirm the
Heavens in some sort to govern men's minds and dispositions, so far forth as
they depend upon the bodily instruments. But here we must note by the way,
that it is one thing to infer a Necessity; another thing to give an
Inclination. The former we cannot absolutely auerre; for as much as man's will,
which is the commandresse of his actions, is absolutely free not subject to any
natural necessity, or external coaction. Yet can we not deny a certain
inclination; for as much as the soul of a man is too much indulgent unto the
body, by whose motion it is rather persuaded then commanded. The third point we
have in hand, is to show how many ways the Heavens by their operation can
affect and dispose a place on the Earth. Here we must note that the operation
of the Heavens in the Earth is twofold; either ordinary or extraordinary. The
ordinary is again twofold; either variable or Inuariable. The variable I call
that which is varyed according to the season, as when the Sun by his increase
or decrease of heat, produces Summer or Winter, Spring, or Autumn: which
operation depends from the motion of the Sun in his Eclipticke line, wherein
he comes sometimes nearer unto us, sometimes goes f^rther from our vertical
point. The Inuariable, I call that, whereby the same places are supposed to
enjoy the same temperament of heat or cold without any sensible difference in
respect of the Heavens; putting aside other causes and circumstances: for how
soever every Region is subject to these four changes, to wit, Summer, Winter,
Spring, and Autumn: yet may the same place enjoy the same temperament of
Summer and Winter one year as it does another without any great alteration:
and this depends from the situation of any place nearer or farther of in
respect of the Equinoctial circle. The Extraordinary operation of the Heavens
depends from some extraordinary combination or concurse of Planets particularly
affecting some special place; whence the cause may be probably showed why
some place should some ^eeres prove extraordinary fruitful, other times
degenerate again to barrenness: or why it should sometimes be molested with
too much drouth, and other times with too much moisture. To let pass the other
considerations as more appertaining to an Astrologer then a Geographer, we
will here only fasten on the Inuariable operation of the Heavens on earthly
places; and search how far forth the places of the Earth are varied in their
Temper and Quality, according to their diverse situations, and respect to the
Equinoctial circle; taking only notice of the Diurnall and ordinary motion of
the Sun in his course. Herein shall we find no small variety, not only in
the temper of the Air, but also in the disposition and complexion of the
Inhabitants: both which we shall more specially declare: the former in this
Chapter* the other in due place: wherein we shall have occasion to treat of the
material constitution and manners of diverse Nations.

2 In respect of the Heavens, a place may be divided two ways: First, into the
North and South. Secondly, into the East and West.

3 Any place is said to be Northern which lies betwixt the Equatour and
Arcticke Pole. Southern, betwixt the Equatour and the Antarcticke-Pole.

The whole Globe of the Earth (as we have formerly taught) is divided by the
Equatour into two Hemispheares; whereof the one is called Northern, lying
toward the Northern or Arcticke Pole: the other toward the other Pole is
called the Southern. But here to clear all doubt, we must understand that a
place may be said to be Northern or Southern two manner of ways: either
Absolutely or Respectively: Absolutely Northern and Southern places are
termed, when they are situated in the Northern or Southern Hemispheares, as
we have taught in this Definition; But such as are Respectively Northern, may
be understood of such Regions, whereof the one is situate nearer the Pole, the
other nearer the Equatour. In the first place here we are to consider a place
as it is absolutely taken to be either North or South: Concerning which we will
particularly note these two Theor^mes.

1 Northern and Southern places alike situate, generally enjoy a like
disposition.

We have formerly granted to every Region or Country a special quality or
temper: although lying or situate under the same Latitude. But here excluding
all concurrent causes which may vary the temper of the Soil, we consider the
disposition of a place so far forth as it depends on the Heavenly Influence
o^ operation. In which sense we cannot deny to a place of like (...), a like
nature, for as Philosophers use to speak, Simile qua simile semper aptum natum
est simile producere: Like causes always produce like effects: so the Heavens
in like distance, being disposed alike as well in regard of Light as Influence*
cannot but affect those parts of the Earth in the selfsame manner. For the
Instruments by which the heavens work on inferior bodies (as we have showed)
are Light and Influence^* For both the Light and Influ^nce, it is certain that
in places of equal Latitude and respect to the Equatour; it is cast equally:
both the one and ^he other being imagined to be carried in direct l^^es of
(...) which with the Horizon makes like Angles. Now that the validity or
weakness of the operative Rays is to be judged according to the Right or
Oblique incidency, making right or oblique Angles, no Mathematician will gain
say. But here we must note by the way, that we only consider the Heaven
a^^ording to his general Inf^^ence or operation depending chiefly on the
Sun: not of the special operation of special Stars, for it may be some
particular constellations in the Northern Hemispheare may be endowed with
some special influence, which is not found in the Southern; or the South in
this kind go beyond the North. But this kind of Influence is rare and hard
to f^nde, by reason of the various mixture of diverse constellations in their
operation in the same subject: and howsoever it were well known, yet it is not
so notable to take place before this com^on Rule, which we shall find to take
place, if not exactly, yet commonly throughout the whole Terrestrial Sphere.
Thus Bodin shows a great likeness betwixt the higher Germany, and the
kingdom of the Pantagones, in the South part of America, out of the great
Stature of the Inhabitants, which must needs proceed out of the nature of the
places, which are found to be situate very near under the same Parallel. The
like correspondency have we noted betwixt Guinea in Afric and that part (as
it is thought) of the South Continent, which they have for this cause termed
Noua Guinea* many more Parallells in this kind might be found out; but these
may suffice in so evident a matter.

2 The Northern Hemispheare is the Masculine, the Southern the Feminine part
of the Earth.

It has been a usual kind of speech amongst men to term such things as
are stronger, worthier, or greater, Masculine: on the contrary side such things
Feminine as are found deficient and wanting in these perfections: by which
kind of Metaphor taken from the Sexes in living creatures they have ascribed
to the Northern Hemispheare a Masculine Temper in respect of the Southern,
which comes fa^re short of it: for howsoever no cause can be showed in regard
of the Heavens (as is taught in our former propositions) except by some
special constellations of the South, which is full of uncertainty, and as
soon denied as affirmed; yet comes it to pass by some hidden property of the
places themselves, or at least some casual Ac^ident or other, tha^ these two
Hemispheares suffer a great and notable disparity. For against the large and
fertile Territories of the Northern Hemisphe^re containing in it wholly Europe
and Asia, with the greatest part of America and Africa, we shall find
(besides some few scattered Islands) only three continents to oppose, to wit, a
small part of Afric, the greatest part of America Per^ana, containing in it
Peru, Brasile* and the Region of the P^ntag^n^s, and the South cont^nent called
T^rra Australi^ Inc^gnita, and by some others, the South Indies. For the former
lying near the Cape of good hope, if we will credit the relations of our own
Merchants, we shall find the air by reason of (...), very di^^^mp^rated*
situat betwixt the Equatour and the Tropicke of Capric^r^^: The land very
barren, the Inhabitants of a br^tish d^^^osition, wanting (a^ it were) all
sense of science or religion: bearing heavy as yet the curse of Noah, the first
Father of that African Nation. For America Peruana we shall find it perhaps
more happy in respect of the Soil, although little better in respect of the
Inhabitants. Yet for the plenty of Gold-mines, wh^reof they can chiefly vaunt,
we shall find it far surmounted by the East Indies, or at least paralelled
by America, Mexicana, lying on this side the Equi^o^tiall ^^rcl^. For other
commodities, as Cattle, Fruit^, Herbag^, Spi^e^, Gumm^^, and other medicinable
roots, and miner^lls, less question can be made, as being far inferior to
Europe, Asia, Mexicana and other Regions included within ou^ Northern
partition. Of the third and greatest, which is the South continent, no
conjecture can be well grounded, being in ^ manner all undiscovered, except
some small quillets on the borders of it* by which, if we may judge of all the
rest, we shall almost give the same judgment, as of the other. The want of
discovery in this age of ours, wherein Navigations ^^th been perfected and
cherished, is no small argu^ent (...) inferior in commodities to other places:
Neith^^ had ^he ^lacknesse of the Spaniard given that occas^on of complaint to
Ferdinand de Qui^, the late discouerer of some of these parts, had not the
Spanish King thought such an expedition either altogether frui^lesse, or to
little purpose. For who k^owes not the Sp^niard to be ^ N^tion ^s covetous of
richesse as ambitious to pursue (...) ^oueraignty: as such who will more
w^llingly expo^^ the lives of their own sub^ects, then loose the least title
over other Countries. This may be a probable argument, that th^s Continent
has not as yet so well smiled on the ambition of this proud Nation, as some
other conq^^sts. For Political and Martial affairs, how far short i^
con^^s of our Northern Hemi^pheare* I shall speak in due place, where I shall
handle the (...) disposition of diverse inhabitants according to their
situation. To find out the true causes of this diversity, is very diff^cult:
To seek^ a reason in some particular conste^^ation, and (...) in the Heavens,
or some sp^ciall disposition of the soy^^* is too general to give
satisfaction, and too vnc^rtaine to i^^orce cr^dulity. Yet putting these aside,
I can only guess at two reasons, which are accidental, yet strengthened with
good probability. The first and greatest is that bitter curse cas^ on Cha^ and
his post^rity by his father Noah, which no doubt was seconded by Gods
dipleasure taking place in his habitation. Th^^ all these Nations sprung from
Cham, ^ dare not confidently avouch: Yet for the most part, it is probable they
were of this Race. For the Africans it is out of question^, as warranted by the
holy Scripture* and it is not unlikely that many of those (...) people fetched
their first original from them* The second cause may be drawn from the
Industry and labor of the inhabitants in tillage and manuring of the ground,
wherein the So^^herne inhabitant has been more defici^nt. For it is certain
out of the holy Scripture that Noah's Arc, wher^in was the Seminary of
mankind, and almost all other liu^^g (...), rested in ^he Northern part of
the world: whence both man and beasts began to be propagated toward the
South^punc; no farther then necessity enforced: the Regions inhabited g^^wing
daily more and more populous, and (as i^ were) groaning to be delivered o^
some of her children. Hence may be inferred ^wo consec^aries. First, that the
Northern Hemispheare was (...) sooner, and is now therefore ^ore populous then
the Southern. Secondly, that the chiefest and principal men, which were best
seated rath^r chose to keep their ancient habitation, sending such abroad, who
could either be best spared, or had the smallest possessions at home. Yet
notwithstanding it cannot be imagined but they retained with them a sufficient
company and more then went away. Out of which it must needs be granted, that
the Northern half of the Earth being best inhabited, should be best manured
and cultured; from whence the ground must in time prove more fruitful and
commodious for habitation: for as a fruitful Country for want of the due
manuring and tillage does degenerate and wax barren, so diverse barren and
sterill Countries have by the industry of the Inhabitants been brought to
fertility, and made capable of many good commodities necessary for man's life.
If I were curious to draw arguments from the nature of the Heavens; I could
allege the Greatness and Multitude of Stars of the greater magnitude in our
Northern Hemispheare, wherein the Southern is deficient, as also the longer
soiourning of the Sun in our Northern Hemispheare: but these as uncertain
causes I pass over Other reasons may perchance be found out by those who are
inquisitiue into the secrets of nature, to whom I leave the more exact search
of these matters.

4 Either Hemispheare consisting of 90 Degrees may be divided into three parts,
each of them containing 30 Degrees.

5 Of these parts 30 we allot for Heat, 30 for Cold, and 30 for Temperature:
whereof the former lies toward the Equatour, the second toward the Pole; the
third betwixt both.

The ancient Cosmographers (as we have showed in our former Treatise) divided
the whole Globe of the Earth into five Zones, which they supposed had also
proportionally divided the Temper and disposition of the Earth. In such sort
that according to the Degrees of Latitude the Heat and Cold should in rease or
diminish. Which rule of theirs had been very certain, were there no other
causes concurrent in the disposition of the Earth and Air, but only the
Heavens. But sithence that many other concurrent causes, as we have showed,
mix themselves with these celestial operations, and the experiment of
Nauigatours have found out a disproportion in the quality, in respect of the
Distance, some later writers have sought out a new pertition more consonant to
natural experience. The whole Latitude of the Hemispheare consisting of 90
Degrees from the Equatour to the Pole, they have divided into three parts,
allowing 30 Degrees toward the Equatour to Heat; 30 Degrees toward the Pole to
Cold; and the other 30 Degrees lying betwixt both to Temperature. These 30
Degrees for Imagination sake they have subdivided again, each of them into two
parts containing 15 Degrees a piece: more particularly to design out the
special disposition of each Region, lying either Northward or Southward from
the Equatour, which is the bound betwixt both Hemispheares. In the first
section of 30 Degrees lying Northward from the Equatour, we comprehend in
Afric, Numidia, Nigritarum Regio, Lybia, Guinia, Nubia, Egypt, Ethiopia
superior. In Asia; Arabia, India, Insulae Philippinae. In America, Noua
Hispania, Hispaniola, Cuba, with other parts of America Mexicana. In the other
extreme section from 60 Degrees of Latitude to the Pole, we comprehend in
Europe, Groenland, Island, Friesland, Norwey, Suethland for the most part, Noua
Zembla. In Asia, a great part of Scythia Orientalis. In America, Anian, Quivira
with diverse other parts of the North of America Mexicana. In the middle
betwixt both, betwixt 30 and 60 Degrees of Latitude we comprehend in Africa,
Barbary; in Europe, all the kingdoms except those North Provinces before
named, and almost all Asia, except some places toward the South, as Arabia,
India, and the Philippinae Insulae, formerly placed in the first Section; In
like manner may we divide the Southern Hemispheare into three Sections: In the
first, from the Equatour 30 Degrees we place in Afric, Congo, Monomotapa,
Madagascar: In the Southern Tract, Beach, and Noua Guinia, with many Islands
thereunto adjoining, as many of the Philippinae Insulae, with Insulae
Solomonis. In America, Peru, Tisnada, Brasilia, with the most part of that
Region which they call America Peruana. In the other extreme Section from 60
Degrees to the Antarctike Pole, is couched the most part of that great land
scarce yet discovered, called Terra Australis Incognita. In the middle Region
betwixt both, from 30 to 60 Degrees, shall we find placed in America, the
Region of the Pantagones, in the Southern Continent, Maletur, Iauaminor, with
many others. In discovering the qualities of these several Sections or
partitions of the earth, our chiefest discourse must be addressed to the
Northern Hemispheare, as that is more discovered and known amongst old and
new writers; by which according to the former Proposition one may parallel the
other; concerning which we will infer these Propositions.

1 In the first Section of the Hemispheare the first 15 Degrees from the
Equatour are found somewhat Temperate; the other 15 about the Tropicks
exceeding Hot.

That the Region lying under the Equatour is Temperately hot, contrary to the
opinion almost of all the Ancients, has been in part proved heretofore, as
well by reason, as experiment: for that all places by how much the nearer they
approach the Equatour, by so much more should be hotter (as some imagine)
diverse instances will contradict. It is reported by Aluarez that the Abyssine
Ambassador arriving at Lisbone in Portugal, was there almost choked with
extreme heat. Also P^rguer the Germane, relates that he has felt the weather
more hot about Dantzicke, and the Balticke Sea, then at Toulouse in a ^eruent
Summer. The causes which we have before touched, are chiefly two. The first
is, that the Sun is higher in this orb in respect of those under the Equatour,
and moves more swiftly from them, spending on them only twelve hours, whence
so great an impression of heat cannot be made as in other places: for heat
being a material quality, must necessarily require some Latitude of time to
be impressed into the air, or any other subject. From the Diminution of heat in
the Region must the air needs receive into it self the contrary quality of
cold. An argument of cold may be drawn from the testimony of Alvarez; who
affirms the waters there in the month of June, to be frozen over with Ice,
the South wind blowing. The second cause is by judicious writers, ascribed to
the subtility and rarity of the Air under the Equinoctial line, which cannot
rec^aue into it self so many degrees of heat as the thick and gross air of
diverse places distant. For the North Region, wherein Europe, and a great part
of Asia is placed, is for the most part full of waters, which bursting out of
secret and unknown concauities, do produce infinite Fennes, Gogges, Lakes,
and Marshes, which in the Summer season cause infinite vapors to abound,
which being intermixed with heat, scorch and heat more fervently then the purer
air of Afric, being for the most part free from the mixture and concurse of
such slimie vapors. That the air being thickened should yield a greater
fervor, every man out of ordinary experience can frame to himself an
argument: For we see Fire and Heat being incorporated (as it were) in the
Steel or Iron, to burn and heat more then in Air or Wood. The like reason
some would draw from the keepers of Sto^es or Hot houses, which do besprinkle
the ground with water, that the vapor being contracted and the air thickened,
they may the longer and better maintain heat, and spare Fuel. Another cause
(which we have formerly touched) may be drawn from the Set and Anniuerwindes
which blow most part of the year one way. Josephus Acosta observes that
betwixt the Tropicks, the wind is for the most part Easterly, beyond Westerly:
and a Dutch-discouerer has related that in Guinea they have a certain wind
which comes from the land till noone: and then very violent from the Sea, in so
much as the Inhabitants are wont to traffic in the morning being not able to
endure it: which if it be true we cannot imagine this Region to be so hot as
men suppose. For here the heat in the night is assuaged, by the absence or
remoteness of the Sun: Likewise the excess of heat incident to noonetide,
is much qualified (or as it should seem by this relation) altogether
vanquished by the cold wind derived from the Sea. Another reason no less
probable may be derived from the excessive height of the land and great
mountains, observed to be near or under the line, whose tops are always
covered with Snow, which give a sufficient testimony of cold: For instance, we
need go no farther then the ridge of the mountains And^ in America, where
they observed the Air to be so ^hinne and cold, that it enforced them to
scowre and vomit, which came near it. The like whereof is related of another
called Punas, where the extremity of cold cutteth off their hands: From which
experience we may find some places near the Line to be more infested with
cold (...) heat. The la^t and greatest ^eason may be taken from the continual
moisture wherewith the regions situate betwixt the Tropicks frequently abound.
This moisture is derived from two causes; 1 From the melting of the Snow on the
tops of the mountains by the Sun, which running from thence continually into
the valleys; keep them almost always watrish, especially in the midst of
Summer when the Sun is nearest. 2 From the extreme heat of the Sun, which
being very near, and many times vertical, rayseth up continually moist
vapors in great quantity. These vapour^ in so short a time as 12 hours, being
not consumed but meeting with the cold from the middle Region of the air, are
therewith converted into drops, which fall down again in great showers: in so
much as some travelers of good credit have told me, that all the while they
sailed betwixt the Tropicks, they seldom saw the Sun, by reason of rain and
clowdy vapors. Whence we note with Josephus Acosta, by way of consectary,
that the presence of the Sun betwixt the Tropicks produces moisture, but
contrariwise without the Tropicks, it is the cause of drouth: whence the
inhabitants enjoy as it were a Winter, when the Sun is to them vertical,
because of the distemperature by Winds, Raines, and Storms, and great
Inundations, whereunto commonly all great rivers betwixt the Tropicks are most
subject. Also they seem to have a Summer, when the Sun is in or near the
Tropicks because being somewhat removed, he cannot be so powerful in drawing
such store of vapors and exhalations which he can dispell and consume. Thus
we see the moity of this first Section lying 15 degrees from the Equatour, how
soever subject to a greater reflection of the Sunne-beames, yet through the
concurrence of other causes to be found indifferently Temperate, and the other
15 degrees about the Tropicks, howsoever subject to a lesser Reflection to be
excessive hot: which later cause, besides all which has been said before,
shall be further confirmed hereafter by the complexion of the native
Inhabitants, which we shall find to be Choller-adust, the true symptom of
an external heat. But if any man shall answer that this accident is incident
as well to the Regions situate under the Equatour, as to that under the
Tropicks, I will produce another reason drawn from the color of their
countenances; which under the Equatour is not seen so black and swarthie as
elsewhere. For toward the Tropicke, is placed the Land of Blackmores or
Nigritarum Regio, where the people are all coleblacke: which might perhaps
happen also to those that dwell under the other Tropicke; but that other causes
interpose themselves, which hinder the excess of heat, which is taken to be
the chief cause of this blackness; Here some would oppose the opinion of
Herodotus, which referred the cause of this blackness in the Negroes, to the
Seed which he would have to be black: others would have this blackness as a
curse inflicted upon Chams posterity: but these opinions carry very little show
of probability. For first, if this former opinion were admitted, it would of
necessity follow (says Boden) that Ethiopians in Scythia should always be
borne black, and Scythians in Ethiopia should be always white. For as much
as all nations from the beginning of the world have been confused and mixed by
the distinction of Colonies: but experience teaches us, that men trasplanted
into another Soil, will in manner of trees and Plants by little and little
degenerate and change their first disposition. As if a Blackmore marry and
beget children here with us in England, experience will plainly declare the
children to be more inclining to whiteness then the fathers and the grand
children more then them. Secondly, if the second opinion of Chams curse
deserved any credit; I see no reason why all his posterity (such as by most
writers consent, are generally the people of Afric) should not be subject to
the same execration, as well as one little parcel of it. Moreover it is
reported by Pline, and confirmed by Appian, that in those places are many
black Lions, which we can ascribe to no other cause then the excess of heat,
and not to any quality of the Seed, or any curse inflicted on the place:
Moreover it is reported by Ferdinando de Quir in his late discovery of the
South Continent* that he there also found some black people; yet can we not
imagine this Land, though stretching very far in quantity toward the
Equinoctial, to come so far or much farther then the Tropicke of Capricorn.
These arguments make it the more probable that the Regions situate under the
Tropicks, generally exceed more in heat, then those placed in the middle of the
Earth under the Line.

2 In the other extreme Section from 60 Degrees toward the Pole, the first 15
Degrees toward the Equatour are more moderately cold; the other toward the
Pole most immoderately cold, and unapt for convenient Habitation.

That this Section of 30 Degrees comprehended betwixt the 60 Degree and the
Pole, is in a sort habitable, is confirmed by the testimony of many
Nauigatours, especially the English and Hollanders; who have adventured very
far Northward, and have there found the Earth, though not so fruitful, yet
furnished with some commodities, and peopled with Inhabitants. The first 15
Degrees toward the Equatour admit of no great exception, containing in their
extent Finmarke, Bodia, in Scandia, Noua Zembla, Auian, Groenland, with many
other places indifferently discovered: where they have indeed found the air
very cold in regard of this of ours: Yet not so Immoderate, but that it can at
all times agree with the natural temper of the native Inhabitants, and at
least at some times of the year admit a passage for foreign Nations. But the
other Region stretching Northward from 75 Degrees to the Pole it self,
howsoever it may be probably thought habitable, yet affords it no convenient
means and sustenance for man's life, in respect of other places; neither can
the people of this climate enjoy any good complexion or Temperament of the
four qualities; for as much as the cold with them is so predominant, that it
choaketh, and almost extinguisheth the natural h^at: whence Hypocrates says
that they are dried up, which is a cause of their swarty color, and dwarfish
stature; which assertion of his can obtain no credit, but of such Northern
people as live near the Pole; Nevertheless we shall not find these poor
Northern Nations, so destitute altogether of vital aides, but that their
wants are in some sort recompensed by the benefit of nature. The chiefest
comforts in this kind, which we enjoy, and they seem to want, are Heat and
Light. The defect of heat is somewhat mollified; 1 By the Sun staying so long
above their Horizon as 6 months, and by consequence impressing into the Air a
greater degree of heat. 2* By the natural custom of the Inhabitants, never
acquainted with any other temperature: both which reasons we have formerly
alleged. 3 By the industry of the Inhabitants, being taught by necessity to
preserve themselves during the Wintertime in Caves, Stoues, and such like
places heated with continual fires: the defect of which providence, was
thought to be the ruin of Sr Hugh Willoughby, intending a search of the
North-east passage on the North of Lapland and Russia. To recompense the defect
of Light, Nature has provided two ways: 1 In that the Sun in his Parallel
coming nearer and nearer to the Horizon, gives them a long time of glimmering
light both before his rising and after his setting: which may serve them
instead of day. 2 For that the Sun and Stars by reason of a refra^tion, in
a vaporou^ and foggy Horizon, appe^re^ ^o the^ sometime before he is truly
risen: which caused the Hollanders Noua Zombla, to wonder why they should see
the Sun diverse days before according to their account he was to rise above
their Horizon according to Astronomicall grounds: which problem had staggered
all the Mathematicians of the world, had not the Perspectiue science stepped in
to give an answer.

3 In the middle Section betwixt 30 and 60 Degrees of Latitude, the first 15
are Temperately Hot, the other 15 more inclined to Cold.

The middle Region partakes a mixture of both extremes, towit, of the cold
Region toward the Pole, and the hot toward the Equatour: whence it must needs
follow, that the more any parts of this Tract approach the hot Region under the
Tropicke and Equatour, the more it must partake of Heat: yet this heat being
mittigated by some cold by reason of the fite of the Sun, it must of
necessity be Temperate and very apt for humane habitation. Also this mixture
of the cold quality being more extended and increased on the other moity
toward the Pole through the vicinity of the cold Region, must loose much of
the former heat, which shall hereafter be more confirmed out of the natural
constitution and complexion of the Inhabitants; bearing the true marks of
external cold and internal Heat, whereof the one is strengthened by the
other: For the external cold, if it be not over predominant, and too much for
the internal Heat, will by an Antiperistasis keep in and condensate this
heat, making it more fervent and vigorous.

6 The East and West Hemispheares are bounded and divided by the Meridian
passing by the Canaries and the Molucco Islands.

7 The East Hemispheare reaches from the Canaries the Moluccoes on this side;
as the other on the opposite part of the Sphere.

We may here note a great difference betwixt this division and the former. For
the North and South Hemispheares being divided by the Equatour, are parted (as
it were) by Nature it self, and the Suns motion; But the division of the
Globe into East and West, we can ascribe to no other cause, then man's
Institution: yet are the Eastern and the Western found to differ many ways,
the discovery of which may give great light to observation.

1 The Eastern Hemispheare wherein we live is every way happier and worthier
then the other Westward.

How far short the Western Hemispheare comes of this of ours, many
circumstances may declare. For first, if we compare the Quantity of Land, we
shall find a great disparity. For the Western Hemispheare contains in it
besides the Southern Continent (wherein our^ also claims a moity) only
America, with the Islands thereunto adjoining: whereas the other within this
large circuit contains all the other parts of the Earth known unto the
Ancients, as Europe, Asia, and Afric, with many Islands to them annexed.
Moreover it is probably conjectured by some, that America is usually on our
Mappes and Globes, especially the more ancient, painted and delineated out
greater then indeed it is: which has been ascribed to the fraudulent deceit
of the Portugalls heretofore; who to the end they might reduce the Molucco
Islands to the East Indies, then their own possession; sought as well in their
Mapps as relations to curtaile Asia, and enlarge America in such sort, as the
Moluc^o Islands might seem to fall within the 180 Degrees Eastward, wherein
they fed themselves with unknown substance, and the Castilians with painted
shadows. But to let pass the quantity as a matter of less moment and less
questioned; a great disparity will be found in the Quality and D^sposition:
For what one commodity almost was ever found in this Continent, which is not
only parallelled, but surmounted by this our Hemispheare? If we compare the
Mines of Gold and Silver wherein consists the wealth and riches of both places;
our East Indies will easily challenge the superiority. If Trees, Plants,
Herbage and Grains, let our Physicians and Apothecaries judge, who owe most of
the medicinable drugges to India: Let our Merchants answer, which owe their
Spices to Arabia, their Wine, to Spain, Italy, the Mediterranean, Grecian,
and Indian Islands; their Silks, Linen, Clothing, and their furniture almost
wholly to Europe. If we compare the multitude and various kinds of Beasts
bred and nourished in either place, no question but Europe, Asia, and Africa
can show far greater Heads of Sheep, Cattle, and such like, with far
greater variety of kinds, then ever were found in this new found Continent. If
all these failed, yet the well tempered disposition of the Europaeans and
Asians in respect of this barbarous and unnurtured place, disdaines all
comparison: where we shall observe on the one side a people long since reduced
to ciuility, instructed as well in liberal sciences, as handy-crafts, armed
with martial discipline, ordered by Laws and civil government, bound with a
conscience and sense of Religion; on the other side a multitude of miserable
and wretched nations, as far distant from us inciuility, as place; wanting
not only Government, Arts, Religion, and such helps, but also the desire, being
senseless of their own misery.

2 The difference of East and West cannot work a diversity in two places by
any diversity of the Heavens.

East and West places compared together, are either of equal or unequal
Latitude. For places of unequal Latitude no question can be made, but they
receive a greater variety of Temper from the Heavens; as we have formerly
proved: but this disparity grows not out of the diversity of East and West,
but the distance of North and South. But that places alike situate in Latitude,
cannot vary by any diversity of the heavens is plain; for as much as all
things to them rise and set alike, without any diversity: wherefore, if any
such diversity be at any place found, we ought not to seek the cause thereof
in the heavens, but rather in the condition of the Earth it self, which no
question suffers in diverse places of the same Latitude a great variety.

8 Either Hemispheare may again Respectively be subdivided into the West or
East. The West in this our Hemispheare I call that which is nearer the Canary
Islands; the East that which lies toward the Molucco Islands; to which points
there are others correspondent in the other Hemispheare.

1 Places situate toward the East in the same Latitude, are hotter then those
which are placed toward the West.

For the explanation of this Theoreme, we are to examine two matters; First,
what probability may induce us to believe the East to be hotter temper then
the West. Secondly, what should be the cause of this diversity in both places,
being supposed equally affected, in respect of the Heavens: for confirmation of
the former, many reasons have been alleged of old and late writers. It is
agreed on (says Bodin) with a joint consent of the Hebrews, Greeks, and
Latins, that the East is better tempered then the West: which he labors to
confirm; First, out of many speeches of ^zekiel, Esaias, and the other Prophet^,
where the East seems to challenge a dignity and prerogative above the West;
which betokens (as he imagines) a blessing of the one above the other. But I
dare not venture on this Interpretation without a farther warrant. Secondly we
may here produce the testimony of Pliny in his seventh book, where he
affirms that by ordinary observation, it is found that the pestilence commonly
is carried from the East into the West, which Bodin testifies himself to have
found by experience in Galia Narbonensis, and many other history seems to
justify. Amianus a Greek Author, observes that Seleucia being taken, and a
certain porch of the Temple being opened, wherein were shut certain secret
mysteries of the Chaldeans; that a sudden contagion arose of incurable
diseases, which in the time of Marcus and Verus from the farthermost ends of
Persia, spread it self as far as the Rh^^^ and France, and filled all the
way with heaps of carcasses. If at any time the contagion be observed to be
carried another way, an universal pestilence is feared: as according to the
histories there happened not long after from Ethiopia toward the North, which
infested the greatest part of the world. A third proof may be drawn from the
testimony of Aristotle, Hippocrates, Gallen, Ct^sias, and other grave Aut^ors,
who affirm that all things are bred better and fairer in Asia then in Europe,
which must needs argue a better temperature: To back which Testimonies, we
need go no farther then modern observation. Every Geographer will tell you
how far in fertility Natolia in Asia surmounts Spain; and China, under the
same Latitude exceeds both: who knows not how far Fez and Morocco on the
Western Verge of Africa, stand inferior to Egypt, a most fruitful and happy
Region? And how far short both these come of India, situate in the same
Climate. An argument of greater heat in the Eastern places may be the
multitude of Gold and Siluer-mines, Spices, and other such like commodities,
wherein Asia excells Europe: whereas such metals and commodities as require
not so great a measure of heat in their con^oction, are rather found in Europe
then in Asia: whence there seems to arise a certain correspondency of the
East with the South, and the West with the North. The greatest reason of all is
taken from the Temper and natural disposition of the Inhabitants, for as much
as the European resembling the Northern men, shows all the Symptoms of
inward heat strengthened with external cold. The Asiaticke follows the
disposition of the Southern man, whose inward heat is exhausted by external
scorching of the Sunne-beames, and therefore partakes more of Choll^r-adust or
melancholy. But this point we shall more fully prosecute in due place. To show
a cause of this variety is very difficult. Those which in wit and learning have
far exceeded my poor scantling, have herein rather confessed their own
ignorance, then adventured their judgment. It were enough to satisfy an
ingenuous mind, to believe that Almighty God was pleased in the first creation
of the world to endow the Eastern part of the Earth with a better temper of
the Soil, from whence all the rest derive their original: which seems not
improbable, in that he made Asia the first resting place of man after the
Creation, the second Seminary of mankind after the Deluge, the only place of
our Saviors Incarnation. In this matter I believe no less, and can speak no
more, except I should urge the beating of the great Atlanticke Ocean upon our
Western shoares; which may in some sort qualify the excess of heat incident
to the Eastern tract, which may produce some degrees of Temperature. But here
also we shall perhaps meet with cross instances, which will stir up more
doubt th^n satisfaction.

CHAP. IV. Of the manner of Expression and Description of Regions.
1 Having treated of the general Adjuncts of places, we are next to handle
the manner of describing a Region, which proposes unto us two points, ^ the
finding out the Position of two places, one in regard of the other. 2 The
Translation of such places so found out into the Globe or Charte.

2 The former depends on the invention of the Angle of Position by some
Dioptricke Instrument.

This manner of description of a particular Region, seems very necessary for a
Geographer, which every Mechanician may soon learn and practice* Many
instruments have been devised by curious Artificers for this purpose: whose
use has been set out largely by later writers, as by Gemma Frisius, Diggs,
Hopton, and others: to whom my reader may have recourse, because I hold it not
my task in this subject to describe the Instruments themselves; but briefly to
show the ground and use of them; which these propositions shall express.

1 Diverse places observed at two or more Stations, by some Dioptricke
Instrument, the situation of two places, one in regard of the other, may be
found out and expressed in a Plain.

This may sensibly be showed in the Figure following: to express which the
more plainly* we will set down these Rules: 1 Let there be drawn in some
Chart or plain platform, a right line, which we must account to be our
Meridian; because it shall afterward serve for that purpose. This right line
shall be AB, whose two ends A and B shall be taken for the North and South. 2
You must choose out of some high place, as a Tower or Mountain, from whence
you may behold such cities, towns, castles, and other such notable places
whereof you desire to know the situation and bearing of the one to the other*
This High place is called the First Station; where you must place the plain
before prepared in such sort, as it may Astronomically and truly agree with
the true Meridian of the place (whose invention we have taught in the first
Book) and so respect the four Cardinal coasts, to wit, East, West, North,
and South: Upon this place seated in such a manner of situation fasten your
Dioptricke instrument, that it may be turned about the point A on every side
at pleasure, in such sort, as the sight may be directed to every one of the
adjacent places. First then removing it from A, direct your sight to F, and
draw the line AF of indefinite length: likewise your Instrument being directed
to G, draw the line AG infinitely, which by this means will also hit the place
E: Let B also be imagined a certain place, as a City, or Castle, situate in
the very Meridian it self, which we find already drawn to our hands. In like
sort ought we to proceed with the other places C and D, and as many as we
please.

This performed, you must remove your self with your Instrument and Plain to
some one of these places thus fore-marked out; as for example unto D, which is
called the second station, and there as in the former, ascending up some high
place, the Plain being first fitted and placed Astronomically, take the
distance AD of any length whatsoever* for to the greatness of this Distance,
shall all the rest be proportional. Hence so place your Dioptricke Instrument
at the place D, that it may be turned round, and directed to all those places
formerly observed. In this sort leuelling your sight to the place or castle F,
draw the line DF: so directing your sight to the rest, you may draw the lines
DCG, DEDB; etc. Now by the points of Intersections of these lines, as in F, G,
E, C, B, etc. are to be described and delineated out the said notable
landmarkes, as Towns, Castles, Promontories, and such like. Betwixt these
places if any man desire to know the distance in miles, he may know it by
finding out any one of these Distances; for one being known, the rest will
also be exactly known* as for example, we will imagine the Distance AD to
contain 10 miles: wherefore let the line AD be divided into 10 equal parts:
then with your compass examine how many such parts are contained in the
Distance AF, for so many miles will be likewise in it contained: as for
example according to this supposition we shall find it 5 parts: wherefore the
castle or city F will be 5 miles distant from the city A. He that desires more
particularly to acquaint himself with the use and diverse manners of
descriptions of Regions, derived from this one ground; Let him have recourse to
diverse Authors who have particularly labored in this subject; amongst which
our two Englishmen, Digges, and Hopton, deserve not the least praise: whereof
the later, out of these principles has framed a curious instrument, which he
calls his Topographicall-Glasse, whose use he has perspicuously and exactly
taught in diverse pleasant conclusions, too large for the scope of my method
to insert.

2 At one Station by opticall observation, the situation of one place in
respect of the other may be found out.

This may be showed out of an opticall experiment, both pleasant and
admirable: The ground is expressed in this proposition: The light traiected by
a narrow hole into a dark place, will represent in any Table or white paper
within, whatsoever is without directly opposed unto it: For demonstration of
which proposition, we must take as granted of the perspecti^e Authors, That
the visuall Image or species will pass by a right line through any little
hole, and will be terminated in any point of the Medium: Now that it should
more perspicuously be seen in a dark place, then in the light. The cause is
assigned to be, because the light of the Sun is taken away, or much
diminished, which otherwise would hide and shadow the species of the thing
which is presented to the sight; as we see by experience the greater light of
the Sun to obscure the Stars: which nevertheless from the dark bottom of a
deep Well or Mine, will show themselves at midday. Nevertheless we must
observe by the way, that this representation of any thing to the sight by this
Image impressed in this sort in a wall or paper, will show it self so, as the
parts will be seen inuersed, or (as we may say) turned on the contrary side:
as the higher, lower, the lower, higher; the right-side, to the left; and the
left, to the right: which we may declare by an ocular demonstration in this
figure here inserted: Let us imagine a Triangular platform of land, whereof
we desire to know the situation, to be ABC: from the extreme Angles of this
Triangle, we will suppose certain Rays to be drawn through the hole D into
a dark place, wherein shall be opposed to the hole D, a white Table or paper,
which shall be NM: Here will a Ray from the point designing out the Angle at A,
be carried through the hole, that it will point out in the Table K (because
all such beams according to the Optics are right lines.) Likewise the Angle B
will in the Table design out the Point I: also C will fall into the point H:
Let KH, IK, HI, be joined together by right lines, there will appear the
Triangle IKH: wherein the top of the Triangle A will be seen in the lowest
place K: Likewise the Angles of the Basis B and C, will appear in the points
of the highest place HI: and the right side A C, will show it self in the left
HK: as the left side will be the right in IH: wherefore the side of the whole
Triangle ABC will show it self in the Table NM, although inuersely placed
according to the sides and Angles: and of a various greatness in respect of
the distance of the Table from the hole. The invention has great use in
Astronomy, in observing Eclipses, the beginning, and continuance, without any
hurt at all to the sight. No less use may it challenge in Topography in
describing of Territories, Cities, Borrowes, Castles, and such like, in their
due symmetry and proportion: To practice which the better, Reusner would have a
little house built of light Timber, with a Muliangle Basis: in every one of
whose sides, a hole should be made, looking inwardly, at the vertex, or top,
but outwardly at the Basis: through which the species or Image of all such
things a^ are visible may have free passage.

2 The manner of translation of a Region into the chart, depends from the
knowledge of the Longitude and Latitude.

3 The parts to be described, whereof the chart consists, are either
Essential, or Accidental: The Essential, are either the Lines, as are the
Meridians and Parallels: or the Places to be delineated out by Pictures; The
declination of both which, shall be taught in these rules.

1 To set down the Meridians and Parallels in a particular chart.

To show the practice hereof, we will take for instance the Region of France,
an example familiar with our later Topographers, and therefore can better
warrant the description: France is supposed to have in latitude 10. degrees, in
longitude 16: This known, you must proceed in this manner: First through the
middle of your table from head to foot, let there be drawn a perpendicular
line expressing the Meridian of the world, which shall be marked with the
letters OF: let this line be divided into 10. equal parts: then draw two
Parallel lines, whereof the one must cross the said line about the point E
with right Angles: and the other Parallel must cross it again beneath in the
point F with like Angles: let the uppermost Parallel be expressed by AB: The
neathermost with CD: Then with your compass take one of the 10 parts of the
line OF, which is one degree, and set that down apart by it self, dividing
the same into 60 Minutes, as the short line GH, in the table here inserted will
show on the right hand. Now you may learn by some Table or Map, that the
farthest part of France toward the North, through which is drawn the Parallel
AB is 52. degrees distant from the Equatour: And that the South Parallel CD,
is distant 42 degrees: Also certain Tables in our former book will inform
you, that to every degree of the Parallel 42. delineated by AB, do answer 37
miles: and that to every degree of the Parallel CD, answer 45 miles: wherefore
with your compass take from the short line GH, 37 parts or Minutes, and with
your compass kept at the same largeness, let the Parallel AB be divided
into 16 equal spaces correspondent to that wideness (that is to say) on each
side of the Meridian 8 parts: at which Meridian OF, you must begine your
measure toward either hand both right and left, marking the end of every such
space with a certain point* Moreover for the South Parallel CD. let 45 parts
likewise be taken from the short line GH, and let that Parallel be divided
into 16 spaces, correspondent to that wideness of the compass, eight spaces
being set down on each side of the Meridian OF: So that we must begin from
the Meridian OF, and mark the end of every such space with a point. Then from
those points wherewith each of those two Parallells AB, and CD is marked; Let
there be drawn a right line from point to point, and those shall serve for
Meridians* expressing as well the longitude of the whole Region, as of every
particular place therein seated. In like sort as you have divided the Meridian
OF, into 10 equal parts, so again into the like number of equal parts must
be divided each of the two uttermost Meridians, on the left hand and the
right, marking with a point the end of every such space, and so from point to
point let there be drawn right lines, cutting all the Meridians, and those
shall serve for Parallells, and in the uttermost spaces, let there be written
the numbers of Longitude and Latitude. The Longitude, is supposed to begin at
the uttermost Meridian at the left hand, which in both Parallells is the
farthest Meridian Westward. Now for as much as the most Westerly Meridian is
fourteen degrees distant from the Meridian passing by the Canary Islands, from
which as the first Meridian, the ancients began their accounts: you must set
down in the first place on the left hand, as well over, as under in the first
space 15, in the second 16, in the third, 17, and so orderly proceed through
all the spaces, till you come to 30: For the difference betwixt 14 and 30, is
16: So you have the whole Longitude of France expressed in your Table, which is
16 degrees: In the like sort to express the Latitude (having the degrees of
Latitude marked out) you must begin at each end of the South Parallel CD,
and so proceed upward in the two uttermost Meridians, writing down in the
first space at the foot of the Table 43 degrees, on the right hand and the
left, in the second space 44, in the third 45, and so upwards along to 52, so
have you expressed the whole Latitude of France from North to South: for
betwixt 42 and 52 are comprehended just 10 degrees: These degrees may again be
divided at pleasure into lesser parts, as minutes, according to the largeness
of your chart.

2 To set down Cities, Castles, Mountains, Rivers, and such like special
places in the chart.

The platform of your chart being once drawn out, as we have formerly taught
in the precedent rule, you may very easily set down special places by
observation of the Longitudes or Latitudes of such places, either by
instruments or Tables, and reducing them accordingly to your chart: which we
suppose before, marked out according to several degrees: As for example, if
we would set down in our chart the Metropolis of France, which is Paris:
having recourse to my Table, I find it to have in Longitude 23 degrees, in
Latitude 48 degrees. Here to find out the said longitude you must extend a
thread from the 23 degrees of the Parallel AB to the like degree in the
Parallel CD: then holding it fast, you must cross that thread with another
extended from the Meridian AC, to the Meridian AD in the points of 28 degrees:
The point wherein these two threeds shall cut and cross one the other, you may
take for the true place of Paris, and mark it out in your chart: In like sort
you may proceed with all other places. But if you were to describe a river in
your chart, it will not be sufficient to take the Longitude and Latitude of
the beginning or fountain, but of the end, middle, turnings, and angles,
Towns, or Cities, by which it passes, Bridges and other occurrent
circumstances: In like sort may you set down Woods, Forests, Mountains,
Lakes, and other places whatsoever.

4 Thus much for the Essential part of the particular Chart: The Accidental
part we call the Scales of Miles, which teaches how many miles are contained
betwixt any two places in the Chart, wherein we are to know two things, 1 The
Fabric; 2 The Use.

1 The Fabric of the Scale depe^ds from the certain knowledge of the
Distance of any two places in the Chart.

The practice is very easy, and taught in these three Rules: 1 You must search
out the distance betwixt any two places whatsoever, which are contained in the
Region, described in your Chart: which you may do either experimentally by
your own knowledge, or some certain relation of Trauailers. 2 Then must you
draw three Parallel lines, containing two spaces, one larger, the other
lesser, in some void space of your Chart. 3 You must divide the said Scale
into so many Miles, as the said void space will give you leave, according to
the known distance first found out: As for example, the distance betwixt Paris
and Roane is known to be 30 French leagues, which contains 60 of our Miles,
allowing for every such league, 2 Miles. Wherefore your Parallel lines being
first drawn (as you see in the former Chart) divide your Scale into 30 parts
accordingly, and in the larger space, place your Numbers, as 10.20.30. and so
forth, so far as your space will conveniently extend.

2 The Distance of any two places set down in the Chart, being taken and
applied to the scale, will show how many miles it contains

As for example, I would willingly know how many English Miles are contained
betwixt Paris and Orleans in my Chart of France: Here I take with my compass
the distance betwixt the said Cities in the Chart, and applying that to the
Scale, I find it to contain 50 miles: which is the true measure.

CHAP. V. Of Hydrography.
1 HItherto have we treated of the General Adjuncts and Proprieties of places
in the Terrestrial Sphere: we are in the next place to handle the Distinction.

2 A place is generally distinguished into Water and Land: The Description of
the former is termed Hydrographie; The other for distinction we call Pedography.

3 Hydrographie is a Description of the Water, with the Accidents thereunto
belonging.

The Water we consider not here merely Physically, as it is an Element,
whereof mixed bodies are compounded; but Topographically, as it bears a part in
the Terrestrial Globe: yet are we not so curious to exclude such Physical
problemes and considerations as are most subject to sense; which a Topographer
cannot well neglect: being the marks and characters, designing out special
places: To find out the original of the Water, we must first take as
granted, that Almighty God (as we read in the first of Genesis) in the
beginning made a separation betwixt the waters above the Firmament, and the
waters under the Firmament; whereof the former is termed in the Scriptures
(...), which is as much to say as expansum, a thing stretched out, or extended.
By these waters above the Firmament, whether we ought to understand the
cloudie vapors in the middle Region of the Air: or the pure fluid and liquid
body, whereof the Firmament consists; I leave it to learned divines and
critic expositours to dispute: although the propriety of the phrase (if it
be well rendered) will seem to favor this opinion rather then the other: for
as much as the Air can no way be said to be above the Firmament, except the
Hebrew term miscarry in the Translation. For the solidity of the Celestial
Orbs, which Aristotle labors to confirm, is found long since to thwart the
observations of Astronomers: although it may thus be retained as useful
suppositions to settle Imagination. But to let this pass, and come to the
waters under the Firmament, understood by the word (...), which signifies as
much as a collection of waters: we shall find them to have taken their
original from the separation of the waters substance from the Dry-land, caused
by God in the first Creation, testified by Moses in 1 Gen: which once granted
(as no Christian can deny) easily rebates the edge of the opinion of some
ancient Philosophers, who contended, out of the nature of Drouth and Moisture,
to derive the beginning of this separation. The dryness of the Earth (say
they) working by little and little, diminishes, or at least resists the
waters, so that they should not altogether ouerwhelme the Land: But this reason
is altogether deficient in Nature: Because Drouth and Moisture are no such
qualities to have such an operation: and if any such there were betwixt Drouth
and Moisture, the Drouth (as we see by experience) would rather draw moisture
unto it, then any way expel it, or drive it away: whence it is most evident,
that it was effected by no other means then the immediate work and providence
of God, for the preservation of living creatures: for, before God said; Let the
waters be gathered into one place: the Water was said to cover the whole face
of the Earth; but afterward at Gods appointment, the water went back, and
showed the dry-land. But by what means God separated the one from the other,
it is much controuersed amongst Divines and Philosophers. Many were of opinion,
that the Earth was suffered to stand entire without alteration, and that the
waters were elevated above it; so that if they were suffered to flow abroad,
they might again cover the face of the Earth, as in the beginning.

But why the Waters should be thus restrained, is not agreed among them: for
some thought, that this was done by the miraculous power of God, which
restraines the flowing abroad of the Water, beyond ordinary bounds; of which
opinion is St Jerome, who grounded his opinion (as it seems) on the authority
of the Scripture, especially in the 8 of the Proverbs, and the 103 Psalm;
where God is said to have set a bound upon the seas, which they should not
pass: But this reason seems not warrantable; That the great Creator of all
things, should in the first institution of Nature impose a perpetual violence
upon Nature. Moreover all miracles are temporary, and not perpetual; for then
were it ordinary, and so scarce a miracle: others upon less ground, have
imagined that there are certain Northern stars in Vrsa mayor and Draco, of
so great virtue, that they can draw the Ocean from this habitable part of the
earth toward the North, and so constrain the waters, that they cannot
ouerwhelme the earth: but this opinion is ridiculous, and deserves no solid
refutation: being a mere conjecture, without ground or probability: others
upon the like reason, have dreamed that there is more Water then Earth in the
Globe; and that the water by his extraordinary mass occupying the center of
the world, turns the earth on one side, making it to swim as a ship upon the
sea: But this assertion we have refuted in our first Chapter of the first
book: All these Authors suppose that the earth is uncovered toward the
North Pole; but overflowed with waters toward the South: which the experience
of Nauigatours at this day has sufficiently disanulled: Others again
affirming out of a Peripateticall dream that the water is ten times greater
then the earth, suppose the earth to be like a sponge to drink up the water:
to prove which assertion they produce an experiment, that the earth being
dug any thing deep in most places, there will appear water: whence they
collect that the water is mixed with the whole earth, and received into it'^
concauities: But howsoever we may grant, that there are many and vast
concauities in the Earth, capable of Waters; yet it is impossible, that the
Water should be ten times as great as the Earth: for by this reason, although
all the Terrestrial Globe were Water, it could not be, but that a greater
portion of Water, then that in the Earth, should arise above the Earth:
because, according to their own Supposition, 9 parts should be above the
Earth: Neither can Aristotle's words be well wrested to this interpretation:
For as much as he understood this ten-fold proportion of the Water to the
Earth; not of the spaces, which they replenished, measured by their Circles and
Diameters: but of the proportion they bear one to the other in their
transmutation: as that one measure of Earth turned into Water, should be as
much as 10. All these opinions seeming so absurd, it seems more probable to
imagine, that either the Waters are condensated, and thickened, which were in
the beginning created thin: whence will follow, that they should occupy a
less place, and by consequence, leave the dry-land in many places habitable:
or, which is more probable; that God in the first Creation made certain hollow
concauities and channels in the Earth, which was before plain and uniform;
into which the waters were received and bounded, in so much, that they could
not flow abroad. This seems enough to satisfy the search of such as are not
too curious to search into his secrets, whose power and omnipotence transcends
the capacity of the wisest: In this division of a place into Water, and Land,
we will first treat of the Sea, and the accidents belonging thereunto: Not
that the water is worthier or greater then the Earth* The contrary whereof we
have proved heretofore: but because the consideration of it, is more simple, as
that wherein fewer matters are to be handled then in the land. For Rivers and
Lakes, although consisting of this watery element, we thought fit to handle
apart: as adjuncts belonging to the land.

4 In the Sea are considered two things: 1 The Adjuncts, 2 The Division. The
Accidents of the sea whereof we are to treat, are either Internal, or
E^ternall.

5 The Internal, are such as are inb^ed in the Sea: These again are either
Absolute or Relative.

6 The Absolute, are such as agree to the Sea, without any comparison with the
land: such are either, Figure, Quality, or Motion.

7 The figure is the conformity of the external superficies of the Sea;
whereof observe this Theorem^.

1 Although the whole body of the water be Sphericall, yet it is probable that
the parts of it, incline to a Conicall figure.

That the whole Water according to it is outward superficies, i^ Sphericall and
round, is sufficiently demonstrated before, in the first book. But
notwithstanding this roundnesse of the whole, the parts of it may (for ought I
see) admit of a Conicall figure; for as much as this has little or no
proportion to the vast Spheracity of the Water, no more then little hills, to
the greatness of the Earth. For the prosecution of which point, I will first
show the reason of this my conjecture, grounded on experience; and afterward
out of the ground and demonstration of the principles of Mathematical
Philosophy, endeavor to make it more manifest. First therefore by a Conicall
line, we understand a crooked line which differs from a Periphery or circle,
in as much as it keeps not always an equal distance, from the center: but is
higher in the midst, then on either side: Now if the parts of the water
standing still, were in their higher superficies exactly sphericall; they
should by the same grounds be concentricall, or have the same center with the
whole Earth: But that it has not the same center, will appear by little
dropps of Water falling on the ground, which incline (as we see) to a round
figure; yet were it more then ridiculous to say, that this round conuexity of a
drop could be concentricall with the whole Earth: since in so great a mass,
it is hardly sensible. But here our ordinary Philosophers are ready to answer,
that this conformity of the water dropps in a round figure, is rather Violent,
then Natural: because the Water being by nature moist, is ready to fly, and
avoid the touch or drouth, or any dry thing. And because the Water thus
avoiding the drouth, cannot of necessity but some way touch it, it is imagined
to conform it self to that figure, whereit it may least of all touch: This is
the round or Sphericall figure; wherein any body contained, cannot touch a
plain, otherwise then in one only point. But against this conjecture of
moisture flying drouth, strong enough is the experiment of Scaliger, in his 105
exercitation: that quicksilver a moist substance, being cast either into Water
or Iron-Oare, will gather it self to a round body, notwithstanding it is
manifest, that quicksilver naturally neither auoides the touch of Water or
Iron, for as much as the one is very m^^st, the other of great affinity, (as
our Chimicks teach) with quicksilver* the parent of all Metals. Moreover it
is manifest, that this conformity to roundnesse, is in dropps of rain falling
to the Earth, through the Air: yet will not our Peripateticks admit of any
drouth in the Air, which this moist element should seek to avoid. Moreover if
Water should conform it self to roundnesse, by reason of the drouth of the
body, whereon it fall, then must it follow; that either the moisture of the
Water should ^xpell the drouth of the Earth; or else that the drouth of the
Earth should work on the moisture of the Water* But neither can be granted
with probability. First because moisture and drouth are not qualities of such
actiuity to drive and rem^ue, one the other from one place to another, as it is
here imagined: Secondly; if the moist should work on the dry, it should either
touch it or not: If it touches not, it cannot work on it: because no Physical
action can be performed with^^t touching: besides, it were very impossible, to
imagine that without thi^ t^uch, one of these qualities should perceive or ^ent
the other to avoid it. If it touch, it auoides not the touch, but ioynes it
self with the drouth: And indeed reason and experience shows, that dro^th
rather couets and draws unto it self moisture, then expels it: wherefore
Scaliger goes about to ^o^ge a new cause of this experience. Every thing (says
he) in this nature is one, and the selfsame: But this unity in Homogeneall
bodies, is best preserved in a Globe or round figure: wherein is no inequality,
no parts higher or lower, abounding or deficient. But her^ might a man ask why
the greater parts of the Water are not likewise conformed unto roundnesse, as
well as the lesser drop; He would perhaps answer, that nature in them was
not in such dist^^sse, to make use of this special privilege; I grant it: yet
find I in this no satisfaction; for as much as he gives a fi^all cause, where
I sought an efficient* for I would farther ask by what action or motion this
water should gather it self into a circular figure, and from what form it
should arise: for first we have showed, that this motion cannot proceed from
the external drouth, we must seek the cause in the water it self: here we
shall find it, either the particular form of the water, or a certain
universal form, as some suppose it cannot be imagined, that it should
proceed from the general form of the universe: First, because as we have
elsewhere proved, there is no such Internal form of the world: Secondly,
those motions are commonly ascribed to an universal Nature or form, wherein
any particular body (as it were) neglects his own Nature, for the preservation
of the whole Universe. But here water containing it self in an orb, and not
^lowing abroad toward the Center, rather seems to forsake the Center and
Universe to preserve it self. Whence we must necessarily conclude, that this
roundnesse in drops of water cast on the sand, proceeds not from external
drouth, nor any vni^ers^ll form, but from the ^peciall and essential form of
the water; and consequently, because it makes a circle excentricall with the
Earth, it must be found rising higher in the midst: To which we will add
another experiment: Let there be cast on a large Table or planke, a little
portion or drop of water: I here ask, whither this water on the midst of the
Table equilibrated, will continually flow abroad, or at length suffer a stay or
stop? It cannot be continually spread abroad: first, because experience
teaches the contrary; for we see little drops cast on such a plain, to
confine themselves within certain bounds: and least any should imagine (as
before) that this happens by reason of the drouth of the Table, let him first
moisten the Table, and he shall find no great alteration: Secondly, if the
water should always fall downward, and so still run abroad, and spread it
self to the margents of the Table, it would follow, that if the Table were of
an infinite capacity, the water thus shed, would infinitely flow abroad,
without intermission; and so should Nature set no bound to the thickness and
motion of the water: whereof experience has sufficiently taught the contrary.
Now, that water thus standing still on a plain equilibrated Table, should have
a Canonical figure, it may be plainly proved almost by sense, whereby we
perceive the middle to be higher then the extremes: for no man can deny but
the water thus standing, is endowed with thickness, for as much as it is a
natural body. Wherefore of necessity it must swell above the Table. It cannot
be Spherically Concentricall with the whole Earth, because in so small a
segment of an Arch, as this little quantity of water admits, it would be
insensible. It cannot be plain, because the sides or extremities of it touch
the Table, whereas the middle superfi^ies, by reason of the thickness, is
elevated above the Table. Neither can we imagine another figure besides, which
can aptly be admitted. It is meet in the next place, that out of the grounds
of Philosophy, we explain how it comes to participate this figure: where we
are first to understand, that the figure of the water is (as it were)
compounded of two spheres; whereof the first is imagined to be concentricall
with the whole Earth; the other lesser only answering to the portion or
quantity of water, were it made round; for if we consider the simple and
particular nature of the water, we shall find it inclining to roundnesse of it
self, as we have showed by experiment* yet such a sensible roundnesse, as
cannot have one Center with the Earth. But if we consider the water as it
concurres to the constitution of the whole Universe, we shall find this Figure
to partake of a circular segment concentricke with the whole Earth. Now because
neither of these two Figures can precisely and exactly arise by it self, since
the one must needs some what alter the other, we must of necessity admit of a
figure mixed and compounded of both these; which can be no other then a Cone.
To express this more plainly (because this path is yet untrodden) we find in
the water a double motion directed to this double figuration. The first whereof
is that, whereby all the parts of a quantity of water, are inclined to an
Absolute roundnesse, or Sphericall Figure, without respect of the Universe: the
Center of which roundnesse, is to be sought in the water it self. The later
is that, whereby the parts of the Water conforming themselves to the Center of
the Earth, as near as they can, make a Sphericall figure (as much as Nature
can suffer) concentricke with the whole Terrestrial Globe. In the former of
these motions, the Water seeks it is own preservation; in the later, the
safety of the whole Universe: for the safety and consistency of the whole, is
derived from the part, which concur to preserve the whole. To express a
little better the manner of these two concurrent operations; we will take for
an undoubted ground, That God has given to Nature a power and inclination to
preserve herself. This granted, we must distinguish of a twofold
preservation: the one Special, wherein every Body seeks it is own safety: the
other General, wherein all Bodies concur to the preservation of the whole:
The former proceeds from the special Form and Nature of every Body; which is
performed by the union of all his parts to it self; this union is greatest of
all in a Sphericall figure; wherein all the extreme parts are equally distant
from the Center, admitting no Equality of dimension. The General depends from
the Resultancy and Harmony of all the parts, whereby is caused an union of all
the parts with the whole; to whose preservation they are secondarily directed:
whence arises a double figurature of the water; the one of a Sphere,
excentricall with the Earth: the other also of a Sphere, but concentricke with
the Earth; whereof this Conicall figure is compounded. Why this figure should
be more sensible in a small drop or quantity, then in the Ocean, may be
declared from the same ground well understood; because the conuexity of the
lesser Sphere excentricke with the Earth, is more; and the greater, is less:
for by how much the lesser is the Sphere, the greater will be the conuexity:
and by how much greater the Sphere, the lesser will the be conuexity, or
crookedness. Wherefore this crookedness being in a small measure of water
very sensible, in a maine Ocean will by sense be hardly distinguished from a
right line.

8 Of the Figure of the Water we have spoken: We must now speak of the
Quality, which is twofold: Saltness, and Thickness.

1 The Water of the Sea is salt, not by Nature, but by Accident.

That the Sea is of a saltish Quality, no man has ever doubted, at least in
most parts: But whether this saltish Quality, essentially agrees to the center
of the Sea, as therein created, or else Accidentally brought in, I find no
small difference among Philosophers. Those which defend the saltishnesse to be
Accidental, are divided into diverse sorts: for some of the old Philosophers
imagined, that the Earth chased and Heat with the Sun, continually sweats out
water: whence is made the Sea, and therefore should have a saltish taste,
because all sweat is of this Quality: But this opinion I take to be no other
then a pleasant Allegory of the old Greek writers, who wrote their Philosophy
in verse, and therefore used such allusions, as we shall perhaps find in many
other matters, poetically devised of them; yet refuted of Aristotle in good
earnest: others have more probably coniectur'd, that this saltishnesse was
first derived from the Earth, through whose parts the Water being strained, is
apt to receive this Quality, being primarily in the Earth it self: as we see
water being wrung through ashes, to grow salt: but this opinion seems of no
great soundness; because the first Rivers and Lakes being drawn out of the
Earth altogether, and in regard of their small quantity, more apt to yield and
receive this tincture, are notwithstanding deuoide of all such Quality. Besides
this, we rather find the contrary by experiment: That Seawater strained
through clay, will turn fresh: as likewise powdered flesh being laid to soake
^n salt water, will soon turn sweet: The former is verified by Baptista
Porta: of the other, every kitchin-maide on the Seaside will inform us. The
third opinion is of Aristotle, who referres the saltish quality of the
Seawater to the Sun, as the chief cause, drawing and lifting up out of the
Sea store of exhalations, which afterward mixed with vapors, fall down again
by drops: for the Sun draws up the thinner and fresher parts of the water,
leaving the thicker and lower water to suffer adustion of the Sunne-beames, and
so consequently to become salt: so that the matter of this saltishnesse in the
Sea, is by an exhalation: the Sun drawing up to the middle Region of the
Air, the fresher parts; where thickened, they descend in rain, leaving the
residue of the Sea salt. The form is the straining and concoction, which is
made by the Sun; for the saltishnes is said to arise out of the commixtion of
Terrestrial dryness, concurring with moisture, ioin'd with adustion of Heat:
so that two things are chiefly concurring to the Generation of saltishnesse; to
wit, Drouth and Adustion. This seems to be proved by instance of
Fresh-waters in the kitchen, which turn salt, being much boiled, because the
thinner and sweeter vapors of it are drawn up, and dissipated, leaving that
behind which is thicker and saltish. The same would some have in the Sea,
seethed (as it were) and burnt with the Heat, which we experimentally find in
hot water on the fire. But this is excepted against by some, because we find
by experience, that many salt wells and fountains arise in diverse places of
the Earth, which are engendered in the bowels of the Earth far remote and
separate from this extreme heat and adustion of the Sunne-beames: But to this
we may easily answer, that such salt springs are either by some violence
enforced from the sea by certain secret cauernes, and hollow places of the
Earth: or else that they receive their tincture of saltness from some salt
minerals of the Earth, through which they pass. Wherefore this opinion of
Aristotle I see not yet sufficiently refuted. The other opinion concerning this
quality of such, which would have it essential to the sea water, and inbred in
the first creation, is grounded on two small causes: First they say that the
sea is salt, for the preservation of the Fishes, who would otherwise rot,
because experience shows, that Fish will soon putrify without salt; but this
is thwarted by three reasons: First, because if fish were in this sort salted
in the sea Water, the cook might save himself a labor in salting them again
in his kitchen: Also Fishes caught in the sea, are oftentimes preserved longer
and sweeter, less needing salt then those which are found in fresh Ponds and
Rivers: Secondly, if this reason should hold current, why should not the Fishes
also rot and put^ify in fresh Water? Thirdly, why should fishes covet the fresh
Water (as we see by experience in many fishes) if in it they should suffer
putrefaction, which is a great enemy to nature; Above all what need we fear
this putrefaction of fishes, while they are endowed with a living soul, which
is a greater preservative then all the salt in the world; or why should we not
doubt the same calamity in all living creatures in the land, which are as
subject to rottenesse in the Air, as the other on the land? The second cause
(say they) Why the sea should be created salt, is; Because the sea it self
should not putrify, for as much as we find by experience, that salt is the
only thing to resist Putrefaction; But here we may demand; why these Authors
should fear Putrefaction in the vast body of the sea, rather then in other
Waters and Rivers, which are neither salt, nor come near the greatness of the
Ocean; whereas Aristotle affirms in the fifth chapter of the 4 book of his
Meteors, that if the Sea were d^uided into many parts, it would more easily
dissolve and putrify. The grounds of this opinion being overthrown, there want
not reasons to contradict: First (says one) if the Sea were not created salt,
then was there some time wherein it was fresh: To this I answer two ways:
First, that it might be created fresh, yet being apt from the heat of the
Sun to receive saltness, it might, almost at the first receive it. Secondly,
if I should grant that it was a long time before it embraced this quality, I
know neither History to confute me, or reason to convince me. Secondly, it is
urged from the Nature of living creatures in the Sea, that they cannot well
live in fresh waters, and therefore it seems originally salt, and not by
Accident: But this is of no great force: First, because experience shows, that
many kind of fishes live in both, and many rather covet and desire the fresh
Water, then the Sea: Secondly, it is not improbable, that as the Sea by little
and little and by degrees turned from freshness to saltness, the temper and
disposition of the fishes, was in like manner changed and altered: Whence it
may come to pass, that fishes since bred and nourished in fresh Waters, cannot
so well endure the salt. Moreover who knows whether all these several kinds
of fishes now found in the Sea, were from the beginning, since we see by
experience, that sundry kinds of living creatures daily arise out of
putrefaction on the land, which may with like probability, or more, be
admitted in the Sea. There are yet behind other reasons of one Patricius a
Platonist, who would oppose Aristotle in good earnest. Aristotle (says he)
speaking of the saltness of the Sea Water, showed not the cause. For I would
ask, why that parcel of water, from whence the thinner parts are extracted,
should remain salt: was it so from the beginning, or afterward impressed; was
it Inbred, or Accidental? If he would have it an inbred quality from the
beginning, he vainly goes about to seek out the cause; If the saltness be
aduentitious, the cause is to be given; but the cause given by him, is not
true, for as much as it rather takes away the saltness: But to these
objections of Patricius, spunne out in many words, we may answer two ways:
either that the saltness is merely aduentitious bred by an exhalation, drawn
up by the Sun, and so distilling down again; or else, because this answer
seems not wholely to satisfy. For as much as rainy Water is seldom salt, and
if it were, could hardly flow in so great quantity to feed the saltness of the
Sea: I will answer secondly, that the saltness is radically or originally in
the matter of the Water; yet so, as it cannot be drawn out and sensibly be
perceived in the mixture of many sweet humors, joined with it, without a
separation first made by the heat of the Sun of the thinner parts from the
thicker: So that the Sun is a disponent, though not a productiue cause of
this saltness in the Sea.

2 Seas absolutely salt, are never frozen.

This may seem a Paradoxe to some men, in regard that amongst our Geographers,
we have so often mention made of Mare Congelatum, taking it is name from the
Ice wherewith it is shut up from passage: as also for that in the voyages of
Frobisher, Dauis, Hudson, and other later Nauigatours, which have been
employed in the search of the Northwest passage, we find such strange
relations, not only of Seas closed up with Ice, and hindering their passage
toward the North; but also of Rocks and Islands of Ice, of an incredible
greatness. The truth of these Relations I no way disapproue, but rather out of
these testimonies, approve our former assertion; that Seas which are wholly
Salt, are never found to freeze: For first whereas it is called Mare
Congelatum, it may bear the n^me well enough from the multitude of Ice
floating on the water, or collected into a Rock or Island. This Ice (as it will
easily appear) is not produced out of the substance of the Salt water of the
maine Ocean, but rather carried into the Sea by great rivers of fresh water
running into the Ocean: For the rivers are not always frozen; but sometimes by
a remission of the cold are thawed, and the pieces broken a sunder* and
floating into the Sea, in it often times meet in great heaps, which may be
proved: 1 In that these great r^cks of Ice melting with the heat of the Sun,
have dissolved into fountains of fresh water, gushing down in great
abundance, wherewith sometimes in case of necessity, they have fraughted their
ships, as we have testified by the forenamed Nauigatours. 2 Because some
part of the maine Sea, situate perhaps more Northern, and in a colder Climate,
suffers not this accident: whereas places near the shore, farther South* are
almost always frozen: The reason whereof, is; because the Sea near the shore
is commonly mixed with fresh waters, conveyed in, either by great Rivers, or
infinite secret passages under ground, which we see not: The reason why that
salt waters exclude this propriety incident or the fresh, I take to be the
Hot-spirits, hid in the salt humor, which are more fervent and operative, then
those of the fresh water.

9 So much for the saltness: The next, is the Thickness: whereof we will set
down this short Theoreme.

1 The Water of the Sea is thicker then other Water.

This Proposition has it is light from the former: because thickness of Water
is a companion of the saltness, as depending from the same cause, to wit, the
exhalation, and extraction of the thinner parts of the Water. There are many
small causes given by Patricius of this thickness of the Seawater. F^^st,
because the parts of it should more strongly hold together, and not cover and
ouerflow the firm land: But this seems to be grounded on an error, that the
Water should be above the Land; and that it should contain it self within
it is own bounds and limits, which opinion we have elsewhere rejected. The
second cause of the thickness of the Sea, is; that it might be more apt to
bear and carry ships, and other great weights for the use of man. Thirdly, the
Water being thick, may more easily be converted into salt, out of which, many
saltish minerals in the Earth are engendered. Other causes are given by this
Author, but less forceable, which we will omit, as referring them to the
Philosopher, whose proper task it is to seek them out.

CHAP. VI. Of the Motions of the Sea.
1 THe Motion of the Sea, whereof we are in this Chapter to treat, is either
Natural, or Violent. The Natural I call that, which is partly incident to the
Natural Disposition of the Sea.

2 This again is twofold, either General, or Special: General is that
which agrees generally to all, or at least to most parts of the Sea: such as is
the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea.

We must here observe, that the Water has a twofold Motion; The first is
common to all heavy Bodies, as well as the Earth, in which is an inclination to
come as near as they can to the Center of the Earth, whereof we have spoken
in our former book: The second is that which more properly agrees to the Sea,
which is again twofold: either the Natural, or the Violent. The Natural,
howsoever requi^ing perhaps the concurrence of some external cause, is
notwithstanding so called; for as much as it chiefly seems to proceed from
the Disposition of the Seawater; The Violent is caused merely by the violence
of the winds moving the Ocean. The Natural motion we have again divided into
general, or special; because the Affluxe, and Refluxe of the Sea, whereof we
are to treat, is general throughout the whole Ocean, (some petty creekes
perchance excepted) whereas the Currents, (which is the second kind of motion)
are more special, as agreeing not to all, or most parts (as it seems) but to
some one or other special place, as we shall show.

1 The Sea twice every day ebbes and flows.

The flowing and ebbing of the Sea, howsoever it cannot be precisely observed
in all Seas; yet because few places of the maine Ocean are exempted from it,
deserves the first and chiefest consideration. That such a motion there is,
experience shows; but the searching out of the cause, is, for ought I can
observe, one of the greatest difficulties in all Natural Philosophy* in so
much as Aristotle one of the acutest Philosophers, is reported to have stood
amazed at the flowing and ebbing of Euripus, and despairing of finding out the
cause, at length enforced to cast himself into the River which had before
confounded him. Wherefore it may seem sufficient for me to trace their steps,
who have waded far into the search of this cause, having very little hope to
go further. The first opinion was of the Stoickes, who supposed the whole
World to be a great living creature, composed of diverse Elements, which
inioyes both breath and life: This living creature they imagine to have his
nostrils placed in the maine Ocean, where by drawing in, and sending forth
breath, the ebbing and flowing of the Sea is caused: but this seems rather to
be a Poetical fiction, or Allegory then any conceit of a Philosopher.
Apollonius Tianaeus was of an opinion, that certain Spirits eithervnder, or
above the Water, breathed into it this motion. Timaeus taught the cause of this
moisture to be the river, breaking into the Ocean by the great mountains;
Plato thought that it was made by the swallowing up of the Sea into a gulf or
hole which being again cast out, was the cause of that motion in the Sea.
Seleuous the Mathematician, which affirmed that the Earth was carried round
with a perpetual motion, thought that the Moon was turned round with a motion
contrary to the motion of the E^rth, and from this to proceed that motion of
ebbing and flowing of the Sea, whereof we now treat. What Aristotle's opinion
was concerning this matter, is an uncertain conjecture; forasmuch as little or
nothing can be gathered touching this point in controversy out of any book,
which is certainly known to be Aristotle's: for the tract of the propriety of
Elements, where the cause of this motion is ascribed to the Moon, is judged to
be none of Aristotle's, but of some later Author. Yet Plutarch imposes on
Aristotle this opinion; that this motion of the Sea should come from the Sun,
because by it are raised up many windy exhalations, which should cause the Sea
to swell, blowing into the great Atlantic Ocean. But thisopinion is charged by
Pa^ricius of a threefold error: 1. That it should proceed from the Sun; 2*
From the wind; 3 That it is only in the Atlantic Sea. He saw (says Patricius)
that in the Atlantic, which he could not in the Aegean Sea at home and near
Athens. For 1 No wind blows so regularly, that for one six hours it should
blow forward, the other six hours backward: for the wind oftentimes blows
many days the same way without ceasing; yet is their not one only flowing or
one ebbing in the Sea. 2. The Sun stirs up sometimes winds, and sometimes
stirs them not up. But of a perpetual effect which is daily, why would this
Philosopher give a cause merely violent, and not quotidian, which
notwithstanding would have nothing violent to be perpetual? If the Sea be
somewhere moved naturally by other motions, as the Euripus, (which is said to
be his death) wherefore will he deny this motion to be Natural, seeking out an
external cause of this effect? But all this while our Platonic Philosopher
seems to fight with shadows: for what judicious man can imagine so judicious
and wise a Philosopher as Aristotle, should so grossly ouershoot himself to
father this opinion? I should much rather believe that no such opinion is to be
found in Aristotle, at least that it is indirectly related: which I the rather
believe, because one Caesalpinus a late Writer, as well opposite to Aristotle,
as the other has related Aristotle's opinion otherwise; to wit, that the ebbing
and flowing of the Sea is derived from a double cause: whereof the one is the
multitude of Rivers bringing in a great force of waters into it: whence it
comes to pass that it flows only toward one part, which is the lower, as it
happens to the Mediterranean; For the Egaean and Ponticke Sea, with Maeotis,
flow into the Tyrrhene, and not on the opposite side: The other cause he makes
to be the libration of the whole Sea: for it is often turned from one side to
the other, which in so great a vastnes seems but little; but in straights and
narrow places much more. So that Aristotle (says Caesalpinus) would have that
to agree to the Sea, which usually happens to a pair of balance: which having
received the beginning once of their motion, are inclined sometimes this way,
and sometimes that way, by reason of the equality of the weight: for if the
weight of one should overcome, thewhole would incline thatway, and would not
ri^e upon the other side. But against this opinion imposed on Aristotle,
Caesalpinus not without good reason, excepts, that the Superficies of the Water
being Equidistant from the Center (as is supposed by Geographers) no reason may
be given why it should incline more to one side then another, having once
obtained his true place: since according to Aristotle's own grounds, no violence
c^n be perpet^all. To which I may add another answer, that no satisfactory
reason can be alleged, why it should always observe so true and just periods
of time in its motion: since all Rivers are sometimes increased, and other times
diminished according to the season of the year, and variety of the weather:
wherefore the said Author, which impugnes this opinion, has framed another
conceit, grounded on the circular motion of the Earth, which he explaineth in
this sort. It agrees ^o reason (says he) that the Water should not altogether
follow the motion of the Earth, but should in part be driven back, and in
part flow besides: for since it is of a moist nature* while the Earth is
carried from the Air about it, the Water i^ somewhat left behind; as we may
see in a small vessel, which is mo^e la^ge then deep: for if it be moved
forward, the Water will leap back to the opposite part, and will oftentimes
poize it self hither and thither, seeking an aequilibration: when therefore
the Earth is a little carried forward, and the water (as it were) left behind,
being out of his Aequilibrium, or aquall poize, it will run to the other
part, but beyond the true poize* forth violence of the motion oppressed into
it in the beginning, from thence, for the same cause, it will tend again to
the opposite part, doing this oftentimes, seeking an equal weight, wherein it
may rest: so that if the Earth should at any times rest from her natural
motion, the Water would also leave off the Libration to and fro. But because
the circumvolution of the Earth is imagined to be perpetual, the libration of
the sea is also per petuall: so far forth then that this motion is of the
continent or Earth, it is only accidental in the Water, neither besides his
proper nature, neither according to nature: But so far forth as the Water is
in some sort moved in the Earth, it may be said to be according to nature: for
it always seeks the lower place, because it cannot aequally follow the motion
of the Earth. Hence they give the reason, why this motion is not perceived in
Lakes and Rivers, as well as in the maine Ocean: for since the motion of the
Earth is not very sensible, it cannot be perceived but in a great mass of
waters. The reasons to confirm this opinion, besides the refutation of other
opinions, are chiefly these two. If the Water by it self should be moved
without the motion of the Earth, it must needs be moved either according to, or
against his nature. But neither of them can be granted; First, if according to
Nature, there would not be one only motion of one body according to nature, but
many, which is denied by Ar^stotle; If besides, or against Nature, some violent
motion would be perpetual, which also seems absurd: wherefore it must needs
follow, that the sea should move accidentally: For since the Water is contained
outwardly of the Air, internally of the Earth: And that part of the Air which
touches the Water is of Aristotle called Stagnans or standing still, not
flowing, as that which is above the Earth, but is only troubled variously with
winds. This libration or motion of the Water cannot be caused by the wind or
Air, wherefore it must proceed from the motion of the Earth. The second reason
may be drawn from the quantity of tides in diverse places of the Earth, for it
is ^ound by experience, that the Water swells higher and greater in the maine
Ocean, then in other lesser Seas. For it is observed, that about great
Britain, it mounts sometimes above 80 cubits: also it oftener ebbes and flows
in lesser currents, because the spaces of this libration are shorter and
stra^ghter: or because besides the motion of ebbing and flowing, which the
Mediterranean seas partake from the Ocean, at Hercules Pillars, they have a
proper libration in their own channels: whence it comes to pass that* in some
narrow seas, as in the Euripus, besides Euboia, the sea seven times a day ebbs
and flows: whereof there can no sufficient reason be given from the motion of
the Moon or other cause whereto other Philosophers ascribe this effect: This
opinion of Caesalpinus seems to carry great likelihood of reason and congruity
with experience: yet because it is grounded on the circular motion of the
Earth, which seems a paradox to most men, I dare not warrant it otherwise then
probable* neither can it well stand with the grounds of our Magneticall
Philosophers, because they affirm the whole sphere of the Earth and Water
together with the Air to move round with one Uniform revolution, in such sort
as one should not move to the opposite part, or stay behind the other; as they
would have it here to do. There is yet another opinion more commonly defended
in the schools of natural Philosopher^; that this motion of the sea is to be
ascribed to the Moon, as the principal cause: others again, as they admit
the Moon to have her operation in this effect, join other causes to it: and
indeed this seems more probable: for there want not arguments in Patricius and
other later writers, to show that the Moon cannot be the sole cause of this
motion: First, because this motion is not observed in all seas, Lakes, and
Rivers, whe^eupon nevertheless the Moon has the like dominion: But
experience shows the contrary: for besides fresh Rivers it is manifest by
observation of trauailers, that this ebbing and flowing is not to be found in
the Hirc^^, Mantian and Dead sea, also in Maotis Palus in the Pontick:
Proponti^ke, Ligurian and Narbon streytes, neither in the Tyrrhene sea:
Moreover it is not observed in a great part of the Red sea: Neither can the
Narrowness of the channel excuse it, because these seas are great, and also
for the most part within the Tropicke of Cancer, and therefore exposed
sometimes to the perpendicular beams of the Moon. Secondly: If the Moon
should by her own ^orce excite and move these water^, then would it move those
seas, which it does move, Altogether and not only in parts. The contrary
whereof we may find: First in the Red Sea, which in the beginning and end,
Ebbes and flows, but in the middle not at all* moreover the Mediterranean sea
ebbes and flows as one sea, on all the coasts of Africa, wherein it is in a
sort divided* and yet those seas, with which it is joined, as the Tyrrhene,
Ligurian, and Gallican Seas, feel not any such motion. Thirdly; it is
objected, that if the Moon were the only cause of this Fl^x and Reflux of the
sea, then those seas, which are said in whole to move, should aequally flow in
hight: but this is contradicted by experience: because some flow higher, and
some lower, As for example: The Adriatic sea in the inmost creek near Venice
swells near four foot in hight; but the rest of it, not above two ^oote:
which increase is likewise observed in the Aegean, Cretian, Ionian, and Cyprian
Seas, also the Syrian and Egyptian, even to Portus Ferinae: But from mons
pulcher to the Herculean streytes, it increases above two foot in length: But
without these straights, the same Ocean by the coasts of Portugal and Biscay,
and France, the Sea rises usually to 15 foot in hight; and near the coasts of
Belgia and Britain 18 foot: At the confines of Bristoll to 60, and thence to
the borders of S. Michael to 60: But at the coasts of Aethiopia, near the
Atlantic shores, it rises not higher then in the Adriatic Sea: But near the
Islands of Madera, the Canaries, and S. Thomas, it surpasses not the hight of
Venice: But in America, on the hithermost coast from Florida Sinus Mexicanus,
the coasts of Brasile and Pari^, more then three thousand leagues, even to the
Magellane straights it increases almost to two Palms breadth: but farther
South to Panama, and all those Southern shores, the ebbing and flowing is of
an excessive hight, as may appear by the coasts of Cambaia, India, and
Taprobana: Thirdly, if the Moon by a natural virtue should move the Waters of
the Sea, then would it move the Ocean and the Mediterranean Seas in the course
of winds, with the same Flux and Refluxe in the same winds. But this thwarts
experience, which is thus proved: The Mediterranean Sea, when as it flows in
the Adriaticke, Ionian, and Sycilian Seas, the Water flows toward the Land,
when the Moon is (as the Mariners speak) in Sirocco and in Maestro; but
ebbes or flows back from the Land, when it is in Graeco atque Garbinio: And
contrariwise the Ocean swells when the Moon is in Graece and Garbinio; but
asswageth it self again when it is carried in Sirocco and Maestro. Fourthly,
if the ebbing and flowing of the Sea should follow the Moon, then all places
in the same distance should ebb and flow alike at like hours. But the
contrary is proved by an experiment of Patricius, who reports, that at the same
hour places distant 20 degrees, have bin seen to ebb or flow alike, and the
places betwixt also to vary and observe no just proportion. Fourthly, if these
Surges should be stirred up by the Moon, then the same superficies of the
Water the same hour should be carried by the Moon: but this i^ contrary to
the observations of Mariners, who have observed, that on the Norman coasts,
and that of Picardy to Callice, the Tide happens the ninth hour from
Midnight: but ten miles from the shore not a full hour, but at the twenty and
sixth mile from the middle of the channel, and under the same Meridian at 22
hours. Fifthly, if the ebbing and flowing should proceed from the Moon, then
should the Water at the same hours increase and decrease: but this is opposite
to observation: for at Venice the Sea is known to flow sometimes for seven,
sometimes for eight; but ebbes in fewer hours, But about the mouth of the
River Senega in the Atlanticke, it is coming in fo^re hours, but goes not
back under eight: so about Go^umniae Ostia, the Tide is coming in seven
hours, but goes back in five. Sixthly, if the Waters flow by the Moon, then
should they be drawn and carried by the light of the Moon: because all
action is by a touching, and the Moon touches the Water by her light: but it
is found by experience, that at midnight, when the Moon is most distant in her
light, our seas do no less ebb and flow then when it is present: and so the
Seas near the Antipodes do ebb and flow, when the Moon is present with us.
7ly, if the Moon were the only ancient cause of this motion, then the same
light being present the same age^^ moving, the same effect should necessarily
follow. But we find that it produces two, contrary one to the other: because
in her ascent to the Meridian it is supposed to lift up the water, but a little
declining from the Meridia^, it is thought to depresse and assuage the waters,
8ly if this effect were ascribed to the light of the Moon, then when the Moon
shines not, there should be no such motion* because contrary causes produce
contrary effects. But we observe the same ebbing and flowing in the
co^iun^tion or New Moon, when she has no light, as in the full Moon, when
with full face she beholds the Sea: for in both these times we have highest
^ides These and many more arguments are urged by Patricius, to show that the
Moon cannot be the cause of this motion in the Sea: of the other opinion, that
this effect is ascribed to the Sun* amongst. others I find the chief patron to
be T^^esius, who taught that the Sea was moved in this wise, because it would
avoid the operation of the Sun, fearing lest it should be too much dissolved
into vapors, and so perish. But this opinion seems far more weak then the
former. For first I would ask concerning this motion, wherein it is thought to
avoid the Suns heat, whether it be voluntary, or necessary? It cannot be
Voluntary, o^ a free action, because the Sea is no living creature, to which
only such a motion is incident: If it be necessary, then it is Natural or
Violent: It cannot be Natural, because according to Aristotle, one Body can
have but one natural motion, but the Water being a simple Body, has another
motion to fall downwards toward the Center: wherefore it cannot also admit of
this. It cannot be violent* first, because no violent thing can be perpetual.
Secondly* no cause can be though^ upon External* which should cause this
violent motion: and if any such cause there be found, then is not this of
Telesius the first and principal cause, since it is referred to a farther
cause: Thirdly, no cause can here be shown according to this opininion, why
all other waters, as fresh Rivers, should not likewise strive to ^ide
themselves from the face of the Sun. Fourthly, he should give a reason why in
the Belgicke and Armoricke shores* which are far more distant from the Sun, the
same motion is no less eminent then in Taprobana, which is subject to the
Torride Zone; and why in the Island of S. Thomas, which is immediately under the
Equatour, there is not a greater working of the Water then at Venice. Fifthly,
that which Telesius brings to confirm his opinion, is no less warrantable
then the maine point in controversy. In the Summer (says he) the flo^ds are
lesser* because the Sun raises up thinner vapour^, which are e^sily dissolved:
But in the Winter they are less, because the Sun is of least force, and so
raises up fewer vapo^rs to work upon the Sea: But both these matters are
proved ^alse by experience: first because in the Summer we have as great a
working of the water as at other times: In the Winter also as great, or
greater. Secondly (says the said Author) in the full Moon the motion is
greater, because the much light arising from the Moon, draws up many vapors.
(...) the New Moon; because the Air being refrigerated, the internal Heat of
the sea collecting it self, is made stronger with more vapors: In the
quarters of the Moon, because there is not much light ca^t from the Moon, and
the Heat of the sea is not so much collected by the external cold of the Air:
To all these matters we may easily answer: First, how can the Moon bestow any
light on our seas, when she is with the Antipodes? Secondly, where he says,
that the internal Heat is gathered together, and made stronger by external
cold; 1 First I ask how the sea can send forth these vapors; if the vapors
kept under do raise the sea up; or if the Sea swell with these vapors in her
womb, how can she let them out? 2 How will he prove the Sea naturally to be
hot, since it is one of the cold Elements? Thirdly, where he says, that the
light of the Moon is but in half imparted to the Sea; why should not the Sea
proportionally in half be stirred up? wherefore Patricius and Casman finding
neither the Sun nor the Moon of it self to be a sole or sufficient cause of
this motion* having joined them both together in this causality, and added
besides other particular causes: first (say they) there are two kind of causes
concurring to that effect: either Universal and external; or Particular,
internal and next causes. The Universal causes are two; to wit, the Sun and
the Moon. The Sun (says he) with the heat of his beams and light does
conserve, viuificate, and stir up to action; the Internal and original heat
in all things here below. This Heat being stirred up and viuificated, all
things are made fit for motion* and being so accommodated, are stirred up to
motion, as if from an Internal life they should be promoted to an External:
for as in the prim^ry life of things, the motion and action is shown: in the
Essence, in the secondary, the action and motion outwardly in respect of other
things: so the first and original heat of the Sea* cherished, and stirred up
by the external heat of the Sun, drives the Ocean, and moves it to action* The
Moon also cherishes, preserves, viuificates, nourishes, and stirs up to
motion, all these earthly humors and moistures: and as she daily by hours
beholds the Sun as her darling and by him is (as it were) big-bellied with
lively seeds, so she beholdes her love, the Ocean, days and nights, and fills
the Ocean with these seeds which she receives from the Sun. But this cannot
be performed without her motion, without the diffusion of her light, without
the effusion of her influe^ce and seeds; wherefore it cannot otherwise be, but
all our humors and moistures should be made fruitful, conceive life, bring
forth, bear fruit, and be stirred up to life and motion, by the motion of the
Moon, through the Aspect of the Moon with the Sun, with the Earth, with the
Ocean: wherefore all lower moistures are subject to the power of the Moon:
Notwithstanding all are not aequally under her dominion; since all are not of
the same substance, of the same Rarity, or density, or of the same Heat. (...)
reasons all ^aged from the Caspian Sea, may be ascribed to the thickness of
the water, not suffering any thing to sink into it: So that for the crassitude
of it, it must needs be heavier then other Water, and so, more unapt for
motion. Thirdly, it is recorded by some that in the inmost creek of the Red
sea there is a motion* and so in the mouth of it, by reason of the Ocean; but
in the middle no such matter is to be observed: which strange effect some
ascribe to the Thinness of the Water (one of the cause^ above named) begetting
fewer and weaker Vapors and Spirits: which either streightway breath out, or
are too weak to raise up the Water. This thinness is confirmed to be in that
middle part of the Red sea, not only out of the authority of John Barro, out of
the experiments of John de Castro, which found this Water to be clear and
liker to Crystal, then that of other parts; but also by the clear
perspicuity of it: For in almost all the sea may the bottom plainly be seen.
Fourthly, we read the like of the Baltic sea: that it never ebbes or flows,
which Bartholomew Kackerman, that countri-man, ascribe^, 1. To the Narrowness
of the channel: 2. To the depth of it,. 3. To the northern situation: which
cause I think he might well have spared, considering that more Northern seas
then that, both ebb and flow. Fifthly: it is reported of Maotis, Pontus, and
Proppotis, that they flow from the one to the other, but never ebb: For
Maotis flows into the Pontick sea as from the Higher place into the lower: and
the Pontick into the Propontick, and Aegean for the same cause, but return not
back again. But besides this cause of this declinity of the ground, it stands
with reason, that the Water should be fresher then that in other places of the
sea: For first, all of them receive into them many and great Rivers of fresh
Water: for Maotis Palus, besides other partakes of Tanais. Into Pontus fall
according to Arcanus report about 52 fresh Rivers: whereof the chief are
Ister, Hispanis, Boristhenes, Tanais, Phasis, all great currents. Secondly the
forenamed fishes, which delight in fresh springs are here also found in
abundance, Besides this freshness (if we believe ancient writers, as Pliny
and others) it is a sea of extraordinary depth, so that for this cause some
part of it was called Negrepont, or the blacke-sea: Which blackness was by
some, thought to arise from the depth of it: wherein in many places, they could
sound no bottom. Sixthly, it is ^estified of the Tyrrhene, Ligurian, and Narbon
seas, that they suffer not this motion: The cause of which is only ascribed to
the extreme depth; for few or no Rivers are disburthened into it, except
Rhodanus: We are in the next place to show, why this working of the sea is more
in one place then in another: The reasons whereof (although many be thought on)
are chiefly reduced either to the exc^sse of saltness in the water, or the
narrowness of the channel, into which from an open place the sea is to be
disburthened, or the shallowness of the shore: All which either concurring
together, or taken by themselves apart, may cause the sea to swell more in one
place the^ another; which may, as the former, be proved by diverse Instances.
Four Seas are more particularly noted to flow and swell higher then other. The
first is that compasses about Europe* from Hercules pillars, which according
to diverse shores, takes diverse names; as the Portugal, Cantabrian, Gallican,
Belgicke, and British Seas. And in the New World, or America, the Southern Sea
shall be the second: The third is that of Cambaia and India: The fourth is
that, which compasses about Taprobana: for the three last, the causes
fore-specified, seem manifestly to concur: for Taprobana is reported by
Pliny to have a shore not above six paces deep, and the Sea to be green and
ouergrowne with weeds, in so much that the tops of the weeds fret their ships;
and later Writers report, that the Land is known to augment the confines by
reason of the shallowness of the Water: so as we have showed that some Seas
neither ebb nor flow by reason of the depth of the channel; so on the other
side must it follow, that other Seas ebb and flow more by reason of the
shortness and shallowness of the shores: for of contrary c^uses proceed
ordinarily contrary effects. Moreover it stands with experience, that in any
Water or Sea, where the flood is stopped and hindered by quicke-sands, it
returns with greater force, as it were enraged, and swel^ so much the higher,
which is the cause why in the coasts of Cambaia it is li^ted up so high,
because the shores are so shallow, and so short, and exposed to impediments,
that in the ebb^, the Sea ^^ns back many miles, and leaves the sand^
uncovered: Whence it must needs return with greater violence. This also is
found in the Indian Sea, and near Panama in the Southern Sea, where the Sea
running back for two leagues, certain Islands and Lands are left naked; so that
in these three Seas here named, the Sea seems to enlarge its limits in breadth
more then in other places; to which we may ascribe this effect. For the Seas
about Europe, we may pronounce also that for the most part they have short and
shallow shores, as may easily appear in the confines of Belgia: But it may be
objected of the English shores, that they swell very high, albeit the depth of
the Water in the middle is found to be 144 foot: Here must we have recourse to
the other cause, the flowing of a large and wide sea into a narrow channel:
for the large torrents of water running swiftly into a narrow channel, being
hindered on both sides by the shores, from spreading it self in breadth, is
enforced to swell in hight: so that the effect is rather to be ascribed to the
violence of a great current, enbosoming it self into a streite channel: which
may more evidently show it self in 3 instances: For in the streite channels of
Zeland and Holland it is lifted up about three foot: At Bristoll in England,
by reason of a greater force of Waters running from the Sea into a more narrow
channel, and seconded by the maine Ocean at the back, it swells to the hight
of 60 foot: In the Armorean seas, where larger seas are emptied into more
narrow streites then the former, it increases to 90 foot: Out of which
experiments may we plainly collect, that to the increase of the moti^n of the
sea besides the saltness of the Water, two other causes are concurring; to
wit, the shallowness of the shore, and the streitnesse of the channel,
wherein a great and large sea is to be ex^^erated. This may lastly be farther
illustrated from the disparity of these seas with others, for in the
Adriaticke, Egaan, Ionian, and almost all the African sea^, the sea seldom
swells to so great a measure: whereof the cause is as well the depth of the
seas, as the equality of the shores: for as the depth is a cause that sometimes
it flows not at all, and the inequality and shortness of the shore that it
flows high: so a mean hight of the Waters from the bottom, and a more equal
figuration of the coasts may be a cause of an indifferent working of the
Water. Hitherto we have showed the variety of motion in the sea, in regard of
the diversity of places: we are next to speak something concerning the
variation of it in regard of the times, which, though it properly appertain
not to Geography, yet am I loath to leave it out, because the discourse is
pleasant. Concerning which point, the Mariners make six degrees of change in
the tides according to the times. First diurnall, whereof we speak in this
discourse: The second Hebdomedary, or weekly which Possidonius called monthly
or weekly; because it is distinguished by several weeks of a month: but
tarries not till the end of the month: For it is found by experience of
Nauigatours that a day before the conjunction of the Moon with the Sun, and
the day of conjunction, and a day afterward, the seas in the maine Ocean have
their greatest flows and ebbes, being lifted higher and laid lower down, and
then the tides are most swift: The fourth day from the conjunction, the tide is
less and less swift: The fifth yet less then then the former; and the sixth
day less then the fifth: But in the seventh day, which is a day before the
quarter, and in the eight following, wherein it is halfe-faced; and in the
ninth, which is a day after the quarter, the sea is, as it were, dead, not much
stirring, neither much ebbing or much flowing; which was (as it seems) only
observed by Pliny in the Euboian Euripus; but whether it so happen elsewhere,
I leave to men experienced in these matters; This motion as it does increase
according to the age of the Moon: So it is said proportionally to decrease
again. The third motion is monthly, which seems in the time of the
conjunction, wherein the sea-tides are highest and swiftest. The fourth is
called motus semestris or six-monthly, happening at the times of the
Equinoctial; differing one from the other like months; The fifth is called
Trimestris, because it happens only in three months distance. The last is
Annual which Patricius witnesses that himself saw in Liburnia, in the month
of January. These motions I carelessly pass over, because the distinction
seems to me full of uncertainty and s^arce warranted; and such experiments as
are brought for the proof of it concern rather particular places, then the
general nature of the sea.

3 Hitherto of the general motion of the sea: The Special is that, which is
observed in some special places.

1 It is probable that the sea is carried somewhere from East to West, and
somewhere from North to South, and contrariwise.

It has been a received opinion amongst Philosophers of this later age, that
the sea by the rapture of the heavens should be moved round, as it were, in a
diurnall course: which they have l^boured to prove by diverse experiments.
First, because it is observed by Mariners that a ship can well sail from
Spain into America with an indifferent wind in 30 days, when she can hardly
return under three months, which they ascribe to the circular motion of the
sea: For a ship going from East to West sails with the Water, but from West to
East against the stream, so that the one must needs be swifter and the other
slower. Their second experiment to confirm this point, is of a ship sailing
from Spain to Holland, which may as they say swifter return back then go
thither. To this motion of the Water from East to West, Julius Scaliger has
added another, which he would have to be from North to South, from Terra
Laboratoris Southward. But Patricius not denying these motions, would have many
more in diverse seas, not admitting any universal circular motion enforced by
the heavens, but various motions diversely disposed in diverse seas, for which
he gives many instances, some whereof we will here relate. First going about
to disprove Scaligers opinion and experience, he brings the experiment of the
Portugal Nauigatours, who testify that they came from Mosambicke of the side
on Madagascar into Malebar in 28, sometimes in 30, other times in 35 days:
which is far from the account of Scaliger, who would not have a ship to pass
it under three months, out of which he labored to prove this motion of the
sea, because the ship was longer a going then returning. The second
experiment he takes from the observation of one John Eupolius, who willing to
pass from the port of S. Blasi^^, which is beyond the Cape of good hope in
Afric to Melinde toward the Indies, could not go forward by reason that the
currents, (as they call them (drove them back from Melinde to Pate, a town by
this side of the Indyes: whence he would conclude that the Water should in
this place rather run from West to East toward the Indies. The third
experiment is drawn from the testimony of Thomas Lope, who when he was to
pass from the Cape of good hope toward the Indies, testifies that the current
of the Water was so violent, that it oftentimes leapt into the forepart of the
ship. The fourth is from the testimony of Johannes Guietanus, who putting
forth from Tidor, came into Spain before the sixteenth month: This journey
from Tidor to the Cape of good hope, contains 55 leagues, which makes 1650
miles: from this to the Island of S. Helena by the relation of another pilot are
1400 miles: from whence to the Equinoctial circle are 1600 miles: from hence
to Spain by the computation of degrees, are not above 1520 miles: of all which
the sum is, 7114. Now if we take out of sixteen months 49 days, wherein
the ship against Cape of good hope, was carried hither and thither (which the
mariners call Voltegiair^) and 70 other days wherein it stood still in the
coasts of Guinea in Melacia, there will remain a whole year spent in this
journey: which days if we divide by those 7114 miles, there will be allotted
to every day no more then 19 miles, which evidently shows that this journey
was most short in respect of the swiftness of the Nauigations. For if the
Ocean should drive his currents to St H^l^na even to the west, they had ended
their journey in a far lesser time, because those currents (as they say)
carry the ship. But this journey was accomplished very slowly: wherefore the
currents were not carried from East to West, a^ S^aliger relates. Likewise from
sundry other experiments, he goes about to prove that it constantly cannot be
observed to flow from North to South, as the said Scaliger affirms, but that
it is various according to diverse places. Nevertheless, that the Sea should
have a perpetual current from the Poles toward the Equatou^, seems to stand
as well with Reason, as Experience: For all men must needs confess, that the
motion of the Heavens under the Equatour, must be much swifter then nearer the
Poles, because the circles of it are greater near the Equatour. Now* by how
much swifter the motion of the Heaven is, by so much more is the Rarefaction of
the Air, or other Elementary bodies right under it: whether it be Air (as it
is most probable) or Fire as Peripatetick^ imagine: But howsoever we determine
that controversy, it must needs be that the Air must suffer Rarefaction,
answerable to the swiftness of the motion: if not immediately by the swift
motion of the Heavens, yet by a consequent by the greater fervor of the Fire,
which under the Equatour must needs be greater and of more force then about the
Poles* whence the parts of the Air under it, must partake more degrees of
Heat, and by necessary consequence suffer a greater Attenuation. 2 The
Sunbeams being darted perpendicularly, cannot choose but attenuate and
rarifie the Air more under the Line, then in places more declining to the
Poles. This ground thus laid, these two consectaries will follow: 1 That the
Air thus attenuated, must needs take up a large^ place then it before
possessed, which cannot be but by enlarging it self toward either Pole,
either North or South; whence the parts of the Air in those places must be
more thickened and condensated. 2 That these parts of the Air carried toward
the Poles, and meeting with the cold Regions of the North and South, must by
condensation turn into water, and so fall down in Rain or Snowes; whence the
Water increasing near the Poles perpetually, must have a perpetual current
toward the Equatour, where they are again exhausted in vapors by the Heat of
the Sun; in such sort, that as well the parts of the Sea betwixt themselves,
as the waters in regard of the Air, may proportionally maintain themselves by
the mutual transmutation. To this reason some have added another, that the
Sun soiourning in the Southern Signs, is nearer to the Earth, then when he
is in the North, by the whole Latitude of his excentrice, and therefore of
greater force to draw the water toward the South: But whether this Reason be of
any great force, I will not spent time to dispute: let every man use his own
judgment. It seems to me a conjecture not improbable, that these currents may
be also varied according to diverse reasons of the year; as also according to
diverse channels, by diverse crossings and doublings of the Tides, as we find in
diverse places: but I will not be too bold in this opinion, because I love not
to walk without a guide in these uncertainties.

4 Of the Natural motion of the Sea we have spoken: It remains we speak
somewhat of the Violent: The Violent motion is that which is stirred up by
winds.

The consideration of winds is either absolute or respective: Absolute I call
that wherein the Natural effects and properties of the winds are handled;
which properties belong to the natural Philosopher, they being (according to
Aristotle) a Natural body imperfectly mixed: The Respe^tiue consideration is
that wherein the winds are considered in respect to the ^errestriall Globe.
This Respect again twofold, either in regard of the whole Sphere of the
Earth, whereof they design out the points of the Horizon by certain lines
called Rhumbas; or else in respect of the Sea, to which they give a motion. The
former respect we have handled in our first book of Geography: The later is
more proper to this place; and howsoever the wind is an exhalation, common as
well to the Earth as to the Sea, affecting both with some alteration; yet
because it more nearly affects the Sea as his proper Province and Dominion,
and has for the most part been most observed of Sea, men and Mariners; We
thought fit to treat of it in this place. Of winds some are uncertain and
various, which in all places interchangeably supply their turns, keeping no
certainty or regularity in times or places: others are called, set or standing
winds, because they are observed to blow at certain time, and places* of both
which, as much as concerns our purpose, we shall speak in these two Theoreme^.

1 To some certain places, at certain times belong certain winds.

These winds are by some, called Anniuersary because they blow at a certain
season every year; of these there are many kinds mentioned by Nauigatours.
The first and chiefest is that which they call the Etesian wind, which is
observed to blow every year from the Northeast about the rising of Dog-starre,
and oftentimes continues about 40 days. This wind drives the Seas from Pontus
into the Egean Sea, even so far as Egypt. In the second place may we range
such winds as are called Chelidonian, because they arise at the first coming
of the Swallows. It blows sometimes from the Direct-west, so that of some it
is taken to be the same. Sometimes from the North-west, so that with others it
is accounted among the North winds: These Chelidonian winds driving from the
North or North-west still fill all the Mediterranean even to the coasts of
Syria and Palestine, and continue in the summer time for many days together.
In the third place may we account that wind, which Columbus perceived on the
coast of Portugal coming over the Atlanticke Ocean, which at some times of
the year was carried higher, at other times cleaving (as it were) to the
bosom of the Sea, whence he probably coniectured that it was derived from
some moist land, whereon he adventured on the first search of America and
laid the first work of that discovery. Fourthly to these winds may be
reduced those yearly flowings of the Persian and Indian Seas, which the
Portugal mariners call Motions. The Persian Sea suffers such a kind of motion
every year while the Sun runs through the Southern degrees, and when he
arriues at the end of Sagittarius it is shaken with an extraordinary great
tempest: On the contrary side the Indian Sea, while the Persian is moved, is
observed to rest without any great motion; and when the Persian is still, it
suffers great motion, especially when the Sun first enters into Cancer. This
last motion seems to be not only derived from the Provincial winds, but some
other concurrent causes: whether these winds are the cause of the currents
before spoken of, is a very disputable point, which I leave to others to search
out. Of every set wind blowing a part of the year on the coast of America,
Acosta treats at large, to which he ascribes the currents forespoken of in
this chapter.

2 The violence of winds makes the Sea sometimes in some places, transcend his
ordinary bounds.

How far the Sea by violence of winds has trespassed on the land, many have
learned to their great loss and calamity. It is observed sometimes in the
Venetian shores, that the Sea driven with winds swells so high, that ouerflowing
all the banks and channels, the Inhabitants are enforced to row in boats from
house to house: Their cesternes are infected with Salt Water, and their
precious waters in vaults and cellars spoiled. The like has heretofore been
found (if we will credit Histories) in the Belgicke Sea, on which the Northwest
winds blow with such vehemence and so long that it brake down the ordinary
banks; and in Zeland and Holland swallowed up many towns with infinite
multitudes of people. Which seems to be warranted by a report, I have heard of
many trauaylers, that in a calm tide the topps of towers and steeples have
been seen above the water. Besides these instances, we may add the testimony
of Strabo and Aristotle in his book de munda: with diverse other relations of
strange inundations whereof we shall have more occasion to speak hereafter.

CHAP. VII. Of the Depth, Situatio, and Termination of the Sea.
1 THe Absolute proprieties of the Sea being hitherto passed over: we will
consider next the comparatiue: which agree to the Sea no otherwise then in
respect or comparison with the Earth; which are chiefly thre^; 1 Depth, 2
Situation, 3 Termination.

2 The Depth or Profundity is the distance betwixt the Bottom and the
Superficies of the Water.

To find out the Absolute depth of the Sea, is a matter of the greatest
difficulty, and by many thought impossible, in respect as well of the immensity
of it in many places where no line could, as of the various places, too many to
be serched out by man's industry: yet where absolute science fails, there
probable conjecture takes place, and is best accepted, which we will venture
to propose in this o^r Theoreme.

1 The ordinary depth of the Sea is commonly answerable to the ordinary hight
of the maine land above the water: and the whirle-pooles and extraordinary
depths answer to the hight of the mountains above the ordinary hight of the
Earth.

It has been a common received opinion among ancient Cosmographers, that the
depth of the Sea being measured by a line and plummet, seldom exceeds two or
three miles, except in some few places near Sueuian shores, and some places
about Pontus observed by Pliny. But as Breedwood a worthy late writer observes,
this position is not to be understood generally, but only of the depth of the
Streits or Narrow Seas, which were perhaps only searched by then ancients who
dwelt far from the maine Ocean: But another account is necessarily to be given
of the maine Ocean. This being a matter of great uncertainty, we will follow
the conceit of the forenamed Author. It has been showed in the former Chapter,
that the most probable opinion concerning the manner of the first separation of
the dry land from the wa^ers would have the Earth by the Creation to be cut
into diverse sluices and channels, apt to receive Water. Now these material
p^rts of the Earth, being taken out to give way to hollownesse, were not
utterly annihilated, but by an almighty hand in some other places, making by
their addition the superficies of the Earth in such places higher then before:
whence by reason it seems to be collec^ed, that the ordinary Eminency of the
hight of the Earth at o^e the Waters, should be answerable to the ordin^ry
depth of the Sea. And if Hills and Mountains be compared, we may s^t them
against the Deepes and extraordinary While-pooles and Gul^es: And so betwixt
the Sea and Land* and the parts of the one and the other we may settle a kind
of agreement and proportion: In a matter of so great uncertainty, no man will
e^pect an evident domonstra^ion.

3 The Site is the position of the Sea in respect o^ the Earth.

Concerning the site of the Sea in respect of the Earth; we must consider the
Water and Earth two ways* First Absolutely as they are Elements and solid
Bodies: Secondly, in respe^t of the superf^^ies of either* if we consider the
whole solid Body of the Water as that of the Earth, we must confess without
all doubt, that the Water has the higher place, being lighter then the Earth;
of which situation we have spoken in the first book: for although some parts
of the Earth are thought (by most as we shall prove) to be above some parts of
the Water, yet is this of no sensible proportion in respect of that vast Mass
of Earth, couched under the Waters betwixt them and the Center of the World.
But the question is here of the superficies of the Water, compared to the
superficies the Earth uncovered, which should be higher in place; of which
shall be this Theoreme.

1 The superficies of the Sea is some-where higher then the superficies of the
Earth, some-where lower.

There has been a great dispute among Philosophers concerning the po^ition of
the Sea in respect of the Land, whether it be higher or lower: some have been
of an opinion, that the Water is higher; which opinion was defended by Tully,
in his Book De Natura Deorum, where he says, that the Sea being placed above
the Earth, yet covering the place of the Earth, is congregated and collected,
neither redounding, nor flowing abroad* which afterward seems to be seconded
by diverse learned Divines, who reducing most things to the supernatural and
first cause, diverse times neglected and ouer-slipt the second. Hence Saint
Basil in his 4 Homily on the Hexameron, lest the water (says he) should
ouerflow and s^red it self out of the place it has occupied, it is commanded
to gather it self together: otherwise what should hinder the Red Sea to
ouer^flow all Egypt, being lower then it self, unless it were manicled with
the Creatours power, as it were with setters: to which also afterward seem to
subscribe Aquin^^, Dionisius, and Catharinus, with diverse other Divines, who
held that the first discovery of the Earth, and the gathering together of the
Waters in the first Creation, was made not by any mutation in the Earth, but by
a violent accu^ulation of the Waters, being (as it were) restrained and bridled
supernaturally, that they could not transcend certain limits and bounds. To
confirm this opinion, some reasons are alleged by modern Philosophers: first
because it is the orde^ of all the Elements amongst themselves, that the Earth,
as the heauiest, should take the lower place* and the water should ascend
above: Secondly, because Mariners coming from the maine Ocean to the Land,
seem to see the land far lower then the Water: Thirdly they allege tha^
place of I^b, where God himself professes, that he has bounded the Water^,
in these words. Hitherto shall thou come, and no farther, and here shall thy
proud waves be stayed. But this opinion seems very improbable* that God in
the first institution of Nature should impose a perp^tuall violence upon
Nature: since w^ ^ee the Creator in other ma^ters to use Nature as his ordinary
^eruant* and to administer the Regiment of things by ^econd causes. Neither
were the authority of these Divines so great in th^se Cosmo^r^phicall
conceits, to ouersway these of the same profession* who could more exactly
judge of these matters. Neither are these reasons of so great validity as to
enforce assent. For first whereas St Basil seems to wonder why the Red Sea
should not ouer^lowe all Egypt, if it were not supern^turally bounded; he
takes that as granted, which is the question in controversy, that the Water is
higher: for which he can produce no other reason, th^n the Testimony of the
sense: but this is very weak, forasmuch as in such matters the sense is
oftentimes deceived, as stands well with the grounds of the perspectiues: for
(as wear there taught) two Parallels will in the end seem to concur so far
as the sight can judge. Now the Sphere of the Heavens, and the Sphericall
segment of the Waters being parallel the one to the other, will necessarily
seem to concur to the end: whence it must needs come to pass, that that
part of the Sea must seem ^o lift it self higher, and contrariwise the
He^uens will seem somewhat lower then indeed they are: and this I take to be
the true cause why the Sea being seen a great way off, may appear raised
above the land whereon we stand. Another reason may be given from the
perpetual Refraction of the usual Lines coming from the Sea to our sight.
For the Air near the Sea being always intermixed with thick watrish vapors
rising up, the Se^ must of necessity be presented in a thicker Medium by a
refracted sight: whence consequently it must seem greater and higher then
indeed it is: for as the Optics teach, all things seem greater and higher in
a thicker Medium. To the other three Reasons brought to confirm this assertion
it is no hard thing to answer. To the first which would out of the order of the
Elements enforce, that the Water is higher ^hen the Earth; I answer (as before)
that if we entirely consider these Elements among^t themselves, we must give
the hight to the Water; for as much as the greatest part of the E^rth lies
^rowned; for that above bea^es no sensible proportion in respect of the parts
of the Earth uncovered. But here we compare not the 2 Elements entirely betwixt
themselves, but the superficies of the Water with the parts of the Earth
uncovered, habitable: which superficies of the earth notwithstanding, this
reason, may be higher then the Water: Secondly, where they produce the
testimony of the sight; for my own part, I can warrant no such experience,
having never launced far into the deep: yet if any such experiment be avouched,
it may easily be answered out of opticall Principles* that coming out of the
maine Ocean toward the land, by reason of the sphericall conue^ity of the
water, interposed between our sight, and the lower part of the land, those
land parcels must needs seem less, as having some parts shadowed from our
fight: whence it must consequently appear lower, as couched almost under
water. From the 3d reason grounded on Scripture, whereon our divines seem most
to depend, nothing else is concluded, but that Almighty God has set certain
bounds and limits which the Waters should not pass: These bounds and limits I
take not to be supernatural, as if the water restrained by such a power should
contain it self, within its own circuit. But natural as clif^s and ^ils,
within which, the waters seems intrenced. This opinion therefore being
disliked, others have labored to defend an opposite position, that the water
is lower then the Earth altogether: which opinion bears more constancy with
the doctrine of Arist. and most of our modern Philosophers. The reason whereon
this assertion is grounded, be chiefly these: 1 If the sea were higher then the
Earth, what should hinder the water of it from flowing ^broad, and ouerwhelming
the Earth: since all men will confess, that the water is by nature disposed to
move downwards to the lower place. If they have recourse to supernatural
^ou^ds, besides that we have spoken concerning the interpretatio^^ of such
places of Scripture, as seem to favor this opinion* we ^nswere as before,
that it is very improbable, that God in the first creation should impose such a
perpetual violence: secondly, we read that in the vniuersal^ deluge wherein
all the world was drowned, God brake open the springs of the deep and opened
the Cataracts of heaven to power down rain continually many days together
upon the Earth: Of which there had been no necessity at all; had the sea been
hea^ed up in such sort as they imagine: For the only withdrawing of that hand
and letting go of that bridle which gave the water that restraint, would have
been ^ufficient to have overwhelmed the whole Earth. The second reason is
taken from Islands in the sea which are nothing else but parts of the land
raised up above the water. Thirdly we find by experience, that a ship carried
with the like wind is driven so swiftly from the port into the open sea, as
from the sea into the port, which could not be done if the sea were higher then
the land: for it must needs be, that a ship if it were to be carried to a
higher place, should be moved slower then if it came from an higher to a lower*
Fourthly all Rivers run into the sea from the inner parts of the land which
is a most evident sign, that the land is higher then the sea; for it is
agreeable to the nature of the water, to flow always to the lower place,
whence we gather that the sea shore, to which the Water is brought from the
land, must needs be lower; otherwise the water in running thither, should not
descend but ascend. This opinion I hold far more probable as being backed by
reason, and the Authority of our best Philosophers: yet not altogether exactly
true (as we shall show hereafter.) But Bartholomew Keckerma^ in a late German
writer holding these 2 former opposite opinions (as it were) in one equal
Balance, labors a reconciliation. In a diverse respect (says he) it is true
that the sea is higher, and that it is lower then the Earth. It is higher in
respect of the shores and borders, to which it so comes that sensibly it swells
to a Globe or a circumference, and so at length in the middle raises up it
self and obtaines a greater hight then in those parts where in the middle of
the sea it declines toward the shore: Of which parts the hight suffer^ such a
decrease, that by how much nearer the shore they shall approach, by so much the
lower they are in respect of the shore: in so much that touching the shore it
self, it is much lower then the Earth. For this opinion our Author pretends a
demonstration: which he grounds on the 4 chapter of Aristotle de Caelo, in his
second book, where he puts down these two positions; which he calls
Hypotheses, or suppositions; First that the Water no less concurrs to the
making of a Globe or circle, then the Earth: for it so descends naturally, that
it does sensibly gather it self together, and makes a swelling, as we see in
small dropps cast on the ground: Secondly the Water makes a circle which has
the same center with the center of the Earth: Out of these grounds would our
Keckerman conclude the water in some places to be higher, in other places to
be lower then the Earth: And hence proceeds he to give an answer to their
reasons who have affirmed the Earth to be higher then the sea: What to think
of the proposition or conclusion we will show hereafter, but in the mean space
I hold this conclusion not rightly inferred out of these premises: For first
whereas he says that the water by nature is apt to gaher it self round into
an orb or sphere, I would demand whether such a roud body has the same
center with the world, or a diverse center: he cannot say that it has a
diverse center, from the center of the Earth: First, because (as we have
demonstrated in our first part) the Earth and the Water have but one center:
and that the Water is concentricall with the Earth: Secondly from the second
proposition or ground of his, out of Aristotle; if he means such a sphaericity
as has the same center with the center of the Earth: I answer, first that he
contradicts himself, because he gives an instance in small dropps cast on the
ground, whose quantity being so small, and conuexity sensible, can in no man's
judgment be concentrick to the Earth. Secondly, out of this ground that the
Sphere of the water is concentrick to the Earth, he confutes himself; for
according to the principles of Geometry, in a Sphere or circle, all the lines
drawn from the center to the circumference must be equal. Then must all
places in the circumference or superficies of a sphericall body be of equal
hight from the center, and by consequence the sea being such a Sphericall body,
cannot have that inequality which Keckerman imagines it to have: wherefore some
other demonstation must be sought for this conclusion. I will go no further
then that I have spoken in the former chapter concerning the figure of the
Water: Where I have probably showed it to be conicall; and out of this may be
easily gathered, how it may be higher then the land in some places, as of the
middle of greater seas, where the head of the Cone is lifted higher; in other,
lower; as in the narrow streits where the increase of the eminency is also
less. The grounds and principles of which we have laid before.

1 The sea in respect of the Earth is higher in one place then another.

Besides the natural conformity of the Water to a conicall figure, (as we have
fore-shewed) whence one part of the superficies must be granted to be higher
then another: we must needs in the sea acknowledge other accidental causes
which produce an inequality in the parts of the sea* The chiefest whereo^ are
the Equality of inclination in all parts of the water to motion: And the
inequality of the channells and shores: whence it comes to pass that the
Water of the sea being every whereof it self equally inclined to motion, is
notwithstanding unequally received into channels, so that in some place, having
(as it were) a large dominion to invade, as in the maine Ocean, it falls lower
and euener: In some other places as streites or narrow seas, the water having a
large entrance from the Ocean, but little or no passage through it, must needs
swell higher, and so one place by accident becomes higher or lower then
another: Which farther to confirm diverse instances may be alleged out of
modern and ancient observations, For diverse histories give testimony that
sundry Kings of Aegipt by cutting the Isthmus or narrow neck of land lying
betwixt the red sea and the Mediterranean, labored to make Africa an Island and
open passage from one sea to the other: but afterward they were persuaded to
desis^ from their enterprise: Some say, because they saw the red sea to be
higher then many parts of Aegipt, and hereupon feared a general inundation of
all Aegipt, if the p^ssage were broken open: Others have delivered that they
feared, that if the passage from one unto another were broke open, and the red
sea having a vent that way, the red sea would become so shallow that men might
wade over it, and so instead of making Africa an Island, it would have been more
joined to the Continent then before. Both opinions consent in this, that the
waters of the red sea were by the perpe^dicular found higher then in the
Mediterranean: Moreover it is observed that the sea on the west part of America
commonly called Mare Del Zur, is much higher then the Atlantic Sea which
bordereth on the Eastern part of it: which gave way to the conjecture of some,
that the Isthmus betwixt Panama and Nombre D^ Dios had been long since cut
through to have made a passage into the Pacifick Sea, without sailing so ^arre
about by the straits of Magellane; had not many inconveniences been feared out
of the inequality in the hight of the water. The like inequality is observed by
Verstegan in the sea betwixt England and France: For according to his
conjecture, France and England being one Continent heretofore, and joined by a
narrow neck of land, betwixt Dover and Callais the water on one side was higher
then on the other: which he probably collects out of the sundry flats and
shallowes at this day appearing on the East side as well on the coasts of
England as of Flanders, especially between Dover and Callis, called by some,
our Ladies Sands, about three English miles in length* Out of which and sundry
other probabilities, he labors to prove that all the Low Countries were
heretofore enueloped with the sea; till such time as the narrow land being
either by Nature or Art cut through, and the Water allowed a free passage, it
became dry land: but this point we shall discuss hereafter in place
convenient.

4 In the next place we are to consider the termination of the sea: The
termination is the bounding of the sea within certain limit^.

5 The Limit is the margent or border of land wherein any sea is circumscribed.

The sea is bounded by the land, as the land by the sea: In respect of which
termination some seas are called Maine seas, others narrow. The maine seas are
four; to wi^, the Atlantic which takes it is name from the mountain Atlas,
by which on the west side it passes, and diuides Europe and Africa from
America* 2 The Ethiopian sea running on the west side of Aethiopia* 3 The
Indian Sea having the East Indies on the North* 4 Mare Del Zur or the South
sea, situate on the South side of America: Which four in respect of other may
be called Maine Oceans* The lesser sea^ are either called Creekes, or streits;
A Creek is a place where the water (as it were) embosomes it self into the
land, having an ^ntrance large from the Ocean, and most commonly streytned
inwardly, but no passage through: A Creek again may be divided into the
greater or lesser: Under the former in a large sense may we comprehend the
whole Mediterran^an sea* for as much as* the ^ea from the Main^ Atlantic Ocean
by an inlet is ingulfed into it, but finds no passage out any other way,
howsoever it invades a large territory. The lesser Creekes are again
distinguished into the Eastern and Western: The chief Creekes found out
toward the East are six in number. 1. Sinus magnus which lies betwixt Mangus
and India extra Gangem teaching as far as the region of Chal^i^. 2. Sinus
Gang^ticus which is comprehended betwixt Aurea Chersonesus, and India intra
Gangem. 3* Sinus Canthi, commonly called Canthi-colpus. 4. Sinus Persicus,
bordering on Persia, and called by Plutarch the Babilonian Sea. 5. Sinus
Arabicus, which is commonly called the Red S^a. 6. Sinus Barbaricus, which by
Pliny is termed Sinus Tr^gloditicus and at this day Golpho de Melinde. The
Creekes lying Westwardly are chiefly these; First Sinus Sarmaticus lying
toward the North, between Denmark and Normay, which is divided into Sinus
Sinnicus and Bodi^us, which is called commonly the Baltic Sea 2 Sinus
Granuicus dividing the Muscouites from the C^relij Northward* it is commonly
called the White Sea. 3 Sinus Mexicanus bordering on the city of Mexico in
America, amongst these, some would number Mare Pacificum, or Mare D^l Zur: but
this we thought fitter to call a maine Sea, then a creek, being
extraordinarily large in quantity. A Strait is a narrow Sea between two Lands;
of such Straits these were ancie^tly known, to wit, 1 Fretum Graditanum, or
the Straits of Gibraltar of 7 Miles distance, dividing Spain from Barbary 2
Fretum Magellanni^u^, found out by Magellane, which diuides A^erica P^ruana
from the Southern land, 3 Fretum Anian, situate betwixt the western shores of
America, and the Eastern borders of Tartary. Besides these there have bin
discovered 3 more, (to wit) 1 Pretum Dauis, found out by captain Dauis in the
year 1586, which lies toward Groenland. ^ Fretum N^souicum* or Way gate, near
Noua Zembla, discovered by the Holla^ders in the year 1614. 3 Fretum de Mayre
found out by William Schoute^ a Bauarian, taking his name from Isaa^ le M^yre,
by whose advice and persuasion he undertook hi^ voyage. But some of these
latt^^ streits here mentioned, for ought I know, may b^tter be reckoned
amongst Creekes, forasmuch as they have not as yet found any passage through,
though with great loss and danger they have often attempted the Discovery.
Concerning the bounding of the Sea with the land, we will insert th^se
Theoremes.

1 The Water is so divided from the dry land, that the quantity of Water is
greater in the South Hemispheare, of Land in the Northern.

That most part of the dry land is situate toward the North, will easily
appear by instance. For toward the North are placed the great Continents of
Europe, Asia, almost all Africa, and the greatest part of America: But in the
South Hemispheare, we find only a little part of Africa and America, besides
the South Continent, which we cannot imagine to be so great in quantity, as it
is painted in our ordinary Mappes: forasmuch as all place^ at the first
discovery are commonly described greater then they are. The reason I take to
be this, that the first draught is always confused and imperfect, wherein a
region discouers it self unto us under a more simple figure, neglecting
curiosities; but after a longer and more exact search of any Region, will be
found in many places ingulfed with diverse Bays, and variously indented; in
such sort, as the bound Line compassing it round, making an inordinate figure,
and less regular, cannot contain so much land as first it might seem to
promise. Moreover we may further observe, that those places which in the first
discovery have been taken for the maine Continent, or at least for some greater
part of Land, have afterward upon more curious examination, been found cloven
into many lesser Islands: As in America, Cuba in the time of Columbus; and
California of late, thought to be a part of the Continent, and so described
almost in all our Mapps; yet since by a Spanish Chart taken by the Hollanders,
discovered to be an Island. The like instance we have in Terra del Fuog^, which
since the time Magellan, was held a part of the South Continent, till Schouten
by sailing round about it* found it divided from the main l^nd by Fr^^um de
Mayre, carrying the name of the Master of the ship in his discovery. Neither
is it much to be doubted, but that in that large tract delineated out in the
Globe for the South-Indies, are contained many Islands, di^ided one from the
other by streites and narrow Seas, which must subtract much from the quantity
of the dry land; so that of necessity it must be granted, that the Northern
Hemispheare takes up the greatest part of the dry land as the other of the
Water. Wherefore that place of Esdras where he says, That Almighty God
allotted (...) paris to the E^^th, and the (...) Water; must r^ther seem
improbable, or suffer anot^er interpretation then that of the anci^nts. For out
of credible conjecture drawn from the view of the (...) of the Terrestri^^l
Globe, we shall hardly collect suc^ a prop^rt^on: In this comp^rison of the
N^rth^rne H^misphe^^^ with the Southern* we shall find ^ kind of Harmony
betwixt the Heavens and the Earth: For, as Trauailers report, the Northern
parts abound with more stars, and of greater magnitude then the other toward
the South; so the Terrestrial Sphere disco^ers unto us more con^inent*
greater Il^nds, and of more no^^, in the North then ^n the South.

2 The whole Globe of the Earth is invi^oned round from the East and the west
with sea, dividing ^he North from the South.

To prove this Theoreme we need go no farther then the famous voyages of
Magellane, Drake, Candish, and Scho^ten; Whereof the first attempted, the first
passage through Fretum Magel^anicum, and gave it the name, though he could not
out-^iue his intended iourny. The two next followed the same way, and the last
found out a new passage through Fretum de Mayre, as we have formerly mentioned.
Whence we may ea^^ly deduce this Corollary, that the Southern continent, not
yet perfectly discovered, is either One, or (which is most probable) ^any
Islands: forasmuch as by sailing round about ^t, they have found it every where
compassed round with Sea. The like may be coniectured of the other parts of the
world, on the Northern side, whereof we shall speak in this next Theore^.

3 It is probable that the Earth is compassed round with the water from North
to South.

I know nothing which has exercised the wits and indu^trie of the Nauigatours
of our age, more then the finding out of a passage Northward to Cathay, and so
to the East Indies, which controversy as yet remains altogether unanswered,
and awaites the happiness of some new discovery. In which difficult passage,
wherein many have spent both their lives and hopes, it may seem enough for me
to go with their Relations; suffering my conjecture to fly no farther then
their sails. The reasons which I meet with in my sle^der reading, I will
examine as I can, without partiality, and so leave every man to be his own
Judge. First* then we must consider that the voyage to the Indies must be
effected by either of these two ways; to wit, Northward, or Southward, To
begin with the South, it must be performed two ways; either by some unknown
passage through the South-Continent near the Antartick Pole, or near the
Magellane-straits. The former is most uncertain, for want of discoueries in
those unknown and remote parts: and if any such passage were found out, it
were little advantage to our Countrymen, who have already a shorter and nearer
way: yet no instance can be given to the contrary, but that this part being
cloven (as it seems most probable) into many lesser lands, may admit of such a
passage: But in such uncertainties it is as easy to deny as to affirm. The
second South-passage is found out by Nauigatours, which is either by the strait
of Magellane it self, or else through the Straights of Mayre beforementioned,
which this Age of ours has put out of doubt. The third passage is South-east
by the ^ape of good hope, known unto our East-Indian Merchants, and therefore
as a matter unquestioned, needs no further examination. The only matter which
troubles men in this Ag^, is the finding out of a passage Northward to Cathay,
either by the North-east, or North-west; wherein we will consider two things: 1
Whether it be likely, that any such passage should be at all? 2 whether this
passage should be performed by the North-East, or North-West. For the former
many arguments are urged which seem to cross this opinion, of a way to the
Indies toward the North-parts: For The manifold attempts of the English and
Hollanders, both toward the North-East and North-West, either altogether spent
in pain or failing of their ends, seems to give large testimony, if not of
absolute impossibility, yet at least of the vnlikely-ho^d of any such discovery
as is hoped. For what cost or dangers would not almost all the Mariners of our
Northern world undergo, to find so near a cut to their golden Indies? and if
by chance many of them mistook the right way, yet would it seem improbable,
that latter Nauigatours corrected by the former errors, should not after so
many trialls and attempts, at length hit the mark. This reason savors of some
probability: yet comparing this with diverse matters of the same kind, would
seem to be of no great force. For the truth and right being only one and the
same, is oppo^ed by infinite errors: so that it may seem easier to commit a
thousand errors, then once to hit the truth: Time and long trial beget many
Inventions, which afterward seem most easy: insomuch that many men have
afterward laughed at their own mistakes. Moreover, for ought I can find in the
Relations of most men's discoueries, the passage which they sought was too far
Northward toward the Pole; where being infes^ed with cold, Ice, and other
inconveniences, they were enforced to return thence again, having seldom had
any opportunity to winter in those parts for want of victuals, or extremity of
cold. A second reason against this North-passage may be drawn from the
innumerable sorts of beasts wherewith America is stored: for admitting this
passage, we must needs grant America to be an Island. Now it is ^ertaine that
Noah's Ark was the storehouse and Seminary, not only of mankind, but of all
other perfect living Creatures. Again, it is evident out of the Holy
Scriptures, that the first Region whereon the Arc was delivered of her
burden, was Asia. These grounds laid, I would demand how such a multitude of
beasts of all sorts, should be transported from Asia to America, being supposed
to be an Island, and every where divided by the Sea from other parts of the
Earth could these silly creatures of their own accord swim from one shore to
another? but alas the Sea was too large, and these beasts too fearful to
adventure on such a voyage. And admit some by Nature had bin fitted to such an
action, yet were it very strange to imagine the same effect of all, being of
many kinds. What then? were they transported in ships? But Navigations in those
days being an infant, unfurnished of the Chart and Compass, durst not
adventure into the Ocean so far out of sight of land. But to give the
opposite part all reasonable advantage, admit the Straites dividing Asia and
America were very narrow, and within kenne; was it likely that from hence they
could by ships transport so many kndes of creatures? Could we believe any man
to be so mad, as to carry over with him Lions, Bears, Tigers, Foxes, and other
innumerable sorts of ravenous and unprofitable beasts, as pernicious to
mankind, as other creatures serving for his use? If any were found so foolish
or malicious, yet were it very unlikely he should transporte so many kinds.
This argument seems no more to concern America, then most Islands of the
World, wherein we find diverse creatures, not only serving for the use of man,
but many unprofitable and hateful to the Inhabitants: The means of this
transportation is very difficult to find. St Augustine with some other Divines
have bin driven to a supernatural cause, as if Almighty God should perform
this matter by the ministry of Angels, which answer we dare not utterly reject,
being supported by the authority of so great a Pillar of the church: yet I
cannot so easily imagine, that God who used natural means for the
preservation of all living creatures in the Arc, should have recourse to a
supernatural power in the propagation of these creatures on the face of the
Earth: wherefore to me the reason would seem better answered out of our ground
which we shall prove hereafter: That Islands were not from the first Creation,
but afterward broken from the maine Continent by the violence of the Water:
Hence it might come to pass, that such beasts as were in the parts of the
Earth so broken off, have since there continued by continual propagation
until this day; I mean of ravenous and hurtful beasts: because of the others
less doubt can be made, but that they might be convayed from one Country into
another by shipping, to serve the necessity of mankind. Here we see that no
argument as yet has bin urged so strong against the North-passage, but may
with reasonable probability be answered. It remains in the second place that
we descend somewhat to particulars, to inquire whether this be to be effected
either toward the North-east or the North-west: The North-east passage has
heretofore bin attempted by many of our English Nauigatours, but with unhappy
success: yet were not these voyages altogether fruitless; forasmuch as by
this means, a way was found out to Russia, whence began the first trade
between ours and the Russian Merchants: But that little hope can hence arise,
sundry reasons may be alleged, the chief whereof are these; 1 The dangerous
rending of the Scythick Cape, set by Ortelius under 80 degrees Northward,
together with the perilous sailing in those Northern Seas always pestred
with Ice and Snow, seconded by diverse Bays or shelues, mists, fogges, long
and darksome nights, most adverse to any happy Navigations, 2 The observation of
the Water, which is more shallow toward the East, which gives small hope of a
through passage, because all Seas are fed with waters, and for the most part
are observed to be more shallow toward the shore then in the middle: But where
in sailing forward, any Sea is found to decrease in depth; it is a likely
argument, that it is rather a Creek Bay or River, then a Strait;
Notwithstanding these reasons, some have heretofore gone about to prove a
passage by the North-east to Cathay; of which opinion was Antony Ienkinson,
whose reasons be well answered by Sr Humphrey Gilbert, which I briefly touch,
adding some things of mine own, as I find occasion. The first reason was drawn
from a Relation of Tartarian, who reported that in hunting the Morse he sailed
very far toward the South-east, wherein he found no end; which might give a
likely conjecture, that it was a passage throughout. But to this we may easily
answer, that the Tartarians are a barbarous Nation, altogether ignorant of
Navigations, which neither know the use of the Charte, Compass, or Celestial
Observations; and therefore in a wide Sea know not how to distinguish the
North-east from the South-east: Besides the curious search of this long passage
must depend on better Discoueries then a poor Fisherman, who seldom dares
adventure himself out of sight of land; besides, the Fisherman judging by
sight, could not see about a kenne at sea, which will prove nothing in regard
of so long a distance, The second Reason urged by Mr Ienkinson, was this that
there was an Vnicorne's horn found upon the coasts of Tartaria, which could
not come (says he) by any other means then with the tide in some straight in
the North-east in the frozen Sea, there being no Unicorn in all Asia, saving
in I^dia and Cataia. To this reason I may answer with Sr Humphrey Gilbert many
ways; 1 We may well doubt whether Tartarians know a true Unicorns horn, or
no: 2 It is credible, that it could be driven so far by the Tide, being of
such a Nature that it cannot swim. 3 The Tides running to and fro, would have
driven it as far back with the Ebb, as it brought it forward with the
Flood. 4 the Horn which was cast on this coast, might be the Horn of an
Asinus Indicu^, which has but one Horn like an Unicorn in his forehead,
whereof there is great plenty in all the North parts, as in Lappia, Norvegia,
Finmarke* as Zeigler testifies in his History of Scandia. 5 Lastly, there is a
fish which has a Horn in his ^ore-head, c^lled the Sea Unicorn, whereof
Martin Frobisher fo^nd one on the coast of Newfound-land* and gave it to Queen
Elizabeth, which was said to be put into her wardrope: But whether it be the
same which is at this day to be seen at Winsor Castle, I cannot tell. The
third and strongest reason which was urged for the North-east passage was this:
That there was a continual current through the Frozen Sea, of such swiftness,
that if any thing were thrown into the water it would presently be carried out
of sight. To this we may easily answer, that this strong current is not
maintained by any Tide coming from another Sea, but by diverse great Rivers
falling into this straight: In like sort we find a strong current from Maeotis
Palus; by Pontus Euxinus, Sinus Bosphorus, and along all the coast of Greci (as
Contarenus and diverse other affirm out of their own experience) and yet the
Sea lies not open to any other Sea, but is maintained by Tanais and diverse
other rivers: so in this North-east part may this current of water be
maintained by the Rivers Du^^a, Ob, and many others which continually fall into
it.

Hitherto have we treated of other passages, either effected or attempted to
Cathay and the East Indies. The last and most desired and sought in our time,
is that by the North West. This way has bin often attempted, as by Cabot,
Dauis, Frobisher, Hudson, Sr Thomas Button and others, but as yet not found
out. Neither has it more troubled the industry of Mariners, then the wit of
Scholars, which we shall find by discourses written of that subject. The
absolute decision of this controversy we must leave to time: only such
probabilities as I chance to meet with, I will faithfully set down, to give
encouragement to their deserving labors, who shall farther attempt the search
and full discovery of this North-west passage. The Reasons I find urged, I may
well reduce to three Heads: The first is drawn from the testimonies and
opinions of ancient Writers* The second from the Relations and discoueries of
later Nauigators, from the time of Henry the seventh, till our age: The third
and last from the last and newest adventures of men of our time; either lately
dead or living. To begin with the first, we shall from the testimony of Plato
in Timaeo, as also in his Dialogue call^^ Critias, draw a probable argument:
for there he mak^s relation of an incomparable great Island, named Atlantis, of
larger extent then Europe and Asia, which was situate Westward from the
streights of Gibraltar, and nauig^ble round about. The Princes of this Island
(according to Plato's report) heretofore extended their government over a great
part of Europe and Africa. To second which opinion of Plato, we shall read in
Marinus Siou^us his History of Spain, that in the American golden mines,
discovered by Columbus, there have bin found certain pieces of Coin, engraven
with the Name and Image of Augustus Caes^r, which were afterward sent to the
Pope by John Rufus, Archbishop of Consentium; whence a probable conjecture
seems to be grounded, that America in those days was both peopled and
discovered* Now it appears again no^ only by Plato* but also by the opinion
of Mansilius ^icinus, Crantor, Proclus, and Philo Iudaeus is witnessed in their
learned Commentaries on Plato, that this Island called Atlantis, some 600 years
before Plato's time, suffered an extraordinary inundation, and was swallowed up
by water: other like examples whereof we sh^l produce many, hereafter in place
convenient* admitting these testimonies of antiquity, whereof we ought to
cherish a reverend esteem, these consectaries will seem to offer themselves by
way of necessary consequence: 1 That this Island Atlantis was the same which
afterward from Americus Vesputius got the name America: because we find no
Island in the Atlanticke Ocean which comes near that greatness and quantity
assigned by Plato: 2 that this Atlantis or America, in those days at least was
an Island, because they reported it to be Nauigable round about. 3 It must
stand with great reason and probability, that this land being an Island before
Plato's time, should be so still, if at least it come not nearer to the nature
of an Island at this day, then before: For either this Relation of the
ouerflowing of this land is true or false* If at all deserves credit, more
reason is, that it should be Nauigable round about then before: insomuch that
the Water in this manner swelling high; would sooner fret through and cause a
passage, then make a stoppage. 4 This passage must of necessity be toward the
North-west where America is divided from Asia by the streites of A^ian, which
opinion seems better warranted, forasmuch as we find it seconded by the
descriptions of many Geographers of great name and authority, as Gemma Fris^us,
Munster, Appian, Hun^erus, Guicciardine, Michael Tramasi^us, Franciscus
Demongenitus, Bernardus Puteanus, Andreas Vanasor, Tramontanus, Peter Martyr,
and Ortelius in his general Map: Who all have described America as an exact
Island, setting down all the coasts and countries on the North-west sea of
America from Hoche-laga as far as Gape Haremantia; all these learned men
having with one voice described or reported America for an Island* He should
show but a slender esteem of Antiquity* or favor of too much selfe-conceite,
who should offer to contradict. This first Argument I confess spunne out into
so many circumstances, seems at first sight to carry a great show of truth;
but upon sound examination will be found very defective, and uncertain,
carrying more probability in the conclusion, then the premises da^e to justify:
How many Paralogismes and uncertain grounds are involved in this reason, let
my ingenious reader judge; 1 whether Plato's report of this Atlantis were a
true Relation grounded on experience and observation, or a pleasant Fiction
derived from the Poets of that time, wherewith the Grecia Learning was much
infected; 2 How comes it to be thought probable that Plato in those days
should be so exact in delineating out the bounds of this New-world, who was so
ignorant in the old, as to think Europe and Asia to be inferior in greatness
to America, which notwithstanding he thought to be an Island. 3 How should so
famous a King as Atlas, stretching his Monarchy (as the Authors of this reason
report) from America to a great part of Europe and Africa, in that vast gulf
of time* slip away with so slight a mention: That there was such a Prince as
Atlas, I make no question; upon whose fame and greatness the Poets grounded
that fiction of raising up the vault of heaven with his shoulders: But whether
this Atlas ever saw America, my reader must give me leave to make a doubt, The
Ignorance of Navigations in those times, wherein occasion had not brought to
light the chart and compass, together with the huge vastness of the Atlantic
Ocean, will speak my Apology. 4 The finding of coin graued with the Image
and inscription of Augustus Caesar in the American mines, seems to me more
ridiculous then all the rest: We find the acts and conquests of Caesar and
Pompey in Europe and Asia, and some parts of Africa particularly set down by
the grave writers of that time: We find Augustus Caesar, for some petty
co^quests against barbarous people, emblasoned by the Poets of that time to the
highest pitch of their invention* we may observe the age wherein Augustus lived
to be the flourish and pride of all the Roman learning: and himself the Idol
and subject of most of their Poetical flatteries; having the happiness to be
invested in the empire, in such a time wherein the Roman Monarchy having been
too much wounded with a civil dissension, was willing to admire her worst
Physician: And can any man be so senseless to imagine that the discovery of
the golden world should pass away clouded in such a flattering age, without
any mention? could not so much as the name be registered to teach posterity the
way to so rich an Empire? For my own part I can ascribe this, (if the History
deserve credit) to nothing else but the pride and imposture of the Spaniards,
whom we observe in all relations to be a most ungrateful Nation, who admiring
nothing but their own greatness, have requited their best deserving
benefactors with disgrace, and obloquie; striving to raze out their names and
memory to whom they owe the greatest glory. Columbus was a Florentine and no
S^aniard, and therefore must not deserve so much of Spain as his golden
Indies: otherwise Augustus Cesars image had bin better lost then found; and the
Bishop received small thanks for his Perasitick presentation, 5: That America
should ever suffer such a deluge as to be lost for so large a time, will sooner
be admitted as a pleasant discourse in table talk, then purchase credit as a
likely History: it seems to be doubted by Mercator a great Geographer of
latter times* inferior to none before named, whether over this tract of la^d
were overwhelmed with Waters in the general deluge* which he was induced to
believe out of the disparity of the Soil, Herbs, Beasts* and Inhabitants,
with ours, in Europe and other parts of the world; This opinion I hold not
sound in Divinity; yet seems it backed with more strength of humane reason,
then Plato's fable of this imaginary Atlantic Island: Much more could I speak
of the uncertainty of this first argument, were I not afraid to tire my Reader
too much: But this North-west passage is a long voyage, and has bin for a long
time sought, and therefore I hope ingenious men will pardon my long discourse.

2 The second reason is taken from a Relation reported by Gemma Frisius of
three Brothers, who in ancient time passed through this strait into America:
which accident gave it the name of Fretum Trium Fratrum, by which appellation
it is known at this day. This argument I take to be more weak then the other,
as depending on uncertain report, Indebted I know not to what approved
History: But where History is uncertain, reasonable conjecture must challenge
precedence: I will here by way of doubt ask these few questions; whether
these three Brothers before mentioned passed through this strait or not? If
not, no good Argument can hence be grounded of such a passage: or if they
passed through, I demand whether they returned to their Country or not, to
make a relation: If they returned not, how could such a report with probability
be brought home unto us? 3 If they returned home: how could such a memorable
Action be forgotten, and not committed to any certain History? especially in
such a Monkish age, wherein out of ignorance and want of experience, the most
petty Inventions were admired for great matters: The reason as yet makes me to
suspend my judgment of Decision, till I find better.

3 The third reason drawn from antiquity, best urged and husbanded by Sr
Humfry Gilbert for this North-west passage, depends on a certain Relation of
Indians in ancient time cast by tempest on the coasts of Germany, Pliny relates
out of a report of Cornelius Nepos, who wrote 57 years before CHRIST, that
certain Indians were enforced by violence of tempest upon the Germane coasts,
which were afterward presented by the King of Sueuia, to Quintus Metellus
Celer, then Proconsul of France, whereupon Pliny inferres in his 2 Book 66
Chapter, that it is no great wonder, though there be a sea North, where there
is so much moisture. To confirm this opinion of Pliny, and report of Cornelius
Nepos, they produce the testimony of the excellent Geographer Dominicus Marius
Niger, who shows how many ways the Indian Sea extends it self, reciting
the same report of certain India^s that were carried by tempest through the
North-seas from India, upon the Borders of Germany, as they were following
their Trade of Merchandise: The argument grounded upon these Testimonies will
stand thus: These forenamed Indians arriving on the coasts of Germany, must
come of necessity either by the South-east, South-west; North-east or
North-west. The three other coasts seem altogether improbable, and therefore
this opinion of the North-west seems more worthy credit; first, they came not
by the South-east; because the roughness of the Seas, occasioned by stormy
winds, and strange currents in those places about Cape bona Speranza, seconded
by the smallness of their Canoas, wherein the Indians usually travailed, seem
to stand against such a long voyage: 2 They could not well come a long by the
shore of Africa and so pass into Europe, because the winds do there commonly
blow Easterly off from the shore; so that the curren^ dri^ing that way would
sooner have carried them Westerly upon some part of America, where they should
by all likely conjecture, have perished in that great Atlanticke Sea, either in
that huge and great Atlanticke Sea either by shipwreck, or want of provision
in so small a vessel. 3 If they had overcome all these dangers which wise men
would hardly take up upon trust: It seems hard they should not have first
touched upon the coasts of the Azores, Portugal, Spain England or Ireland,
before they should arrive at the coasts of Germany. 4 For the reason
before-named they could not come from the South-west, because the current which
comes from the East, strikes with such violence on the straites of
Magellane, running with such swiftness into the South Sea, or Mare del Zur,
that a ship without great burden cannot without much difficulty arrive at our
Western Ocean, through that narrow rea: What then shall we imagine of an Indian
Canoa managed by such unskillful mariners? 5. To prove these men to be true
Indians, and neither Africans nor Americans, seems to be warranted; because
the Inhabitants of Africa and America neither had, nor scarce know other kind
of Boats then such as bear neither mastes, nor sails; but such as are are
only carried along by the shores: except of later times such as have bin
instructed by the Turks on the coasts of Barbary, or by the Spaniards in
America: This argument I confess is wittily spunne out by my renowned
countryman Sr Humfry Gilbert, whose ability seems to have made a harvest out
of the stubble. Nevertheless in my conceit it promises in the conclusion
more then the premises can well warrant: For first it seems not to me a matter
so clear out of question whether these ship-wrackt people cast in upon the
coasts of Germany were true Indians, or not; because so far as my conjecture
leads me, being grounded on History, the name of Indians out of the
ignorance of those times has been given by the Romans to many other foreign
Nations far distant; especially to the Aeth^opia^s in Africa which beside the
testimony of diverse ancient Historians, too tedious to relate, may seem
probable out of that end of a verse of Horace* Vltra Garamantas and Indos:
where for joining together two Nations so separat in place, the former being in
Africa, the other almost in the farthest verge of Asia, he seemed as ignorant
of the distance, as the people: 2 How should these Western inhabitants know
these men to be true Indians, whose condition, place and language they never
understood? 3 Why might not these men come from some of the Islands in the
Atlantic Ocean? 4 The reason against it, drawn from the current striking with
such force on the streits of Magellane, is contradicted by the experience of
latter Nauigators* much more I could speak of this reason; but that I hold it
better to cherish a hope of such a passage* then by excepting against these
ancient arguments to discourage modern industry.

Other probabilities may seem to be drawn from the discoueries of later
Nauigatours since the reign of Henry the seventh, under whose protection
Sebastian Cabot undertook the discovery of the North-West costs: In which he
prevailed as much as the Alchimists, who in seeking out the Philosophers stone
have often mist of their aim: yet by this means invented many rare and
excellent secrets, of use, and admiration. That Cabot the same year discovered
as much of the Northern parts of America as Columbus of the Southern, out of
my small reading seems to me no great question, whence I cannot imagine that
King Philip of Spain can in this New-found-world challenge a greater interest
then King Charles of great Britain: a Prince of those incomparable virtues,
which may be thought worthier to own, then the others to pretend to so great a
Sovereignty: For the latter voyages and discoueries of Dauis and Frobisher (for
ought I see) they promise scarce so much as Hope, which oftentimes flatters and
deceiues men with her best countenance. But if we take up wares upon trust,
some will tell us of a Portugal, who made a voyage through this Streit^
Northward, calling a Promontory within the same after his name Promontorium
Corterialis; of Scolmus a Dane, who passed a great part thereof: but the most
probable in my conjecture, is that which Sr Humfrey Gilbert reports of one
Saluaterra a Gentleman of Victoria in Spain, who was said to have passed by
chance out of the West Indies into Ireland, in the year of our Lord 1568, who
constantly auerred the North-west passage from us to Cathay to be thought
nauigable; and farther related in the presence of Sr Henry Sidney, then Lord
Deputy of Ireland ( Sr Humfrey Gilbert being then present) that a Friar of
Mexico called Andrew Vrdanetta, more then eight years before his arrival,
told him that they came from Mare Del Zur, through this Northwest strait into
Germany, and showed Saluaterra (being with him at that time in Mexico) a
Sea-Chart, made out of his own observation in that voyage, wherein such a
passage was expressed, agreeing with Ortelius his Map: moreover this Friar
told the King of Portugal in his return by that country home-ward, that
having found such a North-west passage, he meant shortly to make the same
public, but the King earnestly entreated him not to discover this secret to
any Nation: for that (said he) if England had knowledge and experience of it,
it would greatly hinder the King of Spain and me. This relation I could
willingly credit from the mouth of any other man then a Friar; of whose
palpable lies, and fabulous inventions in their flattering letters to the Pope,
from both the Indies, we have sufficient experience. Nevertheless that future
ages might not despair of so worthy an attempt as the discovery of this
passage, it has pleased God to stir up the Spirits and industry of two later
Nauigatours, Hudson and Sr Thomas Button, who have revived the forlorn hopes
of the former. For the particulars of whose discoueries I know not better where
to refer my Reader, then to a curious Map not long since set out by our
worthy and learned Professor Mr Brigges: the arguments I collect from thence
are these, expressed in his own words; 1 In the bottom of Hudson Bay, where he
wintred, the hight of the Tide was but two foot, whereas by the neerenesse of
the South sea in Port Nelson, it was constantly 15 foot or more. 2 Moreover in
Port Nelson, where Sr Thomas Button did winter, in 57 degrees he found the Tide
constantly, every twelve hours, to rise 15 foot or more: and that a West wind
made the Nepe Tides equal with the Spring Tides; and the Summer following,
about the latitude of 60 degrees he found a strong race a Tide running
sometimes Eastward, sometimes Westward. 3 To show the land toward the
South Sea, through which we seek to open this passage, not to be so far off
as our ordinary Charts seen to pretend, may be probably auerred, in that
California heretofore supposed to be a part of the Western Continent, is since
by a Spanish Chart taken by the Hollandors, found to be a great Island; the
length of the West shore being about 500 leagues from Cape Mendocin to the
South Cape thereof, called Cape S. Lucas; which may appear both by the Spanish
Charts, and by the report of Francis Gaul, whereas in the ordinary Charts it
is expressed to be 1700 leagues. These Arguments. I confess, have swayde my
opinion, but not as yet absolutely freed me from doubt. Three Quaeries I must
leave for the learned to consider, and for the time to decide; 1 whether this
relation of Mariners concerning the Bay of Sr Thomas Button and Hudson be true
or no? no man will (I suppose) censure me as unmannerly for asking such a
question, considering how much many Nauigatours, either by their mistakes or
their industrious falsities have deceived men's credulities; the one is incident
to mankind, which out of uncertain observations, or unnecessary deductions,
from thence often draws an ill consequence; The other, the ordinary policy of
discouerers, who lest their Travails might be thought fruitless, would at
least promise hope in the reuersion. How many relations have been corrected by
experience of later Nauigatours, every one may judge. 2 Whether this strong
Tide in Hudsons Bay coming from the West, were from the South Sea, or from the
North, betwixt the Continent and diverse Islands by an Inlet, is not a matter as
yet clearly out of doubt. Terra Del Fuogo was heretofore supposed to be a
Continent, till Schouten in his discovery found it to be an Island, and a large
Sea beyond it toward the South. Likewise New Foundland in all our former
Mappes and Globes, expressed as a part of the Maine of America, is by later
experience found to be an Island: and why may not this happen in the other, that
at the entrance into Hudsons Bay, the land on the right hand should be cloven
into many Islands; betwixt which the waters issuing, should be turned in such
sort, as it might seem to proceed from the West: since the Tides taking their
beginning from the Maine Sea, and continued through some Strait, commonly
follow the crooked windings of the Channel. 3 That California is an Island, it
may (for ought I know) be well warranted: But the evidence drawn from the
Spanish Chart, seems rather to cherish hope, then persuade consent. In this
which I have spoken of these worthy men's conjectures, I have rather expressed
my doubts, then my opinion; esteeming notwithstanding that doubt almost and
Heresy, which should discourage any generous and deserving spirit from a
farther attempt of this North-west-Passage.

CHAP. VIII. Of Sea-Trafficke and Merchandise.
1 OF the Internal Affections of the Sea we have spoken: It remains now that
we treat of the External: By the External I understand that which belongs to
Sea-Trafficke, or Navigations.

2 Sea-Trafficke is a passage by Sea from one Country to another.

It is not my purpose in this place exactly to set down the Art of Navigations;
being a matter requiring a special* Treatise of it self: yet because shipping
and Navigations, as External or adjacent Accidents, belong to the Sea as the
proper subject; I could not altogether slip them over without some mention: In
handling of which matter I only propose to my self two things: first, the
Author and efficient causes of Seauoyages or Navigations; Secondly, the End and
Uses thereof: both which we will knit up in these two general Theoremes.

1 Navigations first taught by Almighty God, was afterward seconded by the
industry of famous Men in all ages.

The first invention of this excellent art we can ascribe to no other author
then God himself, who first taught the Hebrews his chosen people, and not the
Egyptians and Phenicians, as some have falsely imagined: For we read in Genesis
that Noah according to Gods precept, made an Arc for the preservation of
himself and other living creatures from the deluge: before which we cannot
learn that there was extant any skill of Navigations: Of which we have many
reasons and conjectures given by ancient writers. 1 Because in those times
there was greater need of Cities then ships; because cities are not made for
ships, but rather ships, for the use of cities. 2 Small or little commodity
could in those times be reaped from other Countries, lying as yet rude and
vnpossessed without Inhabitants. 3 Some would have this to be a reason why God
revealed not this art to the old worldlings: because being ready to perish in
the flood, no man might have means to escape or save himself, which without
doubt they would have attempted, had the Art of Navigations been known amongst
them. Whence it is a probable conjecture, that this knowledge of Navigations was
discovered first to Noah at the time of the Deluge whose Arc resting
afterward on the mountains of Ararat, gave a president to other Nations near
bordering, in what manner ships were to be framed. Whence it came to pass
that the first to whom this skill was derived next to the Hebrews were the
Tyrians and Phaenicians, Nations as well for the commodity of the place as
Inclination to such business more accommodated to Navigations: For Tire was a
chief Mart-towne of Phaenicia bordering upon the sea. Which knowledge being
derived from them to other Natitions gave occasion to Stratus and Strabo to
conjecture that they were the first Inuentours of it, being not able through
the want of holy writ to ascend higher. From the Phaenicians was this knowledge
derived to the Egyptians, as Pliny reports in his 7 Book and 56 Chapter, when
as yet this Art was but rude and altogether unpolished, as may appear by the
same Pliny; who testifies that they then began to sail in a certain vessel
called Ratis: which word howsoever it now be taken generally for any ship, was
originally interpreted to be made of Beams joined together: In which kind of
ship they are reported to have passed the Mediterranian sea, but especially the
Red Sea, being set out by King Erithra. Then came this art from the Egyptians
to the Grecians (according to Pliny by Danaus) who perfected this ^cience, and
made a ship in a more exact form then he had learned amongst the Phenicians*
whence Danaus was celebrated the first Author of this invention: it being a
common error amongst all Nations to ascribe the first invention to him, who
was the first discouerer of it to them, being able to derive it no f^rther: Yet
the Grecians being very full of fabulous inu^ntions have found out other
Authors of this art; for Strabo in his 10 book, gives it to Min^s: others, as
Diodorus Si^ulus in his 6 book, to Neptune; who is of opinion, that for this
cause he was afterward translated into the number of the Gods. But this is
certain that amongst all the Grecians the Cretensians were the first that
excelled in this faculty. Whence grew that Proverb: Cretensis nescit Pelagus:
as who should say nothing could be imagined more absurd and ridiculous then
that a man should be borne in Creet and have no skill in Navigations: Others
ascribe the first knowledge of making ships to Daedalus, a rare workman in
mechanical occupations: From the Grecians afterward was this trade
communicated to the Italians, amongst whom the Geneuensians and Venetians most
excelled. Of the Venetians skill in this matter, we read no other argument then
their great riches and magnificent power, especially by the sea, which has
continued unto this day: whereof no other cause can be thought on, next unto
Gods providence, then their industry in Sea-voyages. After these arose the
Portugalls who under the conduct and direction of Columbus an Italian,
discovered America called the new-world, and gave example and excitement to
many other Nations to adventure farther. Amongst which (by the testimony of
outlandish people) no Nation has waded farther then the English, who under
Drake and Candish have compassed about the world and left an eternal Trophie
of their immortal fame unto posterity. Yet can we not here defraud the
Low Country men of their due commendation, especially the Hollanders,
Flemmings, and Sealanders: who by their riches acquired by navigations and
extraordinary power at Sea, have kept in despite of the usurping Spaniard
these Provinces, far richer then at the beginning of their wars, and
deserved that saying which was given to one of the Grecians cities, by the
Oracle; Tha^ it was guarded not with stones, but with wooden walls. Thus much
may suffice for the Authors and first Inuentours of Navigations. We are now to
speak something of the ends and uses of it, which may in general be referred
either to profit or pleasure: Both which are again spread into many Branches;
the most of which we shall comprize in this following Theoreme.

2 Navigations is very necessary as well for the increase of Knowledge as Riches.

Necessity is usually taken two ways; either for an absolute need, without the
which a thing cannot be: or Comparatively for a conueniency, without the which
a thing cannot well be: In both senses I may call Navigations necessary for a
man's life: for to defer the later, whereof less doubt is made; it is
certain that many places are so poor, barren, and indigent of all succor and
relief, that they cannot maintain a populous Nation without foreign
commerce and traffic; especially in these days, where the multitude of men
is increased to so great abundance: for the later, many arguments may be
produced to prove the conueniency of Navigations, which no man of any judicious
insight can deny to be most strong and forcible. The first argument may be
drawn from the Authors and Inuentours of it, whereof we have spoken in the
former proposition: for first (as we have showed) it was prescribed by God
himself, who never taught mankind any thing idle or unnecessary. It was
embraced and cherished by many Nations even till this day, which no doubt had
long since been lost, had not use and profit seconded the Invention. Neither
is it probable that Almighty God should create that vaste Mass of Water* that
it should be an Element for fishes to live only, or that (as some guess) it
should somewhat mitigate the extremity and drouth of the Suns heat^* But that
men should by this means have an easy and ready way to communicate and
^^a^ficke one with the other; which may appear as well by many Testimonies out
of the sacred Scripture* namely Psalm. 104 verse. 25. Es^^ 26. ver. 1* 2. as also
by the example of King Solomon, the wisest of all Kings, who by this means got
great store of gold from Ophir to build the Temple, as will appear in 1 Kings
and the 9 Chapter. The second reason therefore may be drawn from the exercise
of Merchandise, and t^ansportation of commodities, which cannot be administered
without Sea-voyages: first because greater store of Merchandise may be carried
in a ship then in a Cart, Wagon, or any other Instrument ordinarily in use.
Secondly, because in ships greater variety of wares may be brought from
diverse places, to which a Wagon cannot without great difficulty approach, or
not at all. Thirdly, because wares and such commodities cannot so quickly be
conuayed in the land from places far distant, as on the sea: nor with so
little cost and charges. The commodities conuayed from one Country to another
are chiefly three; stuffes and other matters necessary for apparel, victuals
and food, Physical Druggs* all which no man will deny to be most profitable
for the use of mankind. Moreover it is not to be imagined that nature
produces such commodities only for the private behoof of some one country
wherein they grow: First, because such commodities in some countries are found
in such abundance, that the same place seems not to need them: And nature were
vain, if the use were not required. India mittit Ebur, molles sua thura Sabai.
Secondly, because other Nations altogether want such things which abound in
other countries: without the which not withstanding they cannot well live. A
fourth reason may be drawn from the promotion of Religion and sciences, which
cannot well be atcheiued without Sea-voyages or Navigations. For the former we
need go no farther then the holy Scripture which gives large testimony of such
voyages: In the old Testament as well as in the new, we have recommended to all
posterity the industry of the Queen of Saba, who is said to have come from the
uttermost parts of the Earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon: And how should
the Gospel of Christ have been di^ulged to diverse Nations, had not the
Apostles dispersed themselves, and passed the Sea in ships, to convey their
sacred message to diverse Nations and Kingdoms? neither is it less evident in
the propagation of Learning and humane Sciences: First, out of the example of
many and famous worthy Philosophers, who travailed far to converse with learned
men of other Nations, to enrich their minds with knowledge. Secondly, out of
the first propagation of Learning into our parts; which we shall find (as it
were) foot by foot to follow Navigations. Hence we see that from the Hebrews
and Chaldees it was derived to the Tyrians; from them to the Egyptians* so to
the Romans, and thence to most parts of Europe. A fourth reason may be taken
from the necessity of transporting Colonies into foreign countries: for as
after the universal Deluge of the world* the people daily increasing, were
enforced in tract of time to disperse themselves into diverse Countries: so
every Country left to it self, and not much molested with famine, or devoured
by wars, will at length grow too populous* unable to sustain its own
weight, and relieve its own Inhabitants. Whence it has been a policy
practiced by most Kings and States in such eases, to make forrayne expeditions,
and send forth Colonies into other Countries less peopled, to disburden their
own of such encombrances: as we see the Kings of Spain to have sent many into
the West Indies; and we at this day discharge many Idlers into Virginia and the
Barmudas. Here al^o is the Art of Navigations useful, without which, the Seas
could not be passed, nor foreign Countries known. Fifthly, Navigations seems
to be of greater importance for the defense of a Country against foreign
Nations; because Sea Fights are less dangerous and inconvenient to the Land,
then Land-fights. All these arguments have their force and life to prove the
profit of this excellent Science. Many arguments may be drawn to prove the
use of it for pleasure and delectation; which being well used, has his place
amongst other of Gods especial blessings. This delight will first show it
self in the mutual commerce and society with other Nations: Since a man (as
Aristotle affirms) is by nature inclined to mutual society, and cannot reap
greater pleasure then in such conjunctions: And as one Man with another finds
solace; so one Nation with another: especially in the variety of sundry
manners, customs, rites, and dispositions. Secondly, in the contemplation of
wise Nature, who has endowed diverse countries with diverse Minerals, Plants,
Beasts, and such commodities; then which variety nothing can be more delectable
to an ingenious understanding. To all which we may add as a Corollary, the
Honor which has been given to Navigations by Princes and States, as well of
former as later years. In ancient times we read that Ptolomy Philadelphus,
that learned King of Egypt, who furnished himself with so rich a Library 277
years before Christ's Incarnation, gave great encouragement to Navigations, and
maintained the passage through Sinus Arabicus, or the Red Sea, by which the
commodities of India and Arabia were brought to Alexandria, and from thence
dispersed through diverse places of Europe, Asia, and Africa. This was
afterward seconded and cherished by the Romans, at which time Egypt was made
subject to their dominion: But the Roman Empire being afterward rent in pieces
by the Goths, Vandals, Lumbards, and Saracens, all traffic betwixt nations
began a while to cease; till such time as the inconvenience being known, a new
Mart was set up at Capha in Taurica Chersonesus, belonging at that time to the
Genois: Thence was it derived to Trebizond, and afterward to Samerchand, where
the Indian, Turkish, and Persian Merchants were wont to trade with the
Venetians. This Art was afterward set up and revived by the Sultans of Egypt,
through the passage of the Red Sea, till such time as it was in a manner taken
away by the Portugals, Spaniards, English, and Dutch; who have found out for
themselves a better way by the Cape of good Hope, to the East Indies, and by
this means much abated the Traffic of Alexandria, and the wealth of the
Venetians. Neither in this Age of ours have there wanted great Potentates, who
have not only endowed this Trade with great and ample privileges; but also
themselves practiced such commerce, as well for the benefit of their
Commonwealth, as the increase of their particular estate. Two memorable
examples we have in Henry the third, King of England, and Laurence de Medices
Duke of Florence, whereof the former gave many and large privileges to all the
Hance Towns in his Kingdoms, which were in Number about 27: The other
himself for his own private commodity exercised the Trade of Merchandise: yet
was this man most ingenious, and a great lover of learned Men.

CHAP. IX. Of Pedography, Rivers, Lakes, and Fountains in the Earth.
1 WE have formerly treated of Hydrographie, or the description of the Water;
now are we (by Gods assistance) to proceed on to Pedographie, which is a
description of the Firm Earth, or Dry-Land.

2 The Land is a space contained in the superficies of Earth, distinguished
from the Water.

The Earth in this place is not taken as in the former part of Geographie for
the whole Terrestrial Sphere, composed of Earth and Water: Neither yet as it
is usually taken in Natural Philosophy for an Absolute Elementary body, whose
causes and affections are to be searched out; but Topographically for a place
or habitable space on the dry-land; This dry-land distinguished from the Water
by its Firmness and Constancy, being no^ subject as the Water to motion and
inconstancy, was therefore (if we believe the Poet) called Vest^, according to
that verse, Stat viterra sua, vi stando Vesta vocatur. Neither wants this fable
of Vesta a sufficient moral. First, because Vesta was feigned to be a keeper
and protector of their houses, which may very well agree to the Earth: which
not only sustaines and bears up all buildings and houses; but also affords all
commodities and fruits wherewith households are maintained. Secondly, Vesta was
fained to be the Goddess to whom the first fruits were offered in sacrifice:
which may well square with the nature of the Earth, from which all fruits are
originally derived; and therefore (as it were of due) ought all first fruits to
be consecrated to her altar. Two other Parallels betwixt the Goddess Vesta
are added by Natalis Comes: First, because Plutarch shows in his Symposiacks,
that the Tables of the Ancients, dedicated to Vesta, were made round in form
and fashion of the Earth: Secondly, because the seat of Vesta was imagined to
be in the liquid Air immovable, and not subject to motion: which well agrees
with the common conceived opinion of the Earth. But these two rather express
the nature of the whole Terrestrial Sphere, then of the land divided from the
Waters: This description of the dry-land separated from the Waters, we have
termed Pedographie^ because the Greek (...), commonly derived from (...), a
foot, signifies as much as a firm place, whereon men may have sure footing,
to which is consonant the Hebrew word (...), which seems most probably derived
from (...), which signifies as much as Terere, to wear out or waste: because
the Earth is daily trodden and worn with our feet. The proprieties of the Earth
appertaining to a Cosmographer, are many and various; wherefore to avoid
confusion; we have divided them into these heads.

3 The Adjuncts of a Place in the Land are either Natural or Civil* The
Natural are such as are in bred in the Earth.

4 The Natural may be again divided into Perpetual, or Casual. Perpetual
are such as always, or most ordinarily continue the same.

5 The Perpetual proprieties are again twofold* either Absolute, or
Comparatiue. The Absolute I call such as agree to the Land without any respect
to the Sea.

6 Of the former sort are such as belong to the Figurature of the Soil, wherein
three things are most remarkable: 1 Rivers, Fountains, and Lakes. 2
Mountains, Valleys, and plains. 3 Woods, and Champian Countries.

7 A River is a perpetual course of water from a certain head or fountain
running from an higher to a lower place on the earth.

Rivers are by some Geographers more curiously distinguished into 2 sorts:
whereof the first are settled or stayed Rivers, which slide away with a more
equal and uniform course: The later are called Torrents or stickle waters,
which are carried with a far greater violence. In a River three things are
chiefly remarkable* First the Fountain or Spring secondly Whirle-pooles*
Thirdly the Mouth of it. The spring is the place, where at first the water
sensibly breaks out of the Earth: As Nilus in Afric is thought to have his
first head at the mountains of the Moon. A Whirlepoole is a place in a River,
where the water falling into a Deep trench, is whirled and teurned round* The
Mouth is the place where any River finds a passage our, either into the sea or
into another greater River; which in latin is termed ostium or a gate: Whence
they call Septem ostia Nili: which are seven mouths, by which it falls into the
Mediterranean. This gave the name to many Cities and Towns in England as
Plimmouth, Dar^mouth, Portsmouth, Axmouth, with many others. Now for as much as
all water is by nature heavy, and therefore couets the lowest place; The course
of all Rivers must needs be from a higher to a lower place: whence we may
guess the hight of lands. For it is necessary that for every mile wherein the
water glides forward on the earth, there be made an allowance of 2 foot at
least in the decliuity of the ground. For although water will slide away at any
inequality, yet could not the water be wholesome, and retain any reasonable
swiftness of motion without this allowance. Hence we may probably find out the
huge hight of the Alps about all the places in Europe: because out of them
spring four great Rivers, which run four ways; whereof the two greatest
are the Danow (which receives into it 60 Nauigable rivers and so disburthens it
self into the Euxine Sea far remote) and the Rhene. Of Lakes and Rivers many
memorable matters may be spoken: all which we will reduce to these heads. 1
Their Generation and first original: 2 Their Appearance: 3 Their Place in the
earth: 4 Their Virtues and effects; all which we will comprehend in these
Theoremes following.

1 All Rivers have their first original from the sea the mother of Rivers.

The original of fountains and Rivers on the earth is a matter of great
difficulty, and for ought I know, not yet found out of our greatest
Philosophers; yet being willing to go as far as I can, I will glaunce at
probabilities, and first set down other men's opinions. Some have been of
opinion that in the bowels of the earth are hid certain vast concauities and
cauernes, which receiving into them a great quantity of raine-Water, have given
original to Lakes and Fountains. Hence they give the reason why these
fountains are perpetual; Because the raine-water received into these cauernes
being extraordinary great, is sufficient to nourish such springs of water
until the next winter; whence comes a new supply of more rain. These Rivers
(say they) in the summer decrease, and sometime are dry, because of the defect
of w^ter, when the place is not great enough to receive sufficient water for
the whole year. This opinion seems grounded on these reasons: First, because
we find by experience, that Rivers and fount^ines are greater and larger in
Summer then in Winter. Secondly, because where there is less Rain, fewer or
no Rivers are seen* As in the Deserts of Ethiopia and Afric few or no Rivers
are found: But in Germany, France, Brittany, and Italy many Rivers show
themselves* because they abound in the moisture of the Air and much fall of
Rain. Thirdly, amongst us (we see by experience) in a hot and dry Summer they
are much decreased from their ordinary greatness, or altogether dried up;
which is a great probability that their original is from rain. This opinion
if it be only understood of some Rivers, may be probable; because some
currents out of doubt take their original from great showers or snowes, as at
the foot of the Alps and other such places, where the snow daily melts and
feeds them: but if it be generally understood of all Rivers, it is manifestly
false as may appear by these reasons. First, because the Earth no where
drinks up the rain farther then ten foot deep in the soil; for the higher
superficies of the earth is either dry and so easily drinks up and consumes
the Water within that space; or else being already moist, it receives it not at
all, but expells it by Rivers and channells: Secondly, some mountains not
covered with earth, but consisting of hard rock, notwithstanding send forth
great store of springs and fountains, which water could not be received in,
through a hard rocky substance. Thirdly, because in very dry places certain
pits being dug down into the ground 2 hundred or three hundred foot deep,
will discover many great streams of Water, which could not be from the receite
of Rain. Fourthly, it cannot be imagined that so much rain could in a winter
fall into one place, besides that which the drouth of the earth consumes, to
nourish so mighty and great Rivers in the Earth, as are Rivers running in a
perpetual course. Fifthly, all Rivers almost take their original from some
mountains or other; as Danubius from the Alps, and Nilus from the mountains
of the Moon in Afric; Which places being extraordinary high, are more unapt
to receive water, then lower places of the earth. To the reasons that they
allege for their opinions, it is not hard to answer* That rivers should be
greater in winter the in the summer, the cause may be better given, Because
more moisture of the Air falls into the brinke from external R^ine or snow in
winter then in summer; and the ground being moister, is able to drink less
then at other times: which is also the reason why in hotter and dry Countries
there is not such plenty of Rivers* for we deny not, but fountains may
sometimes be increased and sometimes diminished by addition of raine-water but
that any such vast con^auity should be under ground, as the receptacle of so
much rain, and should nourish so many and so great currents. The second
opinion is of those who think that the original of all rivers and fountains
is from the Sea: Which conceit has been strongly fortified by many Fathers of
the Church, and grave Divines of later time; which opinion is chiefly grounded
upon these reasons: First because it seems a most incredible matter, that so
much vaporous matter should be engendered under the earth, to feed such a
perpetual course of water: Secondly, if all Rivers should not be derived from
the sea, no reason could be given, why so many rivers daily emptying
themselves into the sea, the sea should not increase, but continue in the same
quantity. Thirdly, to this purpose they urge the place of Eccles. 1. All rivers
run into the sea, and yet the sea is not full: To the place whence they came
they return, that they may flow again. But this opinion seems to be shaken
with a great difficulty. For it is a hard matter to conceive how the water of
the sea being by nature heavy, and lower then the superficies of the earth (as
we have demonstrated) should ascend into high mountains; out of which we find
springs of water oftentimes to arise: for either it must ascend Naturally or by
Violence: not naturally for the foresaid cause; because it is a heavy body: If
violently, they must assign some external Agent, which enforces it to this
violence. This difficulty diverse Authors have labored diverse ways to salve:
Some amongst whom the chief was Theoderet* have fled to a supernatural cause
in Gods providence; as though the water in it is own nature heavy, should be
notwithstanding enforced to the topps of the mountains; But this opinion
seems very improbable; because, although we cannot deny Gods miraculous and
extraordinary working in some things; yet all men have supposed this to be
confined within the bounds of nature: And very strange it were to imagine that
almighty God in the first institution of nature should impose a perpetual
violence upon nature. Others, as Basil, have thought that the seawater was
driven upwards toward the tops of mountains by reason of certain sp^rits
enclosed in it: Mare (as he says) fluitans and permeans per cuniculos
fistularet and angustos, ^ox vbi obliquis aut certe recta in sublime surrectis
excursibus se occupatum deprehenderit ab agitante compulsum spiritu, superficie
terr^ vi disrupta erumpit atque for as emicat; The same opinion almost in every
respect is ascribed to Plato in Phedone, and Pliny 2 book.65 chap. Quo
(inquit) spiritu, actu and terr^ pondere expressa siphonum modo e^^cat,
tant^que a periculo decidendi abest vt in summa quoque et ^^tissima exiliat:
Qua ratione manifestum est, quare tot f^u^inum quotidi^n^ accessu maria non
crescant. But this exposition will hardly satisfy him who desires to search
farther then obscurity of words: For first by admitting spirits as mouers of
the waters, they seem to fall into a Platonic opinion before examined of us
concerning the heat of the seawater. Secondly, I would demand whether such
spirits in the water to which they ascribe this motion, be Natural Agents or
Supernatural, or Violent; They cannot be natural Agents: For as much as they
are supposed to drive and enforce the water against his own nature. For by
nature (as all men know) it is apt to descend; whereas here it is supposed to
ascend by reason of such spirits. They cannot be violent agents because they
be perpetual; whereas no violent thing can be perpetual. Thomas Aquinas
being desirous to show, how much fountains could ascend out of the seawater
varies in opinion from the former, and imagines that the fountains and
Riuer-water is drawn upwards through the force of Celestial bodies, for the
common good; to wit that it might water as well the mettalls in the bowels of
the earth, as give moisture and nourishment to Plants, and living creatures,
dwelling thereon. And this motion (says he) although it be against the
particular nature of the water, is not altogether violent: because elementary
bodies are bound by a certain law to obey and subject themselves to the
heavenly; so that motions impressed by them, are not enforced on them by
violence. For albeit in some sort it thwart the physical disposition: yet have
all creatures an ob^dientiall aptness (as they term it) to submit themselves
to the superior. But this opinion of Thomas Aquinas (in my conceit) seems
less sound then the former: For first Thomas had no need at all of these
shifts, holding some of his other grounds: For in another place, comparing the
hight of the s^a and land one with the other, he firmly maintains that* the
sea is above the land, and that it is bounded and restrained from ouerflowing
the dry land, by the immediate power of the Creator: If this be granted, what
need there any ascent or drawing up of the water, by any external power of the
heavenly bodies: since the remitting of this restraint of water^ in some places,
were sufficient to cause such springs and rivers in the earth: Secondly, his
opinion cannot stand without manifest contradiction of himself; for how can
the water, being of his own nature heavy, be drawn upward without violence
and thwarting of nature. And whereas he alleadges for himself an obedientiall
aptness in the elementary bodies to obey the superior, he shall find very
little help to maintain his part. For this obedientiall inclination must be
either according to the nature of the water, or opposite unto it, or at least
the one must be sudordinate unto the other: That it is according to the nature
of the water, he himself disclaimes and experience refutes; because it
naturally descends, not ascends: if it be opposite (as indeed it must needs
be) he contradicts himself: If the Physical and obedientiall inclination be
subordinate the one to the other; I urge, that subordinate causes can produce
no other then subordinate effects; for as much as the causes and the effects are
measured and proportioned the one by the other. But we plainly see that the
motions of ascent or descent are diametrally opposed, and contrary the one to
the other; so that they cannot otherwise proceed, then from opposite and
contrary causes. Secondly this obedientiall aptness, is commonly understood of
a creature, in respect of his Creator, in whose hand it is, as to create all
things of nothing, so to reduce all things again into nothing. But this
although it be above nature, yet no way contradicts nature: and easier it is to
be imagined, that the Creator should annihilate any Creature, then letting it
remain in his own Nature, give it a motion against nature: Moreover (...) we
duly consider nature in her course, we shall find that the lower and elementall
Bodies only concur to the conservation of the whole, and of one another, by
following their own private inclination: for the whole is nothing else then an
orderly concent and harmony of all the parts; from whose mutual cooperation,
it receives his perfection; so that where any part fails in his own office,
the whole must needs sustain damage. Thirdly, it will hardly be resolved by
any of this opinion, by what means or instruments the heavenly or superior
Bodies can have such an operative power over the water, as to lift it upward
from his own Center: for neither can this thing be performed by motion, hight,
or any Influe^ce, which are the three means of operation of celestial Bodies
on elementary: I will not stand to prove every particular in this matter: But
only would have my adversary to answer, and give an instance and speciality.
Another opinion there is of Aristotle, followed by all Peripa^eticks, who in
his first book of Meteors, and 13 Chapter, goes about to prove and maintain,
that all Springs and Wells in the land are produced and generated in the
bowels of the Earth by any vapors resolved into water: which opinion he
labors ^o strengthen in this manner. It is certain (says he) that the Earth
has within it much air; because Nature will nowhere admit a vacuity. But the
Earth has not only many open, but a great many secret holes and con^auities
which cannot otherwise be filled then with air. Moreover a great part of the
Earth, and other vapors therein contained, and stirred up by the force of the
Stars, are converted into Air; and that as well the Air included in the
bowels of the Earth, as vapors there also bred, are perpetually converted
into water: This reason may seem to persuade, because it follows of
necessity, that the coldness of the Earth expelling their heat, they should
harden and condensate, and be disposed at last to the generation of water:
whence also the cause (...) given of the generation of water in the middle
Region of the Air, although it be not always thence bred: as well for other
causes, as for that the Air by the heat of the Sun is sometimes too hot, and
the vapors are too much attenuated and ratified: so that the matter of Rain
cannot be always supplied. This would Aristotle have to be the original of
all Springs and Fountains; So that the water should first distill as it were
drop by drop, out of this vapourous matter: and this moist matter so collected
and drawn together, should afterward^ break forth out of the ground, and so
cause such fountains. Some reasons are also produced to prove this assertion;
for (say the Authors of this opinion) If the Springs and Riuer^ should proceed
from any other cause, then they should take their beginning from Raine-water,
which is before refuted; or from the Sea by certain secre^ passages, which
opinion seems too weak to endure examination: First, this seems an argument,
that the Seawater is commonly Salt but the water of Springs and Rivers is for
the most sweet and fresh; and therefore such Springs are not derived from the
Sea: Secondly, because we never find the Sea to be emptied, which must needs
be, if it should give beginnings to all such currents of water in the Earth;
Thirdly (we have already showed) that the superficies of the Earth is higher
then the Water; so that it cannot be conceived how rivers should be derived
from the Sea. To this opinion, howsoever seeming probable, and supported with
the name and authority of so great a Philosopher, I dare not wholly assent;
forasmuch as it thwarts the Testimony of holy Scripture, and cannot otherwise
stand with reason: because it cannot well be imagined how so many vapors, and
so continually, should be engendered in the bowels of the earth, to nourish so
many and so great currents, as we see springing out of the Earth: for a very
great quantity or portion of Air being condensated and made Water, will become
but as a little drop: The Air, according to Aristotle's grounds being by a
Tenne-fold proportion thinner then the Water. Moreover the Air in these places
seated in the superficies of the Earth, and higher then other places, and by
consequent nearer the Sun, should rather be rarefied and thickened; because heat
is the greatest cause of rarefaction, as we shall show hereafter: for the
reasons alleged for these opinions, they are drawn only from the weakness of
their assertion* which hold that Fountains are derived either from Rain
water, or from the Sea: both which we have examined briefly, and whereof we
shall speak hereafter. The School of Conimbra, not utterly rejecting all the
former opinions* have vndertake^ to forgo an opinion (as it were) partaking of
all, pretending to say something more, when indeed they produce nothing besides
the former. Their assertion they have set down, in eight propositions, which I
will faithfully set down, and then censure. The first is that in subterranean
places under the superficies of the earth, is hid a great quantity of water,
distinguished into Rivers, Ponds, and Lakes. This they prove from the daily
experiment of such as diggs diverse wells and de^pe trenches in the Earth; Who
many times under the Earth; find not only many rivers and ponds, but many times
happen upon so great abundance of Water, that they can neither find the bottom
or bounds thereof. To this they add an experiment of Philip and Macedon
recorded by Asclepiador^^ who caused many men expert in digging of mettalls, to
be let down into an old and forsaken mine to search out the veins of
mettalls, to see whether the covetousness of antiquity had left any thing to
posterity. These men using great lights are said to have found nothing there,
but great and vast rivers and great receptacles of waters. This they also
labor to confirm by many and sudden eruptions and breaking out of waters
out of the earth, whereof we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter. This
first position, howsoever in it self true enough, seems little to the purpose;
but we will proceed to the second, which is this: That when God in the
Architect of all for man's sake, and the rest of living creatures for the use of
man, has discovered the dry land, by restrayning all the waters into one
place: so it was most necessary, that he should inwardly water the earth; by
which stones, mettalls, mineralls, and other such things in the bowels of the
Earth, should in time grow and increase. Also that some water should from hence
break up out of the Earth, for diverse causes hereafter specified. Finally as
Philo-Iudaeus affirms, for the continuation of the parts of the earth, which
otherwise might by drouth be separated and divided. The third proposition
grounded on Creation; because Histories and experience teach us, that many have
broken out of the ground afterward; they affirm, that if the opinion of
Aristotle be understood of all fountains and floods, it cannot be approved;
for as much as it seems sufficiently declared in the third opinion, how such
rivers might be generated without such vapors; as also because many arguments
and places of holy Scriptures, seem to prove the contrary. As also the four
Rivers of Paradise created in the beginning of the world, cannot be guessed to
draw their original from such vapors, as Aristotle imagines; to which accord
many ancient Fathers upon these places recited in that opinion, whereas all
rivers are thought to fetch their original from the sea. Sixthly for the credit
of their master Aristotle, they are constrained to auerre that although his
opinion cannot be verified of all rivers and rain, they have recourse to the
reasons of the first opinion; for others they make it also probable; because we
see by experience that Vapors and Air compassed about with earth, are by
reason of the cold enuironing it, turned into water, This is indeed the opinion
of those subtle Jesuits of Conimbra, wherein although they give a flourish, as
if they would defend their master Aristotle, on whom they comment; yet mean
they nothing less; but indeed warily stick to the other of the Divines and
ancient Fathers of the Church, touching the deriuation of all (...) from the
sea, Which opinion, howsoever in it self most probable, they know not how to
manage and defend against opposition. For whereas they suppose that in the
first sep^^tion of the sea from the dry-land, a great quantity of water was
dispersed into diverse hollow places and cauerns of the earth, from whence
Rivers are derived and made; they have not in any probable manner expressed,
how this water should perpetually flow, and feed so many and great currents*
For first, I would ask of these learned fathers, whether the water enclosed in
the bowels of the earth, whence these springs are fed, be higher or lower then
the fountains arising out of them. If it be higher; whether the Rivers are
continually nourished on the old store, or a new supply be daily made. That so
great rivers should be maintained so many thousand years out of the old
provision, is most improbable; because the mountains out of which such springs
arise, cannot be capable of so great a concauity: neither can it otherwise be
imagined, but that many great rivers since the beginning, had either bin
absolutely dried up, or at least diminished in their quantity, their Cisterns
being daily more and more emptied out into their channells. If they grant that
of this water, a fresh supply be made; it must be either from the sea or from
vapors in the earth. It cannot be from the sea: because (as we have proved
before) the sea is lower then the fountains, where springs break out of the
Earth; forasmuch as we see them run to the sea from their fountains, as from
a higher to a lower place. That this supply of water in the depth of the earth
should be made by vapors* it is also improbable in their opinion; who cannot
imagine so many engendered in one place, as to feed so great currents; as also
because many rivers were apparent in the first creation* as the four great
currents of Paradise. This objection has so far driven the Jesuits to their
shifts, as that they have bin enforced to have recourse to the opinion of
Thomas Aquinas, who dreams that the waters are enforced vpward^ by the
influence of the heavens* which they a little before ^ast by, and we have before
sufficiently refuted. And whereas in the subsequent clause, they labor to
salve this place of Ecclesiastes: That all Rivers come from the sea, and
return thither again; They are constrained to leave their old grounds, and
^unne back to Aristotle, who holds that all rivers had their original from
vapors, drawn up by the sun; whereof the sea is the chief mother. It will
be expected at least that we should disclose our own opinion, having censured
the former: which we will briefly do as near as probability can lead us,
submitting also to those which are more judicious* First therefore* we will
suppose as probable: that the earth is in a manner compassed round about with
water; for howsoever the places more eminent, and separated for our habitation,
be dry land* yet not far under the superficies of the earth, whereon we
tread, is the earth sprinkled round with water, for which we may draw an
argument; as well from the Porous and spongy nature of the Earth, which is apt
to drink in the water of the sea, in the same hight; (because it is the nature
of the water, to diffuse it self abroad) as also from experience of Minors and
such as digg deep into the earth, who in most parts find water* 2ly, this
water so enuironing the earth, were it left to it is own natural situation,
without an external Agent, would lift his superficies no higher, then the
superficies of the sea; because being as one with the sea, it will challenge
the same Sphericall superficies. Now to know how the water thus naturally
settled, is notwihtstanding lifted up higher to become the source of Springs,
we must understand, that it comes to pass not only by the heat of the sun
and stars, piercing farte under the superficies of the earth, according to
the circle, we have allotted to the water. But also to subterranean fires hid
in the bowels of the earth, in many places: which are caused by sulphurous
matter set on fire by the sun, or some other accident: whether this
sulphurous matter be pure Brimstone, or Bitumen, or a mine of sea-coale, as
some have thought of our Ba^h^s in England, I will not curiously here dispute,
being of it self too large a subject for me in this place to handle. This heat
may be conceived to concur to the production of fountains 2 manner of ways:
First, by drawing up diverse moist vapors, which by reason of the thickness
and solidity of the earth, being not presently euaporated out of the
superficies of the earth, are enforced to disperse themselves through diverse
crooked passages, where condensated by cold distilling again into drops of
water, they break out through some places of the earth, and so become a
fountain. A second way which may also seem probable, is that the Heat
peircing the Subterranean Water, though not able to dissolve much of it into
vapors for the solidity of the earth, may notwithstanding through his heat,
Rarifie and attenuate these waters. These waters then rarefied, must needs
seek a greater place, wherein they may be contained: since Rarefaction is
nothing else but the extension of a body to a greater place then before it
occupied. Hence is the Water enforced to enlarge his limits: This enlargement
or the place cannot be downward toward the Center; because all that place was
supposed to be filled up as far as the Earth could drink it. Wherefore it
must needs extend it is limits sidewise, or upwards: By the former of which it
may find a passage to break forth on the superficies of the ground: By the
latter it may be lifted high enough, to run from the side of a higher
mountain, toward the Seashore. If any man should ask why this Rarefaction
and swelling of the Water is not so sensible in the open Ocean, I answer that
the sea is also much rarefied and lifted up by reason of the suns heat:
which whether it be the cause of ebbing and flowing of the sea, in part we have
before disputed: Secondly that the seawater should not rise so high as other
water under the ground, these reasons may be given; First that the Ocean has a
larger channel to run abroad on either side, and so this swelling must of
necessity become more insensible, whereas the Waters in cauerns and concauities
of the Earth, being oftentimes straightly bounded on either side, by the
narrowness of the channel, must of necessity take up the more in hight and
eminency. 2 the Sun, heavenly bodies and subterranean fires work more
strongly and effectually on the open nakedness of the sea, then on the waters
hid under the ground, which are more shrouded from such an extreme heat.
Whence it comes to pass, that many parts of the sea, are dissolved into
vapors, and so consumed and dispelled by the same; Whereas this heat in the
Subterranean waters being more moderatly impressed; does not dissolve into
vapors, and consume so great a quantity of water; but being of a middle
temper, rather rarifies it to the use forenamed. This seems the more probable,
because spring water rising commonly in the sides of mountains, is for the
most part thinner then the Seawater, as experience daily warrants, Thirdly the
subterranean vapors are sooner dissolved into dropps of water by reason of the
cold they must necessarily meet within their passage, through the Earth;
whereas the other from the Sea meet with no such encounter till they arrive at
the Middle-Region of the Air, whence they return again in showers of Rain.

2 All rivers and Fountains were not from the beginning.

For the confirmation of this assertion, many histories may be produced: It is
reported that in Caria near about the city Lorus, there arose out of the Earth
suddenly a great flood of Water, bringing out with it a great quantity of
creatures and fishes, of which being fatted under the Earth, whosoever chanced
to eat, dyed presently. The like is reported, that at the time of the
Mithridatick war, at a certain city of Phrygia named Apamea, there sprang up
out of the ground many new Lakes, Fountains, Brooks; and that one river
sprang up very salt, which brought up with it a great quantity of Oisters, and
other Sea-fishes; although the city Apamea be very far off from the Sea.
This is reported by Nicolaus Damascene. Also Cardinal Contarenus testifies in
the second book of Elements, that in a clear day being in Valentia in Spain,
there happened a very great inundation of water breaking out of the Earth,
which being carried toward the City, had well near turned it into the Sea,
had not the gates bin shut, and dammes well ordered. Why this sudden change
should sometimes happen, many reasons may be produced. The first reason may be,
because of some sudaine ruin or falling down of some parts of the Earth,
whereby the courses of the rivers being one way stopped, must needs seek out a
passage some other way. This sometimes happens in great Earthquakes, as we may
read in Theophrastus, that in the mountain Coricus, after an Earthquake many
new springs and fountains discovered themselves. Another reason not much
unlike the former is given from the Hardness of the Earth, which oftentimes
stopping and hindering the natural course of the water, enforces it to seek a
new passage. Hence the foresaid Theophrastus was induced to believe, that in a
City of Crete the fountains were stopped up because the Inhabitants betoke
themselves to another place; so that the soil was not so much shook and moved
as before. A third reason may be the wasting or cutting down of great woods on
the Earth; for it is the nature of the Trees and plants to suck to themselves
the Moisture of the ground into one place. But these trees cut down or
removed, the waters course must needs be altered.

3 Many Rivers are for a great space of land swallowed up of the Earth: whereof
some after a certain distance rise again.

This is confirmed by many Historical instances, as of the river Timanus in
the province of Aquilia, of Erasenus in Argolica, Padus in the Alps, more
remarkable is that of the river Guadiaua in Spain: which runs under the
ground, for the space of 13 leagues: and near to a town called Villa Horta
breaks up again* the like is recorded of Eurota^ in Arcadia, which is said to
break forth of the ground in the Province of Lacedamon: So Cadmus Asia is
swallowed up in a hole of the ground, not far from Laodicea, So Pira^^s in
Catonia. Licus in Libanon, Orontes in Syria. Other rivers are thought to have
found a secret passage under the sea from one Region to another: As a river
having his fountain in the mountain Meia^es, which being conuayed in a blind
Channel under the middle of the sea, comes forth again at the port of
P^normus: so others report of Alpheus, which being drowned underground nere the
Peloponnesian shore, takes a large iourny under the Sea, till it arrive at
Syracuse, where it ends in Arethuse; which brings forth (they say) such things
as are cast into Alpheus: which is much like that which is spoken of the Well
of Aesculapius in Athens, wherein if any thing were cast, they were rendered
again in Phalericus: But this last I rather hold as a poetical fiction, then
a true History. Some rivers there are which are not wholly drowned in the
earth; but for some part; a^ a part of the Rh^n^, which is hid about four
thousand paces from the city Cauba, and shows it self again before it come to
Bonna: in like manner a part of Danu^ius which hides it self about Greina a
Town of Panonia superi^r: some rivers there are again, which are not drunk
up immediately of the earth, but of certain great Lakes into which they fall as
Jordan of the Lake Asphaltites: some lakes again having swallowed up rivers
(as it were) vomit them forth again, as Rubresius casts out Ara^e in the
Province of Narbon, and so Lemanus the river Rhodanus in the same Province:
also in Italy, Lorus cast out Abdua; Eupilus, Lambre; Fucinus, Marcia.

4 Rivers for the most part rise out of great Mountains, and at last by
diverse or one Inlet, are disburthened into the sea.

The first part of this proposition is manifest enough out of diverse instances
of the greatest rivers in the world: for all Geographers will give you to
understand, that the river Indus in I^dia is derived from the mountain
Ca^casus. Tanais from the Riphaean mountains in Sarma^ia, Araxis from Panardes
in Armenia, Po from the Vesusian Hills in Liguria, Danubius from Arnobia in
Germany, Exesus in Norico from the mountains Elachia Isara from the ridge of
the Alps toward France and Durias toward Italy from thence. So from the
Herminian mount^ines in Portugal are derived three great Rivers: So Nilus in
Africa from the mountains of the Moon: These rivers thus rising, are of
diverse kinds; for some have visible apparent springs and fountains: others
are derived from Lakes, out of which they run. As Alba in Prusia, out of
Elbinga, Medoarus and Oxus out of two lakes of the same names, near the Alps;
Rindacus from Artinia a poole besides Melitopolis. The reason why rivers should
be engendered in mountains, and such high places, may be given; because they
are made (as we showed before) by the heat of the sun, stars and
subterranean fires, rarifying and attenuating the Waters. And this operation of
the sun in higher places, must needs be more effectual then in lower. Now
for the second part, it is plain to prove, that all rivers run into the sea:
either making a passage from their fountains, on the land toward the sea
shore, as Nilus and Danubius, with other rivers, or by disburthening themselves
into greater rivers, wherein they are conuaied into the sea: as the 60 great
Nauigable rivers, which empty themselves into Danubius, or at least are
swallowed up of the Earth, and so reduced again to their first mother; which
we may imagine of the rivers forespoken of, drunk up of the Earth: Although all
rivers (as we showed (fall into the sea yet not all in one and the selfsame
fashion; if we respect their passage on the la^d. For some are carried into the
sea by one o^tiu^ or mouth, whereof we have two notable examples; the first of
a great river in Brasill called Rio de La Plate, which is carried into the sea,
by a mouth of 40 leagues with such violence, that the Mariners may ^hence draw
fresh water, before they come within sight of land. The other not much unlike,
is that which runs by the kingdom of Congo and Angolo, which is six and
thirty thousand paces broad* where it enters into the sea, and is carried with
such a force, that it seuers the waves, and keeps his own channel, and
renders the shipp-men fresh water betwixt the sea waters, for the distance of
eight hundred thousand paces. Other great rivers are disburthened into the sea,
by diverse Ostia or Inletts; as Rhene into the Germane Ocean by three; Danubius
into the Pontick sea* by 6; Indus into the Iud^an sea by 7; Nilus into the
Mediterranean by 7 great and famous passages* Volga into the Caspian lake by 72
gates. These are the most remarkable: others we shall supply in our
historical part.

5 Diverse fountains are endowed with diverse admirable virtues and operations.

There is nothing wherein Nature delights more in miraculous variety, then in
fountains and springs of the earth. Of these admirable works of nature, being
infinite in these springs, I will touch some. Which the better to effect, I
will reduce all to these heads: 1 Their qualities and operations. 2 their
motions: For the former we will produce some sew insta^ces. It is reported,
that near the Garamantes there is a fountain so cold in the days that no man
can drink thereof; so hot in the nights, that no man can abide to touch it:
There is another in India wherein a candle will burn. There is also another
called heretofore the well of Jupiter Hammon which in the morning is
lukewarm: at noone col^* in the evening Hot, at midnight boiling hot; From
whence again it begins to assuage till the morning; and so (as it were) by
turn it grows hot and cold* a matter of great admiration. Some fountains in
Liguria and Paphlagonia being drunk will make the head giddy as if he had
drunk wine. Another fountain in Aranea a part of Arcadia being drunk; will
so affect the taste, that who drink it shall never afterward endure the taste of
wine: which was very like the fountain Clitorius whereof Ovid in his
Metamorphosis the last book sings in this manner: Clitorio quiounque sitim de
font leu^^is,
Vina fugit, gaudetque meris abstemius vndis.
The ancients have also recorded, that in Boeotia near the river Orchomenon,
are two fountains; whereof the one gets memory, the other causes obli^io^*
There is in the Island Cea a fountain making the senses dull; another in
Aethiopia* whereon the Water drunken will make a man mad: Some water absolutely
kills him which drinks* as the river Styx in Arcadia, being a venomous fretting
poison, and therefore by the poets fained to be one of the rivers in Hell.
Diverse other rivers are profitable to cure diverse diseases of the body, whereof
I need not bring any instances; because such newfound wells are sometimes
discovered ^^ongst us here at home. There are 2 rivers in B^eotia of admirable
virtue* whereof the former, if a sheep drink of it, he will become yellow: but
if a sheep of a dunne or yellow color drink of the other, he will become
white: Rivers which make sheep white colored besides, are Neleus in Euboea,
Aliac^^on in Macedonia: Crathris in Thurijs: so Cerius in Euboea, Auxius in
Macedonia, Peneas in Thessaly, will make them black: (...) will cause
whiteness in oxen: So the river Astaces in Ponti^^ waters the land, whereby
mares have their milk black. Amongst the regions of the Troglodites, there is
a well which thrice a day will become sweet and bitter, and again return to
his former sweetness: and so often again in the night. This may suffice to
show the variety of operations in these wells, in respect of other creatures.
No less admirable variety is discovered in observing of their diverse motions.
For some rivers ouerflowe their banks at some certain times of the year,
(...) Nilus in Egypt, Euphrates in Mesopotania, Ind^^ in Indi^* some fountains
are carried with such violence, that they cast up stones, as M^rsia in Phrygia,
and expel any weight as a certain one in Arabia, whereof the like was
recorded to be in Portugal: some will swallow up any thing ^^^owne into them,
as one in Portugal, if we believe Pliny: some others although they are cold,
will sees and seem to boil^ a^ the water o^ the fire; yet never cast out
their water beyond their b^nk^^, but straightway swallow it up again, as
Acidula in Alb^g^^^, and another fountain in Cappidoci^ named Tia^^* some
there are which sometimes rise and swell, and other times fall again of their
own accord, as Crater of (...), and a fountain in Italy called Ph^iana: some
wells imitate the ^bbing and flowing of the sea in all increases and
dimi^utions, as one in Cale^, and the other near Bordeaux in France: some are
contrariwise affected to the ebbing and flowing of the sea flowing when the sea
^bbs, and ^bbing when the sea flows as certain Pits in Spain: some increase
and diminish without any consent or agreement with the motion of the sea; as a
Well in Tenodus, an Island near Troy. In Cantabria are three fountains,
distant 8 foot the one from the other, and falling into one Channel in a vast
river, which every day are dry twelve times, and sometimes twenty times: others
of their own accord purge and cleanse themselves, casting out wood, clay, dirt,
and other matters wherewith they are defiled, as a Well in the Chersonesus of
Rhodes. These and many more remarkable instances have our natural Historians
gathered together, whereof though some perhaps may be thought to be forged of
Poets for pleasure, or mistaken for want of good discovery and observation; yet
must we not wrong Antiquity so much as to reject all, having in this subject
enough to wonder at in ourowne Country.

6 Places near great Rivers and Lakes are most commodious for habitation.

It has bin the custom of all times and nations almost in the world, to
choose out for a choice place for building of cities, their habitation near
some great Lake, River, or Arm of the Sea; which sprang from the common
observation of Men, who found such places to be more convenient. This
conueniency is showed many ways: first, because by means of such water they
have quick passage and traffic with other Nations, being able with more ease
both to receive, and to send forth wares and merchandise. Whence we see that
such cities as are seated upon the water, are commonly of all other the
richest: whereof we may give an instance almost in every country, as of Seuill
and Lisbone in Spain and Portugal: of all the Cities almost of the
Low Countries; of Paris in France: whence (no doubt) grew that English
Proverb* That the Sea is a good neighbor; which may as well be understood of
any nauigable River. Secondly such a site is most convenient for the purging
away of all filth and excrements, which could not with the like conueniency be
so soon transported by land: whence many men have labored to transport rivers
far remote unto Cities. Thirdly, because such rivers and wa^ry lakes yield
store of fish, whereby the Inhabitants may be nourished, and other creatures
the better preserved: Fourthly, no small commodity would accrow to a Cyty by
water near adjoining If it should chance (as often it does) to be set on fire;
for having water near it, it may soon be quenched: whereas many little
springs cannot afford so much water as would suffice for such a purpose.
Lastly, amongst other reasons we cannot forget the pleasantnes of fair
rivers, which are no small ornaments to a City, and delights to the eye of the
Inhabitants.

8 Thus much for rivers: A Lake is a collection of perpetual waters, nourished
with fresh springs, and having of it self no passage forth.

In this definition of a Lake, we have comprised these three things: First
that it is a collection of constant and perpetual waters: Secondly, that it is
continually fed and cherished with fresh springs, rising up from the bottom.
Thirdly, that it finds no passage forth into the sea or otherwise. By the two
first it is distinguished from a great Pond or standing poole called in Latin
Stagnum: For as much as a standing poole, being commonly ^ed with rain water,
and having no springs from the Earth whereby it may be long nourished, is
often times by the heat of the sun exhausting it out by vapors, either
extraordinarily diminished, or altogether dried up: Whereas in a Lake by reason
of fresh springs, the Water is perpetual and remains sweet and wholesome,
except by some other accidents, it change it is disposition. For the latter
clause that a lake finds no passage forth, it may be two ways understood:
either of a visible or apparent passage outwardly through the superficies of
the Earth to the sea, or of a secret and subterranean passage under ground: The
former may again be understood of a passage forth immediately by it self, or
mediatly by some river: whereas we have said that it finds no entrance into
the sea, we ought to understand it, that immediately it is not to be accounted
a continuate part conjoined with the sea: nevertheless it may be disburthened
into the sea by some rivers running out of it, as some would have the great
river Tanais not to have his head or fountain in the Riphaean mountains, as
the ancients have taught, but in a certain Lake not fa^re from the city Tulla*
so Volga and Edill draw their original from a lake not far from Moscow: with
many others of like nature. What to think of the subterranean intercourse
betwixt Lakes and the sea, we will show in this Theoreme.

1 It is probable, that most Lakes have some secret intercourse with the sea
under ground.

For the confirmation of this point, there want not reasons: The first reason
may be drawn from the quantity of Water in most Lakes, which is found without
any great sensible difference to remain the same, without any diminution or
increase; whereas if the water bound in with these limits, should have no
passage out any way, it should increase to such greatness, that it would easily
ouerwhelme the banks To give a few instances, we find that diverse very vast
rivers exhaust themselves into the Caspian Lake as Volga and Edill, which
receiving into them many notable rivers, are at last themselves swallowed up in
the said lake: In like manner the Lake of Palestine called the dead sea, is
known to receive into it besides diverse lesser rivers, the great and famous
river Jordan. Here would I demand, whether these great rivers perpetually
casting themselves into a Lake, give an increase to the former quantity or not:
if they should augment the water, they would by consequence alter the bounds:
But this is contradicted by experience. If the quantity of the water suffers no
increase, it must needs follow then, that the water should some other way be
diminished, as it is here increased. This must either be by the sun drawing
up some parts of it by vapors, or by some cauerns of the Earth, drinking up
some parts of it: Or lastly by a subterranean passage into the sea: Concerning
the former it cannot be denied, but much Water is drawn up into vapors by
the heat of the sun yet that these vapors counteruaile the water perpetually
brought in, is in my conceit very improbable: for against this quantity of
water extracted out this way of evaporation, I will oppose these three things
which shall persuade a reasonable man, that the water received in, shall far
surpass the vapors exhaled from it* First that the vapors are stirred up in
the day time, when the sun is lifted above the Horizon; at such a height that
his heat is somewhat strengthened, whereas all these watery currents never
intermitting their usual course, never cease to run by day or night: wherein
is seen a double advantage of the rivers, in respect of the watery exhalation*
Secondly of these watery vapors, so drawn out, a great part must at diverse
times return back, or at least so much otherwise by rayny showers, dropped
down into this Lake. Thirdly, these watery parts thus rarefied and attenuated
in vapor should (putting this supposition) in equality, diffuse themselves
abroad in such extraordinary manner, that all the Regions round about should in
all likelihood suffer a great inconueniency of foggy exhalations. On the other
side it is very unlikely, that it should be received into empty caverns of the
Earth, without passage into the sea, or some great river, disburthening it
self thereunto. For I would demand whether these cauerns were ever filled
with water or not? if they have been filled, how could they receive more water,
since the filling of any place supposes it to be first empty. That they were
never yet filled with Water, is far more unreasonable: that any man should
imagine, any cauerne of the Earth to be so vast, with so great currents of
Water perpetually running in almost six thousand years, should not replenish:
especially considering the bowels of the Earth, not far from the upper face,
to be every where spread with Water round, which might also help to this
purpose: Wherefore it cannot well be imagined but that every such great lake,
has some vent or passage unto the sea, either by some secret and subterranean
channel, or at least by some great river issuing out of it, and so running
into the Ocean. Another reason may be taken from the currents of some seas,
which are by good reason ascribed to this cause: For it is observed by skillful
Nauigatours, that the Water is carried by a very stiff course from Propontis
and the black sea into the Aegaean, and from thence into the Mediterranean: The
original of which current may with good conjecture be found out in the
Caspian, which by some secret passage under ground, disburthening it self into
the black sea, causes it to enforce his own waters farther of, for the receipt
of the other. Thirdly that these subterranean passages are not unlikely, may be
confirmed by many rivers which are swallowed up, some wholly, some for ^ome
place only of the Earth, whereof we have spoken before. Also it may seem
likely by the Water, spread round about the Earth, which through the bowels of
it find a passage from the sea, bearing as it seems the same level. This may
(for ought we know) be the original of all Lakes, and this also may be a way
or means, whereby they empty and disburthen themselves being ouercharged with
too much Water.

CHAP. X. Of Mountains, Valleys, Plain Regions, Woods, and Champian
Countries.
1 THe second variation in the figurature of the Earth is expressed in
Mountains, Valleys, and Plain Countries. A Mountain is a quantity of Earth
heaped above the ordinary height of the land. A Valley is the depth of the
Earth between two Mountains. A plain is a space of Earth where there is found
no notable rising or falling of the ground.

The distinction of the Earth according to it is external figurature into
Mountains, Valleys, and Plains is very natural; because every space or
parcel of land in respect of the places near or about it, must either rise
higher, or fall lower, or at least must bear an equality; where the former is
admitted, there must needs be Mountains swelling higher then the ordinary
level of the Earth; where the second is found, the ground is indented with
Valleys and concauities: where the third is to be seen, there must be
Plains. Here is to be noted that howsoever Plains absolutely considered, have
a sphericall surface for the most part, especially, if the Plains be large
because they concur as circular segments to make up the Sphere of the Earth;
yet they may be called Plains, because they so appear to our sense, which in
so short a distance, cannot perceive the Sphericall figurature of the Earth;
Some Gramarians here curiously distinguish between mons or a Mountain, and
Collis or a Hillock, which is a little hill: and also betwixt Vallis, which
they would have to be a low parcel of ground betwixt two mountains, and
Conuallis which is a lower space, only bounded on one part by a mountain,
which Varro would have to be derived from Cauata vallis; but these Grammatical
scruples are of small use to such as spend themselves on greater matters:
because the ordinary and usual manner of speech (even amongst the vulgar) will
shut out all mistakes in this kind; what deserves the study of ^ Topographer
concerning this, shall be expressed in these Theoremes.

1 Mountains, Valleys, and Plains were created in the Earth from the
beginning, and few made by the violence of the Deluge.

It has bin the opinion of some, as well Divines as Philosophers, that the
violence of the Deluge has extraordinarily altered and defaced the Earth,
being the chief cause of Mountains and Valleys therein: but this opinion is
contradicted by many reasons; first out of the Text it self of Genesis, where
it is said, that the water of the flood ouer-flowed by 15 Cubits the highest
Mountains: to which may be added the Testimony of Damascenus, who reports,
that in the time of the Deluge many resorted to a high mountain of Armenia,
called Baris, where they saved themselves which last clause although it
expressly contradicts the holy Scriptures, which speak but of Eight Persons
that were saved: yet it is a sufficient testimony to prove that such Mountains
were before the Flood, and therefore not made by it: Secondly had there
followed so great an alteration of the Earth, to cause mountains as some
imagine, then should not the same places after the flood retain their names,
bounds, and descriptions, which they did before the flood; the contrary whereof
we find, in that Moses writing of Paradise, and other places, about 850 years
after the flood, was most exact in setting down the Names, Limits, and whole
description of them, as though they had remained to be seen in his days.
Thirdly, had the violence of the waters been so great as to raise up
mountains in the Earth, it would without doubt have bin forceable enough to
have turned Rivers, and have changed them from one place to another, cast down
and demolished the greatest Cities and buildings, thrown down and
ouer-whelmed all plants and vegetalls on the Earth, and (as it were) have
buried from all succeeding time, the memories of the former ages, so that
little or nothing should appear: but this may be proved otherwi^e by sundry
Instances: First that the Rivers have still remained the same, may appear out
of the place alleged of Genesis, where Moses speaking of the site of Paradise,
sets down all the rivers of it exactly, especially Tigris and Euphrates: out
of the which we may easily gather in what longitude and latitude it stood: had
any thing bin altered in the course of the rivers, it is likely Moses would
have specified it in this History, that after ages looking for these places,
might not mistake or suspect the truth of his Relations: Secondly, that it has
not extinguished all Buildings* and ancient monuments of the fathers before the
flood, may probably be coniectured by the testimony of Josephus a writer of
good credit, who affirms that he saw one of the pillars, erected by Seth, the
second from Adam; which pillars were set up above 1426 years before the flood,
accompting Seth to be a hundred years old at the erection of them, and
Josephus himself to have lived some 40 or 50 years after Christ; Now although
we are not bound to credit all thar he relates; yet may we trust him concerning
such matters as happened in his time; and that this pillar was set up by Seth
was never yet called in question, but warranted by antiquity: the like is
recorded by Berosus of the City of Enoch, that it was not demolished by the
flood, but remained many years after, the ruins whereof as Annius in his
commentary reports, were to be seen in his time, who lived in the time of
Ferdinand and Isabella of Castile. It is also reported by Pomponius Mela, that
the City of Ioppa was built before the flood, of which Cepha was King, whose
name with his brother Phineus together with the grounds and principles of their
religion, were found graven upon Altars of stone: All which are sufficient to
prove the violence of the Waters, not to have bin so great to demolish all
mountains and monuments; Moreover it may be plainly proved out of the text,
that the Waters suffered the plants and trees of the Earth to grow, and remain
as* they did before; because it is said, that when Noah the second time sent
out the Dove, she returned with an olive branch in her mouth, which no doubt
she had plucked from the trees, after the trees were uncovered; for otherwise
she might the first time have found it floating on the Waters: a manifest proof
that the trees were not torn up by the roots, or turned topsy turuy, but
remained fixed in the Earth as they did before. Fourthly, had the water
suffered this extreme violent motion, as whereby it might make many
mountains. I ask whence this motion should come* it could not be from the
natural motion of the water, which is to move downward: for what descent of
waters can be in a Sphericall round body, where no part is higher, or lower?
That there was any wind to drive and enrage the Waters, is very unlikely;
because it is said, that God caused a wind to pass upon the Earth, and the
Waters ceased* so that there was no wind till the Waters sanke: Lastly, we may
argue from a final cause, that this inequality in the superficies of the Earth
was before the flood; because it is certain that all things were in as good or
better estate, then now with us, and that the Earth was adorned with all
varieties of creatures as well for profit; as delectation. Now it is found by
experience, that all commodities agree not to all places, but some are found in
the mountains, at all sorts of mettalls and mineralls, Plants, and Vegetalls
for the most part prosper best in the valleys and plains: Also that the
mountains serve for a shelter to guard the valleys from the rigor of cold and
wind, both for the better conueniencie of man's life, and increase of fruits for
the use of man: Whence we may conclude, that it is far more probable, that
the great Mountains were so created in the beginning, and not made by the
flood; yet can we not deny, but that some small Hillockes might be made by the
flood, and afterward by the industry of man, which have raised great
fortresses, and bulworks, which afterward decayed, were made great heaps of
Earth (as we see many in this land) but this is of small note and not worthy
consideration, in comparison of the great mountains of the Earth whereof we
especially treat.

2 The perpendicular height of the highest mountains seldom exceeds 10
furlong.

This proposition depends on the authority of Eratosthenes a famous
Mathematician, who being employed by his King, found out by Dioptrick
Instruments the height of the highest mountains, not to exceed the quantity
above specified* Cleomedes extends this a little farther, and would have some
mountains to attain the height of 15 furlongs, of which height he would have
an high rock in Bactriana called by Strabo 11 libro Sisimitrae Petra; But yet
if we credit Pliny on Dicaearch^^ who measured the Mountain Pelion accounted
the highest, he found it not to exceed 1250 paces which make 10 furlongs: and
Solinus relates the mountains of Thessaly to be higher then elsewhere are to
be found. But this opinion howsoever supported by the authority of the ancient
and famous Mathematicians, has been called in question as well by modern, as
ancient writers. Many matters are miraculously, or rather fabulously spoken of
the Mountain Athos in Macedonia, of Cassius in Syria, and another of the same
name in Arabia, of the mountain Caucasus, and others: which Histories
notwithstanding are related by no meaner Authors then Aristotle, Mela, Pliny,
and Solinus, yet it is not hard to imagine, that these Authors might be
deceived in those times, either trusting to other men's relations, or wanting
Mathematical instruments, to search these matters: Of the Mountain Athos it
is much wondered at, that it should cast a shadow from Macedonia into the
marketplace of Myrhina a town of the Island Lemnos, distant from Athos 86
miles: But this as our learned Countriman Mr Hues well observes, can be no
great argument of such a miraculous height; because the mountain Athos situate
East from Lemnos (as may be gathered from Ptolomies Table) may without any
great wonder cast a very long shadow, the Sun either rising, or setting.
Other matters are related of this mountain Athos more strange then the former,
to wit, that it should in hight transcend the Region of the rain, and wind,
which they would strive to confirm out of an old tradition; that the ashes
heaped together on certain Altars built on the top thereof were nener blown
away, but remained in the same manner as they were left: to which may be added
out of Strabo, that they who inhabit the top of this mountain, can see the
Sun 3 hours before those who inhabit near the sea: The like is reported by
Aristotle of the Mountain Caucasus, that for the extreme height; the top of
it enioyes the Sunbeams a third part of the night; Little less is spoken by
Pliny and Solinus of the mountain Cassius in Syria and by Pomponius Mela of
the mountain Cassius in Arabia; But how fabulous and incredulous these things
are, Petrus Nonius and other Mathematicians have sufficiently demonstrated out
of the grounds of Geometry; more absurd by far seems that, which Eustathius
reports of Hercules pillars celebrated by Dionysius Perieges, for their
admirable height; whereas they are found not to exceed 100 else making one
furlong; a height according to Strabo not exceeding the Egyptian Pyramides,
and coming short of certain Indian trees near the River Hyarotes, whose
Meridian shadows reach 5 furlongs; These errors in the ancient might seem
venial had they not bin seconded by latter writers: Of the Mountain Tenariffe
in the Canaries, Scaliger is bold to report out of other men's relations, that
it rises in height above 15 leagues, which make 60 miles; but Petricius more
bold then he, would have it 70 miles; Little less is spoken of Pico amongst the
Azoris In^ul^, and the Mountain Andi in Peru; But to confute these relatio^s
we will use this argument; It is reported by the Spanish writers which have
spoken of this place, that the topps of these Mountains scarce any one or two
months in the year are free from snow: Now that snow should be engendered
above 60 or 70 miles above the ordinary plain of the Winter or Earth, is
against the judgment of our best Astronomers; because, as they have observed
out of Eratosthenes measure, the highest vapors seldom reach so far as 48
miles in height every way from the Earth. This argument may as well serve to
confute these ancient opinions before mentioned, had they not been so fabulous,
as scarce to deserve any solid confutation.

3 The ordinary height of the Land above the Sea in diverse places is more then
the hight of the highest Mountains above the ordinary face of the Earth.

We have probably showed out of former grounds, that as the ordinary height of
the Earth is answerable to the ordinary depth of the Sea, so the hills and
mountains in proportion answer to the whirle-pooles and extraordinary Gulphes
of the Sea: but it is to be imagined that the depth of the Sea in the maine
Ocean, is far more below the superficies of the Earth then those other
whirle-pooles and Holes extend themselves below that depth. But to prove this
by a more sensible argument we will compare the one with the other, so far
forth as Mathematicians by experience have guessed* for it is found by
Mathematick Instruments (as we have proved in the precedent Theoreme) that the
highest Mountains seldom or never mount upward above ten furlongs, which is
an English mile, and a quarter: but the hight of the Land in some places where
appear no such hills, is observed to be much more: to prove which assertion,
we can have no fitter argument then the fresh Springs of Rivers; for it is
manifest that all Rivers are higher at the Spring or fountain, then at the
place where they disburthe^ themselves into the sea. Now although water is apt
to slide away at any Inequality, yet it is most probable that in greater
rivers, especially where the waters fall oftentimes with violence (as at the
Cataracts of Nile) much inequality must be granted in the Declivity of the
ground: supposing yet the water for every mile to gain two foot in the
Declivity of the ground, we shall find the hight very near to equalize the
hight of the highest mountains; although 2 foot in a mile is far less then
can be imagined in so great a River. The River which I take for an example
shall be Nilus, which we shall observe to run about 50 Degrees from South to
North, which resolved into miles will make 3000 accompting for every mile 2
foot, we shall have 6000 foot, which will be near these 10 furlongs, being a
mile and 5 parts; then allowing for these mighty Cataracts where the water
falls with so great a violence, we must reckon a number of feet far greater
then this measure; for every mile must the hight of land above the sea be much
more then of the mountains.

4 Mountainous Regions are commonly colder then other plain countries.

This proposition is not absolutely to be understood without a limitation: for
some plain Countries near the Articke Pole, may be colder then some hilly
Regions near the Aequatour, in regard of other concurrent causes: but here we
speak (as the Logicians use) caeteris paribus; comparing two places either
together like, or not much different, or at least in our understanding,
abstracting them from the mixture of all other considerations: that this
Theoreme is worthy credit, diverse reasons stand in readiness to justify: the
first may be drawn from the cause of heat in Inferior Bodies, which is the
reflection of the Sun beams. Now that this reflection is of more strength and
validity in plain then in hilly and mountanous Countries, is evident: first,
because (as the Optickes teach) the rays are more joined and combined in a
plain, then in a conuex superficies; for howsoever the whole Earth be of it
self Sphericall, yet the conuexity being not sensible, by reason of the
vastnes of the Circle, whereby the conuexity is made less it may optically be
called a plain superficies: Secondly it is taught in the Optickes, that a
reflection is of more validity in an equal, then in an uneven and ragged
superficies, such as is found in Mountains and uneven places. A second reason
why mountanous Regions should exceed others in cold, may be the vicinity of
them to the middle Region of the Air; for of all the Regions (if we believe
Aristotle) the middle is the coldest, as being more separate from the Sun the
fountain of heat, and the higher Region, farther off from the reflection of the
Sunne-beames, then the lower: Now since the parts of the Earth are affected with
the quality of the Air, it must needs stand with reason, that the more it
shall approach to the middle Region, the more it must partake of its quality.
Thirdly, that this is consonant to observation, reasons are urged by experience
of all Trauailers, who report the topps of Mountains even in the midst of
Summer to be covered over with snow although situa^e under or near the
Aequinoctiall Circle: Of this nature are the Alps in Italy, the Mountains of
the Moon in Afric, And^ in Peru, and Tenariffe in the Canaries. That snow
should be an effect of cold, I need nor labor to confirm. A fourth reason may
be drawn from other effects of cold or heat; for it is daily proved by
experience, that such diseases as chiefly follow heat, especially the
Pestilence in Egypt, and such plain Countries, are wonderful prevalent,
whereas hilly and rockic Countries by the benefit of Nature stand in little
fear of such Inconveniences. Lastly, no greater argument can be drawn, then
from the disposition of such men as inhabit such hilly Regions, who have all
the Symptoms of external cold, and internal heat* Insomuch as ^odin seems
to make a Harmony and ^o^cent betwixt the Northern man and the Mountanist
(...) Southern man and such as inhabit plain countries ascribing to the
former external cold, and internal heat: to the latter external heat, and
internal cold. How far this comparison will hold, we shall have more
occasion to discuss here after, when we come to the consideration of the
Inhabitants.

^ Mountains since the beginning of the world have still decreased in their
quantity, and so will continually decrease until the end.

This observation Blaucanus, I know not how truly, ascribes to his own
Invention: but to what Author soever we owe it, we must needs acknowledge a
pleasant speculation, grounded on good reason. This Theoreme to demonstrate the
better, we will first lay these grounds oftentimes beforementioned. First (as
appears by testimony of holy Scripture) the figure of the Earth was in the
beginning more perfectly Sphericall, ouer-whelmed euery-where with Waters. 2ly
That a separation was made by translocation of the parts of the Earth, in such
manner as some places admitting of concauities, became the receptacle of the
waters, other places whereon these parts of the Earth were heaped together, were
made mountanous. 3. Hence will follow, that the Earth thus swelling up in high
mountains, is out of his natural site and position: and therefore according
to the law of nature, will endeavor by little and little to return to her former
state and condition. Now that the Earth has sensibly suffered such a change
since the beginning, it is easy to show out of experiments: the causes we
shall find to be the water, as well of the Rain as Rivers, which we shall
demonstrate by these Reasons: 1 We see Rivers by little and little continually to
fret and eat out the feet of mountains, whence the parts thus fretted through,
by continual falling down wear out the mountains, and fill up the lower
places in the valleys, making the one to increase, as the other to decrease,
and the whole Earth to approach nearer to a Sphericall figure then before;
which seems to be warranted by a place in Job 14, where he says to God; The
mountain falling, comes to ^ought, and the rock is removed out of his
place. The waters wear the stones, thou washest away the things which grow out
of the dust of the earth. From these Rivers in the valleys continually eating
through the parts of the Earth, as the feet of mountains are caused those
slow but great Ruins called Labinae, a lambendo, by which sometimes whole
Towns and Villages have bin cast into the next great River. 2 To prove that
Rain water challenges a part in this diminution of mountains, we may show by
the like experience: we see plainly that Raine-water daily washes down from
the Tops of mountains some parts of the Earth; whence it comes to pass that
the highest mountains are harder and more rocky then others as being more able
to resist this violence of the water. Hence also it happens that old buildings
being erected in the sides of mountains, have their foundations after a time
uncovered, and are much subject to Ruins: an instance whereof may be given
out of the Roman Capitol, whose foundation (according to the relation of
George Agricola) appears now plainly above the ground, which without question
was heretofore deep rooted in the Earth. In Plains and valleys we find all
things to happen contrary wise, to wit, that all places in regard of their
superficies are raised much higher then they were in times past, The reason
whereof may easily be given out of the great quantity of the Earth, carried by
the washing of the Rain from the Topps of mountains into the valleys* whence
we may perceive old houses, heretofore fairly built, to be now almost buried
under ground, and their windows heretofore set at a reasonable hight, now
grown even with the pauement: so some write of the Triumphall Arch of
Septimius at the foot of the Capitol Mountain in Rome, now almost covered
with Earth, insomuch as they are enforced to descend down into it by as many
stairs as formerly they were used to asce^d. In like sort we see in old
Monasteries and Religious houses, their lower rooms, windows, and doors,
very far couched under ground, of which great inconvenience we cannot suspect
the Architects judgment, but rather our forementioned cause: from this burying
of parts of some houses under ground, it may be gathered, that the farther they
are under ground, so much ancienter they are: as we may observe here with us
in Oxford, that our most ancient Colleges have the windows of their lower
rooms, some-where altogether choked up with Earth without, or at least half
way, in so much as the flore within, is found to be far inferior in height
to the street without: This is also confirmed by Architects, who in digging up
old foundations, before they came to firm ground whereon to erect a building,
are enforced first to remove away the Rubbish or (as they term it) the
Made-ground, wherein oftentimes they find Wood, Iron-Instruments, old coin,
with diverse other Trash of this Nature. An instance we have in some of the
lower places in Somersetshire, where some upon occasion digging the Earth
somewhat deep, have found great Oaks turned topsy turvy with their Roots
upwards. To conjecture with some, that this was caused by Noah's Flood, seems
to be very improbable: 1 because as we have formerly showed in this Chapter,
the Water in the Deluge could not have so violent a motion to procure such an
alteration in the parts of the Earth. 2 It cannot so well be imagined how such
Trees should remain so long a time without putrefaction: wherefore we cannot
well cast it on any other cause, then the addition of the earthly parts,
brought by rain from the mountains into the valleys: and so by some
Land-flood which partakes much of slimy and earthly matter dispersed abroad
upon the land about. Now on the contrary part we find in few places of
mountains such made-ground which has before been moved. This will also
appear out of the industry of our Low-countreyman, who by baying up the Rivers
into certain Artificial Channels, the ground about has been much raised:
where on the contrary side the forcing of the water into higher places,
oftentimes is found to fret through the Earth, and make it lower. What we have
spoken of the effects of Rivers and Rain in diminishing the greatness of the
mountains and exalting of the vallyes, we may in some sort find in the sea.
For the bottom of the Sea being lower then the Earth, and many great Rivers
continually running from the Earth into it; it is manifest that there is
carried in their current a great quantity of earth, in so much as by the
heaping of sand and earthly rubbish, the mouths of great Rivers are in time
choked up, and commodious havens spoiled and removed farther into the land: of
which alternall transmutation of the Sea and Land w^ shall speak hereafter:
and for present instance need to go no farther then diverse Towns in Deuon,
which (according to the Relation of ancient men) have heretofore been fair
havens, able to receive great ships, to which notwithstanding at this time a
small boat cannot arrive except in a full Tide. 1 Meteor.
The like whereof is reported by Aristotle, 1 of a place in Egypt called Delta,
made by the heaping up of sand and slime, brought by Nilus from the Ethiopian
mountain. 2 of Ammania Regio, which in times past being Sea, through the slime
conuayed in the Rivers, became afterward as a standing poole, which in
process of time waxed dry, and joined it self to the Continent. 3 Of Maeotis
Palus, that the dry land enuironing it round, is so much increased, that ships
of that burden cannot arrive, which could in times past within 60 years
before; which is also in some sort testified by Polybius. 4 The like is related
of Bosphorus Thracius, and many other places recorded by Pliny* Lib. 4.
of which we shall speak hereafter. From these observations Blancanus would
infer these consectaries: 1 That the Earth was not from the beginning endowed
with mountains: 2 That it should not so continue until the end of the world;
and unless the Fire (whereof the Scripture speaks) should prevent it, the
whole Earth should in the end be ouer-whelmed with waters, as in the beginning,
and so be made void of habitation: but on such conjectures I dare not too
boldly venture, being speculations built on no sufficient grounds: All which
can hence warrantably be collected is expressed in our former Theoreme.

2 Of the Figurature of Countries in Mountains, Valleys, and Plains, we
have spoken: It is requisite here we speak somewhat of Woods and Champian
Countries.

3 A Wood is a Region or space of Land beset with trees. A Champian Region is a
space of Land either altogether void, or scarce furnished with trees.

Some Critics here curiously distinguish in Latin, betwixt Sylua, Lucus, and
Nemus: by Sylua understanding a space beset with trees, ordained to be cut
down; but Lucus was a place where trees were not ordained to be cut down,
but reserved sacred: For in such groves they did anciently use to offer
sacrifice, as may appear by diverse places out of the Old Testament, where the
Heathenish manner of worshipping was forbidden, and sometimes reproved in the
Kings of Judah and Israel: That which the Latins call Nemus, is a Grove or Wood
ordained only for pleasure and recreation: but the discussing of these
businesses rather belong to a Grammarian then a Geographer; who takes little
notice but of those matters which most principally and remarkeably belong to
any Region; wherefore omitting other curiosities, we have distinguished only
between a Woody and a Champian Country; whereof (as we have defined) one is
beset with a multitude of trees; the other with few or none. What concerns a
Geographer to observe in those matters, shall generally be comprised in this
Theoreme.

1 Woods in these days are not so frequent, nor so great as in ancient times.

We cannot imagine otherwise then that the Earth soon upon the flood, bearing
in her womb the seeds of all vegetals, being inwardly moistened, and outwardly
comforted with Heat, should presently abound with plants of all sorts; in so
much as in a short time each thing propagating it self by communication of his
own seeds, the whole Earth was ouergrown as one forest: but afterward as man
began to spread and multiply on the face of the Earth, these Woods and Thickets
began to suffer chastisement under the hand of laborious husbandry: For first
to open a passage from one place unto another, and that some parcels of ground
should as pastures be divided from Woody acres, it was necessary that this
great plenty of trees should suffer a decrease: yet little had this been noted
in so vast a store, had not the invention of building of houses by little and
little turned great forests into Cities; which for the most part owed not only
their first original, but also their daily reparation to Trees and Timber: but
above all the greatest deuourer of Woods and Forests is Fire, an element fed
and nourished almost of no other matter. For to let pass the ordinary use of
fire in every house and family, which in so infinite a multitude of people, in
so many years since the Flood, must require an extraordinary proportion of
wood and fuel, how many Arts have been since invented, depending only upon
this Element? we will go no farther then the Art of Liquefaction, fining of
gold and other metals, found out in the bowels of the Earth, wherein the
covetousness of men has been as vnsati^ble as the fire. To this which we
have said, may probably be opposed two things: first, the power and inclination
of every Creature to multiply and propagate it self. Secondly, the industry of
mankind in seconding that inclination: Whence it may be coniectured that great
woods should by durance increase to a greater quantity: for the former, no man
will deny, but that plants and trees left to themselves, will commonly
propagate their kind: nevertheless it cannot prevail so much as the other,
which procure the decrease: first because the Earth being dryer now, then soon
upon the Flood, cannot so much further the growth of vegetals as then it did:
Secondly, because (as we have said) this growth in a populous Country, cannot
be so great as the diminution, since few or no houses can want so necessary an
Element as fire. To the second we answer that man's industry has done somewhat
in plantation of groves, and such like: but how little is this in comparison of
the huge and vast forests in time by man wasted and consumed. We shall read of
Germany, that in the time of Caesar it seemed a wild Country, having many
great woods and forests, but few Cities: but now the case being altered, we
shall find the Cities both in number and greatness increased, and the Woods
diminished. Two instances may suffice, the one of the Forest of Ardenna in
Lutzemburg, accounted in Caesar's time 500 miles over, now scarce 50. The other
of Sylua Hyrcinia, which heretofore (if we believe Histories) reached so far as
a man could travail in 60 days; but now is made the only limit or bound
dividing Bohemia from the rest of Germany. The like may be observed almost of
every other Country reduced to ciuility.

2 Places moderatly situated toward the North or South Pole abound more in
Woods then near the Equatour.

This situation we understand to comprehend almost all the temperat Zone,
reaching either way so far as 60 degrees or there about. The demonstration of
this Theoreme depends of these two foments of all plants, Heat and Moisture;
both which concur, not only to the abundance and fertility, but also to the
greatness of all plants; for it is most certain that wheresoever these two
vital succors are wanting or deficient, there must be a great scarcity of
trees, fruits, herbage, and such like: This is the cause why the Regions far
North near about the Pole, beyond 60 degrees, have not only scarcity of
trees, but have them such as are, of a far smaller quantity then other
Regions, lying more temperate: For the internal and natural heat is almost
extinguished, with the extremity of cold, and the moisture (as it were) dried
up by the frosty disposition of the Region. To this cause may we ascribe, that
which Geographers have delivered concerning Island, that for want of Timber
they cover their houses with fish-bones, digging out houses in the sides of
Rocks and mountains. Moreover that the mere defect of moisture may cause a
scarcity of growth, may be proved by many places: 1 because temperate Regions,
which are Mountainous and lying higher, produce trees of small length; Bodin
testifies as a thing very remarkable, that he has observed oaks in France
not exceeding 3 or 4 feet. But this is no great wonder with us in England: since
in the dry and barren plains about Salisbury there are many examples not much
different: All which, we can ascribe to no other cause then the want of
moisture. On the other side as great or greater a defect of heat and moisture,
is found near the Equatour, by reason of the external heat of the Sun;
which in all plants and vegetalls, not only euaporates the moisture, and by
consequence causes drowth; but by the extraction of Internal heat, leaves a
greater cold behind, correspondent to that humor in a man, which we call
Melancholy and choler-adust: But this extremity of heat causing this defect of
internal heat and moisture, we place not directly under the Equinoctial;
because we have showed it to be more temperate: but rather under the Tropicks,
which by experience are found scorched with great heat. How subject these
places under the Tropickes are to this sterility, we need go no farther then
Libia and Numidia to confirm; Places by the report of trauailers, indigent not
only of Woods and Trees, but almost of all vital succors. Whereas the Woods
and Forests dispersed almost in every region of Europe, and the more temperate
parts of Asia, are celebrated of all writers. Yet whereas we have defined the
chiefest places for the growth of Woods to be toward the North, so far as 60
degrees or there-abouts; we cannot warrant this as an absolute general
observation; because some places lying very low, and subject to much moisture,
though situat more Southerly, may enjoy this proportion, as we have formerly
showed of trees near the River Hiarotis recorded by Strabo, to have their
noone shadows of 5 furlongs, as also of certain trees in America near Riuo
Negro, wherein (as Peter Martyr writes) a King dwelt with all his family. But
these places howsoever situat toward the South are (as Geographers deliver
unto us) most times of the year overwhelmed with Water, consisting all of
marish grounds: yet these few instances drawn from the particular disposition
of the Earth it self, cannot much impeach our proposition, which takes notice
only of the situation of the Earth, in respect of the cardinal points of North
and South, compared with the Heavens.

CHAP. XI.
1 HItherto have we treated of the Absolute adjuncts of the land; we are now to
speak of the Relative, which imply a respect of the Land to the Sea.

2 From this Termination of the land with the sea, there arises a twofold
distinction: The first is of the land into Continent and Islands.

3 A Continent is a great quantity of land consisting of many Kingdoms and
Regions, not divided by Water, the one from the other: An Island is a parcel of
land compassed round with the sea.

An Island is called in Latin Insula, quasi in salo; because it stands in the
Sea; some would have it in English termed an Island, as it were, Eye of the
land: But this deriuation seems affected and not natural: it might seem more
naturally to be derived from the French L'Isle. But we will not dispute of the
name: It is enough to understand, that an Island is a portion of the habitable
Earth, every where environed with the sea, orat least with some great River:
but this last sense seems more improper then the other; yet oftentimes used,
as Meroe in Africa an Island of Nilus, and the Island of Eely in England. To this
is opposed the Continent, as that land, which being not divided and separated
by the sea, contains in it many Empires and Kingdoms, as Europe, Asia,
Afric, America; all which, as far as we can yet gather, are united and
joined together, in one continuate land; Strabo affirms out of this in his 1
Boooke and first Chapter of Geographie, that the whole Earth is one Island; since
all these known parts of the Earth, are compassed about with the sea on every
side: But this opinion cannot stand with reason, or modern observation: First,
because this acception is too large; for as much as an Island is properly taken
for a smaller part, divided from the rest of the land, and opposed to the
Continent; whereas if this sense were admitted, the distinction of land into
Continent and Island would have no place, or at least the same in a diverse
respect, might be called a Continent and an Island. But it is plain that
Islands were always opposed to the continent, to which, although separate by
Water, they were supposed to belong, as to Europe, Asia, Afric, America, or
Magellanica, or some other as Geographers have reduced them. Secondly, because
it was a bold conjecture to think the whole world to consist only of those
parts, found out in Strabos time: For besides the two parts of America since
that time discovered by Columbus, another great portion is since that time
found out in the South, by the conjecture of Ferdinando de Quir, coming near
the quantity of Europe, Asia, and Africa. Which howsoever it be round environed
with sea, and therefore might seem an Island, yet in respect of the greatness of
it, and the many regions and kingdoms it contains, it may well be reputed a
continent: To which many lesser Islands belong.

1 It is probable that Islands were not from the first creation, but were made
afterward either by the universal deluge, or some other violence of the Water.

It has been the opinion of diverse learned men, that Islands were not only
before the Flood, but from the first creation of the world: because they seem
no less to make for the ornament of the Earth, then diverse Lakes and Rivers
dispersed on the Land. But this argument seems very weak first because a
greater ornament seems to consist in uniformity then confusion* besides, the
ornament must not be measured by our fantasy, but Gods Almighty pleasure and
will expressed in his own workmanship: and that he created Islands in the
beginning, is the thing in question. That Islands were not from the Creation,
many probable reasons are alleged: First from the words in the 1 of Genesis:
Dixit vero Deus, congregentur aequae quae sub coelo sunt, in locum vnum, and
appareat arida: and factum est ita; and vocauit Deus aridam, terram;
congregationesque Aquarum appellauit maria. By which may be collected* that the
waters were gathered together in their own place, by themselves, and therefore
had no such intercourse betwixt Land and Land as now they have, admitting
Islands: wherefore it is more probable* that such Islands as now appear were
either caused by that Universal Deluge of Noah, or by some other Accidents:
for it is most certain that the Sea on the Land some-where gains, and
other-where in recompense of it, it loses again: as may appear by the 14 of
Genesis; where it is said of the coming together of certain Kings: Hi omnes
conuen^runt in vallem Syluestrem, quae nunc est mare salis; out of which it is
evident that that parcel of ground which was a woody place in the time of
Abraham, was before the time of Moses become the Salt Sea. Many examples of the
like are given us by Pliny in his Natural History, which we shall have
occasion to urge hereafter: And therefore it is no hard thing to believe, that
since the first beginning of the world all Islands might be produced in this
sort. Another argument by which they would ^stablish this opinion, is that we
see almost all Islands of the Earth not only inhabited of mankind, but also
furnished with diverse kinds of Beasts, some tame, some wild, some wholesome,
some venomous, some useful, some altogether unprofitable. Now it seems very
unlikely that men b^ing in elder times, and now also in most places of the
Earth, altogether unskillful in the Art of Navigations, should venture so far
on the maine Ocean, to people Countries so far distant; since at this day,
wherein Navigations is arrived at a great perfection, having the helps both of
the Chart and Compass, altogether unknown unto the ancients, we see most
Nations very scrupulous in searching out far remote Countries. But admit
this were overcome by man's Industry, which no doubt is much increased by
Necessity; yet cannot it be very probable, that so many sundry kinds of
beasts should in this sort be transported: for howsoever we conjecture
concerning such beasts as necessarily serve for man's sustenance; yet seems it
hard to think that man should be so improuident and envious to the place of
his own Habitation as to transport ravenous, venomous, unwholesome, and
unprofitable creatures: for by no other me^nes but by transportation can such
beasts be imagined to be brought into Islands: For the first original of all
creatures in the Creation was in or near Paradise, which we shall prove to
have been ^n the Continent of Asia; the second Seminary was in the Arc, which
by the testimony of the Scriptures was first disburthened in the same
Continent. How from hence they should spread themselves into Islands, is the
doubt. Impossible it seems they should swim so far; for what Creature will
venture it self on the maine Ocean being by a natural instinct fearful of
death, and careful of his own preservation: Whence it is more likely to
imagine, that these parcels of land being first furnished with such creatures,
were afterward by the violence of the flood, or some other like Accident,
torn off from the maine Continent, retaining still such Creatures as it had
before. But here S. Augustine seem to avoid this Argument two ways: It is not
(says he) incredible, that wild and savage beasts might be transported from
one Country to another by Sea: either by Men for the delight of Hunting; or
else by the help of Angels by Gods Commandment, or at least permission. This
answer seems very probable as well for it self, supposing nothing impossible
to Almighty God, as also for the authority of the Author. But with all
reverence to the Author, whom all the Christian Churches are bound to honor,
this assertion is not so strongly fortified to enforce assent. And first it is
not very likely that pleasure with men should so far ouersway the general
weal and profit, as to transport so many ravenous and hurtful beasts, for
mere hunting sports and recreation. Secondly, the chase of some, as Lions,
Leopards, and such like, has more danger in it then sport or delight; and if
so be these were conveyed over Sea for such ends, yet it is very probable, they
would keep them rather close and imprisoned to serve occasion, then to let
them loose and free for farther propagation. Finally, whereas he ascribes the
transportation of them to the ministry of Angels; no man can deny but this may
be possible; because by their permission of Almighty God they might effect
greater matters. Yet seems this not so likely as the other, because we find
that in the general preservation of all creatures in the Arc, he used the
ordinary help of Natural means, although directed and assisted by a Divine
power: And of God effected greater matters in this sort, why may we not
believe it of things of lesser moment and necessity? But of this we have
spoken before. Another reason for our opinion that Islands were not before the
flood, or at least from the Creation, is urged by Verstegan a late Writer in
this manner: There is nothing broken) (says he) that has not bin whole; which
he sets down as an infallible principle: for howbeit Nature does sometimes
against her own intent commit some errors, in so much as the things formed
have either too much, or too little; yet brings she forth nothing broken or
disseuered; but such as it is, it is always whole and not broken, except
afterward by some accident. And if Nature, the hand-maide of God, never
misseth this perfection, much more ought we to believe that God the Father of
Nature in the first Creation left no part thereof broken and imperfect. But
every man may see by ordinary observation, that the Clifts and bounds of the
Sea (as not being by God in the creation so formed) seem not only severed and
broken, but (as it were) cut straight and steep down from the top to the
bottom, not stooping or declining by degrees; as we see in Inland Hills in
their descent unto the valleys. The forceable breach of the land (as we
pretend) by the Sea fretting through some narrow place, seems the more to be
confirmed in that we find it not steep toward the Land, where the Land
declines by a sloping descent as in other places; but rather toward the Sea in
such sort, as both the sides of a narrow and streite Sea oftentimes in the
nature of the soil, and conformity of figure, seem to answer one other; only
showing the want of substance betwixt them which is lost. It may hence be
objected that many other hills and rocky places of Island Countries* seem in
like manner as broken and steep down at these clifts bounding the Ocean: as
also that the clifts toward the Sea are broken higher up then any ways the
Sea could be imagined to ascend. To this we answer, first that rocks on the
dry land many times seem broken, when indeed they are not, being by Nature
fashioned craggie and uneven: Secondly, whereas Hills in Inland countries seem
broken, this might proceed heretofore by Earthquakes which have oftentimes
been observed to produce such effects as it has lately been known to do in
a Town called Pleurs in the Grisons Country near the Alps: and for the
appearance of such breaches in the tops of clifts above the ascent of the
waters, it might be caused by the violence of the Sea-waues, fretting and
eating out the sides of them beneath the bottom; whence it happens that the
higher part for want of vnder-propping must needs fall and break off from the
other. This Argument of our said Author is by him backed with another, drawn
from the name of a cliffe, which in our ancient language is drawn from
cleaving or breaking off: which appellation is never given to our Inland Hills,
but only to such as terminate and compass in the Sea. These reasons make the
matter seem probable; yet condemn I not the other as absurd, because it may
prob^bly be defended, and backed with the authority of many grave Authors.

4 A second Distinction arises out of the termination of the Land with the
Sea: For either it is uniform or various.

5 An uniform termination I call that which without any notable difference
inclines more to evenness and Regularity.

It is manifest that the Sea-wawes working on the Land violently, and not
naturally, seldom or never so bound and compass the Land, as to reduce it to
a regular and perfect figure. But yet because in some places it comes somewhat
near to such a figure, somewhere it is very far off; we thought it fit to
insert this distinction. This inclination to a Regular figure is some-where
square, consisting of Right-lines, some-where circular; an example of the
former we have in Spain, which on the North-side, and the West is bounded more
streitly, coming near a right-line: of the other in Africk^, whose North-West
side from the Mediterranean streits to Guinea seems in some sort circular.

6 A various Termination is that wherein the bounds are crooked, and as it were
indented with crekes and turnings. Here three things are remarkable. 1.
Peninsula, Istmus, and Promontorium.

7 A Peninsula is a part of land every where environed with the sea, excepting
in one part, where it is knit unto the maine land: An Istmus is a narrow land
betwixt two seas: A Promontorie is a high mountain bending it self into the
sea: the head whereof is called a Cape:

These three are remarkable accidents growing out of the Termination of the
land with the sea, and belonging as well to continents as Islands. The first we
call Peninsula, quasi pene Insula, termed of the Graecians Chersonesus,
although I find this name oftener given to the Istmus then the Peninsula.
Amongst the Peninsula's the most famous are Africa, Scandia, Taurica
Chersonesus, Peloponnesus, and America Peruana. That little parcel of land
which ioynes this Peninsula with the maine land, we call an Istmus, which is a
narrow neck of land betwixt two seas, joining two Continents; such as are
Istmus Corinthiacus and Istmus Cimbricus: more famous are those two narrow
lands, whereof the one lies betwixt Peruana, and Mexico in America, the other
dividing Afric from Asia. A Promontorie is a great mountain stretching it
self far into the sea: whose extremity is called a Cape or Head, of which the
most remarkable are the Cape of good hope in Afric, 2. The Cape of S.
Vincent in Portugal, 3. The Cape of Comary in Asia. 4. The Cape de la Victoria
in America. Our observation concerning this distinction shall be comprised in
this Theoreme.

1 Peninsula's by the violence of the sea fretting through the Istmus, have
oftentimes been turned into Islands* and contrariwise sometimes Peninsula's by
diminution of the sea made of Islands.

This proposition is not hard to prove, if any credit ought to be g^uen to
ancient writers: for it is commonly related, that Sicily was heretofore joined
to Italy, Cyprus to Syria, Euboea with Boeotia, Besbicum with Bythinia; all
which at this day are Islands separated and divided from the continent. The like
has been coniectured of our Brittany, which some imagined heretofore to have
been joined with the continent of France, about Dover and Calais: as may seem
probably to be gathered out of the correspondency of the Cliffs (whereof we
have spoken in this chapter before) the agreement of the soil, the smalnesse
of the distance, and many more arguments remembered by us elsewhere. Also it
has been observed on the other side, that the sea in some places leaving his
ancient bounds, has joined some Islands to the land, making Peninsulas of
Islands. In this sort if we believe antiquity was Antissa joined to Lesbos,
Zephirium to Halicarnassus, Ethusa to Mindus, Promiscon to Miletum, Narthucusa
to the Promontory of Parthenius: In these antiquities it behooues every man to
judge without partiality, according to reason, not ascribing too much to
fabulous narrations, wherein those ages did abound* neither yet showing
himself too incredulous: For as much as we cannot charge these Authors with
any manifest absurdity. The special and particular arguments by which we
should establish our assertion, we must according to the rules of method
reserve to the special part, where we shall treat ofspeciall Countries.

CHAP. XII.
1 OF the perpetual Accidents of the land, we have spoken somewhat: it
remains in this place we treat of the Casual.

2 The casual I call such as happen not ordinarily at all times: such as are
Inundations and Earthquakes.

3 An Inundation is an ouerwhelming of the land by Water.

Howsoever it be certain out of holy Scriptures, that God has set the sea
his certain bounds and limits, which it cannot pass: yet the same God
sometimes to show his special judgment on some place or age, has
extraordinarily permitted the sea sometimes to break his appointed limits, and
invade the Jurisdiction of the land. This we call a Deluge or Inundation. The
inundations which ever have been observed on the Earth, are of two sorts,
either Universal or particular: An universal is that whereby the whole face
of the Earth is covered with water; whereof we have only two examples: The
first was in the first creation of the world, when (as we read in the
Scriptures) the whole face of the Earth was round inueloped with Water, which
covered the tops of the highest mountains, till such time as God by a
supernatural hand, made a separation of the Waters from the dry land: But this
is improperly called an Inundation, because, the same properly taken implies as
much as an ouer-flowing of that which was dry land before: The second (as we
read in Genesis) happened in the time of Noah, when God for the sin of man,
drowned the whole world, breaking open the cataracts of Heaven, and loosing the
springs of the deep. Particular inundations are such, as are not over the
whole Earth, but in some particular places or regions; Such a deluge (according
to Genebrardus) happened in the time of Enos, wherein a third part of the Earth
was drowned. The like i^ spoken of Ogyge^ King of Athens, that in his time
happened a very great Inundation, which drowned all the confines and coasts of
Attica and Achaia even to the Aegean sea: In which time it was thought that
Buras and Helice Cities of Achaia, were swallowed up: whereof Ovid in his
Metamorphosis, speaks thus. Si quaeras Helicen and Buran Achaidos vrbes.
Inuenies sub aquis:
Buras and Helice on Achai^n ground
Are sought in vain, but under seas are found.
As famous was the Inundation of Thessaly in Deucalions time mentioned not
only by profane writers and Poets, but also by S. Augustine, Ierom, and
Eusebius, which would have it to happen in the time of Cranaus, who next after
Cecrops governed Athens. This inundation was exceeding great, extending it
self not only over all Thessaly and the regions adjoining westward, but
overwhelmed the greatest part of Italy. The same or other happening near the
same time, oppressed Egypt, if Eusebius may obtain credit. Hence some would
have the people of Italy to have been called Vmbrij (as Pliny and Solinus
report) quia ab imbribus diluuij superfuissent. But this Etymology seems too
far fetched. There are also two other notable Inundations mentioned by ancient
writers, which fell out in Egypt from the River of Nilus, whereof the first
covered all the neither Egypt, which was subject to Prometheus, and hence (as
Natalis Comes observes) was the fable drawn of the vulture lighting on
Prometheus liver, afterward slain by Hercules. For (as Diodorus Siculus
observes) the River Nilus for the swiftnes of his course was in ancient time
called an Eagle. This River afterward did Hercules by his great ^kill and
judgment streiten and bound* reducing it into narrow channels: whence some
Greek Poets turning Hercules labors into fables, feigned that Hercules slew
the Eagle which sed on Prometheus breast, meaning that he delivered Prometheus
out of that sorrow and loss which he and his people sustained by that
Inundation. The second of these Egyptian floods happened about Pharus in Egypt,
where Alexander the great built Alexandria. To these may be added many more of
lesser moment, as well in ancient times as in our days: As that of Belgia in
some parts mentioned before, on another occasion; and not many years since in
some parts of Somersetshire with us in Britanny.

1 No universal Inundation of the Earth can be Natural: The other may depend
on some Natural causes.

Of the causes of Inundations many disputes have been amongst Natural
Philosophers: some have trusted so far to Nature, that they have ascribed not
only particular Inundations, but that universal Deluge in the time of Noah to
second causes: of this opinion was Henricus Mecliensis a Scholar of Albertus
Magnus, who in his Commentaries upon the great Conjunctions of Albumazar,
observed that before Noah's flood, chanced a conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn
in the last degree of Cancer, against the constellation since termed Argo's
ship: out of which he would needs collect, that the flood of Noah might have
been fore-showne; because Cancer is a watery sign, and the house of the Moon
being mistrisse of the Sea, and all moist bodies according to Astrology: which
opinion was afterward confirmed by Petrus de Alliaco, who affirms in his
Comment upon Genesis, that although Noah did well know this flood by divine
Revelation; yet this conjunction being so notable, he could not be ignorant
of the causes thereof; for those were not only signs, but also apparent causes
by virtue received from the first cause, which is God himself. Further to
confirm this assertion he would have Moses by the cataracts of Heaven, to
have meant the the great and watery conjunction of the Planets. A reason whereof
he seems to allege, because it is likely that God would show some sign in
the Heavens, by which all men might be warned to forsake their wicked courses.
But notwithstanding this curious opinion, I rather cleave to those which think
this Deluge to be merely Supernatural, which I am induced to believe for
diverse causes urged by worthy writers. First, because this is set down in Holy
Scripture for a chief token or mark of Noah's extraordinary faith and
dependence upon Gods promises: which had been much diminished, and of small
moment, had it any way been grounded on the foresight of second causes. For
this was no more then might have been discovered to the rest of the wicked
worldlings, who no doubt would in some sort have provided for their safety, had
they received any firm persuasion of this dreadful Deluge. To which others
add a second reason, that second causes of themselves, without any change or
alteration, are not able to produce such an admirable effect as the drowning of
the whole World: for it is not convenient (say they) that God the Author of
Nature should so dispose and direct the second causes, that they might of
themselves be able to inuert the order of the Universe, and ouer-whelme the
whole Earth, which he gave man for his habitation. But this reason is thought
very weak, for as much as it seems to imply a new creation: The conceit of a
new Creation is pronounced by a learned Countreyman of ours, both unlearned and
foolish: for whereas it is written (says he) that the fountains of the deep
were broken open, it cannot otherwise be understood, then that the waters
forsook the very bowels of the Earth, and all whatsoever therein was dispersed
made an eruption through the face of the Earth. Now if we compare the height
of the waters in this deluge above the highest mountains, being only 15
cubits, with the depth of the semi-diameter of the Earth to the Center, we
shall not find it impossible, answering reason with reason, that all these
waters dispersed under the Earth* should so far extend as to drown the whole
Earth: for the semi-diameter of the Earth (as Astronomers teach) is not above
35 ^ miles, wherein the waters contained and dispersed, may be sufficient for
the hight of the greatest mountains, which never attain 30 miles upright:
whereas this distance of 30 miles is found in the depth of the Earth 116 times.
Secondly, the extension of the Air being exceeding great, it might please God
to condensate and thicken a great part thereof, which might concur to this
Inundation. We willingly assent to the worthy Author, that this Inundation
might be performed without any new creation: Notwithstanding we cannot hence
collect that it was Natural. But to compose the difference the better, and to
show how far Nature had a hand in this admirable effect, we will thus
distinguish; that an effect may be called Natural two manner of ways: First,
in regard of the causes themselves: Secondly in respect of the Direction and
Application of the causes. If we consider the mere secondary and isntrumental
causes, we might call this effect Natural, because it was partly performed by
their help and concurrence. But if we consider the mutual application and
conjunction of these second causes together with the first cause, which
extraordinarily set them a work, we must needs acknowledge it to be
supernatural. For other particular Inundations in particular Regions we may
more safely term them Natural, as directed and stirred up by second causes,
working no otherwise, then according to their own natural disposition. Two
causes concurring together, are here most notable, whereof the first is the
great conjunction of watery Planets working on the water their proper subject:
the other the weakness of the bounds and banks restraining the water, which by
process of time wear out and suffer breaches: both these causes sometimes
concurring together, cause an Inundation: which assertion we may lawfully
accept, but with this caution, that Almighty God working by second causes,
nevertheless directs them oftentimes to supernatural and extraordinary ends.

2 Particular alterations have happened to Bounds of Regions by Particular
Inundations.

Howsoever some inundation have not continued long, but after a small time le^t
the Earth to her own possession; yet others have been of such violence, as
they have been found to have fretted away, or added, and so altered the bounds
and limits of places: which besides diverse examples produced by us, in our
former chapter. Aristotle seems to acknowledge in the 1 book ofhis Meteors,
the 14 Chapter, where he says, that by such Accidents sometimes the Continent
and firm land is turned into the Sea, and other-where the Sea has resigned
places to the Land: for since the agitation or moving of the water depends
ordinarily upon the virtue of Heavenly bodies, if it should happen that those
Stars should meet in conjunction, which are most forceable and effectual for
stirring up of Tempests and Floods, the Sea is known to rage beyond measure,
either leaving her ancient bounds, or else usurping new. By this means (as we
have showed in the former Chapter) some Islands have been joined to the Land,
and some Peninsula's separated from the Land, and made Islands: somewhere the
Sea has been observed for a great space to leave the Land naked, as Verstegan
conjectures of the most part of Belgia, which he says, was in ancient time
covered with water; which besides many other arguments he labors to prove out
of the multitude of fish-shells, and fish-bones, found euery-where far under
ground about Holland, and the coasts thereabouts, which being dug up in such
abundance, and from such depthes, could not (says he) proceed from any other
cause then the Sea, which covered the whole Country, and strewed it with
fishes. Lastly, that the Sea might seem as well to get as lose, she has
showed her power in taking away and swallowing up some Regions and Cities,
which before were extant: Such fortune had Pyrrha and Antis^a about Meotis,
Helic^ and Bura before mentioned in the Corinthian straites: some have been of
opinion that the whole Mediterranean within Hercules pillars, was in time past
habitable land, till it gave way to the violency of the Seas invasion: But in
this I credit nothing without farther ground. The like uncertainties are also
related of the Atlantic Islands, greater then all Africa, swallowed up of the
Ocean: which Columbus was said in a sort to have discovered in the Sea, finding
a great shallow fraught with weeds, where he supposed this great Island to have
stood. But I rather believe that this Atlanticke Island spoken of by Plato, was
either a Poetical fiction, as Moors Vtopia with us, or at least the Continent
of America perhaps in those days obscurely discovered, but the discovery lost
again to after ages.

3 Certain Regions by reason of great Rivers are subject to certain
Anniuersary Inundations, which commonly happen betwixt the Tropicks in the
Summer, without the Tropicks in the Winter.

The former clause is proved by experience almost in all great Rivers in the
world, which at some times of the year swell higher, ouerflowing their banks,
and drowning a part of the land about them. But this happens not alike in all
places; for in Rivers included within the Tropicks, as Nilus and Niger in
Africa, and Oregliana in America with others there-about, this Anniuersary
Inundation, is in the Su^mer, elsewhere it is commonly in the Winter. For the
former these causes may be assigned; 1 The melting of the snow on the tops of
the great mountains in those parts, which is greatest of all, when the Sun is
nearest or vertical unto them, which we are to account their Summer. 2 The
daily raines and showers such Regions are subject unto; These showers are much
more frequent and greater when the Sun is nearest their vertical point or in
it: The reason whereof we have formerly showed to be this: That the Sun daily
in those parts draws up more vapors, then he can dissipate and consume:
Whence meeting with the cold of the middle Region of the Air they are
condensated into drops, and so turned into rain. For the later case in rivers
situat without the Tropicks, commonly happens the contrary, to wit, that such
Inundations happen rather in the winter then in the Summer, whereof these
reasons may be rendered. 1 Because Rain* and showers whereof such ouer-flowing
are engendered in those parts, are more frequent in winter then in the Summer. 2
whereas near the Equatour, the snow is known to melt with the Sun from the
tops of high Mountains, in other parts it seldom or never melts at all, (as
may be thought (under the Pole or thereabouts; or else, if it melt, it
happens, (as in the temperat Zones we see it does) oftener by rain, then the
heat of the Sun.

4 Next are we to speak of Earthquakes: An Earthquake is a sensible motion and
shaking of the parts of the Earth.

Amongst other remarkable affections of a place, which are not so ordinary, an
Earthquake has no small consideration, being oftentimes a means which God
uses to show some great and extraordinary judgment. But not to spend more on
this subject then may seem meet for Geography* we will show the causes and
kinds of it, by which we may the sooner come to learn what Regions and places
of the Earth are most subject to this affection, which is necessary of a
Cosmographer to be known. Concerning the cau^es of it, much dispute has been
among Philosophers: some have ridiculously affirmed, that the Earth is a living
creature, and suppose with no less, if not greater ab^urdity, that the Earth
being in good temper, does rest and settle quietly according to her natural
disposition: From which temper if she be any way removed, as if she were sick,
or pained in some part, she shakes and shiuers. The relation of this opinion is
a sufficient confutation. Thales Milesius would have the Earth as a ship to
swim on the Waters, which being sometimes as a vessel by tempests turned on
one side too much, it takes a great quantity of water, which is the cause of
Earthquakes: But this opinion is a poetical fiction. Little more probable is
the opinion of Democritus, that the Earth drinking in rain water more then her
cauernes can well contain, the water reuerberated back is cause of such a
motion: But who can imagine that drops of rain falling into the Earth can be
reuerberated back, with such violence to cause such an extraordinary motion of
the Earth? Anaximenes Milesius was of opinion that the Earth her self was
cause of her own motion; for the parts of it being taken out (as it were) and
broken, fall down sometimes into a great depth, causing the upper face of it
to shake and tremble; to which opinion also Seneca seems to subscribe in the
sixth book of his natural questions the 10 chapter; To which also accords the
Philosophical Poet Lucretius in these words.

Terra superna tremit magnis concussa ruinis,
Subter vbi ingentes speluncas subruit aetas,
Quippe cadunt toti montes, magnoque repent
Concussu la^e dispergunt inde Tremores,
Et merito; quoniam plaustris concussu tremiscunt
Tecta viam propter non magno pondere tota.
The upper Earth seaz'd with great ruins shakes,
When surrowed age her vast ribs ouertakes.
For mountains great fall down, and with the blow
The Tremblings are dispersed to and fro.
Not without reason; when a small-siz'd waine
Makes houses near the way to shake amain,
This last opinion seems to carry more show ofprobability then the former;
neither can any man deny, that sometimes the Earth in some parts, may shake by
the breaking down of some subterranean parts, whose sudden and violent motion
may cause the rest being continuate to entertain the like conuulsion. But yet
more general seems the opinion of Aristotle who would have Earthquakes to
proceed from a spirit or vapor included in the bowels of the Earth, as he
testifies in the 2 of his Meteors the 7 chapter. For this vapor finding no way
to pass out, is enforced to return back; and batred any passage out, seeks
every corner: and while it labors to break open some place for going forth,
it makes a tumultuous motion, which is the Earthquake. Now least it should
seem improbable that so great a mass of Earth should be moved, and shaken,
by so thin and rarefied a body as is a fume or vapor; Aristotle in the same
place shows the admirable force of Winds as well upon the Air, as on the
bodies of living creatures: In the Air; because experience shows that being
stirred up by a Windy vapor it sometimes is known to move rocks from one
place to another, to pluck up trees and shrubbs by the roots; and sometimes
to throw down the strongest and most stately buildings: In man's body, because
by the stirring up and agitation of the spirits, which are the Instruments of
vital and animal functions, sometimes one sick man can do that, which
cannot be performed by many stronger and abler men; as it has been tried
sometimes, that a Frantic man has broken very strong chains, wherewith he
has been bound; which many other men could not do. Neither on the other side,
can it seem strange, that many and great exhalations, vapors, and spirits
should be engendered under the Earth; For as much as the Earth is hea^ed many
ways. Many ways may be specified whence such fumes should arise; as, first,
from the Sun and Stars; Secondly, from the subterranean fires hid in the
bowels of the Earth; Thirdly, in the wintertime by an Antiperistasis, the heat
collecting it self downward to the inner parts of the Earth, which was before
in the outward parts of it: The argument by which Aristotle would confirm this
opinion, is drawn as well from the time, as from the places, wherein
Earthquakes usually happen: from the time; because then most Earthquakes are
observed to be, when most exhalations are enclosed in the bowels of the Earth;
to wit, in the Springtime and the Autumn. From the places; because, for the
most part spongie and hollow Regions, which may drink in a greater quantity of
exhalations, are commonly most subject unto it: for although many exhalations
are daily enclosed in the womb of the Earth, yet Earthquakes fall but seldom;
because the matter is seldom so strong and violent as to shake the Earth:
Wherefore some Philosophers have expressed three principal ways which make
this Earthquake: first, when a great quantity of exhalations is suddenly
engendered, which for the greatness of it cannot be contained in so little a
space: for then being almost choked, it seeks a way to fly forth: Secondly,
when the Earth is condensated by cold, and drives the exhalation from one place
to another, which flying hither and thither, shakes and strikes the Earth:
Thirdly, when the exhalation, the cold compassing it round by an
Antiperistasis, begets heat within it, and so is rarefied: for so being unable
any longer to confine it self to its former place, it breaks forth, and so
shakes the Earth: We must here note by the way, that not only exhalations are
cause of the distemperature in the Earth, but also subterranean fires and
winds: all which by some are judged to be of equal force in this action: for
the division of Earthquakes so far forth as it concerns the difference of
places, we must understand, that it may be either Universal or particular: An
Universal Earthquake is that which shakes all the whole Earth in every part,
at least in the upper face: whereof (I suppose) no natural cause can be given,
but the immediate and miraculous power of God: such an Earthquake happened at
the time of our Saviors Passion, whereof Dydimus a grave and ancient Writer
left record. But that which is said to have happened in the time of
Valentinian, mentioned by Orosius in his 7 book of Histories, and 32 Chapter,
is thought by grave Authors to be no universal* Earthquake, howsoever for
the large extent of it, it was thought to be general. A particular Earthquake
is that which is bounded in some one or more particular places, which for the
causes before-alleaged cannot be so far extended, because the cauernes and
conuexities of the Earth, where such vapors and exhalations are contained,
cannot be ordinarily so great as to extend to many Kingdoms and Regions.

1 Regions extreme cold or extreme hot are not so subject to Earthquakes as
places of a Middle temper.

The reason is, because in places extreme cold, exhalations are not so soon
engendered, and in so great a quantity as in other parts: on the other side in
places which are extreme hot, the exhalations which are bred, are soon
consumed with excess of heat: both which may be confirmed by Instances. It is
observed that in the cold Northern parts (as Olaus Magnus writes in his 10
book and 13 Chapter) Earthquakes are very seldom or never: so it is observed
by Pliny in his 2 book and 18 Chapter: and Albertus Magnus in his 3 book of
M^teours tract. 2* That places which are very hot, as Egypt, are seldom
troubled with this shaking of the Earth: whereas places betwixt both, which are
seated in a more temperat climate, find it not so strange.

1 Hollow and spongie places are more subject to Earthquakes then solid and
compacted soyles.

We must here understand that hollow places are either such as lie open to the
Air, or are hollow only under, and close upward. The former sort are not at
all subject to the molestation of Earthquakes, because the exhalations fly out
without impediment: but the latter being more apt to engender and retain such
matter, must of necessity be more troubled. This is most plainly observed in
Phrygia, Italia, Caria, Lydia, wherein such motions are more frequent. To
confirm this a little farther, we observe that hilly and mountainous places,
suffer this violence oftener then other parts; because there most commonly
cauernes and conca^ities are more frequent then in plain countries. But here
by the way may be objected, that sandy and slimy countries are many times more
free from Earthquakes then other places: an instance whereof was given before
in Egypt, wherein never any Earthquake (as most Authors affirm) or at least
but one (as Seneca) has been observed. The reason may be given, that sandy
places without any strife suffer the exhalatio^s to disperse themselves: that
slimy places want sufficient receptacles to entertayne them.

3 Islands are more often troubled with Earthquakes then the Continent.

This have they found to be true in many Islands of the Mediterranean Sea, and
others also; chiefly in Cyprus, Sicylia, Euboea, Tyrus, Angria, Lippora, and
the Molucco Islands betwixt the East and West Indies. The cause some would have
to be the Antiperistasis or circumstancy of the waters, which is apt to
engender greater store of exhalations in the Earth. But nevertheless that
Islands are more subject to Earthquakes then Continents I dare affirm no
otherwise then probable; because some places in the Continent seem very much
affected, especially in Europe, above other places, Constantinople and
Basilaea, if we credit authors which have written of this matter; in Asia,
China, and other Regions adjoining thereunto.

CHAP. XIII.
1 THe Natural affections of the Land have hitherto been declared: We are in
the next place to treat of the Civil: Those we term Civil which concern
the Inhabitants.

2 An Inhabitant is a man dwelling in a certain place.

The name of an Inhabitant (as we have before noted) may be taken either
generally for any living creature, residing in a certain place, in which sense
Brute beasts may be called Inhabitants* which signification is only
metaphorical: or else for a Reasonable living creature, whose abode is settled
in any place or Region, in which sense we here take it. The consideration of
the Inhabitants we have reserved for this last Treatise; following as well the
method of the first creation, as of Moses in the narration. For God proceeding
in the first Creation according to the order of Generation, from the more
imperfect to the perfect, created not man before such time as he had furnished
the Earth with all things agreeable and necessary for his use; to which alludes
the Poet in these Verses. Sanctius his animal mentisque capacius altae
Deerat adhuc, and quod dominari in caetera possit,
Natus homo est. --
More sacred and of understanding mind,
A creature wants to govern every kind;
So man begun --
Of the Nature, Proprieties, Dignities, and other accidents of this principal
creature, there wants no discovery; since large volumes are stuffed with this
theme, and every man which knows himself can prevent me in this subject: I
will here speak of him so far forth as he is an Inhabitant or dweller on
the Earth.

3 In the Inhabitants we are to consider two things: either the Original, or
the Disposition.

4 The Original is the offspring whence all Inhabitants took their beginning.

Concerning the original of people of the Earth, we are to observe two
things; First, the Distinction of original; Secondly, the manner of Invention:
For the first, we must note that all Inhabitants of the Earth, have a
threefold original or beginning. The first was from the first Creation, the
second was immediately after the general deluge, wherein all the seminary of
living creatures was preserved in the Arc: The third, is the first stock or
original of each several Nation: For this last, it is a matter which we
cannot here so well define, till we come to the particular description of each
Region, to which it properly belongs. It shall be enough in this general
part, to speak of the two first, as far as approved History and Observation
shall direct us: For the Manner of finding out the original of Nations, these
rules are given us by Bodin in his ninth chapter of the method of History. The
first is by the testimony of approved Authors. The second is by the marks and
footsteps of Languages. The third may be drawn from the Limits and known
bounds and situation of Countries. This knowledge of the Original of Nations,
has been a matter of no small importance: For (as Bodin observes) there is
nothing which has more exercised the wits of Writers, or caused more civil
discords and ruins of diverse commonwealths, then the contention about the
first original of nations: which iarres and contentions (as I take it) spring
from no other ground then the natural pride in the minds of men, and the
affection of Nobility: whereby it often comes to pass, that such men as have
risen to grea^^es, by their Wealth, Villainies, or other such like means, have
afterward, to continue and bolster up their usurped dignities, sought out new
pedegrees and Ancesters, to set a gloss upon their own base beginnings; a
humor in our days more affected, then prayse-worthy; not only of private
persons, but of whole nations, which run far off to seek out their first
original, which with more ease and certainty, they might find nearer home. To
let pass other examples we need go no farther then the French and the
Britanes, both which labor as much as may be, to derive their first original
from the Trojans. The first from the lineage of Hector, the other from Aeneas;
as if more glory were to be derived from Trojan fugitives, then from the
valiant nation of the ancient Gauls and Germans; from whom they might der^ue a
^ruer and a more certain descent. The consideration of this antiquity of
nations so far forth as it concerns our Geographicall discourse, reserving
matters of more specialty to our Special part, we will comprise in these
Th^oremes.

1 All Nations had their first original from one stock, whence afterward
they became divided.

We must here understand (as we have before noted) that all Nations have a
threefold original, the first before the universal deluge, the other soon
after, the later long after. For the first, no doubt can be made by such as
credit the truth of holy Scriptures, but it was from Adam the first father of
mankind* For the last, it is doubtful and various, and therefore cannot well
be handled in general, before we come to the description of particular
countries; where we are determined to make a search as near as can be into
their original: But that which we chiefly here note in the second offspring of
mankind soon after the flood: For certain it is that all mankind was confined
to the family of Noah in the Arc, so that their first original must be drawn
from the Arc, and that place where the Arc rested, presently upon the falling
of the waters: which we shall prove to be far Eastward. Hence is the manifold
arrogance of many nations well discovered; for amongst the Ancients some have
so much affected the antiquity of their race* that forgetting their humane
condition, they have derived their nobility from the Gods. Which humor has
not only invaded the minds and affections of foolish and ignorant men, but
also of such as have stood in great opinion and estimation of wisdom and
virtue: In so much as Caesar in a certain oration to the people of Rome, was
not ashamed to boast, that he was descended by his Fathers side from the Gods,
by his mother from Kings: As also Aristotle derived his offspring from Apollo
and Aesculapius: which strange affectation was little less in the people of
lower and baser condition, who either being utterly ignorant of their own
offspring, or at least dissembling it, for the hate they bore to strangers have
called themselves (...) which is as much to say, as a people bred of the same
region, not fetching their descent from any other nation: In which sense
Aristides in Panathenai^ gives the greatest nobility to the Athenians; to wit
that being borne of the Earth the mother of the Gods, they derived not their
descent from any other foreign country: and this error is observed not only
amongst the Ancient, but also with the newer writers, to be so common, that
Polydore Virgill otherwise a prudent writer, affirms the Britains to be a
people taking their original from the Island Countries, and not derived
farther. The like is written by Athamerus that the German nation being first
bred in Germany owed their original to no other; Which he labors to confirm
out of Tacitus, Sabellicus, and Sepontinus. But (as Bodin speaks ingenuously)
the ancient might well be excused in this error: But these men are subject to
great reprehension: 1. Because they being Christians seem to reject the
authority of holy Scriptures, which testify that all mankind was derived from
the selfsame original, being (as we have said) all confined in the Arc of
Noah. 2 Because by this means, giving to nati^ns no other original, then from
their own country, they distract and divide each one from the mutual love and
society of other Nations. For besides many other reasons which moved Moses to
write of the Genealogies of people, this one seems not the least, that men
should understand themselves to be all (as it were) kin, and descended from
the same original; then which there is no greater means to conciliate and
join men's affections for mutual amity and conversation. As it is reported of
Diomedes and Glaucus and many others, who being armed to one another ruin and
overthrow, have been drawn to break off their hatred by the mere pretense
and show of consanguinity. But these who so arrogantly boast themselves to be
Sons of the Earth, not beholding to any other country for their offspring,
strive to break in sunder the bonds of society betwixt nations, which* Gods
Word and the Law of Nations binds us to observe. Hence grow those mortal
hatreds and heart-burnings betwixt diverse countries, as of the Egyptians,
against the Hebrews, of the Greeks against the Latins, wherein they
persecuted one the other extremely. Hence came it to pass that strangers
amongst the Romans were called enemies, as the name of Welch-men with the
Germans signifies as much as a forrainer; wherein they seem much to
degenerate from the ancient hospitality of their Ancestors, for which they have
been much praised* Finally from this one root spring those infamous libels cast
out of one Nation against another, written by such Firebrarnds as delight in
nothing more then dissension; but how much better were it to reconcile all
people out of this assured ground of consanguinity, since Religion persuades
more to Charity and agreement, then to Faction; and contentions. But this I
leave to the Divine, whom it more properly concerns.

2 The first inhabitants of the Earth were planted in Paradise, and thence
translated to the places near adjoining.

For the confirmation of this point we need no farther proof then the
authority of God himself, speaking in his Word, whereon all truth is grounded;
But of the plac^ of Paradise, where we place the first habitation, sundry
disputes have been amongst Divines sufficiently examined, of late by a
judicious and worthy Writer in his History of the World. Which tract being too
tedious to insert, Sr Walter Rawleigh.
we will contract as far as concerns our purpose. First therefore it would
seem meet that we examine their opinion, which hold this History of Paradise
to be a mere Allegory: Of this opinion were Origin, Philo Iudaeus, Fran.
Gregorius with many others: who by the four rivers of Paradise would have to
be understood the four Cardinal Virtues: as by the Tree of knowledge,
Sapience or Wisdom: To which opinion also S. Ambrose Teemes to adhere: who
would have that by Paradise should be meant the Soul or mind, by Adam the
understanding, by Eve the sense, by the Serpent delectation, by the rest of the
Trees the virtues of the mind: Against the Fathers themselves I will not
inueigh, since some men suppose their conceits to be rather allusions, then
conclusions. But against the opinion it self, many reasons may be drawn to
prove there was a true local Paradise Eastward: first out of the text it
self, which says; For out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree
pleasant to the ^ight, and good for meats: by the process of which Story it
seems that God first created man out of the garden, as it were in the world at
large, and then put him in this garden: the end whereof is expressed to dress
and manure it: Paradise being a garden filled with plants and trees, pleasant
to behold, and good for meat: which proves that Paradise was a terrestrial
garden. Secondly, to express it more plainly, he averreth that it was watered
with a river springing out of a Region called Eden, being a country near unto
Canaan in Mesopotania as Ezechiel witnesses. Thirdly Epiphanius and St Hierome
urge to this effect; if Paradise were such an Allegory, then were there no
Rivers, no place out of which they sprung, no Eve, no Adam, and so the whole
History should be turned into a mere fable or poetical fiction. Fourthly, it
is proved by continuation of the same Story: 1 Because God gave Adam free will
to eat of every tree of the garden (the foresaid tree excepted:) besides he
left all the beasts of the Earth to be named by him, which cannot be meant of
imaginary trees and beasts: for this were to make the whole Creation
aenigmaticall. 2ly This name is often used in holy Scriptures elsewhere as in
Ezech* 10 Genesis 13.19. which would not have been so, if the whole story had
bin merely Allegorical, and Paradise an Vtopia; since the Scripture, specially
the historical part of them, are written in a plain style, fitting the
capacity of vulgar auditors. Lastly of this Paradise planted in the East, we
may find some footsteps in profane Poets, as in Homer, Orpheus, Li^us,
Pindarus, Hesiod, who often speak of Alcinous garden, and the Elisian fields:
all which derived their first invention from this description of Paradise,
recorded by Moses in Holy Scripture, whereof the Heathen themselves had some
obscure traditions. The second opinion was, that Paradise was the whole Earth,
and the Ocean the fountain of these four rivers; which was defended heretofore
by the Manichees, Noviomagus, Vadianus, and Goropius Becanus. The reasons which
they allege for their part to prove this assertion, were chiefly these. 1
Because those things which were in Scripture attributed to Paradise, are
generally ascribed to the whole world, as that place of Genesis; Bring forth
fruit and multiply, fill the earth, and subdue it, rule over every creature.
But this argument may easi^y be answered: for although the world in general
were created for man, and all men descended from the same original, to wit,
the loins of Adam; yet this disproueth nothing the particular garden assigned
to Adam to dress, wherein he lived before his transgression: for if there had
been no other choice, but that Adam had been left to the universal (as they
imagine,) why should Moses say, the garden was East from Eden: since the world
can not be East or West but in respect of particular places? Also why was the
Angel set after Adams expulsion to bar his re entrance, if it were not a
particular place: for according to their opinion Adam should be driven out of
the whole World. Their second reason is, because it semes impossible that
Nilus, Ganges, and Euphrates, by so many portions of the world so far
distant, should issue out of the same fountain. To this we answer, that by
common Interpreters of Scripture, being ignorant of Geographie, Pison was
falsely taken for Ganges, and Gihon for Nilus: Although it can no way be true
that Ganges should be taken for a river by Ha^ilah in India, and Nilus should
run through Aethiopia, as we shall show hereafter. The third opinion is, that
Paradise is higher then the Moon, or higher at least then the Middle Region of
the Air: this opinion is cast upon Beda and ^abanus; to which also Rupertus
seems to accord: who (as it seems) borrowed their opinion from Plato, and he
from Socrates. But these two (as it seems) are misinterpreted, Because by
Paradise they meant Heaven it self as many imagine. But to confirm that this
terrestrial Paradise is such a place, some men produce these Arguments. First
that it is reported by Solinus, that there is a place exceeding delightsome and
healthsome on the top of Mount Athos called Acrothones, which being seated
about clouds, or rain, or such inconveniences, the people by reason of their
long lives are called (...). Secondly they allege for the hight of this
Paradise, that Enoch was there preserved from the violence of the flood, as
Isidore and Peter Lombaard maintain: But this opinion was of the Divines
condemned in the Florentine counsel: and first where as they say, that such a
pleasant place is in the top of the mountain Athos; this neither proves that
this is Paradise, neither is it so high as they would have it: For every high
and pleasant place is not Paradise. Secondly, whereas they would have Enoch and
Elias preserved in the place, it is expressly against Holy Scripture, which
affirms directly that the waters ouer-flowed all the mountains, making no
such distinction. Secondly should we credit this* we might as well believe
that certain Giants saved themselves in that high place, as some have
believed. Besides the answer of their frivolous arguments, these reasons may
be brought against their assertion: First, that such a place cannot be
commodious to live in: for being so near the moon, it had also bin too near
the sun. Secondly, because in this sort it had bin too near a neighbor to the
Element of fire. Thirdly, because (as many hold) the Air in that Region by the
motion of the heavens is carried about so violently, as nothing there can well
consist. Fourthly, because according to Ptolomy, the place between the Earth
and the Moon is seventeen times the Diameter of the Earth, which make by a
gross account about 120000 miles. Hence it must needs follow that Paradise
being lifted up to this great hight, must have the compass of the whole Earth
for a basis or foundation. But this cannot be imagined: first, because it would
be subject to the eyes and knowledge of men. Secondly, it would hide the light
of the Sun for the first part of the day being on the East side. Thirdly it
would ouer-poize the Earth, and so make it to shrink out of his place; one
side being far greater and heavier then the other. The fourth conceit is of
Tertullian, Bonauenture, and Durandus, who would have Paradise to be seated
under the Aequatour, because that contrary to the opinion of most of all the
Ancients, they thought this place to be most pleasant and commodious for
habitation. It is true that the places under the Aequinoctial are not so burnt
with the Sun as some thought: but, as we have proved out of latter
Nauigators, very pleasant and fruitful for the most part: yet cannot this be
the place of Paradise; for as much as the Rivers of Paradise mentioned in holy
Scripture, are not found to meet there: which argument might also confute them
which thought it was seated under the North Pole. The last opinion which I hold
the truest, is of some latter Writers, that Paradise was seated in a Region
South-east from Mesopotania, which is most amply and copiously proved by Sr
Walter Rawleigh, to whom I refer my Reader: only two reasons I will allege.
The first from the name of Eden, since there is found an Island of this name
North-west from the place assigned, very fruitful and pleasant in all
commodities of the Earth, and in later times known also by the name of Eden,
which is likely to have been continued from the beginning. Secondly from the
Rivers of Paradise, which cannot be imagined to meet in any part of the world:
for Tigris and Euphrates it is certain that they are found in this very
Region: for the other River Gihon that it is falsely understood of a River
running through Aethiopia is also most certain; for such a River could never
meet with Euphrates, which is out of question one of the Rivers of Paradise:
for as much as it is so far dista^t and divided from it by the Mediterranean
Sea: wherefore I am constrained rather to embrace their opinion which interpret
Chut to be a part of Arabia, where Chush the father of Noah se^^led his first
habitation; which for this cause he called after his own name: but afterward in
process of time his posterity growing exceeding large and populous, they were
enforced to pass over into Africa, and so settle themselves in Aethiopia,
which place also they called after the same name: as we have seen of later
years the Spaniards at the first discovery of the West Indies called one place
Hispaniola, and another Hispania Noua in remembrance of their former
habitation. But howsoever it be, certain it is, that Paradise was seated in the
East, from whence mankind had it is first offspring And probable it is that
Adam being excluded out of Paradise, was cast into some place near adjoining
thereunto, which may also from our habitable place of the West, be accounted
Eastward.

3 The first plantation of Inhabitants immediately after the Deluge begun in
the East.

As Adam the father of all Nations before the flood began his offspring in the
East, near Paradise, so the second father of Nations Noah in the East first
began to repeople the world, after the deluge: Which besides the clearer
testimony of holy Scripture, may sundry ways be demonstrated: First, because
it is most certain, that the Earth began first to be peopled, near the
place where the Arc rested, which is the mountain Ararat: Whether this be a
mountain of Armenia as the common Interpreters imagine, or the mountain
Caucasus betwixt Scythia and India, as some later Writers with greater
probabilities have guessed, has suffered a great dispute; all agree in this
that it was Eastward. I will not be here over curious, but refer it to our
historical part, where we shall particularly handle the memorable accidents,
of particular places: Enough it is to prove that the first plantatio^ after the
flood was Eastward: 2ly no small probability is drawn from the ciuility,
magnificence, and populosity of these Eastern nations before others: For it is
certain that many excellent Arts have flourished amongst those Eastern
people, before ever our western climate dreamed of such matters; Amongst many
other matters, Artillery and Printing was in use amongst the Chinois and
East Indies of ancient time, long before this invention was known to us; as the
Portugalls who have travailed thither have confirmed. To the use of gunnes and
ordinance, many suppose Philostratus to have alluded, speaking in the life of
Apollonius Tiraneus lib: 2. cap: 14. Where he says that the people dwelling
betwixt Hyphasis and Ganges use not to go far to war, but drive away their
enemies with thunder and lightning sent down from Jupiter. By which means it
is said that Hercules and Bacchus joining their forces were there defeated, and
that Hercules there cast away his golden shield. For the other Invention of
letters howsoever it were by the Graecians ascribed to Cadmus, as the first
Inuentour, because he was the man that first discovered it to the Graecians; it
is most certain that it was as ancient as Seth: And that Printing first came
to us, from this Eastern part, appears by John Guttemberg, who brought it
first out of the Eastern world: Which art Conradus being instructed in,
brought the practice thereof to Rome, which afterward one Gesnerus a Frenchman
much bettered and perfected: For howsoever amongst the Europaeans this
invention seemed but newly borne, yet the Chinois, had it before either the
Egyptians or Phaenicians: When the Graecians had neither knowledge nor
ciuility: which is witnessed above a hundred years gone by the Spaniards and
Portugalls. Farther for the magnificence of those nations, an argument may be
drawn from the History of Alexander the great, who found more stately
buildings and Cities in the little kingdom of Porus which lay side by side
against the East Indies, then in all his former travails: for in Alexanders
time learning and ciuility were not spread so far west as Rome: Neither did
he esteem of Italy any otherwise, then of a barbarous and uncivil place:
which made him to turn his army rather against Babylon and the east, which
seemed a far worthier prize: Moreover, Paulus Venetus shows that letters and
discipline was first borrowed from the eastern people, without any return of
interest. A third reason may be from the extraordinary strength of those
eastern people in most ancient times. For it is reported by Diodorus Siculus
out of Clesias that Semiramis the wife of Ninus, not many discents from Noah,
brought an army to invade India* of three millions, besides horses and
waggoners: Neither had Staurobates her adversary smaller multitudes to
encounter her: which extraordinary strength and multitude of men could not
possibly issue out of any Colony, sent thither from the western parts: And
therefore it must needs follow, that they had their first offspring and
original in those eastern parts near India. Sundry other reasons might be
alleged, but these I suppose will suffice to fortify this assertion. Then it
is manifest that the first Plantation of nations begun in the eastern parts
of the Earth: But where we shall place and define this Eastern part, seems a
matter of greater difficulty then the other. Sr Walter Rawleigh out of the
premised arguments would seem to prove, that this first plantation was far
^ast as far as India, near which, he would have the Arc to rest, to wit, on
the mountain Caucasus lying betwixt India and Scythia: Notwithstanding the
authority of the learned Author, I find that the most ancient writers have
drawn the original of all nations soon after the flood, from the Caldaeans or
at least amongst all, made them the first: For confirmation of which opinion,
they urge many strong arguments: In the first place, they urge the testimony of
Moses in the 11 of Genesis, where speaking of the first assembly of people
after the flood he relates, that they came from the East into the plains of
Shinaar, in which place stood Babylon the chief seat of the Caldaeans. To this
they add the testimony of Metasthenes, Herodotus, C^esias, and Xenophon: which
have afterward bin seconded by Diogenes, Laertius, Philo, Porphyry in a
certain epistle to Boethus, Clemens Alexandrinus in Stromatis; Eusebius de
Euangelica demonstratione, Theodoretus lib: 1. de Graecarum affectionum
ouratione, Rabbi Moses Maymonis filius lib: 3. cap. 30. Perplexorum: with
almost all the Interpreters of the Hebrews: All which with uniform consent
have affirmed that Ciuility, Arts and sciences, derived their first descent
from the Caldaeans. Hence they faigne that Prometheus being a Caldaean, for
that he recalled men from a wild life to a more civil conversation, and
taught the regular motion of the stars and planets before unknown, stole fire
from heaven, and animated men formed out of clay, with a caelestiall soul. But
above all which may be collected in this kind, no small argument may be drawn
from the marks and footesteppes of the Hebrew and Chaldy tongues, which in no
mixture of tongues, or process of time could ever be abolished: For this,
being the first of all other languages, was preserved by Abraham and his
posterity; And challenges antiquity before ever the Latin or Grecian tongues
had any memory: in so much as all the ancient nations of the world are found in
most of their original names of Gods, peoples, Princes, and places to make use
of the Hebrew or Chaldey tongues, differing only in dialect, which without
manifest wresting and absurdity, cannot well be derived from other latter
languages. The first father of the people of Europe was Iaphet the son of
Noah, according to the joint consent of Hebrews, Graecians, and Latins* To
which alludes the Poet, where he says, Audax Iapetigenus. This name (...) or
Iaphet in Hebrew signifies as much as Dilatation or enlargement: Whereas the
Greek Etymologists ridiculously draw it from many other originalls: in the
like sort Tacitus ignorant of the Hebrew, would have the people of Palestine to
be called Iudaei quasi Idaei, from the mountain Ida in Creete, from which he
dreams they were derived; whereas the word in the Chaldy signifies, as much as
Praysers. In like manner Ion or (according to Homer) Iaon, supposed the first
Author of the Jones, would the Graecians derive from a flower, whereas the word
in Hebrew signify, as much as a deceiuer: Whence Daniel prophesied of
Alexander the great, that the King of (...) that is Iaan or Iauan should reign
in Assiria* Instances in this kind are infinite, as of Danaus, drawn from
(...) Dan which signifies a Judge, whence comes Dardanus which is the seat of
Judges: Of Ianus from (...) Iaijn* signifying wine, in which sense he is by
Halicharnisseus called Oenotrius: Of Achaeis which signifies Greece, Aegipt
which is straight or narrow Nimrode Rebellous. Ninus a son, Niniue the house
of Ninus, Solon quasi Solam a peacemaker. So Cadmus supposed to be the father
of letters and learning, amongst the Graecians, signifies in the original, so
much as an Eastern man or an ancient man. Should we run any further on this
point, we should be thought to write a dictionary, for as much as all the
ancient names amongst the Graecians spring from the same fountain* Whence that
Egyptian Priest had good reason to object to Solon: That the Graecians seemed
children, because they had nothing ancient amongst them: But to better purpose
a Christian objected to the Graecians that Moses the Lawgiuer to the
Christians was ancienter then all the Grecian Gods; Other reasons are taken
from the Religion of the Hebrews, out of which seem to be derived all the
famous religions of the Earth; For to let pass the Christian, Jewish, and
Mohammedan Religions at this day flourishing, all of them challenging great
antiquity, and taking a great mixture from the truest and ancientest Hebrew
discipline: It is manifest that in the Heathenish superstitions themselves,
many footsteppes have bin discovered: which will appear by diverse Instances.
These arguments I confess seem very strong, but yet not of sufficient
strength to enforce credulity without other warrant: To say peremptorily with
Mr. Bodin, that by the consent of ancient writers, the Chaldeans are
acknowledged the most ancient people, is more then I dare to venture: Neither is
this opinion so strongly fortified with arguments, but Reason may step in to
have a doubtful assault. Their first argument drawn from the testimony of
holy Scriptures in th ^^ of Genesis, seems to stand on our side, altogether
against them: For whereas it is said, that they came from the east into the
plain of Shinaar, it is manifest that the east was first peopled; or else how
should this people come from the east into these plains of Shinaar, to erect
the tower of Babel? Secondly, whereas they urge Arts, Ciuility, Magnificence of
the Chaldeans, we shall find it rather to agree to the people which dwell
farther east, as is witnessed by the former instances. And if any object that
at this day is found the contrary, for as much as we find the Indian to be a
barbarous blind and ignorant Nation, in respect of the Asiatickes and
Europaeans, we answer two ways. 1 First, that we find not by experience the
East-Indians to be so altogether deuoide of ciuility, but that we may observe
not only amongst them the footsteppes, but also the practice of many ingenuous
Arts, sage government, policy, and magnificence, as amongst the Chinois and the
large territory of the great Mogull 2. It is not hard to imagine, that in so
large a tract of time, the best settled common wealths should be brought to
naught, arts, ciuility, magnificence, be forgotten, and the rarest inventions
be cast into oblivion, especially by those two enemies of ciuility* wars and
luxury; both which having the reigns in their own hands, are quickly able to
abolish all wholesome discipline, both in Laws and Religion. 3. Their argument
drawn from the footesteppes of Languages in my shallow conceit, proves nothing
else but that all Laws, Arts, and Learning was derived to the Graecians from
the Chaldaeans, or the Nations near adjoining, which formerly received it from
them. But how far Learning might propagate it self the other way toward the
East, is not a matter so clear and out of question. The preservation of the
Language (for ought I ^ee) might grow from the continuance of the Religion,
more firmly rooted, and for a long time continued in Abraham's posterity, whose
abode was settled there about, whereas the other far divorced, as well from
their first spring, as the monumentall seals of their religion, quickly turned
Religion into Pagan Idolatry: Many reasons besides the disprouing of this
former opinion may be alleged to prove the Eastern part of the world to have
bin first peopled: amongst which I will only cull out this one, grounded on the
text of holy Scripture. It is warranted out of the text: 1 That when the waters
beg^n to decrease upon the face of the earth, and the Arc began to rest upon
the mountain Ara^at, Noah sent out a dove to make trial, who returned with an
oliue-branch in her mouth. 2 That near the place he issued out of the Arc
with all his family, he planted a vineyard, and was drunk with the juice of
the Grape, not knowing the strength thereof: out of which by all probable
conjecture must needs be collected, that the Regions near the place where
the Arc first rested, by the benefit of Nature afforded both Vines and Olives:
for we cannot imagine the silly Dove at the time of the flood empty gorged to
have flowne very far over the face of the waters to obtain this Olive
branch, nor Noah after the flood to have gone very far to seek out a
convenient place for his Vineyard: whence it is most likely that the Arc
rested in such a place, whose near adjoining Regions are enriched with such
commodities. But this cannot be verified of Armenia, wherein for ought my
reading informs me, are found neither Vines nor Olives, whereas some places
Eastward, whereon the Arc according to this other opinion was supposed to
rest, afford both in great plenty. To vmpite betwixt these two opinions, I
leave to my friendly Readers; because it is not in our power to command, but
obey Reason.

CHAP. XIV.
1OF the original of Inhabitants of the Earth we have spoken: It remains we
now treat of their natural Disposition.

There is nothing more subject to admiration, then the diversity of natural
Dispositions in Nations; a matter evident to the eye of observation, and
needing no proof or demonstration: for who observes not in all Nations
certain natural or national virtues or vices, which neither time nor Laws
could ever change or correct. For not to (...) farther off then our
neighboring Nations Confines; what Writer in this kind almost, were he not
very partial, has not taxed pride and ambition in the Spaniard; leuity, or
rather (as Bodin would have it) temerity in the Fren^h; dangerous dissimulation
in the Italian; Drunkenness in the Dutch; Falsehood in the Irish; and gluttony
in the English? And howsoever many means have bin put in practice, either by
the severity of laws to curb such enormities, or the subtilty of discourse to
shroud these vices under the name of virtues: yet these marks are found to
stick as close as the spots unto the Leopard, as neither altering their
pristine hue, or yielding to time or statutes: And if it happened at any time
that by extraordinary violence some little alteration were wrought, yet some few
years would find it return again unto his own nature and disposition. This
variety of dispositions being very many, and d^pending on sundry causes, to
help memory, we will reduce into certain heads* out of which in the general
we may give a judgment, leaving the rest to our special Tract. The name of
natural disposition in this place we take in the largest sense, so far forth
as it comprehends under it the Complexion, Manners, Actions, Languages, Laws,
Religion, and Government. All which so far forth as they depend from the
places we will show. Neither intend we to handle nicely all these specialities,
forasmuch as the Manners, Customs, Laws, (and for a great part) the external
rites of Religion depend on the natural constitution of the Inhabitants: so
that little can be spoken of the natural constitution, but of such actions,
effects and marks as show themselves in their ordinary customs and manners.
Wherefore we shall be constrained to treat of them together, the one being a
great furtherance to the explanation of the other.

2 The natural disposition of the Inhabitants of the Earth may suffer change
and diversity, either in respect of the site, or in respect of the quality of
the soil, or in regard of the Inhabitants themselves.

3 The site is the respect which one place in position bears to another: Here
a Nation is divided into, 1 The Northern or Southern, 2 The Eastern or
Western.

4 The Northern is placed in the North Hemispheare, betwixt the Aequatour and
the Artick Pole; The Southern on the opposite side betwixt the Aequatour and
the Antarticke Pole.

Of the Northern and Southern Inhabitants we speak not here respectively,
as in regard of the same Hemispheare, but absolutely in regard of the two
Hemispheares and their Inhabita^^s, How these 2 Hemispheares of North and South
are varied in respect of the quantity and disposition of the soil is
deciphered before. What diversity shall be found in the people or inhabitants
shall be showed in this Theoreme.

1 The people of the Northern Hemispheare as well in riches and magnificence,
as valor, science, and civil government, far surpass the people of the
South Hemispheare.

The people of the Northern Hemispheare we understand to be the Europeans,
the Asiatickes, the hithermost African^ being the greater part the Inhabitants
of America Mexicana, with the hithermost part of America Peruana together with
the people inhabiting the unknown land* lying under the Artick pole, with all
the Islands belonging to each of these* The people of the Southern Hemi-spheare
contai^e a moity Southward of the Africans, the Inhabitants of America Peruana
for the most part: the people of the T^rra Australis incognita or the soutth
Indies, with some Iland^ belonging thereunto. Betwix^ the^e two partitions, If
we make a comparison we shall find a greater disparity then ever any invention
of man could any ways reduce to any shadow of Aequality, or any Trauailers
observation ^ould ever step in to diminish. To begin with the ri^hes* It is
certain, that the (...) ^ase of it in any ^^tion proceeds, either from the
benefit of the soil or from the ^^ill and diligence of the inhabitants* The
benefit of the soil either in respect of the quantity of the ground, or the
quality of the soil in this southern part, we have at large proved to be
fa^^e ^nferio^^ to that of the Northe^^e H^mispheare. The dilig^^ce of the
people we can measure no otherwise then ^y their Traffic with foreign
nations, or their good husbandry of their own commodities Their traffic with
foreign nations, is suspe^ted to be little or nothing at ^ll, in respect of
the (...) theme Inhabitants ha^ing small commerce or knowledge of for^eigne
^ations, and that rather enforced by violence and ^onques^s* them any way
des^^^d of them* Whereas scarce can be found any nation of the Eart^, which
cannot by commerce or traffic with foreign Countries, at least neighboring
confines both strengthen themselves, and draw riches from other nations: Less
can be hoped from their homebred industry, which is content with sufficiency,
never aiming at farther riches then natural neces^^ty seems to exact, as may
appear by all records and Histories almost which have treated of this matter.
If we consider the state and magnificene of either, we shall acknowledge a
great difference, as disdaining all comparison. The first offpring of all
nations owes it self (as we have proved) to our Northern hemispheare, which
that Almighty Creator of al things blessed with knowledge and civil
government, before ever this Southern coast was known or mentioned. All the
acts of the old and new Testament performed on this side of the Aequatour, can
speak the state and magnificence of these nations, leaving the other as yet
neglected without memory or History. Neither has the Christian religion, the
true ground of all settled government ever bin so propitious, as to smile on
these ^iserable Nations, as yet groaning under the servile bonds of g^o^^e.
^gnorance and Pagan superstition. Where shall we find in any records or
antiquities, any state amongst them to parallel the four greater Monarchies
of the Ae^syrians, Medes, and Persians, Graecians, and Romans, or the later
risen out of their ashes, whereof this one age can produce no few examples*
What place is extant at this day in Europe, Asia, the Northern tract of Africa
or America (some few Deserts only excepted) which have not been either by
knowledge received from foreign Nations, or some other means in some sort
reduced to ciuility* At least to have embrased some settled form of government*
Whereas the Regions daily discovered in the Southern moity are found most
barbarous, without laws, sciences, or ciuility* Or if any such perfection show
it self amongst them, it is manifest that it is owed altogether, to the
industry of the Europeans, who with great cost and travail, ^aue brought them
such riches w^^^eof the poor wretches never knew the want. Instead of ^o many
Colonies sent out of Europe and Asia into these Southern Regions, no record I
suppose can mention one ever sent from them unto us. Which is an argument of
their ignorance and want of traffic. What shall I speak of the valor and
prowess of the Northern inhabitants, having by the sword erected so many
kingdoms, and (as it were) without resistance brought into captivity those
Nations of the South? of Arts and Sciences what can be said, but that the
Northern Inhabitant has all, and the other in a manner none: For liberal and
ingenious sciences and Schools and Universities dispersed in most part^ of
Europe and elsewhere can speak our glory: Which for ought I could ever learn
the Southern Continent, never saw; and admit they know ^ome thing in some
Mechanical arts, it is no more then necessity requires. Neither in the number
and extent of invention, or curiousness of workmanship answearable to that we
find at home. The arts of Printing and Artilery were I suppose never of their
acquaintance, except perhaps the later, which I dare swear has had better
acquaintance then welcome; as that which never showed it self but to their
ruin: No objection can here take place in this comparison, except some man
suppose the monuments and Trophies of the^e nations, either being very ancient
have miscarried by time, or else being of a newer birth are hid, wanting the
light of discovery: But this is a mere conjecture wanting ground: For what
Antiquity or record could ever show so much, as the footesteps or marks of any
such mon^ments? as for the countries as yet undiscovered, no better
coniecturall judgment can be given, then by that which is already found: For
where all other reason and obsernation is silent, I always hold equality the
best measure: Another argument not inferior to the rest, is the antiquity of
the Northern nations, which without all question is far greater then that of
the Southern: Because we cannot ^magine any ^an so aduenturous to pass into
these remote quarters, till such times as the places nearer adjoining, growing
too populous, cons^rained them to seek out a new ha^ita^ion; which no man
could conceiu^ to be but in many years after the universal Deluge.

5 Each Hemispheare with the Inhabitants therein contained, may again be
divided according to the longitude or latitude: according to the Latitude,
Inhabitants may be called either the extreme or Middle.

6 The extreme inhabitants are either the Northern or Southern. The former
in the higher Hemispheare. The other are the inhabitants thereunto opposite in
the other Hemispheare.

7 The middle Inhabitants are such as are situate in the middle betwixt the
Equator and the Pole in either Hemispheare.

The mistaking of the true limits of North and South in this our Northern
Hemispheare, has caused great error amongst the Ancients: Insomuch as
Hippocrates pronounced the people of the North to be of a lean and dry
disposition, of a small and dwarfish statu^e; whereas either writers out of a
good observation have found them to be of a tall stature, big-boned, and of a
most able constitution in respect of those of the South. To compose which
difference we must have recourse to that sub-partition of the Hemispheare
before mentioned, wherein we allotted of the 90 degrees accounted from the
Aequatour to the Pole, 30 for heat, 30 for cold, and 30 for temperament;
Whereof the former lies Southward to the Aequatour* The second is accounted
from the pole: the other is conceived to lie betwixt both. But because we find
this Mathematical division to be too precise, to answer the observation of
Writers in this kind, we must a little alter these bounds, that these rules
may rather stoop to Nature and ob^eruation. then Nature be sq^ared to our own
conceits; yet shall we show in a generality, and for the most part, that the
natural disposition of the Inhabitants, ought to be judged and measured
according to these limits: though not exactly answering in precise degrees.
Wherefore toward the North we limit these (with Bodin and other good writers)
which lie from the 50th degree Northward to the 70th; in which Tract we shall
find our Britains, Ireland, Denmark, Gotland, the lower Germany from Moenus
and Hipanus to Scythia and Tartary, which ^ake up a great part of Europe and
Asia: on the South we place the mos^ Southerly Spaniards, ^he Sicilians,
Peloponnesians, Cretians, Syrians, Arabians, Persians, Sufians, Gedrosians,
Indians, Egyptians, Cyranians, Carthaginians, Numidians, Lybians, Moors, and
the Inhabitants of Florida in America. The middle Region is meant that which
lies just in the middle place betwixt the Tropicke and the Pole; not that which
lies betwixt the Pole and the Line: the reason whereof we have showed before;
because the places under the Tropicks are found to be hottest, but under the
Line more temperate; so that our temperate Clime here we place that which
begins at the 40* and ends at the 50 degree of latitude: In which Climat be
the Northernmost Spain, France, Italy, the higher Germany (as far as the
Mase) both H^ngaries, Illyria, both Mys^as, Da^ia, Moldauia, Macedon, Thrace,
and the better part of Asia the lesser, Armenia, Parthia, Sogdiana, and a great
part of the greater Asia: so that all the Nations as yet mentioned in
histories* and perfectly discovered in our Northern Hemispheare are contained
betwixt the 30 degrees of latitude and the 60. What to think of the Nations
dwelling betwixt the two Tropicks, and those which are 60 degrees to the Pole,
for want of accurate observation and History we can set down no certainty* ye^
so far as men may judge by conjecture, we may a^compt in the Region betwixt
the Tropicks, the 15 degrees from the Tropicke toward the Line, to be of like
quality with the 15 degrees without the Tropicke. The Tract in the middle under
the Equatour, being more temperate, the^ that of the Tropicks, may be judged to
come near the temp^r of the middle Region betwixt the Tropicke and the Line,
though perhaps somewhat hotter. For the Regions very near the Poles, less
c^rtainty can be collected: yet that little which we find concerning the nature
of these Inhabitants we will ^ot omit. According to this partition of our
Northern Hemispheare* we may ma^^ judgment of ^he other; because where no other
cause shows it self, we may well guess these places which are of equal site
to be of equal disposition, so far forth as they respect the heavenly
operation. All which concern the n^turall disposition of the Inhabitants* we
will reduce to these ^hree heads* to wit either 1 the bodily qualities; 2 the
mental Affections, 3 the outward Actions.

1 The Extreme Inhabitants toward either Pole, are in complexion Hot and
Moist: Those toward the Equatour Cold and Dry: those of the middle indifferent
as partaking of both.

The confirmation of this proposition depends on 2 points* the first is the
Declaration of the Cause of this diversity: the second is the ^ffects and
diverse tokens which this variety of ^empe^ p^oduces, a^ well in the Accidents
of the Body* as the Mind. The cause we have partly before opened* which is the
Heat of the Sun in ^limates nearer the Equatour, and the Cold i^ places
farthe^ remote, and situate nearer the Pole: whereof the former, working on the
Internal heat and moisture of men and all other li^^ng creatures living in
those hot Climats, d^awes it o^t, and consumes it in such ^ort* that little
remains but Cold and Dry Melancholy, as the Seas in the bottom, the other
parts being (as it were) euaporated: For by how much more heat any man receives
outwardly from the heat of the Sun* so much more wants he the ^ame inwardly;
which every man may see confirmed out of ordinary experience* since that our
natural heat is far more vigorous in Win^er then in Summer, and that our
ioints are more opera^^ue in frosty weather, and then when the Northwinde is
sti^^ing. On the other side in the Summer we commonly observe the contrary: we
find our ioints lazy and heavy, our Appetites dull, as may also be perceived
in the English, Germans, and French* tra^ailing from the Nor^h Southerly into
I^aly and Spain, who if they confine not their diet to a sparing rate, they
commonly are surprised by surfets: an example we have of Philip Duke of
Austria, living in Spain after his German fashion. But on the contrary if a
Spaniard, who in his own Country is inured to great Niggardliness, arrive in
our Northern Country, he commonly proves a better ^rencher-man then our
native Inhabitants. And this Bodin observes to fall out true, not only in Men,
but also in beasts, which driven toward the North wax fat, and prove well;
but toward the South they pine away and wax ^eane* which may well be
confirmed out of Leo Afer, who auerres, that almost throughout all Afric you
shall find f^w or no herds of cattle or horse; few sheep, and scarce any
milk: whereas each man's Table almost in Germany and Brita^ny can give a plain
demonstration of our Countries store in this kind* Hence may appear that as
the heat of the Sun toward the Equatour, by drawing out the internal heat
and moisture causes men inwardly to be left cold and ^ry; so toward the Pole
the internal moisture being pr^se^^ed from the Excess of External heat, and
the internal heat being strengthened and thickened by external cold, have left
unto them a complexion of heat and moisture. The middle Region betwixt both
extremes being compounded of both, must needs by mix^ure and participation
enjoy a middle quality. Besides this e^po^i^ion of the causes of this temper
we shall observe many special marks and Instances which will discover this
variety of disposition. First, it is plain that heat and moisture are the two
qualities of fecundity. Whence it must consequently follow, those Regions which
are most populous to be chiefly endowed with this quality and disposition. Now
where shall we of this Hemispheare find any Country to whom Nature owes a
greater inc^ease of mankind, but in the North amongst the Go^hes, the
S^y^hians, the Scandians* and Germans, by whose abundant fertility* vast
deserts have been cultured and inhabited, stately Cities have bin founded,
Colonies have bin transported and derived almost into all Europe? Hence have
Methodius, and P. Diaco^^^ compared the armies of the North to swarme^ of Bee^;
and the North is termed by Olaus Magnus, the storehouse of mankind: to wit,
from which so many strong Nations, a^ the Goths, the Gepidae, the Hunnes, the
Cymbrians* the Lumbards, ^he Alan^* the B^rgundians, the Normans, the Picts,
the Her^^^, the S^e^ian^, the Slaui, the Swi^zers and the Russians are not
ashamed to derive their Ancestry. But here may be objected that the Southern
people are much more addicted to Veneri^ then the Northern, which seems an
argument of greater Heat: But to this I answer, that this insatiate appe^ite of
Venery in the Souther^e people, proceeds not from heat, b^t from Choler Adust,
and Melancholy: which humors carry in them a Salt and sharp quality
(according to Physicians) which stirs up their appetite to Venery: which we
may plainly obseru^ by experience: for no men are more moved by this itching
appetite of carnal Copulation, then Melanch^ly men. But howsoever this
affection is most predominant in such men, yet it is hardly seconded by
p^rformance; which makes Geographers to ascribe more promptness of generation
to the No^therne men, although sensual co^^^piscence reign more in the
Southern men; which indifferent proportion was without doubt granted to
either, by the providence of Almighty God, that they who were endowed with a
greater sufficiency, should less affect sensual delights then the rest, which
want that proportion of hea^ and moisture. And those of the other sort should
have their Appetites more raised up to wantonness, without the which their
offspring would soon fail. A second argument to prove our assertion is the
Tall and large statur^ of the Norther^e man, which argues both heat and
moisture; whereas the Southern man is small and dwarfish in stature, composed
of weak* and feeble Nerves. That the people situate toward the Pole in a
moderate distance, su^passe in greatness, can be shown not only in this our
Hemisph^are in the Germa^s, Scythians, Belgians, and others* but also in the
other by the Pantagones, whose si^uation Southward answers somewhat nearly to
the hight of Germany. That moisture is a great cause of growth, appears as
well by Trees and other vegetalls, which growing in low and marish grounds
increase to a most incredible greatness; as of those ^orementioned on the side
of Riuo Negro in Peru* and near the Lake Hiarotis in India as by Beasts* For
first we find the moistest to be of greatest stature, which is the reason why
the great Whales and fishes in the sea grow to such a vast quantity. Secondly,
such Beasts as have hot and moist bodies cannot so well prosper and live in
those Southern coun^reyes; as the horse which by nature being hot and moist,
lives but fa^ntly in Aethiopia, yet is of good strength in Scythia; Whereas
the Ass being by nature hot and dry is of great account and service in
Afric, in Europe little respected, in Scythia cannot live. Neither is
moisture sufficient for the growth except it be stirred up by heat: wherefore
we may conclude hence that the Northern man has both: Out of the contrary
effects, we may likewise collect, that the Southern man wants this quality*
These reasons indifferently prove these qualities to wit, of heat and moisture,
to be in the Northern man, and the contrary in the Southern. Diverse other
arguments are urged, some to prove the one quality, some the other apart. A
great argument of heat in the Northern man may be his extraordinary drinking:
A vic^ which could never be reformed or corrected by times or statutes. This
drowth of theirs stirring up this desire of drinking, can proceed from no other
cause then their heat: Whereas the Southern man is seldom taxed of this vice:
not because he is more religiously temperat then the Northern; but rather for
the natural temper of his body, which can neither require or bear so much as
the Northern. In so much as Bodin seems to make a doubt, whether the
immoderat drinking of the Germans is to be esteemed a greater f^ult, then the
niggardly sparing humor of the Italian: since both arise rather out of nature
then education: Another argument of heat in the Northern man, is the
extraordinary strength in respect of the Southern man, which is an apparent
demonstration of heat* We find that the blood of the Scythian is full of small
strings such as are in the gore of Bulls and Bores, and betokens strength:
Whereas the blood of the African is thin, such as is in a Heart or Hare. No
less are those reasons which especially prove the Northern man to be endowed
with much moisture. Thirdly we may much better argue from the Physiognomicall
accident of the body: we shall find the inhabitants under the Tropickes to be
exceeding black: under the Pole it self beyond 60 degrees somewhat brown,
but from thence about 60 their color is reddish: from thence to 45 degrees
whitish: about the 30 they begin to wax yellow* and then some what enclining
to green: all which proceeds out of the variety of heat and cold: For the
Blackness of the Africans about the Tropickes, we can ascribe to no other
c^rtaine ^ause, then external heat, and internal cold, his necessary
concomitant: near to which approaches the yellow and green color of the
people not far of; Whereof the form^r discouers Choler and Adustion: the
other me^an^holy* And how soever the brownnesse of the people dwelling very
near the Pole may come by reason of external cold, which by excess, rather
dries up their moisture, then strengthens the internal heat: Yet the Red
color of the Inhabitants about 60 degrees is a firm argument of heat: and the
white ^ue of the middle people, an apparent mark of a middle tempe^. No less
may be collected from the eyes and hairs of these three Nations. The eyes of
the Scythians are generally tending to a gray color; The remote have them of a
blew-whitish shining color; as the Cymbrians and Danes according to Plutarch*
The Britannes, ^ermans, and Normans come near unto this color, but have them
not al^ogether so gray and shining but more obscure. But the Southern man has
^he color of his eyes much enclining to black. Now if we will belee^^
^ristotle in his Problemes, the gray color of the eyes is a very great
argument of heat; But the blackish color ^rgues the want of heat; Those which
dwell in the middle Regions, have for the most part their eyes of a darke-blew*
which color is app^r^nt in the eyes of Goats, which as Pliny writes are never
pur-blind or dim of sight. Many special arguments besides those before
mentioned, are produced to show ^he Northern man to surpass in moisture, as
the other in drouth: The first may be taken from their voice, which in the
Scy^hian, or Northern man is tending to hoarsenes; but in the Africans very
sharp and shrill, as in the Ethiopians, and Carthaginians, and the most
southerly Spaniards. That this difference does arise from the moisture of the
one, and the want of it in the other may as easily be persuaded; because we
observe women which are moister then men, to have sharp and shriller voices:
Also that too much moisture in wood or metal makes the sound of it very
hoarse and harsh; as we see in lead, whereas other mettalls give a shriller
sound: Another reason is drawn from their extraordinary sweating; for it is
observed, that Northern men travailing toward the So^th, or warring in hotter
Countries, are like to faint and perish through extraordinary sweating, as
Plutarch in the life of Marius, records of the moist bodies of the Cimbrians.
Thirdly, it might seem wounderfull which Tacitus relates of the German nation,
that they love sloth and yet ^ate rest; because (as in Children) the natural
heat prouokes them to Action, but the moisture procures Softness: whence they
must either fight or sleep* Hence the Italians and Spaniards make account, if
they can suffer or withstand the f^rst or secon^ assa^lt of the French or
Germans* easily to vanquish them; because as Mari^^ and Caesar observed of the
French, tha^ in the first as^ault they showed themselves more then Men, in the
second less then Women. A fourth reason not inferior to the rest may be
drawn from the so^t bodies, of the Germ^ns and Scyt^i^ns, not any way patient
of labor, hunger, and thir^t* although very s^rong and able to give a sudden
encounter or venture on a warlike exploite: The contrary in all shall we find
in the Southern man; out of which we may we^l collect, that he enioies a
contrary tempe^: Besides all which we have said concerning this assertion more
shall appear hereafter by these subsequent Theoremes.

2 The extreme Inhabitants toward the Poles are more naturally inclined to
Mechanical works and Martial endeauours: the Extreme toward the Equatour
to works of Religion and Contemplation: the middle to laws and ciuility.

There are found three kinds of discipline, which usually invade and occupy the
mind and faculties of man: The first are Mechanical and external operations,
the which are proiected in the Intellectual part, yet receive their perfection
from the hands and external organs; Such as are Artillery, making of
Ordinance; casting of mettalls, and Chymicall inuention^; Printing and the like
Arts. The second is Contemplation, separate and removed from external
operation. The third as the mean betwixt both, is Civil and Moral
discipline, whose act and perfection consists, in the making of Laws,
establishing and governing of States, prescribing and maintaining of Divine
worship, with other matters of the like nature. These gifts it plea^ed God so
to distribute to mankind, that the former should be most appropriate to the
Northern man; the second to the Southern, the third to the inhabitants of the
middle region: in such wise as the one should need, and not envy the others
perfection. All which we shall demonstrate first out of the causes and ground;
Secondly* out of the effects. The causes we have showed in the former
Theoreme, wherein we have ascribed to the Northern man abundance of heat and
moisture in respect of the other; which are the chiefest aides of the
imagination, on which mechanical faculties depend; also their plenty of blood
and humors distempering their minds: they are, by this means less given to
contemplation. The Southern men having cold and dry brains* are of greatest
understanding in Contemplati^e matters, being (as it were) by reason of
melancholy abstract from external operation. The middle temper of the brain
and humors must needs be the mother o^ a middle discipline, which is found to
be that which concerns Manners, Laws, and Religion. Here some have gone about
to reduce these three kinds of people to three planets answerable to these 3
dispositions. Over ^he Southern people they set Saturn: the Northern they
commit to the government of Mars; the middle inhabitants to Jupiter. The power
of Saturn according to the Chaldeans consists in Contemplation; of Jupiter in
practical action; of Mars in Artificial operation. Which 3 properties may be
well gathered out of the Hebrew tongue, natures best interpreter; for Saturn
they call (...) which is as much to say as quiet; because nothing better b^fits
the nature of contemplation then retired quietness: Jupiter they call (...)
which is as much to say as Just: Which the Grecians having received from these
Hebrews, they fained Jupiter to be the God of Justice. Mars they called (...)
which signifies strong or puis^ant, for which cause the Chaldeans and the
Greclans* would have Mars the God of war. To Saturn they ascribe cold, to
Mars heat, to Jupiter a temperature betwixt both. To the first, they impute the
invention of sciences and such as concerns Contemplation; To the second
practical prudence; To the third Arts and Workmanship. Whereof the first
depends from the Understanding, the second from practical discourse, the last
from the opera^ion of the fantasy. But to come nearer the matter and descend
to particulars: we will first begin with the Northern man whom we shall
find to be the father of most mechanical Inventions as of Gunnes, Printing,
the art of Liquefaction, Chimistrie with infinite other excellent Arts. Hence
it comes to pass that the Italians and Spaniards, are used to send over for
Britains and Germans, as for those which are endowed with a heavenly gift in
the Invention of vei^es of Mettalls under the Earth, as also for the opening
and well ordering of such Mines: Let any man cast his eyes on England, the
Neither-lands, Germany, he shall find the In^abi^ants generally, either as the
Scholars and darlings of Mars weilding their swords, or as Pioners leuelling
of mountains, or as Ingmers contriuing the course of waters, or hunting in the
woods, or plowing in the field, or looking to their flocks on the mo^ntaines,
or working in their shops, or at least set upon some external work or other:
that their wits* (as Bodin merrily speaks) might seem to be in their hands.
From whence come for the most part ou^ several sorts of stuffes* our choice
works in wood, metal, Iuo^y, our variety of instruments, from the Italian or
Spaniard? No truly: they can rather admire then imitate; and better set us the
mater^alls then invent the workem^nship, like those distressed Israelites which
were enforced to run unto the Philistines to have their swords sharpened. As
we ascribe to those nations of the North this perfection in operative and
external faculties; So cannot we deny the Southern man his due prerogative*
which is Religion and Contemplation. For these nations being above all other
affected with melancholy, willingly withdr^w themselves from common society
into Deserts, and remote receptacles, more accommodated to abstracted
meditation: For contemplation (being of the Hebrews termed a precious death)
has a special force to sharpen the wits of men, and by separation, (as it
were) from the dregs of the vulgar, not only opens unto him the se^rets of
nature, but given him wings to ^lie up to heaven in sacred meditation. Whence
it cannot seem strange that from these parts at first proceeded the Prophets,
Philosophers, Mathematicians of great estimation* Al^o that almost all
Religions of any great moment, owe their first original to those parts: we
need roue no farther then the Hebrews, Chaldaeans, Egyptians, Graecians, whom
we shall find the first founders of Divine and Humane sciences. Which
historical observation dissents not any whit from the judgment of the
Naturalists: Because (as Huar^^s observes) the true ^oment of the best
understanding, consis^s in the cold and dry brain incident to melancholy. And
Aristo^le observes, that beas^s themselves are so much the more adjudged to
approach the prudencie of man, by how much they par^ake the quality of cold. An
instance of which may be given in the Elephant, whose blood (according to
Plinys Testimony) is coldest of all other Creatures. To this I might add for
an argument. of the r^ligious disposition of the Southern man, (...) Af^r
writes ^oncerning the vast number of Temples in ^ome places of Afric, as
about Fesse and Morocco, their strict obs^ruation of holy rites, their ^igide
Ecclesiastical censure, wit^ such like. What is spoken by Aluarez of the hill
A^iar^ in the midst of Afric, of their strange Library. Churches, Palaces,
with other matters of this purpose, would serve well to my purpose, had ^ the
ingenuity to bele^ue the I^s^^te. But against this may be objected perchance
that the Chris^ian Religion which is the truest and only Religion has no great
footing as yet amongst those Southern Nations. Secondly, that their Churches
have no perfect platform of Ecclesiastical* government, as we find in other
Churches toward the North^rne tract. To the first I answer; that we here
speak of the Inclination of men to Religious exercises, so far forth as it
depends on their natural disposition; not respecting this or that Religion:
for to be informed in the true Religion and reject all other, depends not any
way on the natural Inclination of men, but on the immediate gift of the
Almighty God, which is pleased oftentimes to make elec^^on of one Nation before
the other, to make the one (according to the Apostle) a vessel of honor, the
other of dishonor. To the second I likewise answer, that in Religion two
things are to be con^idered: First the Religious and deuou^ Inclination of man
to embrace divine contemplation: Secondly, the well ordering and gouer^ing of
Religious a^^ions, according to Laws and Statutes perta^ning to the extern^ll
regi^ent of the Church The fo^mer only being gran^ed to ^he Southern man, we
may ascribe the perfection of the other to the people of the middle Region,
whom we have pronounced to be most happy in the managing of ^iuill af^aires
and Politic government* Now to prove this people to be b^st endow^d with
this faculty, many reasons may be alleged; because according to the test^mony
of most approved writers, we have found Laws, Manners* Statutes, and the best
manner of governing Commonwealths to have proce^ded from these Nations. For
Histories will show us, that the greatest and b^st empires of the world have
flourished in Asia, Greece, Asy^ia, Italy, France, Germany, which lie betwixt
the Equ^tour and the P^le, from the 40 to the 50 degrees: And that out of these
have always proceeded the best commanders, the most prudent Statesmen and
Law-giuers, the wisest Lawyers, the most eloquent Orators, the wariest
Merchants. Whereas neither Africa in the South nor Scythia in the North* could
ever boast of many Law-giuers or Statesmen worthy note; whence Galen
complains that Scythia never brought forth any Philosopher besides Anacharsis
of any great credit.

3 The People of the Extreme Region toward the Poles in Martial prowess
have commonly proved stronger then those near the Equatour: but the middle
people more provident then either in the establishment and preservation of
Commonwealths.

The grounds of this Proposition we have laid before: for the former clause,
that the people of the North should prove more puissant then these of the
South, may well be concluded out of their natural strength of body, and their
courage of the mind: whereof the latter makes them ^eady to attempt, the other
to execute most chiualrous designs. Neither want there most true and pregnant
examples in history to second this principle: for every man that is
indifferently seen in history may observe with wonder how the strong Nations
of the Scythians have invaded the South, winning from them many Trophies and
victories: whereas we seldom find any expedition set on from the South to the
North (except to the loss or ruin of the South*) worth any memorable
relation. To this many would have these threatening prophecies of Jeremy,
Ezechiel, and Esaias to allude, which foretold, that from the North should issue
wars, troops of horsemen, and the Ruins of Kingdoms: This we shall observe
to be true not only in the general, but almost in all particular States,
which we shall find propagated from the North to the South. The Assyrians at
first overcame the Chald^^^s; the Medes the Assyrians; the Persians the Medes,
the Greeks the Persians, the Parthians the Greeks, the Romans the
Cart^aginians, the Goths the Romans, the Turks the Arabians, the Tartars the
Turks: and howsoever the Romans by their prowess wanne somewhat toward the
North, yet found they by experience that beyond Danubius no great matter was to
be expected; for as much as these Nations could not be easily vanquished, and
being overcome would not away with subjection: which (as some say) was the
cause that Traian having built a great Bridge of stone over the Danow, was
persuaded to break it down. Tacitus expressly confesses, that the Germans
were too hard for the Romans, and could not have been overcome by them, but by
the advantage of the weapons and manner of fight; wherein the Romans having
long continued a civil Nation, had practiced themselves* which he secondeth by
many instances, drawn from several confl^cts betwixt the Germans and the
Romans, which he might well speak; for as much as himself reports 210 years
were spent in the conquest of Germany, and no Nation so much troubled them as
this; which notwithstanding when all was past, was thought to be triumphed
over rather then conquered. It were an infinite task to write all which
Tacitus relates of the valor and warlike disposition of the Germans, being a
Nation loving rest, and hating Idleness, puni^hing cowardice with Death, and
reputing it an inexplable shame for a subject to see his Prince slain in
Battail^, and return alive without him. As much or more he reports from
Julius Agricola, then Proconsul of Britany, of our ancient British Nation whose
factions and dissentions amongst themselves gave occasion to the Roman victory,
and not the Roman valor wherein he confessed them no way to stand inferior.
To strengthen this assertion, History will afford an evidence almost in every
corner of the world, wherein we shall find the North by sundry conquests to
have prevailed against the South* In the East parts we find that Ci^gis Can a
Northern Tartar conquered the Indians: That the Tartarians also conquered the
Armenians; and yet the Armenians had such aduant^ge against the Southern
people, that the Mamalukes esteemed a strong Nation in Egypt, were first
chosen out of Armenia. Also* we find that the people of Ca^ha^ subdued the
Chinois and the Indians. We read also that Mahomet a Saracen Sultan of Persia,
hired certain Northern Scythians, with whose strength he overthrew the
Caliph of Babylon, who dwelt afterward in Turcomania. Neither wants America
many examples in this kind, and no question but many others have been drowned
in oblivion for want of History. We find that the people of the North in this
Continent prevailed against the South, and conquered Mexico, which was
afterward subdued again by Cortese; and by later discovery of our English
nation we are given to understand that the people about Terra de Laboradore are
a fierce warlike people, in so much as rather then they would yield themselves
to be taken captive by our men, they have been seen to make away themselves.
To go no further then our own country, who knows not how many famous
overthrows have in later Ages* been given to the Spaniards and the French;
especially to the later, who have feared the utter undoing of their State: yet
neither of these two great Kingdoms could ever attempt any thing against the
English* worthy Chronicle or observation: If any man object the actions of King
William the Conqueror, we can answer many ways: first that he wanne the
sovereignty not merely by the sword, but by Agreement and composition,
challenging a promise from King Edward the predecessor, and being fortified
with a strong faction of the nobility of the Realm: and moreover the malice of
the Subjects against Harald being an usurping Tyrant, gave great spurs to his
victory: wherefore we cannot judge this a true Conquest: yet has England
been conquered of the Danes a more Northern people, and suffered many
inconveniences of the Scots, but yet were never able to conquer them utterly,
or bring them under subjection; although fewer in number, and neer^ their
Confines. Now for the second clause* that the people of the Middle Region are
more provident in preservation of Commonwealths is warranted out of the same
grounds: for to this two things are necessary, to wit, Arms and Counsel:
whence they used to paint Pallas armed, to signify that not only strength, but
Counsel was necessary for the establishmen^ of Kingdoms. The Southern people
(as we have showed) being altogether addicted to contemplation, have been
unable either to defend themselves, or repel an enemy. On the other side the
people of the North having strength sufficient to assault, for want of prudence
and counsel could never long enjoy their Conquests, so that we shall seldom
read of any great Empire established of either. But the middle people having
strength to subdue the Southern, and policy enough to overcome the strength of
the North, have established many great and famous Empires. Here for an ample
example we may produce the State of the Roman Empire, which borrowed Laws and
discipline from the Graecians, nauticall Scien^es from the Sicilians and
Punicks, military discipline from their daily exercise: and therefore was it no
great wonder, that in state and glory they surmounted all other Nations. On the
other side we find many famous victories achieved by the Northern people,
yet could they never leave behind them any large Empire, but as easily lost as
won their Kingdoms. Thus fared it with the Goths, the Hunnes, the Heruli,
and the Vandals, which with so many strong Armies invaded Europe, and Asia, who
nevertheless for want of Wisdom and foresight, could not hold what they got,
or settle therein any state of long continuance.

4 The extreme Regions in manners, actions, and customs, are clean opposite,
the one to the other. The middle partake of mixture of both.

That the manners of men depend on the natural complexion and temper, is
warranted as well by experience as approved testimony of our best Philosophers.
For howsoever grace o^ education may make a change; yet this is extraordinary,
and these raines once loosed men easily return to their former disposition:
How much the Northern man differs from the Southern in natural constitution,
we have formerly ^aught; out of which we cannot but conclude, a great
disparity in manners and customs* Yet ^o show a mo^e special and evident
demonstration, we will make a particular enumeration of such affections as are
incident to the Nort^ern^ and Sothern^ man, and out of the comparison make ou^
judgment*

First therefore, it is manifest out of ancient and modern observation, that
the Northern man has been ^axed of too much leuity and inconstancy: The
Southern man contrariwise of too much perverse stubbornness, as well in
opinion as affection. The reason of both we have before specified, to be
their natural complexion: which in the former is inclined to sanguine, in the
later to Choler Adust, and melancholy: whereof the one is the more subject to
change or impression, then the other. Galen deriuing all virtues from the
humors of the body, makes Choll^r the mother of prudence, melanch^ly of
constancy, blood of mirth, fleame of mansuetude: Out of the mixture of which
humors, infinite variety arises. And because these humors are seldom
equally, or proportionally combined, and tempered together; they become the
sources of infinite vices: Which Inequality of temperament is rather found in
the extreme regions: And therefore no marvel if they are observed, to have
been subject to greater vices then those of the middle region: For the
mutability and leuity of the Northern Nations, we can have no greater
argument then the change of religion: It is written of the Ostrogothes and
Visigothes, that being expulsed by King Attila, they besought Valens that he
would grant them a dwelling place: conditionally promising, that they would
submit themselves, as well to the laws of the Empire, as to the Christian
Religion. Which having obtained, they fled from their promise and perfidiously
burnt the Emperor alive. The Goths, as soon as they came into Italy, embraced
the Christian Religion, but soon ran into Arianisme: The people of Gr^enland
according to M^^sters relation, being of a wavering disposition, soon liked
the Christian Religion, but soon relapsed to Idolatry. The Turks being a
kind of Scythians, as soon as they came into Asia, without any great
cons^raint, embraced Mah^metanisme. The Tartars likewise, without any
enforcement yielded first to Christianity, and soon fell back to the Arabian
rites. The Normans coming into France although very rude and barbarous,
rejecting Gentilisme, Paganism, subscribed to the Christians. As soon or
sooner the Islander^ fell from Idolatry to the true Religion. The Bohemians
and Saxons first cast off the Roman yoke; which were seconded by all Saxoni^,
the Cities of the Balticke sea, Denmark, Norway, Suedia, Heluetia, and
Britanny. The revolt of these Nations from the Roman subjection, I cannot
term leuity or inconstancy in their chief leaders and teachers: Being such
as upon long deliberation and mature advice attempted that, which they knew to
be most consonant to truth and reason: to whom without doubt God Almighties
hand was not wanting. But for the rude and vulgar people to be so soon won,
and turned from one opinion to aonther, without longer deliberation, was
argument of a mutable disposition: Since there can be no greater token of
Inconstancy then to make an absolu^e change of Religion in all points in so
short a space; whereas the Religions being so nearly affined, the one to the
other, no man at first sight, out of reason and discourse would embrace or
reject all grounds together, but by degrees: No less argument of leuity in
those Northern people, is the distraction and division of them into so many
sorts and factions of Religion, as we find now in Germany, Belgia, Polonia,
and elsewhere, which no doubt at first proceeded from one or few beginnings.
But on the contrary side, if we look on the Africans and Southern people, we
shall find them as obstinate and perverse in standing to their own
propositions, as ready to tax the Northern people of leuity and Inconstancy.
For such has been the settled constancy of these nations, as well Africans as
Asiaticks; that no means could be invented to draw them from their opinion,
but either heavenly miracles or force of arms. Which constancy has been
apparent, no^ only in men but also in women and children: which made Antiochus
even mad when he by all cruelty tortured the seven Sons (as we find in the
bo^ke of the Maccabees) yet was as far from turning them from their Ceremony
of forbearing the eating of Swines flesh, that both the mother invited them,
and the Children willingly submitted themselves to Martyrdom. Against this
constancy Mahomet, when neither by fained miracles no^ persuasion, he saw he
could prevail, betook himself to Arms, for the establishment of his
discipline which otherwise he could no ways have brought to p^sse. And it is
strange to see the Jews at this day, which being a people dispersed over the
face of the whole Earth, groaning under the servile yoke of subjection, having
no King, or supreme governor of their own, have so obstinately retained
their religion, for these three thousand years. What shall I speak of the
Mahumetans in Afric and Asia; of the Indians, the Chinois and other Southern
people, which having once settled a platform of Religious discipline, are
impregnable against all persuasion, mainely opposing themselves against the
grounds of our Religion, having not so much as the principles of nature to
support their own. To let pass the ordinary commerce and traffic, with
Christian nations, which in so evident a case, might probably beget some
fruits; the admired Industry of the Jesuits, erecting their Colleges amongst
them, might seem to promise greater matters. But as I have credibly been
enforced, by such as have travailed, as well into Turkey as Africk^ and India,
the event of their labors has come so far short of expectation, that they
have by their conference rather engendered a worse opinion of Christianity.
Which though some may impute probably to their indirect means and
superstitious rites, imposing on the conscience, what God never commanded, but
rather forbad: Yet who so shall observe the cunning and subtilty of these
Sophisters will rather ascribe it to the perverse and stubborn disposition of
the people, unapt to receive any new impression: For else, who could imagine
they could be so powerful in perverting and infecting others with their Roman
superstition in these parts, having their consciences better informed out of
Gods Word, and their understandings ordinarily better taught, in principles,
and every way more strongly fenced against temptation. As these Southern
nations always boasted of their own Constancy as a prime virtue, so ceased
they not to vpbraide the Northern man with inconstant leuity. This the
Italians object to the French and Germans (as we find in Tacitus.) The
Greeks heretofore to the Italians, the Cretians to the Graecians, the Hebrews
and Egyptians to the Greeks and Cretians; On the other side the other have so
much complained of their perverse and settled superstitions. For to judge
indifferently of either, they are both vices declining from that golden
mediocrity, which we call Constancy. For the defect is leuity, the excess
Pertinacy: and as it is very culpable in any man to turn with every wind; so
it is as great an indiscretion, to be so wedded to our own opinions or
affections as to turn on no occasion: Because all things under the sun are
subject to change and alteration: And therefore it is the part of a wise man to
accommodate himself unto the object, and not in a fond dream to wrest all the
world to his own fancy. For a wise Seaman will rather obey the storm then
seek his ruin, and when he cannot recover the port, will turn to any other
point for his own preservation. I speak here only of matters of state and
policy, and not of religious actions, otherwise then concern the external
rites and Ecclesiastical discipline, the most part of which, by wise men have
been esteemed no other, then matters indifferent which may admit of change and
alteration. But here some one might object that the French of all Nations, have
been generally taxed of lightness and inconstancy, being notwithstanding in
the middle region, more North then the Africans, yet more South then the
Germans or Scythians; I cannot altogether excuse them of this National
blemish, yet with their countreyman Bodin, I hold it more fitly termed
temerity then leuity, being a people very quick and agill, as well in speech,
as action in so much as the executions of matters with them many times are
past, ^re the Spaniard can enter into consolation: for as the Spanish counsel
is over slow, and full of delays, so is the French too heady and hasty: and as
delay to the one, so rashness to the other has proved dangerous. The mediocrity
betwixt both being a promptitude or alacrity in effecting matters* is to be
esteemed as a virtue, which we find in the Italians, whose action is quick
enough, yet commonly grounded on sufficient deliberation; yet if we compare the
two extremes, we shall find the Spanish delays to have overcome the French
hastiness, being far less subject to error, then the other.

Another difference betwixt the Northern and Southern man is discovered in
the Affection of Anger and Revenge. The Northern man though quickly moved to
anger, and very furious, prouokes his enemy to the open field, and after a
little time is quickly pacified, forgetting the injury. The Southern man
contrariwise is not so quickly in^aged, but being once provoked, pursues his
revenge by secret stratagemes, rather then open fury, and will never or very
hardly be drawn to reconciliation: which base and brutish disposition arises
not so much out of their evil education (as some have imagined) as out of
melancholy ill tempered. A proof whereof we have in most men amongst us, of a
melancholy disposition, which according to our common proverb, threaten danger
and hatred implacable: of this disposition were Ajax and M. Coriolanus, whereof
the former for want of revenge, in a distracted fury fell on the herds of
cattle: the other would by no means be reconciled to his Countrymen, till he
saw all their Cities in flames. Of the cruelty of the Africans many histories
have given testimonies, especially Leo Afer, speaking of the Carthaginian
dissension: and with later Writers most memorable is the story of miserable
Mulleasses deposed of his Crown, his eyes burnt out, and his face disfigured,
tendering his complaint to the Emperor Charles. This cruelty has no less been
observed in the most Southern Ameri^ans, with whom it is ^ custom to ^athe
their children in the blood of their slaughtered enemies, o drink their blood,
and banquet with their carcases: And if we examine the original of tortures
and severe laws, we shall find them originally derived from the Southern
people, which the Northern Man has seldom used but unwillingly in matters of
horrible treason. And not without good reason have our Laws taken other
courses for the conviction of malefactors in cases of felony and murder, then
the extortion of confession by extreme tortures, a thing common with the
Italian; because (as some of our Statists have observed) our Nation is by
nature more apt to confession without torture, and so fearful of torment,
that they will more willingly be brought to the block or gallows, then the
rack: whereas the Southern people by their melancholy temper more fearful
of death, and obstinate in their opinion, will yield rather to the greatest
torture then confession.

Thirdly we shall find as great a disparity betwixt the Northern and Southern
man in the sluttish carelessness of the one, and the cleanly neatness of the
other. Tacitus reports of the old Germans, that they lived at home in their
houses in sordide manner, almost naked, and that they used the same rooms as
receptacles as well of their beasts as of themselves: which custom we shall
not find much changed amongst some, if we read Lipsius speaking of the
Westphalians, or have so much patience elsewhere to make experiment. It is also
reported that the Scythians whenever they found themselves oppressed on the
way, or in the wars by hunger or thirst, were wont to open a vein under their
horses ears, and to suck out their blood, and to banquet with the flesh, as
we read of Tamerlanes Army on the like occasion: but the Southern people are
of a neat and cleanly disposition, abhorring all sordide and uncleanly action,
using often bathings and washings, not only in sacred and Ecclesiastical
matters, but also in private. And therefore no wonder if (as Xenophon among the
Ancients reports) that amongst the Persians it were accounted a very unmannerly
thing to spit; or that amongst the Abyssines (as Aluarez writes) it should be
deemed a most heinous and flagitious crime, to drop any filth or spittle in any
of their temples. An argument of this may be their extraordinary affection of
neat and dainty delicates, which (as Athen^us relates) is most noted in the
Asiatickes and Egyptians, by which means M. Anthony a luxurious spend-thrift,
finding himself by Cleopatra surmounted, he smiled at his own ambition in
that kind, and laughed at the Romans his own Nation as ignorant and
barbarous. Of the Persian Theophrastus writes, that by a certain Law certain
great rewards were promised to such men as had invented any new kinds of
Delicates or pleasures, which is a great argument of the licorous affection of
this Nation. A fourth difference may be discovered in the conversation of the
Northern and Southern Man. For the Scythian and Northern man is naturally
addicted to company and society, as may appear by the communion of many men in
one place in the fields, who amongst the ancients were ^earmed Nomades, and are
now called Hordes* in which manner the Tartars live at this day* also it is
well known how much the Germans, Britains, Danes are addicted to company, in
so much as they can hardly live long without companions. But the Southern man
being (as we have proved) of a melancholy disposition, chooses rather to live
solitary, and to lurk in woods and deserts, then amongst people: Near to
which nature come the Italians and Spaniards, who affect rather a retired
Gravity, then an open Society* and converse but at a distance, rather for
formality the friendship* 5ly, no less disparity in the disposition of these
nations shall we find as well in the Languages they ordinarily use, as the kinds
of music which they affects for the former we may generally observe in the
Northern Languages a rough collision of consonants and aspirations, as in the
German and Bohemian Tongues. Neither is this observed only in their native
Tongues, but also in their use of the Latin Tongue, in pronunciation of which
they cannot but mix rough aspirations; as I have observed oftentimes in the
Northern Germans* who commonly pronounce firum for virum; fulgus for vulgus,
Pipi for bibi, with diverse other of the like nature: as unable they are on the
other side to give any soft aspiration his due sound, but commonly leave it out
altogether, or pronounce either the vocales media for vocales tenues, and
aspiratae for mediae, which proceeds altogether from the immoderate strength
of hea^ and force of the spirits: But the Southern people contrariwise wanting
that degree of heat, in their pronunciation abstain from these hard
aspirations and collision of many consonant together, without v^wels to mollify
the harshnes* as we find, in the Greek, Latin, Spanish, and I^alian tongues,
which ly^ nearer to the South. Also the Turkish, Arabian, and Persian tongues
are by such as are experienced in them, said to be sweet and elegant. Also it
is to be noted, that as often as the Colonies of the North have invaded the
South, although retaining the same foot steps and original, have
notwithstanding much altered their pronunciation not only through the mixture
and impression of other languages, but also through the nature of the place, as
we find the Gotish tongue of the Spaniards to be changed to a smoother and
sweeter pronunciation, then that which is retained in Scythia. I speak not of
the Latin mixtu^e, out of the mere Gotish words, which we shall percei^e
mollified with more vowels, and set to a sweeter termination. The like may be
observed in the Hebrew tongue, which (as Josephus Abudachnon, sometimes, a
Reader in this University observed) to the ear sounded far sweeter in the
Arabian, Turkish, and Persian dialects then its own original; not that it is
in them more perfect (which were impiety to believe) but because men in
pronouncing of a language preferring pleasure before significancy, have
mollified it, with soft vowels and aspirations, rather to serve the ear then
understanding. No less affectation shall we find of diverse sorts of
music, ^orting with diverse dispositions. The Northern man's humor consortes
best with the Phrygian measure, a loud and stirring harmony. The Soth^rne man
having his spirits more mollified affects the Lydian: The people of the middle
region, are most of all delighted with the Doricke, a music heretofore used
in sacred exercises. They who know these measures exactly, and which is
agreeable to this or that man's fancy, will give a probable guess unto his
natural disposition. To run over all the differences in manners and customs
of the Northern and Southern nations were a matter infinite; wherefore it
shall suffice to wrap up all in general recapitulation. If we compare the
Nort^erne man with the Southern, we shall find the one white and red, the
other bl^cke or tawney; the one big-boned, the other small and dwarfis^; the
one strong* but eas^e to be deceived; the other weak, but witty and
circumspect. The one given much to wine* the other exceeding sober* the one
neglecting both himself and others, the other careful and ceremonious: The
one rustically arrogant, the other high minded; the one prodigal, the other
parsimoniou^* The one temperate, the other lecherous; the one a slouen; the
other neat and hand some; the one plain and simple, the other crafty; the one
a Soldier, the other a Priest, the one a Workman, the other a Philosopher; the
one standing on the strength of his ^ands; the other of his wit.

Out of the mixture of these extremes, it is no difficult matter to draw the
disposition of the middle Nations. For finding the two extreme nations of the
North and the South to be not only diverse, but for the most part opposite one
to the other, in disposition and manners; it were very rational to judge the
middle to have a mixture of both, which, observation we will prove* For if we
compare the middle region with either) the extremes, we shall find no such
apparent diversity* as betwixt the extremes themselves* Here Monsieur B^di^
dreams of a golden mediocrity to magnify his own Country, which he finds
in his middle region. For sithence both these extremes challenge an extremity
of disposition, he imagine^ this middle tract only reserved for virtue and
temperance. But if he justly weigh all in the balance of impartial
judgment, he shall find no such advantage. For first out of his own grounds,
to which we have hitherto assented, he ascribes to the extreme nations an
eminency both of vice and virtue: Then cannot the middle challenge these
qualities otherwise then remitted, and of less force. If therefore he would
have their inclination to vice more moderated, and corrected; he must also
confess their disposition to virtuous actions to be of less validity. Again
these middle nations are to be accounted either directly situate betwixt both
the extremes, or more inclining to the one then the other* For these directly
in the middle, we must imagine them to partake of both dispositions, as well
to vice as to virtue, borrowing from either extreme as well good as bad: Here
therefore can be found no disadvantage: For if they will boast of the virtues
of either, they must likewise be ashamed of either vices: If they plead a
moderation of the former, they must loose so much reputation in the later. For
these which more nearly incline to the one then the other, it will be
apparent that as they approach the one in one quality, so they are farther off
in another: as if they approach nearer in contemplative wit to the Southern
people, so will they come so far short of the Northerns valor. For by how
much more they come near the virtue of the one, so much come they short of the
others Affections. The like may be judged of their Imperfections; so weighing
reason with reason we shall find no such inequality and disproportion to
magnify the one, or vpbraid the other: for that Almighty Creator of all
things is wont to distribute his blessings in proportion: and Nature his
sovereign hand-maide triumphs in nothing more then variety. Thus have we
spoken as far as history and observation can justify, of the laws,
customs, and manners of the Extreme and middle Nations, in which we have
chiefly tied our discourse to the Northern and Southern people in this
Hemispheare, having few histories to lead us to the consideration of the other
opposite on the Southern Hemispheare: yet the causes being like, we may out of
the former be able to give a judgment of the later.

8 Hitherto have we treated of the people of the Northern and Southern
Hemispheares, with the special subdiuision of each into Extreme or middle: It
now remains that we speak of the division of Inhabitants according to the
Longitude.

9 According to the Longitude, Inhabitants are either in the Eastern
Hemispheare, or Western. Those I term of the Eastern which live betwixt the
Canaries and the Molucco Islands on this side: The Western those which dwell
betwixt those two on the other.

These two Hemispheares of the Earth have by some been called the Old and
New-world; because the former containing Europe, Asia, and Afric, has been
known to the ancients as the portions of Noah's three Sons, Shem, Ham, and
Iaphet, whereof (as the Scriptures testify) Shem had Asia, Iaphet Europa, and
Ham Africa. The other containing America the South-continent, and some other
Islands, have been since discovered. Of the comparison of the Inhabitants of
these two Hemispheares we will insert this Theoreme.

1 The people of the Eastern Hemispheare in Science, Religion, Ciuility,
Magnificence, and almost every thing else, are far superior to the
Inhabitants of the Western.

For demonstration of this point we need not spend much time; first, it is
manifest that this Hemispheare was peopled a long time before the other, which
is a probable argument of their culture and ciuility: because all these matters
have commonly their growth and perfection with Time, the mother of all
perfection. That this part was peopled a long time before the other, is most
credible: for it is plain out of the Holy Scriptures, that the first
offspring of mankind was in Asia; whence it could not disperse it self into
America and other parts of the Earth, till such time as their populous growth
had required larger bounds. The passage from Asia into America without doubt
had been performed either by sea or land. By Sea it was improbable they should
adventure in that infancy of the World, when the Art of Navigations was in her
swathing bands, and neither the Chart or Compass as yet invented. If by land
they made their passage, it was doubtless through the North of Asia, supposing
America with Asia to be one Continent. But this people coming out of a
pleasant and temperate Country, would without question first attempt the
places of the like quality, as most pleasing their eye, and fitting their
disposition, before they would enforce their passage to the Icy and frozen
Climates of the North, which can only be beholding to necessity for
habitation. Hence without doubt it came to pass, that those Nations wandering
far from their first fountain, and leaving no sufficient monument to
instruct their posterity in their first original, came short of the other, as
well in revealed as acquired knowledge in revealed knowledge, either sought in
Holy Scriptures, or Traditions, they could not but come short; as being most
distant from the first head and fountain where it was to be found in greatest
perfection. In Acquired knowledge gotten by industry and experience they could
not come so far as the other; because all such knowledge having its beginning
from observation, and its growth with age, could not be brought to that
perfection amongst them, who came more lately to be a people, and scarce ever
endowed with any settled government: but whatsoever the causes may be thought
of this diversity betwixt the people of the Western and Eastern Hemispheare,
certain I am that the effect it self is most apparent. Of the happy
endowments of Europe, Asia, and a good part of Afric, both in Arts liberal
and mechanical, state, policy, magnificence, and Religion, we have often
spoken, and need make no repetition. To this if we compare America, being (as
it were) the only portion of this Hemispheare, we shall amongst them find few
or no Arts either invented or taught, the use of letters scarce ever known;
state and magnificence little regarded, and the Light of Christian Religion
scarce ever seen, or at least through the dim clouds of Roman superstition.
He that would know more in this matter, let him read Peter Martyr, Cortesius,
Acosta, and others, of the natural disposition of the people of America.

10 The Inhabitants of such Hemispheares are again subdivided into the
Eastern and Western: the Western in the Eastern Hemispheare, are they who
live nearer the Canaries: the Eastern are such as are situate toward the
Moluccoes: to which those other in the Western Hemispeare are correspondent.

1 The Western people have been observed to be more happy and able in martial
discipline: the Eastern in witty contemplation, and speculatiue Sciences.

There is no small affinity (as we have before touched) betwixt the West and
the North, as betwixt the East and the South; as well in the temperament of the
Air, as the disposition of the Inhabitants: which cognation will appear more
fully by the proof and demonstration of this Theoreme. Of the strength and
valor of the Western people* many records give evidence; we read of
innumerable Colonies of the Celtes a people situate on the West of France, sent
into Italy, Greece, and Asia. But the Italians durst never invade France, till
such time as their Empire was at the hight under Caesar, taking also advantage
of the homebred enmities of the Inhabitants among themselves, whence Tully the
Orator took occasion to praise Caesar for subduing those Nations, and reducing
them to the Romans obedience, whose strength the Roman Empire could hardly
sustain. The Italians have oftentimes molested the Graecians, yet from them
suffered little or small inconvenience* so the Graecians having with their
Arms cut out a large way through Asia, scarce ever dared to come into Italy
but once under the conduct of Pyrrhus* who being almost defeated of his Army,
was enforced to save himself by ^light. In like sort Xerxes who brought men
enough into Greece to dry up the Rivers, was notwithstanding defeated by a few
Graecians to his great dishonor. Wherefore Cato had good reason to object to
Muraena, and Caesar to Pompey, that their wars waged against the people of Asia
in respect of others were (as it were) rather against Women then Men. This
without doubt gave Alexander his greatest happiness and victory, that he turned
his Arms against the Eastern people, which were either altogether barbarous,
wanting martial discipline, or all over delicate, not able to resist such
hardness: whereas if he had opposed the Western people (by the censure of Liuy)
he had at least failed of those many Conquests, if not purchased ^ fatal
overthrow. The observation perhaps of which cou^^gious valor in the Western
people was the cause why the Turks heretofore were wont to choose their
Ianisaries, and chief men of war out of the Europaeans, accompting them more
strong and able then the Asiaticks, being of temper more soft and delicate. To
this accords Julian in his book against the Christians: the Celtes (says he)
are Bold and Aduenturous: the Greeks and Romans both warlike and civil: the
Egyptians more industrious and subtle, although weak and tender. The Syri^ns
with great ala^rity conform themselves to discipline: And a little after has
these words: What shall I declare (says he) how coue^ous of liberty and
impatient of servitude the Germans are how quiet and tractable the Syrians,
Persians, Parthians, and all the Nations situate toward the East and South
parts of the World. Tacitus reports, that the Barauians lying on the West of
Germany of all the Germans are the strongest and most valiant: which Plutarch
also confirms in the life of Marius, that the most warlike people of all
France are these which are most Western. The like opinion had Caesar of the
Western Nations: of all the people of Europe (says he) the Western people
of the Britains and Spaniards are the strongest. Now as the Western people
justly challenge to themselves this prerogative of strength and valor, so must
they yield to the Eastern, that of Religion and contemplation. To let pass
the Indians, which a long time gone, were enriched with knowledge, if we
believe ancient writers; who can deny the Hebrews, Chaldaeans, Syrians,
Egyptians, Arabians, and others of the East their just trophies of learning
and contemplation, which they have erected to after ages? From these fountains
have the Greeks and Latins derived those large streams, wherewith they have
(as it were) watered all Europe. It is written, That there came wise men from
the East to worship Christ; which must needs be understood of Chaldaea or the
places near adjoining, where the Magi or Wisemen were had in great reputation.
If any object the decay both of Learning and Religion at this day, in the
eastern parts of the world; We answer that this in most parts is merely
Accidental, caused by the hostile invasion of the usurping Turks, which
profess themselves to be utter enemies to Learning and the true Religion. To
which, we may add the ignorance of the Christian Religion in many places,
which is the greatest ground of solid knowledge. For amongst all religions in
the world, there is none which gives more way to learning then the Christian:
Whereas some others altogether forbid the study of such matters; yet is not
this inclination so absurd in the Eastern people, but that euery-where some
marks and footesteps will discover their disposition. For in the East shall
we find no small number of Christian Churches and Monasteries, professing
Christianity and other good learning. But to speak no more of the Christian
Religion, which we hold rather by Gods special grace, then nature: the
superstitious devotion of these heathen nations to their own false religions,
is a sufficient argument of their natural inclination to religious exercises.
How obstinately perverse, Ceremonious, and superstitious the Indians are found
in Idolatrous Religions, I have often wondered to hear some trauaylers report:
Of the other Hemispheare comprehending America, I have as yet small evidence
out of History, whereon to ground any certainty; all we can say shall be
comprised in this Theoreme.

2 The eastern part of the western Hemispheare was peopled before the
western.

This proposition seems probably warranted, as well by reason as authority;
for first, supposing as an infallible ground, that the first offspring of all
nations was in Asia, toward the East; it must needs follow, that to people
America, there should be a passage thereunto out of Asia; because America was a
long time not inhabited ere it was discovered to the Europaeans. This passage
then, was either by Sea or Land: Were it by sea, the first part whereat they
could arrive was the eastern side. If we suppose it to be by land (as is most
likely in those ancient times) yet was it most probable it should be on the
North-east side from the Pole, because it is found by observation that on the
North-west side it is divided from Asia by streites, then must they first touch
on the Eastern part. To this we may add the experience of the Castilians and
Portugalls (who first discovered this part) who affirm that the people
dwelling on that side, have been observed to surpass the western by far in
ciuility of manners, knowledge, and such endowments, which may be an argument
of the antiquity of their plantation.

CHAP. XV.
1. THe second diversity of disposition of inhabitants arises from the diverse
nature of the Soil: Here four distinctions of Nations are remarkable. 1 Of
the Inhabitants of the Mountains and plaine-Countreyes. 2 Of marish and dry.
3. Of windy and quiet. 4. Of sea-borders and Iland-people.

That men's dispositions are diversely varied according to the temper of the
soil, every man's own experience may easily inform him; for to reserve
particular instances to their proper places, it is most manifest that all the
vital operations of the soul depends as well upon the corporeal and
organicall parts, as the spirits; which being diuersely affected by the
qualities of the Air, and Earth must needs vary and suffer a change. Plain
and evident dis^arity is found: first betwixt two nations situate in the same
Parallel or climate in respect of the heavens. Secondly, betwixt two men borne
in several Countries living together for some time, in the same region.
Thirdly, of one and the selfsame man living at diverse times in diverse
regions. Fourthly, of a man living in the same Country at diverse seasons and
times; all which being heretofore demonstrated will declare unto us the great
Sympathy, and operation the Air and his diverse qualities, has with, and on
our corporeal spirits and organs. But the temperament of the Air (as we have
formerly showed) depends on the temperature of the soil: whence it must needs
follow that the natural disposition of men should be varied somewhat in
respect of the soil. This disposition of the soil being manifold, we have
reduced only to three heads: leaving other curiosities to such, as have more
leisure: What we judge in this, shall be declared in these Theoremes.

1 Mountain people are for the most part more stout, warlike and generous then
those of plain Countries: yet less tractable to government.

Of the warlike disposition of the mountanists and their strange Impatience to
subjection, many Histories give testimony Geographers repor, that setting aside
the people of the North (to whom for strength and valor we have given the
palm,) the Inhabitants of the mountain Atlas are great and strong, out of
whom the Kings of Numidia and Mauritania in time of war are wont to leuy
their forces. And it is worthy admiration to consider the mountain people of
Arabia, who could never be drawn to yield to subjection, but being fortified
not so much by the benefit of the place (as some might happily imagine) but
rather by natural strength and valor, have always lived in liberty. To whom
(as is reported) the Turks give a yearly stipend to keep them off from
inuading the Territories of Palaestine and Damascus. Of the Ma^sians the
ancient inhabitants of the Appenine mountains in Italy, the Romans were wont
so well to conceive, that it grew into a proverb: Sine Marsis triumphasse
neminem. Gostane, when he went about to invade the kingdom of Succia, chose
his legions of soldiers, out of the Dalecarly, who inhabit the Succian
mountains. But amongst all, no nation has purchased a greater opinion and
reputation then the Heluetians, living amongst the Alps. These men are
originally descended from the Succians, which for valor, have ^o far
approved themselves, that they have not only kept themselves free from
foreign jurisdiction, but have often delivered their neighboring countries
from slavery and oppression* Against the house Austria they have not once
displaied their banners, and triumphed in their overthrow. A great part of
Germany has smarted under their valor; and such an honorable opinion have
they won, that they are accounted (as it were) the Censors and moderators to
decide controversies in matters of state and kingdoms. Cicero gives grrat
commendations of strength to the Ligurgians inhabiting the mountains: It is
well known how long and tedious wars the mountain Cilicians and
Acr^cerauneans had with the Turks: how long with small damage they endured
affront, and drove them back* Here we might add the examples of the Biscanes
and Cantabrians in Spain, who under the conduct of Pelagius their King,
withstood the Saracens, and preserved both their language and religion. The
like ought to be spoken of the Welsh and Cornish people amongst us, as of the
Scottish Highlander: all which living in mountanous countries have withstood
the violence of forraigners, and for many y^ares preserved their own liberty.
And howso^uer it may be objected that the advantage of the place gave them
courage, yet can we not deny their disposition due commendation; having not
only thus for a time protected their own rights, but made many hostile
invasions on their enemies. Hence Bodin would make a certain Harmony betwixt
the mountain people, and the Northern, esteeming the inhabitants of the
Alps, the Pyraeneans, the Acroceraunij the inhabitants of Haemus, Carpathus,
Olympus, Taurus, Stella, Caucasus, Imaeus, with diverse others of the same
nature, albeit situate in the temperate part, to be accounted northern
people: as also farther toward the South, the inhabitants of A^las, of the
Arabian mountains, of Pirus, and Seraleona, are (as it were) by him excepted
from the Southern inhabitants, in regard of their high and mountanous
situation; which recompenseth the other, and challenges as much cold, as by the
heavens it should seem to receive heat. This conceit of a Monsieur Bodin, I
admit without any great contradiction, were he not over peremptory in overmuch
censuring all mountanous people of blockishnesse and barbarism, against the
opinion of Auerroes a great writer; who finding these people nearer heaven
suspected in them a more heavenly nature. Neither want their many reasons,
drawn from nature and experiment, to prove mountanous people, to be more
pregnant in wit and gifts of understanding then others, inhabiting low and
plain Countries. For howsoever wit and valor are many times divided, as we
have showed in the northern and southern people, yet were they never so much
at variance, but they would sometimes meet. First therefore what can speak
more, for the witty temper of the mountain people, then their clear and
subtle Air being far more purged and rarefied, then that in low countries:
For holding the vital spirits to be the chiefest instruments in the souls
operation, no man can deny but they sympathrize, especially with the air their
chiefest foment. Every man may by experience find his intellectual operations
more vigorous in a clear day, and on the contrary most dull and heavy when the
air is any way affected with foggy vapors. What we find in our selves in
the same place at diverse seasons, may we much more expect of places, diuersely
affected in constitution. A second reason for the proof of our assertion, may
be drawn from the thin and spare diet, in respect of those others.
Forpeople living on plains, have commonly all commodities in such plenty, that
they are much subject to surfeting and luxury, the greatest enemy and
underminer of all intellectual operations. For a fat-belly commonly begets a
gross head, and a lean brain: But want and scarcity the mother of frugality,
inuites the mountain dwellers to a more sparing and wholesome diet. Neither
grows this conuenience only out of the scarcity of viandes, but also out of
the nature of the diet. Birds, Fowls and Beasts, which are bred upon higher
places, are esteemed of a more cleanely and wholesome feeding, then others
living in fennes and foggy places: And how far the quality of our diet
preuailes in the alteration of our organs and dispositions; every naturalist
will easily resolve us. A third reason may be drawn from the cold Air of
these mountanous regions, which by an Antiperistasis keeps in, and strengthens
the internal heat, the chief instrument in natural and vital operations.
For who perceiues not his vital, and by consequence his intellectual parts,
in cold frosty weather to be more strong and vigorous, then in hot and soultry
seasons, wherein the spirits are more diffused and weakened. This disparity in
the same region, at diverse times, in regard of the disposition of the air,
may easily declare the disparity of diverse Regions, being in this sort
diuersely affected. A fourth reason may be taken from the customary hardness,
whereunto such people inure themselves from their infancy; which (as Huartus
proves) begets a better temper of the brain, in regard of the wit and
understanding; which we happen to find clean otherwise with them, who have
accustomed themselves to delicateness. These reasons perhaps would seem only
probable, and of no great moment, were they not strengthened with foreign and
Domest^cke observation. Have not the Heluetians situate amongst the mountains,
given sufficient testimony; especially in the infancy of our Reformation? Have
not the Sueuians and Silesians showed themselves able enough, to wipe off the
blot of a blockish disposition; yet having a situation wild and mountainous?
Had that great Doctor Reu^lin judged well of the nature of such people, he
would not have made it so great a wonder as he did, that wild Sueuia should
produce such learned Men. Foreign influences elsewhere wherein all histories
abound, I forbear to relate; desirous rather to be accounted deficient then
tedious. Should I draw home to my native Western Confines, to which I owe my
breath, I should perhaps by some be taxed of partiality or affectation. Should
I mention our ancient Britains, inhabiting the Mountainous Country of Wales,
or the greater part of the Scottish Nation, inioying the like condition of
life, and disposition of the Soil; I might at once win love, and stir up
envy. Nevertheless, as a man by nature borne careless of Detraction, yet most
respective of Friendship, I had rather venture my credit, then prejudice the
truth: betwixt both which with me the choice is easy. Mine own Country of
Deuon, which duty commands me to make the first Instance, I had rather set on
the stage of Envy, then Dishonor. I am not of the opinion of the
vainglorious Greeks, who boasting too much of their own perfections,
esteemed all Nations else Barbarians. Yet to check Mr Bodins bold conjecture,
out of which he could find but one Anacharsis in all Scythia; I will
demonstrate that our mountainous Provinces of Deuon and Cornwall, have not
deserved so ill, as to be so sharply censured for Blockishnesse or Inciuility.
Barren Countries have been known to nourish as good wits, as Bodin, Aristippus
the Philosopher, Callimachus the Poet, Eratosthenes the Mathematician, have not
been ashamed to call Cyrene in Egypt their native Country, a Mountainous and
Rocky Region. Neither can it be styled our reproach, but glory, to draw our
offspring from such an Air which produces wits as eminent as the Mountains,
approaching far nearer to Heaven in Excellency, then the other in hight
transcend the Valleys. Wherein can any Province of Great Britain challenge
precedence before us? Should any deny us the reputation of Arts and Learning:
the pious Ghosts of Jewel, Raynolds, and Ho^ker, would rise up in opposition;
whom the World knows so valiantly to have displayed their Banners in defense
of our Church and Religion. Should they exclude us from the reputation of
knowledge in State and Politic affairs? who has not acquainted himself
with the name of S^ William Petre our famous Benefactor, whose desert chose him
chief Secretary to three Princes of famous memory? Who has not known or read
of that prodigy of wit and fortune S^ Walter Raleigh, a man unfortunate in
nothing else but the greatness of his wit and advancement? whose eminent worth
was such, both in Domesticke Policy, Foreign Expeditions, and Discoueries,
Arts and Literature, both Practicke and Contemplative, which might seem at
once to conquerre both Example and Imitation. For valor and chiualrous
Designs by Sea* who reads not without admiration the acts of Sr Francis
Drake, who thought the circuit of this Earthly Globe too little for his
generous and magnanimous Ambition? Of Sr Richard Grenuill, who undertaking with
so great a disadvantage, so strong an Enemy* yet with an undaunted Spirit made
his Honor legible in the wounds of the proud Spaniard: and at last triumphed
more in his own honorable Death, then the other in his base conquest? Of Sr
Humfrey Gilbert, Sr Richard Hawkins, Dauies, Fr^bisher, and Captain Parker,
with many others of worth, note, and estimation, whose names live with the
Ocean? In the Catalogue of able and worthy Land-Souldiers, whose eye would not
at first, glance on my Lord Belfast, who lately deceased to the great grief of
his Country, because in such a time which most requires his assistance?
Courage, and Wisdom. which are often at odds, and seldom meet, in him shook
hands as friends, and challenged an equal share in his perfections. His wife
managing of his affairs in Ireland, so well commends his own Loyalty, and his
Masters choice, that the whole Realm may truly be said for the most part to
owe her present Peace to his industry. should I speak of Generous
Magnificence and Favor of Learning, showed by Heroical Spirits in the
general Munificence extended to our whole University; what Age or Place can
give a Parallel to renowned Bodley, whose name carries more persuasion then the
tongue of the wisest Orator? His magnificent Bounty, which showed itself so
extraordinarily transcendent, as well in erection of his Famous Library, which
he (as another Ptolomy) so richly furnished, as other munificent Largesses,
exhibited to our English Athens, was yet farther crowned by his wise choice, as
proceeding from one, who being both a great Scholar, and a prudent Statist,
knew as well how to direct as bestow his liberality. If Founders and
Benefactours of private Colleges may find place in this Catalogue of Worthies,
the sweet hi^e and receptacle of our Western wits can produce in honor of our
Country a famous Stapledon Bishop of Excester, and worthy Founder of Exon
College: whose large bounty was afterward seconded (next to Edm* Stafford
Bishop of Sarum, a Western Man) by the pious charge and liberality of Mr John
Peryam, Sr John Acland, and very lately by Mr Dr Hakewill, whose worthy
Encomium, (though unwillingly) leave out, lest I should seem rather to flatter
them commend his Worth. But what needs he my poor mention? His learned works
published to the World, and his Pious Monument bestowed on our House, speak in
silence more the^ I can utter out of the highest pitch of Invention. To all
which I might add Mr Nicholas Wadham* whose liberal hand having augmented the
number of our Colleges with an absolute and complete Foundation, have left
Muses enough to preserve his Name unto eternity. Had I the lik privilege to
mention the living as the dead, we should not find wanting out of the ashes of
these generous Heroes, of our Deuonian confines, many genuine and worthy Sons
standing up in their Fathers places, to show the world a succession as well of
wits as times. There would appear at once upon the stage our famous Dr
Sutcliffe, the worthy Dean of Excester, whose magnanimous endeauours, as well in
his learned conflicts with our pernicious Romanists, as in erecting a College
to oppose our sworn enemies, the Jesuits, will (no doubt) lengthen out the
end of his declining age with Fame and immortality. I could offer to your
admiration the Worth and Works of our renowned Rector, Dr Prideaux, His
Majesty's learned Professor of Divinity in our University, in whom the
Heroical wits of Jewel, Rainolds, and Hooker, as united into one, seem to
triumph anew, and threaten a fatal blow to the Babilonish Hierachie: Insomuch
that he may justly challenge to himself that glory, which sometimes Ovid
speaking of his own country; Mantua Virgilium laudet, Verona Catullum,
Romanae gentis gloria dicar ego.
Mantua Virgill, Verone Catullus praise,
I will the glory of the Romans raise.


Neither want the laws of our Land, out of this one source, sufficient props
to defend their Countries and the Kingdoms right. The admired sufficiency of
Justice Doddrige, testified to the world by so large a report, and expressed in
his incomparable skill in the Laws (besides his indowments of Arts and other
Learning, seconded by the deserved Fame of Mr William Noy) can hardly escape my
pen, being so deeply dipped in the middle of my Native Country. I care not what
envy I stir up in others, so my mother Excester College, which sometimes
cherished in her bosom these two worthy Darlings, and since found her courtesy
returned back with interest, indulgently permit me this liberty.

Besides these choice flowers cropped from our Hesperian garden, no question but
many more would be found out alive or dead; whom fame, if not injurious, cannot
suffer to sleep without deserved memory. I have hitherto touched such eminent
wits and persons, of whom for their profession sake the Church or Commonwealth
have greater reason to take especial notice. Many inferior faculties are yet
left wherein our Da^o^ has displaied her abilities as well as in the former, as
in Philosophers, Historians, Orators and Poets, the blazoning of whom to the
life, especially the last, I had rather leave to my worthy friend Mr. W.
Brown; who as he has already honored his country in his elegant and sweet
Pastoralls* so questionles will easily be entreated a little farther to grace
it, by drawing out the line of his Poeticke Auncesters, beginning in Josephus
Iscanus, and ending in himself. Bodin perhaps might oppose against us the
eminency of his Parisian territoy, as some with us the glory of our Me^ropolis
and Universities, disdaining all comparison: But to this it is not hard to
shape an answer, 1. That a Metropolis or University is to be imagined as a
common receptacle of the most selected wits derived rather from other places
then the temperament of their own Air: Insomuch as they may be said to owe
their abilities, for the most part, to those to whom they owe their wealth.
Neither can they challenge a greater interest in this glory, then our Townsmen
here in Oxford in the eminent gifts of our choicest Scholars; besides, that
often happens in our great Metropolitan cities by the promiscuous concurse of
diverse dispositions; which is reported of the beasts once a year coming
together to drink of Nilu^, of diverse sorts; that by unnatural commixture,
they yearly beget new monsters: Africa aliquid semper oportat noui. 2. The
ready means of Advancement to high and eminent dignityes in Metropolitan
cities, which are commonly the ordi^ary seats of Princes, sets many a brain a
work although In vita Minerua, to show it self in public: wherein he has
the advantage of estimation sooner then sufficiency: whereas many a towardly wit
in places far remote, never finds opportunity so propitious as to present him
to popularity. I fear I shall be too tedious in this point, recalling to mind
that I shall find few of my readers in this matter so affected as my self: yet
should I not have spunne out this theme so long, but to stop their mouths who
being sooner taught to speak then understand, take advantage of the rude
lang^age and plain attire of our countrymen, admiring nothing more then
themselves or the magnificent splendor of their own habitation: As though all
the wit in the world were annexed to their own schoooles, and no flowers of
science could grow in another garden: But a rude dialect being more indebted to
Custom then Nature, is a small argument of a blockish disposition: and a
homely outside may shroud more wit then the Silke-wormes industry. I have
sometimes heard a rude speech in a Frize habit, express better sense then at
other times a scarlet Robe: And a plain Yeoman with a mat^ocke in his hand
speak more to the purpose, then some Counselors at the bar: And what other
prorogatiue can such men appropriate to themselves above us, but toys and
formalities, the Idols of Gulls and fools, and the laughter of solid
understandings? But now after all this bickering with Mr Bodin to grow to a
reconcilement, ere we part, we will part stakes, and in the way of kindness
give him this one distinction, which I hope for quietness sake, he will
accept. The natural disposition of men and their gifts of understanding and
mental faculties, arise either from their natural Temper, or their Discipline
and education: For the former I have small reason to give (as I have said) the
excellency to the inhabitants of plain and low Countries, rather then to the
mountain people: But in discipline and education I must confess others
commonly to be happier. 1. Because the Fertility and increase of the Earth
inuiting men to such an Habitation, it must needs happen that such countries
must be more populous, and by consequence settle to themselves a better form
of government, then those which by reason of their barren soil are more
neglected: 2. Because, most Cities and Towns, where are found the chiefest
means of Institution of youth, are founded in plain Countries and valleys.
This Perfection that such regions boast of, is owed rather to Institu^ion then
Nature: Hence appears the reason of the last clause of our Theoreme, to wit,
why they should be less tractable to government: Because being (as it were)
borne to too much liberty, they cannot so well inure themselves to subjection,
as other who perhaps know no Condition but servitude of the mountainous people
of Wales and Scotland, I cannot speak so much as ^ intended: Both because I
have (I fear) tired already my readers patience, as also for that, being not
to conversant in their His^ories as mine own, as an ill herald, I may chance
to marshall all amiss. Who ^o list to read the courage of our ancient British
nation, he shall find enough as well in the Roman Story, as our English
Chronicles, to set them far enough above contempt, and place them an eye sore
in the sight of envy. But to leave Antiquities and come to these times, we may
easily amongst many other deserving men single out some, whose eminence so
obuious to the eye of common observation, is able to dash detraction out of
countenance. Who has not heard not many years since of Dr Holland the Kings
Professor in our University, and Sr Roger Williams a famous Coronell in the
French and Belgicke wars? The Scholasticall Learning of the one, and the
martial prowess of the other, was too well known to require a Panegyricke.
Neither is Wales at this day below her self, but that she can triumph in two
of the most Honorable and Generous Peers of this Land, (to whose acceptance I
owe these my poor labors) and the gr^atest Administratour of Justice in our
Courts: the two former, borne as well to hereditary virtue as greatness: the
later advanced no higher then his own ability, whom the world knows beyond my
expression.

Scarce had I shut up this tedious discourse, spent for the most part in
defense of my native Country, but surprised with a deep melancholy, I entered
into a serious consideration of what I had too rashly spoken: I called my
meditatio^s to a strict account, to examine what motive should make me run so
far beyond my intended purpose, to meet the Ambition of my Country or mine
own affection. The remembrance of some grieuances, seconded by mine inbred
Nature, never taught to fawn on misprision, began to check my officious pen,
as guilty of too much weakness or adulation: when suddenly as in a vision
there appeared unto me my Mother Oxford vsher'd in by Isis and all his Muses,
who with a discontented countenance and harsh language, seemed to chide me in
this manner: Fond Son, who taught thy undeserved praise,
To crown thy country with these thanklesse Baies?
What owe thou unto that barren Earth
But harsh reproach, sad cares, and hapless Birth?
What Legacy bequeathed that soil to thee,
But fruitless Hopes, and helpless Poverty?
What thou have spoken of thy Western stronds*
Will sooner plough up mine, then cure thy wounds.
Had thy neglected Muse without a Name,
Spent half this industry to spinne my fame,
Isis had graced thee with Muses more
Then ever tript on thy Deuonian shore.
Which of these Worthies whom thou crown'st with praise
Will ere thy wants relieve, or Fortunes raise?
All the proud wooers of the Sisters Nine,
Like Pilgrims come to worship at my shrine:
And vauntest thou on Deuons part their Names
Who owe to me their worth, to her their shames?
The prime and choice of all thy glorious flowers
Cropped from my gardens and admired Bowres,
Ought to return the tribute of their praise
Unto my golden tongue and learned Lays:
Nor had thy Western Confines ever found
A Muse to sing of thy Deuonian ground,
Had not I touched her ambitious tongue
First taught to chaunt amongst my learned throng.
How often have thou drawn out thy precious time
To tutour in my arms their youthly prime,
Who like respectlesse and vntutour'd swains,
With loss and obloquie reward thy pains?
Such are thy Darlings whom thou make to ride
In a triumphant carre by Honors side:
As if proud Honor which can Kings command,
As a poor servant waited on thy hand.
Thus thou unwise give immortality
To those, whose base reproaches follow thee.
Had thine Ambition waited on my springs,
The breath of Princes, and the power of Kings
Had seconded thy Hopes, which now accuse
To my disgrace and grief thy hapless Muse.
Thy wants enforce thee still with me to stay,
When each Pedant or makes or finds his way.
To play and stake it at that lawless Game,
Selling my Honors for to buy their shame:
Unhappy purchase owed to Charity,
Bought by conniuence, sold to Perjury;
By griping Brokers, since the fatal time
That fair Astraea left thy thankelesse Clime.
Thus thy admired Deuons charity
Sets strangers in her lap and shuts out Thee.
Have thou been honored by my sacred Breath,
Amongst rude Arcadians thus to beg a Death?
What greater glory can thy ashes have,
Then in my flowery groves to dig thy grave?
Although the least among my learned sons,
Thy fortunes told thee that I loved thee once,
And so do still: although my hapless Baies
Taught thy despair to spinne out careless days,
And to compose thy discontented Head
To slumber softly on the Muses Bed.
Be ruled by me my poor, yet loved Son,
Trust not their smiles whose wrongs have thee undone:
Thy fair Hopes grounded on thy place of birth,
Will fly in Atoms or consume in Earth;
Before within that Hemispheare of thine,
Thy Deuons Sun on thee shall ever shine.
Then trust unto my bounty, turn thy sight
From thy dark Confines to my golden light.
All thy endowments owed to my womb,
Return them back, and there erect thy tomb.
If no Mecenas crown thee with his Rays,
Teach thy content to sleep out quiet days.
Let Contemplation with transpiercing eyes,
Mount thee a pitch beyond the starry skies.
And there present thee that eternal glass,
Wherein the greatness of this wondrous mass,
Shrinkes to an A^ome* where my Astrolube
Shall show thee stars beyond thy painted Globe:
Where thou aloft as from a mountain steep,
Shall see the greatest men like Antes to creep:
Thy days shall minister thee choicest Theames,
Which night shall render in delicious dreams*
And thy severe Philosophy the whiles,
In amourous kind shall court thee with her smiles,
Or if thy nature with constraint, descends
Below her own delight, to practick ends;
Rise with my morning Phoebus, slight the West,
Till furrowed Age inuit thee to rest.
And then perchance, thy Earth which seldom gave,
Thee Air to breath, will lend thy Corpse a grave,
Soon the last trumpet will be heard to sound,
And of thy load Ease the De^o^ian ground.
Mean time if any gentle swain come by,
To view the marble where thy ashes ly,
He may upon that stone in fewer years,
Engraue an ^^i^^ph with fret^ing tears,
Then make men's frozen hearts with all his cries
Drink in a drop from his distilling eyes:
Yet will I promise thy neglected bones
A firmer monument then speachles stones,
And when I pin^ with age, and wits with rust,
Seraphick Angels shall dreserue thy dust,
And all good men acknowledge shall with me
Thou love thy Country, when she hates thee.


This strange reproof of an indulgent mother, I could not entertain without
passion: In so much as without fear or wit, I adventured in this sort, to
answer her, in her own language.

Ad Matrem Academiam.
(...) have my former years
So much (...) on thy hate, or these my tears?
Thus to divorce me from my place of birth,
To be a stranger to my native Earth?
Will thou expose him on thy common stage,
To strive and struggle in an Iron age;
Whose low ambition never learned of thee
The curious Arts of thriuing policy?
Thy golden tongue from which my younger days
Sucked the sweet music of thy learned lays,
Was better taught thy office then my fate,
To make me thine, yet most unfortunate.
Why was I fostred in thy learned schools,
To study with for the reward of fools:
That while I sat to he^re the Muses sing,
The Winter suddenly ore-took my Spring:
Have I so played the truant with my hours,
Or with base riot stained thy sacred Bowres,
Or as a Viper did I ever strive,
To gnaw a passage through thy womb to thrive:
To pluck me thus from Deuons breast, to try
What thou can do when as thy dugges are dry?
When my short thread of life is almost spunne,
Thou biddst me rise up with thy morning Sun;
And like a Heliotrope adore the East,
When my care-hastened Age arriues at West.
Could I encounter (as I once did hope,)
The God of learning in the Horoscope,
My Ph^bu^ would auspicious looks incline,
On my hard fate, and discontents to shine:
Now lodged in a luckles house, reiects
My former suites, and frowns with sad aspects.
Had I been borne when that eternal hand
Wrapped the infant world in her first swaddling band,
Before Philosophy was taught the way,
To rock the cradle in which Nature lay,
My Learning had been Husbandry: My Birth
Had owed no toll but to the virgin Earth:
No^ ha^ I courted for these thi^^y years,
Thy seven proud minions with officious tears:
To live had been my industry: no tongue
Had taxt thy honors, guilty of my wrong.
Had I been shepherd on our Western plains,
I might have sung amongst those happy swains;
Some shepherdess hearing my melody,
Might have been charmed kind as charity,
And taught me those sad minutes to repriue,
Which I have lost in studying how to thrive.
Had I aduetur'd on the brinish foam,
And sworn my self a stranger to my home
Till time the Harvest reapt my youth did owe,
And Ages winter had spent all her snow
Upon my hairs; what worser could I have,
Then loose thy frowns to find a wished grave?
The Scythian hewne from Caucasus would ask
before my slaughter, why a needles task
Of Travail I should vndert^ke, to see
Their Countries bounds and my sad misery?
But hearing my harsh bondage under thee,
Would thine unkindness hate and pi^ty me.
To see thy Child far seuer'd from thy womb
The Canniball would make himself my tomb;
And till his own were spent preserve my dust,
In his dear vrne which thou have slightly lost.
Can thou neglected see his Age to freeze,
Whose youth thou dandl'st on indulgent knees?
The foul aspersions on my Deuon thrown,
Thou might in right acknowledge for thine own
Only this difference: to men wanting worth
They sell preferments, and thou sends them forth.
Can thou be bribed to honor with a kiss
Thy gilded folly which deserves the hiss?
If thy fo^'d wants and flattery conspire,
To sell thy Scarlet to a worthles Squire,
Or grace with miniuere some proselite
Who nere knew arts, or read the Stagirite;
Yet should thy hand be frugall to preserve
That stock for want of which thy sons may starve.
Have I served out three prentiships, yet find
Thy trade inferior to the humblest mind?
And that outstript by unthrifts, which were sent
Free with indentures ere their years were spent?
Then cease, ye sisters of the Thespian springs,
Thalia burn thy books and break thy strings,
And mother make thy self a second Tomb
For all thy offspring, and so shut thy womb.
Accuse not my just anger, but the cause
Nature may urge, but fury scorns her laws.
I fawned too long on Justice: Since that fails,
Storm Indignation and blow up my sails;
Ingenious choler armed with Scorpions stings
Which whipp'st on Pesants, and command Kings,
And give each milky soul a pen to write
Though all the world turned a parasite; O
Temper my brains, thy bitterness infuse,
Descend and dictate to my angry Muse.
O pardon mother something checkes my spleen,
And from thy face takes off my angry teene:
Revolted Nature by the same degrees
Goes and returns; begges pardon on her knees:
Thou art a mirror by reflection taught
To faigne defects, yet guilty art of naught.
Thy stewards which by thy indulgence thrive
Were they as just, as thou art free to give,
We all might share a portion of that store,
Which now thy sons deserve, thy slaves devour.
Thy will is seldom measured by the Law,
But power, whose greatness thy Edicts can awe,
Slights thy decrees: O would Imperial Jove
But once descend from his high Court above,
To see thy innocent and maiden hands,
By thine own servants basely shut in bands:
These Caterpillars by his three-forkt Rays,
Would soon be scorched from of^ thy sacred Bays;
And thou restored unto that pristine-hue,
Which ancient times admired ours never knew.
All this time as in a fit of phrensy I have spoken, I scarce know what my
self: I fear me too much, to, or of, my Country and University, and too
little for the present purpose. Now as one suddenly awaked out of sleep, no
otherwise then in a dream I remember the occasion: We have all a semel
Insaniuimus, and as a learned man of this University seems to maintain, no
man has ever had the happiness to be exempted from this imputation: And
therefore I hope my Reader will pardon me this once, if in such a general
concourse and conspiracy of mad men, I sometimes show my self mad for company.

3 Windy Regions produce men of wild and instable dispositions; but quiet
regions more constant and courteous.

The cause of this disparity is apparent; because a quiet mind, and apt for
contemplation, cannot be in such a man, as is perpetually tossed to and fro.
For no man can well contemplate, except he have his mind purged and free from
motion of the body; and it is noted by Physiognomers that wiser men are slower
in the motion of their body and mind, whereas mad and frantic men are always
busied in body and mind. Hence a reason may be given why Mariners and seamen
being continually tossed with the wind, are observed to be more barbarous,
inhumane, and inconstant. Another reason of this inconstancy and change, may
be drawn from the change of the Air, caused by diversity of winds; For wind
being an exhalation affecting the air and derived from the Earth, must needs
be diverse in regard of the diverse regions, from whence it blows. what cause
soever be imagined, it is most certain that people in windy regions have been
more warlike, though perhaps less humane: As in Thracia, France, Circassia,
Lybia, Portugal, Persia, Noruegia, and Polonia: But in places in the same
tract where the wind has a less domination we shall find them more tractable,
but less valiant, as Asyria, Asia minor, Italy for the most part, and Egypt.
In like manner the people of Gallia Nar^onensis, Aquitany, and Prouence in
France, are observed to be the most warlike, although situate in a more
Southern tract: Being daily infested, partly by the Vulturnus, partly by the
Corus, which in these parts has great power.

4 Sea-borderers are generally more witty and adorned with more knowledge, then
Inlanders, though subject to greater vices.

That Arts, Ciuility, and many inventions are owed to the sea, as the mother
of increase, seems a matter out of question: For since all nations have not
found out all arts and inventions it must follow necessarily, that they have
been propagated by traffic, and commerce with foreign nations: Whence it
comes to pass many times that Sea-borderers by conference with outlandish
people, have gotten that knowledge and experience of things, for which others
have with great cost and danger adventured on long and tedious travails: Which
I take to be the reason why Themisto^les would have a City depending on the
sea, and not as Caelius Rhodoginus imagines, that he might transfer the
power from the Nobility, to the Ship-masters. Thus we find scienc^s and
learning to have been derived from the Chaldeans to the Egyptians, from the
Egyptians to the Phaenicians, from them to the Grecians and Romans: And in our
days every man can speak how much the industry of the Venetians, Spaniards,
Hollanders, English, and Portugalls have effected in both Indies, in
trafficking with them, deriuing together with their merchandise, much of their
own knowledge and religion. But as the Ilanders and sea-bordering people have
excelled the Inland nations in skill and knowledge, so also in vices: Which
stands with reason, whether we ascribe it to their natural wit or condition of
life, or education. For the greatest wits are commonly matched with the
greatest vices, as depending on such a temper of the brain whose smallest
change may beget madness: according to that proverb, Nullum magnum ingenium
sine mixtura insaniae. Also Arts and Sciences turned to the worst use, become
more dangerous, then naked simplicity; for there is nothing to be feared more
then armed fury. This might be the cause why Plato in his book de Republica
warnes men to avoid the Sea, as the mother of wickedness. Which is seconded by
Strabo, who deriues the offspring of Robbery, pillage, and murder, from the
Sea: By which argument, the old Athenians were induced to draw the Inhabitants
as much as they could from Sea-trafficke to husbandry and tillage of the Earth:
Whence came at first (as some imagine) that fable of Neptune striving with
Minerua for victory, against whom she prevailed, by showing the judges a
mandrakes apple as an especial rarity of the land.

CHAP. XVI. Of the dispositions of Inhabitants according to their Original and
Education.
1 IN the third place there may be a diversity of Inhabitants in disposition,
either in respect of their Offspring, or their Education. In the former we are
to consider the dispositions of nations so far forth, as it depends from
their first stock and original.

By the first stock and original of nations, we understand not here either
the first offspring from the loins of Adam, or the second from Noah; because
these two are common to all nations of the world, and therefore cannot vary the
several dispositions of people: But the more mediate or special stock whence
they sprang, which is found to have no small power in the nature and temper of
posterity. In this offspring two things are chiefly remarkable; first, how
people suffer an alteration in respect of their several Transplantations:
Secondly, in the mixture of colonies, both which we will show in these
Theoremes.

1 Colonies transplanted from one region into another, far remote, retain a
long time their first disposition, though by little and little they decline and
suf^er alteration.

All mutation requires a certain distance of time: Since no motion according to
Aristotle is in an instant, neither is it a small time can alter the natural
complexion of men: For as much as the children for the most part derive their
nature from their parents, and every man's constitution is commonly radically
grounded, and not easily subject to external change: Thus we see the Children
of Blackmores being transplanted into Europe for diverse descents to continue
black: Yet so as they by little and little declining from their former hue,
will in time become white; as the rest of the European Inhabitants: For
otherwise it must needs follow, that Scythia should at this day breed many
Blackmores, and Ethiopia many white; because no question can be made, but that
all nations almost of the world since the beginning have suffered mixture. We
read that the Goths, being a warlike people of the North, long after their
first invasion of Spain, France, Italy, and other Territories of Europe,
retained their own disposition and nature, altogether disagreeing with the
nations, amongst whom they lived: governing (as is the manner of Northern
Potentates) rather by Strength then Policy, better able to win then establish
an Empire. But in process of time it came to pass, that putting off their
harsh temper they grew into one nation with the native Inhabitants, as in
France and Italy, or at least as in Spain, establishing a government of their
own, by little and little declined from their rudeness to ciuility, turning
their arms to Arts, their strength to stratagemmes, having of late years by
witty policy established a greater empire, then ever their Ancestors could
atcheiue by multitudes of men, and strength of arms. And it is worth
observation, that as these have suffered a change of Laws, customs,
government, which they owe more to the nature of the Climate then to Education;
so in their very language. For the language of the Goths heretofore, differed
little from the language of the ancient Germans, which (as most Northern
languages) was very rough, consisting of many hard and harsh aspirations, with
unpleasant collision of many consonants together: But at this day is changed
into a very elegant tongue pleasant to the ear, consisting of many vowels and
the softest aspirations. Finally such have been the alterations of this
people, that being heretofore far North and branded with all the marks of
Northern rudeness, they are now esteemed in the Catalogue of Southern
Inhabitants: Not in regard, as much of place, as nature. The like may we
observe of the Turks and Tartars, who spreading their empire from the North
toward the South, a long time retained their rude barbarous nature, which they
have not at this day altogether cast off; yet so much has time and place
gained upon their temper, that they are much mollified and far more tractable
to humanity, addicting themselves every day more and more to the study of arts
and ciuility: in so much that (as one observes) had they not preserved their
strict discipline in training up their youth to arms, they had long since lost
much of their large empire, and have yielded to the Polonian and Muscouite.
This change may we find not only in mankind, but also in beasts and plants,
which being transported into other regions, though a long time retaining their
native perfection, will notwithstanding in time by little and little
degenerate: As I have heard by relation of some of our Virginian colony in
America: who find a great alteration in our Corn and Cattle, translated
thither. This might also be observed in the Danes, Saxons, and Angles, coming
into Britanny, who partly by the Climate, partly by mixture with them, by
little and little deposed their disposition, and became more civil. The like
may be spoken of the Saxon-colonies sent by Charles the great into Belgia, who
since that time becoming more ci^ill have proved less warlike, loosing as
much by the one, as they ob^ained by the other. This point I will no further
pros^cute, because I hold it sufficiently demonstrated out of that I have
spoken of the variety of natural dispositions according to the heavenly
situation, and the soil. For since all nations came at first from one
original, we must needs ascribe this mutation to the places which they
inhabit.

2 The mixture of Colonies begets in the same nation a greater disparity and
variety of the Inhabitants amongst themselves

This proposition is by natural consequence deduced from the former: Because
all Colonies transplanted retaining somewhat of their former nature, the
Mixture must produce variety. First, because the number of people of any region
by this is supposed to consist of more kinds of dispositions: Secondly,
because the promiscuous mixture of these kinds being unequally tempered, must
according to their several combinations produce people, as unlike one to the
other, as to the former. Hence a reason may be given, why the Inhabitants of
the extreme regions, either North or South are found to be amongst themselves
as well in temper, as in external face and habit more like one to the other:
whereas the middle partake of more variety. For the Cimbrians, Danes, and other
Scythians, are for the most part of a whitish hue, with flaxen, and yellow
hair; on the other side the Ethiopians for the most part are blacke-haired and
curled. The French, Germans, and the English, admit of all variety, having some
white-haired, some black, some yellow, some tawny, some smooth and some
curled-pates. This diversity the Stoics would ascribe to the fantasy, or
image conceived in the minds of men. Whence they would give a cause, why beasts
commonly bring forth young, more like one the other then men; because (say they)
wanting a reasonable soul they are not stirred up as men with sundry
cogitations, but only with sense. So the Scit hian and Northern man being by
nature more simple, and affecting those pleasures which are agreeable to
nature, and less distracted by variety of thoughts, is found to beget children
more like their parents then those of the middle climate. This cause we should
admit probable enough, but for a reason urged by Bodin and others, that in
Aethiopia, where the people of all other is more Acute, and more violent in
lust, they are most like one to the other. For even all are found to be small
of stature, curle-pated, black-skinned, flat-nosed, smooth-skinned,
great-lip't, white-toothed, black-eyed: Wherefore this infinite diversity in
the middle region, we cannot well ascribe to any other reason, then the
manifold intermixtion and combination of both the extremes. Whence it comes to
pass, that by how much more we wander from the middle region, so much the more
shall we find the people amongst themselves: In so much as Tacitus spoke of
the Germans, that amongst themselves they were very like in respect of other
nations. This mixture in the middle region out of the extremes, may easily be
showed out of diverse Colonies, which from the extremes, have been translated
into the middle region, as the better place of habitation. For hither came the
great and extraordinary armies of the Scythians, Goths, Turks and Tartars;
None besides the Vandalls passed into Afric, from whence they were in short
time expulsed. The Arabians and Punicaeans called by the ancient Saracens,
leading their Colonies into Europe and Asia, settled themselves in the middle
region; None came into Scythia: for when they had invaded Spain, Italy and
France, they were in France altogether broken, and cut off: After which, Spain
and Italy found a means to free themselves from their bondage. Likewise the
Colonyes of the Celtes and Romans, endeavored always to settle themselves in
the middle Regions, and never ventured as far as Scythia Northward, or
Southward as far as Aethiopia: Whence the middle charged with intermixture of
both extremes begat a great diversity. For we find by experience, that out of
the mixture of diverse kinds, diverse Forms and Natures are engendered: As of
the Mule, Leopard, Crocuta, Lycisca, and Camelopardus; which being mixed
Creatures are unlike their Sires: So may we judge of the various mixture of
diverse kinds of men. A Mastiffe or Lycisca, little differs from a Wolf,
because he was conceived of a Wolf and a Dog; So that a Wolf is (as Varro
notes) nothing else then a wild Dog. But on the other side, a Mule from an
Ass and a Horse, As a Camelopardus from a Panthor and a Camel, differ very
much; so that if people very near in Nature be linckt together, they produce
an offspring very like themselves: But if two very unlike in nature, as an
Ethiopian and a Scythian should match together, they must needs bring forth a
birth very unlike to themselves: like a Personated man brought upon the stage
by Ptolomaeus Philedephus, who (as Athenaeus writes) was of two colors, on one
side white, on the other black.

2 The second point whereby the disposition of people is varied, is Education.
Education is the exercise of many people in religions, or moral discipline.

Amongst all external causes of the change of dispositions, there is none
greater then Education. For as a good nature is oftentimes corrupted with evil
conversation, so an ill disposition with good institution has in some sort
been corrected. The chief objects of discipline are Religion and Morality:
Whereof we give the chiefest prerogative to Religion, as that which more
immediately binds the consciences of men, even against nature. In the second
place Ciuility; whose end is worldly happiness. How far each of these
prevail, shall be showed in these Theoremes.

1 Education has great force in the alteration of natural dispositions: yet
so as by accident remitted, they soon return to their former temper.

The force of institution has been so great, that by some it has been thought
to equal, if not surmount Nature; whence they have termed it a second nature:
For as we see all sorts of Plants and Herbs by good husbandry, to grow
better, but left to themselves to grow wild and barren; So shall we find it,
if not much more, in mankind* which though never so Savage and Barbarous, have
by discipline been corrected and reformed, and though never so Polite and
civil neglecting discipline, have degenerated, and grown barbarous. For if
the external lineaments of the body may be by art (as it were) wrought into
another mould, much more may we ascribe this to the habits and operations of
the mind, being of a more agill nature, and apter to receive impression. The
ancients amongst the French (as Bodin testifies) deemed a long visage the most
handsome: Whence the Midwiues endeavored to frame most faces to this fashion,
as may be seen in most ancient statues and images. In India (as we also
read) a great nose and a broad face was most admitted: which caused their
Midwiues to effect it as near as they could in their tender infants. In like
manner it has been the endeavor and ambition of most teachers, and informers
of youth, to frame the wits of their nouices to such disciplines and
perfections, as in the same country found most honor and best acceptance. Hence
it came to pass that custom prevailing beyond nature, many nations situate in
a ruder climate, wanting that benefit of the Heavens which others plentifully
inioye, have surpassed them in Arts, Sciences, and many other Endowments of
the mind. In so triuiall a matter we will not roue far for example. It is
recorded by the ancients as well of the Germans, as of our own nation, that
they lived almost in the condition of wild beasts in Woods and Deserts,
feeding like swine on herbs and roots, without law or discipline: In so much
as their Bardes or learned men (as they deemed them) wanting the use of
letters, challenged their chiefect perfection in the composure of certain
rimes of triuiall subjects to please the people. Their houses were caves, their
palaces brackes and thickots, their tables rocks (as one says of them) Antra
lares, dumeta thoros, caenacula rupes, They were (as Iustine speaks of the
infancy of the world) rather careful to keep their own, then ambitious to
conquer others; and more studious to preserve life then seek honor. Their
only law was nature, or some few customs preserved by tradition, not writing:
Little differing from the present Americans, not yet reduced to civility. But
time and discipline prevailing against barbarism, they are (God be praised)
reduced to such a height of civility, that they may (as it were) read other
men's wantes in their own perfections, and measure other men's loss by their
own gains. Insomuch as they seem to have robbed the Asiaticks of humanity,
the Romans of military Discipline, the Hebrews of Religion, the Grecians of
Philosophy, the Aegiptians of Geometry, the Phoenicians of Arithmetic, the
Chaldaeans of Astrology, and almost all the world of curious Workmanship. This
their excellency has bin so fortunate, as to set them in the envy of other
nations, who notwithstanding have been feign to borrow of their store. The
Italians are censured by Machiauell the Florentine for sending for Germans to
measure their land, chalenging to themselves the prerogative of wit, above
other nations. Likewise Pope Leo dispatched his Ambassador into Germany for
Mathematicians, to rectify the calender, as sometimes Caesar into Aegipt. This
force of discipline how great soever being for a time neglected, nature is
notwithstanding found to return to her own corruption. A prime example of it
we have in the Romans and Italians, heretofore for Arts and Military
discipline carrying away the palm from the whole world: But now degenerated so
much, as it may seem the image of baseness; submitting their necks to the
pride of an insulting Prelate, far more abject then the loss of their
liberty under Caesar, or the Gothish usurpation of Alaricus. The like effect
of this neglect of discipline may we find in the Hebrews, Chaldaeans,
Phaenicians, Aegiptians, Graecians, and Indians, who were sometimes admired for
learning and Eloquence, and set in the highest top of perfection. Wherefore
Aristotle had good reason in his first book de Coelo to affirm, that Arts
and Sciences with all nations had been subject to ebbes and flows, sometimes
flourishing in great perfection, and sometimes languishing and contemned. And
to this and no other cause, can we ascribe the present Ignorance and Barbarism
of the Americans: Their descent being from Noah and his posterity, they could
not at first but have some form of discipline, which afterward being by long
process of time or incertainty of tradition neglected and obliterated, they
fell back into such ways as their own depraved nature dictated or the devil
maliciously suggested.

2 By Discipline nations become mo^e wise and politic in the preseruations of
states, yet less stout and courageous.

As Discipline has been the chief cause of the establishment of all states,
so has it on the other side been occasion to soften and weaken the courage of
many nations: For it has been many times seen, that such people who have
been commended for wit, have yielded to such who are of a ruder disposition:
as at this day the Greeks and Macedons to the Turks, the ancient Gauls to the
French, the Egyptians to the Persians, the Chaldeans to the Saracens. Hence
some give a reason why the French did invade and run over Italy without
control under Charles the 5; because the Italian Princes at that time were
given to study and learning; and it is observed that the ancient courage of the
Turk is much abated, since the time that they grew more civil and more
strictly embraced discipline. And this some think to have given occasion to
Alexander the great, to conquer the Persian Monarchy, the Persians having
been before reduced to ciuility, and lost their hardness. And we daily see by
experience, that no men are more desperate and aduenturous; then those which
are rude and barbarous, wanting all good manners and education. None more
fearful and many times more cowardlike then such as are most wise and
politic: an example of the former we have in Ajax, of the other in Ulysses,
whereupon the wisest l^aders and commanders have not been esteemed the most
valiant. A certain English gentleman writing military observations affirms
the French nobility to be more valorous and coragious then the English:
Because of the looseness of their discipline and the strictness of ours. But
I will neither grant him the one or the other, neither can I auerre their
courage to be greater, or our discipline stricter. If their valor be more, it
must needs follow their wit is less out of this ground. But how soever it be,
I am sure that Caesar and Tacitus give the cause of the great stature and
courage of the Germans to be their looseness and liberty, which howbeit it be
not the sole cause, it must needs be a great help. For we plainly find by
experience that those countries which be most mountanous where is less
discipline, are found to produce men for the most part, most warlicke: Such as
the Suitzers in Germany and Biscayn^s and Arragonians in Spain^. Whence (as
some observe) such countries as are partly Mountanous, partly plain are
seldom at quiet, the one part willingly submitting themselves to government,
the other affecting war and rebellion. Which has been the cause of the
troubles of Naples, and in England before Henry the eight's time betwixt the
Welsh and English. Why discipline should in this sort mollify and weaken the
courage of men, many causes may be given. The first and greatest is Religion,
then the which, there is no greater curb to the courage: not merely of it
self, but by accident; Because Death being the greatest hazard of a soldier,
religion gives a more evident apprehension and sense of the immortality of the
soul of man, and sets before the eye of his understanding, as it were the
images of Hell-paines and Caelestiall joys, weighing in an aequall scale the
danger of the one, and the loss of the other. Whereas ignorant people wanting
all sense of religion lightly esteem of either, holding a temporal death the
greatest danger. Whence grew the usual Proverb amongst profane Ruffians; that
conscience makes cowards. But this (as I said) is merely accidental: For as
much as nothing spurs on a true resolution more then a good conscience, and a
true touch of religion: witness the holy Martyrs of the Church of all ages,
whose valor and constancy has outgone all heathen presidents. But because
soldiers for the most part, being a most dissolute kind of people, having
either a false religion which can suggest no settled resolution, or an ill
conscience grounded upon no assurance, Religion must needs beget in them a more
fearful disposition. Another cause may be the severity of discipline, which
especially in the training up of youth, is mixed with a kind of slavery:
without which our younger years are very intractable to taste the bitter roots of
knowledge. This fear (as it were) stamped in our affections cannot but leave
behind it a continual impression, which cannot suddenly be razed out. Such
as we find in us of our masters and teachers, whose friendship we rather
embrace, then familiarity. A third reason, why discipline would weaken and
mollify a Nation, may be the delight which men reap in Contemplative studies,
and moral or politic duties, whence follows a neglect of the other. For
people of knowledge must needs find a greater felicity in gifts of the mind,
which is usually seconded with a contempt of external and military affairs.
The last cause may be the want of use and practice of military affairs in
most commonwealths; for many states well established continue a long time
without wars, neither molesting their neighbors, nor dissenting amongst
themselves; except very seldom, and that by a small army, without troubling
the whole state: whence the general practice being less known, becomes more
fearful. Notwithstanding, all this it were brutish to imagine discipline any
way unnecessary or hurtful, either to a Captain or Statesman. For as much as
it more strengthens the wit then abates the courage of a nation. Neither is it
properly said to break and weaken, but rather to temper and regulate our
spirits. For it is not valor, but rather rashness or fierceness, which is
not managed with policy and discretion. And although it has sometimes been
attended with notable exploites, as that of Alexander the great, of the Goths,
the ancient Gauls and many other. Yet shall we observe such conquests, to be
of small continuance: For what they atcheiued by strength, they lost for want
of policy. So that it is well said by one: that moderation is the mother of
continuance, to States and Kingdoms. Thus have we run over (by Gods
assistance) the chief causes of diversity of dispositions of Nations: Wherein
if any man will inform himself (as he should) he must compare one
circumstance with another, and make his judgment not from a man but a nation;
and not censure any Nation out of one observation: For practice in Art cannot
always come home to speculation. So experience in this kind will oftentimes
cross the most general rules we can imagine. It Is enough to judge as we
find, and walk where the way is open; If any man will desire more curiosity,
he may spend more labor to less purpose. Let every man by beholding the
national vices of other men, praise Almighty God for his own happiness: and
by seeing their virtues, learn to correct his own vices. So should our
travail in this Terrestrial Globe be our direct way to Heaven: And that
eternal guide should conduct us which can never err: To whom be ascribed all
Glory, Praise, and Power, for evermore.

Deo triuni Laus in aeternum.
FINIS.

