THE PLAIN MAN Spiritual Plough.

CONTAINING THE GODLY and Spiritual Husbandry.

Wherein every Christian ought to be exercised, for the happy increase of
fruit, to eternal life.

By I. C. Preacher of the Word.

Ierem. 4.4. Plough up your fallowed ground: and sow not among the thorns.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, my very good Lord, William Cotton, Lord
Bishop of Exon. Grace, mercy, peace, and Piety, in Jesus Christ.
PTolomeus Philadelphus, king of Egypt, (Right Reverend Father) asking his
friend, whom he had invited to his Table, what was the greatest glory of a Man:
received of him this answer: Timan ton theon: To honor God: that not so much
with gifts and sacrifices, as with the Piety of mind, and a godly purpose.
Which saying, not only Ptolomaeus (being a right wise and learned Prince) well
approved; but also those Philosophers which frequented his Presence, with great
constancy, both published and praised. Likewise, among the divine Oracles of
the wisest Graecians, this was celebrated for a Principle, Epou^ Theo; Imitate
God: as that whereby men might be incited to acknowledge, to love, and to
worship the highest Majesty. As the former has an affinity with that godly
Affixe of Salomons last Solace; Fear God, and keep his commandments. And the
latter, a resemblance of S. Paul's exhortation: Be ye followers of God, as
dear children: so, in either, that heroical grace (I mean Piety) is highly
advanced, and no less commended unto men, and that condignelie: for being
the daughter of the heavenly Logos, a right sovereign Princess, and of
beauty, incomparabiliter pulchrior, quam Helena Graecorum, (as Saint Augustine
said of the Verity) she is also (after Platoes definition) the perfect
knowledge of the divine worship: also the beginning, the middle, and the end
of man's life: tollerating the things before spoken of, hoping for that which is
promised, teaching that which is commanded, mittigating the enormities of this
world, wherein a man has his Cross; and leading him to eternal life, wherein
is his Crown. This is the same (after Saint Paul's affirmation) which is to the
Divines the greatest mystery: to the contented, the richest treasure: to men
of most utility, and that which (indeed) has all the promises both of this
life, and of the life to come. Neither is the greatest wisdom in all the
world, which has not any combination with Piety, of higher estimate, then
that Religion which has no wisdom: for as the one among men is mere
superstition (as that zeal which has no knowledge): so is the other before
God, very foolishness, and evermore liable to the sense of that resolute
judgment perdam sapientum sapientiam. Finally, this is that sovereign Seed
of the highest Power, without the which, there is placed no certain difference
between a man and a beast. Haec enim sola (said Lactantius) differentes
homines a belius facit, and quam, qui non admittit, alienus a natura hominis,
vitam pecudum sub humana specie vivit. Therefore, Piety being in nature so
good, in beauty so excellent, in mystery so high, in price so inestimable, in
use so profitable, in request so necessary, and in the end so glorious; she
has not only enamored her friends, and furthered her followers: but at this
time persuaded these, and semblable productions, so correspondent to Verity,
against the synister oppositions of the maleuolent foes.

Moreover, for that Piety is that sovereign Seed, appointed by the decree of
the most Holy, to be sown in the heart and mind of man, co^parable to that
ground, which without the help of the Plough and manual industry, is neither
fit for the seed, nor apt to bear fruit, for the desire of which good effects,
the causes should not be neglected. I have thought it as necessary, as it is
profitable, and no less my duty, not only to affect this kind of Georgy with
the spiritual good husband* but also with the Plough-wright to assay the
framing of such an Aratre, as whereby my Lords field in this seed time, may be
the better cultured, manured and prepared: the which I resolved might the
sooner be performed by placing (in a meet Antithesis) the image of Impieties
Plough, and manner of husbandry opposite to the same: so that, as virtues are
best discerned by the consideration of vices, and the clear light esteemed in
respect of ugly darkness the wicked Hag Kakia might be abandoned, in the due
regard of noble Eusebia, worthy to be honored. And that being done in this
form and frame, and my self pressed to expose the Plough (by Gods help) to the
Lords Land, I presumed to dedicate the same to your good L: and at this time to
present it, as a grateful gift of this new year, the which I wish to be
prosperous unto your L: and the whole Church. And hereunto was I justly moved
(in my conceit) as for many others: so chiefly for these 3. causes: First, for
that, as I considered your L: high calling and like place in this particular
part of the Church, over which the Holy Ghost has made you Ouerseer: ye are
beyond many others so much the more excited to regard the good direction of the
Plough, the which is then best performed, when respecting rather Onus, the^
Honos, with that good Elder, who in lieu of the first, deserves well the
second: ye urge on the Lords work, for the benfit of the Church, the example
of others, and the praise of the right Lord of this land. Secondly, I was
willing in this sort (though over audatious) to express, as my grateful mind
and duty: so my hea^ty good will toward your L: whose favors I have so often
enjoyed, as well for others, as for my self: the which, seeing it was not so
easy for me to obtain that wherewith to requite, as to desire it (as Nazian
also said in the like) I was willing to offer, though not gold with the wise
Magi: yet with Peter and John, such as I had. Thirdly, of all other my labors
in the Church, I was the sooner moved to commend this Georgie unto your L:
because, when sometimes it pleased you to yield me audience in the assembly of
my brethren at your visitation, I then briefly intimated that in effect, which
I have sithence conceived and thus brought forth: hoping that as it was on that
occasion well meant of my part, and not disliked either of your L or any other
learned and then godly hearers: so eftsoons, these fragme^ts collected, with
some others of semblable nature, subject and quality in this method disgested,
will seem neither harsh to your hearing, nor to your presence unpleasant. It
may therefore well please your wisdom to accept of my good meaning, to pardon
my defect, and admit my present, and Pastor like to protect this Spiritual
Plough, as whereby the Lords land may be well tilled, the husbandry furthered,
the work desired, and the highest glorified. In this hope, I humbly take my
leave, committing my present to your Lordship, and the same with that right
worshipful and virtuous Matron (Mistress Cotton) and al yours to the heavenly
Landlord, who be blessed for ever.

Norleigh in Deuon. this first of January. Anno salutis. 1606. Your good
Lordships to be commanded in all duty, JOHN CARPENTER.

THE PLAIN man's spiritual Plough.
CHAP. I. God speed the Plough.
HE that well begins (for the most part) well succeeds, A good beginning
has the like end.
as that Builder which best plotteth, best prospers: And truly, well he
begins, Eales. 12. 1.
and soundly he plotteth, who, remembering his Creator the sooner in his youth,
beholds his face, and seeks in all his endeavors to glorify his blessed
name.

This method has our heavenly and most learned Schoolemaister taught and
prescribed us in his doctrine: First seek ye the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, and rightly observed the same in his life and actions for our
imitation, when (according to the prophecy of the sweet Psalmists Psalm. 16.8.
of Israel ( He set Jehovah before his face, who therefore stood at his right
hand to the joy of his soul, and stabilitie of his glory, when others fell.
And here is both standing and falling, for where this rule is not holden, the
weight of the walls (as laid on a sandy foundation) is with Nimrods Babel
subject to a sudden down fall. Genesis 11.9.
The very sweet Spowsesse (whom King Saloman brings in reporting her
adventures) seeking for her Sovereign, Cant. 1.3.
found him not, because she observed neither the due time, nor the true manner
thereof: For she sought him in her bed by the nights: that is, in
voluptuousness and security, signified by the bed, and by ignorance and
errors, noted by the nights.

Ioh. 21.6.
In like manner (as the Evangelist tells it) the Apostles of our Lord (not yet
fully confirmed) went forth to fish, and caught just nothing, for that they
labored in the night, neither regarded to cast forth their nets on the right
side of the Ship. But that the holy Spowsesse might best find him whom her
soul loved, she is taught by the watchmen, how, where, and to what end to
seek him: and that those unfortunate Fishers might catch, they are advised by
their Master, both to labor in the bright morning, and to cast out their nets
on the right side of the Ship: that is, to labor with knowledge and
integrity, as such as are beautified with Vrim and Thummim.

The Lord GOD, willing that we should take this course without fear or
fainting, as well for the obtaining of things necessary, God will that we
sho^d pray vnt^ him at the beginning of our labors.
as for the comfort of our souls and glory of his name, commands us to call
upon him: to ask, to seek, to knock, yea, and to continue this exercise.

Next, to encourage and animate our spirits, he has promised to hear us, and
to grant that whatsoever we shall ask or desire of him in the name of Jesus.

Thirdly, the Lord, being as good as his word, grants and gives, unto such
as call upon him, even his holy Spirit, and all things needful, as well for
their bodies as for their souls. Fourthly, as the necessity of man provoke
it, so is the exercise of holy prayer most sweet and comfortable. Therefore
the godly in all ages have been in this much delighted, and felt the greatest
solace in the midst of their greatest afflictions, persuading, that as they
set the Lord before their eyes, he was to them as their father, both willing
to bless, and declaring his power to preserve them: and therefore praying unto
him, they call him their father in the heavens.

Noah, the eight Preacher of righteousness, as he before faithfully depended
on the Lord his God, from whose grace he had both co^menced and proceeded in
that great work of the Arc, wherein Gods glory and Noah's faith did appear:
Genesis 8.20.
So coming forth thereof, he adventured not his husbandry until he had
built an Altar to the Lord, and laid thereon his oblations, to the honor of
his name.

Abraham, being called out of his own country by the Lord, ever placed him in
his eyes, offered Sacrifices unto his Grace, Ge^. 12.7. and. 24.14. and. 28.20.
and thence proceeded to the performance of his word. Also his servant Eleazar,
being sent from him with a charge in the Divine fear, first inuocated the
Lord, desiring him to prosper his journey. The same rule observed Moses, David,
Saloman, and other the godly of those times. In the new Testament, we have the
blessed examples, not only of our Lord Jesus praying to his father; but also
of his holy Apostles and Disciples, who gladly learned and followed him
therein. Act. 1.14.
In the first of the Acts, when they had assembled about the choice of Matthias
in Judas place, they had not only Preaching, an orderly choice of persons, and
casting of Lottes; but also (and that chiefly) prayers, as whereby they might
move the Lord to supply and to effect that, which neither themselves, nor any
other (without his holy hand) was able to perform for his glory.

All the which was purposed and done, not only for them then, An example for
us to seek the Lord before all things.
but also for us now, and chiefly for the Teachers and Ministers of the word,
that they might not only be willing to bestow their studies and endeavors to
Preach and divulgate the word, and the same to confirm by their own godly
examples: but also both to prefixe and affixe met prayers to the same,
thereby to desire the Divine aid, by whose grace and blessings those labors
of theires in his Vineyarde and husbandry, might be made fruitful: yea, and
that we might know, whether they either teach others, or hear others
teaching them, there is no fruit or increase to be presumed or expected from
the power or practice of man, but from the Lord, who only gives both to the
speaker, and also to the hearer, not only a tongue to speak, and an ear to
hear, but also that fruit and profit of either, as whereby his name might be
glorified, and themselves edified and comforted for eternal life.

Moreover, the very heathen The heathen how they began.
Poets, and wisemen of the Gentiles, have not neglected, but most carefully
regarded to begin their works with the Invocation of those divine powers which
they most affected and worshipped, as from whose graces (they were persuaded)
their labors and studies might enjoy the happier fine: whereof followed this
Distich. A^ love fit orfum, ne Serpe^s det tibi morsum.

And therein, howsoever some have vainly hunted after the praise of worldly
men, the better sort (as Philemon, Socrates, Plato, and such) did ever aim at
the Glory of the highest power, the which they placed for the chief scope of
their labors, and therefore from thence expected aid, and continual
assistance.

But by how much greater the work in action was of estimation, so much the
more regard they ever had of this ground-plot: knowing, that as the weakness
of humane ability and slenderness of man's wit, could never of it self
effect any thing of the meanest request, The best commencements.
much less that which is of the noblest regard: so also (as wisdom, reason
and experience teach) things well begun have commonly like successes: and that
the good beginnings are taken from the divine grace, wherein the greatest
actions have been enabled with the semblable regard.

This when I also well weighed, I thought it a matter most unseemly and
nolesse sinful to adventure, this present work, without holy invocation: yea,
much I doubted, lest that without this one thing, I should not only transgress
in many things: but also setting the building, not on the Rock, with the wise
man, but with the fool on the sand, the weight of the walls would have fallen
to the ground: and so much the sooner, for that the work now endeavored is
both exceeding great, and the degree thereof excellent high: The weight of the
matter in hand. vz, Piety.
for behold, this is that which aptly concerns the supreme magnificency of
the most princely Lady Piety, of whose right nobility I persuade, every man
who has been schooled either in the knowledge of God, or of himself has
happily heard, and with whose laudable graces, whosoever is truly adorned, is
both honored with God, and well commended of all good men. And this I am sure
ye will confess together with me, when ye shall aright understand both the
nature and utility of this Sovereign Princess by her plain description, but
the more when ye shall be moved to entertain and embrace the sweet influences
of her glorious virtues.

Now, Piety. Cicer. in Re. tue. li. 2. Aug. epist. 22. ad Macedo.
if ye ask me what I understand by this word: I answer, not only that
Philostorge, or loving affection, whereby a man loves, honors, r^uerenceth,
gratifieth, and dutifully regards his father, mother, brethren, kindred,
Country, and such as have thereby well deserved (according to the definition of
the Philosophers) but also, and that chiefly, that most reverend, holy and true
worship of the most high God, Chris. in ser. De fide and de lege.
and the true love and right regard of duty toward all men; whose original
and fountain the whole scriptures divinely inspired, have drawn not from the
nature, wit, ability, or policy of sinful man: but from the very spirit of
truth, as an influence of the highest heavens, comprehended in the fear of
God, expressed in Faith, Hope, and Charity, and has his Mystery exceeding
great: for under the same, not only God is manifested in the flesh (as Paul
the holy Apostle affirms): 1. Tim. 3.
but also there lie couched great safety, great wealth, great utility, great
glory. Thereof the ancient Hermes knowing the safety, protested that,
Lactan. li. 2. de Origin Erro. cap. 16.
Mia Phylake, Eusebeia, etc. Piety is that only keeper or preser. matrix of
men: for neither has the wicked devil, nor yet Fate, any manner power over the
godly man: for God delivers him from all evil: therefore is Piety (or
Godliness) that one and only good thing among men.

Next, we hear the Apostle to affirm, that Piety is great riches to them
which are content with that which they have: thirdly, he says, that this
virtue is profitable to all things: and lastly, that it has for her end
everlasting life. For in the true tenure of Piety, not only all the Creatures
of God in the world, but also all the treasures and rights of the kingdom of
heaven are ours. Therefore this is the same, which beyond all other things he
boldly commends, as not only the best and most acceptable to God, but the
very scope of all the holy Scriptures, which are given to this end, that men
might believe, and in believing, might have eternal life in the name of the
Son of God.

Lo, such a thing have I adventured to have at this time, whose reverence
although I esteem far beyond mine ability and worthiness: yet under the
fear of him, who has called me with an holy calling, granted me to know the
secrets of this virtue, and enabled me to declare his glory in the midst of
his congregation, have I so far forth presumed: yet not I, but that divine
grace which works in me.

Therefore, let us now with meek hearts and due reverence, fall down before
his footstool, and faithfully lift up our humble minds unto that heavenly
Father, from whom this grace desendeth. Let us seek him in a true faith; and
desire his gracious goodness, that in his divine favor, mercy and loving
affection toward us, through his sweet son our Savior, he would respect
our condition, speed well our Plough, and prosper all our godly endeavors:
that thereof plowing and sowing, not to the flesh, but to the spirit, we may
reap, not of the flesh corruption, but of the spirit, life everlasting, for
the high glory of his majesty, the soueraign benefit of his Church, the
perfect discharge of Christian duty, and the prosperity of the elected Saints.

O most blessed father, the God of glory, A prayer for the good speed of
Pieties Plough.
and king of all consolation, we thy poor children oppressed with the
intolerable burden of sin, and scourged with miseries rod, the guard of
transgressions, do now here prostrate both our bodies and souls before thy
foote-stoole. Thou have commanded us to sow for Righteousness, Hos. 10.12.
and to reap according to Mercies measure, to plough up our fallow ground, to
seek after thee in the happy time, and to apply Pieties Plough in the true
observation of godly duty. But (alas, o father) we be so witless and weak,
as we neither know how to use the one, nor are able to labor in the other:
nor can we be drawn from the idle market place, into the happy field of the
spiritual husbandry, but by thy wisdom, thy mercy, and thy loving and
gracious calling, through thy most holy Messiah our Savior. For as no man
comes unto thee but by thy Son: so neither comes any man to thy Son,
but whom thou drawest, and thou drawest them (no doubt) by thy mercy, Ier.
31.3.
whom thou have embraced with thine everlasting love. Genesis 9.27.
Therefore (with righteous Noah) we beseech thee to persuade us in thy mercies
to enter Sichems Tabernacles, Cant. 1.3.
and heartily desire thee (with thy holy Spowsesse) to draw us forth after
thee, with a promise of our parts (but assisted by thee) that then we will
run. Call us (o father effectually, manure our work without, and prepare our
minds within: Let it please thy good spirit to inspire our hearts, thy power
to enable our bodies, thy grace to confirm our whole man to to thy holy will
and pleasure, and thy loving mercies to make us meet for thy service: that,
standing no longer idle, we may henceforth labor in thy field, follow Pieties
Plough, and be wholly employed in the heavenly husbandry, whereof we may timely
reap, and gladsomely use and enjoy the ripe and sovereign fruits in all peace
and quietness, through Jesus Christ our true happiness. Amen.

CHAP. II. Piety, the scope of all the holy Scriptures.
SAint Paul endeavoring to persuade Piety, not only to Timothy, but to all the
elected Saints, 2. Tim 3.16
commends unto both him and them the holy Scripture, which has (as he
affirms) his chief aim to this scope: that the man of GOD may be absolute,
To. 15.4. A double use of the Scripture.
being made perfect unto all good works, and for whose better acceptance
writing to the Romans, delivers thereof a double use, the first serves for
Doctrine: the second for consolation: The Doctrine instructs men, not only
what is this virtue, and wherein it consists, but also the ready way how and
by what means to obtain and enjoy her: The consolation encourages both them
that seek her, and persevere in her ways, to hold on and continue without
fear or fainting: for seeing that they which will live godly in CHRIST JESUS
shall suffer persecution, for that the old Serpent stands as an enemy
opposite to their peace: it is necessary that they should not only be taught
what they ought to do, and what they ought to fly, and so in the true use of
Pieties Plough be persuaded to work out their salvation in fear: but also to
be encouraged to proceed and preseuere in the known truth and study of
Piety, in the full assurance of GODS mercies and hope of eternal felicity.
To and for the former, are annexed Admonitions, threatenings, Judgments,
corrections, refutations, and such like as are not only requisite but
needful to beat down the pride of man's nature, and the presumption of the
enemy, and so to till and manure (as it were) man's vnfallowed soil: to the
latter belong the loving promises, graces and sweet mercies of GOD, which is
no less necessary then the former, to succor, sustain and consolate that,
which is ready to perish in the deep consideration of his own imbecilitie
and unworthiness. And thereof is it, that the LORD GOD who might justly by his
supreme authority have only commanded and compelled all men to the
observance of this service and duty without any other reason, An argument of
God, love to man.
does nevertheless in his great love and mercies allure and encourage them to
come and labor in his field, with the sweet promises of meet wages and
eternal rewards: yea, he does most gently, and with unspeakable kindness,
persuade and entreat them to be reconciled unto him, and to dwell in his house.

To this purpose was that doctrine preached, that Jesus Christ was sent unto us
from his father to bless us, Act. 3.19.26.
and in turning every one of us from our inequities, he would that we should
amend our lives and convert to the Lord, that our sins might be done away,
when the time of refreshing comes in the presence of the Lord. In sum, this
is the scope of the Scriptures, both legal, Prophetical, Historical,
Evangelical, and Apostolical, that thereby men might be taught and persuaded
to repent and believe, and that they might find and obtain remission of
sins and eternal life through Jesus Christ. So are we certified therein,
both of Piety and her princely reward, the former whereof is declared in those
two other words, Piety and her reward.
Repentance and Faith: the latter in those two other words, Remission of
sins and eternal life.

A place taken from Hos. 10. Verse. 12.
But now, of and among so many pregnant places as the holy Scriptures afford
us concerning this argument, I have gladly made chief choice of that one,
wherein the Prophet Hoseay Preaching to those ten Tribes of Israel, which had
before fallen away from GOD, by the wicked counsel of Jeroboam the son of
Nabat, and long wallowed in their sins and abominations without amendment or
remorse, said thus to them in the name of the Lord: So we to your selves in
Righteousness: Reap after the measure of Mercy: Plough up your fallow
Ground, for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come, and rain
Righteousness upon you.

In the which words the Prophet has two principal parts: whereof, Two
general parts of the whole discourse.
the one is an Exhortation to Piety: the other is, the conueience thereof. The
former has his efficacy of the Lords commandment, to the which they should
in equity obey: the latter, of the Lords gracious promise of mercy and
rewards, which both consolateth and encourages them to perform. Again, in
the former, is seen what the Lord God requires of his people, namely, Justice
and Mercy: In the latter, we learn what they are to expect and hope for from
his gracious hand, namely, the fruit of Righteousness. Finally, Covenants and
conditions between God and us.
these two points contain the covenants and conditions had, made, and
concluded between God and his people, and so, that if they will take and enjoy
the benefit of the Lords promises, they must be careful to observe the
conditions and promises on their part made and provided.

But before we attempt to pearce the bowels of this present place, knowing
that the occasion of the Prophets exhortation may well stand for a meet
introduction, and no mean help for the better understanding of the Lords
pleasure therein, we may neither omit nor neglect, but carefully regard, and
duly consider of the same.

The occasion of the words.
The Prophet, perusing the case and condition of the Israelites (unto whom the
Lord sent him to preach in the days of Jeroboam the second of that name) found
that part of the land of Israel right resemblant to the field of the foolish,
covered over and over with briars, Pro. 24 3^.
bushes and thorns, into the which he knew well it booted him little to cast
the sovereign seed, until the same were cleans^d of those unprofitable
things: for (as the Lord says) The seed falling into the thorns is choked
and made unfruitful, and therefore he wisely advised Judah and Jerusalem by
the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 4.3.4.
Plough up your fallowe ground, and so we not among the thorns. For
notwithstanding all the great mercies and wonderful works of the Lord done
too and for this people (far beyond that he had done too and for other nations)
whereof he was worthily called the God of Israel, The ingratitude of the
Israelites, and their condition.
and they known by the name of the people of God, before all other the
inhabitors of the earth, which required their great gratitude and godly
obedience: yet were they ungrateful, and long time wallowed in their stubborn
disobedience, whereby they had quite extinguished the fear of God, true
Religion, and all Piety. For from the reign of King Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, who had set up the Calves in Bethel and Dan, to be worshipped (and
thereby had subtly allured and drawn away those ten Tribes called Israel, or
Ephraim, from their obedience to the kings of Judah) unto the time of Hezekiah
king of Judah, and Jeroboam the second (the son of Ioash) king of Israel,
being about threescore and ten years, they had ever erred, sinned, and gone
astray, that not only in manners, but also in Religion: nor could it be they
should well live, whiles they served not the Lord in his holy Religion: nor
was it possible, that they could obtain pardon of the Lord their God and
prosper, so long as they continued in their gross errors and sins, and would
neither repent, nor seek the way to return home to him, from whom they had
estranged themselves through the filthiness of their horrible abominatio^s.

In all this long time, The diligence of the Prophet Hoseah.
the godly and painful Prophet laboring and toyling among them (as the good
husbandman in a froward and vncultured field) ceased not, but continued his
calling and duty, with great diligence and regard, and so much more laborious
was his work, by how much the field was thwacked with thorns, tares, and
noisome weeds. For perusing the field, The sins of the Israelites. Hos. 1.
and 2. and 3. and 7.
he found therein (among many others) the spiritual fornication, as namely
Idolatry: for they had forsaken the Lord God of Israel, and hunted and
followed after strange and false gods, as semblant to the Heathens, whom the
Lord had cast out before them. He espied also in that field lying, swearing,
blasphemy, murder, theft, pollutio^ of blood, hypocrisy, inconstancy,
vanity, infidelity, gluttony, drunkenness, luxury and uncleanness. To be
brief, he perceived among the Prophets, the pride of Lions; among the Priests,
the liberty of Leuiatha^; among the Rulers, the cruelty of wolves: among the
people, the rudenes of Behemoth; and in all estates and conditions great
enormities: for the which he was compelled by the Lords spirit, not only to
accuse and reprove the people of Israel: but also to threaten vengeance and
destruction to the godless, obstinate, The promises of mercy, mixed with
threats of plagues. Ezec. 18.23.32.
and rebellious among them. Howbeit, he has not yet so accused, reproved and
threatened them with vengeance and destruction, but he mitigateth the rigor
thereof, with often and profitable Admonitions, exhortations, and sweet
promises of grace, mercy, and prosperity, so as they would be contented to
turn to the Lord, and submit themselves unto his will, knowing that the will of
his Lord and master was, that he should not only threaten judgments and
plagues to the rebellious and obstinate, but also to preach mercy, pardon, and
peace, to all them which faithfully and timely came home, yielding themselves
unto his correction, by true repentance: for thus says the Lord the holy one
of Israel; Have I any pleasure in the death of the unrighteous?

And true it is, that howsoever men through the frailty of their nature,
ignorance, fear or occasion, offend the divine majesty; and how fearcely
soever the wrath of God is bent against sinners for their sins (the which the
Lord would that his servants the holy Prophets should reprove and threaten to
terrify them from their audatious presumption in their sin) yet we are
assured that the whole scripture does every where commend unto us the mercy of
God, yea, even in those things which seem to express great severity: for he
threatens men to this end, that he might not punish them; he punishes them,
that he might not punish and destroy them for ever: he exhorts them, that
he might do them good: and he does them good, that he might bind all men to
himself and be beneficial for ever. To pass over many other things, what is
greater then this, that he delivered over his only begotten Son to the
death of the Cross for such as are both sinners and his enemies? behold both
Justice and mcrcie: But that the Lords great mercy be not extended them in
vain, the Prophet tells them, that whereas of long time they had Ploughed
wickedness, reapt iniquity, and eaten the fruit of lies; it is now required,
The Sum of the place.
that they sow unto themselves in Righteousness, and reap according to the
measure of Mercy: Romans 6.19.
which is in effect so much as the Apostle exhorted to the Romans, saying; As
ye have given your members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity, to commit
iniquity: so now give your members servants to Righteousness in holiness: and
this we may esteem not only for a good counsel, but an especial law
provided by the Lord, which binds and constrains all men (of whatsoever
estate or condition) to the due regard of their duties and lawful vocations in
the fear divine: chiefly, it recalleth them from their errors, who have as
yet wandered in the vanity of their minds, to the right service of the
eternal God, in the true use of Pieties Plough, without the which, the law of
God is contemned, and man's salvation hindered. Therefore we should dutifully
reverence the one, and carefully provide for the other, as whereby the Lord God
may be well pleased, and our selves benefited with good effect.

But this that we may the better observe, it is meet that we both learn and
consider well of these two points: contained within the first general part: viz.

1. In the exhortation to Piety, are three points.
First, what it is which the Lord God requires of our parts to be yielded and
performed.

Secondly, what ways and means he would that we should take, to atchiue,
perform and effect the same.

Righteousness and Mercy.

Sow ye, reap ye, Plough ye: And finally in the word, Seek ye the Lord.

The Metaphor.
And here we may first observe and consider that the place is not only
metaphorical, under certain terms and words of the husbandman, but also
enjoys the apt exposition of the metaphor, of either which, we shall speak
in the second part of this division, when we come to consider of the actions to
be employed about that chiuing of those two sovereign graces, being (indeed)
the matter or subject of those actions.

The labor and end.
Here also are we to consider, that as all labors are not commended in a true
Christian; but those only which are lawful, and to them enjoyed by the divine
Law: so neither is every end of their labors to be regarded, but the same
only, which is chiefly required by the Lord, for his glory and the good of
his Saints, as we may fully persuade of this subject, for which they must sow,
and according to which they must reap that appertain to the Lord. For as the
LORD in the beginning made a division between light and darkness, and
separated his chosen from among malign worldlings; so would he, that they
should wholly abandon the world and the flesh, and the devil, Genesis 1.
with all their lusts, and wholly dedicate themselves to his most excellent
glory, to and for the which, there is ever required that bright Vrim and
perfect Thummim, prescribed in the divine Law. And this (no doubt) would the
Prophet signify under those two general words, Righteousness and Mercy, as
that wherein the whole Law is perfected and performed: The office of Justice:
and of Mercy.
for as the office of Justice is to will well (as to every man his due) so the
office of Mercy is to do well (as disposing of that, which Justice wills)
in a just analogy.

And for our better instruction, we may observe this order. First to consider,
how either of these two words, Righteousness, and Mercy is defined and accepted
in their common signification, and as placed apart, and absolutely in the holy
Scriptures.

Next, how they are defined and taken in a more especial acceptance, and
combined together the one with the other, or having the one relation to the
other.

Thirdly, what is meant by the sowing in Righteousness, and reaping after the
measure of Mercy.

Fourthly, too, and for whose use and especial benefit those virtues are
prepared and made profitable.

CHAP. III. The Subject or things required: and first of Righteousness.
THere be, who either not well understanding the word, or wedded to their own
affections, labor to abridge and restrain the scope thereof to three
particular works of Mercy, as namely, alms deeds, prayer, and fasting: in
regard whereof, Rhem. Testa. in mat. 6.1.
they blush not to transl^te the word Almesdeede into Justice: as, Take heed
ye do not your Justice before men. Others, apply it to judicials, judgments,
and distributatiue Justice, as if the Prophet aimed only to these things, and
rather to that particular duty which every man was to regard and perform in
his own person and place, as well toward the Lord, as toward all men. But
sounding the ground of the Hebrew verity, we find that the word is of an
higher nature and a greater content. The word in the Hebrew is Tzed^cah, The
signification of the word Justice, or Righteousness.
the which the Septuaginta have translated, Dicaiosune, the Latins, Iustitia,
from whence we have the word Justice or Righteousness: between the which two
words we need not to place that difference, which our adversaries would
compel us, who whiles they endeavor to attribute somewhat to the ability of
man's nature in the demerite of salvation by his own Justice, they assay to
rob Christ of his glory, and declare themselves rather heathen Philosophers,
then the Disciples and followers of the King of Righteousness.

But howsoever be the acceptance of the word, the thing thereby signified has
bin of diverse men diversely defined: and although of the better sort (both of
the Philosophers and of the Divines) it has not been extended to an equal
analogy of consent in all parts: yet has there not been any great difference
touching the foundation, nor have they much erred from this general scope that
Justice is not only that Virtue, A definition of Justice.
or habit of the mind which is most agreeable to nature, reason and manners:
but that which (before all others, has a certain communion, or fellowship
with God, in equality or likeness. Pro. 22.
Which definition is compounded of an universality, and a particularitie: The
former comprehends those divine motions which are inspired into man's mind by
the holy Ghost: The latter those particular duties required of man toward man.
Phil. Melant. Clem. Alexand. To yield every one his due
And this did that learned Philip take from Clement, where in after the
sentence of Symonides (the which Plato also received) there is found Vis
tribuendi suum cuique: A virtue or power of yielding to every one his own.

Others restrain the word to that good affection or motion of the mind,
whereby a man wishes that only to another, Do to another as thou would he
should do to thee.
which he would gladly should betide himself: and again, would not that any
thing should fall on any other, which he would should not fall on himself: the
which (indeed) we grant a particular point of this virtue, but not that which
comprehends it, except we would conclude the whole within some certain
parts of the same. Therefore Lactantius approaches nearer to the verity:
affirming Justice to be that virtue which has both Piety and Equity, Piety
and equity.
the first whereof respects the holy Religion and right GODS service; the
second, the honor and benefit of man.

Another allotteth unto Justice, Equality, Equality.
Medietie Medietie.
and Stabilitie, Stabilitie.
defining it to be a constant and perpetual will, which gives to every one
his right: and it is called a will, for that the Art of Justice is voluntary,
and not constrained: for then were it not a virtue.

Constant, to design the stabilitie of the good purpose, 3. perpetual, to
declare the perseverance of the Action: and again, this perpetual will is
double, as first in the consideration of the action of the just persons which
lasts for ever, as the will of god, next of the part of the Object, Ansel. his
definition of Justice. Maiori reuerentiam, part concordiam, etc.
which would ever in some sort be doing somewhat. But Anselmus makes this more
plain, defining Justice to be that liberty of the mind which duly yields
to every one his proper dignity: As to an elder reverence, to an equal
concord, to an inferior discipline; to God obedience, to thy self holiness: to
an enemy patience: to the needy the work of mercy. For all these good
fruits the Tree of Justice yields, being (indeed) all, Obedientia secundum
legem seu virtus congruentia cum tota lege: seu eum Deo. All virtues contained
in Justice.
and so much as the law of God requires. And therefore it has bin also not
amiss defined, An obedience according to the Law: or a virtue agreeable with
the total Law, or with God. In such an acceptance the Philosophers have under
this word understood all Virtues, yea, and the same which they call Virtue.
Therefore as Chaeremon (after Theogius in his Elegies) said, that Prudence
contained in her all good things: so the famous Aristotle wrote of Justice,
that she summarily comprehended all virtues. Arist. li. mor. Nico.
The same has Plato in his Dialogues, En de dicaiosynem sullabden pas, aret,
estin: and no doubt to this scope aimed the learned Latin Poet, when he said;
Discite Iustitiam moniti, and non temuere Diuos, Virgil.
howsoever the Commentor on Alciatus Emblemes has constrained the
signification thereof to the moral virtues.

To be brief, The acceptance of the word Justice in the holy Scriptures.
howsoever the word has been or is taken, either for the Justice of Nature,
or of the Law, or of manners, or for any other particular virtue or habit,
either private or public, it is certain that the word absolutely placed in
the holy Scriptures (especially in the old Testament) notes not only that
divine motion which is agreeable with the law of God, which is enkindled of
the spirit of God, by the which a man resemble the image of God, in the which
he was created: but the fear of God, obedience to the Law, holiness,
integrity, honesty, goodness, and grace: and therefore (as the Genus or
general voice of all virtues) it has been rightly opposed to the Hebrew
Reschayah, or Greek Adikia, that is Injustice, the general voice of all
malice, transgression, guiltiness, profanity, impiety, naughtiness, and vice.

Thus therefore the holy Psalmist places those two words opposite the one to
the other; Thou (speaking to God, Psalm. 45.
love Justice or Righteousness, and hate Iniquity or naughtiness. The
same observes Saloman, Justice preserves the upright: but Wickedness
overthrows the sinner. In which two places there is found a diverse
acceptance, and reward, according to the diversity of the persons and their
contrary qualities: God loves the one, he hates the other: the one he
saves, the other he destroys: for thus being contrary in nature and
quality, they may not partake the like life and lot.

And as in those two words, namely Justice and Injustice, or Righteousness
and wickedness, has been well observed the odds and difference between all
virtue and all vice: so by two other words of the same roots, is set forth
the contrariety between the persons in whom those contrary qualities reign
and bear sway: the first whereof has the Hebrew Tzadic, expounded by the
Greek Dicaios, by the Latins Iustus, and by us translated, A Just, or
Righteous person. Such as was Abel, and Noah, and Abraham, and Lot, and
Zachary, and Elizabeth, and James, and other like, who although as being men
they were not free from original guilt, were nevertheless before many others
clothed in the habit of virtue, accepted with the Lord, approved by an
honest life before men, and set forth for examples of imitation, to the
posterity. The second word is Raschay, and is translated by the Apostle,
Adocamos, that is, unjust, wicked, unquiet, a troubler, a seditious and damned
person. Such as was Cayne, and Nimrod, and Esau, and Saul, and Judas, and their
like, whose iniquities and naughty natures are depainted forth to be
abandoned. And of this contrariety, under those two words, we have many
testimonies both in the old and new Testament. Abraham (speaking to the Lord
touching the overthrow of the wicked Sodomites, amongst whom as yet inhabited
righteous Lot) said: Genesis 18.23.
And will thou destroy the lust with the unjust? the righteous with the wicked?
And shall Catzadic Caraschay the righteous be as the wicked? that be far from
thee. David also in the Psalm, by the same words makes the like common
difference between those two contrary persons and their lives, the which
having described, thus concludes: For the Lord knows the way of the
righteous, and the way of the ungodly shall perish. Psalm. 1.6. Prou. 12. Verse.
2.5.6 16.12.13 14.21 26. Eccle. 3.17.
Solomon no less then nine times in one Chapter of his Proverbs, puts the like
difference under the same words, between those unlike persons. And in his
Preacher he says: I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous and the
ungodly. Finally, to those two persons, as to those of a far contrary
constitution, nature, quality, and life, the Son of God, both applies a
far contrary title, and also to either of them gives a contrary reward: when
to the one (that is the Righteous) he says, Come ye blessed of my father,
receive the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. And to
the other, (that is the wicked and ungodly) he says, Depart ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. But hereof we shall
speak somewhat more in the combination of those two virtues, Justice and
Mercy, hereafter in place convenient.

The holy man Job speaking of this Virtue, declares what the same is, with the
true use thereof in his own person. Job. 29.14.
I put on Justice and it covered me, and judgment was as a Roabe and Crown.
For the godly being clothed in this habit, have therein neither rent nor
seame, being artificially wrought and composed of many golden threedes; as
Faith, Love, Charity, Hope, Prudence, Chastity, Diligence, Liberality,
Mercy, Goodness, and other like: the which in the Apocalips are called the
pure raines of the Bride: Apo. 19.8
and interpreted in the Plural number, the Iustifications of the Saints.

In regard hereof, Noah was witnessed to be (Isch tzadic tamim) A man righteous
and perfect, Genesis 6.9.
or righteous of perfections, that is, just and merciful: in the which sense
Christ calls him a just man, which is a man of mercies. The prophet Ezechiel
Ezec. 18.5
describes such a man generally, in two points, that is, he forsakes evil,
and he does that which is good: and then (soon after) he numbreth up certain
particular virtues, alluding as to that of David in the first and fifteen
Psalms. And thus the wise Collectors of Salomons Ecclesiasts, Gal. 12, 13.
having declared his contempt of the studies, devises, and vanities of worldly
men, reduced all his particular and sundry precepts touching man's righteousness
and perfection, unto two general heads: that is to say; Fear God, and keep his
commandments: the which (as they testify) is the whole duty of a man, as
whereof he is esteemed just. Noah was just, and walked with God. Genesis 6.
And this was notably expressed in that excellent commendation which the holy
Scriptures give unto that righteous man Noah, before mentioned, who having the
habit of virtues, walked with God: which is so much to say, as that he had
conformed himself, or applied himself in all things to the Lord: the which may
be well gathered of the word Hithhalech, which being coniugated in the Hebrew
Hithpael, has a reciprocal signification, and notes, that Noah dedicated,
consecrated, applied, and conformed himself unto God: that is, in holiness,
righteousness, and perfections. Lo, thus we see what is meant by the word
Justice, or Righteousness.

Nevertheless, as one thing ought to be considered with another, that thereof
wisdom may be had: we must note, This is not wrought of man's ability: but
by God.
that yet there is no righteousness, no justice, no virtue, no perfection, nor
any meet conformity of man to the divine image, that is either wrought or
effected in man, of man's own wit, wisdom, study, industerie, action or
merit: for thereof is man utterly deprived, seeing that every man is a liar, a
vain thing, and being a sinner, has ever need of the grace and mercy of God:
but all the ability, wisdom and sufficiency of man, and every good gift,
comes down from him that says unto his people: I made thee that thou
should serve me; that is, God Almighty, to whom belongs the kingdom, the
power, and the glory for ever. For as the learned Doctor says: In omni opere
bono, non nos incipimus and postea dei omnia adiuvamur, Aug. in Psalm. 51.
etc. In every good work, we our selves do not first begin the same, and
then afterward are assisted by the mercy of God: but it is he, that first
inspireth both our faith and love toward him, without any of our good deserts
preceding. And seeing that this virtue (as it is said) is a divine motion
inspired into man's heart, I remember that David praying to God for the same,
did first desire God, Psalm. 51.10.
to Create a new heart within him. As if he should say; That which must steed
me in this matter, must come from above, neither is there any thing in mine
heart already that can be made to serve in this business, therefore it is
needful, not that my old heart be renewed, but that I have another heart, not
made or framed of the old, but created: to the which also (o Lord) I beseech
thee to renew within me thy spirit, which I have enjoyed heretofore of thine
especial love and favor toward me. Therefore although the Lord both
commands and commends the labor and diligence of man, as the means whereby
he is willing to exhibit us his graces: yet do all our labors and diligence
nothing profit us therein, except there be both love and grace in the Giver,
that is, in God, who justifies and frames man's heart to his Image and will,
for the sake of his son. For this grace and mercy proceeding from that divine
love, does ever prevent us, and go before our faith, our love, our virtues, our
Justice. Yea, this is the same whereby we have further engendered in our
hearts, and made able to apprehend that Justice, the which as a good Tree
grows and buddeth and bears fruit: namely, all those godly virtues,
qualities, and actions which are required of that man whom the Lord has
justified. And therefore in our justification, Two things in our Iusttification.
there is not only the faith of the Belieuer, but also the grace of him that
justifies. This meat our Savior when in his Doctrine he said: Ioh. 15.
Without me ye can do nothing: that is, ye cannot bring fourth any manner
fruit, either healthful or profitable, neither are ye able to do any good
work acceptable to the Lord, except ye believe in me, and by your faith remain
in me. And hereof is it, that when Saint Paul speaks of man's justification,
being very wary that nothing thereof be yielded to man's works or merits, he
says that we are justified, sometimes by grace, sometimes by mercy, sometimes
by faith approaching grace: for it is most certain (as Augustine says again)
that the grace is of him that calls; Ad Sympli. g. 2. vocantis est Gratia,
etc. Grace and faith.
and the good works follow him which has received that grace: neither yet
are the works such as obtain grace, but such as proceed of grace. And this
he makes plain by a notable Simbole or similitude: For the fire (says he)
scaldeth not that it may be hoate: but therefore because it is hoate: nor
therefore runs well the wheel that it may be round, but for that it is
already round: So no man works well that he may thereby receive grace: but
therefore he works well because he has already obtained it: for how can he
live justly, which has not bin justified? how can he live holily, who has not
been sanctified? So said Augustine, alluding to the words of Christ: First make
the tree good, and then the fruit will be good: for a good man from the good
treasure of his heart brings forth that which is good: but on the other
side, ye can not gather figs of thistles: the evil man from the evil
treasure of his heart, brings forth that which is evil: and how can ye
think, or speak, or do well, when your selves are evil? By this we see, that
howsoever our adversaries would that our perfect justice should depend on our
works: that no work (seem it never so good before men) is a perfect work of
Justice, except it be wrought by the person justified. Whereof it was said,
that the very Prayers of the ungodly are turned into sin: Neither may we
imagine, No good work but that which follows grace.
that any work, endeavor, study, thought, or Action, is either acceptable to
the lord, or profitable for man's soul, without this precede^t grace which
proceeds from the eternal love of God in his son: the Which we may explane
by a familiar example, (though taken from an heathen History) without just
offense. Valerius Maximus, Valor. Max. Lib. 2.
among his examples of memorable deeds, makes mention of one Liuius Torquatus
Manlius, a noble Consul of Rome, and of his Son ^ right valiant and courageous
gentleman. This gentleman (says he) being of a courageous mind, went forth
with his men of War, and waged battle against another Nation, his fathers
enemy, but without his said fathers leave, favor, or know^edge, and thereof
got the victory, and a famous conquest in the judgment of all men, who at his
return home praised his valiant exployt and noble action, with the highest
applause, the which they all hoped would not only be confirmed, but also
tripled by his most noble father. Howbeit, Torquatus contrary both to their
hope, and his expectation, did not only presently unfold his great dislike of
his son, who adventured to go forth without his will and consent (and so in
his disgrace) but also all the action and great exploit of his adventure, for he
commanded him to be slain for a sacrifice. Satius iudicaus, patrem forti
filio, quam patriam mili^ari disciplina, carere: Judging it better that a
father wanted such a valiant son, then that the country should be deprived of
her military discipline. In like manner, we should beware, that we presume not
to get credit with the Lord by any work that we shall endeavor to do, without
his grace and good will preventing us, or to think, that we can be righteous,
holy and acceptable unto him, but that he first justify us in his son. And
truly, besides this memorable example, the very experiment of men's dealing
(after the course of nature and reason) informs us of those things.

The order of Noah's approbatio^. Genesis 6.8.9
But passing by them, let us again return to those examples and Testimonies of
the holy Scriptures, and therein, first consider the method and order of the
righteousness and approbation of Noah. It is reported of him: First, that he
found Secondly, that he was a Thirdly, that he was perfect. Fourthly, he walked
with God. In that he found grace, Abraham, who being first loved and graced of
God, did by the divine gifts of faith, apprehend that grace, by the which he
pleased the Lord God, in that which he did, answereable to that commandment of
the Lord: Genesis 17.1
I am God all sufficient, walk before me, and be thou perfect. This
considered, the Apostle writing to the Hebrews: Heb. 13.28
Let us (says he) retain grace: to what end? that thereby we may serve God,
to to please him with reverence and fear. As if he should add: for without
this grace, we may neither serve nor please God, as he requires.

But on the other side we find, The works of the Jewish Hypocrites.
not only by the testimony of the Prophets; but also of the lord Jesus
himself, that albeit the Jews did many great works, made mighty shows of
integrity and perfection, offered up many Sacrifices and oblations, used much
prayer, Almes-deedes, fastings: and observed many ceremonies of the Law, and
traditions of their Elders, with wonderful devotion: they were nevertheless
both blamed and condemned for Hypocrites, with this saying: Isa. 1.11.12.14.
Mat. 9.
But Who has required those things at your hands? Go ye, and learn what
this means: I will (have mercy,) and not those sacrifices. For the Lord would
that their hearts should first be graced and conformed to his will, by faith,
apprehending his grace, of and by the which, they might be justified and well
approved in his sight. Therefore, 1. Sam. 15
although King Saul gave a glorious pretense to the honor of God, when having
subdued Agag the Amalakite, he reserved part of the spoil to be offered up in a
burnt Sacrifice to the Lord of heaven: yet because his heart was not well
qualified by grace going before, whereof he might have taken his approbation
with the Lord, he was not only nothing commended, but much blamed and
threatened to be cast off from the kingdom of Israel. For had he been graced,
he would have believed, and having believed, he would have obeyed; and in his
obedience pleased the Lord, which offreth his grace, and would not that we
should receive the same in vain.

Righteousness is the effect of Justification.
These things well considered we find that righteousness or Justice, is the very
effect or fruit of that Justification of man before God, of the which we shall
have occasion to speak hereafter. And thus have we seen, what it is which the
Lord God requires of us, and what we are to yield him under this word Justice,
or Righteousnesses. Neither may we doubt, but as those persons of virtue and
prowes in all ages, Io. 12.26.
have been though worthy of honor among the children of men^ the Lord will
reward and crown those his graces and works in us, as if they were not his,
but ours: as not only the holy scriptures warrant us, but the examples of his
Saints and children remembered in the same for our consolation, sufficiently
confirm. In regard whereof, they have attributed to this noble Virtue many
princely prerogatives: as that (among others) she yields to her lovers and
followers, Honor, life, glory, security, goodness, peace, quietness, co^stancy,
boldness, consolation, prosperity, and the highest felicity, through Jesus the
true king of righteousness.

CHAP. IIII. Of the word Mercy; the second member of the requested Subject.
THe word which the Prophet Hoseyah uses in this place, is Chesed, which we
find diversely translated, and so accepted, according to that whereunto it is
applied and used: as sometimes for good will, kindness, humanity, or friendship.
In which sense, Abraham meant it, when he said unto his wife Sarah: Genesis 12.13
and 20.13.
This Mercy shall thou show me, wheresoever I come, that thou say thou art my
Sister. Sometimes for remission and pardon of sins, clemency, benignity: As the
Prophet Isay says; Let the ungodly man forsake his own ways: so shall the
Lord have mercy upon him: Isay. 55.7.
for he is very ready to forgive. And this (as it seems) Cicero expounded in
the word Mercy, when speaking in the commendation of Caesar (as also Augustine
cites it) he said: Nulla de virtutibus tuis, nec admirabilior, nec gration
Misericordia est. Cicer. August. in lib. de ciui dei, Affectio Amoris, Storge.
There is not any one of all thy virtues, either more praise worthy, or more
acceptable the^ Mercy. Sometimes for that affection of love, whereby the
parents are naturally touched toward their children, and again the children
toward their parents: the friend toward his friend, the brother toward his
brother, and the neighbor toward his neighbor: sometimes for Alms deeds,
and such like: whereof examples may be taken from many places in the holy
Scriptures. Indeed, the word Chesed, comprehends al those particular virtues,
Chesed, or Mercy.
being as the Species or branches thereof: but yet I find not that the same
which the word signifies in his large acceptance, can be either comprehended
or fully expressed in any of those particulars, no more then the whole can be
contained within any one part thereof. More aptly the general word Bonitas
Bonitas.
or Goodness well contains it: for this may be extended to every virtue,
especially to Mercy, by the which it is expressed. Therefore the Mercy of God
is often called his goodness, and himself being the highest Good, is called
Merciful: for that by Mercy his goodness is worthily declared toward all his
Creatures. In the like sense we name them good men, whose Christian love and
charity to and for others, are made apparent in the works of Mercy.

But to avoid those doubts which might rise of the diversity of translations,
that shall best content us, which not only the Septuagint have yielded, but
also that the Lord Jesus himself (by the testimony of the Evangelist) has
confirmed, saying; Hose. 6.6. Mat. 9.13 and 12.7. In Moral. The definition of
Mercy.
Volo misericordiam, I will have Mercy.

This word (after Cregory) accepted in his common signification, is made misero
cord: that is, of an afflicted or troubled heart, which either being
sorrowful for another misery, takes on him compassion: or as wretched,
requires and needs the pity and relief of others. Basil Basil. in Psalm.
114.
amplifieth the same, saying; it is a certain passion, proceeding from the
compassionate, toward them which are unworthily and by just means afflicted.
But because this virtue is not perfected, but in that whereby it is declared,
Augustine has a definition thereof, including either member with effect. Mercy
(says he) is the affection of the mind condoling, with some addition of a
benefit, as whereby we may both take compassion of our afflicted neighbor,
and help to relieve him with that which is our own. The which definition has
four principal branches; The first whereof is, that Mercy is an affection of
the mind, against the opinion of them which place this virtue only in
external actions. For neither are those to be esteemed virtues, which have not
their original in the heart or mind of man. Therefore as Wisdom says, Give
me thine heart: So those Scribes and Pharisees were rejected of the Lord, and
their works reprobated, because whiles they seemed to honor him with their
lips, their hearts were far away. The next is, that Mercy is that affection
of the mind which condoleth, that is, sorroweth and lamenteth together, with
and for another. Or as Augustine again said: Aliena miseriae in nostr^
corpore compassio, the compassion of another misery in our own bodies. In
such sort, Jeremy pittieth and lamenteth the wretched condition of his people,
and Christ sorrowed together with Martha and Mary, lamenting their brothers
death. Thirdly, in this definition is found somewhat added of our benevolence,
whereof our destressed neighbor might be relieved, comforted, or eased: for it
little helps the afflicted that we condole with him in his condition, except
that also we exhibit and bestow somewhat, whereof he might hope for remedy
or relief. To this the Apostle persuading, said: we should remember the words
of the Lord Jesus; that it is better to give, then to receive. Acts. 20. Io. 6.
Thus the Lord had not only compassion on the people, which wandered as sheep
without a shepherd: but gave them for their comfort the bread, both for their
souls and their bodies. The fourth the afflicted for his comfort, not another
ma^s goods, but that which is our own. For if we take from one man and give to
another, we shall declare our selves cruel, whiles we would seem merciful.
And thus should the good affection of the merciful mind be expressed in those
actions and deeds, which are not only called, but are indeed the works of
Mercy. Gregory Grego. his 3. terms.
would that those works should be contained in Giving, counsailing, and
teaching: but Lyra Lyra 3.
better comprehends them, in the helping or releeuing others with our wealth,
with our works, and with our Counsel. But best of all our Lord and Savior
Christ persuading to this right excellent virtue, Christ his 4. points of
Mercy.
teaches me^, first to love, next to bless, thirdly to work, fourthly to
pray. Yea, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you: do good to them that
hate you, and pray for them which hurt you. In another place be sets down
four other words to express this virtue: Mat. 5.14
viz First, Judge not: secondly, condemn thirdly, forgive. Fourthly give. An^
finally, in an I was hungry, ye gave me meat. 2. Thirsty and ye gave me
drink 3. Harbourles, and ye took me in. 4. Naked, and ye clothed me. 5.
Sick, and ye visited me. 6. A prisoner, and ye comforted me. To the which, some
others have added one other work of mercy, and made in all, the number seven,
aptly comprehended in this Monostich.

7. works of mercy
Visito, poto, cibo, redimo, tego, colligo, condo: that is; To visit, to give
drink, to feed, to redeem, to cloth, to harbor, to bury. But because this
belong rather ^o th'externall action, then to the mind, and therefor may not
fully express the whole virtue (al^hough they declare her in the works) some
others combyning this latter, with those former words of Christ, do gather
both from the one and ^he other, fourteen branches of this tree: 14. Branches
of Mercies tree.
whereof ^euen may be applied to the exercise of the body, and seven to the
affection of the mind, and comprehended them all in this Tristich.

Voslio, poto, cibo, tectum do, visito, soluo,
Comodo, compatior, converto, dono, remitto:
Arguo, supplico, consulo, do quoque quodque talentum.
To cloth, to give to drink, to feed, to harbor,
To visit, to pay, to lend, to pity, to convert,
To bestow, to remit, to reprove, to beseech,
To counsel, to give of whatsoever good thing I have.
Now this must not be forgotten, that as we may not unjustly take from one to
bestow in Alms on another: so, whiles we endeavor to declare our good
affections by our good works, we have a care to do those works well, Do good
works well.
least they loose their proper grace: remembering this, that when Christ spoke
of Alms and the works of Mercy, he advised his Disciples to observe three
things; As first, a good affection: secondly, a convenient handling: thirdly, a
good end: that is, that first the heart and mind be well constituted in love,
faith, and the Divine fear: next, that the persons, times, places, and
occasions, be duly regarded: thirdly, that the whole be referred to the glory
of God, the good of our brethren, and the discharge of profane duty, the
first whereof notes heavenly wisdom, the second godly discretion, the the
third grateful obedience, the beautiful ornaments of a faithful and
merciful person.

Moreover, as the virtue Mercy, is an affection of a condoling mind, as that
whereby man is touched or moved toward man, it is requisite to consider (with
the semblable discretion) to what kind of persons this affection is extended.

To whom Mercy is extended.
As it was before said, that it respects the miserable condition of the
wretched and afflicted person. But there be which would constrain this Virtue,
(or rather the effect of this Virtue) to four sorts: as namely, to the Poor,
the Righteous, the Widows, the Elders: respecting the poor, for their
poverty: the Righteous, for their innocence: the Widows, for their
insufficiency: the Elders, for their reverence. Pro. 12.10
Against the which kind of persons, the unmerciful and cruel in all ages have
bent their fury and rage, saying: (as in the Book of Sapience Sap. 2.
) Let us oppress the Poor: Let us persecute the Righteous: Let us wring the
Widows, and let us not spare the hoare heads.

Gal. 6.10.
But Saint Paul, speaking of our good works (meaning no doubt the works of
mercy) exhorts us to do good to all men, but chiefly, to the household of
faith: wherein he would that we should extend the fruits of mercy,
especially to the godly: but yet so, that we ought not neglect all others, or
withdraw our willingness of doing good unto all that need the same. In the
which (no doubt) he had an eye to the Doctrine of his Master, who in his true
exposition of the Law, Mat. 5. and 6. and 7.
wills that this goodness be extended even to our enemies: as (it is before
remembered) Love your enemies: Bless them that curse you: do good to them that
hate you pray for them which hate and persecute you: Following therein the
example of our heavenly father, who makes his Sun to shine as well on the
evil, as on the good: and gives rain both to the just and unjust: and is
merciful unto all. To this he adds a reason; For if ye love and do good to
them, that love and do good to you, what reward have you? do not the
Publicans even the same? To and for this, we have also the examples of many
good men: as of Abraham, whose good deeds Ghrist commends: of Lot in Sodom,
of Noah in the old world, of Moses in Egypt, of David in Israel, of Nehemiah
Neh. 1.4.5.6.15.
in Iudeah. And in the new Testament (besides Zachary, Elizabeth, Lydia,
Cornelius, Labitha, Anna, Martha, Mary, Paul, Stephen, and such,) we have the
most perfect example of the Lord Jesus himself, who though God became, and
dyed for man to bring him to life, even then, when man was sinful and an enemy
unto him.

CHAP. V. The general signification of the word Mercy.
AS the word Justice or Righteousness before mentioned (as so placed alone)
has a very large signification, comprehending (as in one word) the sum and
habit of all virtues, and so the whole duty of a man: even so, this Word
Chesed or Mercy (in the like sort accepted) is extended to the same; but yet
so, as that therein Justice is declared and perfected. For Mercy, The mercy of
God.
as it is applied to the Lord, signifies not only his free remission and
pardon of our sins (as it is before said) but also all those good motions,
ways, blessings, graces, and means which he bestows, uses and applies to
the calling home, redemption, and preservation of them whom in his eternal
love he has elected and predestined to life in his son Jesus. Thereof the
Lord says (by the Prophet Jeremy) I have loved thee with an everlasting love:
therefore in Mercy have I drawn thee: Ier. 31.3.
yea, under this word (and that most commonly) in the holy Scriptures, are
signified all and singular those graces, bounties, benefits, blessings, and
whatsoever good things the Lord our God of his mere love, favor and good will,
powers forth and bestows on men, being indeed the effect and fruit of his
divine and eternal love to his Saints in Christ. This word therefore used the
holy Patriarch, Jacob, when returning from Mesopotamia, and considering how
rich and bountiful the Lord his God had been unto him in love, graces, and
manifold benefits, far beyond all his deserts or worthiness, he confessed and
said: Catontimickol hachasadim: Genesis 32.10 and 33.11
that is: I am far unworthy all those Mercies. This king David very often
acknowledged under the same word Chesed. Of such a force is it, as it is justly
applied unto our good God, whose mercy is said to comprehend all his works.

In like manner, the same being applied to man, The mercy of man.
and especially to that duty which is required of man toward man, signifies
not only those particular Species or kinds of Justice, as humanity,
benignity, benevolence, kindness, gratitude: or that Sogyn or affection of
love, or that work of mercy, which we call almsdeeds, or pardon of
trespasses, or such like (before mentioned) as in any part or member thereof:
but all and every those loving affections, godly words, holy actions, good
deeds, and commendable things whatsoever to the which a true Christian is
worthily invited, persuaded, and directed within that love of his neighbors,
contained and commanded in the second Table of the divine Law, and confirmed
both by the Doctrine and example of our Lord Christ, as that whereby true love
and charity is expressed, performed, and perfected with effect. The holy
Psalmist speaking of the righteous man, Psalm 37.21
says; The Righteous is Merciful: as if this were the fruit which so good a
tree yielded, he is Righteous, Ergo, he is merciful, or he is unmerciful: for
he is righteous. Therefore is the word taken for the very definition of
Justice, Megaudes in. 2. Tim. 2 Caiu. in Hos. 12.
because that therein only, that general virtue so often commanded and
commended in the holy Scriptures, is apparently expressed and perfected, as the
cause by his effects. The Apostles have commonly for this word, used Agape,
Love, or Charity, comprehending all the fruits of faith, and man's whole
duty: against the which is opposed a word which signifies distraction,
cruelie, uncharitableness, unmercifulness, oppression, spoiling, and the
effects of malice. As it is said of the old world; the earth was filled with
cruelty. Genesis 6. Pro 22. Psalm. 50. Mercy and perfection. Mat. 5 48 Luke 6.36.
The ungodly are cruel, and pertakers with thieves, robbers, or oppressors.
Finally, we may observe that in the Sermon of Christ: Saint Luke calls that
Perfection, which Saint Luke calls Mercy: ye shall therefore be perfect, as
your father in heaven is perfect. Be ye therefore merciful, as your father
also is merciful. By the which as he means one thing, so he would that men,
(under this word Mercy,) should be perfect in all goodness, though not in
measure or quantity, yet of nature and quality, like unto God our heavenly
father. And to this are we invited by the Prophet Hosey, Hos. 10 12
when he says, Reap ye according to the measure of mercy. And by the Lord
Jesus, citing the Prophets words; I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: which
is, as if he said: Mat. 9.13 and 12.7.
All your sacrifices and oblations nothing please me, whiles I find you to be
cruel, uncharitable, and unmerciful one toward another: yea whiles I find
no goodness nor perfection in you, conformable to the image of God. But on the
other side: If ye do justly, love mercy, humble your selves, and walk with
God: Mich. 6.8
as Noah, Enoch, Abraham, and others, the godly and faithful in their times
have done: then will I accept your Sacrifices, not only with your Mercy, but
in regard thereof, as the right effect of so good a cause.

And so much touching those two virtues: Justice and Mercy, as either of the
words are absolutely placed, and so commonly accepted in the holy Scriptures.

CHAP. VI. 1. Of Justice and Mercy conjoined. 2. And of such their acceptance
for the use of Piety.
AS we often find those two words ( Justice and Mercy, disioyned and set a
part: so also we find them often conjoined: the which (after the first sight)
should seem, Hos. 10 12
that the former signify the thing Isay. 55.
as elsewhere it is said: Let the unrighteous man forsake his own ways: so
shall the Lord be merciful unto him: so the Lord should here say by his
Prophet: Sow to your selves for Righteousness: and then shall ye reap
according to the measure of mercy. Howbeit, although I will not utterly impugn
that sense: yet (consenting with the best) it is certain, that the Prophet (as
well here as elsewhere) inviteth the Lords people not only to the former, but
also to the latter, in both the which conjoined, and enjoined to man,
consists Omnis summa Christiana Disciplinae and Religionis: the sum of all
Christian discipline

Justice and Mercy. Isay. 57.1.
The Prophet Isaiah conioyneth the words thus: The righteous man perishes, and
no man regards it in his heart. The men of Mercy are taken away, Pro. 21.21
and no man considers it. Solomon has this combination: Who so loves
Righteousness and Mercy, finds Life, Righteousness, and Honor. Daniel in
his good Counsel to Nebucadnezar, Dan. 4.27.
makes this conjunction, Break off thy sins by Righteousness, and thine
iniquities by Mercy to the poor. Micheas the Prophet in his Chain lincketh
them together thus: He has showed thee (o man) what is good, and what the
Lord requires of thee, Mich. 6.
namely to do Justice, and to love Mercy. The like has Zachary, saying in
the Name of the Lord: They shall be my people, Zach. 8.8.
and ^ will be their God, in Righteousness and Mercy. To ^e short, Christ Jesus
in the new Testament, Mat. 5.
ha^ing pronounced them happy that hunger and ^hirst after Righteousness, by
and by added: Blessed ^e the Merciful. In this, and many other places, we
find not only the apt conjunction and commendation of those two virtues so
placed: but ^lso the glorious reward of the same annexed ^hereto, as that
which orderly follows the peer^esse plough of Piety in the true use.

And truly, as we have found for the former, 2 Examples of practice.
^s Justice and Mercy disioyned and set apart, and for ^ither of them (besides
the testimonies) many no^able examples of practice, so also have we for those
^oth conjoined, as wherein the Saints of yore de^laring themselves (as the
children of the highest) Righteous and Merciful, Heb. 11.
have in their times been well reported of (as the Apostle says writing to the
Hebrews) and left behind them, not only a perpetual memory of their Piety,
but also the like instru^tion and example thereof to all others in posteri^ie,
who seeing and considering well of those ver^ues and holy perfection, might be
thereby occasioned to follow them therein to the high praise of God, and their
own souls health. Gen 6.
It is therefore ^eported of Noah, that he was not only a righ^eous man, but
also that he was perfect and walked with God: Abraham being a righteous man, Genesis
18,
declared himself merciful in his kindness to the Sodomites, to Lot, Genesis 18.
to the Angels, to Strangers, and in a word in many such works of Mercy. Job.
1 8. Epoc. 32.3^.32.
The like may be easily found and approved in the holy man Job: in Moses the
servant of God: in David the King in the noble Captain Nehemias, Neh. 1.4. and
58.10 11.16.
in good Tobiah: Tob 1. Luke 1. Mat. 1.
in the Priest Zachary, and his wife: In Symeon the^ just and godly man: in
Joseph the husband of Mary: and (to pass by many others) beyond all, the
Justice of the Lord has been mixed with mercy, in the admirable redemption of
mankind, in and by the means and merit of his son Jesus, in whom also these
virtues, as in the image of the father, have and do ever shine, and declare
themselves to the glory of God, and eternal benefit of his elected Saints.

3 A double Justice.
Thirdly, finding these words with semblable examples thus conjoined and of
such affinity, we may well perceive how the Prophet aymeth to that double
Justice required of man: that is, not only to that contained and commanded in
the second; but also in the first Tabie of the divine law: by the which men
might observe that word of Christ: Pelican. in Prou. 21. Gual. in Hos. 10.
To make not only the fruit good: but first the Tree, and then the fruit,
whereby the Tree is known and approved. For except the Tree be first good, there
comes thereof no good fruit. Whereby we see this matter likened to a Tree
with her fruit. The Tree is our Justice, The Tree of Justice.
the fruit is our Mercy: in the former is respected Justification: in the
latter Sanctification: And this necessarily follows the former, as the fruit,
the Tree: if the Tree be good. Whereof I may say, that the former produces
Justification, and the latter, Opera Iustficati, the works of the person
justified. For the former (which is the Tree, whereof mercy springs) it is
doubtless that Righteousness of God, Justice is approved.
which being perfect and blameless, holy, and sound in it self, was yet never
reprehended or reproved by the wisdom of God, nor justly condemned by the
children of of me^: but has bin, and is, and shall be (by ^he ^a ra^t of holy
Scripture) worthelie justified, approved, and commended by God and his Saints,
and not denied, but rather acknowledged and confessed, even by the very Devils
and ungodly persons, though against their wills, by the constrainte of the
spirit of truth, to the glory of God, and the consolation of the godly.

But Christ has said: of Righteousness, Job. 16.8.9.
because they believe not in him. This indeed is true, neither may the word of
Christ be thought to contrary ^he word of the Prophet in this place: for we
must understand, that our Lord distinguishes of ^he word Righteousness or
Justice: and as a learned ^ather writes, Nisi esset institia falsa; Iustitia
Dei ^on diceretur vera, were there not a false Justice, the justice of God
should not be called the true Iu^^ice. But the Justice of God is called (as it
is indeed) the true Justice: therefore there is some other Justice, which is
the false Justice, and liable to that reprehension of the holy Ghost, neither
(as the case now stands) is there any Righteousness either natural, moral,
legal, pharisaicall, or political in man, which may be justly exe^pted from
the same. No Justice approved, but that which is of God, 1. Cor. 1.19.
For the natural Justice was lost in Adams fall: the moral, wanting faith, by
man's concupiscence is sinful: the legal, is abandoned by transgression: the
pharisaicall reprobated by hypocrisy: and the political is by lewd foolishne^
opposed to the Justice and wisdom of God. The maine reason of this
reprobation of man's justice, is the want of says, as Christ witnesses:
(because they believe not in me) without the which whatsoever is done, Job.
16.1^
is condemned for a sin, seem the same never so goodly to the eyes and
judgment of men. But that whereto the Prophet Hoseas exhorts, is that
Righteousness of God, and the true and perfect Justice of the LORDS Elect, Hos.
10.
after the which as from a cause, there follow for effects good Actions, good
endeavors, good works, and an holy and sound life, in and by the which a man
is justified and commended before men, as he is justified and commended in the
sight of God by the former: The former is called Justice: the latter is called
Mercy. And as the former is taken for the cause, Calu. in Hes. 10.
the latter for the effect, or the one for the tree, the other for the fruit:
so is this latter made the definition of the former, being indeed the very
Symbol or sign, as whereby the Righteousness of God in Christ, by the which we
are approved with him, is plainly expressed and set forth as elsewhere it is
said, that the observation of the second table of the law, plainly testifies
the true performance of the first Table. Therefore, Faith expressed by dec^es.
Matt. ^5.
as well to teach and persuade this unto the Saints, as to comfort and encourage
them in their duty therein, Christ remembers and commends in them, rather
the observation of those works of the second Table, then those of the first;
that is, their works, before their faith, as that whereby indeed their true
faith appeared: therefore he says not, I was hungry, thirsty, naked,
harborles, sick and in prison, and ye believed in me: but he said: I was
thirsty, and ye gave me drink: naked, and ye clothed me: harbourles, and ye
lodged me: sick, and ye visited me: in prison, and ye came unto me. Thus he
commended the work which expressed the faith: for, as a learned father writes
(after the saying of Saint James) Pistis choris ergon necra, hos erga dicha
pisteos. Gre. Naz. Eisto ha^ion baptisma. Iam. ^.18 Matt 5.
Faith is dead without works, even as the works are dead without faith.
Therefore it was the counsel of the same Apostle, that we should declare our
faith by our works, alluding to that Commandment of the Lord: So let your
light shine before men, that they may see your good works, etc.

In this consideration, let us remember that (as I said) the Prophet Hosey
commends to us a double Justice, whereof, the one is before God, the other is
toward and before men. To. 3 2.24.8. 1. Cor: 1 30. Ia^ 2.^^.2^.
Of the former spoke Paul: saying, we are justified by faith: and Christ is
our righteousness. Of the latter spoke James, we be justified by works, and
Abraham was justified by works. And as either of them (as the cause, the time,
the persons, and the occasions required) have duly attributed as well to faith,
as to works, Faith and works.
the due prerogative, and honor of both; so have they taught and esteemed not
only the one, but both of the^ necessary in a godly man.

The first, which is the tree, or cause of the latter, is defined in the New
Testament, Our Righteousness before God of two parts.
to be our Reconciliation with God, by the means of Christ Jesus our Mediator:
Or, our Approbation with the Father, through the merit of the Son. Or, the
free Remission of sins, obtained by them which believe in God, and by the
which, we who who are guilty, God pronou^ceth just, for the sake of his Son.
And this defintiion has two general parts: the one, is remission of sins:
the other, is the imputation of Justice: A remission of our own sins: An
imputation of the Justice of another: wherein, there is a fit allusion to the
order and usage of a gracious Prince, toward his guilty Subject, whom
notwithstanding his fault, he does not only pardon for his offense: but also
does adorn with benefits. The sin is pardoned through him, by whose Justice
and merit we are approved and pronounced Righteous, and that is, not by any
Angel, or man, or any other creature whatsoever (which were not only ashamed,
but also blemished by man's sin) but only in, and by the holy Messiah the Lord
Jesus, who (indeed) for that purpose came down from his Father, and died, and
with his precious blood paid the debt of our transgression, and set us at
liberty: yea, he beautified us with the glorious beauty of himself. Of the
former member of this our Justice, we have a notable testimony of the Lord in
Isaiah: Isa. 53.^1
where he says, My righteous Servant (meaning Christ) shall justify the
multitude with his wisdom: and how? he tells, for he shall bear their
sins. And that approoueth the Apostle: where he says of Christ, that he
bare our sins in his body, 1. Pet: ^.21.14.
hanging on the tree, when there was no guile found in his mouth. To this
belongs that example of the Publican, Luke. 18.
whom the Lord approved before the proud pharisie: for he prayed for pardon for
his sin which he confessed, and that being granted, he was said to be
justified: for his sins were not imputed, and therefore both after the
Testimony of David, and of Paul, he was blessed: To. 4.^.8 Gal. 3.8.
as blessed is that man to who^ the Lord imputes not sin. Of the latter member
of this Justice, the same Apostle speaking, says, that God imputed
Righteousness to the^ that believed: that is, 1. Cor. 1.30.
the Righteousness of Christ, to the faithful: and that he is made unto us of
God, not only wisdom, sanctification and redemption: but also Righteousness:
and in one other sentence, he comprehends either member thus: Christ dyed for
our sins, To: 4.1^.
and he rose again for our justification: that is, he dyed to abolish sin,
and rose again to work our perfect Righteousness.

This is our Righteousness with the Lord, The order of our Justification.
to the which the former Justice must be referred, and the order thereof, in the
merit of the Son of God, is as follows. viz. First, we consider the
eternal love of God to mankind in Jesus Christ before all worlds: according to
that saying: I loved thee with an everlasting love. Secondly, his divine grace
and favor, whereby he powers forth on us of his divine blessings: as of whose
fulness, we all receive grace upon grace. Thirdly, his Mercy, in drawing us
unto him: as he says by the Prophet: By my mercy have I drawn thee unto me.
Fourthlie, the merit of Jesus Christ, working and deserving it in the Justice
of his Father. Fiftlie, his perfect Righteousness, the which of that his love,
grace, mercy, and merit extended unto us, Christ is made ours, and his graces
and virtues esteemed ours, in and by the which, Man's merit excluded.
we are accepted (as is the Son or Mediator) Righteous and glorious before
God. Thus far forth we find man to be utterly excluded, not only from all
merit, but also from all action or means in himself of this Justice, and
therefore has he no cause to boaste, of that which is not found in or of
himself toward his acceptance and Justice before God. Moreover, this
Treasure is not laid up in the frail nature of man; Where Justice dwells.
but in the strong habitacle of the person of Christ, as both in his proper
place, and there where it finds the greatest preservation and safety for our
better benefit. For when Adam had that in his possession, Pro. 3.
after his free will, the subtle Serpent prevented him, and he was justly
deprived thereof in his sin: As if the Lord should thus have said: I will from
henceforth take on my self the protection of this high Treasure, as where it
shall be full safe and surely defended from all danger of loss. And therefore
(in^eed) when he came in the flesh, although he were mightily tempted and
assaulted by the Enemy of man's soul, he was not vanquished or overcome, ^ut
being most strong, he vanquished and subdu^d Satan and all his Angels to his
power, as wher^f he said: The Prince of the world comes, Ioh: 22.3^ and
14.30. and 16.14.
and finds naught in me. Again, Now is the judgment of ^his world, and the
Prince of this world is cast out. Howbeit, the faithful never want, nor are
they denied ^he benefit of this treasure, whenever they look up unto him, and
draw toward his Divine Grace with their Faith, as the Eagles hasten unto their
pray, in and by the which they find peace and rest unto their souls,
howesoeuer they be tempted, persecuted, and afflicted in this miserable world.

Lo: this is that former Justice or Righteousness to the which the Prophet
directs us, when he says, Sow ye to yourselues for Righteousness. Whereof
we have spoken more largely in our A book^ so entitled
Acolastos. Dialogu. 7. vv. and not unworthy the reading of all true
Christians, with godly deliberation and like consideration.

CHAP. VII. The second kind of Justice (which is that of the second Table) is
comprehended in the word Mercy: and necessarily follows the former, in due
order.
THe other kind of Righteousness required of men, What is this kind of Justice.
and defined and set forth in the word Mercy, is the very fruit or effect of
the former, and contains the sum of those virtues, duties, and works of
Charity, contained in the second table of the Law (as it is before said) and
often times expressed in the works of Charity. Agape. Luke 1.74.
This the holy man Zachary calls Holiness, when he says, that we are
delivered from our enemies hand, that we should serve God in holiness and
righteousness. And St. Paul consenting thereto, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.4.
says: This is the will of God, even your holiness: The same meant the Lord,
when he said: Be ye holy, for I am holy. And Christ in one word called it
perfection: saying: Mat. 3.48
Ye shall be perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.

We may not either speak or think otherwise of this virtue, Justice and Mercy.
then we have before (in effect) said and considered thereof, saving that,
whereas before we placed and accepted the same apart by it self, here we place
it together with the former virtue, that is Justice, and accept it as the
definition or effectual fruit thereof: neither may we imagine, that either this
can be without that, or that perfected without this.

When the Lord God had made Adam, and set him in Paradise, yet for that he had
not this help, the Lord pronounced him as imperfect: saying; It is not good
that the man should be alone, Genesis 2.
I will therefore make him an help like unto him. So doubtless, although the
Lord had justified the believer, Acts. 13.
and by the blood of his Son we be delivered from all things, from which by
the law of Moses we could not be justified nor delivered: yet is it not the
Lords will that we should be idle in the field or market place, but his will
is, that we should endeavor that which he of us requires in his law, though
not to that perfection which is needful, (the which we cannot perform) yet
according to that measure of ability which he has to that end given us. To
this did Isaiah Isa. 1.17
the Prophet invite the people, when he said; Learn to do well, seek
judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherles, defend the widows. And
Micheas Mich. 6.
the Prophet saying, Do justly, love mercy. This remembered Daniel, Dan. 4.
in his good counsel to the king Nebucadnezar: Cut off thy sins with
righteousness: he adds: and thine iniquities by mercy to the poor: that is,
Change thy cruelty into mercy; and where as thou art a man profane; be thou
henceforth holy and righteous. To this would S. John the Baptist persuade the
Jews: Ye say ye are Abraham's children and believers: but I would ye should
do the works of the faithful, and bring forth fruits worthy amendment of
life. And S. Paul, after that he had strongly confirmed the foundation of our
Justification by the divine grace accepted by faith, without any the deeds of
the law, that men might not imagine, he condemned those works which proceeded
from the justified man, he omitted not to build, on that foundation, the
excellency of such actions and works, as necessarily follow the justified
man, as the effects usually follow the causes: therefore he says: I beseech
you brethren by the mercifulnes of God, To. 12.1.
that ye offer up your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable serving of God. And this Saint James Iam. 2.
labors to persuade with many mighty arguments, to the^ who thought that a
bare faith had bin enough for a man to come to heaven, although he never
travailed in the way of life by any work: because Paul had preached, that a man
was justified before God by faith, and not by works.

Lo, thus ought the perfect Thumim Thumim. perfection, integrity.
to be made answereable to the bright Vrim, Vrim light or knowledge.
that righteousness which is by Faith in Christ, manifested in Mercy, and that
holiness which proceeds from the influence of the holy Spirit, wherewith they
be baptized which believe, declared before men, that men may see our good
works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven.

And so have we seen what the Lord God requires of us in these two words,
Righteousness and Mercy. Note.
But here I would not, that any man should gather, that because we say that
GOD requires good works, therefore we are able to do those works without
Faith, or can believe without his grace, or can merit life with those our
works, seeing we be all sinners and unprofitable: but so, as those works are
as the effects of good causes: fruits of a good tree, and notes of our
faithful obedience to the Divine will, which we must aim unto, and therein
feeling our great imperfection, depend on the merit of our heavenly Savior
Jesus, who only supplieth all our wantes, and helps the imperfections of the^
that believe, and obey him in truth.

CHAP. VIII. 2. The ways and means prescribed, for the obtaining of
Righteousness and Mercy, in a Metaphor.
AS we have found in the holy Scriptures many duties enjoined man, This is
the 2. member of the 2. division.
to be performed as well toward God, as toward his neighbor: so has the
Lord not only charged and enjoined, but also has provided and exhibited unto
man, the ways and means whereby he may observe and perform those things
after his will: the which ways and means we should neither contemn nor
neglect, if we will not hinder our own salvation, nor declare our selves
ungrateful and rebellious against the Lord our God: The means are to be used.
for as Noah was not preserved in the deluge, without the means of the Arc,
nor Lot delivered from the fire of Sodom, but by the means of the Angels
which brought him forth, and his obedience therein; nor Solomon perfectly wise,
without that study, industry and means, whereby he prospered in favor,
wisdom and stature, both with God and men, because God would it should so
be: so neither may we imagine, that the excellent things can be achieved or
gotten by idleness and sloth, but by the blessing of the Lord, which he uses
to power forth on the studious and diligent in his fear. To the which purpose
belong those commandments, Six days shall thou labor: Ask and ye shall
have, seek and ye shall find, hear the word of the Lord, watch and pray,
be diligent, etc.

Now the ways and means here prescribed us, to obtain righteousness and to be
merciful, is contained and taught us in four several words, noting four
several actions which we are to endeavor and apply on this object, or matter
commended to us. The first word is, Sow ye. The second is, Reap ye. The
third is, Plough ye. The fourth is, Seek ye. As, 1. Sow ye to your selves
for Righteousness. 2. Reap ye after the measure of mercy. 3. Plough up your
fallow ground. 4. Seek ye the Lord.
The first second and third words are metaphorical: and the fourth does
briefly expound the metaphor.

Indeed the prophet tn this chapter before these words took up a Parable A
parable.
(or a similitude drawn from the truth) against the house of Israel, wherein,
Hos: 1^.
having an excellent Metaphor, he yet continues the same: Judah (says he)
shall plough, God teaches men by natural things.
and Iakob shall break the cloddes. Neither was this devised by the Prophet,
without the wisdom and direction of the divine Spirit, who would, that even
by the consideration of those natural and terrene things, men should be taught
to learn their duties, according to the which, ye may hear St. Paul to
acknowledge, that he spoke after the manner of men, (that is, grossly) because of
the infirmity of the Romans, Rom: 6.
to whom he wrote: for he disputed of the things divine by arguments taken from
the members of the body of man, and things terrene. And although the wise
Solomon said right well, Eccle. 1.8.
Col haddaber: Every word or thing is hard, a man is not able to express it:
whereby some have taken occasion to reject the search of those hidden things of
nature (as if that Solomon had in those his words utterly condemned it, as too
deep to be searched, and their presumption too high that attempt it: The
knowledge of Nature.
) yet we know, that as Solomon has not intended any such thing, nor bin
willing to discourage any man from the lawful search of Natures secrets: so
also that the science is right excellent, and so necessary, as without the
which no man shall easily either understand or expound the holy Scriptures,
Luth: in Eccl: ca. 1.
which have from hence such a beauty, as whosoever shall deprive them of those
parables and metaphors taken from the right nature and use of natural things,
shall take from the same an exceeding great light, and like glory.

When Zophar had hardly charged holy Job with high presumption in the search of
Gods secrets and the things Divine: Job Job. 11.7.8. ca. 12.7
answered him thus. Ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee: and the
fowls of heaven, and they shall tell thee: or speak to the earth, and it
shall show thee: or the fishes of the Sea, and they shall declare unto thee:
who is ignorant of all these, but that the hand of the Lord has made them all?
As if the Lord should send wise Zophar, to be instructed by those natural
things, as thus: It is not needful that we should pearce through the height
of the heavens, the breadth of the Sea, and the length of the earth, in the
inquisition of the ordinary wisdom (as thou Zophar have argued) when even
those small beasts which are here conversant with us on the earth, the birds,
and the fishes, and such things, do instruct us of the incomparable wisdom
of the Almighty God.

Therefore, as Moses, Moses and the prophets, and Christ used natural
similitudes.
David, and the prophets, have bin plentifully stored with those things,
thereby the sooner, not only to teach and inform the people, but also to
condemn the rebellions of that time, for their great abominations inferior to
the bruit beasts: so in the new Testament, both Christ and his Apostles have
both worthily observed and commended the same unto us. Thereof it is, that
Christ is called a Rock, a door, a Serpent, a priest, a King, a Prophet, a
Pastor, a Bridegroom, a husband, a captain, a calfe, a lamb, a vine, a worm,
a flower, bread: and the Apostles and disciples of Christ, are called the Salt
of the earth, the light of the world, fishers of men, pastors, builders,
fighters, watchmen, workers, branches of the vine, and such, in and by the
which, are set forth and signified, the diverse actions, offices, degrees,
dignities, functions, and virtues of Christ Jesus and his Saints.

Here the Prophet takes his Metaphore from the labor of the husband men,
whose terms, Sow ye.
and words he boroweth, and to this purpose applies, whereby he would intimate
those three things.

1. First, that there is required a work or labor.

2. Next, that the labor is, of husbandry.

3. Thirdly, that the kind of labor, is plowing, sowing, reaping. And surely
as by this, A labor is enjoined to men.
he would inculcate into their minds the true knowledge of Gods will: so would
he, that they should consider, that to men living in this world, there is
enjoined a labor, with the which they are to be exercised, and not fed with
idle conceits, nor their eyes dazeled with vain shows. We read that Adam in
Paradize was not idle, Genesis 2. and Genesis 3.
but was busied in dressing of the gardein: and that after he fell, he had this
enjoined, that be should live on the earth with sweat and hard labor. And
thenceforth, as this was commanded and commended unto man, as that he should
eat and live of the labors of his hands: so have not only the godly in their
times, but also the very heathen, bin exercised in the honest labors of their
vocations: whereof Paul has gathered and laid down this peremptory law, that
he which labors not, 2. Thessa: 3.10.
should not eat: as if he were unworthy to enjoy the use of any the
creatures, wherein he disdained to bestow his labors. Therefore Idelnes and
sloth, have not only been reproved and blamed; but also deemed unprofitable,
and worthy shame and wretchedness. Thereof said Solomon: Pro. 24 30
I passed by the vineyard of the idle husbandman, and it was covered over with
briars. Again; How long will thou sleep, o thou sluggard? but poverty shall
invade thee as an armed man. Therefore he says again: Pr. 24.27
Prepare thy works without, and make ready thy things in the field: and
afterward build thine house. By this doctrine, is removed from us that vain
imagination of the Jews Corban, Mar. 7.11 Spiritual ydlenes.
naught else but a kind of spiritual Idleness, which Christ found and reproved
in them: by the which (as a Sacrifice offered or dedicated to the holy uses of
the Temple) they thought they fully performed the commandment and request of
the law, without any further action or work of piety, though the whiles they
neglected duty to their own natural parents, whom they permitted to lie,
languish, and die wretchedly in the streets, for want of food and things
necessary. As who should say, It is enough for us, that we give of our goods
and store to the Temples use: for by that, as well our parents, and the poor,
as our selves, are relieved and benefited. Thus they dishonored their parents,
infringed the law, and blasphemed the Lord; who in that (and some other like
respects) contemned their sacrifices as abominable, saying that he required
mercy, and not such sacrifices.

And with this is likewise abandoned that faith, A dead faith. Devotion.
Profession
which being deuoid of good works, is called a dead faith: and that glorious
devotion which has no deeds, and that holy profession, which wants an honest
and godly life: for as the service of God, is not an idle service: so is not he
esteemed for a good hearer, or a sound believer, or a devout Christian, or a
perfect professor, who has not good works, good deeds, and a Christian life,
accompanying the same, as the bright shining of a clear candle, and the timely
fruit of a sound tree. To this end are words, orations, preachings, and the use
of tongues, for works are the final cause or end of all words: whereof I
gladly remember the saying of Miso, reported by Diogenes Laertius, Ougar eneca
toon logoon ta pragmata sunteleisthai alla eneca ^oon pragmatoon tous logous.
Works are not done for the words sake: but the words are spoken for the work.
And therefore says the Lord by the Prophet: Thou art taught what is good, and
what the Lord requires of thee, namely to do justice or righteousness. And
Christ says: Mich. 6.
Blessed is he that hears the word of God and does the same: for he is
likened to the wise man, that builds his house on the Rock, yea, he is the
mother, Matthew. 7
brother, and sister of Christ, as himself acknow^edgeth, and with him in the
end shall be made partakers of his glory.

This the Apostles well considered, and therefore did not only assaye to
imitate the Lord in holy life and good conversation, but also generally
taught, that men should declare their faith by their works, according to that
doctrine of their Master: Matthew. 5.
So let your light shine before men, that they may see your good works.

And as the Lord has been willing by diverse similitudes of natural things, 2.
The labor is of husbandry
to teach, instruct, and persuade men to the right understanding of things
supernatural and divine, in all the course of the holy scriptures: so here by
the labor of an husba^dman, toyling and manuring the rude and vncultured earth
(on the which he has set him as in the place of his travail, Genesis 3.
) he teaches us what we should observe, perform, and work, in matters of
Piety, as whereby to be directed toward the holy land the sooner, for that
there is not any other particular labor, work, or action in any vocation or
calling under the Sun, whereby this thing can be better displayed and set
forth, as that which of all others is most ancient, most lawful, most
profitable, and most commendable in man's life.

Plin. h. 18. 4. 5. 6. ca. 1. 2. 3.
This Pliny in his Natural history excellently proves: but we better find
in the holy Scriptures, that this was the same which the Lord God of all
manual labors, 1. Husbandry the most ancient labor of man.
first ordained for man, immediately after his Creation, and that wherein (next
to the divine services) he should be exercised in, and for his life and
maintenance, and as the end of his placing in the garden of Eden, as witnesses
Moses in these words: Gen: 2.15.
The Lord God took the man whom he had made, and put him in the garden of
Eden, that he might dress it and keep it. Neither was this omitted, but
confirmed to him after his fall: Genesis 3.
when he said, that in the sweat of his face man should eat his bread: the
which therefore, not only Adam, but also his children after him observed: for
Abel was a keeper of the sheep, and Cayn was a tiller of the fields. After
this, it is in Scripture reported, Genesis 9.20.
that Noah the righteous, soon upon the flood became an husbandman, and
planted a vineyard. King Solomon planted gardens, and orchyards, Eccl. 2.6.
and much commended the exercise and profit thereof: yea, he protested, that
the king himself is maintained by husbandry: neither is he able to help his
poor people, 2. K. Deuteronomy. 28.3. The kind of husbandry
except it please the Lord that way to bless his vineyards and fields.
Moreover, the Lord God by his servant Moses, promised to them that feared him,
a blessing from the tillage of the earth: and to them that disobeied, he
threatened to withdraw the same for a cursing.

But here it may be demanded, that as there be diverse points in the labor of
husbandry (as the care of sheep and cattle noted in Abel and Jacob: the
planting of vineyardes observed in Noah, and Solomon, and such like, commended
and used from the beginning, by holy men) lawful for Christians: so also
whether the tilling of the ground which Cain used, and which for man's sin was
cursed, be no less lawful and commendable. To this I answer, that absolutely
we may not doubt thereof. Indeed there be some Arts, which in themselves are
lawful, and yet by reason of the end thereof are become unlawful: As it is
lawful for a man to make a sword for the defense of himself or his brother:
The end of our tillages
but he may not make a sword to this end to kill men, saving by the Judgment
of public authority, as in wars, or in the execution of Justice on the
malefactors: So it is right lawful, yea and commanded to men, to till and
plough up their fields for the better sustentation of man's life; but not of
avarice, and covetousness, as Cain did, whose mind and studies were fixed wholly
on the earth. And this did he express by two simboles: first, that he
challe^ged for his own the thing immovable, as the earth, and then did build a
city, which he called after his sons name, Enoch, that is, taught or
dedicated (as to this trade or labor) So the end of this labor and the manner
thereof, makes it either good or evil, which yet, in it own nature is good.
Therefore, although that wicked Cain abused this noble exercise of the ground,
who therefore was cursed from off the ground, Genesis 4.
which should not yield him the fruits of his labors therein, and that the
Lord had covered the earth with a flood, and destroyed the fruits and fashion
of all the husbandry and labors thereon, for man's great sin: Genesis 8.22.
yet after his wrath was appeased, willing that this benefit should be renewed
and prospered unto man, made this merciful promise unto Noah, that yet Sowing
time and Harvest should not cease all the days of the earth.

Ezekiel. 36.
And so he commanded to the Israelites, that after their return from Babylon,
they should till and sow their fields, to the which he also promised a
blessing. Therefore (besides many others) Hosiah the good king of Judah loved
husbandry, Elisha was found by Eliah in the fields, plowing with twelve yoke of
oxen, and himself with the twelfth: Job was an husband man, and had may oxen
to that purpose: so was Abraham, as his servant Eleazer witnesses: and Booz
the grandfather of David, was a tiller of the field, and into his field Ruth
Ruth. 2.3
the Moabitesse first came to gleane ears of corn.

Finally, our Savior compares God our heavenly Father to an Husbandman, in
whose field is sown the good corn: yea he compares sometimes his disciples
or believers, to the good field. From hence Paul takes a Metaphor: Ye are
Gods husbandry: We are the laborers, liking the work of the Lord by the
Minister to the labor of the husbandman in the field.

And surely I have not found, how plainer to express the love and regard of
the Lord to his people, nor how better to display the duty, This kind of
labor fitty expresses man's duty.
not only of a minister in the church, but of every true christian in his
place and calling, then by kind husbandry, and especially that which
appertains to the Plough, Sowing, Reaping. etc.

Wherein besides the ioile and labor of the body, is required seven several
virtues: that is to say, First Wisdom, next Fortitude, 3. Prayer. 4.
Diligence. 5. Perseverance. 6. Expectation. 7. 7. Vertuos
Thankfulness. And the which are surely in right request with all true
Christians in their several callings, as without the which, and every of them,
no man is of ability to hold and enjoy his place, comfortable to himself, or
profitable to others.

Thus therefore, the good husband man does not only labor: but also by
Wisdom 1. Wisdom
does know and consider the state of his land and soil: the manner of usage,
the nature of his feed, the times and seasons of his Sowing, 2. Fortitude.
Reaping, Tilling, and manuring. Next, as the labors of husbandry are very
gainefull and profitable: so require they the more industry and pains of
body: therefore the husband men are commonly strong, both of mind, and body:
of mind, thereby willing and ready to labor without disdain in these things
of the earth: of body, as whereby they endure the labor. For weak and feeble
persons are not fit for this work, nor are they meet which contemn or disdain
it. They be strong of body, whom even nature has framed to sustain labors:
Hugo de saen. Victo. h 1. ca. 14 de Claustr.
of the which there be 3. sorts: some though they are able, yet will not
perform things profitable: others are both able and willing: and others are
willing to do more then their power extends: though the first is to be
blamed, and the third commended: yet the second makes a meet husbandman. 3.
Because we must first seek the kingdom of God and his Righteousness: it is
not convenient, nor safe, that the husbandman should attempt any thing on the
presumption of that his wisdom or ability of body, without Prayer, and the
devout, service of God: persuading that this is the way to obtain a blessing
unto his labors, and a prosperity from the Lord, from whose goodness every
good gift and perfect gift comes, and that in the name of Christ, without
whom (as he says) we can do nothing. Fourthly, add to the former, Christian
Diligence: 4. Diligence
for this kind of labor is not an idle, negligent, or easy endeavor: but
such, as must be compassed and effected, as by an able, so by a diligent hand,
especially in those times and seasons of the year, when men plough, sow, and
reap: else, as little or nothing is performed to effect, and as delays bring
dangers, men may be prevented of their expectation, by contrary weather: by
the springing of tares, the devouring of byrds, blastings, and other such
inconveniences, which commonly ensue the want of timely diligence.

5. 5. Perseverance.
Neither may we think that this labor lasts but for a day, or a week, or a
month: but that the labor of the husbandman continues: for unto him every
day brings his work, and every day in the year his appointed labor, the
which if the idler once neglect, he can never or very hardly recover it:
therefore he that takes this in hand, or goes to the plough, must proceed, and
not look back, or give over: for then all is lost, neither gains the
husbandman any thing, but by Perseverance. After this, the husbandman expecting
the end of his labors, must Patiently abide, and continue in Hope, 6.
Patience in hope.
Here we must depend by Faith on the Lord, and wait his pleasure, for the
fruits of his labors at the appointed time. And this is that which
incourageth him both to labor and to continue in his labor. Lastly, that he
may not show himself ungrateful to the Lord, having from his blessing
received the fruits of his labor, he is bound to be thankful to the Lord
God, to whom it is in deed a right good thing to be thankful, as the Psalmist
says. In and by all these things we are taught, what is required in the
spiritual husbandry, in the which Pieties Plough is taken in hand: And therein
is required not only labor, but a good labor, 7. Thankfulness.
and that is well performed for the pleasure of God, and the benefit of men,
when the labourer in this husbandry is furnished with those seven former
Virtues, so well fitting his vocation and function. But all those things shall
(by Gods grace) be explaned in the place and order of the proceeding of this
heavenly Plough.

CHAP. IX. What is meant by this, that men must sow for righteousness, and
reap according to Mercy?
We must endeavor to perform that which is required of us.
AS the Prophet by these Metaphorical words taken from Georgie, and the
common labors of husbandmen, would teach what is required of us in the
spiritual husbandry of the Lord: So thereby knowing what the will of God is,
and what shall be the end of our labors, we should daily endeavor the practice
of those things. We must endeavor to perform that which is requi ed of us.
And therein with the husbandman, let us not omit, at the seed time to manure
and sow our fields, though with great labor and like cost, and afterward with
all diligence to reap and gather the fruits of our labors with the true
application and use thereof, as it shall be thought most convenient for the
glory of God, the discharge of our duties, and the profit both of our selves
and others, in our several functions and places.

Howbeit, there be, Corban, (as I said before) produce the words of the Lord
Jesus against those painful endeavors of the true labourer: saying. Matthew.
6.26.
Be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor
yet for your body, what ye shall put on, etc. Behold the fowls of the
heaven: for they sow not, neither reap, nor carry into the barnes: yet your
heavenly Father feeds them: Are ye not much better then they? Muscul: in
Matthew: 6. Non dicie Christus, propterea dico vobis, ne labores pro victu. etc.
were a sufficient answer: yet for the better understanding of the Lords
meaning, I gladly remember the words of the godly learned, resolving the
doubt. Christ says not: therefore I say unto you, that ye labor not for food
and clothing: but, be ye not careful: he forbids not the labor, but the
carefulnes. Paul says to the Ephesians: 4. Let every man labor with his hands,
that he may have what to give to him that has need. Again, Shall we nothing
sow, nothing reap? and carry nothing into the barn? he says not so: but by
this he reproves our incredulity, or indeed the weakness of our faith: to
whom, although it be commanded of God that we should sow, reap, plant, and
gather into the barnes, that whereof we may live: yet notwithstanding, men
have neither that trust in God, nor so much security as the fowls of the
heaven, which neither sow nor reap, nor bring into the barnes, whereof to be
sustained. Therefore (as it is said) we must not be idle, but industrious: and
in our labors depend on the divine grace, without our excessive carefulnes.
And here let us not forget that which the Lord chiefly requires, namely
Rihgteousnes, To sow for righteousness.
for the which he would we should sow: and Mercy, according to whose
measure, we should reap: that is, to use and practice those ways and means,
whereby we may obtain the one, perfo^me the other, and express both the one
and the other, in our charitable actions and godly lives.

This is that sowing for Righteousness, and that reaping after the measure of
Mercy, this is that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, whereof our Lord
speaks, Justice.
Matthew: 5. wherein men having faith, do daily desire, study, endeavor, and
labor to praise and please God, Mercy.
by walking in his ways. And this is that Symbol or token, whereby we^
express and make known that Righteousness of God Matthew. 5.
before men in the works of Piety. For thus are men willed to measure out
Righteousness in Mercy, as whereof the Lord said, Do Justice and love
Mercy: or execute Justice by mercy. The same which Daniel comprised in his
good counsel given to the king of Babylon: Cut off thy sins by Justice, and
thine iniquity by mercy: meaning that he should alter and change the copy and
manner of his life: that whereas before he was unrighteous, and thereby
appeared, as a savage and wild beast, cruel, hard, severe and unmerciful
unto his Subjects, especially to the poor Jews, then under his captivity,
he should now labor to become righteous, as whereby he might embrace and
declare humanity, gentleness, softenes, benignity, mercy, not only in word,
but in affection, action, good works, and all ways and means. And doubtless,
as there is not any one thing commended and commanded unto men by the Lord,
Vltra posse viri, non vult Deus vlta requiri.
but with the lawful ways and means to be attained and performed: so, God
willing we should live, he prepares us food, and wills us both to eat, and
use it as the means of our life.

Again, too and for the same to be maintained, he would we should labor and
manure the soil, to sow, reap, and lay up in the barn, and that we should
neither contemn nor neglect those lawful ways and means offered, but take,
and use the the same. To this purpose says Christ, I stand at the door and
knock: If any man will open the door to me, I will come in unto him, Revel: 3.
We know that Christ is able to enter in, the gate being fast shut: howbeit,
this he says, to stir us up to vigilancie, and to the study of the works
of our vocation. Christ is ready to enter into our hearts by his Spirit: but
he would we should open our hearts unto him by our faith: that we should be
prepared as David wished to be, when he prayed for a new heart. Psalm, 51.
To this belongs that which the Lord commands: Seek, and ye shall find:
Knock, and it shall be opened unto you. So the talents being committed to our
use, require a diligent traffic and occupation for the increase. Thus the
Lord would, that men having wisdom, knowledge, understanding, memory,
judgment, reason, ability, and other ornaments, as well of soul as body,
they should neither bury them, nor restrain them, but rightly use them.

And now, as ye have heretofore ploughed Iniquity, whereof ye have reapte
ungodliness: and have been overmuch busied about the things of this life,
which are vain and transitory, directed by the wisdom of the serpent
(earthly, sensual, and devilish) so it is required, that henceforth ye turn
another leaf, and yet ye may not be idle or exempted from labors: but by the
wisdom which is from above, (gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
good works,) ye study and learn to be employed in the Spiritual husbandry,
and therein consider well, what ye ought to sow, and what ye ought to reap. For
whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap: Gal: 6.
so that, whosoever sows in in the flesh, shall thence reap corruption: but
he that sows in the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.

CHAP. X. Of the Seed, the Sowers, and the manner of the fructification
thereof.
THere be two kind of Seeds: the one is of Impiety: the other of Piety:
between the which (as also between the several Sowers thereof,) there is as
great a difference, as between the East and the West. The former is a seed of
the wicked, a seed of corruption and sin, taken from three dangerous
enemies: whereof the 1. is privy, the 2. domestical, the 3. familiar: whereof
being by them sown, spring the pride of life: the lust of the flesh, and the
lust of the eye, whereof it is in meet place hereafter plainly spoken, by the
which the good Seed is oftentimes annoyed in the Lords field. But from hence
we are right happily dissuaded by the true consideration of the true Seed of
Piety, The seed of Piety.
which is to be sown for the increase of Justice and Mercy: as also by them
by whom the same is to be sown and cast forth: for, as much lies in the
nature of the seed: so not a little in the wisdom of the Sower: for as men
may not gather grapes of thorns: so neither find we commonly good success to
follow the foolish or idle husbandman, Semin. Sunt quadam Semi^ na vtilia,
quaeda^ sterilia. etc.
for the Seed, one says (which in this I gladly remember) there be Seeds,
some profitable, and some barraine: Those barraine or unprofitable, are the
words of vain preachers, as also the words of the Philosophers: But those are
right profitable Seeds, which are neither withered nor consumed with any
vain glory or fond curiosity. And this good Seed is the Word of GOD, The
word of God.
being indeed the manifestation and expression of the Divine Will, as well
touching his essence, as touching his purpose and works past, present, and
future, in the breathing of the holy Ghost, by the Prophets, by Jesus Christ,
and by his Apostles and Evangelists, powered forth from the bosom of the
everlasting Father; and by his commandment, not only described in the books
of the old and new Testaments: but also preached and taught through the same
Spirit, by the ministry of his Servants: to this end, that God might be made
known unto men, and that the man of God might be instructed, and made apt for
every good work. This is that sovereign Seed, the which according to his
diverse effects and respects is called and known, by so many sundry names in
the holy Scriptures, especially in the hundred and nineteen Psalm: Psalm: 119.
whereof there is not any one verse of an hundred threescore and sixteen,
wherein the same is not mentioned, with some praise of the sweetness, utility,
purity, dignity, glory, eternity, and goodness thereof.

It is called the Word of the Lord, for that thereby the mind and will of God
is expressed: the speech of God, in that it is pronounced and written to be
heard or read to men's understanding: the Law of the Lord, because the Lord
has both provided and given it unto men, as wherewith they be obliged and kept
in the observance of certain duties: the Precepts of the Lord, in that it
forbids and terrifieth men from evil: the Commandments of the Lord, in
that it admonishes and persuades men to do good: the Testimonies of the Lord,
because he by his Prophets testify the same unto men: the will of God, for
that thereby his will is declared: his Testament, in that it is confirmed and
commended unto us by the death of his Son the Testator: his Justice, because
the obseruers thereof by faith are justified: his iustifications, for that the
works thereof, are correspondent to Justice: his Judgments, because the
contribution thereof are extended by Justice: his ways, because he deals and
directs men according to the same: his Truth, in that all the sacred
Scriptures do aim to Christ, the perfect truth, and in the same are
performed, etc.

Now this word of God, as well by Christ, as by the Prophets and Apostles, is
well likened to the Seed which the husbandman sows in his field, especially
for two causes; First, in respect of the Sower, The word of God likened to the
Seed. The sower God.
and his endeavor and practice thereon.

Secondly, in regard of the nature, order, and manner of fructification of the
seed being sown.

There be diverse Sowers of this Seed in the Spiritual field. The first, and
most principal, is the Lord God himself, whom in regard thereof, Christ calls
an Husbandman. For this is the same, which gives Seed to the Sower, and fruit
thereof unto him that truly labors. He gives the word, even the word of
life, that immortal seed, this he sows, this he distributeth, this he
increases with prosperous effect, to the use and benefit of his Saints, as the
Prophet David and Isaiah Psalm. Isa. 55.
testify. This indeed is the same, without whose help, whosoever planteth, or
whosoever waters, (whether Paul, or Apollo) he is just nothing profitable;
the which Saint Paul considering, prayed for the Corinthians, 2. Cor: 9 10.
that he which ministered Seed to the Sower, would also minister bread for
food, and multiply their Seed, and increase the fruits of their
Righteousness, that in all things they might be made rich unto all bountifulnes;
which caused (through him and other his fellow laborers in the Lords field)
joy and thanksgiving to the Lord. Next, although the Lord God be most able of
himself, through the Spirit to sow this Seed in his field, The Prophets.
Christ and his ministers are Sowers.
nor uses at all times the means and ministry of men, having thousand
thousands of Angels, ready to serve him at all times and in all places: yet
in his profound wisdom, has he thought good to exhibit unto men such means
thereto as best fitted man's nature and capacity. And therefore as the good
householder or husbandman appoints, calls, and sends forth his servants to
labor in his field, the Lord God has chosen, called, and sent forth into his
Church, not only his holy Prophets with this sovereign Seed in the spiritual
seed-lappe, that is, their mouths, but also his only begotten Son, the Lord
Jesus, who came forth from his Fathers bosom, and in his Ministry, was named
the Crier in the wilderness: who cried out saying; Hearken to this o Israel:
and all ye that have ears to hear, now hear. Then, after him came forth
his holy Apostles and Disciples into the world, who also faithfully
distributed that Seed which they had received being in the execution of their
charge, well likened to the voice of that Crier, as was also John the Baptist,
who named himself not the Crier, but the voice of the Crier in the wilderness:
for Christ himself was that Crier or true preacher of Righteousness unto men,
and the ministers of his grace, are the voice of this Crier, by whom the word
of the Crier is brought unto us. At this time the Lord sows this seed, by
the preachers and ministers thereof, who are also compared to the same Criers
voice, whose mouths and hands he fills for this work, with his hi^den
treasures, as whereby they are furnished and made able ministers of Christ, and
faithful disposers of his secrets. And in this are they the Lords Ambassadors
or Messengers, Gregor: August: ep: 1. ad Iub.
to bring unto men from his high Grace, his letters of Au^horitie. For the word
of God and the holy Scrip^ures (which they preach and produce for the
instruction and edification of the people) are as cer^aine Epistles of the
Almighty, written or sent to his Creature: the which a certain learned Father
well weighing: thus said, Ecce de coelo coelorum Rex Regum, etc. Behold, the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, yea, our Redeemer has vouchsafed to direct
his letters unto us from the highest heaven, by the ministry of his Prophets
and Apostles, that thereby we might know that which is necessary to be
known for our salvation and glory.

The Ministers of the word likened to the Sower.
And these persons are likened to the Sower, especially in six points.

First, in that he observes the quality of the land or place: Secondly, the
congruitie of the time.

Thirdly, the quantity of the Seed.

Fourthlie, the quality thereof.

Fifthlie, his own treadinges. And sixtlie, his yearly regard and operation,
in and about the same.

1. the Land
Thus the Sower of the spiritual Seed, considering that the same is to be sown
and distributed either thicker or thinner, according to the qualiry of the
place or soil, that is, the persons and their constitutions to whom the same
is to be ministered, he measures forth the word of God proportionallie,
according to that rule, whereof Father Gregory sometimes said (In
praedicatione secundum qualitate^ Auditorum formari debet Sermo Doctorum) that
the word of the Teachers in their preachings, ought to be framed according to
the quality of the hearers For all men are not of the like capacity, of the
same diet, and disposition: nor is it meet, that the holy things should be
given to dogs, or the precious pearls cast before the swine. Again, it is no^
profitable for the sick person to have sweet potions, where need purges, nor
pleasant plaster where hard corasiues ought to be applied. Therefore
considering what the Lord has done by his Prophets and Apostles, the Minister
and Preacher is to use and apply sometimes threats and judgments, sometimes
promises and mercies: now the law with the rigor thereof, and then the Gospel
with the comforts of the same. Again, doctrines, exhortations, instructions,
refutations, and such, now more, then less, as he shall think it best, for
the quality and nature of his hearers.

Secondly, in this he also observes the congruitie of the time and season. 2.
The congruitie of the time.
For as in some places are required rather sowing, in other places late sowing,
as in moist places, they must sow sooner, and with more speed, lest the
seed putrify with the moisture of winter before it take root: and in dry
places latter, that when the weather comes on it, it vanish not away: In like
sort there be some like moist ground, namely those which are filled with
fleshly humors and lusts, and they need to be prevented: they which resemble
the drier ground, are those which are more religiously minded, which therefore
will more gladly receive and nourish the seed: and these must not be neglected
in the due time. Touching the duty of the Sower, Eccl: 11.
to either of these thus says the wise man. Sow thy Seed in the Morning, and
also in the evening: Let not thine hand rest ^ for thou know not whether
shall prosper this or that, or whether both shall be alike good.

Thirdly, the Sower regards the quantity of ^his Seed, 3. The qua^ti^ie of
the Seed.
casting less thereof into the fat and moist earth, then into the lighter and
drier earth: for in the fatter it shall more multiply, fall down, and waste:
but in the other it may be, all will not prosper: even so the preacher casts
the See^e of the word more fully unto the gross sinner, and less on the
person better qualified: for such a sinner needs more labor and teaching
then the godly, and yet the godly must be sustained by the same, as the food
of his soul, whereof his faith first came, and his virtues enabled. Fourthlie,
the Sower considers the quality of the Seed: 4. Quality of the Seed
for there be seeds which fit not all kinds of earth: and again, some not so
good or strong of nature, as others: therefore as he fitteth the seeds to the
soil; so he takes the best, and refuses that which is weak and vain. Even
so the preacher of the word (as it is before said in the nature of soiles)
chooses and applies several doctrines and matters for every part: and again,
abandoning and refusing all vain babbling and unprofitable reeds of fools, the
legends of the Monks, the curious opinions of the vaineglorious the discourses
of profane philosophers, the amorous conceits of peevish Poets, and all such
like noisome tares, he only takes, uses, and disposes the true word of God,
of the which the holy Ghost has made him a Minister. Thus, In omni quod
dicitur, Gregor:
necesse est vt Causa, tempus, and persona pensetur, etc. In every thing that
is spoken, needful it is that the matter, the time, and the person, be
weighed: As, whether the words of the sentence be ratified with truth. Whether
the same be answereable to the time, and whether the quality of the person
nothing impugneth the truth of the sentence, and the congruitie of the time:
for he casts forth his darts against the enemy with commendation, Who
first does, see and well observe the enemy: but he is nothing praise worthy,
who for want of good observation strikes a faithful citizen in steed of his
enemy.

Fifthly, the Sower regards his own treadings, 5. The Sower treads well.
that whiles he sows in one place, he may not conculcate and tread down
that which is cast in some other place: and therefore he keeps a due order
and measure in his steps: even so the sowers of the spiritual Seeds ought
to be not only well qualified in learning, life, and behavior, as made fit for
this labor, as were Christ and his Apostles: but also to be circumspect in the
disposition of the word, and careful in the manner of their dealings. They
must take heed, that whiles they seek to recover the penitent sinners by the
promises of sweet Mercies, they encourage not the obstinate in high presumption
on Gods mercies: and whiles they would beat down sin, they do not
discourage the godly minds from their duties: In a word, they must beware, that
whiles they endeavor to build in one place meet to be repaired, they destroy
not in another place, not meet to be destroyed. And to this purpose the life
and behavior of the Sower much avails. Gregory Gregor: Ille vbere^ fructus
praedicationis colligit. etc
who himself was a Bishop, and knew how of them in this place, before all
others, was required a Sowing for Justice, and reaping after mercies measure,
wrote thereof thus: He reapeth the plentiful fruit of his Preaching, which
first sends forth the good Seed of works. For, as of good tillage of the
fields follows the great abundance of fruit: so of the good life going before
(in the Preacher) there is ministered unto him the worthy fruit of profitable
words. Neither does the word at any time more good to the hearers, then when
the same has the honest life of the preacher going before it. Praedicatores
qui dicuat, and non faciu^t.
But on the other side: The Preachers which say well and do not the same, are
comparable to those Butchers which sell away the best flesh of their slain
bullocks, and feed themselves on their tails: or to those Mariners, which
transporting goodly Apples in their ships, have only the smell, but may not
feed on them. But of these things we may better hear the Apostle Paul in his
Eipstles to Timothy and Titus, to whom, and by whom to all other Bishops and
ministers of the word, he has prouidentlie prescribed.

6. Yearly operation.
Sixtlie, and lastly, the Sower considering the strength of his soil, and how
many years he may conveniently manure the same with this kind of tillage and
seed, until he give it rest, employeth himself, his labors, and his seed
thereon accordingly. So the spiritual Sower looking on the law of the Lord,
Ex: 23.10
finds this charge thereof: Six years thou shall sow thy land, and gather
the fruits thereof: but the seventh year thou shall let it rest and lie
still. And in Leuiticus Leuit: 25.3.4.
it is added: The seventh year shall be a Sabbath of rest unto the land, the
Lords Sabbath thou shall neither sow thy field, nor cut thy vineyard, etc.
Thus in every of the six Ages of the world, there is a time limited for the
sowing: Likewise, in every age of the vi. ages of man's life, until the
seventh age, wherein there shall be a general rest unto the people of God, and
wherein every man shall enjoy his Saboth. The Pastor must be diligent in his
duty, as long as he lives: and he may not neglect the soil of him that yet
lives: Every man must be a labourer for himself in his life, and for others
in their lives. After this time he must cease, and the land must enjoy the
Saboth, neither may a man recover that for himself, Eccl. ^.
or for any other in the grave or in hell, the which he should have performed,
and has neglected in his life. Therefore the Minister in the Church must be
regardfull of this duty, and truly observe the limited times, as such as
stand not idle in the market place, but are called, and gladly should come into
the Lords field to sow, to reap, and to labor faithfully in the same. This
belongs to every one.
Neither (indeed should Kings, Princes, Magistrates, Parents, Masters and all
others in their lawful places, think themselves exempted of this charge: for
indeed, it generally apparteineth to all the children of God, who (in this
case) are required to be sowers, reapers, and laborers in the Lord, partly for
others, but chiefly for themselves, according to that he said: Sow to
yourselues for Righteousness. Hos: 10.
And this is not to be neglected for as by sowing for others we express
charity: so sowing for our selves we appear to be wise. But that we may be
indeed charitable in sowing and reaping for others: we must first by wisdom
sow for our selves: for neither can we be rightly called charitable persons,
except we declare our selves the same by that which is our own, or in that
which we have before lawfully gathered to our selves: for it is not charity
in us to give unto others, that which is not our own of other men's goods, the
which we have taken from them unjustly. In this kind of speech, the Prophet
pointed to the Jews, To whom the Prophet pointed. Ier: 5.5.
yea even the chiefest among them, of whom Jeremy spoke when he said, Ib^ ad
optimates: I will go to the Princes, or great ones, whom he had found breachers
of the yoke, and of whom the Lord spoke in the parable of the proud Pharisie,
who was so far exalted in his proper conceyt beyond other men. Luke 18.
There be some Preachers which acknowledge not that this touches them, as if
it were required only of the people, and not of them also to sow and labor in
the Lords field. Again, some oaths of them dread to speak thus unto others,
especially to the rich and wealthy in the world: yea rather they flatter them
in their ignorance and sin, whereby thinking themselves sufficiently well
spedde already, they neither hunger nor thirst after Righteousness. Also the
Princes of this world, and the Magistrates, which should much regard this
commandment, have little care either to perforne, or to consider of the same.
To be short: the Parents the Masters, and other persons in their several
functions imagine, (for the most part the like, who the whiles are comparable
to the ship wrights of Noah's Ark, who laboring for the safety of others, were
c^relesse of themselves, and perished in the flood. And what gain these (after
the judgment of S. Paul) when they sow and preach unto others, and themselves
remain cast-awayes, wracking in the depth of hell? therefore that is well
worthy to be noted that the Lord says, Sow ye for your selves: Thus the
righteous shall live, (not by an others,) but by his own faith.

Secondly, touching the nature, order, and manner of the fructification of
this Seed, The nature, order and manner of fructification of the Seed.
as it holds proportton with the Seed of the husbandman: I gladly remember
that pretty Comparison of father Gregory, where he said, Quum Desideria bona,
When we conceive good desires or motions in the heart, (upon the hearing of
the word) then as good ground we receive the Seed: when we begin good works,
then are we as the herb or blade growing: when we are proceeded to some
perfection in those works, then are we made as the ear fit for the corn:
and when we be established or confirmed therein, then have we the full corn
in the ear. In this we find the Word comparable to that Seed, in four
points, besides the sowing thereof, (as it is referred to the Action of the
Sower.) As first, in that it takes root in men's hearts, as the Seed in full
corn in the ear. This our Savior does not only confirm, but adds three
other Reasons of this Analogy, whereof the first is taken from the continual
growing of the Seed; the second, from the fructification thereof, the third
from the use. Mark: 4.26.
where a man casts Seed in the ground, and sleeps, and rises up night and
day, and the Seed springs and grows up, he not knowing how. The second,
Matthew: 13.8.24.
in the example of that Seed, which falling into the good ground, took root,
grew up, and brought forth fruit, some thirty, some sixty, some an hundred
fold. The third, is that Parable of the good Seed, which the husbandman took
and sowed in his field, which in the time of harvest was gathered from the
tares, and brought into the barn, for the use and commodity of the
husbandman. Whereby is seen the wonderful nature of the Seed in growing, the
great increase, and the goodly commodity thereof, to him rhat labors in the
same: for this is that immortal Seed, Ioh: 3.
whereby men are engendered to life everlasting, and the power of God to
salvation, to all that believe: Therefore the Lord willing that his children
should be drawn forth of the darkness into the light, and from ignorance unto
the true knowledge of God, and so preserved by Faith i^ him, thus exhorts:
Search ye the Scriptures, for they testify of me: he that has ears to
hear, let him hear: that is, the word of life: he that has an hear^ to
conceive, let him conceive it: he that is wise let him hearken and follow it:
he that will be blessed, let him meditate therein day and night: neither is the
holy Scripture without abundant store, of those and such like exhortations,
admonitions, and persuasions to the thankful acceptance and right use of this
sovereign good Seed, the Word of God, the which therefore the true servants of
God do believe, embrace and obey: Io: 8. and 10.
according to that saying: My Sheep hear my voice: and he that is of God,
hears the word of God.

CHAP. XI. The kind of Soil wherein the good Seed is to be sown, with the
manner of the manurance thereof.
AS the Lord God has not only required of his people, those two noble
virtues, Justice and Mercy: but also taught them how to procure and express
the same, by two metaphorical words, taken from the labor of the husbandman
in his field, as Sowing, and Reaping: so now, by two other like words, as
Fallowed ground, and Ploughing, he declares first, in what kind of land the
Seed should be sown: and then, by what kind of husbandry the land is to be
tilled, and prepared for the Seed.

The land liable to this use, 1. The land fallowed.
is named in the first tongue Nir, made of a verb, which signifies either to
till the ground, or to eradicate and cast forth the thorns and weeds of a
land, before it be sown with good corn: that word uses the Prophet Hosey,
Hos: 10 1^. Ier: 4.4. Laur: Val: Seruius.
the which Jeremy confirms in that when he had said, Plough up your Nir or
fallow ground: he added, and sow not among the thorns. The Latins translate
it Nouale, which notes either that land which is yearly renewed with manurance
and seed: or that which is first broken up with tillage or manurance, and made
fit for the seed: we call it the fallowed land, as namely that, which was
sometimes ouergrowne and combred with thistles, briars, weeds, and such like
noisome things, and afterward by the wisdom and labor of the good
husbandman, turned up, and so let lie at rest for that year, to the end, that
the weeds and those noisome herbs being mortified, and the soil mollified,
and made better, it might be fit to receive Seed they ear following: in the
which sense, not only Paulus Iurisconsultus, Varro, and Pliny, have taken it;
but also the Poet, who thereof has written; Virgil:
Alterius idem tonsas cessare Nouales.
Et Segnem patiere situ durescere campum. Again
Impius haec tam culta Noualia, Miles habebit?


He means such principal grounds as had been well curried and prepared with
the great labor and toil of the husbandman, the loss whereof, he much
bewailed. So by this fallowed land is understood, that which is well cultured
and seasoned for the Seed, and by the metaphor ot translation, sometimes
places, sometimes persons, or any other thing which by the study, endeavor, lab
out or diligence of man, is made fit and applyable to the use of that whereto
it is destinated or appointed.

Next, although the word of this Action, is Plough ye, break ye, or turn
ye up, is in the holy tongue, generally applied to every kind of labor
which the husbandman undertakes for the culturage and better manurance of his
land: yet it chiefly signifies that which is to be performed with the Plough
or Soul, drawn of the Oxen, called of the Hebrews Machrescheth: The
Israelites went down to the philistines, Machrescheth. 1. Sam: 13.^0.
to sharpen every man his Share or Soole: which word is made of that verb
which signifies to plough the field, as with Oxen or horses: As it is said in
the law: Thou shall not plough thy field with an Ox and an Ass yoked
together. So it is said, that Jobs Oxen were ploughing in the field: and
Samson from thence took that parable, If ye had not ploughed with my he offer,
Judge: 14.18.
ye had not found out my riddle. But as the former word, so also this by
translation, signifies sometimes the

Of the first acceptance, we hear the Psalmist, Malice.
The Ploughers ploughed upon my back and made long surrowes. Psalm: 129.
From this kind of labor, Solomon dissuading men, Pro: 3.
says: Thou shall not plough evil upon thy neighbor or brother: that is,
thou shall neither imagine nor execute any evil thing on thy brother. Hos: 10.
This Hosey calls, the Ploughing of iniquity. The like has Eliphaz in Job:
Job. 4.8.
they that plough iniquity and sow wickedness, reap the same.* Of the second
signification, 2. Correction. Hos: 10.10.11.
the Lord in Hosey says: Vt is my desire that I should chastise them: and
afterward he says: Ephraim is as an Heaffer, used to delight in threshing (or
treading out) the corn, wherein is pleasure, as (there is pain in ploughing:)
But I will lay my yoke upon her fair neck: I will make Ephraim to ride, Judah
shall plough, and Jacob shall break the cloddes, or harrowe. 3. A Christian
man's action.
The third acceptance of the word, we find in the prophet Isaiah: Isay. 28.
Shall the Ploughman plough all the day, that he might sow? and that word so
translated has the Evangelist, Two men shall be ploughing in the field:
Again, he that goes to the Plough, and looks backwarde, is not fit for the
Kingdom of God: in the which speeches are noted the office and function of the
true Christians, with their continuance in the labors of the same.

But now concerning this conjunction, and iniunction, Plough or break up your
fallowed or prepared land: we find, that Solomon in a certain proverbiall
speech, conioyning both the words, has the like in effect, Pr: 24.27
Prepare thy work without, and make ready thy things in the field: (as who
should say) play the good husband in the manuring, dressing, and culturing of
thy land, to avoid the inconvenience that follows bad husbandry) for I passed
by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the man without
understanding, and lo, it was all grown over with thorns, and nettles had
covered the face thereof, and the stone wall thereof was broken down. Luke: 35.
S. John the Baptist, endeavoring to persuade this good Husbandry, says:
Every valley shall be filled and every hill shall be brought low: and crooked
things shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made smoothe: all the
which words are likewise metaphorical, and signify what the Lord God required
in them which should be prepared for the acceptance of the holy Messiah. And
the Lord himself has a Parable to the like effect, of the sower which cast
forth his seed into diverse kinds of earth: whereof that only received the
seed to profit, which was the good ground; that is, the same which was by this
kind of husbandry well manured and prepared. But whereas Solomon leaves it
in the bare metaphor, The Metaphor expounded.
the others have added an exposition, as not only for them then, but also for
us, to whom the Lord has granted to know the mysteries of his kingdom.
Therefore Jeremy having taken up this metaphor, by and by expounds it thus;
Ier: 4.
Be ye circumcised to the Lord, and take away the foreskinnes of your hearts,
ye men of Judah, and inhabiters of Jerusalem, lest my wrath come forth like
fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the wickedness of your
inventions. And herein he teaches amongst other, those two things: first, what
is meant by this land or ground: Next, what is the husbandry thereon required:
he would that we should by this ground understand, not that natural Element or
ground, accustomed to the material seed: but the heart of man; yea and by the
figure Zenegdoche (which under part, comprehends the whole) the whole man,
The ground is man's heart.
whose life, conversation, and ways before the Lord, are commonly judged and
discerned by the co^stitution of the heart or thought, the fountain of all
man's words, actions and endeavors. But the heart of man, naturally and
without this tillage or fallowing, is comparable to the thornie, barraine, and
waste ground: which nevertheless being circumcised, Fallowed or circumcised.
that is, fallowed and well manured, is like unto the good ground, and thereof
called Gods hushandrie: according to Paul's speeches to the Corinthians, after
that they had been occupied in the study and practice of Piety: ye are Gods
husbandry: that is, the hearts circumcised, the land well manured, and a people
holy and well prepared for the Lord. Also John the Baptist expounds the
metaphor thus, Prepare ye the Lords way: Repent, Amend your lives, and bring
ye forth fruits worthy amendeme^t of life. And the Lord declaring the
parable of the Sower and his field: tells his Disciples, that the good ground
is, He that hears the word, and understands it, which also bears fruit,
and brings forth some thirty, Mat. 13.
some sixty, some an hundredth fold. Although sometimes by a field is meant the
World, Mat. 1^.
and by the good seed, Gods children: yet here (as he said) by the Seed, is
meant the Word of God, and by the field, the persons to whom the same is
preached, by the which many be called, but few that is, those which are
comparable to the good ground) are persuaded. So, neither has the prophet
Hosey here left his Metaphor without his exposition, when to the same he
added: It is time to seek the Lord. To seek the Lord, is to sow for
righteousness.
In the which words he compares all that, whatsoever is before spoken of the
good Ground, for this comprehe^deth the hearing of the word, and the
understanding of the same, Faith, obedience, Justice, Mercy, Virtue,
Amendeme^t, Repentance, and the true conversion of man unto God.

By this therefore we gather, that the Lord knows how far off the people of
Israel were from the right practice of the wise and provident husbandman in
this point, as that in steed of sowing for Righteousness in the fallowed Land,
they sowed among the thorns, and ploughed wickedness, whereof ensued inquitie,
as pride, covetousness, gluttony, wrath, envy, luxury, cruelty, and many other
ungodly fruits, whereof the wrath of God enkindled, was now ready to fall on
them: he did in his great mercy and long suffering, yet endeavor by the
ministry of his prophet to withdraw them from such their sins and miseries,
and to allure them to Piety and goodness, by persuading in them that good *
affection or passion of mind, That is, true repentance.
wherewith being deeply touched, in the bitter sense of the divine wrath
conceived against them for their sins, they might be heartily sorry, loath
their sins, thirst after mercy, hunger after righteousness, and turn
again unto the Lord, from whom they had been estranged in the leaudnes of
their minds.

This is indeed the same, which the Greeks understood in their Metanoia,
Metanoia.
but the Hebrews more fully in their Thescubah: noting with the former a
renewing of the mind: and with the latter, a turning again into the way, from
whence a man had erred: and is so much to say, as the conversion of a man unto
God, not only in mind, but also in body, and in both: wherein being truly
mortified, he might again be renewed and conformed unto the Lord in holiness
and righteousness. Against this is directly opposed, that Meschubah, Mescubah
or turning away, as from God to the Devil, and from all good, to all evil:
wherein is found wickedness and destruction. In a word, the prophet by this
exposition of the Metaphor, preaches true Repentance, which he knew to be
the only way to recover those wandering persons, and therefore most necessary,
as that without it, the sinner is not pardoned of his sin, and so profitable,
as in the which he finds and that timely, both mercy and life: whereof also
it is, that those persons are said to sin unto death, The sin unto death
which cannot repent: and they are said to be borne of God and exempted from
sin, which truly and timely repent. To the which we have not only many
Tstimonies, as in the Prophets, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Jeremy, and others: but also
most notable examples, as of David, Solomon, Manasses, Magdalen, Peter, Paul,
and many such who have not only taught, that at what time soever a sinner
does repent him of his sin from the bottom of his heart, the Lord does
pardon him: but also have sensibly felt and proved the effect of the same. In
regard whereof, the godly Fathers of the church have both thought and spoken
very honorably of this godly virtue: Among others, the learned Chrysostom
thereof says: O Repentance, which (the Lord being merciful) do remit
sins, openest the gate of Paradise, healest the man contrite: make glad the
sorrowful, recallest life from death, restorest man's estate, renuest honor,
give boldness, reformest the virtues, and fillest man with grace more
abundant! And Cyprian Cyprian: o poenite^tia, quid de te Noutrefe ramus.
has a very excellent praise thereof: O worthy Repentance, what excellent or
strange matter should I report of thee? All things bound up thou loosest: All
things loosed, thou shuttest up: All adverse things thou mittigatest, all
contrite things thou healest, all things confused thou brightenest, and all
things desperate thou cheerest. And this is in deed, that new life, which
necessarily follows that new birthe, whereof our Lord disputes with
Nichodemus: Ioh: 3.
the which (as the same Chrysostom said) is more glittering then gold,
brighter then the Sun, The repentant sin not against the holy Ghost.
and that which neither sin quaileth, nor defection overcomes, nor
desperation daunteth. We never ^ead or found, that any man has or may fall
into that damnable sin against the holy Ghost, to whom the Lord gives true
Repentance, as we ^ightlie define it: for albeeit, that sin be not rightly
defined, final impenitencie, but is indeed, that Obstinate peruicacie or
stubbornness until death, The sinne-against the holy Ghost. Heb. 6 4. and
10.26.
by the which a man not by ignorance, nor by infirmity, nor by fear, nor by
an occasion, but by a certain determinate malice of mind, is turned away from
the doctrine of the Gospel, and so persisting, does hate and persecute the
known truth of the same: yet, because the Lord has debarred them this noble
Grace which sin against the holy Sptrit, many have so defined it, knowing
that if the Lord in mercy, would grant them true Repentance, they could
therewith be remitted and live. Therefore the Lord has been willing that his
people should be drawn thereto by many persuasions and arguments, as by Isaiah,
Wash you, make you clean. Let the ungodly man forsake his Own ways, and the
unrighteous his own imaginations, and turn again unto the Lord. And by his
Son he says: Come unto me allye which travail and be heavy laden, and I
will refresh you. These, and many such comfortable words, has the Lord used
to them on whom he is willing to show mercy: and unto them only, Io. 1. and
3.
he gives that peerless virtue, and therwithall grace and power to be made
his children in the new birth, and to honor him as their best Father, in a
righteous and honest life. And from hence are rightly gathered these general
motives and causes, 1^. Motives to repentance^
persuading men to the estimation and desire of this thing: whereof the first
is the consideration of our own condition, being great and Father, whereof we
should be sorry, and amend our lives. The second, is the remembrance of the
Lords commandment, which commands and admonishes us to repentance. The
third is, the goodness and long suffering of God, who allureth, and daily and
hourelie wayteth for our return unto him. The fourth is, the diverse kinds of
Calamities of this life, wherewith (as with a rod) our heavenly Father
humbles us, and assayeth to draw us unto him, whiles we be negligent.
Fifthlie, the uncertainty of our lives: knowing that death is certain, but the
time thereof uncertain, neither after death is there place left us to repent,
therefore we should not delay nor neglect to take the opportunity thereof.
Sixthly, the sudden coming of the judge in the most terrible and latter
judgment, against impenitent sinners. Seventhly, the pain eternal of them
which live and die without repentance. Eightlie, the consideration of the sweet
comforts and commodities, which follow them which timely repent. Ninthlie, the
examples of them which have returned unto the Lord, as Adam, David, the
Ninevites, and others, who timely obtained mercy, and salvation from the Lord,
who is so willing to forgive them that return unto him. Tenthly, and lastly,
the fearful examples of the impenitent, who^ the Lord has shut out from his
loving mercies; as Cayn, Esau, Saul, Judas, and Dives in hell; who sought for
mercy, but obtained it not. By this we learn what is meant by Plowing and
turning up of the fallowed land, for the sovereign Seed.

CHAP. XII. The heart of man is likened unto the Earth, or Land, both fallowed,
and vnfallowed.
Now, that we may yet better understand the Metaphor, with profitable fruit,
let us examine Man, or Man's heart, is likened Man is likened to the Earth, for
7. causes.
Next, why the heart of the Godly man or repenta^t sinner, is likened to that
Fallowed or tilled soil: As for the former, we find that man is called Earth,
and that his heart is Genesis 3. Secondly, by reason of his nature corrupt, which
is as the earth, cold and dry, and thereby barraine of all good thoughts, and
godly endeavors: neither is the same easily persuaded to goodness, but by the
divine grace, and therefore no less comparable to the Rock or Stone: as the
prophet says: Amos. 6.1^.
Shall the horses run on Rocks? thar is, on a barraine or hard land to
plough, for the sowing of Piety? Thirdly, for that, as the were he not
sustained by the finger and mercy of God in Christ. Fourthly, as the earth has
many Man himself, most unconstant, wavering, and reeling too and fro, now of
one constitution, then of another, after the manifold changes and chances of
this life. Fifthlie: as the earth is the receptacle of all seeds, prauum and
inscrutabile, wicked and unsearchable. Seuenthlie and lastly, the earth being
not tilled and Genesis 3. Even so man's heart without discipline or spiritual
culturing, brings forth all kind of cor^upt and naughty imaginations, sins,
evil deeds, and like fruits, such (as Christ tells us) defile the man. And
surely, here may we see the true image ^f the Old Adam, who has (as said
Bernard Bern: in 30. Sermon: pervo^de. 1. Cor. 15.
) a ^hreefolde oldnes, namely that of the heart: that of ^he mouth, and that of
the body, in the which we offend three manner of ways: that is to say, in
^hought, in word, and in deed. In the heart are ^ound carnal and worldly
desires: that is, the love of the flesh, and the love of the world: Likewise in
the mouth there is double inueteration, as Arrogancy, and Derogacie. Also a
double oldnes is in the body, that is, heinous and wicked actions. All these
are the Old Man's image, and require in us to be renewed.

On the other side, the heart of the repentant, yea, The heart of the penitent
and godly.
of the godly Man, is compared to the Land fallowed, or well manured: First,
in regard of the labor thereon employed. Next, for the aptnes of Ioh. 3 3.
thorns, thistles, and tares, and renewed the same in the best manner of the
spiritual georgie, and thereby has given it power to procreate and yield forth
the happy Fruits of those good Seeds and Plants thereon bestowed. This is a
special Fallowing of the spiritual Land, as wherein may be seen a true
Mortification, M^^tifi^^^^^n.
and a right Renouation, R^^^^^tio^.
so often commended unto us in the sacred Scriptures. By the former, our
corrupt Nature is mortified 1. Cor: ^
that is to say, without the fear of God, without hope, without joy in God,
and so all unfit for the kingdom of God, (as that Old Man): Now are we
lightened in our minds, we have new motions kindled in our hearts by the Word,
and by the holy Spirit: that is, we have the true knowledge of God, faith and
boldness in Christ, the fear of God, right invocation, love, joy in god,
hope, and other good spiritual virtues, under the government of Jesus our
Prince. To this exhorted the Apostle. 1. Cor. 15
As we have borne the Image of the earthly man, so let us bear the Image of
the heavenly Man. This heavenly Man is Christ, by whom we have a triple Nouitie
or Newness, as the same Bernard writes, opposite to the triple oldnesse of
the Old Man: that is to say, the Newness of the heart, of the mouth, and of
the body. Concurring the first, the Apostle says: Be ye renewed Ephesians. 4.
and put ye on the New Man, which according to God is recreated in
Righteousness and holiness of truth. For the second he Let not any evil word
come out of your mouth, but that which is good to the edification of faith,
that ye may give grace to the hearers. And for the third, To. 6.19.
As ye have given your members servants to to uncleanness, and to iniquity,
to commit iniquity: so now give your members servants unto Righteousness in
holiness. And this Bernard Bern. Renouetur ergo Cor noctrum, etc.
draws to particulars, saying: Let our hearts be renewed from fleshly and
worldly lusts, that those being excluded, ^he love of God, and of our heavenly
Father, may be brought in. Let all arrogancy and derogation be banished our
mouths, that in the place thereof may succeed the true confession of our
sins, and the good estimation of our neigbours. And for those heinous and
wicked actions which appertains to the corruption of the body, let
Continency and perfest innocence be embraced: as where, by the contrary,
vices may b^e expelled and overcome by these contrary virtues. This kind of
Renouation works the Lord Jesus, dwelling in us by faith, according to that
his saying: Behold, I make all things new. The same dwelling in our hearts, is
our true wisdom: in our mouth the very truth: and in our person, the right
justice. To this husbandry chiefly aimed the Prophet, when prophesying of the
return of the Jews from their captivity, and of the reedifying of Jerusalem,
he said in the Lords name thus; I will cause you to dwell in the Cities, and
the desolate places shall be builded, and the desolate land shall be tilled,
whereas it lay waste in the sight of all that passed by. This meant the
Apostle, when he advised the Collossians Col. 3.
to mortify their earthly members: when he willed the Romans To. 13.
to cast away the deeds of darkness, and to put on the armor of light: when
he exhorted the Corinthians 1. Cor.
to bear the Image of the heavenly.

By this is every one taught his own condition and estate, according to that
saying, Know thy self, and thereby endeavor the sooner to assay to purge out
the gross corruptions of his nature: so to be prepared for the heavenly
graces, least it be said of us, that whiles we peruse all others, we neglect
our selves. And what gain they, who either for vainglory, or greedy lucre,
or any worldly respects, seek to pleasure others, and the whiles make
themselves castawaies. The sick man, who knows not his own estate, seeks
not for a Physician, nor studieth to prevent his own danger, until it be
ouerlate: God grant we may look better to our selves hereafter, then
heretofore we have done, and in the true fear of the divine Justice, be
terrified from sin, and by the consideration of his fatherly love and mercy,
be incited and encouraged to Righteousness and Mercy. Then shall the Spirit
of Discipline inhabit our hearts, and therein, the good seed sown, bring forth
the good fruit in great abundance, to the honor of God, and comfort of our
souls.

CHAP. XIII. The Plough wherewith the land of the Righteous is fallowed and
prepared.
Having before spoken of the sowing of the seed, and that it is required, the
land wherein the same seed is sown, should first be well fallowed, whereby
the tares and weeds may be mortified and suppressed, that the good fruits
might ensue without hindrance: it is now in question with what instrument this
is to be wrought and performed. But seeing that al things are difficile, and
so hard, as few men can express them, we hold him happy, which by the
divine grace is made able thereto: for it is certain, that the natural man
cannot conceive the things of the holy Ghost, as we plainly see in the
example of Nicodemus, Ioh. 3.^.2.
with whom Christ disputed concerning man's Regeneration, teaching him to
understand divine things by the similitudes taken from the truth of things
terrene. After whose example, we may again consider the Husbandman, how and
with what instrument he deals in this point of good husbandry, as wherewith
the better to ease himself and expedite his work. The chief Instrument of
his Action is that Aratrum, which we call the Plough, wherein are found five
general parts to be considered, as: First, the Soole, with his members. Five
parts of the Plough.
Next, the Oxen, which draw it. Thirdly, the Holder, which directs it.
Fourthly, the Leader, who allureth it. Fifthly, the Driuer, wh provoke it.


To the which also we may add one other thing, which though not any part of
this Plough, yet incident and convenient to the better preparation of the Land,
and that is, the Harrowing: wherein also are considered three parts: That is:
1. The Heart owes which break the Clods. Three parts in the har^owing of the
La^d.
2. The Horses which draw. 3. The Driuer, who yoketh them.


Comparable to the which, we have found a ^ertaine spiritual Plough, and like
Harrowes, in ^^d by the true use whereof, the spiritual Hus^^ndman may with
the more facility and better ^eed, effect that which is required, and thereby
^uch ease himself touching the great pains and ^rowes of his hands about the
Earth, Gen, 3.17, and 5.^9.
which ^e Lord had cursed, according to that prophecy Lamech, in the naming of
his son Noah, who ^erwarde became so good a Husbandman. ^ow, in the
examination of the Parts, let us first ^^nsider of the Soul, which is that
Instrument ^erewith being fastened to the Oxen, The Soul with che parts thereof
14.
the Hus^^dman rippeth up his land for the Seed: and ^^^rein we find (besides
some others) fourteen ^s or members: as they follow. viz. 1 The Share. 2 The
Ship. 3 The Culter. 4 The Beam. 5 The Tractorie. 6 The ground Rise. 7 The
broad hale. 8 The Round Halt. 9 The Chain. 10 The farther Wheel. 11 The near
Wheel. 12 The Axell. 13 The Key. 14 The Tawe.
^o the which particular parts and members, so many Actions and virtues of
Righteousness and Mercy may be compared. viz.

1 Contrition of the heart. 2 Humility of the Spirit. 3 Confession of the
mouth. 4 Maceration of the flesh. 5 Hope of Remission. 6 Patience in
affliction. 7 Conversion of mind. 8 Correction of works. 9 Combination of
virtues. 10 Meditation of godliness. 11 Continuance of good actions. 12
Invocation of God. 13 Justification of faith. 13 Love of the Spirit.
A memorandu^ for the Ploghmen in the field.
Lo, in this sort is the Soole of Pieties Plough framed, as whereby the very
Plough men and laborers in the field, following or beholding the Plough, may
easily (as by certain Symboles) consider theit own condition, and call to
memory, those things whereunto the Lord in his word, and by his servants has
invited, and seeks to persuade them: that being thereby sooner taught, they
may as good Husbandmen, labor in the Lords field, both for his glory, and
their own commodity. And this that we may yet better know and remember to
observe, let us be contented to peruse and examine those particulars.

CHAP. XIII.. The first part of the Soole, is the Share.
THe first is the Contrition of heart, Contrition of heart.
likened to the Share of the Soole. This Instrument is called in Latin
Dentale, Dentale.
of the word Dens, or Tooth, for that it pierces or biteth: and the use
thereof is to pierce the ^owels of the soil, as therein to force the same, and
make way for the Culter, which follows ^^ne to divide and open that which the
Share ^^th pierced: and this very aptly expresses, that ^^ntrition of heart,
which is well defined the Co^^^ction or wholesome motion of an humble ^inde, or
sorrowful heart, rising of the Recorda^^n of sins committed, and the fear of
Gods ^^ements on the same, and is declared with (...) sighs and weeping eyes.
And howsoe^^ we find the same to be occasioned by any ^^^^rnall action, we
most know it to be the ve^^ work of God then wrought, when by the (...) and
judgment of Conscience, he opens (...) a man the greatness and horror of his
trans^^ssion and sins, demonstrateth to him his high pleasure, with an iminent
plague for the same, (...) it slicteth on his heart the bitter sense o^ his
^^ath, as whereby he is forced to fear, to tremble, and to feel the eager
gnawing and wringing torment of a guilty Conscience, now as ready to be drawn
to the Judgment Seat, and thence as gultie to be sent forth to the place of
execution: that so, beaten down, daunted, and mortified, he might afterward be
made capeable either of grace and consolation in the Lords mercy: or being left
to himself, might fall through despair into eternal death and damnation.
With this Share, did the Lord pierce and wound the hearts of those Jews to
whom Peter preached, accusing and charging them with the betraying and
murdering of the Lord Jesus, which had justly provoked the Lord, and deserved
the pain of his just judgments: whereon being pricked in conscience, they
said unto Peter and the other Apostles, Act. 2.37.
Men and brethren what shall we do? The same Share pierced the Publicans, the
Soldiers, and the people, when John the Baptist told them that the Axe was
laid even to the root of the tree: so that every tree that brought not forth
good fruit, was to be hewn down and cast into the fire. This was the
preaching of the Law, whereat also, David, Manasses, Peter, and Magaalen,
accusing themselves as guilty, were brought to contrition. And (indeed) David
after the experience of this instrument, found that it was not only a thing
profitable for him, as whereby not might begin to proceed with Pieties Plough:
Psalm. 50.
but also a pleasing Sacrifice unto God, the which is strongly seconded by the
Lord himself, who says: To whom should I look, but to him which is poor and
contrite in heart, and trembles at my words. Esai. 66.2.
Therefore the same, Paul much commends, 2. Cor. 7.7.8.
writing to the Corinthians, and adds: Though I made you sorry with a Letter,
I repent not, though I did repent. Again, I now rejoice, not that ye were
sorry, but that you sorrowed to repentance, for ye sorrowed godly, so that in
nothing ye were hurt by us: for godly sorrow causes Repentance unto salvation,
not to be repented of: but the worldly sorrow causes death. Wherein also
distinguishing the godly sorrow, (that is, the Christian contrition) from that
which is ungodly, he shows the ends and fruits of either. And truly as that
medicine which draws forth from the sick man's heart the venomous humor of
his disease, and prepares him for the sweet and healing potion: This godly
contrition draws out of the sinners heart, the poiso^ of the wicked fact, and
mittigateth the biting and sorrow of the conscience, albeit it pierces and
wounds the same: for by this shall be made even a sovereign medicine to
heal the wound of it own piercing, comparable therein to that ointment or
plaster, which, made of the Spider or fly that stingeth a man, shall easily
heal and mitigate the pain thereof. This is a practice used in the cure of the
body, in the which, that is thought no less needful that a vein be opened,
when the Physician perceives the blood infected. But the sinner is throghly
infected both in body and mind, and so inflamed therewith, that he will be
soon agonized and dead indeed, if his vein be not soon opened, even the
Cordial vein, from whence the rankour of malice and wicked imaginations may
be drawn forth. Gen, 6.
For the imaginations of man's heart are only evil every day. Therefore said
the Lord; Circumcise your hearts: Root your hearts: Let the sinner forsake his
own imaginations.

This commenceth the Action of man's Mortification, and is the first part of
Repentance, and so needful, as that without it men cannot repent indeed. Ps.
51. and 126.6.7.
But having the same in the right constitution of mind, we are accepted with
the Lord: though we sow in tears, we reap in joy: we enter the gate of
right Repentance, we move the Lord GOD to pity us, we find mercy with his
grace: and finally, be directed from hell to heaven, and from eternal death,
to eternal life, through the merits of the Son of God.

CHAP. XV. The second part of the Soole of piety, is the Ship.
NExt to the Share, is the Ship, 2. Humiliation of the Spirit.
which is that member of the Soole whereon the Share is fastened, and this
notes the humiliation of the Spirit, wrought by that true fear of GOD,
whereby (man's heart being contrite) the mind is also so humbled and made poor
in his own conceit, as that it casts off all boldness of it own strength,
wisdom, justice, wealth and estimation. Hereof it is, that a man chooses to
be an abject in the house of God, and prefers all others before him, when
he considers his own vileness, as David did: acknowledges himself to be
but dust and ashes, as Abraham did: esteems himself unworthy of Gods
manifold mercies, as Jacob did: stands a far off, and is afraid to look
up to heaven, as the poor Publican did: dreadeth to take the holy name of God
in his mouth, as Solomon did: desires to be but as a servant in Gods house, as
the prodigal Son did in the house of his father: esteems himself a worm,
and no man, as Christ did: thinks both himself and his house, unworthy of
Christ, as the Ruler did: and says to Christ, Lord go from me, for I am a
sinful man, as Peter did. In a word, as this humble Spirit casts down, and
condemns and contemns himself, as a servant unprofitable, in thought, word
and deed: so has he no desire to be praised before God or man, because he
sees and feels in himself nothing worthy commendation; but rather sin
and damnation. This is contrary to the humor of the world, which hunteth
after the vain glory of the same, and thinks magnificently of her followers
therein: disdaining and contemning the whiles the humble and lowly men of
Spirit. Howbeit, the Lord Jesus, as he himself was humble and meek, Mat. 52.
and would that all his Disciples should follow him therein: so he pronounces
those persons blessed: for that to them belongs the kingdom of heaven:
neither (as he says) shall any be admitted into the same, but such only as be
truly humbled, and in the meekness of Spirit become as children: the which
Augustine considering, said, that this was indeed the first, the second, and
the third point, yea the highest and cheifest point of Christianity. Why
humility is likened to the Ship.
And worthily is this virtue compared to the Ship in the Soole: for that, as
the Ship is not only that piece which holds the Share, but is placed beneath
next to the earth: so the humiliation of the Spirit, holds fast the true
Contrition of the heart, the which without the same, would soon be abated:
and yet how low soever this be placed under some other parts of the Soole, and
next the ground, with the Ship: yet as Nazianzen said: (ypsus arozenthe
etapeinosen) it goes before exal^ation and honor. Therefore Saint James
counseled, Be ye humble under Gods mighty hand, that he may exalt you in the
time convenient. For, God resists the proud, but gives grace to the lowly.
And to strengthen all, the Lord himself says, Learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly of heart, and ye shall find rest for your souls: for he that
humbles himself shall be exalted.

CHAP. XVI. The third part of the Soole is the Culter.
THe third member of this Soole is Confession of the Mouth: 3. Confession of
Mouth.
compared to the Vomere, Vomer.
or that which we call the Culter. The Culter has his name of cutting or
dividing: the Vomer is so called a Vomendo, that is, of vomiting or casting
forth any thing from the stomach. This Culter is that which cuts, divides
and opens that which the Share pierces, casting or separating the sound
earth, some on this side, some on that: as a man may thereby see not only a
division or opening of the parts, but also the very bottom or ground of that
earth. And thereto that Confession of the Mouth being compared, is defined the
express manifestation of our sins, either publicly or privately, either to
God, Confession to God.
or to men: that to God, is when our Consciences touched with the divine Law,
we so acknowledge our sins before the Lord, that we confess our selves most
worthy damnation both of body and soul, and therein we accuse not Gods
Judgments, but implore his great mercies, and praise his glory which
justifies the sinner, not of desert, but of his divine grace in his Son:
that to man is, when having hurt or offended our brethren, Confession to man.
we willingly acknowledge and confess our faults unto them, with an humble
and hearty desire of pardon. And this confession is sometimes private, as when
the faults be private: and sometimes public, as when the faults be public:
always accompanied with a promise of amendment and ready satisfaction, in
such measure as hability, opportunity and occasion can extend and be ministered
to answer the proportion of the injury or fault. To this aimed David, when
having sinned not only against the Lord, but against man, he did not alone
say, that he would confess his sins unto the Lord, but also declared the
performance of either, openly and before the congregation. Psalm. 51.
Such a matter imports Solomon's Preacher, wherein he confesses (among the
vanities of the sons of men) his own abominations and errors: Eccl. 1, and
2. Solomon's confession.
yea as the Hebrews report, in the bitter sense of his sins, and grief of
conscience, he exposed himself ready to confess his faults throughout the
City of Jerusalem, wherein he reigned king, before the eyes of all the
inhabitors of the same. A rare example of such a personage. Thus King Manasses
being imprisoned in Babylon by the divine judgment for his great
abominations, confessed openly that his sins were more then the stars of the
heavens, and the sand by the sea shore, in multitude, without number. Daniel
also in the behalf of the captive Jews for their sins, confesses, Lord, Dan.
9.9.10.
unto us belongs shame and confusion: for we have gone away from thee: and
many other like examples (besides testimonies) do the holy Scriptures exhibit
unto us of the use of this spiritual Culter: unto the which we may aptly affix
that confession of the Ghristian Emperor Theodosius, Theodosius
who being reproved by Ambrose the Bishop of Millane for some heinous fault,
and excluded the Church, did not only humbly acknowledge his offense with
tears, but confessing the same openly, said, that the Church doors, which
were set wide open to receive in the poor folk and beggars, were shut (and
that worthily) against him, who was made a Lord over his brethren. Whereby as
with a Culter or knife, this Emperor (with those other of like estate) ripped
up and laid wide open their committed sins. Neither is this virtue unaptly
compared to that Vomer, The Vomer and use thereof.
being indeed a spiritual vomiting or casting forth of that which is noisome
from the stomach. The stomach is man's heart. As the stomach is oppressed
with repletion: so is man's heart annoyed with sin. And as the wringing of the
stomach provoke vomit: so the contrition of the heart, and true humiliation
of a man, yields a good Confession. Again, as the stomach is not eased, ere
it be discharged, no more is the heart until wicked imaginations be cast out.
For it is certain, that no sinner has any ease or comfort, before he find
the gracious countenance of God turn toward him: but until the sinner in the
sorrow of his heart confesses his sin, God shows him no favorable
countenance: and because he is willing in his loving mercies, to recover his
children, he never leaves off to strike, beat and chastise them with
afflictions, until they acknowledge and confess their sins, and in all
humility seek unto him for mercy. Number. 21.7 Le. 16.18.22.
This to teach and persuade unto the Israelites, he commanded the High Priest
to confess openly both his and the peoples sins upon the scapte goat. And
this surely as the godly used, they ever found the mercy of God ready to pardon
and to forgive them, according to that saying of Solomon, the which he had
before seen in his Father David, and by good experience tried on himself.
Pro. 28, 13
To confess and forsake sin, obtains mercy: 1. Ioh. 1.9.
but he that hides his sins, shall not prosper. To the which we hear the
Apostle to accord, If we confess our sins (says he) God is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Lo,
here is Mercy: here is prosperity: here is pardon; here is cleansing.
Therefore let us well use this spiritual Culter, and therein answer to the
admonition of S. James, where he says unto sinners replete with many noisome
and dangerous humors of heart: Iam. 4.48.
Cleanse your hearts ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye wavering minded. And
if this Share and this Culter be waxen so blunt, The sharpening of the Culter.
and therewith the ground of Man's heart can neither be torn up nor divided in
good sort, the Lord will cause the enemy to blow the fire of affliction, and to
beat on with the hammers of persecutions and troubles for the sharpening
thereof, the which was signified by that example of the Israelites, 1. Sam:
13.20.
who having no Smith in Israel, were forced to repair to the Philistines to
sharpen every man his Share, and his Culter, for the better tillage of their
Land. Thus the poor prodigal child, Luk: 16.
after he had felt the smart of affliction and misery under a cruel master
in a strange country, was moved to acknowledge his disobedience and sin,
saying: Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and I am not
worthy to be called thy Son.

CHAP. XVII. The 4. part of the Soole is the Beam.
The manuring of the flesh.
THe Fourth part of this sacred Soole is Temo, that is the Beam, which
strongly bears and holds all the other parts together: and notes
Macerationem carnis: the Macerating of the flesh: that is, the extenuating,
chastising, and humbling of the body, as that voluptuousnes, and wanton lusts
being allayed, the spirit may have the more freedom and liberty in the true
use of the senses of the Soul, and made the apter to every virtue, 1. Cor:
9.7.
the which therefore, is esteemed the strength of the Soole. This virtue Paul
exercised in himself, when he said, I beat down my body and bring it into
subjection least by any means, after that I have preached to others, I my
self should be reproved: the meaning is, that he kept a strait dyer, and
abstained from such things as might distemper his body. This he saw to be
needful, for that he perceived the law of sin reigning in his members,
provoking him to insolency, pride, wicked lusts, and naughtines. And lest
that Paul (as a man) should have been negligent in this necessary duty, he
testified again, that the Lord permitted the messenger of Satan to buffet him:
that is, God laid on him crosses, afflictions, and many troubles, whereby (as
under the rod or yoke of correction) he might be humbled and kept within the
bowndes of his duty. The pampring of the proud flesh brings many
enormities to the soul, and destruction to both body and soul. Every man
(says S. James) is tempted when he is drawn away of his own concupiscence
and is entised, then, Iam. 1.14.15. Genesis 6. Genesis 19. Ezec. 16. Deuteronomy: 3^. 1.
Cor: 10.
when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin and sin, when it is
finished, brings fourth death. The old world given to this sin, swayed
therein and were drowned: Sodom and Gomorra for the same, were burned to
cinders: the Israelites being full, forgot God and were plagued in the
wilderness. Baltazar in his gluttonous feast, could not repent, though he saw
the handwriting on the wall, but he was destroyed: those two rich men mentioned
in the Gospel by S. Luke, Luke. 12, and 16.
being full, would neither pity the pore, nor amend their lives, and so they
were taken away in their sins. Moreover, the very godly have by this enemy,
as domestical, been annoyed and endangered: Gen, 9.19.
Noah being full of wine, lay shamefully uncovered: and Lot, being drunken
with wine, committed incest with his own daughters. David in his fulness and
pomp, doated on Bethsabe Vrias wife, and committed murder and adultery,
whereof followed many plagues and troubles. And surely, they which are (Somno
vinoque Sepulti) overcome with ydlenes and wine, have not only their
cogitations blinded, but are fed as Oxen, fatted for the slaughter. CHRIST
therefore, to dissuade men from this sin, and to persuade them to the true use
of the Plough-beam, being the very strength of Mortification, and the way to
safety, thus exhorts; Take heed that your hearts be not overcome with
surfeitting and dronkennes, and so the day of the Lord come upon you unawares.
Again, Watch and pray, test ye enter into temptation, for the spirit is
willing, but the flesh is weak: meaning that the flesh having his will, is an
hinderance to the good motions and desires of the Spirit, and therefore we
should not pamper such an enemy. Again, there is a Devil which possessing the
hearts of the voluptuous persons goes not out, but by fasting and prayer. S.
Paul condemns pampering of the flesh, as a work of darkness, in the which the
Devil dominiers to destroy: and therefore Saint Peter, dissuading men from
this danger, exhorts them to be Sober and Watch. In and by the which, as we
see the danger of voluptuousnes and carnal lusts: so are we taught the true
use of Pieties Beam, and persuaded to the same for our own good. The
Physicians when they be willing to extenuate men after repletions or corrupt
humors of body, The order of extenuation of sins. Physician.
prescribe sometimes sweatings, sometimes vomits, sometimes diets, sometimes
unctions, sometimes minutions, sometimes cauterizings, sometimes glysters:
sometimes exercises, sometimes watchings, sometimes potions. In like sort the
sinner which is spiritually distempered with the repletion and corruption of
sin, requires all these points of spiritual medicine, as whereby he may be
macerated and prepared for health. The sweatings are Agonies, sorrows, The good
wife teaches sinners the order of Mortification.


The like Simbole is taken from the good wife in the allaying of her pot,
which being on the fire begins to boil over.

First, she uncovers the pot.

Next, if that help not, she in all the have blows on the liquor.

Thirdly, she casts in Salt.

Fourthly, she allayeth it with cold water.

Fifthly, she stirs it with the Ladle.

Sixthly, she with-draweth the fire: and lastly,

In like sort, the sinner swelling in repletion,

First, to acknowledge and confess his sins.

2. To pray to God for assistance.

3. To hearken to the word of God, and to fear his Judgments.

4. Apply that which is contrary to the humor or cause of the sin.

5. To be diligent in some honest labor of exercise.

6. To abstain from the voluptuousness of meats and drinks: and 7. To
withdraw our selves from all those occasions of our sickness and danger.

All these things require a meet amplification, from the which I am restrained
through my desire of breuity to avoid tediousnes. Surely this is that strong
Beam, without the which, the best man on the earth often falls, and is
annoyed, as king David and king Solomon, yea, as Noah and Lot did, being
replenished with wine and fleshly security. Therefore, as we should hearken to
the good counsel of our SAVIOVR and his Apostles, so should we pray to the
LORD with Agur, Lord give me not Poverty, nor Riches: feed me with food
convenient for me: lest I be full and deny thee: and say, Who is the Lord?

CHAP. XVIII. The 5. part of the Soole, is the Tractorie.
THe first member of the Spiritual Soole, is the Hope of Remission, The hope
of Remission.
signified by the Tractorie, (or Lamb, as some call it) which necessarily must
be fastened to the former four, lest whiles by terrifying the sinner with
continual threats of Gods Judgments and Spiritual corasiues to cast him
down, and to draw him from proud presumption, he should (for want of
comforts and relief,) be drench't in utter despair: yet not so, that being a
grievous offender, ^ee might be occasioned to presume on Mercy, but, that
knowing both his sins with the danger and horror thereof, and repenting, he
should not be overwhelmed in fear, but hope for mercy. This rule Paul
observed writing to the Corinthians, who having terrified them, by laying
before their eyes the terrible examples of Gods Judgments on the ancient
Jews in the wilderness, to breed in them true contrition, humility,
confession, and mortification of the flesh, by and by he adds for their
consolation and stay; There is no tentation has taken you, but such as
belongs to the Nature of man: and God is Righteous, who will not suffer you
to be tempted above your power. And this has been the custom of the holy
Prophets to mix sweeet things with sower, to this end, that whilst they
sought to plaster one wound, they might not make another: but rather (one
thing considered with another) they might heal the one, and withstand the
other. Therefore have we also thought good, soon after those four hard
Corasines before going, to minister this godly Comfortatiue, the Hope of
Remission, which animateth the sinner to follow Pieties Plough, for Hope is To
en Toi^s Senois Pharmacon, a Remedy in all hard adventures, as said Gregory
Nazianzen Naz: ad ciues Naz: Aug: in Psalm 104.
to his citizens. And as another said truly, Qui gaudet in Spetenebit and rem,
etc: He that rejoices in Hope, shall also enjoy the thing hoped for: but, he
that is without Hope, cannot obtain the thing. In regard whereof, this virtue
is called the Mother of all endeavors and studies, Hope is the Mother of
endeavors. Matter conatuu^.
engendring not only the will, but also the endeavor of studying, working and
prosecuting that which is commenced. By this, the Mariner and Merchant pass
over the dangerous Seas, hoping to return home with gain. The husbandman
teareth up his soil and labors hardly in the field, in Hope to gather the
fruits of his travails. The Father puts forth his Son in a far Country at
his great charge, in hope he will return home a learned man. By this, the
very Rebel sometimes yields himself to the Princes hand, in hope of pardon,
the condemned man hopes for life, the sick man seeing the Physician, looks for
health: and to all men, the greatest solace in the concourse of calamities is
the Hope of an Alteration: Nazian: Eccl 9.4.
whereof the wise man said, To the living there is hope: 3. Kind^^ of Hope.
and therefore a living dog is better then a dead Lion. By this are we
retained in the full expectation of those things which are either promised or
wished for. And of this, there be three kinds: the first whereof, Opinion: the
second of certain the third of Faith. The Opinionate Faith, The vain hope.
and being of affinity to the second, expects that which Faith assures,
relying on Gods promises. Again, that first kind, though but deceitful and
vain, has drawn many men forth, not only to the contriuing of many
unlawful actions; Genesis 3.1.
but also to the adventure of diverse and sundry hard exploits: the which
Pindare considering, said* that many a man it exalted, whom upon a sudden it
cast down. Heuah, hearkening to the deceitful words of the Serpent, Act. 12.
hoped that she should be made a Goddess, and passing wise, by eating of the
forbidden fruit. King Herod seeing that he prevailed in his purpose, against
James the brother of John, he proceeded further, and took Peter also, hoping
he should have had therein the like success: arguing thus; I had my purpose
on James, Ergo I shall have the like on Peter. Genesis 4.
Cayn conceyted so well of himself and of his actions, that if Abel his
brother were extinguished, he hoped he should be the only promised Seed of
the woman, the heir of the world, and live in all peace. The like hope had
Absalom against his Father David: 2 Samuel 15 Mat: 2.
So the other Herod hoped that in the murdering of the Innocent children, he
should also murder Christ, and overthrow his kingdom. But (as the wise man
says) Whiles the ungodly hope to have a friend of unrighteousness, Sap. 2.16.
and 5.14. Job. 8 9. Ia: 1.10.
they come to naught: for the hope of the ungodly is like the dry thistle
flower or dust, which is blowe^ away of the wind, and ^ike a thin scumme
that is scattered abroad with the storm, and as the smoke that the wind
disperseth, and as the remembrance of him that passes and taryeth but for a
day.

2 The more certain hope.
The second kind of hope is more assured, for that it is taken from the
certain knowledge or experience of things, as whereby me^ of the same causes
hope for the like effects: as from the fire heat: from the water moisture:
from the Sun light: and from the night darkness. So in things divine and
spiritual, from Gods love we expect grace, and upon our true repentance, the
mercy of God. Thus we hope as God is our Father, and we are his children, that
he will provide for us, according to his good nature, and his loving kindness
to others his children. Thus Paul consolated the Corinthians 2. Cor 1.7
in their affliction. Our hope (says he) is steadfast concerning you, in as
much as we know, that as ye are partakers of the sufferings, ye shall also be
partakers of the Consolation: he adds: for we would not have you ignorant
of our afflictions, etc: because we should not trust in our selves, but in
God, who delivered us from so great a death: and thus he would thereof
conclude: therefore he will also deliver you, who have the same God for your
Father: who are professors of the same cause: who are partakers of the same
afflictions with us. Thus the poor prodigal Son, Luke 15.
upon certain knowledge of his good Fathers nature and love, returned home,
hoping to find the fruits thereof toward himself. 1. King. 20.32.
Thus the Assyrians, having experienced the merciful hearts of the Kings of
Israel, came and submitted themselves to the King with halters on their necks.
And thus the people having tried and found the great virtue of healing in the
Lord Jesus, and his Apostles, came and presented their sick before him and
them, in hope of help. Such arguments we find abundant, as in the holy
Scriptures, so chiefly in David's Psalms Psalm 37.
and sayings, among the which, that is notable, where he says: I have been
young, and now I am old, yet I never saw the righteous forsaken: thereof he
would conclude, therefore I hope he will not forsake me, which am a righteous
man in this, that my sins are pardoned, and I depend on him by my faith.
Again, he says: The righteous man is merciful. As if he would argue: This
is a righteous man: ergo, I hope he will show me mercy. For I find it truly
tried, that from righteousness, issues mercy. This is a good hope, and of near
affinity with that which follows, 3. The best kind of hope, and chiefly
he^e required.
which rising of a true faith in Jesus Christ, is defined the sure expectation
of those good things promised us in the holy Gospel: as namely, remission of
our sins, the righteousness of Christ, the gracious aid and help of God in
all our afflictions, the mitigation of our sorrows and calamities, a glorious
victory over sin and the devil, and the inheritance of life everlasting,
according to the fore knowledge and good will of God in his Son. Romans 8.
This is that which fortifieth patience, and persuades the very groaning
creature to abide and serve until the day of the adoption of Gods children. In
this hope said David I believe verily to see the goodness of God in the land
of the living. In the same said Job, Job. ^4.
I know that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall rise again in the last day,
and shall be covered with my skin, Heb. 11
and shall see God. In this, the ancient fathers travailed patiently toward
the City of the Saints, before they obtained the promises. This is that
Helmet of Salvation whereof St. Paul speaks in the furniture of a true
Christian, Ephesians. 6 Omnium prorum spes, etc.
and the only hope of all the godly (as not only Augustine, but the Apostle
writes that we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous,
and he is the propiciation for our sins. For whenever the ungodly shall
forsake his own ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and turn
again unto the Lord, the Lord (through this his Son) shall be merciful unto
him, for he is very ready to forgive: yea, he will put all his wickedness
out of his remembrance: as the holy Prophets testify. Therefore is this part
worthily likened to the Tractorie, by the which all Christians are not only
consolated in their great sorrow: but also drawn forth and encouraged in the
works of their vocation, to follow Christ their Master (though under the
Cross) toward everlasting life.

CHAP. XIX. The sixth part of the Soole, is the ground-Rise.
AFter the Contrition, Humiliation, Confession, Maceration, and Hope of
Remission, there needs Christian Patience: 6. Christian Patience.
by the which a Repentant Sinner is wonderfully strengthened in the better
performance of all the former: for by this a man is made able to sustain and
overcome with an equal mind all adverse and hard adventures whatsoever: the
which therefore our Savior commended to his Disciples in the midst of their
afflictions and troubles in this world, Mat. ^4. Iam. 5.7.
saying: In patience ye shall possess your souless: the like has James: Be
ye pattent therefore brethren unto the coming of the Lord. And this is
signified by the Grownd-Rise in the Soole of Pieties Plough. This is that piece
of timber which is fastened to the foot of the broadhale: and serves not only
for an aid to that part in the staying up of the earth which the Culter has
opened, but also, for the beating of the stones, clods and earth, from the
bottom of the furrow, and indeed stands in the place of the mightiest
assaults of those manifold oppositions, the which notwithstanding being of
that force (though of no great bigness) it slideth forth with the Soole, and
passes on in the work pretended, leaving all those stones, cloddes, and rased
earth behind it, as that valiant victor which having slain his enemy in the
field, passes over him, and lets him there lie. And of that nature and force
is Patience, which therefore is defined, a voluntary and daily sustentation and
tolleration of very difficult and hard things for the sake of honesty and
vtility: or (after the Philosophers) an obedience to Reason, in bearing those
hard adventures which Reason persuades to be borne, and not daunted with
sorrow, that a man should yield to do or commit any thing against virtue,
notwithstanding he should die or suffer any pain whatsoever. Neither are such
esteemed patient persons, which overcome with sorrow, are persuaded to
perpetrate that which is not agreeable to Justice or any other virtues. But the
Fathers of our Church defining the right Christian and true Patience, the same
(which is here required) have strengthened it with the divine love in Jesus,
without the which all patience is painful, and every affliction intolerable.
He therefore which gladly bears all labors, Cassiodor. True Patience and
her off^ce.
afflictions and griefs, laid on him in this life, in the hope of those good
things which are to come unto him, and for the love of GOD in Christ, is a
right patient man. He bears, not against his will, or perforce, but
willingly and gladly: not pleasures, but pains: not in hope of worldly
promotion, but of the good things of the life to come: not for the love of the
world, devil or flesh; but for the love of God: that not deserved by that
suffering, or any his merits, but in Jesus Christ. This therefore is that virtue
(indeed) which obeys God, in bearing all afflictions which the Lord
commands him to bear, and therein is not broken with sorrow, as that we
would endeavor any thing against Gods will, or grudge at those his
corrections. For it is the office of Patience to mollify all sorrows by the
acknowledging of Gods will, and the consideration of the gladness of his
Spirit, to retain hope of good delivery from troubles through Christ: to
desire of God mitigation, and ease, according to that saying of the Psalmist,
Wait on the Lord, and keep his ways, and he will promote thee, thou shall see
it. John Chrysostom Chrysostom.
gathers Ground-Rise. The first Mat. 5.3^.
which he preached to his Disciples on the Mount: I say unto you (says he)
Resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to
him the other also: And if any man will sew thee at the law, and take away thy
coat, let him have thy cloak also: and whosoever will compel thee to go a
mile, go with him twain. Again, Love your enemies: bless them that curse
you: do good to them that hate you pray for them which hurt you, and persecute
you. This he says, to teach how far off we should be from revenge and
murmour: and that we should rather be contented to bear yet more and greater
wrongs and troubles, then to study or endeavor to revenge or grudge against
that which we have already laid on us. Our Lord to persuade to this virtue,
produces one sound reason: That you may be the children of your Father which
is in heaven. As if he said: God is patient and long suffering: he is your
Father, ye are his children: it is meet that ye should therein be conformed
to your father, which says; Be ye holy, as I am holy. Christ might have
produced the example of Job, that patient man, as James did: or of Abraham, of
Joseph, or of Moses, as Stephen, and Paul did: yea, he might have brought his
own example, who (as the Scripture testifies) being stricken, he struck not
again, God is called Patie^t
but patiently bare our sins and our punishments in his body on the tree: and
was the most perfect pattern of this virtue, far beyond all them that ever
lived in the world: but he brings forth God his natural father, and our
heavenly father: and as he declared therein both his true nature and obedience
to his natural father: so would he that we also through him should be
therein conformed and made like to our heavenly father, and might thus argue:
God is patient, and he is my Father: therefore am I also patient, which am his
son. God is patient, and he is your Father: and I am patient, which am his
Son, and your Brother, and Savior. Therefore should ye also be patient
which are his children, and my brethren, and by me preserved. Again, God is
patient to you ward, therefore should ye also be patient, not only toward him,
but also one toward an other of you. And surely, as the Soole is imperfect,
without the Ground-Rise: neither can a Christian be a sufficient labourer in
the Lords field, or meet qualified for this Spiritual Plough, without
patience. For by this, hard things are easy: grievous matters are made
tolerable, and sour things seem sweet. The contrition of the heart, the
humiliation of the mind: the confession of the mouth, the narration of the
flesh, and the hope of remission, is mightily confirmed and established by this
Christian virtue. Therefore let us harken therein to the Lord and his holy
Apostles, which exhort and persuade us to help on the Plough, with this
powerful Ground-rise.

CHAP. XX. The seventh part of the Soole, is the broad Hale.
THe sixth member of the spiritual Soole, Conversion of mind.
is called Stiua, and englished the Handle, or Hale, on the which the
Plough-man holding his hand by winding and wilding the same, turns the Soole,
and corrects the work, comparable therein to the Mariner, who holding the
Helm of his Ship, turns about the same, and corrects the error of his
course at his pleasure. And of this (as having a double use) there be two
sorts, as whereon either hand of the Plough-man might lean for the better
framing of the work. The one is called the Broad handle, the other the
Round-handle: to the former is fastened that which is called the Ground-rise,
by the which the furrow is cast up and fully perfected: and this notes the
Conversion of the mind: as the other the correction of the action: both the
which are no less necessary, then the turning of the turfes, and amendment
of the faults. For the turfe being thereby loosed from the ground, must be
altered, as that which was before downward, turned upward, and that which was
upward turned down. Again, by this kind of correction, that which was old,
must be renewed, and the spinie turse changed into a gentle soil. But first of
the former.

By this is meant the altring of the affection, and the conversion of the
mind. It is well known, that the mind in his right nature is the same by
whose light all inferior virtues are directed and governed, and by the which
(being well qualified) a man is made able to judge between truth and
falsehood, good and evil. But without this (as deuoide of reason, which has
her seat in the mind) a man is comparable to the perishing beast. Here was it
where the Lord imprinted the image of his nature, and happy had bin our
condition, had not that sovereign image been taken from sinful man. But (as
says the Wise man) Man sought out many inventions: yea, the Serpent as a
venomous Salamander infected this part of man's soul, which being thereby as the
root of a tree poisoned, could thenceforth naturally yield no wholesome fruit.
Isa. ^7.^0 Romans 1.18
Thus man having his mind surcharged in most pitiful wise, fell out of his
wit, as one cast into a lewd mind, in the vanity whereof he walked, having his
cogitation darkened, and became a stranger from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in him. But seeing the Lord is willing man should be
restored and brought home, he gives him by his spirit, an alteration of mind,
being changed from evil to good: from the devil to God. And this God chiefly
required in that word of the wise man; My son, give me thine heart: for
having thine heart, I shall easily have thy body also. Man's heart and man's mind.
We may here note, that the mind, and the heart of man, do often signify one
and the same thing in the Scripture, as the fountain or root of all his
cogitations, words, actions and endeavors. Adam had turned his mind or heart
from God, when he listened to his wife, and turned to the Serpent: but then he
began to turn again, when he ackowledged his sin, and sought to the Lord
for mercy. The Israelites in the Wilderness had forgotten God that made them:
but then they began to remember him, and to change their minds, when they
began to repent. So the Jews captiued in Babylon for their auersion and
forgetfulness of God, Psalm. 137.
began at length to turn toward him, and remember Sion. Thus also Manasses,
and David, and Solomon, and Peter, and Paul, turned from their former wicked
lives, wherein they had offended the Majesty of God, and came home again,
humbly acknowledging their errors. And this is that which our Savior teaches
in the coming home of the lost Son to his Faher, against whom he had sinned,
being now of another mind and constitution then he was when he went from
home. Saint Paul perceiving not only the praise but the profit of this good
alteration, desired the Romans by the tender mercies of God, to be changed by
the renewing of their minds. Romans 12.2 1.
And S. Peter Pet. 4.1
put for our example Christ Jesus, to whom he would we should in mind be
conformed. Ier. 31.
And this the Prophet understood in the person of the children of Ephraim, who
had been estranged from Gods grace, and now desired to be reclaimed and
received into favor again, saying: Convert thou me, and I shall be converted,
for thou art the Lord my God. But David, We need new hearts.
to show the manner of this action, desired God to create in him a new heart,
and renew the right spirit within him. Where note, that this work must be
framed not of any thing in our selves, but another heart is to be created, that
is, not made or framed of that older heart, but created, that is, of nothing by
a new work: for the word to create, is to make something (not, ex praeiacente
materia, but) of nothing. For so indeed need we to have new made hearts, that
the holy Spirit may again be renewed to us in the same. For it is certain,
that we have turned away from the Lord, with the Prodigal Son, and loving
darkness more then light, have thought the pleasures of sin for the time,
better then the divine graces which last for ever: wherein we must confess
with David and Daniel, that we have egregiously erred, transgressed, and
offended against God and the Angels. But now we are better resolved, and
thinking more reverently of the Lord in goodness, are by this, ready to renew
our former love, and turning our hearts again unto our God, do endeavor to
serve him in singleness of mind. This is that which the Prophet Joel would
persuade, when he says; Rent your hearts and not you garments, Joel. 2.13.
and turn to the Lord your God. Lo this is that first Plough-handle, and such
is the true use thereof. Now let us consider of the second.

CHAP. XXI. The eight part of the Soole, is the round-Hale.
BY the former handle of the Soole, called also the Broad Hale, is signified
the turning about, 7 Correction of the words and works, etc.
and correction of the heart, mind, and inward affection of the Soul. Now by
this second, called the Round-hale, there is noted also a correction of man's
words, works, actions, conditions, and endeavors, that therein the conversion
might be not only in the mind or inward man; but also without in the members,
and so in the whole man is a perfect conversion, answerable not only to the
Greek Metonoiah, but also to the Hebrew Teschubah, the altring or renewing not
only of the mind, but of the whole man. That is the meaning of the Prophet,
when he says: Turn again unto the Lord: Convert thou us, and we shall be
converted. The order thereof we may learn from the practice of the cunning
Physician, who endeavoring to alter the constitution of his sick Patient,
applies to cold causes, hot medicines; and to hot humors, cold things:
as that with the cause of every malady, The order of conversion.
might with his contrary be best maistred and suppressed: the like we may take
from the usage of the husbandman, who into his hungry fields brings the fattest
soil, into snapy and wet places hot lime, ashes and sand, into high earth
the sound marrle, and into stony ground, the cleanest worth. Even so in this
conversion, it is required, that against wicked vices, there be opposed all
godly virtues.

Thus taught our Savior Christ, who came into the world to save sinners, and
thereto (as Simeon prophesied) to be the downe-falling, Luke ^.
and the vprising of many in Israel: which is meant not only of sundry
persons diversely affected, to whom he allots a contrary retribution, but also
of one and the same singular person or persons in whom he destroys the
kingdom of sin, that in the same he might set up and establish the kingdom
of righteousness. And in this he wrought the ruin of pride, by his humility:
the ruin of avarice, by his liberality: the ruin of luxury, by his
chastity: the ruin of envy, by his charity: the ruin of gluttony, by his
sobriety: the ruin of wrath, by his patience: the ruin of sloth, by his
diligence: in a word, the ruin of all wickedness, by his righteousness. A
certain man endeavoring to persuade to this pattern, counseled, as thus
translated: Unto the sickness of the Soul,
the contraries apply:
Give Niggard of thine own,
thou wanton, bend to chastity.
Turn Envy into love,
and Pride to good humility:
Yield Glutton to Sobriety,
thou wrathful, patience love:
In fine, to bridle youthful flesh,
the Rod of Nurture prove.


Luke 3.5.
This rule taught John the Baptist in his preaching of Repentance: Let every
hill be brought low: let every valley be filled up: let things which are
crooked be made straight, and that which is rough be made plain. The same
Ezechiel has without a metaphor, saying: Ezec. 18.21.
Let the ungodly man turn away from his ungodliness, and do the thing that
is right. And Daniel counsailing Nabuchadnezar thus. Break off thy sins by
righteousness: Dan. 4.
and thine iniquity by mercy. The meaning is, that men should cast away the
deeds of darkness, and put on the armor of light: that the error of their
lives might be redressed, and themselves turned to the truth, and brought from
the power of Satan, unto the Lord their God.

This is the enkindling of the black cole, which having fire in it, shines
bright: yea, this is the well culturing of man's untrimmed land, whereby the face
and form thereof being changed, renewed, and all things perfected, he is made
liable both in body and mind to the heavenly and sovereign seed. Howbeit, we
must never forget this, that both the beginning, the proceeding, and the
effecting of this holy work of man's Conversion, is not of man's own will or
ability: but that which belongs only to his grace, who has created him,
and by his Spirit in his Son, renueth them which belong unto his kingdom.
The necessity and manner of the Lords divine work therein, he declares in
his disputation with Nichodemus, concerning the same, saying: Verily, verily, I
say unto thee, Io. 3.5.
except that a man be borne of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God. Where he means the Spiritual water, whereby we are
baptized by the holy Ghost into newness of life. The which being an especial
work of God, not only above man's ability, but far beyond his wisdom to
conceive, he is bound to ascribe the praise thereof unto the Lord, and with
continual inuocations and prayers, desires of his goodness, that as he is
most willing to work this conversion in us by his Spirit, we may not any way
refuse the good motions of the same, but evermore yield our selves ready both
in mind and members, to suppress vices, by the exercises of holy virtues, and
to turn away from all evil, to follow and incline unto all that is good, by
the help and grace of God, in his son Jesus.

CHAP. XXII. The ninth part of the Soole, is the Chain.
8 The combination of Virtue.
AFter the two Hales or Handles, we regard the Chain, or Iron-Rope, the which
being fastened to the Tractorie, and grapled to the yokes, the whole Soole is
pulled forth by the Oxen. This Chain or Rope is made of many Rings, or
linckes, fastened one within an other, so as one of the^ being drawn forth, all
the other must of necessity follow. To such a matter aimed those ancient, The
three Graces.
wise, and grateful men, who framed their three ( Xarisetes or Graces, so as
Xaris charin pherei) One grace held, supported, or provoked an other. By this,
is fitly depainted the true combination and provocation of those motions which
are agreeable to the law of God, inspired and kindled by his divine Spirit:
yea, those very heavenly virtues and graces which are derived unto us, by a
measure from the fullness of Christ, and are appointed to sustain and follow
one an other in these persons regenerate. Of this spoke Saint John, when he
said, that From his fullness, we all receive Grace, Ioh. 1.
upon Grace: or, one virtue following an other. And no doubt, of the same spoke
Paul, when he would, that such as believed, should thereto add, not only
virtue, but Proceed from virtue to virtue: that is, to add one virtue to an
other, until they were made perfect in Christ. But Saint Peter iumpeth just to
the Graces, 1. Pet. 15.
and numbreth up six particular Linckes for this Chain, saying: Give ye all
heed, that ye minister in your faith, virtue: in your virtue, knowledge: in
your knowledge, temperance: in your temperance, godliness: in your godliness,
brotherly kindness: in your brotherly kindness, love. Whereas he says,
Give ye all heed, that ye minister in your faith virtue, etc. He means not,
that the power of the action, or the disposition of these virtues is our own:
but that as we should neither resist the holy motions of the Spirit offered
us, nor receive the graces of God in vain: so we should gladly yield our
selves unto the Lord, and receive by the hand of a lively says, from his
goodness, Grace upon Grace, and Virtue upon Virtue: as such, as being well
taught, under our heavenly Father, might honor and serve him in holiness and
righteousness. Lo this is that infringeable Chain of Pieties Plough,
comparable to that complete armor of God, the which S. Paul would a Christian
should put on, and the which in this Chain, Ephesians. 6.
are aptly lincked and framed together. Whereof the first is Verity: the next,
Righteousness: the third, Readiness for the Gospel: the fourth, Faith: the
fifth, Hope: the sixth, Gods word: the seventh, Prayer, etc. This Chain is so
necessary for the Spiritual Plough-man, as that without it, the Plough cannot
proceed: but having this holy combination, and provocation of all Virtues, the
Plough proceeds with good speed, and all prosperity, as strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might.

CHAP. XXII. The tenth part of the Soole, is the further wheel.
IN Pieties Plough, there be two Wheels, as whereon the Beam is carried by the
Axell, 9 Meditation profitable.
and the Soole more stedily directed forth in the land. Albeit that in some
places, the fields are turned by the Soole, without wheels: yet, as the
Husbandman finds the commodity, so does he commend the right use of the
same. The two wheels of this Plough, are the profitable Meditation, and the
continuance of the good action: both the which the holy Psalmist described and
commended in that blessed man, Psalm. 1.
whose delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in that Law is exercised both day
and night.

The former, is that remission of the mind according to nature, from things
which are without ad principatum, to the chief rule or head: which then is
most profitable when it has for his chief object the best and most profitable
things, in the consideration whereof a man may be taught, instructed, and
edified in that which is of like nature, for the glory of God and his own
safety. And well is this virtue likened to the Wheel in three points. First,
for the figure: secondly, for the conjunction: thirdly, for the motion thereof.

The figure is round by the which (as the Philosophers Meditation of the
believing Christian perfect, as the Lord is perfect. Mat. 5.

The Conjunction is of diverse parts, and so, as new Testament, of Moses, the
Prophets, and the Psalms, of the doctrine Evangelical, Apostolica^l, and
Historical, and so, as it the thing figured were seen in the figure, and the
figure in the thing figured, in an equal proportion: as then when the holy
Prophets by a strong meditation in the things to them revealed and foreshewed
long before the things were accomplished, saw the same, and thereof used often
the preter or present tence, for the future. This Ezekiel Ezekiel. 1.
saw in a vision, a wheel in the midst of a wheel: this Solomon taught,
that one thing should be considered or meditated on with another, that men
might attain to wisdom. For in our meditations it is meet that we observe
the true proportion of those parts and members which are to be conioined: as
the Law with the Prophets, faith with obedience, hope with charity, goodness
with grace; the Father and the Son, Christ Jesus and his Church, the Church
and her children, the death of Christ and his resurrection, his ascension and
his high glory, man's election and glorification, his justification and his
sanctification. What man is without Christ, and what he is in Christ: what God
has done for us, and what he requires of us: etc.

the end of our meditation, we should begin again, and orderly proceed in
the circularie motion of the Wheel. Mat. 2^.40. Phil. 3.1.
Thus the Lord Jesus praying to his Father, spoke the same words three times:
and Saint Paul to the Philippians said, that it grieved him not to write unto
them oftentimes the same thing. Thus we are taught to pray every day to the
Lord for our daily food, Mat. 6.11
and for the forgiveness of our sins, both in the morning, at noone tide, in
the evening, and in the night season. This also intimated Solomon, not only in
that he says, Eccl. 11.2
Remember thy Maker the sooner in thy youth: but in that, Give a portion to
seven, and also to eight: as that, when we have ended one week, (which
consists of seven days) we should begin again (with the eight day) another
week. And in this circulary motion, we should ruminate Paul's wheel of
fourteen spokes. Act. 17.
As first, that there is but one chief and best good thing, which is God.
Secondly, that he alone is author of all good things, both in heaven and earth.
Thirdly, that he is Lord of all. Fourthly, that he is concluded in no place.
Fifthly, that he is not worshipped with the works of men's hands. Sixthly, that
he has need of no man's help. Seventhly, that he disposes of his riches to
every man. Eighthly, that he is the creator and maker of mankind. Ninthly,
that he placed men on the earth. Tenthly, that he is every where, filling
every thing. Twelfthly, that in him we live, move, and have our being.
Thirteenth, that he is honored, not with gold, silver, or any outward things.
And fourteenthly, that in Christ Jesus our Mediator, he is good and gracious
unto all men. Here also we are to meditate, how the majesty, power, justice
and mercy of God, is both declared and confirmed to mankind: first, by
creation: next, by sustentation, government, Paul in this matter, who writing
to the Philippians, thus exhorts. Phil 4 8.
Whatsoever things are true: whatsoever things are honest whatsoever things are
just: whatsoever things are of good report: if there be any virtue: if there be
any thing praiseworthy, meditate on these things: (chiefly in this how ye may
obtain and perform them) and the God of peace shall be with you. All these
and such like things are to be ruminated in a circularie meditation, as
whereof may be framed an healthful Rownd or Wheel, whereof is made a very
vehement motive to true Mortification.

CHAP. XXIIII. The eleventh part of the Soole, is the near Wheel.
THe second Wheel of this Plough, 10. The second wheel noting perseverance.
is Continuatio Actionis, the continuance of the action: which is the constant,
stable, and perpetual perseverance in the reason or way well considered of,
and not, unaptly likened to the Wheel in this, that as the Wheel in his
winding, begins to wind again there where it lastly ended, and the circle
or compass thereof is without end: so should the end of one good meditation
be the entrance into another: one good word should bring in an other: and one
charitable action performed, we must begin an other: chiefly every good action,
study, or endeavor once begun, must not be given over or delaied, but holden
on and continued to the end. This doubtless was intimated by that mystery in
the Law, where the tails of the beasts were commanded to be offered up in
sacrifice, together with their bodies. The same meant the Prophet Hoseah, when
he commanded the people to seek the Lord until he came to rain righteousness
upon them: Hos. 10.
and that intended Solomon, when he said; that the end of a thing was better
then the beginning, as from whence the censure of either good or evil is best
taken. The wild Ass overcomes the Lion and the Wolf, not by strength, but
by continuance of course. Neither without perseverance is the battle won by
the fight, the crown gotten by the victor, or the goal archieued by the
runner. So says our Savior, He that goes to the Plough and looks backward,
is nothing fit for the kingdom of heaven. But, If ye continue in my words,
then are ye my very Disciples, and ye shall know the truth, and the truth
shall make you free: yea, he that continues to the end, the same shall be
saved. Lo, this is that Wheel, by the which Pieties Plough oug^t to proceed
without fear or fainting, until the action in hand be fully effected for the
praise of God, and benefit of man Saul the king of Israel, wanted this Wheel:
so did Judas the traitor, Demas, and such other Apostataes, execrable to God,
and odious before men: but Abraham, David, Daniel, Paul, John the Baptist, and
John the Evangelist, continued their course and calling, being therefore
blessed with the Lord, and commended of all good men. Thus having perused the
two Wheels, we are next to consider of the Axel-tree whereon those Wheels are
carried in Pieties Plough.

CHAP. XXV. The twelfth part is the Axell.
AS the two Wheels of the Plough are combined and carried by the Axell-tree:
11. Wholesome prayer.
so is that Christian meditation and godly Perseverance in the good action,
mightily combined and supported by godly invocation therefore worthily
resembled in the same. This is that true virtue which comes of that true Good
of his Son Jesus, and of the Holy ghost, and desires the good things, not
only of this life, but also of the life to come. This is that, which fighting
against all doubtfulnesse, does promise us to be heard, and that we shall
thereby obtain the good things desired for the sake of the Mediator.
Therefore, as the Lord in the old Testament has commanded men to call upon
him in troubles, with a promise to hear and help: so the holy men of that
time have duly observed it. Again, as in the new Testament, our Savior has
both taught and commanded his Apostles to pray in his name to the Father, for
daily food and necessaries of nature, for pardon of trespasses, for their
defense against the devil, and such: so they thinking it needful, and
finding the benefit thereof, have not only duly observed it, but in their
doctrines and good counsels taught and exhorts all others to do the like:
not only for themselves, Ephesians. 6.
but for all estates and conditions of men. Surely this is that spiritual
Axell-tree which holds together the Wheels, and bears up the Beam, and
that very virtue of the Spirit, whereby it pieaseth God (hearing our prayers)
to help our weakness, and to direct us to the effecting and perfecting of
all other virtues. For this is (as Augustine said) Locutio ad Deum, quando
legis Deus tibi loquiter: quando oras cum Deoloqueris: A speaking to God: when
thou read, God speaks to thee: when thou praiest, thou talkest with God.
An other calls it an humble conversion to God, Hugo.
with the mouth of the mind, assisted with fath, hope and charity: and
touching the good operation and effects thereof, says an other: It clears
the heart, withdraws it from terrene affections, cleanses it from vices,
lifts it up to heavenly things, yields him more capable and worthy to
conceive the spiritual good things. This does our Savior Christ worthily
confirm, when he says, that his Father gives the holy Spirit to them that
ask the same of him in his name: by the which Spirit, he means all the
graces and blessings of the holy Ghost. Therefore he says again to his
Disciples, Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. Wherefore when
we have assayed to frame the Soole of all the former members, and know that
yet there remains in us many deserts, let us devoutly convert our selves to
GOD our heavenly Father, in hearty and humble prayer, that it would vouchsafe
him of his power and goodness in Christ, to supply all those our defects, and
feeling the sweetness thereof, not forget to glorify him with the Psalmist,
saying: Praised be GOD, which has not put back my prayers from him, nor his
mercies from me.

CHAP. XXVI. The thirteenth part of the Soole, is the Key.
IN the twelfth place it is required, 12. Faith wholesome.
that we consider of the Keye or Pin, whereby the Beam is fastened to the
Tawe, and the Soole set either higher or lower, deeper or shallower, as
occasion requires, according to the nature of the ground, and discretion of
the Plough-man.

By this Keye, is signified that true faith in Christ (before spoken of)
whereby Righteousness is apprehended, and we justified and approved before
God. For after the proportion of our faith, and quality of our belief, all
those excellent graces and virtues are either lifted up or letten down,
strengthened or weakened; neither is it possible that those former parts of
true repentance shall be profitable to the sinner without this, by the which,
whatsoever is done is acceptable to the Lord: and whatsoever is wrought without
it, is sinful and vile: for whatsoever is done without faith, is sin (by the
testimony of the Apostle) therefore it is impossible without faith to please
God. He that believes in the Son of God has life: Aug. de verbis apostoli
petr. sermon. 27. Et lib. 1. de pecca. iuait. and remiss. c. ^0. de Ciuit. Dei
li. 13. ca. 4.
because that faith is the beginning of a good life, to the which also
belongs eternal life. As this is that foundation of things hoped for, and
the assurance of that which is not seen, (tunc est fides, quando expectatur in
spe, quod in renondum videtur) so is it made the very hand of the soul, whereby
we take hold on Jesus Christ* and apply unto our selves by his grace, all his
justice, merits, and virtues, whereof we be said to be justified by faith,
because it pleases the Lord to impute his proper Righteousness and virtues,
to such as apprehend the same by faith. By this, Abel offered up unto God a
more acceptable sacrifice then Caine: Heb. 11.
by this, Henoch was reported of that he pleased God: by this, Noah moved with
reverence, prepared the Ark: by this, Abraham being called of God, gladly
obeyed him: by this, Sarah being well nigh a hundred years of age, had
strength to conceive seed: by this, Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau, concerning
things to come: to be brief, by this, Moses and Iosuah, and Rahab, and Gideon,
and Barach, and Iepthe, and Sampson, and Samuel, and David, and the Prophets,
obtained a good report, subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obeyed the
promises, stopped Lions mouths, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the
edge of the sword, of weak were made strong, waxed valiant in battle, turned
to flight the army of the enemies, etc. For this is the very key, even the key
of the son of David, which opens, and no man shuts: and which shuts,
and no man opens. And as without this no man pleases God, but being judged
sinners, are shut out from his favor and abandoned: so by this virtue of the
Spirit, and power of grace, are offered and performed unto us that eternal
happiness and peace, and all those heavenly treasures which our faithful hope
expects. Worthily therefore said our Lord to such whom he was willing to
help and preserve, Have faith in God. For he that believes is made holy (by
the divine grace) to remove mountains, yea all things are made possible unto
him. Finally, this is the fai^hfull promise of him that is the very truth, and
cannot lie, that God loving the world, Ioh. 3.16.
has given his only begotten Son to this end, that all they which believe in
him, should not perish, but have everlasting life: and that the righteous man
shall live, not by any his own works, wisdom, ability or merits, but by his
says. Hab. ^ 4.
This is that faith which comes to a man, by hearing of gods word, which is
brought unto us by his servants the Preachers, Ioh. 20.
who are sent unto us from the Lord, to preach the same. To this end, that men
might believe, and that in believing they might have life through the name of
Jesus. And as the Pin in the Soole, is fitly placed in the very midst of
the same: so is faith mightily peazed between all other virtues, as the very
strength, by the which they are fortified and tied together.

CHAP. XXVII. The fourteenth and last part, is the Tawe.
Spiritual Love.
THere now remains one other thing in this Soole, no less necessary then
any of the former: yea, and that without the which, all the former members of
the same are nothing available to this spiritual husbandry. That is, the
Tawe, or that iron Rope which embracing the Beam, assures it to the Tractory
or Lamb. By this is meant that Spiritual Love, which is so often commended
and commanded unto the brethren of Christ, as whereby, not only the
mortification of the flesh is fastened to the faithful hope, and so the former
is the better sustained and performed by the latter: but also the whole Soole,
with his parts holden together by the help of the Key of Christian faith. This
is that sweet delight of a man's heart toward something, for the sake of some
what, August.
which runs through desire, and surceaseth in hope by a desire in lusting
for, and by a joy in having it. Neither if man's heart be good, can it be good
of any other occasion, then by loving that well which is good: nor can the same
be evil, if ever it be of any thing else, saving in not loving well that thing
which is good.

As this Taw is made of three or four iron rings, or lincks of iron fastened
one wtihin an other, in the order of a chain, the greatest whereof compasses
or embraces the Beam: the second lincked to the first, the third to the
second, and the fourth to the third, which is also assured to the Tractory or
Lamb. So in the spiritual Taw, which is Love, there be four kinds or
branches. 4. Branches of Love.
The first (which is the highest and greatest) is the Love of God the Father:
the second, is the love of God the Son: the third, is the love of God the
holy Ghost: the fourth, is the love of man: of God the Father, as our Creator
and maker: of the Son, as our redeemer and Savior: of the holy Ghost, as our
sanctifier and consolator: of man, as our neighbor and brother.

Therefore it is commanded, that we love God the Father, with all our hearts,
strength, soul, mind, and whatsoever else we have. Love him, for he loved
thee first: love him, for he sent his only Son into the world that thou
should live through him: love him, for he is thy Father, thy King: thy God,
and best good for ever. This is well resembled by the great Ring in the Taw,
which embraces the Beam, and pulls on those other parts which follow it:
(by which Beam (as is before said) is signified the Maceration or
mortification of the flesh.) For as this Ring of the Taw compasses the Beam,
so Love compasses or embraces true maceration of the flesh in the godly, who
after the example of Christ (being persuaded through Love to take our flesh,
and therein to be macerated and mortified) we are well pleased for the love and
good affection they have to God, to suffer and sustain hunger, cold,
nakedness, watchings, travails, persecutions, and all afflictions, whereby the
flesh is often manifested and subdued to the Spirit. For this loving Taw,
Raban. in sermon.
esteems nothing hard, nothing bitter, nothing heavy, nothing deadly: what
hard yrons, what bitter wounds, what intolerable pains, what mortal pangs
prevail to dau^t Love, which is a shield impenitrable against all darts,
withstanding all swords, contemning all perils, and diriding all deaths? Thereof
could the most holy Spowsesse say: Cant. 5, 6, 7.
As strong as death is Love: much water cannot quench it: neither can the
floods drown it: If a man should give all the substance of his house for Love,
they would greatly contemn it.

Love to the Son, Psalm. 2.
we hear the Psalmist say: O kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and so ye
perish by the way. Again, He is the Lord, Psalm. 45.
and worship thou him. To this the holy Apostles often persuade, and beyond all
others, 1. Ioh. 1.
that most lovely Apostle in Christ is in this very emphatical: and the Lord
Jesus himself (as he exhorted his Apostles and followers to this virtue) so
he willed them to express the same by the keeping of his commandments, Ioh.
21.
by feeding his flock, by mercy and charitable actions. The reasons may be
taken from the words of the Psalmist, where he says; Kiss the Son, etc.
That is, first he is the Son of God the Father, and of right ought to beloved:
next, if we love him not, he will be angry: thirdly, if he be angry, he
destroys them that provoke him: fourthly, if we love him, we are blessed:
fifthly, he is the Lord our God: sixthly, he is our King, our Priest, our
Prophet, our Savior, our Mediator, our life: Psalm. 2. and 45.
and who should not love his King, his Priest, his Prophet, his Savior, his
Mediator, his life. The Apostles have gathered and applied many reasons
thereof, which yet are thus concluded by a learned Father. Aug. de Caten. rudi.
Ama amorem illius, qui amore tui amoris descendit in vterum virginis, etc.
Love his Love (says he) who for thy Love came down into the womb of a
virgin, and there made a copulation of his Love with thy Love, by humbling
himself and exalting thee, and conioyning the light of his eternity to the
vile slime of thy mortality. Moreover, touching the nature, operation and
utility of this Love in our selves, from whence spring no mean causes to
persuade us. An other in a certain sermon calls it fire, light, honey, wine,
and the Sun. Fire in meditation, purifying the mind from all blemishes: Light
in prayer, illuminating the mind with the clearenesse of virtues. Honey in
thanksgiving, sweetning the mind with the dulcor of divine benefits: wine in
contemplation, consolating the mind with cheerful delectation, and a bright
Sun in the eternal happiness, clarifying the mind with gladsome and
wholesome light, brightening the mind with unspeakable joy and eternal
gladness. This therefore is a most divine treasure, the which whosoever has
it, is right rich, and whosoever has it not, is wretched and poor.

The third link is that love of the holy Spirit, when feeling our selves both
sanctified and comforted by the pleasant beams of the same, we are so
ravished with the love thereof, as we embrace his most excellent graces, not
only in our selves, but also in all others. This is that Spirit of wisdom
and understanding, of counsel and strength, of knowledge and of the fear of
God, the which resting on Christ, made him prudent in the fear of the Lord,
the which all Christians do both admire and praise before all the virtues of
men. Isai. 11.2.
The same from his fullness diriued unto men, has distributed diversity of
gifts, and the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to edify
withal. 1. Cor. 12.7.
For one from thence has the word of wisdom: an other the word of knowledge:
an other faith: an other the gifts of healing: an other the operations of great
works: an other prophecy: an other discerning of spirits: an other diversity
of tongues: an other the interpretation of tongues. And all these things
works the same spirit, distributing to every man severally as he will: the
which are to be accepted and commended with ardent love of this spirit. Besides
this, by this Spirit is Christ Jesus present with us in the world, even unto
the end thereof. For he says, I will be with you always: and where two or
three be congregated in his name, he is in the midst of them; that is, by
his Spirit. By this we have our consolation in this world, and therefore he
is called the Comforter: as he says: I will send you another Comforter which
shall remain with you for ever. Ioh. 14, and 16.
This is the same which assures us in our spirits, that we are Gods children:
and to be short, by the help of this Spirit, we behold Gods face: for he
sanctifies us, without the which we cannot see the face of God. Heb. 12.14.
Therefore we are to embrace him and his rich graces with faithful and godly
love. These things Augustine deeply perpending, made his prayer unto the holy
Ghost in these words; Sanctum opus in me spira vt cogitem, etc. In epist. ad
quendam comitem.
Inspire in me a good work, that I may think thereof, provoke me to
perform it, persuade me to love thee: confirm me, that I may retain thee:
keep me, that I loose thee not.

The fourth lincke of this spiritual Taw, signifies the love of our
neighbor. We cannot be ignorant both what the Lord in the Law and the
Prophets, and also in the Gospel, bids in this point: as namely, that we
should love our neighbor as our selves. And this also the holy Apostle
(especially St. John the Euangelst) in their Epistles, labor to persuade all
Christians under that word (agape) that is, Charity.
Love, or Charity, which is a right divine faculty inspired into our hearts
by that divine Spirit, by the which we ever wish well unto our neighbors, and
according to the measure of our ability, study to help and benefit him, for
Christ his sake, and in the name of God. The true nature of this lovely link
is well defined before in the word Mercy, the which (as Christ teaches) the
Lord requires of man toward man (to declare his justice) beyond all burnt
offerings, Mat. 9. Mich. 6.
and external sacrifices. And to this are we moved (besides the former
causes) in that the nature thereof is good, the use profitable: we are
brethren, the sons of one Father, of the same baptism, the same faith, the
same family: people of the same God, heirs of one inheritance, and partakers
of life together, through one Mediator and Savior.

Now Saint Paul conioyning together those four Linkes, confirms Love to be
the perfection of the Law: that is, the same wherein is performed our duty both
to God and man. And speaking of the nature, dignity and office thereof, he
thought he could not sufficiently exalt the honor of the same: 1. Cor. 13.
but thus he says. Though I speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and
have not Love, I am as a soundiing brass, or tinckling Cimball. Though I had
the gift of prophesying, and knew all secrets, and all knowledge: yea, if I had
all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and had not Love, I were nothing.
And though I feed the poor with all my goods: and though I give my body to
be burned, and have not Love, it profits me nothing. Love suffers long,
is bountiful, enuieth not, boasts not, is not puffed up, disdaineth not,
seeks not her own, is not provoked to anger, thinks not evil, rejoices
not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth: suffers all things, believes
all things, hops all things, and endures all things. Love never falls
away, though that prophecyings be abolished, or the tongues cease, or
knowledge vanish away. Again, Verse. 13.
Now abides Faith, Hope and Love: these three, but the chiefest of these is
Love. Therefore Saint Augustine perusing Paul's praise of this most honorable
virtue, seems to recapitulate his manifold members in his description
thereof. Thus is (says he) a right Will turned utterly away from all earthly
and present things, joined in seperable to GOD, and united with a certain
fire of the holy Spirit, from whence it proceeds, and is said to be
enkindled, estraunged from all filthy pollution, ignorant of corruption,
empaired with no kind of immutabilitie: superior to all things which are
carnally minded: the strongest of all affections, desirous of holy
contemplations, not at any time conquered of any other in any thing: the sum
of all good actions: the health of manners: the end of the heavenly laws: the
death of all crimes: the life of virtues: the strength of the fighters: the
palm of the victors: the armor of sacred minds: the cause of good deserts:
the reward of the perfect, that, without the which, no man pleases God:
fruitful in the repentance, gladsome in them that profit: glorious in those
which persevere: victorious in the Martyrs: profitable in all believers: the
same, in the which every good work whatsoever, has and holds life. Finally,
because Saint Paul has conjoined together faith, hope and love, we find them
so placed in this Soole, and conjoined, that albeit we may distinguish them,
yet divide them we may not: for it is necessary the one hold fast by the
other, nor works the one without the other. The Taw is stayed with the Key or
Pin, and reaches from thence to the Tractory or Lamb: where, by the Key is
signified Faith: by the Tractory, Hope: and by the Taw, Love: as before it is
declared. Which three having their several offices, may well express the same
in three words: Faith says, I assure it. Hope says, I expect it. Love says,
I tend toward it. For Faith is assured of the good things which God has
promised, nor doubts she of the performance of his word, knowing him to be
righteous. Hope with a longing desire, ever expects and looks to obtain
those good things which God has promised, and faith has assured, and
therefore is not weary. Love in the daily exercise of the divine virtues and
fruits of faith, stands not still gaping for the same without her dutiful
endeavor: but works righteously, and tends toward the attainement of that
which is promised, assured and hoped for. Lo, such a precious Jewel is Love!
Such a powerful Taw has Pieties Plough. And thus have we the Soole thoroughly
performed.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Oxen which draw forth the Soole of Pieties Plough.
AS we have thoroughly perused the Soole of Spiritual Plough; so now is it
meet that we also peruse the Oxen which draw the same: wherein we may
consider three principal points: viz.

First, those Oxen. Next, their Labor. Lastly, their Reward.
First, 1 The Oxen
we might (after the mind of some men) understand by those Oxen, the
Commandments of God: partly in regard of the number, partly for the office.
10. Oxen.
There be ten particular Commandments in both the Tables of the Law, which
stand as for five yoke or couples, whose strength is the force of true
Contrition, and the powerful draught of godly repentance, by the which man's
hard and uncircumcised heart is fallowed and prepared for the seed, whereof
the Apostle called it a Schoolemaister unto Christ: for they draw or force men
to Christ, in whom there is found mercy and perfection.

Howbeit, there be other lively Oxen the which the Master husbandman has
both prepared, yoked together, and persuaded to draw strongly forth this
Spiritual Soole. 1. Cor. 9.9 1. Tim. 5.18.
Saint Paul as well in his Epistle to Timothy, as in that to the Corinthians,
likeneth the true laborers of the Lord in his spiritual work, Deu. 25.4
to Oxen. Thou shall not must the mouth of the Ox that treads out the
corn. This he takes out of the Law: and that we might the better understand
his meaning, he adds: Does God take care for Oxen? As if he said: God
does not so much respect the Oxen themselves, as he does men, for whose sake
this was written: for the labourer in the Lords work is worthy of his hire,
as the laboring Ox requires to have his fodder.

2. King. 19 19.
We find in the second Book of the Kings, that when Eliah went forth to
anoint Elishah for a Prophet in his place, he found him in the Land
ploughing with twelve yoke of Oxen, and himself with the twelve. 12. Yoke of
Oxen.
After the which number we may take for this labor, certain orders of holy
and wise persons, remembered and commended in the sacred Scriptures. As first,
the twelve Patriarchs tied up under the yoke of the old Testament: and the
twelve Apostles, bearing the gentle yoke of the Gospel: And these both yoked
or numbered together, make the just twelve yoke, and the number of those four
and twenty Elders mentioned by Saint John in his Apocalypse. In the like sense,
Apoc. 4. and 5.
we have the number of the twelve foundations, and twelve gates of the
heavenly Jerusalem.

Saint Paul nevertheless, 10. Orders of Oxen.
alluding to the former number of the ten Commandments, makes ten orders of
those spiritual Oxen, of the which in his Epistle to the Ephesians, chapter,
4. he names five; and in his former Epistle to the Corinthians, chapter, 12.
he names other five. As first, Apostles: next, Prophets: thirdly,
Evangelists: fourthly, Pastors: fifthly, Doctors: sixthly, Powers: seventhly,
Healers: eighthly, Helpers: ninthly, Governors: tenthly, Linguists. And these
are first those Doctors of the new Testament, immediately chosen, called, 1
Apostles
and sent forth of Christ to teach the Gospel, with a special power of the
holy Ministry. 2 Prophets.
The second sort are those Preachers of the divine mysteries for the
institution of the people. The third, 3 Evangelists
are such as are sent to some particular Churches, to preach the Gospel unto
them. The fourth, 4 Pastors.
are divinely called and appointed to take charge of the souls to them
committed, to feed them with spiritual food, and to administer the Sacraments.
The fifth, 5 Doctors.
are called to catechize and teach the principles and grounds of Religion. The
sixth, were to execute the faculty of the Spirit against wicked deriders of
discipline, 6 Powers.
and to correct such as contemned the plain doctrine. 7 Healers.
The seventh, are to heal and work beyond the common course of nature in the
prime of the Church, thereby the sooner to confirm the faith and doctrine
preached, transferred at this time unto such (as beyond some others, bountiful
and zealous in the works of mercy) do refresh and comfort others. The eight, 8
Helpers.
are appointed as Deacons or Ministers, to regard the necessity of the Church,
to help the poor Christians with a faithful collection and distribution of
goods. The ninth, are to rule and govern others, 9 Governors
after the grace and wisdom given them thereto, in the ecclesiastical
policy. 10 Linguistes.
The tenth, have the gift of tongues, and grace of interpretation of tongues,
for the better edification of the Church. Here we have five yoke of Oxen. The
Oxen are the Preachers etc: and why?
In a word, the Oxen which ordinarily draw on this Plough, are the Preachers,
Ministers, and faithful disposers of the secrets of the word of God unto the
people (as before it is said) who are not unaptly likened to Oxen, for five
chief respects: that is: First, for their wisdom: secondly, for their
authority: thirdly, for their continency: fourthly, for their strength: fifthly,
for their vtility. The wisdom appears in the eyes: the authority in the
horns: their continency in their castracie: their strength in their labors:
their utility in their use.

It is said in the Apocalypse, 5. that the Lamb had seven eyes: which noted his
great wisdom 1 Wisdom.
and perfection of knowledge. But the Ox has but two eyes, whereby (as Isaiah
says) he knows his owner, and is ready to obey him. By these two eyes is
signified knowledge of the Lords Law and Commandments, and a willing
obedience to the same. And again, here is the love of God, and the love of
man, alluding to those two tables in the Law. In a word, here is both
wisdom, and the work of wisdom, in the Ox.

Secondly, the Lamb has also seven horns, which notes the perfect power and
authority 2 Authority
of Christ. But this Ox has but two horns, to note a double vocation, whereof
the one is within, the other without, from the which, the Christian, especially
the Pastor, Preacher, Minister, or Elder, takes his power and authority: for
how can he preach, except he be sent?

Thirdly, the Ox is gelded, by the which he is made more tame, ready, 3
Chastity.
and subject to his work and yoke. And of certain spiritual Oxen we hear the
Lord say, There be some chaste, Mat. 19.12.
which were so borne of their mothers womb: and there be some chaste, which be
made chaste of men: and there be some chaste, which have made themselves chaste
for the kingdom of heaven. For some are chaste by nature, and some others are
made chaste (being gelded) by men: but these having subdued their appetites,
use the gift of continenci^ in the service of God: for they are disposed by the
holy Ghost, to bear the yoke of Christ with meekness of mind, by the
ripeness of repentance, the quietness of conscience, the work of obedience,
the gravity of their modest conversation, and christian modesty.

4 Strength.
Fourthly, the Ox is ordained for labor, and so the Husbandman uses him in
his field and plough. In like manner the Elders and Ministers of the Word, in
their spiritual Husbandry, are not to stand idle, but to labor: as said the
Apostles, We are Gods Laborers, ye are his Husbandry. And this was the
saying of the good husbandman, to them whom he found standing idle in the
Marketplace: Why stand you here all the day idle? go and enter my Vineyard,
and labor: and whatsoever is just, ye shall receive. Here is labor required:
neither may such imagine which take this charge on them, that they are worthy
their rewards, without labor: nor that they shall be holden guiltless before
the Lord, except they work and labor, for they be spiritual Oxen.

5 Utility.
Fifthly, the Ox brings great utility unto the Husbandman: As not only in
that it eases him of the great labor of his hand, in tilling the earth which
the Lord cursed (as Genesis 15.20.) but also in treading out his corn, in
yielding him plenty of grain, in drawing for his carriages: and lastly, in
submitting his life and body to him for his victualles. So able is the
faithful Minister of the Gospel, to boulte out and dispose the hidden grain
of Gods mysteries unto the people, in yielding him plenty of food at all
times, by preaching the Word, in season, and out of season: yea, and to offer
up his body unto the Lord, a sacrifice (as the holy Marters have done) for the
confirmation of the faith, and better comfort of the Church.

Thus, having perused the Oxen, let us now consider something more of their
kind of labor. 2 The labor of the Oxen.
The Apostle (citing that place of the law) says, that the chief labor of
the Ox is, to Tread out the Corn. Meaning, such a labor, as whereby the
Husbandman is provided for, and furnished with that whereof he lives. And
(indeed) the labor of the spiritual Ox is, the treading out of the
spiritual food unto the people. The good Householder (says our Savior)
brings forth out of his treasure, things new and old. To this he compares
the Preacher, or preaching of the kingdom of heaven, in the which, the Law
applied to the Gospel, and as well judgments from the one, as mercies from
the other, declared unto men, the field of the Lord is fallowed, and prepared,
and a great abundance of good fruits brought unto them that labor the same.

Saint Paul writing to Timothy, 1. Tim. 5.17.
speaking of those Oxen: whom he there calls Elders, for ^^^ir wisdom,
gravity, authority and digni^^^ ^ommendeth unto them two especial duties,
viz. First, good government: next study and doctrine. The Elders (says he)
which rule well, Elders that rule well.
are worthy of double honor: especially they which labor in the Word and
Doctrine. By this Ruling, he notes a government: but, by well ruling, he
notes the manner thereof: neither is it much regarded, that men rule, but that
they rule well in their places: thus ought the Minister to rule well the
Church: the which, that he may the better perform, he must learn first to
govern well himself, and next his own family: for he that cannot do that, is
not yet made meet to rule the Church. Labor in the word and doctrine
By Laboring in the Word, the Apostle means his exercise in the holy
Mysteries, but chiefly, diligent study and meditation, in the fear of God,
whereby being that way furnished, he may be able to draw forth of his full
vessel measurably unto his flock in the Church; the which is meant by the
labor in doctrine.

And that this may be done with more cheerfulness, The yoke of the oxen. Act.
1.15.
they forget not the nature of their yoke and combinations: This is not that
servile yoke of the law tied to circumcision, ceremonies, and such like, (the
which except they did in those times observe, they were cursed) but that easy
yoke, which our Savior wills us to take up: that is, the sweet doctrine and
most wholesome discipline of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, by faith, in
whom we are saved, and whom to serve is perfect freedom: for he is our
sanctification and redemption. To take up this yoke, is to submit our selves to
the doctrine, rule, and discipline of Christ, to do him homage, to embrace
him, to harken to him, and to honor, serve and follow him, as our Master, our
teacher, our king, and the author of our health: he says not, cast off the
yoke of the Law: but take mine: for it is not enough to abandon other yokes,
except we also take up this yoke, and follow him in the field as his
loue-labouring Oxen, under this yoke: wherein although some sower things are
mixed with sweet things, yet has it both great comfort, and like utility.
And this, The manner of the combination in the yoke.
that we may also the better enjoy the manner of the combination, labor and
proceeding of those Oxen, it may be considered, and by comparison duly applied.
Therefore here first, let us note the agreement, as of two Oxen under the same
yoke: so the meet concord of them all together in the same labor. Secondly,
their faithfulness in the work, wherein drawing proportionably, one deceives
not another. Thirdly, their strength, which is not lither or weak, bu^
forcible to the purpose. Fourthly, their willingness to the furtherance of the
work. Fifthly, their mutual comfort, wherein one encourages an other in there
labor. In like manner, for the better speed of this Plough, the spiritual
Oxen have and retain: first, love and concord in and among themselves: for
hereby (says Christ) shall all men know that ye are my Disciples: secondly,
faithfulness in their function: which (as the Apostle says) is required of
the disposers of the mysterries of God: thirdly, fortitude assisted by godly
patience as he says, Possess your souls in patience, and be strong in the
Lord: fourthly, goodwill, as the Angels proclaimed, Goodwill unto men: fifthly,
it is required, that those good Oxen should animate and provoke one an other of
them in this good work, in such sort as did the vigilant Pastors, who hearing
of the birth of Christ, said one to an other: Luke 2.15 Heb. 8.10. Romans 3.27.
1. Tim. 1.19. 1. Cor. 1.24. 1. Pet. 1.5.
Come, let us go to Beth-lem and see this thing. And as also did Saint Peter
and John, Paul and Barnabas, Philippe and Nathanael, taking and using for their
better furnishing of those yokes, the Law of the Spirit and of a sound
conscience for necke-bowes, the wisdom and power of the Highest for the
kayes, and the lawful disposition of their senses internal and external, for
the ropes or chains, as whereby they see, hear, taste, savor, and feel the
things which appertain as well to the soul as to the body, for the the glory
of God, the benefit of the church, and discharge of proper duties. All the
which is not a little fortified by that faithful Hope, which looks not only
to the expected fruits of their labors in others, but to a meet remuneration
on themselves, albeit they have an especial regard as well to their own duty,
binding them, as to the glory divine emboldning them. 1. Cor. 9. 1. Tim. 5.
For as the laboring Ox (by the rule of the law) might not be defrauded of
his due fodder: so he that tilleth the ground, should till the same in hope.
And this is spoken not only to persuade the spiritual land to yield fit food
to the spiritual Oxen, as of right: Grego in Job. lib. 1. c. 16.
but to encourage those Oxen to to labor the land, as of duty, without
fainting. When therefore the Apostle wishes, that the Ministers of the Gospel
should live of the Gospel; his meaning is; that they should be well
maintained, as whereby the better able to perform the work. And this he
likewise understands by that double honor, Double honor.
which they deserve, that rule well, and labor in the word and doctrine first,
they are to be esteemed with due reverence, and maintained with like
benevolence. Neither is their reward only with men, but with the Lord, who is
not forgetful of their good works. God promised to Abraham, 1. Cor. 15.
that he would be his exceeding great reward, which doubtless was intended not
of that only which should be enjoyed in this life, but of that wherein those
Saints are, and shall be as the heavens light, Dan. 12.13. How the true
Laborers are rewar^ded with men.
and shine as the stars in the firmament for ever. It is too often observed in
the malign world, that the best laborers want their condign honor, yea,
their most worthy studies and godly endeuouors are rewarded with hatreds,
emulations, displeasures and ingratitudes, as sometime the laborious Ox finds
at the unthrifty husbands hands tedious toiles, sorry fare, and bad usage:
that far inferior, touching this duty, to the heathen, who (as Plato Plato
de Leg. dial* 6. de sacer.
disputed in his laws) ever regarded the honor of their Priests. Howbeit, it
is most true (for their endless comfort) that those their labors in the Lord
are not in vain: but evermore recompensed with a double reward of the Lords
bounty and grace. In regard whereof, not only Moses, the Prophe^s and
Apostles, have been well pleased to bear Onus and aestum Diei, the burden of
the day, in this service: but also the Martyrs of the Primitive Church, with
the Ministers and all other faithful workmen in this field, have exposed
themselves to the wood rage of bloody Tyrants, resolving not only with Job and
Paul, If thou would kill me, yet wuld I trust in thee. And in this cause,
death is to me an advantage: but also with those Martyrs of the Greek church,
Gordius Gordius Martyr.
and Ignatius, saying: Ego ou monon hapax apothanein eitotmos echo huper tou
onomatos tou Kuriou Iesou, alla kai muriakis ean iaie: I am ready (said
Gordius) not only to labor, but to die for the name of the Lord Jesus, not
only once, but a thousand times, if it might so be. Ignat. in apost. ad
Trattia. acts. Epest. 10. ad Ephesians.
And I (said Ignatius) have settled my hope in him who died for me (that is,
Christ). For there is no guile found in him. Again, I am for Gods cause
delivered into the hands of murderers, as from the blood of Abell the just,
unto the blood of Ignatius the least. Again, writing to the Romans: Suffer
me (says he) to be made meat for the beasts appointed to devour me, Epist.
11
that I may be made worthy of God. For I am the wheat or corn of God: and I
shall be grinded with the teeth of beasts, that I may become clean bread for
the Lord, and thereto ye may persuade those beasts, that their wombes become my
Sepulcher, and that they leave no part of my body, whereby after my death, the
same may not remain loathsome unto any of them which live. Lo, this is that
which faithful hope persuades: and such are the Oxen, such is their labor in
this field, and such is their remuneration with the Lord and his Saints.

CHAP. XXIX. 1 The Holder. 2 The Leader. 3 The Driuer. of Pieties Plough.
WE know right well, The working of God, in the regeneration of man Dionys.
Areo in Caiest. hierarchiae ca. 1.
that no man comes to the Father, but by the Son: that no man comes to
the Son, but he whom the Father draws: and that no man comes either to the
one, or to the other, but by the power and motion of the holy Ghost: So that in
this work, the whole Trinity of the divine Deity, has his action and
perfect working: therefore it is, Cant. 1.
that the most holy Spowsesse (^s Solomon testifies) prays to her most
peerlesse head, saying: Draw me forth after thee, and then will we run. Ier.
31.
Ephraim implores (as the Prophet Jeremy says) O Lord convert us, and we
shall be converted. The Apostles desire* O Lord, increase our faith. And the
Lord Jesus himself, sending forth his Apostles, commaundes them to preach the
Gospel, and to Baptize the believers, in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost. Therefore, as the Plough is by the Holder thereof
directed: by the Leader allured, and by the Driuer provoked: so is Plough, in
this husbandry and field of the Lord.

Genesis 1.1.
Thus in the great work of the Creation, these three persons had not only their
several, but their joint operations, as Moses testifies. Thus in the
conception and birth of Christ, God the Father begets, Mat. 1. Luk 2.
God the holy Ghost works in the conception, and God the Son is begotten and
borne: which three also work in the begetting, regeneration, and new birth of
the elected Saints: albeit they are not three, but one eternal God.

The Holder.
My Father (says Christ) is an Husbandman: and so called, in regard of his
wisdom, providence, and good endeavors had, God is as a Husbandman. Secund.
Philoso.
and daily employed by him on the soil of man's heart: wherein semblant to the
Husbandman, (whom the Philosopher Secundus in the presence of Adrian, defined)
he is a Minister of labors, an improuer of the desert, a Physician of the
earth, a Planter of trees, and a Measurer, or Proportioner of months. In this
person we may here remember (beyond many others) two principal attributes, or
divine virtues: namely, Gods justice and mercy.
his Justice and his Mercy; both the which, in the holding of this Plough, he
aptly applies as his two hands, to those two Hales, or handles of the Soole.
In the former, we find him ever upright and severe against presumptious
sinners: in the latter loving and cheerful to penitents. The first is
strengthened by the vigor of the Law: the latter beautified by the comforts
of the Gospel: and therein, both these are so tempted by the meditation of
Messiah his merit, Gregor. mor. in Job. 35 lib. 26. cap. 10.
that neither presumption hurts, nor desperation kills him that truly
repents. For as God is a good Father: so in his goodness he respects not only
his natural Son, God and man: but all such, as have their adoption by grace
in him, with a right fatherly love and affection.

The Leader (as it is said before) is Christ Jesus, 2 Christ is the Leader of
the Plough.
who (indeed) goes forth before all those his Oxen, as their Head and
Captain: and willing to bring man from errors to the truth, and especially
his Ministers, to the right method and order of their vocation, Aug. in Joan.
tract. 22.
he says: I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. As if he would say: Falli non
vis? Ego sum veritas, Mori non vis? Ego sum vita: Errare non vis? Ego sum via.
Non est qua eas, nisi ad me: non est qua cas, nisi per me. Will thou not be
deceived? I am the Truth. Will thou not die? I am the Life: Will thou not err?
I am the Way. Thou have not whither to go, but unto me: neither may thou
walk safely, saving by me. This is the same to whom the Law directs, the
Prophets point, the Figures aim, and whom the Father would that all men should
hear: and he has not only showed the way unto the kingdom, but lovingly
allures men to walk in the same. Therefore he faith: Mat. 11.29.
Learn of me: Come unto me. Neither has he at any time required that of his
followers in this work, which himself had not first undertaken in his own
person. In regard whereof, Apo. 14.1
those hundred, forty, and four thousand redeemed souls, which stand with
the Lamb on Mount Sion, follow him wheresoever he goes: and therefore as for
him, they are crossed, they shall be with him also crowned, finding that all
the afflictions of this life for him, To. 8.
are not worthy that glory which shall be revealed in him.

3 The Driuer. The holy Ghost prouokes the good Ox.
The Driuer of this Plough is the divine Spirit, through whose instigation the
goade is agitated, the Oxen provoked, and the Plough furthered: too and for the
which, it pleases him (semblant to the Goad inch or driuer of Oxen) to use and
apply sometimes Words: sometimes Voices: sometimes Songs, or whistlings:
sometimes pricks and stripes. The Words Words.
are the examples, testimonies, sentences and Parables of the holy Scriptures,
Eccle. 12.
the which (as says Solomon) as are goades and nails fastened by the masters
of the Assemblies, which are given by one Pastor: goades to provoke, and nails
to confirm the working true Christian. The Voices Voices.
are the preachings of the Prophets, Preachers, Evangelists, and Ministers of
the holy word, who, like Saint John the Baptist, the Criers voice in the world,
prepares the Lords way among men. The Songs Songs.
or whistlings, are the sweet promises of God in Christ, who by many
comfortable metaphors, and arguments of love, allures men unto him. The Shaking
of the Goade, Shaking of the Goade.
is the comination or threat of punishment and heavy judgments, to fall on
them which are either negligent or unfaithful in this service. As thou Son
of man (says the Lord) if thou tell them not of their sins, but permit them,
that they die therein, I will require their blood from thine hand. Again,
Cursed is he who does the Lords work negligently. The Pricks of the Goade
Pricks of the Goade
are corrections, afflictions, crosses, anguishes and sorrows, whereby the
lazy is stirred up, the idler provoked, the sinner punished. Ion. 2.
By this Goade was Jonas pierced when he was found faulty in his Ministry:
by the same was Peter persuaded to acknowledge and confess him thrice, whom
he had thrice denied, Job. 20.
Saul by the same became a Paul, most ready to run his course in this Plough,
and those Angels in the Ephesian Churches, Apoc. 2.
which were sometime tepidous and backward, were well warned and set forward.
And truly, this is Gods wisdom to deal with his servants, as for his own
glory and the good of his Church: so for their good whom he warns, threatens
and punishes, not to destroy them, but as a good Father to his prodigal
child, as a prudent Schoolemaister to his negligent scholars, as a cunning
Physician to his insolent patients, Chrysostom. ad Bab. Martyr.
and as the wise husbandman to his lazy Oxen: but yet, with some severity on
them that disobey his known will, and abuse with presumption his gracious long
suffering. Thus have we perused Pieties Plough in all parts and members
performed. Now, he that takes hold of this Plough, He that takes the Plough
in hand but continue it.
and continues not to the end, but looks backward with Demas, is not fit for
the kingdom of God. Let us therefore pray to the Lord to increase our faith,
to help on our labors, to confirm our ministry, and strengthen us in him,
both to the end, and in the end, by the strong influence and power of his
Spirit, the agitator and driuer of this potent Plough.

CHAP. XXX. The harrowing of the Lords Land after the Seed sown therein.
PIeties Plough being thus complete, we are next to consider of the harrowing
of the Lords Land. The good husbandman for the breaking and bruising of the
rough cloddes of earth, and better covering of the Seed cast into his field,
has an instrument framed to that use, which he calls the Harrow, or Dragge:
and this contains diverse orders or rewes of many sharp tines, or nails, the
which, by how much more keen and tender pointed they be, the better by so
much they serve to this use. Now, in this spiritual Georgie, there is likewise
a spiritual Harrow, without the which, there rest in the heart of man, many
stubborn cloddes of concupiscence and sin, as whereby the sovereign seed
of the heavenly word may not well take root and bring forth fruit of increase.
This Harrow is that tentation whereby the Lord God bruiseth the corruption of
man's nature, The Harrow or Dragge.
and tries them that appertain to his Kingdom for their good. And therefore
as the Harrow has in it many sharp tines or pricks for that use, this
Tentation has his Contents of diverse kinds of affliction, applicable, and
that profitable for the spiritual Land. Amongst many others of this kind,
the Apostle to the Hebrews, The harrow tines.
chap: 11. has numbered these particulars: as namely, mockings, scourgings,
bands, prisonments, stonings, piercings, woundings, burnings, wanderings,
tormentings, afflictions, death. And those and such like vexations has the
Lord appointed, and permits to fall on his Saints, as whereby in this life
they might be tried, and in their trial purged as corn, and purified as gold
in the fire: that so through many tribulations incident to man's nature, they
might be framed liable to this use: and finally, being redeemed from the
earth, and washed in the blood of the Lamb, and abandoning the world, they
might effect and enter the heavenly Ierus^lem, Greg. in Job. li. ^6 ca. 9.
the place of their rest. Neguitia reproborum triturae more electorum vitam,
quasi grana a paleis seperans, premit and purgat. The naughtiness of the
Reprobates (says Gregory) after the manner of a triture or threshing, does
bruise and purge the life of the elect, as seperating the corn from the
chafe: for the evil when they afflict the good, The cause wherefore God
suffers the godly to be afflicted in this life.
do the sooner thereby drive them from the desires of this world: for whiles
they lay on them many violent pressures, they compel them to hasten to things
heavenly, the which is well noted in the example of the Israelites, when Moses
called them from the oppression of Pharaoh. And this is the cause that the Lord
permittes the righteous to be troubled by the unrighteous, that when they
hear tell of the good things future, which they desire, they may sustain for
a time, the affliction of those evil things, which they abhor, and such their
crosses may enforce them to an happy end, while love allures them to the same.
Neither (indeed) may the nature of men be otherwise framed applicable to the
Lords use, as thus by praue concupiscence subdued to sin.

But by this (as by the rough Harrow) the clods of his nature being bruised,
and that good corn covered in the earth, (howsoever the wicked imagine the
seed of Gods word therein dies) the fruit of Righteousness, in time, is
seen to recompense the husbands toil. Therefore, when the Prophet David
observed the necessity and conuenience thereof, he confessed, that good it was
for him, that he had been troubled: that is, harrowed; though by the
persecution of Gods enemies. 1 We are not afflicted by God unjustly.
But if at any time we seek for the cause of this our trouble, and can hardly
find the same; yet let this suffice, to persuade that we suffer none of these
trialles unjustly: for if by the goodness of God we be now made somewhat, who
before were not, there is no doubt, but that the same God bearing rule over
all, will not permit us, which now are made to be unjustly afflicted: he will
not neglect the work of his own hand, but preserve that himself has
created, Greg. ibi i. cap. 10.
and constrain all those hard adventures betiding us, to further the same
preservation for his glory, and our endless consolation.

Next, let us endeavor in this case to resemble the good ground, which first
simply obeys and yeldeth to the hand of the husbandman, to be by him turned,
delued and labored after his wll, without dispute, 3. Patience
grudge, question or denial. Thirdly, with the same, let us learn to bear and
endure with patience and tolleration, whatsoever this good husbandman imposes
and lays on us. 4. Thankfulness.
Fourthlie, having received the good seed of Gods word, and the labors of his
hand, let us (with the same) be thankful, and express our thankfulness in
rendering unto his hand, sometimes thirty, sometimes sixty, sometimes an hundred
fold. And then, howsoever the Ploughers plough on our backs and make long
furrows, that our soul is heavy even to the death, because the sword has
pierced it: 5. Comfort
let us not fear nor wax fainte hearted, but believe and know that all things
shall work together for the best unto us which love God, and depend on his
goodness.

The two Horses The two horses that harrow.
which draw forth this Harraw or Dragge, are two strong barbed beasts, and in
nature of themselves most evil and unthrifty, though by the good Husbandman
constrained, prepared, and applied to thriftines: the one is the World, so
called: the other, the Flesh.

By the World, 1. The World.
(in this place) is meant not the creature containing the heavens, and the
earth: within which, men live, and thereof by divine providence, take benefit
and use, but (according to the meaning of Christ and his Apostles) we
understand the malign, wicked, To. 1.
and impious persons of this life, who being nothing capable of the things
which are of the Spirit of God, oppose themselves in lewd lusts against the
Saints, against the truth, against God: whom therefore the Apostle advises us
not to love, nor any their studies or affairs.

By the Flesh 2. The Flesh.
also we understand, not this natural material body of man: but (as Christ
and the same Apostles teach) those carnal and lustful men of this life, and
their fleshly affections, which are ever contrary to the Spirit of God, and
the sacred motions of the same. By these two Horses, the very godly are both
tempted, troubled, and mightily assaulted. Howbeit, How the godly are harrowed,
and to what end, by those horses.
for their better exercise and profit (as it is before said) nor may we
persuade, but that as well those ungodly instruments of wrath, as the very
sins of the elect, are no less profitable unto them oppressed with sin,
then that very poison, whereof potions are made, is good for the sick patient:
and as that Scorpion, which is bruised, and applied to the wound he had
pierced before, is said to be a sovereign remedy against the same. Moreover,
to this Harrow (which God uses as an instrument of justice) belong ^^me other
things, by the which those horses being furnished and fastened, may both
strongly draw on, and labor the same.

These are diversely named by the Husbandme^ of diverse countries; but known to
us by those names, The furniture of the horses harrowing.
vz. First, the two Collers. Secondly, the two Hambers. Thirdly, the four
Traces, or Tresses. Fourthly, the two Batter-quills. Fifthly, the two Tenours,
or withes. Sixthly, the two Halters, or raynes. The first and second are applied
to the necks and shoulders of those horses: the third, to their sides: the
fourth, to their heels: the fifth, are fastened to the harrowes: and the last,
to their heads. Of the which parts, there might much be spoken, and many things
discovered, for good use: but for brevity, it shall be enough at this time,
that we only remember them. By the first, namely, the Collers, 1. The Collers.
understand the righteousness of man. Secondly, judgment of the world. Both
the which, the Spirit of God reproves, as Christ protests, being contrary
to the justice and judgment of God. By the second is noted, 2. The Hambers.
that Philantia or self-love. Secondly, that Contempt and Disdain of others:
the which also, the Lord observed and reprehended in the proud Pharisees. By
the third, is considered, 3. The Traces or Tresses. 4. The batter quides. 5.
The tenou es. 6. The halter or raynes.
those four cords of Vanity, as Envy, Wrath, Injury, and Cruelty: which
are deadly, and condemned in the Law of God. By the fourth are signified, 1.
The blasphemous tongues. 2. The godless actions of presumptuous sins. By the
first observe: first, the devilish suggestions and damnable imaginations of the
impious miscreants of this life: and by the sixth and last, consider well of the
wise Providence and Power of God, by the which all things are carried and
powerfully ordered; as well for the benefit of his Saints, as for his own
glory, the end of all his works: neither has the devil any power or might
whatsoever, to go one jot beyond the will and permission of the Lord in any
thing, whereof the godly take no mean comfort: knowing, that as they be his
dear children, 1. Cor. 10.
and will not suffer them to be tempted beyond their power: so he will defend
and inherit them in the end, when the enemy (maugre all his studies and
struglings) shall not only be restrained of the effecting of his hurtful
purposes, but also plagued with torments eternal.

The Driuer of those two Horses, God permits the wicked to aff^ict his Saints.
is the Spirit of Malignitie, who being of a nature maleuolent and perverse,
yerkes them on by Gods permission: but persuading, that because the Lord has
permitted him to rage and storm against his disobedient children and such as
yet repent not of their heinous sins, that therefore he is of power
sufficient in himself, to execute and effect against them (in his wood-furie)
whatsoever he lists. Of this proud conceit, was King Nabuchadnezar of
Babylon, whom the Lord had made the Hamber of the earth, and his rod of
revenge. But he is deceived, and such his followers: for he and they be none
other, then as the rod in Gods hand, and his instruments of wrath, to be
guided and restraind at his will. God restraines the insolent by his power.
Therefore, howsoever these stiff-necked horses run, neigh, leap, and kick
with their heels: how fiercely soever they pull on the sharp harrow, to annoy
the Saints, being yerked forth in furious rage, by the malign Spirit: yet
true it is, (as before it is said) that being brideled and restrained by the
providence and power of God, Dionys. Arcopag. in diuinis nominibus cap. 10.
the chief Moter, they shall not be able to hurt one hair of the head of the
Lords children: or perpetrate any one action whatsoever, without his will and
permission to whom they are compelled and bound to obey. So have we plainly
seen a description of the harrowing of the Lords land, after the plowing and
sowing of the same.

Now, before we come to the fruits of this labor, let us briefly peruse the
Plough of Impiety, as whereby in a fit comparison, we may the better discern
and observe that which has been said.

CHAP. XXXI. A brief view of Impieties Husbandry, contrary to the former:
and first, of the Land and Seed of Impiety.
THat we may not be prevented by Satan, and the guilefulnes of his assaults
(the deepnesse of whose devices, is bottomless, and his lewd purpose ever
opposite to the purpose divine) let us not omit to observe him, to know his
malice: yea, let us well mark the nature and manner of his ploughing, sowing,
harrowing, and working in the field of this world: and so take heed of him,
prevent him, and by our faith in Christ, and true labors in the Lord, conquer,
overthrow, abandon, and cast him out, as our most deadly enemy.

It is certain, that the Devil has a Plough, The Devil has his Plough.
which is of Impiety: wherewith, howsoever he pretends in show, his full
purpose is to destroy that which the Lord God has built: root and cast forth
the good Seed from the the Lords land, wherein to sow Tares, and to plough
for sin and unrighteousness, that he may reap after the measure of tirannie
and cruelty on the earth. And surely, Why many men sow and plough iniquity.
what by means of his sophistical arguments, or for that the ways of
Impiety, seem pleasant to man's eye, and lustful to the flesh: or for that
the path of true Piety is narrow and painful to the men of this life, many
men, yea mighty men of the world, have rather chosen to plough with Impiety,
then with Piety, and therein to serve rather to the Devil, then to God.

Therefore have we placed here following, a view of the devils husbandry in
the world, opposed to the former, as whereby ye might behold and consider the
contrary Image and order of either, with their ends and rewards. Howbeit, too
and for this purpose, that seeseeing the good, with the commodity thereof, ye
might love and ensue it: and knowing also that evil, with the danger and hurt
thereof, ye might warily eschew it. And this the better to perform, we may
consider in this impious Georgy, to be abandoned, three general points, as: 1
The Land and the Seed of Impiety. 2 The Plough of Impiety. 3 The Harrow of
Impiety.


Although the Devil goes about like a ramping and roaring Lion, ever seeking
whom he may devour, and every day catches and swalloweth up such as
appertain to his kingdom, The subtlety of the Devil.
and therefore are liable to his power and tyranny: yet is he not so willing
to appear as he is, in his own likeness, being as ashamed of his own ugly
deformity. But therefore, that he might as well satisfy himself therein, as
beguile others, he mustreth forth as an Angel of Light: Isa. 5.
and therein endeavors to persuade, that for a virtue, which is a foul vice:
to commend that for good, which is evil: and that for sweet, which is most
sower.

Thus, the Devil willing to deface the Plough of Piety, and godly Georgy,
would by many subtle arguments and shifts, enduce men to believe that Impieties
Plough is the best, that the tares sown by him in the field, are good corn,
that the soil of sinfulness is the most healthsome land, and that to sow for
wickedness, and to reap after the measure of cruelty, is far preferred
before that sowing and reaping which the Lord God has prescribed in his word
for his Saints. But this is his guilefull engine to circumuent the ignorant and
heedlesse, to advance the power of his royalty, and to blemish the glory of
the heavenly Saints, as we shall the better see and consider, after that we
have perused the particular parts before mentioned: for thereby shall the
legerdemane of this crafty imitator be found out, and his practices
prevented, to the final confusion of him and all his ungodly impes.

The Land of Impiety, The Land of Impiety.
is not fallowed or well tilled ground of the Lords field: but the vnfallowed,
untilled and rude earth, as that which is barren, naught, and all unfit for the
good seed, Genesis 3.
and bears thorns, thistles, brambles, and tares, such as naturally spring
of evil and vncultured fields, all unprofitable and combersome to the
husbandman This Solomon descried in the vineyard of the foolish and slothful
man: It was all grown over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face
thereof, and the stone wall thereof was broken down: then he adds: Prou.
24.30.^4.
thy poverty comes as one that trauaileth by the way, and thy necessity like
an armed man. This rightly displaieth the malicious heart of old Adam, which
is not apprehensiue of the things which are of the divine Spirit, nor is well
cultured and prepared for the heavenly Seed, and so neither for the fruit of
righteousness. The Seed sown therein, is either choked with thorns, or
trodden down of men, or devoured of birds, or over withered with the Sun, and
so is not fruitful in good wo^kes, (as the Lord has taught in the Gospel)
and therefore (as also the Apostle says) is subject to burning. Of this nature
was the heart of cursed Caine, of Saul, of Achitophel, of Judas, of Simon
Magus, of Herod, of the High Priests of the Jews, and such as being hardened,
were ever obstinate, rebellious against God, hateful to Christ, his Apostles
and Ministers: and finally, left without timely repentance, perished in their
sins, without mercy, as if it were impossible they could be renewed into
repentance.

The Seed of Impiety The Seed of Impiety.
cast into this naughty ground, is neither that sovereign word of God, nor
those heavenly virtues and motions of the Spirit, but the noisome tares of the
envious: as wicked and ungodly thoughts, suggestions, imaginations, conceits,
studies and endeavors, murders, thefts, blasphemies, lies, adulteries, envy,
wrath, pride, gluttony, sloth, lechery, covetousness, and many other like, of
which this earth is naturally capable, and whereof springs nothing else, but
that (which being of the like nature) is fit for the fire. So says our
Savior, the wicked man having received in those Seeds, from that evil
treasure of his heart, brings forth that which evil is: for we may not
expect Grapes to spring of thorns, nor figs of thistles. To this belong
those wicked heresies, sophistries, schisms, erroneous doctrines, deceivable
opinions, and godless counsels, broached and divulged in the Church by
Antichrist and his members. Hence also is that sowing of seditions and
contentions among brethren and neighbors, the seeds of Impiety, whereof
Solomon spoke: Prou. 22.
the sowing of vain wind and wickedness, mentioned by the Prophet Hoseah:
Hos. 2. and 10.13. Mat. 13. Gal. 6.8. Plato de voluptate.
the sowing of tares, whereof Christ tells, and the sowing in the flesh,
whereof grows corruption; of the which Saint Paul disputed. These be evil
sowers, and their seed, fits both their hand and the soil, as mali falsis
gaudent voluptatibus.

CHAP. XXXII. 1. Of the Plough of Impiety. 2. Of the Soole.
THe ungodly (as it is said) have also their Plough, as wherein they pretend
to imitate the godly in their husbandry: howbeit, as they are of an other mind
and constitution: The end of Impieties Plough.
so is their Plough quite contrary to the Plough of Piety, having therein this
chief purpose, not only to broach thereby their inueterate mischiefs, but to
grieve and gall the Lord Jesus at the heart, and all his blessed members, and
to overthrow and root out all celestial grace and divine virtues from the
hearts of men. Of this the Prophet woefully complained, in the person of Christ
and his Saints: Isa. 44.
The Plowers plowed upon my back, and made long furrows: thus said the Lord
of such plowers: Thou have laden me with thine iniquities, and pained me with
thy transgressions. And of the same it is said: The sinner considers the
righteous, and seeks occasion to slay him. Psalm. 37.
For these wicked and perverse Plowers, are ever most hard-hearted, The nature
of the evil Plowers.
cruel, envious, malicious, irefull, and severe, against the Saints of the
most holy: they pierce and wound the righteous, by tyrannies, blasphemies,
persecutions, torments, and horrible mischiefs. Howbeit, we find them not
always so prosperous in their actions and studies, but that they are often
galled, grieved and condemned by that gnawing and fretting worm of Conscience
which torments their sinfful souls day and night with pains intolerable: and
lastly, they are destroyed for ever from the presence of God and his blessed
Angels. In this Plough are considered (as in the Plough of Piety)

1. The Aratre or Soole, of the Plough. 2. The Oxen, of the Plough. 3. The
Holder, of the Plough. 4. The Leader, of the Plough. 5. The Driuer, of the
Plough.
But not the same before mentioned in that Plough, nor the like in either
nature or condition: for as Piety and Impiety are mere contraries, as
virtues and vices: so also are their several actions, fruits and effects.

First, touching the Aratre or Soole, The Soole of Impiety. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 9.
7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14.
we find therein the same number of parts and points, as in the Soole of
Piety. As first, the Share: secondly, the Ship: thirdly, the Culter: fourthly,
the Beam: fifthly, the Tractory: sixthly, the Ground-rise: seventhly, the
Broad-Hale: eighthly, the Round-hale: ninthly, the Chain: tenthly, the Farther
Wheel: eleuenthly, the Nearer Wheel: twelfthly, the Axell: thirteenthly, the
Kay fourteenthly, the Taw. The first of the which notes hardness of heart: An
hard heart. Bern. li. 5. de consider.
the second, pride: the third, sinful shame: the fourth, impenitency: the
fifth, pampering of the flesh: the sixth, despair of remission: the seventh, a
turning away from God: the eight, an abiding or dwelling in sin: the ninth, a
noisome combination of vices: the tenth, a thriftlesse meditation: the
eleventh, a continuance of ungodly actions: the twelfth, a blasphemy: the
thirteenth, infidelity: and the fourteenth, malicious cruelty. First, the
Share of Impieties Soole is hardness of heart, which ever withstands godly
contrition. Quid est Cor durum? ipsum est, quod nec compunctione scinditur, nec
pietate mollitur, nec mouetur precibus, minis non cedit, flagellis duratur,
ingratum est ad beneficia, etc What is the hard heart (said Baruard) It is the
same which is neither pierced with compunctio^: nor mollified with piety, nor
moved with prayers, nor yields to threats: is hardened with scourges, for
benefits ingratefu^l, for counsels unfaithful, for judgments cruel, for
vices shameless, for dangers desperate, for humane things brutish, for divine
matters rash, of things past forgetful, for things present negligent, for
things ^uture improuident the same who forgets all things before passed, saving
injuries, and respects nothing that is to come, saving how to be revenged. Ioh.
41. Ephesians. 4 18.
Lo here is the display of an indurate heart, which being past feeling and
strange from the life of God, given to all kind of wantonness, works all kind
of wickedness. With this instrument labored Pharaoh the Egiptian King, Exodus
7.
whose heart being hardened, he would by no means be persuaded to let the
people of Israel to go out of his land, the end whereof was his own
destruction. Well therefore the Lord admonished his people by Moses, Deuteronomy. 10.16
Psalm. 91.
to circumcise the fore-skinnes of their hearts: and by David, not to harden
their hearts, as in the time of provocation in the Wilderness. For this sin
has nothing profitable for man's health, but many things as whereby man is
utterly annoyed, and finally confounded.

Next to this, follows the Ship of Impiety, and that is a Proud Spirit, 2.
A Proud Spirit.
which possessing an inordinate love of it proper excellency, and an ambitious
desire of that celsitude which evermore contrarieth godly humility, causes men
without all fear of God, and the acknowledgement of their own infirmities,
either for some wisdom, or some strength, or some beauty, or some favor, or
some holiness, or some laudable qualities, which they either find or conceit
to be in themselves to extol themselves, in regard whereof, they
disdainefully contemn others: howbeit, feeling the least touch of adversity,
they begin to murmour against God, as if he were most unjust in dealing
toward them. Secondly, as the Ship is the lowest member of the Soole: so is
pride deeply rooted in the heart of man: yet so, as from thence it ever
aspireth, and by devilish ambition croppeth the head thereof, and gettes the
victory. Thirdly, the Ship bears the Share, which pierces and makes way
for the rest of this swelling humor, though in a man miserable and poor (for
the poor man is proud also, as well as the rich) looks ever upward,
thirsterh after sovereignty, and ministers cause and occasions to pertinacie
and hardness of heart: neither is there any sin or wickedness which is not
accompanied or provoked of this: for every sin committed, argues a proud
contempt of the divine Law. Elatum cor, durum and expers est pietatis, ignarum
compunctionis, In li 5 de considerat
siccum ab omni rore gratia spiritualis: An high or haughty heart (said
Bernard) is hard and deuoid of all piety, ignorant of compunction, and arie
from all the dew of spiritual grace. Aug. tract. 25. in Joan.
This Saint Augustine (after the wise Syracides) considering, for an admonition
to the godly, to fly that destruction, thus says: Quid superbis homo? filius
Dei propter te humilis factus est, etc. Wherefore art thou proud o man? the
Son of God was made humble for thee. Albeit thou may be ashamed to
imitate an humble man: yet at the least be thou nothing ashamed to imitate
humble God. The Son of God came in man, and was humbled: that God was made
man, thou o man know thy self, for thou art a man. Thy whole humility is, that
thou know thy self. But this virtue is either quenched out, or withstoode by
this impious Ship of Pride, to the perdition of them that follow this
pestilent Plough: as besides many testimonies of holy Scriptures, we find it
verified in that fearful example of Nimrod, the mighty Hunter, Nebuchadnezar
the Monarch of Babylon, Herod, Abimelech, Antiochus, Holofernes, and such
haughtie-hearted plowers of mischiefs. For the Lord does always resist the
proud as unworthy, both his benediction and Kingdom. Therefore to his Saints
he commends humility, in the which, as they are called blessed, so have they
in the end the Kingdom of heaven, and happiness eternal.

Thirdly, the Culter of this Soole, is that Shame Sinful Shame.
which brings sin, as by the which the sinner denies to acknowledge and
confess his sins and transgressions, committed either to God, or to the
congregation, or to his even brother, whom he has offended, contrarying or
withstanding that Confession of the mouth which was semblant to the Culter,
whereby the earth pierced with the Share, is opened and divided. Nevertheless,
as the evil man from the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth that which
is evil, he is not any thing ashamed to belke and blatter forth heinous
blasphemies against God and the King, scandalles, letters, periuries, evil
words: and to sin openly without shame. This was Sodomes abomination:
imitating therein wicked Cayn, who albeit he could not but see the
heinousness of his own fault, would yet not confess himself faulty; or at
the least, not much faulty: but ieasted (as it were) at Gods commination. As,
Is my sin so great? or greater then that it may be pardoned? But as those
obtain no promise of pardon: so are they justly secluded from all hope of
saving health. Well therefore, said S. Augustine: Aug. in Psalm.
O homo: quid times confiteri? etc. O thou man, wherefore fear thou to
confess that, which by confession I am yet more ignorant of, then of that I
know not at all? Why shamest thou thy sins to confess? I am a sinner, as
thou art: I am also a man: and nothing of that which is humane, is wanting in
me. Confess thy sin (o man) even before man: a sinful man, to a sinful
man. Choose now either part: If thou conceal thy sins, for want of
Confession, thou shall be damned, as vnconfest. For to this end the Lord
requires man's confession, that he might pardon the man which is thereby
humbled: and to this end he dammes him which confesses not, that he might
punish the person which is proud.

The Plough Beam of Impiety is, the repletion of bread, pampering of the
flesh, and luxury, 4. Luxury
a severe enemy to true Mortification. For as that beam of Piety, is the
strength of godly Repentance: so is this the utter dissolution of the same: as
then when men are filled and glutted with carnal lusts, they are apt and
ready to all impiety and wickedness with greedines. Gregor. in moral. in
Job. Aug. de ciu. dei. lib. 12.
For (as Gregory said) afte^ that the vice of luxury has assailed man's mind,
it scarcely permits him to think of any goodness: for his desires are clibbe
or clammie: for of an evil suggestion, springs cogitation: of cogitation,
affection: of affection, delight: of delight, consent: of consent, operation:
of operation, custom: of custom, despair: of despair, defense of sin: of
defense of sin, proud boasting: Ezech. 16. Genesis 6.
of proud boasting, death. This was an other of Sodomes sins, (as witnesses
the Prophet, under the title of their idleness) and of the filthy sinners in
the time of the general deluge: whereof it followed, that they both perished,
the former by fire, the latter by water, in the Lords fearful anger, whose
justice most worthily abhorres this filthy Ploughbeame.

The Tractory of this Aratre is, a desperate mind touching any consolation or
help from above, or of the life to come: 5. Desperation. Sap. 2.22.
the which the ungodly hope not for. Therefore, whereas the faithful are
drawn forth, and persuaded through the hope of those good things promised
them, these ungodly, thereof both doubtful and desperate, slug on the waves of
this world, slumber as in the dark night, err from the right way: and setting
before them, only that which either their own wisdom or power, or policy,
or labors, or studies, or the favor and the wealth of the world may suggest,
procute, and afford them, they perish with profane Esau, and with that rich
man, Genesis Luke 12. Sap. 5. Ambros. super. Luc. lib. 12.
who lost his soul suddenly in the night. For the hope of the ungodly (as
says the wise man) is like a dry Thiftle-flower, blown off with the wind.
Against the which humor of those ungodly, thus counsels Saint Ambrose: Nemo
diffidat, etc. Let no man distrust. Let no man as guilty of his former sins
despair of the divine graces. The Lord knows how to alter his sentence, if
thou know how to amend thy faults. Isidor. de Sum. bono. lib. 2.
But as to commit an evil action is the death of the Soul: so to despair of
Gods mercy and grace is the falling down headlong of a man into hell.
Therefore, as the godly person should be wary, that he fall not through pride:
Aug. in lib. de sym.
so should the sinner take heed that he despair not through malice.

After this, follows the Ground-Rise of Impieties Soole, and that is impious
Impatiencie, 6. Impatiencie.
or that malicious Anger, the which in them who are not well plained, but left
ill hewn and rough, meets daily with those oppositions of man's nature, with
exceeding great murmr, and unreasonable exclamations: nor (indeed) through
the disposition of a dangerous evil humor of man's heart, is the same able to
sustain and persevere in the assaults and tentations, but cracketh, breaks,
and gives over, because it has not, nor can obtain either the love divine,
or any hope of good things future, or is willing to endure any adverse or hard
adventures, In Pastor.
for Pieties cause. Ipsa quae matter est omnium, custosque virtutum per
impotientiae vitium virtus amittitur. That Virtue of Charity (says Gregory)
which is the mother, and keeper of all Virtues, is quite overthrown by the
vice of impatiencie. With this Ground-Rise labored Saul, though King of
Israel, and Demas, though sometimes an hearer and follower of the blessed
Apostles, 1. Pet.
who thereby waxing faint, perished in the way, to the terror of other.

^. Auersion from ^od.
The Broad-Hale of this Aratre is, Auersio, the turning away from God: this
Saint Paul noted, and reproved in them of his time, which turned their ears
from the truth. 2 Timothy 4. Deuteronomy. 9 Sap.
And Moses, in those Israelites, whose heart was turned from the Lord their God.
Whereas true Conversion has peace and life, this has trouble and death: for
the Apostating of the ungodly, is his own destruction, according to that
comination: 1. Kin. 9.6
If ye shall turn away from me (says the Lord) then will I cut you off from
the land which I have given you. This is a dangerous evil, wherein the sick
man in stead of a good Physician to help him, follows after his enemy that
destroys him: and for health wished him, he finds maladies to annoy him. Scio
(says Augustine) quia male mihi est, praeter te, Aug. in confess.
non so^um extra me, sed in meipso; and omnis copia, quae deus meus non est,
Egestas mihi est. I know well that it evil betides me, besides thee (o my God)
that not only without me, but within my self: and all that copy or riches
which is without my God, is naught else but extreme poverty. Therefore
resolved David: Psalm.
It is goed for me to hold me fast by God.

The Round-Hale is the plaining and polishing of the carnal man's actions, 8.
The approbation of evil accounts.
making provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. These Plowers
endeavor not to correct or amend their impious works: but rather labor how to
foster and maintain them, or at the least to tolerate, and permit them to
reign in themselves: nor will they be persuaded to depresse their gross
errors in the same: but study how to increase and augment them. Of this kind
spoke Solomon, that Albeit they be brayed in a mortar, Pro. Isai. 1.
like the frumentie corn, yet will they not leave their folly. For sitting in
the pestilent chair, and entertaining that fiend which was sometime cast out,
they are made worse in the end, then at the beginning, and consequently, Act.
1.
sent with Judas and Julian, to the center of sinful souls, without
repentance.

9. The lincking together of many vices.
The Chain of Impiety Aratre, is the combining and linking together of many
vices: and so, as that one provoke and draws on an other, contrary to that
of Piety: wherein is found a conjunction, and provocation of many Virtues. For
by this Chain the ungodly study and labor with all their wit, policy and
power, to minister in their infidelity, malice: in their malice, ignorance of
God: in their ignorance, insolency: in their insolency, impiety: in their
impiety, inhumanitie: in their inhumanitie, naughtiness. Isa. 5.
Isayah the Prophet calls these linckes, the Cords of Vanity: and Saint Paul
in his Epistle to the Romans, Chapter 1. displaies their order.

By this, Lots wife drawn from her duty (as I have said in her Apostacy)
bended toward Sodom, That is in a book entitled, Remember Lots wise on
Luke 17.
to the destruction and perpetual ignomy. Herod the Tetrach, Judas the
Traitor, Simon the Sorcerer, Antiochus the Tyrant, and Saul the King of Israel,
were mightily drawn away by this ungodly Chain, and so made shipwreck of
their health and salvation. A dangerous provocation.

10. A wicked cogitation.
The Wheels also of this Plough, although in figure, conjunction and motion,
much like those of Pieties Plough, are yet contrary in nature, working and
effect. They allude to the wheels of Pharaohs Chariot, Exo. 14.25.
which the Lord took off with violence, when he fought for Israel, against
him and the Egyptians. For here is no holy meditation either of God, or of his
divine Law, or of any goodness: but, Hugo de claus. anima. lib. ^ cap. 12.
Hier. ad Demetrid.
as Meditatio sermoni, sermo operationi, ab ociosis complicatur, quasi triplex
funiculus in vsu prauae consuetudinis, quo ligatur senex: there is the
meditation of the lust of the eye, the pleasure of the flesh, the pride of man's
life, which are carried round in this Wheel, to the which therefore, David
likeneth the ungodly man. In this, Psalm.
whatsoever thing are false, vnpure, dishonest, appertaining to malice, to
evil reports, to vices, and the dishonor of that which is good, is apparently
seen. For true it is that Gregory said in his Moralles* Greg. lib. ^^ Moral.
howsoever it be, that the reprobate have not always occasion ministered them
to the effecting of their mischiefs: yet notwithstanding the desire of their
cogitations, wants not in their hearts. And although they follow, not the
Devil in their works always: yet are they strongly obliged unto him in
cogitation. Against which in conuenience, the godly are admonished to meditate
of God, Cass. super. Psalm. Sap.
of whose goodness as long as men have no thought, they may persuade, that
they loose so much of their time in this life.

The second Wheel is not much unlike the former: namely in this, 11. A
continuance of vices.
that it quite contrarieth Piety. For this has not a perseverance in godly
virtues, but maintenance and continuance of horrible vices: 11. A continuance
of vice.
and as one generation passes, and another succeeds: so this with the wind
of wickedness, turns in the same circle or round. Men be perverse in their
sins (as they have been) nor will they be altered from that base by as,
which in their inueterate malice they have taken, with a purpose to effect: and
one sin follows on another neck.

Genesis 4.10
Thus Cayn, having a purpose to murder his brother, he would not be persuaded
from prosecuting the same: and having effected it, he would presumptuously
defend it. So Nimrod and his associates, would not be removed from the proud
practice of their hands. Nor would King Pharaoh surcease his pursuit against
Moses and the Israelites, but attempted one mischief after an other, as more
cruel and fierce against Moses and them. Nor would the Devil either surcease
or assuage his cursed malignities against Christ, until he was nailed on the
tree. This is a continuance in an evil purpose or action, against the law of
God, and a good conscience: the end whereof is death and confusion: as the
end of godly perseverance, is life and honor. Those by correction profit
nothing: by good admonition they wax worse: and settled in their wicked
purposes, whatsoever they promise touching their amendment, they mean not to
perform: but they multiply their mischief.

The Axell-tree of those Wheels, is that most horrible Blasphemy, 12.
Blasphemy and contempt of Gods service.
lying, extraction, slanderous words, false accusation, superstition,
idolatry, and such like, which conjoined in one tree, both combine and support
those two Wheels. For as the ungodly sinner is deuoide of all good mind and
motion to seek and serve the Lord: so i^ he ever busied in the worship and
service of Satan, who therefore is appointed not only his lord, but his
tormentor, without all hope of health. Joel. 2. Act. 2. Psalm. 50.
Godly invocation and prayer has a lure promise and help of deliverance in
all times of distresses: but this, being hateful to God, and hurtful to men,
has a comination of ire and vengeance, as it is testified by the Prophets, and
made apparent in the examples of Senacherib, Rabsache, Holofernes, Julian the
Apostate, the blasphemous Jewish Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, Deog, Shimei,
and such like ungodly.

The Keye of Impiety, wherewith the Taw is fastened to the Beam, is
Infidelity, 13. Infidelity.
which retaining a profane doubtfulnesse of Gods word, of the Articles of
faith, and of the promises of grace, and salvation in the holy Messiah, cannot
apply to it self any of Christ's merits, nor apprehend hope of remission, or
justification, not bring forth, or effect any of those good fruits which
belong to true repentance: but rather lifts up the Beam of Luxury, and
turns the ridges of impiety, whereof spring those noisome tares which the
envious man sows in the field of his heart. Chrysostom. in Mat. 13.
For this is right semblant to that sandy ground, the which is made never the
more fruitful for the rain that falls therein, but remains barren touching
all good fruits. This Key therefore is nothing profi^able, as is the Key of
Piety, but always noisome, as by the which no man, of what estate soever he
be, can or may please God, Genesis 3. Mat. 25. 1. Cor. 10. Mat. 22.11.
who by our only faith in his Son is well pleased. This sin spewed Adam
and Henah out of Paradise, caused the Isralites to fall in Wilderness, the
five foolish Virgins to be barred out from the Brides chamber, and the
dissembling Hypocrite to be expelled the marriage Table. Therefore, as our Lord
often commended unto his followers Faith: so also he reproved them for their
unbelief, from the which he much labored to withdraw them, lest whiles they
continued infidelious with the malign world, they perished with the same.

The last member of this Soole Aratre, is Malicious Cruelty, 14. Malicious
Cruelty.
likened to the Taw, which does not only compass the Beam, but holds the
Tractory by the help of the Key. This vice fastened to Despair by the Key of
Impiety, embraces the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride
of life, with that wisdom which is earthly, sensual and devilish. The Taw
of Piety which is true Charity, loves God and hates the devil: this ha^eth
God and loves the Devil: that likes well the word of God, and abhors the
world: this loatheth the word of God, and affects the world: that honors
the Spirit, and suppresseth the flesh: this honors the flesh, and grieves
the Spirit of God: that embraces the true brethren in Christ, and consolateth
them, in their afflictions: this disdaines them and adds pains to their
troubles: for this vice is most cruel to the true members of Christ: but
favorable and obsequious to the Ministers of Antichrist: finally, the former
perfects all virtues, this replenisheth the dole of all vices. For as Charity
is the fulfilling of the Law, so is this the transgression of the same: and as
every virtue is comprehended within love, so are all vices under uncharitable
cruelty: and therefore unto such an one appertains punishment, as to the just
belongs honor (as said Philo Iudaus Philo in officio Iudieis.
) seeing that he, who of his malign mind perpetrateth cruel actions, is not
only unhappy, but unjust. Wherefore, as in the old time, the Lord plagued the
Giants for their cruelty: so afterward, Gen 6.
he both reproved and reprobated the Jews and their sacrifices for the same:
saying; I will have mercy and not sacrifices: for your hands are full of
blood: in regard whereof, all your sacrifices, oblations, yea your prayers are
sinful before me. Lo, such is the Soole of Impiety so opposite and contrary
to that of true Piety spoken of before.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Oxen which labor and draw on the Soole of Impiety.
THe Aratre or Soole of Impiety, is drawn forth with ten impious Gregor.
moral: in Job. li. 1. c. 16. Nomine boum ^liquando habetudo fatuorum
disignatur. etc.
Oxen, which allude in number, nature and quality to those five yoke of Oxen,
with the which he ploughed, who, being called to the marriage feast of the Kings
son, refused to come, and would be excused: and these are so many kinds of
wicked and evil disposed persons, which being coupled together, consent and
agree to plough iniquity and ungodliness: and being ten, they complete and
furnish five yokes or couples, as a perfect number of malign and devilish
works in the field of this world. In this, for the first yoke, is placed, the
profane Job: 1. Atheists Job. 21.7.
Who is the Almighty? and in the Psalm, Psalm. 14.1
There is no God, or God is not. Job calls them ungodly, and David calls
them fools: for they be neither of any religion toward God, nor wise for
themselves, nor profitable to the Church. And of the next affinity to these are
the Cyclopicall Epicures, 2 Epicures
which diriding all discipline, especially the doctrine of the resurrection,
and defying the Lord Jesus, they make their bellies their gods, consolating
their hearts with this loathsome loare: Let us eat and drink and be merry here
whiles we live: for we may die to morrow, and then shall have no pleasure
neither in this world, nor any where else. Sap. 2. Mat.
Of this kind were those ungodly sinners in the dais of Salomo^: those saduces
in the time of Christ, and those grunting swine, which when St. Paul met at
Ephesus, and fought with them, 1. Cor. 15. Ignat. epist. 3.
(though in quality beasts) after the manner of men.

The former Ox in the second yoke, The second yoke. 1. Heretics.
is he which does not only invent and broach a devilish error, and damnable
opinion in the Church, to the seduction and hurt of the people, but labors
most eagerly by all arguments, ways and means to maintain and defend the
same against the manifest and approved truth of Gods word. Of this kind was
Arrius, Eutichius Manichaeus, Sabellianus Valenteneanus, and such others in the
time of those bloody persecutions of the Church by the Roman Emperors, before
and after the reign of blessed Constantine, by whose impiety both the Tyrants
were much provoked against the Christians, and the Saints much offended. To
these are combined in the same yoke those impropriate Catholics, ^. Romish
Catholics
which depending on the Bishop of Rome, have with his impiety, not only
swallowed up into their caniculare wombes, all the Satanicall heresies broached
and defended by those ancient Heretics in the Church: but also have vomited
and cast forth the same on the poor people of this time, to the seducing of
many simple souls laden with sin, and the great disturbance of the Christian
peace. And therein, they are not contented, Cassiod. in Psalm.
either through the desire of riches, and an odious boasting of pride and
vainglory to persecute others, which consent not with them in their errors,
and treacherous designs: but through unmerciful cruelty and rage, to
persecute the poor and needy, without any regard, Rende more of this in my
Preparatiue to Contentation. Chap. 3. 4. 5. etc.
either of honor, or of gain: neither are they ashamed (albeit they be
entitled, Catholics, and persons of especial orders and note) to oppose
themselves against the Lord Jesus Christ and his Ministers, in their studies,
in their Doctrines, and in their lives: of the which, the first is most
impious: the second most devilish: the third most filthy.

In the third Yoke, The third Yoke.
are first, those which infringe the unity and record of the Church, renting
therein (as much as in them lies) the seamelesse coat of the Lord Jesus, 1.
Scismatiskes.
making questions and doubts of things, which in themselves are indifferent,
and which nevertheless by the imposition of laws are necessary: as touch
not, handle not, taste not: that we profane not our selves, and our holy
religion: such were in the time of the Apostles, and of this kind are they in
this time, which through their precise curiosity, 1. Cor. 7.
exasperate the ordinance, and offend the weak brethren, to the affliction of
Joseph. To these are aptly added, the troublesome Seditionaries, 2.
Seditionaries.
who in their polypragmosynie, minister vehement causes, and occasions of
wars, brawles, contentions, commotions and tumults, in well ordered
Commonwealths: with a purpose to alter and change the constitutions thereof
after thelr own fantastical opinions: Such were Judas and Theudas, about the
time of Christ, Act.
and his Apostles: and of this kind, the Chronicles and Histories make large
mention in every age. The Lord in his wisdom, preserve and defend both our
Church and Commonwealth, from the labors of those pestilent plowers, and
unthrifty Oxen.

In the fourth Yoke, The 4. Yoke.
we find him, who having taken the Plough of Piety in hand, looks backward,
as did Cayn, Judas, Lots Wife, Demas, and Julian the Apostatate, 1. Apostates.
Heb. 6.6. and 10.26.
which are therefore compared to unsavory Salt, good for nothing: to Candles,
whose lights are quenched out: so are they most hard to be recovered and
brought to life again. The nature of those Oxen (as Solomon testifies) is to
plough and sow for brawlings and contentions at all times: whom Job also
condemns, as such, who with a perverse judgment, Gregor. in Job lib. 20. cap
16.
Perturbata tranquillis, dura leuibus, aspera mitibus transitoria aeternis,
suspecta securis anteponunt. 1. Prefer things troublesome, before things
quiet: hard things before soft: sharp before me^ke: transitory, before
eternal: and things suspected, before those which are secure. And with those
are aptly conjoined, the Idle Laborers (wherefore Bernard 2. Idelers. Bern.
speaks) which slugging on the waves of this Ocean, with an vnstancht ship,
are miserably wracked in the depth of the same. For as the trees which grow not
sterue, or are very near to steruing: so such as proceed not from virtue to
virtue, and from one grace to another, with them that are newborn in Christ,
are ready to fall into those noisome snares of the devil, 1. Tim.
which drown men in perdition, and loose that which they have, with that idle
servant, who hid his Lords talent in the earth, without use. (For deficiens,
and non proficiens, are of one affinity). This when S. Paul had noted in the
Galathians, Gal. 3.1.
he reproved them sharply. And observing the same in the Corinthians, 1. Cor.
10.12.
he did not only set before their eyes, the fearful example of the
Israelites, which perished in the Wilderness: but admonished, that he who
thought he surely stood, should beware of falling.

In the fifth Yoke The fifth yoke.
are placed such, as protest for the Lord Jesus, in word; but in their works
they do both deny and defy him. Of this kind complained Ignatius, Carnal
Protestants. Ignat. Ep. 1. ad Iralianos Gregor. Aug. As well for this, as for
the former Read my Preparatiue to Co^tentation.
the Antiochian Bishop and Martyr, whom he called vain bablers, seducers of
the mind: not Christian, but Christ-sellers. Another said of them: Lingua
omnis, Christum loquitur, sed vita neminis. Christ is confessed by every man's
tongue, but by no man's life. The work of the true Christian should indeed
express his love, least he be called a Christian in vain: but these men will
yet be called Christians, who in their actions and lives, are no better then
Atheists, and Epicures: yea, notwithstanding their profession: we may easily
perceive, that these persons, being of a perverse nature, for the glory of this
world, love tribulations, Greg. in Job. li. 20 ca. 15
and for the same serve willingly to all toiles, and devoutly submit their
necks (with the ox) to the yoke of irksome labors, the which the Prophet
Hoseah Hos. 10
under the person of Ephraim describes: for the ox accustomed to the yoke or
triture, albeit he be vnyoked, yet nor compelled, does often (of his own
ac^ord) return to the yoke again: even so, the mind of the carnal man
dedicated to the servitude of this world, and accustomed to the fatigation of
things temporal, although he may be freed from the same, yet hasteneth with
terror, sweatings and toiles, and by the use of a wretched custom, seeks for
the tritary of hard labors: so that he will not cease to bear the yoke of
worldly servitude, albeit he be released and may be free. These be drenched
with wormwood: and yet they feel not the bitterness of that wherewith they be
repleat. But what says the Lord? What right have ye to preach my Word, Psalm.
50.
and to take my Law in your mouth: seeing ye hate to be reformed, and have
cast my word behind you? Again, Wherefore call ye me Lord, Lord, when ye will
not do that which I command you? With these are combined those hollow-hearted
persons, 2. Hypocrites.
which under the same name, or at the least under the title of love Christians,
pretend great holiness, zeal and devotion, so far beyond all others, as
that the godly plain Christian, and indeed the right Protestant, is
contemptible in their curious eyes, no less then sometimes the poor Publican
repenting, was disdained of the proud Pharisie. These draw near to the Lord
with their mouths, but in their hearts they are far away from him* resembling
the painted Sepulchers. But howsoever they simulate, that good which indeed
they have not, and dissemble that evil which lies hidden in their hearts, and
so glance in glory before the face of men, the Lord searches their reins,
and sees them well enough, and discovers the^ to be proud, malicious,
covetous, yea, deuoid of true religion, and so abominable. Therefore howsoever
they be esteemed wise and honorable in the school of their followers, they
are (as one well said) Stulti and ignobilis quos ab aeternae hereditatis
consortio repellit seruitus mentis; Greg. in Job. li. 21. cc. 19.
They are very fools and base persons, whom thraldom of their minds has
alienated from the company of the eternal inheritance. Moreover, these Oxen,
for their furniture in this business, have also (as answerable to Pieties
Plough) their Yokes, 1. The yoke of Impiety.
their Necke-bowes, their Keys, and their Chains or Ropes. Their yoke is not
that which the true christians bear with great courage and comfort: nor only
that servile yoke of the Law, whereto the Jews were constrained to bow their
necks: but the heavy yoke of preuarication and sin, to the which they are in
every rank prostituted and constrained by the law of their members and a
cankred conscience, wherein they have a consuming worm ever gnawing their
souls, which are as the Neck-bowes 2. Necke-bowes.
of this yoke, strengthened or holden in by the Keys 3. The Keys.
of Satan's suggestion and policy: and finally, they are tied together with
five chains or iron ropes, 4. The Ropes.
which are the five chief senses, as well of soul as of body, under natures
corruption and their sinful abuse: as whereby neither seeing, nor hearing, nor
tasting, nor smelling, nor feeling perfectly, they put light for darkness, and
darkness for light; sweet for so were, and sower for sweet; good for evil, and
evil for good: therefore worthily reproved by the holy Prophet, and threatened
with a terrible woe. Isa. 5.

CHAP. XXXIIII. 1. The Holder. 2. The Leader. 3. The Driuer of this impious
Plough.
THis Plough has also an Holder, a Leader, and a Driuer. First, the Holder
thereof is the Devil, 1. The Holder is the Devil.
which apostating from the glory of holy Angels, opposes himself and his
actions to God, to his Saints, and to all goodness. He is the principal
Tiller of this field, Io. 8.44.
in the which he sets forth those his Oxen, not only for the sowing of
iniquity to their destruction: but for the terror, fear and trouble of others,
both in the Church and in the commonwealth: in such sort, as he tumbled forth
the heard of Swine into the waterrs, Mark. 5.13.
whereon not only the swine perished, but all the Country stood in dread what
thereof would ensue, if the Lord Jesus had remained there among them.

The Leader of the Oxen is Antichrist: 1. The Leader is Antichrist. Aug. de
ciuit. dei c. 19. l. 20.
that is, not only the kingdom of the false Doctors and Teachers in the
succession of the Roman Bishops and that Sea, which obscure the bright beams
of the Gospel, persecute Christ in his members, and maintain a worldly
kingdom in the pride and ambition of their minds: but he, which is gone forth
of the Church, and contrarieth Jesus Christ in study, doctrine and life, as I
have more plainly taught in my Preparation to Contentation. Chap ^, 4.5.


The Driuer of this Plough is the Spirit of Error 3. The Driuer is the Spirit
of Error.
in the false Prophets, which yoketh on these deceived souls to follow their
deceiuer, sometimes by flatteries, sometimes by sophistries, sometimes by
policies, sometimes by tyrannies, sometimes by herisies, and by a thousand
hypocrisies and guilfull vanities, in and by all the which, he ever crosses
and contrarieth the holy Ghost, by whom the oxen of Piety are justly moved to
draw on the Soole. And herein, the devil seeking to deceive men, he first
sounds their natures, and knowing to what sin they are most profane, Isul le 3.
de sum bono. Pet. Raven in meerk. 2.
and applies his tentations thereunto. For he is the author of evil, the
original of iniquity, the enemy of things, the corruptor of the world, the
adversary of man: he lays snares, causes falls, digges pits, prepares ruins,
pricks on the bodies, pierces the souls, suggesteth the cogitations,
prouokes angers, gives powers to hatreds, adds vices to love, planteth errors,
nourishes discordes, disturbeth peace, dissipates affections, violateth humane
things, tempts divine things, strikes at the beginning of good things,
captives the rudiment of virtue, and hasteneth to extinguish that which is holy
even at the beginning, knowing that he shall be all unable to subvert that
which is once well grounded. To and with whom conioyne those others, who (after
Gregory Greg. in Job. 35. li. 26. ca. ^.
) we may call Calumniatores, being such (indeed) as do not only rob and
dispoile men of their external substance: but by their erroneous doctrines,
evil manners, and examples of a reprobate life, contend and endeavor to
dissipate their internal virtues: and therefore are more to be feared and
abandoned then those thieves and robbers: for they assay to invade our
external good, these spoil us within: they for the desire of our riches
temporal, these cease not to rage in the hatred of our virtues spiritual:
they envy the things we enjoy, these envy our life: they study to take away
our external goods which please them, these to destroy the internal treasures
which displeases them: therefore by how much the life of good manners differs
from the substance of this world, by so much the more grievous are those
wicked, which either by devilish suggestion, an evil doctrine, or ungodly
life, assaults, or good manners, then they which violently oppressing, invade
on our goods. For by such the quiet spirits led into tentation, are subjected
to damnable perdition.

CHAP. XXXV. The Harrow or Drag, and the Horses of Impiety, with the fruits
and ends thereof.
Moreover, to this Plough and Land of Impiety, there is fitted by the Devil)
a certain Harrow or Dragge, with two ill favored Iades to draw the same. 1.
The Harrow of Impiety.
The Harrow is that Adulation and flattery of that false Prophet, which may
rather be called a Rolier or Smoother: such as used the Prophets of Israel, who
when they should have reproved the people for their abominations, Isa. 2^.1.
and 5^.11. Iere. 6.14. and 8.11.
and terrified them with judgments, healed their wounds with fair words, and
dawbed their sins with untempered mortar. Furthermore, whereas in Pieties
Harrow, were found many sharp pinnes o^ tynes of bitter affliction, to tear
abroad the hard cloddes of man's perverse and stubborn nature. In this Roll or
Dragge are fixed those tynes, which are of a contrary nature and operation, as
namely the sinful Solaces and fancies of fools, by the which (as with
precious balmes) man's head is broken, (as David says). To this purpose the
maleuolent Temptor proposes to the eyes of men, the glory, pleasure, wealth
and pomp of the world to be desired: to the ears, the songs of fools, Pro.
1. Cor. 15.
resembled to the cracking of thorns under the pot in the fire, and such
words, which (as Saint Paul says) corrupt good manners. To the taste, Luk 16.
meats and liquors of deliciousnes, wherewith men are glutted to their pain.
To the sent of smelling, oderiferous gummes, herbs and sweet perfumes. To the
feeling, soft apparel, easy beds, quiet sleeps, long rest, idleness and
wished tranquillity: and to pass by many other particulars of this kind, here
is found offered or promised, whatsoever may seem pleasing to man's
concupiscence and degenerated nature, by the which being enchanted, as with
singing Syrenes, beautiful ^amiae, and deceitful Physicians, they bend to
their own bane, embrace their deep danger, and possess in themselves, not
only a cursed Chironia (or Noli me tangere) but that remediless Nunquam
sanabite, without all recovery.

The two draught Horses of this Dragge, The 2. Harrow Horses. Gregor in Job.
lib 6. cap 16. The Driuer of the Horses.
are two pernicious Devils, which invade the minds of worldly men, of the
which the one is called Mammon, the other Asmodaeus: both fed with lust; the
former of the eye, the latter of the flesh. But that they might not slake
course, they are agitated with Lucifer, that proud feend, whom St. John
descried and discovered, playing his part in the malign world. His songs,
tunes and voices, wherewith he animateth and prouokes those Horses, and with
them, all such as follow on with that Harrow, are the same which either
himself used in heaven, or which he taught Adam and Heuah in Paradise: in the
first was noted elation, Hugo. de Clustro ania lib 2. cap. 19.
suggestion and desperation: in the second, delectation, consent and
excusation: the former smacketh of Avarice, the latter of Voluptuousness.
Whereof, that the godly may be heedefull, and fly the danger, one thus
advises them: Noli cantare cum Lucifero in Calo: seu cum primo homine in
Paradiso: sed cantes in templo cum Christo eijcient vendentes and ementes exeo,
eijciens vendentes datam gratiam, and ementes vanam gloriam. Do thou not sing
with Lucifer in Heaven, or with the first man in Paradise: but sing with Christ
in the Temple, casting out from thence the buyers and the sellers, casting out
them (I say) that sell grace freely bestowed, and that buy vain glory.

Of such odious fingers spoke holy Job Job 2.
in his affliction, and observed, that in the midst of their mirth they were
cast down into hell, the center of ungodly souls, and the place of
remuneration for worldly delights, Luke 12. and 6.
as Christ also has well taught in the fearful examples of those two Rich
men mentioned in the Gospel.

Now, albeit the ground of Impiety be both stubborn, impatient, disobedient
and ungrateful to the Almighty and his Saints in his permission: yet it
yields it self apt and ready to this perverse husbandma^ (I mean the devil) in
all things after his will, according to the ce^sure of the Lord of the reprobate
Jews, Ioh 8.
saying: Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye
will do.

Moreover, to this heinous Harrow belongs diverse other things, especially for
the furniture of those Horses that are liable to the draught of the same in
this lewd land; and the particulars allude in number and place to those which
appertain to the Horses and Harrowes in the ground of Piety: as namely the
Collers, the Hambers, the Trase ropes, the Batter quills, the tenours and the
halters By the Presumption and Despair, as depending on the assurance of this
worldly felicity, and distrusting utterly the promises of God, Concupiscence
and beastly Appetite. Worldly honor, the desire of the Riches of this life,
the desire of fleshly Pleasures, and the desire of Revenge. By the fourth,
Self love, and Self will. By the fifth, the conceit of Security, and the
persuasion of Long By the sixth, understand Seduction and Perdition, and
thereunto the envious man, namely the Devil, sets too both hands, wherein
that he may allure them, he is as a Serpent, and to daunt and destroy them as
a ramping Lion. Howbeit (as it is before said) he has not power to effect
ought, On whom the Devil has power by Gods permission. Dionis. Areop in dui
n^w. lz ca 10. Mat. 4.
were it not of the permission of the Almighty, who, in his just judgments
suffers him both to rage and dominere in and over the vessels of wrath: but
upon his Saints, having no power, in them he finds naught: for the Lord will
not suffer them to fall into tentation, that is, to be overcome of the devil,
albeit he often permits them to be tempted of the devil, as Christ himself was
tempted. Thus have we seen both the Harrow of Impiety, with the Horses,
Driuer, and furniture inci^ent. Now it remains, that we briefly consider of
the fruits that spring of this husbandry, with the reward.

The fruits are most horrible The fruits and reward of ^mpietie
(as so well observed and tried) Eliphaz in Job, Job. ^.8 9.
making an answer to Jobs words, thus protests: I have seen, that they
which plough iniquity, and sew wickedness, do also reap the same. Again,
he remembers their reward with the manner thereof, saying: With the blast of
God they perish, and with the breath of his nestrells they are consumed. And
Solomon has not only seconded, but briefly expounded him therein: Pro. 22.8.
He that sows iniquity (says he) shall reap affliction: and the rod of his
arger shall fail: that is, he shall be plagued for his lewd labors, and that
power he sometimes had to oppress and afflict the godly, shall be restrained
and taken from him. The prophet Hoseah Hos. 10.14
says, that they which plough wickedness, reap the fruit of lies: and that is
(as S. John says) the torment of the second death, Appoc. 22.
in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. St. Paul tells the
Galathians, Gal. 6 8.
that whosoever sowes of the flesh, Chap. 5.19.^1.
shall of the flesh reap corruption. And this (a little before) he calls the
fruits of the flesh, the which (as he says) who so does, he shall not inherit
the kingdom of God. And finally, as well for the consideration of the fine and
reward of Impiety, as for a brief use of that which has been declared of and
in the same, we hear the sweet Psalmist of Israel thus to sing and admonish
and teach the right godly man in his patient abiding: Fret not thy self
because of wicked men: Psalm 37.1, 2, 3.
neither be envious for the evil doers for they shall soon be cut down
like the grass, and shall wither as the green herb. Trust t^ou in the Lord,
and do good, dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall be fed. Again, Verse.
34.
Wait thou on the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee, that thou
sha t inherit that Land when the wicked men shall perish, thou shall see. I
have seen the wicked strong, and spreading himself like a green Bay Tree:
yet he passed away, and he was gone: and I sought him, but I could not find
him. For notwithstanding, his worldly prosperity of late, he is suddenly
gone down into hell, and all his glory is defaced with him in his death: for
why? the Lord has spoken to him in his wrath, and vexed him in his sore
displeasure, when he exalted the horn of his Anointed, and placed his King on
Sion his holy hill.

CHAP. XXXVI. The second general part, containing the Reasons and motives
persuading all men to follow the godly husbandry: wherein is seen the reward
of Piety, with the conclusion.
THe Lord God Almighty, as he is the supreme King, the highest Lord, the
Father eternal, and the God of both heaven and earth, might justly by such his
powerful authority have commanded the Israelies; An Argument of Gods great
mercy.
as in their dutiful obedience to sow for righteousness, and to reap according
to the measure of mercy, without any other reason or respect. And whereas he
might have menaced and threatened the disobedient with the fierceness of his
judgments, as he did the Jews, by the ministry of St. John the Baptist: as
now the axe is laid to the root of the tree: and as Christ says; Except ye
repent, ye shall perish. Howbeit, See what I have said hereof in the Song of
the beloved touching his vineyard, in Isai. 5. part. 1.
such is the Lords unspeakable mercy, that applying himself to man's
capacity and weakness, rather like a father, then a King: he proposes such
reasons, and uses such means, as may rather gently allure and persuade them,
then in any sort terrify, force, or compel them: the which manner of
inducement our Savior Christ, imitating his good Father, has also used,
saying: Come unto me all ye that trauile and be heavy laden, and I will
refresh you: learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall
find rest to your souls. And of this kind the Prophet Hoseah has produced
in number eight, whereof (as we well observe) The first Reason. Time. Job. Ian.
There was a time of deuiation, a time of reuocation, or reuouation: a time of
reconciliation, and a time of peregrination: of deuiation Adam unto Moses, of
reuoca^ion from Moses until the nativity of Christ: of reconciliation Bernard
could worthily complain: In sermon, ^d colar.
Nil preciosius tempore, and heu nil body vilius inuentur: nothing is more
precious then time, and (alas) nothing in these days is less regarded. The
Jews in the days of Heggaeus the Prophet, being willing by him to set on and
further the building of the Lords house, answered him, that the time thereof
was not then come. To whom the Prophet replied: Is it time for your selves to
dwell in your settled houses, and the Lords house to lie waste? Moreover, that
they might consider that their present dearth of corn, victuals, and other
necessary things fell on them, as a just plague for such their neglect of that
house in the time appointed, he added: Consider your own ways in your
hearts: ye have sown much, and brought in little: ye eat, but ye have not
enough: yt drink, but ye are not filled: ye cloth your selves, but ye be not
warm: and he that earneth wages, puts the same into a broken bag. But now,
the Lord being gracious, wills them to observe the time, as reason and equity
require, the time for this business appointed by himself, and not after their
wills, saying: It is time, or the time is now come, wherein ye should seek the
Lord. Such a thing entendeth Solomon in his Canticle: Cant. 3.
The winter is past (says he) the summer it come: the voice of the tirtle dove
is heard in our Land: the like has S. Paul to the Romans; Romans 13.
It is now time that ye awake out of sleep: for the night is past, the day is
come near, and our redemption is nearer then when we first believed. And the
Prophet Hoseah seems to say in effect thus: O ye of the house of Israel and
Judah, ye have long enough, and too long sought after vanity in the error of
your mind: ye have ploughed iniquity too many days and years, ye have been
as sheep going a great whiles astray: and as prodigal sons have wandered
far from your good fathers house: and the Lord has hither unto in long
suffering permitted you (as the good father permits his young children) to play
the wantons: for the which also he has sometimes severely corrected you.
Again, ye have bin often called, long scooled, many times instructed in
godliness now, by this time ye should be no longer as children, but such as are
grown to the years of wisdom and discretion. It is therefore meet and
convenient ye should know the time of your calling, to walk in a new life, as
honestly, worthily and warily: in a word, putting away the former conversation
of your lusts, ye should now serve the Lord in holiness and righteousness before
him, and so redeem the time, for the days are evil, and the enemy is
malicious and subtle, ever seeking to prevent and hinder you with his
mischiefs.

2. The fit opportunity.
But to this ye are the more excited, when ye shall consider duly of the
second argument, which is taken from the fit opportunity of this time,
intimated by that perticle whiles, or until; that is, whiles the Lord comes,
or until he comes. Wherein we find a fit allusion to the natures either
of those birds which observe their fit times in the year, as the Swallow, the
Nightingale, the Storke: or to the manner of those husbandmen, which apprehend
their seasons for sowing, reaping, and other works of husbandry, as the
opportunity is offered them: or to those prisoners in bands, who being guilty,
and trusting to the mercy and lenity of their king for pardon and
deliverance, wait the opportune time, and then gladly accept the same. Such a
thing has the Prophet, where he says: Isai. 55.
Seek ye the Lord whiles he may be found call upon him whiles he is near: the
Psalmist Psalm.
admonishes: To day if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts. And
Christ says; Whiles ye have the light walk in the light. Moreover, the Lord
speaking of an especial time, says: Isai. 49.8.
I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I
succored thee. The which, S. Paul applying to this gracious opportunity,
wherein the Lord did not only declare, but offer unto the Corinthians and
others, the effects of his love, he says: Now is that acceptable time, 2.
Cor. 6.
now is that day of salvation. And this is that which the Lord graciously
extends to his Saints, the which he would they should accept without delays,
for their good. This therefore observed righteous Noah, when according to Gods
commandment, he did not only preach of Gods mercies 120. years to the old
world: but entered the Arc in the opportune time. The like observed Abraham,
when he went forth of his own Country: Lot, when he departed from Sodom:
Moses, when with the Israelites he went out of Egypt: and Matthew, Peter,
James, Andrew, Paul, and John, when they were called, they answered not, we
will first go and bury our fathers, or bid them farewell which are at home,
or go see the farms we have purchased, or prove the oxen we have bought:
but they presently accepted the divine grace without lingering or excuses.
Thus, the five wise Virgins waited, and in the due time entered in with the
Bride, when the foolish, neglecting the opportunity, were shut out, with this
saying: I know you not. And this should teach us, to accept of the precious
good opportunity, the rather for that as in the same we shall find rest to our
souls, and be blessed: So, in the neglect thereof, there is commonly found
affliction and woe. Chry. in Babil con^ra gentes.
For as Saint Chrysostom said, T^iaute gar esti tou thi^^macrothamia tois
oule eis deon chromenois aute^ peer ateran eo ageitendiken. Such is the long
suffering or goodness of God, that he grievously punishes them which abuse
it: and as to them which repent the same is ever found profitable: so to the
obstinate and stubborn persons it offers an occasion of more grievous
punishment, and is according to that conjunction on the Israelites, saying: As
the Lord rejoiced over you to do you good, Deuteronomy. 28.63.
and tomulti^ly you so be will rejoice over you to bring you to naught, and ye
shall be rooted out of the Land whither thou go to enjoy it, if thou will not
fear the Lord thy God. This being well considered by the Prophet, and willing
that the Lords children well advised, should observe the due time with her
oppertunitie, he said: It is time to seek the Lord whiles he comes: as if
he should say, to serve him, to fear him, and to apprehend and accept his
loving graces, then whiles he offers the same.

3. The Lords fatherly affection. Dyonis. Areo page: in Caelest. hierarchia cap.
1.
The third Reason is drawn from the consideration of that Storge, or most
loving affection of a natural father to his d^are son. Wherein the Lord
declares himself as a Father to his people: and therein, as we see how
parents in many things prevent their children, and are willing and ready to
pardon them before that ever they ask or seek for pardon upon their faults
committed, being sorry that by their slidings they offer occasion of anger or
correction: even so (as the Prophet says) The Lord is very ready to forgive,
and comes forth unto them, Isa. 5.5. Hos. 10. Luk 15.
to rain Righteousness upon them. This has Christ expressed in the Parable of
the good Father, and his prodigal Son. Where, the good father seeing his
poor son coming toward him (yet a great way off, ran forth to meet him:
and yet before his son could open his mouth, to ask mercy, he prevented him
with the tokens of his goodness and fatherly love. Of this grace and mercy of
our heavenly Father, coming near unto us, and so ready to help and embrace
us, with the arms of his love, Saint Augustine in his holy Cofessions, could
meditate in this sort. Gratia and misericordia Dei semper prauenieb^^t (...)
etc. The grace and mercy of God did always preuert me: from many dangers it
delivered me: when I was sick, it salued me: when I erred, it reduced me: when
I fell down, it vpraised me: when I was sorrowful, it consolated me, etc.
Thus, as the Lord seems very sorrowful, that we should sin, to offend him
and endanger ourselves: so is he glad of our return unto him, as whereby, we
may be recured for our safety. And knowing our necessities at all times, he
does often minister unto us: that whereof we have need, albeit be have neither
the knowledge, nor the readiness of our selves, to a ke or require the same at
his hands.

The fourth Reason is taken from the excellency of the benefit, or thing
promised: for he says, 4. The exc^l^encie of the benefit.
that the Lord will come, and rain down Righteousness upon them that sow
for righteousness, and reap after mercies measure: which (indeed) is a great
and excellent blessing of the Lord on his Saints, as whereby they shall not
only have a good reward, but with great abundance.

Righteousness: Righteousness.
that is, the fruits, effects, and reward of Righteousness, by the figure
Metonomia. Now, as we should persuade, that the promises of God are, Yea, and
Amen: so his will is, that such as hear his word, and obey him therein, shall
obtain and retain that which they faithfully desire, for his own glory, and
their benefit. Therefore he says: Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall
find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. Heb. 11.
And Blessed are they which hunger and th rst after Righteousness, for they
shall be satisfied. Therefore was it, as the Apostle says, that the holy
Fathers staggered not in faith, but steadfastly believed, that God would ever be
as good as his promise. So ploughing for Righteousness, and seeking after
goodness, we shall no doubt timely reap, and enjoy the fruits thereof.
Secondly, by this word, the Prophet points to that increase of virtues which
should ensue our labors in the Lord: by the same we are encouraged to
diligence, and therein to regard how we may be augmented: as that the five
talents committed unto us, should by our godly exercises be made ten, and
those ten talents, twenty, never doubting of the rich bounty of the Lord,
who, as he uses not to quench the smoking Flax, nor to break the bruised
Reed, he will accept that which we have, and not condemn us for want of
quantity, when we endeavor in his fear to express the quality, and he will
of his goodness give a plentiful increase unto our labors. To this aimed
Saint John, Ioh 1.^.
when he said, that from his fullness we all receive grace upon grace, as the
following of one virtue after an other in great abundance. And this is that
which the Spirit alludeth unto in Apo: 22. Let him which is righteous, be yet
more righteous, and let him which is holy, be yet more holy. And this tendes to
the perfection of them which proceed from virtue to virtue, until they come
to be perfect men in Christ. This was observed well in Noah, the Righteous,
Genesis 6.
who (as it is testified by Moses) was Righteous in perfections, (for so the
words signify) to the which the holy Spowsesse alludeth in her shining
garments, Apo. 22.
being interpreted by Saint John, to be the Iustifications or Perfections of
the Saints.

The second thing promised is, Riches, not Solomon, says: that Godliness is
great Riches. Riches of Godliness.
Here is not only Riches, but great Riches: and indeed, Great is that Mystery
of Godliness, having all the promises, both of this life, and of the life to
come, as the Apostle witnesses.

The riches of this world is transitory and vain; but this is that, which
being obtained, is of more value then all worldly treasures, the which they
easily contemn, that have this Jewel in possession. Therefore, as worldly men
seek after the riches of the world, the godly are incited and persuaded, to
lay up their treasures in heaven, in the which they have and shall enjoy with
all Society, life, light, rest, peace, abundance of all good things,
security, and eternity.

Solomon adds one other word, to ratify and strengthen the same: Pro. 21.21.
saying, They which follow after Righteousness and mercy, shall find Honor.
Honor.
By the which he means, not only that joint commendation of good men for
some laudable virtues, and the favor of God in this world, honoring them
which honor him: To. 8.
but also the Glory which shall be revealed: of the which, as all the glory of
this world: so all the afflictions of this time are not worthy as S. Paul
says: neither the thing being of that high excellency, can we either speak
thereof as it is, nor comprehend the same in thought: passing indeed (as does
that peace of God) all man's understanding. But as the glory of Christ Jesus was
extolled, in that the Father manifested him in the flesh, by the operation of
his Spirit, in his mighty works, and merits for man's salvation: and as the
glory of the Father appeared in those his loving mercies declared toward men
in his dear son Jesus: so does the glory of man appear first in this world,
by that it pleases God to declare him, by his grace, justified, sanctified,
adopted, called, elected and honored in his Son Jesus. Next, in the
resurrection, exaltation, and glorification of Jesus: who has taken on him
man's nature, and the same preserved and glorified, has taken seize and
possession for man in the kingdom of his Father. Thirdly, it shall be most
apparent, when being set and placed on the right hand of Christ, in the great
judgment, we shall not only be commended in our labors done by faith,
before both Angels and men: yea, in the presence of the most High God: but,
being pronounced just, and the blessed Saints of the Father, we shall receive
the honor of that his most glorious kingdom prepared for us from the
beginning.

The fifth Reason is taken from the apt comparison with the Rain: 5. The
comparison with the Rain.
by the which the former arguments are not only confirmed, but amplified. The
Lord comes to rain down Righteousness here: Righteousness is likened to
the Rain, which comes down from heaven: and that as for many, so chiefly
for these causes. First, for that the Rain cleanses the air from the corrupt
vapors which rise of the earth. 2. The Rain of all other waters is the
sweetest in taste. 3. It is more subtle and light then any other water. 4. It
is pure without mixtures. 5. It waters the barren earth, to make it fertile.
6. It gives nourishment and comfort to the fishes in the Sea, and other
waters. 7. It qualifieth the force of fires. 8. It makes the land tractable to
the labor of the Husbandman. 9. It washes clean the ways wherein men
travel. 10. It comes down from above, and not from beneath. In semblable
manner, Righteousness is of that nature, that it cleanses the cogitations of
men from noisome affections and studies: It is the sweetest solace of a godly
man's mind: it eases their consciences, which thereby discharged of the
burden of sin, aspire to the heavens. It is not contaminated with the
fantasies of vain persons: nor the doctrines of deceivable Heretics. It
gives moisture to our barren natures, whereby we yield forth fruit
acceptable to the Lord. It asswageth the ardencie of man's concupiscence. It
persuades both our bodies and souls to yield obedience both to the will and
word of God. It cleanses our conuersations, as whereby we may the better
travel to the harbor of health: And coming down from the Lord, is of his
Highness, made unto us an influence of his grace and goodness; as whereby we
be so seasoned and tempered, as we remain acceptable unto his glory.

6. The manner of bestowing it.
Sixthly, the manner of pouring down these Graces, as Rain on the Earth, puts
us in mind of three principal Virtues in the Lord, which bestows them: as
first his large bounty: secondly, his fine liberality: thirdly, his exquisite
wisdom. His bounty is apparent in his gift: his liberality, in the abundant
largeness thereof: and his wisdom in an orderly disposition. The gift is of
his love: his liberality of his abundant riches: and his wisdom of his
eternal providence. He gives, and that freely, without respect of any reward,
or any thing in man, moving him thereunto. In his liberality he gives to
every man abundantly: yea, the very wicked are not left without the sense of
his goodness, in that he sends forth his Rain to fall as well on them, as
on his Saints. The Prophets are full of Metaphors, to set forth this the Lords
liberality to men. Although therefore there was a time when the Prophet Joel
threatened the disobedient with wars and troubles: in the which they should
be constrained to break up their Plough Shares into Swords: Joel. 3.10.
whereon should follow famine and ruin in the Lords anger. Yet the Prophet
Isay, to declare this large liberality of the Lord, at an other time,
prophesied, that the people should convert their Swords into Plough Shares,
and their Spears into Sythes: Isa. 2.4.
for he would send them great plenty of fruits in the time of peace. Thirdly,
as the Lord powers down

The seventh Argument is taken from the benefit of righteousness in our
selves: 7. The benefit in our selves.
for he says, that he will rain Righteousness on you: that is, on them
which have sown unto themselves for righteousness, or labored for Piety.
Surely the fruit of this Grace shall be our own, if we seek the Lord after
this method and rule. So said the sweet Psalmist concerning the godly: Psalm.
107.37.
Thou shall eat the labor of thine hands. Again, they sow the fields, and
plant Vineyards, which bring forth unto themselves fruitful increase: for he
blesses them, and they multiply exceedingly. What Husbandman is he, which is
not encouraged to labor in his field, if he once persuade in assurance, that
he shall not only have great increase, but that the profit thereof shall be his
own? What Merchant man aduentureth not on the raging Seas, with the more
boldness, which hops that the gains of his travels, shall redound to
himself? And truly so is that man animated and encouraged in his vocation,
that hops for his proper commodity, and reward of the same. So says the
Prophet to the righteous; The Lord will rain down Righteousness: that is,
the full fruits and effects of Righteousness upon you. As Christ said in his
prayer to his Father: I pray not for the world, but for them whom thou have
given me out of the world. So says the Lord by the Prophet: I say not, that
those large Graces are laid up of my love, To whom Gods graces appertain.
and so bestowed on the worldlings, which follow after their own lusts in
voluptuousnes and sin (for these things appertain not unto them): but only
for the Righteousness which are exercised in the works of Piety, which have
labored in my Vineyard, and therein borne the burden and heat of the day:
for it is meet (according to my promise) that by the merit of my Son, they
now rest from their labors, and have a refreshing: yea, that they be
rewarded, and all their works follow them in the glory of their Savior.

The eight and last Argument is taken from the Lords kind favor unto his
chosen, 8. The Lords kindness and regard
and his lovely regard of this business to be performed, considered in this
word, He comes. For first, in that himself being so high and glorious,
should not only respect man, but also vouchsafe to come unto him, intimates
unto us, with what gracious kindness, and kind grace he embraces his Saints.
To this the Lord alluding by his Apostle says: Apo. 3.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any will open unto me, I will come
in and sup with him, and he with me. It is esteemed no mean love of a Prince,
and grace of a subject, when the Prince vouchsafes to come unto his subject,
resting himself under the covering of his house: and such is the Lords kind
love unto us: and such is our honor by his grace.

Next, hereof is gathered the great regard that the Lord God has of the
performance of his word, and preservation of his chosen: for howsoever he has
risen up early, and sent forth his servants with a charge, not only to work,
but to ouersee, direct, and also to recompense the laborers with meet
rewards: yet such is his regard, that he likewise comes himself, not only
to see the thing performed, but to effect it, or at the least to supply by his
powerful hand, wisdom and providence, that whatsoever has been found in
them wanting or defective, according as himself says in the Prophet Joel:
Joel. 2. Act. 13.
Behold, I work a work in your days: as if he said: howsoever the whole
host of heaven be moved, and the inhabitants of the earth provoked, and all my
servants are ready in their places to perform my word to them commanded: yet
do I my self work all, neither are they able to effect or bring to pass
ought without me: yea, and I will see that the thing promised shall be surely
performed and brought to pass in his due time. And this we must believe and
persuade, that as the Lord is good to Israel, so will he of his loving affection
be present with Israel: that is, to the godly, to help them, to preserve
them, and to benefit them with the rich treasures of his house: Lo, such is his
goodness, and so large are his mercies unto them which plough for
righteousness, and reap after the method of mercy.

In regard whereof, let us be excited and stirred up in the right performance
of this duty: let us seek the Lord in singleness of heart, and call upon him
with our voice: let us love him above all things, and come unto him: let us be
thankful, and express our thankfulness in our humble and dutiful obedience
unto his most high Majesty, in the name of his sweet Son Jesus: to whom,
with the holy Ghost, three persons in Trinity, and one eternal God in unity,
be praise, honor and glory, for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

