THE CONSCIONABLE CHRISTIAN: OR, THE INDEVOVR OF SAINT PAVL, TO HAVE AND
DISCHARGE a good conscience always toward God, and men: laid open and applied
in three Sermons.

Preached before the Honorable Judges of the Circuit, at their several
Assizes, holden in CHARD and TAVNTON, for the County of Somerset 1620.

By RICHARD CARPENTER, Doctor of Divinity, and Pastor of Sherwell in Deuon.

Acts 23. 1. I have in all good conscience served God until this day. 2. Cor.
1. 12. This is our rejoicing the testimony of our conscience, etc. Aug. cont.
Petil. Conscienti^n^ malam laudant is ^^^^^nium non sa^at Bona^ cal^mniantis
conuitiam non vulnerat. Imprinted at London by F. K. for John Bartlet, and are
to be sold at the sign of the gilded Cup, in the Goldsmiths Row in Cheapside.
1623.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL HIGH SHERIFF OF SOMERSET, JOHN TREVELIAN of
Nettlecom, Esquire, etc. The Author wishes what the work describes, the
singular comforts of a Conscionable Christian in this life, and in that to
come, blessed immortality.
SIR: Your worth shines in so high a Sphere of dignity, being now the worthily
honored high Sheriff of the County; that if I should endeavor to hold forth
a Candle to any, to behold the brightness thereof, I might justly be censured
of folly or flattery. But I have no such project: and in truth, it is not your
annual acquired greatness, and eminency of office and place, but your
continually inspired goodness, and life of grace appearing in your practice of
piety, charity, and hospitality far beyond many of your rank and quality;
which has as it were by a secret forcible influence drawn me unto you; and
this discourse of a Conscionable Christian, from me. Which as it resembles you
much, so desires to honor you long; and so much the more to honor you, as you
shall the more desire and endeavor to resemble it, and proceed in some competent
proportion, to express and represent the lines, limbs and lineaments thereof
in the future course of your life and conversation. Whereof I conceive no small
hope, having been an often eyewitness of the manifold graces of God shining
in you, and occasionally enforced to take notice of your exemplary integrity,
in the faithful discharge of your public Magistracy heretofore; and at this
time, in managing wisely and worthily this important Office, whereunto your
virtues have advanced you; from which (I doubt not) but you will come off
commendably and comfortably, without any gash or galling of your conscience.
Which that you may the better do, give me leave (whom you have chosen at your
several Assizes to be a Monitor to many) to be also now a Remembrancer unto
you, that you put your soul to that noble employment of reflecting upon it
self, and recollecting the particular knowne-passages of your well-neere
ouerpast Magistracy, with an vndazeled and vndissembling eye, that so thoroughly
trying and discrying what you have done, and finding, upon serious examination
of your ways, words and works, that as another Moses, and Samuel, you have
wittingly and willingly done no man wrong, neither been voluntary Agent, nor
forced instrument in the doing of any thing unjustly; you may hereupon rest
assured, and secured of this, that you have carefully and conscionably
accomplished your Office and duty: Whereof the Country makes thankful report,
and I cannot but here to my knowledge give public testimony thereunto; being
also desirous, that the tender of this poor Paperpresent should be, if it may
be, a perpetual acknowledgement, how much I stand bound to you in general,
for your many Christian favors vouchsafed to me in particular: I have long (I
confess) run on the score, so that the interest of your love, exceeds the
principal of my abilities: But yet, if verbal payment may satisfy for real
benefits and go for current, I hope hereby at length to strike out some part
of my debt. At this present let it please you to accept this little monument of
that great respect which I deservedly bear unto you: what propriety you justly
have, both in the work, and in the Author, it is well known to all which know
us. I need say no more but this, At your instance and entreaty these Sermons
were preached; by your best devotion they were attended; and in testification
of my dutiful love toward you, they are now published. You were the chief
means and motive to bring these meditations to the hearing of many; and
therefore cheerfully they run to your hands, and are bold, under your name, to
offer themselves to the view of all.

And so humbly commending them to your gentle acceptance, and heartily
committing you to the Almighties gracious protection, and to the Word of his
grace, which is able to keep Act. 20. 32.
you from falling, to build you further, and to give you an inheritance with
them that are truly sanctified; I rest ever pressed to be proved,

Your loving Sonne-in-law in all Christian obseruancy truly devoted, RICH.
CARPENTER.
Loxford the 20. of September. 1620.
TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader: In these later and looser times, wherein (as the Heathen of
old complained) Malunt disputare homines quam viuere: Men delight rather to
argue and discourse of piety and Religion, then seriously to reduce the
principles thereof into practice and action: It is much to be feared, that we
all fear God too little; and it may justly be suspected, that too many stand
so affected in these days of long peace, as the Romans did in the time of
their civil wars: Then some followed Caesar, and they were weakest; some
Pompey, and they were thought wisest; some Crassus, and they were accounted
worst: So now some follow the flesh, and are led by her corrupting allurements;
some are Favorites and Minions of the world, carried away with its glittering
preferments; some are mere Factors for the devil, fulfilling his
crafty-cruell designements; all are set on work, but under the Commander of
this cursed Triumvirate, for the most part so wickedly, that every where there
is a consumption of grace, through the corruption of sin; piety complaining
that she is sick, charity near dead, good works buried, prayer and
preaching neglected, honesty and sobriety derided, justice and equity
abandoned, truth and plaine-dealing imprisoned, faith and a good conscience
banished and driven out of the Country: For the recalling whereof from
banishment, or rather, for the inciting of Christians to give thereunto better
entertainment, I had (I confess) some extraordinary calling to those places
where these Sermons were preached, and therefore more then ordinarily labored,
to work by them powerfully on the consciences of my Auditors, that they might
be truly enlightened and inliued. To this purpose my desire and study was (as
the circumstances of persons, time, and place required) to lay the Axe of Gods
Word close to the root, and to apply my doctrine home to the heart, and so to
set conscience it self aworke.

Now the whole and entire work of conscience (to give by the way some light to
the ignorant herein) consists, as I conceive it, in a practical Syllogism:
the mayor and proposition whereof arises from the Synteresis or treasury of
moral principles, and of sacred rules wherewith the practical understanding
is furnished, for the saving direction of us in all actions. The minor or
assumption is properly Syneidesis-conscience, that is, an actual application
of our knowledge, to this or that particular act or object; whence follows the
immediate and necessary issue and office of conscience; to testify in respect
of things simply done, or not done; in respect of things to be done, either to
excite and encourage, or to restrain and bridle; in respect of things done
well, or wickedly, to excuse and comfort, or accuse and terrify.

As for example: thus it reasons against lying; Every liar shall be banished
from the holy Mountain of the Lord, and barred out of the new Jerusalem, as
the Synteresis, from Psalm. 15. and Reu. 21. supplyeth the proposition. But I
have thus and thus lied for advantage, as the conscience of the liar tells
him making the assumption. Therefore I shall be banished from the holy
Mountain of the Lord, etc. A conclusion full of terror. And as the liar is
thus of his sin, and punishment due unto the same, convinced; So the upright
liver, on the other side, may thus by consciences-reasoning be comforted: Every
one that desires in heart, and indeuoureth in life, to walk uprightly before
God and men, shall rest in Gods holy Hill: But I, as the conscience of the
godly man tells him, do thus desire and endeavor to walk uprightly:
Therefore I shall rest in Gods holy Hill. A conclusion full of life and
consolation. God grant us such consciences as may enable us to make such
conclusions. To this principal end, have my poor endeavors, in this ensuing
Discourse, been especially directed; wherein, because I know this age to be
full of science, penurious of conscience, and Gods school to be more of
affection then understanding: therefore have I the less studied by variety of
choice doctrines, to give edge to the judgment, accounting it more necessary
to be instant in exhortation, and frequent in the use and application of some
few pregnant points, for the whetting up of the will and affection to holy
duties, and warming of the heart with lively devotion in the practice of
Christianity. Glad I would be, If I could but bring a pin or two, toward the
decking of Christ's Spouse, whilst others, out of their abundance, adorn her
with costly Robes, and rich ornaments. Howsoever it be, I have done my best, by
the assistance of his grace, to the praise of his glory, and according to the
nature of my Text, have often and earnestly pressed upon Christians this
necessary duty of expressing in their conscionable conversation, the saving
power of inward sanctimony, and the truth of a sound conversion, aiming here
and there, and every where, generally at this, that the slumbring conscience
might be awaked, the erroneous better informed, the tender confirmed, the sad
and heavy comforted, and all, some way or other benefited. Which benefit of my
unworthy labors, if any any way have obtained, let the goodness of God be
duly glorified and praised; and in their best vows and prayers for the family
of the faithful, let me, his unworthiest servant, be remembered. In hope hereof
I rest theirs, and

Thine in the Lord Jesus to be commanded, RICH. CARPENTER.

THE CONSCIONABLE CHRISTIAN.
Preached at Charde, March. 4.
The Text: Acts 24. 16. And herein (or in this therefore) do I endeavor my
self to have always a clear (or inoffensiue) conscience toward God and men.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
IF it be sufficient to accuse, who shall be innocent? Not Saint Paul
himself, though never so faithful in his function, never so sincere and
upright in his conversation. We find him (as many times elsewhere) so here
in this Chapter, called in question, for his life and doctrine too, before
Felix the Governor; and at once accused of both, and abused in both, by
Tertullus a mercenary O^^^our, who making b^ ^^attery his Rhetoric, and bold
lying his Logic, beginning with the one, and concluding with the other;
lays to Saint Paul's charge (no marvel then if zealous Ministers taste of the
same cup in this last and worst age) that he was a pestilent fellow, a moouer
of sedition, a maintainer of sects, and a polluter of the Temple. To all which
objected crimes, or rather forged calumnies, the blessed Apostle, with great
patience, and no less confidence, pleads not guilty; and having by pregnant
reasons and powerful arguments refelled those unjust imputations, with a
victorious grace, proceeds to the ingenious confession of his faith, and
course of life; and thus in effect says: As concerning my Religion; be it
known, that after the way which my adversaries call heresy, so worship I the
God of my Fathers, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that only true God,
with a true heart, in a true manner, not as man has invented, but as God
himself has in his Word prescribed, believing all things which are written in
the Law and the Prophets; especially, holding fast this assured hope and full
persuasion (as the maine Basis, and principal pillar of my Profession) that
the resurrection of the dead shall be both of just and unjust, and that we
shall all appear in that Day, before the 1. Cor. 5. 10.
Tribunal of the Son of God, gloriously visible, in the Luke 21. 27.
form of the Son of man, to render an account, and to receive a reward
according to our Reu. 20. 12.
deeds. In due regard and serious consideration whereof, I do labor and
endeavor my self to live unblameably, and to keep always a good conscience
toward God and men: For so it follows in my Text; which being by way of
Paraphrase somewhat enlarged, offers it self to your better apprehension and
understanding in these terms:

And herein, or in this therefore (as reverend Paraph. Text.
Beza, a long fixed star in the firmament of our Church expounds it) do I
Paul (the servant of the Lord, and Apostle of Jesus Christ) exercise my self,
(earnestly endeavor, study, and strive, as a Runner to the goal, a Wrestler
for the game, a due Tasker and Day-labourer for the appointed wages and gain)
To have, to keep, and discharge (the Original will bear it well) to have
always (in all cases, in all places, upon all references and occurrences
whatsoever, through the whole tenor of my life) a conscience (as Monitor of my
duties, defects, bounties, blemishes, as moderatour of my desires and
affections, and under God, principal Commander of all my thoughts, speeches,
and actions) Yea; Heereunto fully, freely, actually, punctually, do I bend and
extend all my sanctified will, wit, power, policy, and all, to have always by
all means (...), an upright, Note.
clear, acquitting conscience toward God and men, that is, a conscience void
of offense, not staggering, tripping, or failing any way for matter or manner,
either in the duties of holiness and piety toward God, or of righteousness,
peace, or equity toward men. And herein, etc. which words being thus
expounded by way of division, offer to the duty of our consideration,

Three remarkable points of observation. 1. The first, S. Paul's Christian
practice and actual employment, grounded on the hope of the resurrection:
Herein therefore do I exercise my self. 2. The second, is the matter subject
of his Division.
employment and exercise; to have and preserve an upright conscience. 3. The
third, is the latitude and extent of the same, either In respect of time, to
have a good conscience always. In respect of the objects, to have and
discharge a good conscience toward God and Men.



THe blessed Apostle confesses in the verse Illustr. Text.
foregoing my Text, that he confidently believed the doctrine of the
Resurrection, and (therefore) in a well grounded expectation thereof, professes
himself here studious of a godly life, and unblameable conversation; He had
well learned, that Christianity consisted not in idle speculation, but
industrious negotiation; and therefore sets to the work, not doing it by a
Deputy, or putting it over to aftertimes, but for the present, without doubt
or delay exercises himself; Herein I exercise my self. He understood well
enough, that the best duties required the greatest diligence; and therefore
vltimata voluntate, with all might and maine, exercises himself in this, to
have always an upright conscience. He knew, that to make a show of devotion
and piety toward God, and not to procure things honest in the sight of men,
sauoured of hypocrisy; and on the contrary, to observe a kind of peaceable
truth, and plausible equity in our dealing with men, and to be regardlesse of
Religion and Zeal in matters of Gods worship, was no other then profane
formality; and therefore with a settled resolution, indeuoureth to hold a
concurrence and correspondencie of both in their order, that is, first, to
approve the truth and sincerity of his service, in all duties Divine toward
God, and then with all diligence and dexterity, to perform all humane dues and
duties toward men.

These (Right Honorable and Beloved) are the several bounds and limits of my
intended Meditations on this Text, answerable to the several limbs and
lineaments of S. Paul's holy practice and profession shaddowed forth therein,
for the more lively describing and portraying of which in their proper colors
and proportions, three general doctrines and instructions 3. Doct. obs.
are principally to be observed; Whereof the first resulteth, and issues from
the motive; The second, from the manner; The third, from the matter of Saint
Paul's religious exercise and employment, as in order they offer themselves to
be handled.

The first Doctrine, arising from the motive 1. Doct.
(to wit) the hope Saint Paul had of the resurrection of just and unjust, is
this: That the assured hope and settled expectancy of the day of Resurrection
and Judgment to come, when we shall render account, and receive a reward
according to our deeds, is, and ought to be a forcible allectiue to draw on
Christians to the earnest pursuit of godliness, and constant practice of true
Religion. Toll spem Resurrectionis Chrysostom. in 24. Mat.
(says golden-mouthed Chrysostom) and resoluta est omnis obseruantia
pietatis: Take away the hope of the Resurrection, and the building of piety
wants her foundation. For upon this foundation all the Apostles have builded
their exhortations to amendment of life and sanctification, as Saint Paul, Acts
17. Now God admonishes Acts 17. 30. 1. These. 4. 2. Tit. 11.
all men every where to repent, because he has appointed a Day, in which he
will judge the world in righteousness. And 1. John 3. 1. Ioh. 3. 3.
We know, when Christ Jesus shall appear, we shall be like him, and every
one that has this hope, purges himself, as he is pure. So S. Peter; Seeing
the Heavens shall pass with a 2. Pet. 3. 11.
noise, the Elements melt with heat, and all these things be dissolved; what
manner of persons Verse. 14.
ought ye to be in holy conversation and godliness? Yea, seeing that ye
look for these things, be diligent, that ye may be found of him in peace, and
blameless in that Day. The expectation of which Day, called the Day of
Restoration Acts. 3. 21.
of all things, has ever been, is, and will be to such as fear God, a
forcible provocation to virtuous atchieuements and religious actions. Then,
then indeed runs a man cheerfully in the Race of Christianity, when he knows
that he runs not at uncertainty: Toll Bernard.
viatori spem perueniendi, and continuo franguntur vires ambulandi: He blunts
the edge of industry, that denies recompense, and where there is no
apprehension of a Day of remuneration, there is little care of proficiency, or
striving to perfection. For to reason as the Apostle does, Phil. 3. How can we,
dwelling on earth, desire Phil. 3. 20, 21.
to have our conversation in heaven, if we look not for the second coming of
our Savior? and how can we look for his coming, except we believe the
Resurrection? and how can we believe the Resurrection, unless we acknowledge
that power by which he is able to subdue all things to himself? Again, How
do we acknowledge our God to be Almighty in power, without the faith of the
Resurrection? and how can we have the faith of the Resurrection, without the
hope of a Savior? and how can we have hope of a Savior, without an heavenly
conversation? So that the life of this conversation is hope, by which we
expect the coming of a Savior: and the ground of this hope is faith, by which
we are assured, that at his coming he will change our vile bodies, and make
them like to his glorious Body; and the reason of this faith (beyond reason) is
his power, by which he is able to accomplish all things after his good will
and pleasure. All these be linkes so divinely hanging and depending each on
other, in that golden chain of the Apostle, that if we let slip one, we lose
the comfortable hold-fast of all; but good Christians miss not of any, but
established in faith, rooted in hope, and abounding in love, set forward in an
holy course of life, and follow hard toward Phil. 3. 14.
the Mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ, knowing that
they are begotten by the immortal seed of the Word, in the bosom 1. Pet. 1. 3.
of the Church Militant on earth, to a lively hope of an inheritance immortal
and undefiled in the Church Triumphant in heaven.



Doubtless, this holy persuasion of a Judgment Esa. 26. 19. Hos. 6. 3. Ezekiel.
37. Dan. 7. and 12.
to come in the Day of Resurrection (by the Prophets and 2. Cor 5. 10. Romans 14.
10. Reu. 20 12.
Apostles, and by our Ioh. 5. 28. Mat. 25.
Savior himself so lively described) has ever possessed the hearts of Gods
Saints and servants, and the life of this persuasion has been the death of
sin in them, and ought to be in us the remembrance, that there is dies and
Deus vltionis, a day and God of revenge: for his power irresistable, for his
wisdom infallible, for his Justice inflexible, ought to strike sin in the
blade, break it in the head, and kill it to the heart; and the due Meditation
of the reuniting of our bodies and souls in that day, to be joint partakers of
heavenly felicity, should move us all, to consecrate both the parts of the
one, and faculties of the other, as pure Nazarites to the service of God, in
all holiness, righteousness, and sobriety.

that we may lay hold of everlasting life hereafter. For our better direction
and encouragement wherein, let us look seriously on those worthy patterns of
well-doing, David, Paul, Job, and other faithful servants of God, and withal
take notice for our instruction and imitation of those praiseworthy things,
which upon the like consideration of the Day of Resurrection, they both did,
and resolved to do. And to begin with the Princely Prophet David, 1. David.
Psalm. 101.
most apparent it is in the 101. Psalm, (which it seems he made, when he
first drew the sovereign breath of a King, to give notice to the world what an
excellent Governor he would be, and all others by his example should be) that
he voweth and protests that he will do wisely and worthily, both in the
moral carriage of himself, and in the domestical well ordering of his
family, and in the political religious government of his Kingdom and
Country, upon expectancy of the Lords coming: I will do wisely (says he) in
the Verse. 2, 3, 4.
perfect way, till thou come to me, etc. being well assured, that nothing is
so sure as his coming, nothing so great as he that shall come, nothing so
strict as the Judgment to come; and therefore nothing so needful as to live
godly, to walk warily in private, to work wisely in public, until his
coming.

And to go on with our zealous Apostle S. 2. Paul.
Paul, certain it is, that he did not much pass by man's day, or esteem of
man's doom, but in respect of the judgment and approbation of God (with whom
his work and wages were) he had an accurate incessant care, (...), both to
walk uprightly, Gal. 2. and to Gal. 2. 14.
divide the Word aright, 2. Tim. 2. and for the 2. Tim. 2 25.
euidencing of his great love toward Christ's little flock, and him the great
and good Shepherd thereof; he ceased not to admonish Acts 20. 31.
every one night and day with tears; he ceased not, ecce laborem, to admonish,
ecce officium, every one, ecce amorem, night and day, ecce vigilantiam, with
tears, ecce compassionem, etc. Such a painful, pitiful, powerful dispenser
of the Word was he: neither yet did his care consist only in fulfilling his
ministry by fidelity of dispensation, in publishing all the counsel of God,
in preaching constantly, plainly, profitably, to the conviction of the
conscience, the information of the understanding, and the reformation of the
will, whereunto all Ministers should aim; but also by integrity of
conversation, and singular sanctimony of life (which is the very soul and life
of the Ministry) whereof, in the Acts of the Apostles, and many Acts 22. 23,
24.
passages of his Epistles we have abundant testimony. 2. Cor. 6. Phil. 4 9.
He knew, the people would hardly believe the truth of Religion in his mouth,
unless they did see the power of it in his life; and therefore he did as well
teach their eyes by his conscionable doings, as their ears by his comfortable
doctrine, making full reckoning, that one day he was to be called to a
reckoning for both, in regard whereof he thus triumphantly concludes, 2. Tim.
4. I have fought a good 2. Tim. 4. 7.
fight, I have finished my course, and kept the faith, ravished with this
heavenly hope and soule-solacing assurance that a Crown of righteousness was
laid up for him, which the righteous Judge would give unto him in that day. The
expectation of which day of reckoning and recompense, as it made Saint Paul
diligent and faithful in fulfilling his Ministry: So did it make holy Job
very cautelous in the 3. Job.
private course of his life, and most careful in his public government and
Magistarcy. As for the former, I made says he, Cap. 32. a Covenant Job 31. 1.
with mine eyes, not to look or think on a Maid, or any other thing, whether
gift or bribe, pleasing to the lustful eye. Why? this seems too much
precisenes (will the carnal man say:) for looks and thoughts are free. Oh,
but what Verse. 2.
portion then should I have from above, says Job? q. d. I dare not give way to
my flesh and the lust thereof in any sort: for this were to deprive my self of
the comfort of the Word and Spirit here, and of happiness hereafter: and
suppose I should herein escape the censures of men, yet, Is not destruction
(says he) to the Verse. 3.
wicked? that is, Has not the Lord means inconceivable by man, for the
punishment of the ungodly? and can he not bring secret sins to open shame?
yea grant that it be kept close from the eyes of the world, yet does not he
behold Verse. ^
my ways, and tell all my steps? verse. 4. though men take view only of the
outward action, yet God looks upon the inward disposition and affection of
the heart, and he has placed also his deputy-Intelligencer, conscience,
within me, to testify against me.

These, and the like spiritual reasons and arguments Job used to keep
himself in order, and to affright himself from all manner of iniquity in his
private comportment.

And as for his public government, you shall find him lively described and
charactred in the 29. Chapter, to be the Oracle of Wisdom, Chap. 29.
the Guardian of Justice, the Refuge of Innocence, the Comet of the guilty, the
Champion and defender of the fatherless, poor and needy, the Patron of peace,
and the perfect Myrrour and pattern for all Magistrates, to direct them in the
wise managing of all public affairs of Judgment and Mercy: in performing of
all which duties, Job showed himself very sedulous and sollicitous; yea, most
studious he was of doing well, and most timorous of doing evil, because he was
assured, that God himself would one day come to visit all his doings; and
then, Quid faciam, says he, verse. 14. Chap. 31. 14.
What shall I do, when God shall rise up to judge me? when he shall visit me,
what shall I answer?

Job, but thinking of the Day of Judgment, come on with his Quid faciet? What
shall he do? Alas then, quid fiet? what shall be done to the unjust? whose
bodies must boil, and souls fry for it, when God comes to Judgment? If
righteous Job make question what he shall do or say; Alas, what then shall
the unrighteous be able to say or do for themselves? What shall merciless
preiudicate bribe-taking Magistrates, mercenary illiterate soule-staruing
Ministers, vsurarious extorting State-spoyling money-mongers, sacrilegious
Church-polling Patrons, and rent-racking Landlords and oppressors, covetous
time-seruing Court-officers, and unconscionable Lawyers, with that contagious
crew of brothel-hunters, Alehouse-hunters, and all other blasphemous
Sabbath-breaking ruffians, reuellers, and scornful mock-Preachers? What will
these, or any of these be able to say or do at that Day? Quando non Bern.
perorabit lingua, sed denudabitur conscientia, when the books of conscience
shall be opened, and the mouth of iniquity be stopped, and all vicious and
flagitious sinners shall be utterly undone; when a fear and consternation of
mind shall overtake the hypocrites and presumptuous transgressors in Sion, and
none of them shall be able to answer this fearful question, Who among Esa.
33. 14, 15.
us shall dwell with the devouring fire, with the euerlastings burning? But
those which walk in justice, and speak righteous things, refusing gain of
oppression, shaking their hands from taking of gifts, stopping their ears from
hearing of blood, and shutting their eyes from seeing evil, even they shall
dwell on high, and see the Lord in his glory. The time pressing me forward, I
cannot stand now to press this in particular to the present occasion, only my
desire is, that all in general, and you in special, which are to act any part
in this weeks solemn business, would often rub up your memories, with that
saying of Joseph, Genesis 39. Genesis 39. 9.
Shall I do this, and so sin against God? and rowze up your consciences with
this meditation of Job, What shall I do then, when God comes to Judgment?
And that you may not then do amiss, but be found of God in peace, be
exercised now as Job was in doing well. Follow peace and holiness, without
which, ye cannot Heb. 12. 14.
see God; put on, as he did, justice and judgment, as a robe and Crown; be
eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, fathers to the poor, to the widow and
fatherless. Show your selves, in your several employments, men of courage,
Exodus 18. 21. 2. Cor. 13. 8.
fearing God, dealing truly, and hating covetousness: judge, plead, witness,
work nothing against the truth, but all for the truth; use the Law lawfully,
wrong not the right, right the wronged, justify the righteous, condemn the
wicked, as the Lord commands, Deuteronomy. 25. To Deuteronomy. 25. 1.
be brief, let the view of these Assizes suggest to your consciences a
memorandum of that universal circuit and visitation, which Christ, the Lord
chief Justice of the whole world, and Judge of all Judges, will in one day
begin and end; and let the meditation of this Day, when we shall all stand to
our trial, for life or death, serve as the dead hand on the navel, to cure
the dropsy of worldly and unwarrantable desires, and be as a continual
Monitor unto us all, so to number our days, and so to spend them, that every
day, and every night we may be able to make up a good account, especially in
the night of death, and in the morning of the Resurrection. For the making up
of which account against that day, in the best manner, the due consideration of
the sollicitous and industrious manner of Saint Paul's exercise and employment,
will serve for more then an ordinary president and encouragement unto us all;
and therefore, according to the method proposed, I will now descend from the
motive, to the manner, as it offers it self here to be considered.

Herein (...), by an usual Elleipsis, for Second part.
(...)) I do exercise my self; He says not, Herein I have labored, but
cannot now, or will labor, but may not yet; he speaks not doubtfully,
Peradventure I shall; or faintly, I purpose if I can; or fainedly, with some
popishlike reservation, I, or some other will; but courageously, confidently,
satis pro Apostolo, yea constantly, instantly, satis pro imperio: In this do I
exercise my self, I defer not the doing of it, knowing it most necessary to
be done. In this I do really and for the present, without delay, readily,
exercise (not others) but my self personally, to have a good conscience, etc.
Whence (you see) many particular pregnant instructions might easily be deduced;
but the general observation naturally arising therfrom (under which the rest
are contained) and upon which I mean only to insist, is this: Strive to enter
into Math. 7. Luke 13. 24.
the strait gate, into the narrow way which leads unto life; he knew, and
would have us to know, that without striving and struggling against our
corruptions, without stooping, and stripping our selves of our carnal worldly
affections, there is no passage into the narrow portall of heaven. We must, as
the holy Ghost charge, walk circumspectly and precisely, Ephesians. 5. Make
straight steps to our feet, Hebr. Ephesians. 5. 15. Heb. 12. 13. Psalm. 39. 1.
12. Walk by a rule, Gal. 5. 16. Take heed to our ways, with David, Psalm. 39.
and strive to keep an even and direct course, as it were by line or level,
that so we may have entrance into the strait gate, into the which, the proud
man, with his high looks; the ambitious, with his aspiring thoughts; the
malicious, with his swelling uncharitable heart; the Usurer, with his full
bags; the drunkard, with his full cups, and corrupt lungs; the adulterer, with
his fulsome minions, and wasted loins, can have no admittance; no admittance,
if they live, and lie and die in their sins without repentance: facilis
descensus auerni; A man may go to hell without a staff, as the Heathen says;
sed reuocare gradum, etc. But to make a step to heaven, and so to seek the
Kingdom thereof, as to find it, so to find it, as to enjoy it, hic labor, hoc
opus est, non puluinaris, sed pulueris: This, this indeed is a labor of great
worth, a work requiring much heedfulnesse, diligence, and watchfulness.
Whereof our Apostle had good experience, and therefore for our learning and
imitation, he has left it recorded, that he did forget what Phil. 3. 13, 14.
was behind, that is, account whatsoever he had done or suffered already for
Gods sake, to be as nothing, not worth the naming; but this one thing he did,
he did endeavor himself to that which was before, and striued to do better,
and to be better, and followed hard toward the Mark, for the price of the
high calling of God in Jesus Christ; So here in my Text he exercised
himself, that is, with diligence and dexterity, and continual endeavor to the
utmost; he pursued this one thing above all other things, to wit, the having
and holding of a good conscience, esteeming it at so high a rate, as the
Merchant did the Pearl for which he sold all Mat. 13. 46.
that he had, accounting all things else as dross and loss in comparison
thereof. He knew, that the imperfect Essays, proffers, and momentany purposes,
and propensities of lazy languishing wishers and woulders, ripen not, reach
not home thereunto, and therefore with a steady settled will, and full
resolution with the greatest bent and extent of his regenerate rectified
affection, (such as was in David, where he vowed and Ps. 119. 106.
swore that he would keep Gods righteous judgments; and in Joshua, where he
resolved Josh. 24. 15.
that whatsoever others did, he and his house would serve the Lord) pursues
the purchase of this heavenly Jewel, a good conscience; in which pursuit he
deserves our best imitation, and most zealous emulation too. So that as S.
Ierom, having read the religious life and comfortable death of Hilarion, said,
Surely Hilarion shall be the Champion which I will follow. So having heard the
godly care, and continual endeavor which Saint Paul had to keep an upright
conscience; we should all, both Magistrates and Ministers, and all other
officers and instruments of Justice here present, religiously resolve to make
Saint Paul our Champion and guide, in a business of so singular consequence,
henceforward exercising our selves in this, to have always a good conscience
toward God and men; to have, I say, that tranquillity of mind, that heavenly
Music, whereon the old Philosophers doubtfully harped, but the good Christian
heart only hears it, and answers it with just measures of joy: Which
spiritual harmony (to give you by the way a taste of it, for the sharpning of
your appetite after it) as a song of three parts, consists in a threefold
Pax supra, exra, intra.
peace, with God above us, and men without us, and the soul within us; and
therefore is both hard to be gotten, and rare to be found.

But after we have sought heaven and earth, Note.
behold, where only the wearied Dove, the humbled Christian may find this
Olive of peace, this peace of a good conscience, namely, in that reconciliation
to God, in that remission of sins, and fruition of Gods favor, which the
eternal Peacemaker, the Esa. 9.
Savior of men, and anointed of God, CHRIST JESUS, has procured and
purchased, 1. Pet. 1. 19.
by the infinite price of his most precious Blood; the benefit whereof he
offers to be apprehended of us by the spiritual hand of faith: Receive then
peace, and be happy; believe, and thou have received; by faith thou Ioh. 3. 16.
art interessed in all that either God has promised, or Christ performed. The
faithful apprehension and application of Christ's all-sufficient satisfaction,
makes it to be thine. Upon this satisfaction thou have the broad Seal of
pardon and remission; upon remission follows reconciliation; and upon
reconciliation, peace of conscience. O heavenly peace, whereby alone we are at
league with our selves, and God with us, without which, all other pleasures are
to be pitied; without which, the heart will deny to be cheered, though all the
world be her Minstrell and Musician. When therefore thy conscience, like a
stern Sergeant, shall catch thee by the throat, and arrest thee upon Gods
debt, let this be thy plea, that thou have already paid it, bring forth that
bloody acquittance sealed to thee from heaven upon thy true faith, and
straightway thou shall see her fierce looks changed into friendly smiles, and
that hand which was ready violently to drag thee to prison, now lovingly to
embrace thee, and fight for thee against all temptations and accusations
whatsoever. For what can accuse or condemn, where God and the conscience do
acquit? Hic murus ahaeneus esto, nil conscire tibi: Let this be thy fortress
and brazen Bulwark in all assaults of thy spiritual enemies, that thou have
no sin unrepented; no corruption vnbewailed, with the guilt whereof thou can
charge thy self. Surely thou can not be by the false Saluianus.
judgment of another made miserable, who art thus by the true testimony of
thine own conscience become blessed; the unjust exclamations of the wicked
without, shall not be able to hurt thee, whilst the just acclamation of thy
witness within, does clear and cheer thee; nay, rather thou shall make to
thy self a Garland of the false aspersions of Sycophants, and be able
comfortably and confidently to say, as S. Austin, in a case not much unlike
said; Fideliter in conspectu Dei dico, etc. I speak it solemnly Aug. cont.
lit. Petil. l. 3. c. 6.
in the sight of God, that I am not guilty to any of those actions wherewith my
adversary charge me, since the time I was baptized in the name of Christ, and
therefore have no cause to be sad, but to rejoice and exult. Go to then, ye
righteous, rejoice in the Lord, sing merrily, ye that are purged and pacified
by faith in Christ's Blood, to the mighty God of your salvation. Walk
cheerfully on in the way of peace, thus chalked forth unto you: let no
difficulty be a sufficient excuse to hinder you in the pursuit of this peace
of conscience, which of all other things is most precious, and yields sweetest
and durablest contentment; and that you may so have it, that you may also hold
it fast, and be confirmed in the same, put in daily practice these few rules.
Rules for the preserving of a good conscience.
Prayer, of hearing the Word of God, by conference and Meditation, to find the
fruition of his sweet presence renewed in you. twisted, are sufficiently able
to strengthen in us, and to confirm unto us the hold-fast of a good quiet
conscience. To the which general rules, these particular helps are
subordinate, which the conscionable Christian may, and must use for his surer
footing, and better furtherance in the way to heaven.

First, his holy care must be so to hear the 1. Help.
Word, as with a settled purpose to yield obedience from the heart, to the
form of doctrine Romans 6. 17.
whereunto he is delivered; not talking, as many do in a dream, of the
Kingdom of God, and righteousness thereof; or walking, as others do (with
respect to their profit or preferment) in some good duties, as Herod did; but
with an heart enlarged by grace, running in all the ways of Gods
Commandments, blessing Psalm. 119.
God for the daylight of the Gospel, and the opportunity offered thereby, of
casting off the works of darkness, and putting on the armor of light;
embracing at all times the sound of the Word, not only when it comes in a
still and soft voice (gently admonishing us to avoid the quagmires of
voluptuousness, the thorny copse of covetousness, and the stickle path of
Prou. 3. 17.
pride, and to walk precisely in the pleasant and prosperous ways of
wisdom,) but also when as a Trumpet it sounds the Alarm of judgment
against secure and impenitent sinners, that so he may be kept in awe, and say
with the Prophet, O Lord, I heard thy voice and was afraid, Hab. 3. 2. Psalm.
119. 120.
my flesh trembles for fear of thy judgments.

Verse. 8, 9.
with his soul desiring him in the night, and with his spirit seeking him in
the morning, that thereby he may not only be terrified, but as the Prophet
there speaks, learn righteousness, and behold the high hand of God, as well
in protecting the virtuous, and compassing them about with a wall of brass for
their defense, Ezekiel. 5.
as in punishing the vicious, (which in the Land of uprightness do wickedly)
for their destruction.

David's vow, and make Psalm. 119. 106.
a covenant betwixt God and his soul, that he will perform his righteous
judgments, and be as the Clock in the house where he lives, in the company
where he conuerseth, awaking others to do their duties; and to this end must
daily edify himself in his most holy faith, Jude, verse. 20.
praying in the holy Ghost, that God, (who in his conversion rowzed him out of
the sleep of sin) would, by the neuer-ceasing influence of that grace which
first awaked him, keep always his heart awake, and not suffer him to sleep
as others do, and let slip opportunity of grace, but preserve him watchful
and sober, 1. These. 5. 6.
that so continuing the spiritual motion of prayer, thanksgiving, meditation,
and examination of his heart and life, he may be preserved in his spirit, and
not transgress, Mal. 2. and Mal. 2. 16.
more and more strengthen in himself the good things which else would be
ready to dye, Reu. 3. 2.
Revel. 3.

Luke 21. 34.
to sit down and write fifty for an hundred: Luke 16.
that is, to abridge himself of many profits and pleasures; yea, by seasonable
abstinence, he is to bring his flesh into subjection, and by perpetual
sobriety, to fence the City of his soul, that by any rout or riot of
voluptuousness, the walls thereof be not broken down.

Numb. 9. 23.
their eyes on the pillar of a cloud by day, and of fire by night, that
according thereto they might rest or remove; so the conscionable Christian is
to mark and observe diligently Gods works and dealings with others and
himself, and when he calls to feasting or mourning, is to have his eyes
opened, and his senses awaked, to entertain the Lords mercies or judgments
with joy or sorrow, as he has appointed: Contrary to the disposition of Amos
6. 8.
those retchlesse rebellious persons by the Prophets Ier 5. 3.
condemned, Amos 6. Ier. 5. Esa. 22.

guard of faith and a good conscience, he is seriously to meditate on, and
daily to expect Christ's coming to Judgment; that whether Luke 12. 35.
he come at evening, or morning, or midnight, he may be ready with his Lamp
burning, and loins girded, to entertain him: and finally, for the full and
final preservation of his conscience from ruin, he is in humble prayer to
Psalm. 127.
commend the keeping thereof to the neuersleeping Keeper of Israel, that he
making his Watchtower therein, it may be preserved through faith unto
eternal life. Believe me then (Fathers and Brethren) the procuring, and
preserving of this true Diamond, which flings beams of comfort upon the soul
of this true Rubie, which carries in her face the color of virtue, of this
sovereign cordial of a good and quiet conscience, requires an excellent
exercised man, well skild in the pure and pious trade of Christianity, etc.

care and study to get this choice Jewel of admirable virtue and operation,
and to set it in the best and chiefest room of our holy and hearty affection,
as a blessing of all blessings: sufficient for present maintenance, Psalm. 84.
and future Psalm. 84. 11.
inheritance, Luke 12. 31. With which, that we Luke 12.
may be really possessed, and so royally blessed, it is generally required of
us all, (as in part it has, and shall be more fully declared hereafter) that we
be, according to our several callings, much exercised in prayer, in
thanksgiving, in hearing, reading, and meditating of the Word; much in
patience, temperance, repentance, obedience, Gods mercies and judgments on our
selves and others, must be daily considered; his Temple, on public solemn
assemblies, duly frequented; his Throne of grace in private devotion often
solicited; his distressed servants pitied and relieved; especially we must be
inured to a daily diligent search and examination of our souls by that
scrutiny in Seneca, Anima Seneca.
mea, quid fecisti hodie? O my soul, what have thou Ier. 8. 6.
done to day? that so coming to a true sight and sorrow of our sins and
corruptions, we may humbly confess them, fervently crave pardon for them, and
by faith in Christ's blood, be assured of the forgiveness of them, and so with
peace of conscience, and joy of heart, walk on cheerfully in the religious
race of godliness and virtue, to the iourneys end of endless felicity.
Herein, and therein ought we to be exercised, if we would enjoy the comfort and
credit of conscionable Christians. And as these general duties of Christianity
are carefully to be performed; so the particular offices whereunto we are
called, for the propagation of Religion and piety, or the preservation of
order, justice and equity in Church or Commonwealth, are seriously to be
attended and executed. Hoc agite, in the sacrifices of the heathen gods, was a
precept much used and observed: how much more in the services of the God of
heaven, especially in that great business of Justice and Judgment, whereunto,
by God, the King and the Country, the most of you are now designed, should the
said precept ( Do ye this, that is, intend and apply all the faculties of
your mind to the doing of it) be kept inviolable: and that not only of you, the
chief agents and ministers, but of all others the instruments and assistants
of Justice; whether witnesses, who are faithfully to prove the action; or
counselors, who are formally to plead the cause; or Iurators, who are
uprightly to censure the allegations? These, and every of these, for the
discharge of a good conscience herein, and therein, according to Saint Paul's
practice, must exercise themselves, and that ingeniously, without sinister
affection; and that instantly, as the occasion is given, without put-offs to
aftertimes, or any tedious protraction.

(as they esteem themselves) to be sharply reproved, for their security and
gross stupidity, in slighting, neglecting and procrastinating necessary
duties, who think and speak much of doing, but leave to do the effect of
their thinking; who mention and motion many things fit to be acted and done,
for the reformation of disorders, and matters amiss in themselves and family
at home, in the Church and Commonwealth abroad, but as weaklings and
slacke-graces, set not their hands to the work, thrust not themselves forth
with David's resolution, Psalm. 101. tot.
Psalm. 101. to the speedy execution of the same. Far be they from the
Prophets and our Apostles spirit and resolution; far from the obedient
disposition which was in Father Abraham, who according to Gods Commandment,
forthwith circumcised his family, Genes. Genesis 17.
17. put away the bondwoman and her son, Genesis 21.
Genesis 21. yea, readily and betimes went on his Genesis 22.
journey, to sacrifice his only beloved Son Isaac, Genesis 22. and not asking a
reason for it, which he thought to be presumption; or opposing any carnal
reason against it, which he knew to be rebellion, instantly did that he was
called unto, and commanded to do with all expedition. But alas, these, (and
are not some of you, Fathers, many of you, Brethren, such?) either in favor to
themselves, or for fear of others, stand still with the idlers in the market,
and do nothing; or having begun well, revolt Math. 20. 1. Tim. 4. 10. Judge. 5.
with Demas, disappoynt with Meroz, or follow a far off, as Peter did Christ,
and do not put themselves forward to the reforming of any course that is
evil, or the furtherance of any cause that is good. Yea; whereas the places
and callings of some require, that they should, as State-Physicians, purge
themselves of all distempered humors, that they might the more effectually
work on the humorous distemperatures of others, and that they should be
patrons of peace and piety, and patterns of temperance and honesty, that so
they might the more boldly reprove, and soundly repress the lewd and lawless
irregularities of the sons of Belial, wherewith these times swarm: They, on
the contrary run a race of the like excess of riot with others, and as if it
were no disparagement, but rather an ornament unto them; swear by authority,
oppress and extort by license; drink, that I may not say, drab it too,
without control, without fear, care or conscience.

Such, and such, with shame and grief I speak it, are more then a good many of
our neuterpassiue Magistrates, scar-crow Constables, and meale-mouthed
under-officers in Town and Country, who resembling Ostritches, which Plin.
have great feathers, but no flight; or Jupiters Block cast amongst the Frogs,
to be the king, whom they feared at first for its greatness, but despised at
length for its stillness, suffer many heinous and hidious enormities of
whoredom, blasphemy, drunkenness, profaning of the Sabbath, and wilful
recusancy to pass by them uncontrolled, and are loath (lest they might be
accounted precise and pragmaticall) to exercise themselves in this, to see
these and the like abuses punished or reformed. So that as Demosthenes Plut.
sometimes complained, that by the Athenians slothfulness, the power of their
adversary, Philip, King of Macedon, was greatly augmented; so may we that are
Ministers justly complain, that by the remissness of the aforesaid Magistrates
and Officers, the kingdom of Satan, in those his vicious vicegerents is
exceedingly enlarged.

And therefore we do the more humbly entreat you, my Honorable Lords,
according to the great measure of courage, wisdom and gravity which God has
given you, that you would with an heroical spirit, encounter the many-headed
monstrous Hydra of sinful abuses, in these exulcerate times, and by an
Herculean arm of public justice, by degrees cut off the farre-spreading
branches of all State-spoyling, couenant-breaking, Church-robbing,
soule-murthering iniquity, which bears up crest and breast too, against all
the inferior Magistracy. Some faults, I know, may be like Cummin-seed, beaten
out with the rod, as the Prophet speaks, Esa. 28. other more scandalous Esa.
28. 27.
offenses, like fitches, must be driven out with a flaile, but the cart-wheele
it self must make a noise, that is, the seuerest punishment must be
inflicted, where the parties peccant will not be reformed, especially the
incorrigible followers of drunken Bacchus, the professed friends of Romish
Balaam, without dallying or delay, must be confronted, curbed, confounded;
wherein, if you (my Lords) shall duly exercise your authority, and (as chief
substitutes under God and our King, for the redressing of inormities in this
Circuit) approve your fidelity and integrity, assure your selves, we shall
be ever ready to bless God for you, and to pray that God would bless you,
that you may continue a blessing unto us, in the conscionable execution of your
Judicial function.

Simile.
the best metal and making, will not strike orderly and truly, but much
therein will be out of frame and fashion, if the lesser wheels, as well as the
greater, keep not their due and regular motion: So in the curious Clockworke
of Justice, there will be many exorbitancies (albeit the chief agents and
moouers therein be never so sound in their integrity) if the vnderagents and
instruments of Justice (as witnesses, in proving the action; Counselors, in
pleading and prosecuting the cause; Quest-men, in sifting and censuring the
evidences and allegations) do not also take care and make conscience of
discharging their duties.

And as Nebuchadnezzars Image, Dan. 2. Dan. 2. 32.
though it had a golden head, yet fell to the ground, and was dashed in pieces,
because it had feet of clay: Even so, though the chief Magistrates, the
reverend Judges, and some worthy Iusticers, be as golden heads in places of
judicature, and do desire and endeavor to discharge their bounden duty; yet we
hear too often, that truth and equity falls to the ground, because these
golden heads have dirty feet, covetous undermining servants, corrupt and
cheating under-officers, which set to sale, conscience and honesty. If these
things be not so, what means the bleating of Sheep and lowing of Oxen in my
ears? as Samuel spoke to Saul, 1. Sa. 1. Sam. 15. 14.
that is, What mean the mournful complaints of many poor plain Country men,
and wronged Widows, who coming from far to the Assizes and Sessions, for
Justice, and redress of injuries, return full often home again, with much
discomfort of heart, sit down in heaviness, and cry out with tears and
wringing of hands? Alas, what a thing is this? I had thought to have found
Justice, to have had some redress of my wrongs, relief of my wants, remedy of
my evils, and an end of my suite in Law; but I see, I feel, I find, that
there is little equity, conscience, or honesty; much dissembling,
double-dealing, and partiality, the most things are ruled by favor and
affection, and greatness will have the victory, my journey is long, my
expenses great, my travel painful, my case helpelesse, labor fruitless,
sorrow endless, for I think my matter put off from time to time, Term to
Term, will never be ended, etc.

O ye seats of Judgment, be ashamed of this, and ye thrones of Justice, blush
at this iniquity, and ye Fathers and Brethren, on whom depends the redress
of these enormities; Let the cry, I beseech you, of the poor fatherless and
innocent, enter into your ears and hearts, and move you to exercise true
judgment, and to Zech. 7. 9.
show mercy to your poor distressed Brethren. Up and be doing what you ought
to do, and the Lord will be with you. Herein exercise your selves, that
every day, and every action of the day, may witness your desire and endeavor
to keep and discharge a good conscience toward God and men. O suffer not your
Religion and profession, your credit and reputation, godly courses, good men's
causes, and your own consciences to lie a bleeding, whilst you, too indulgent
over your selves, and regardlesse of the weale-publicke, lie a sleeping. Rather
as sentinels in a watch, keep your selves ever waking and intent to that
work, office, and employment, whereunto, by occasion of these solemn Assizes,
you are called and assigned. And as for you which are called hither to be
witnesses, to testify the truth in matters of right or wrong, life or death;
hearken briefly to your watchword, and apply it to your selves as your own
proper Motto; Dicatur veritas, rumpatur inuidia: Though envy and greatness
swell, sweat, fume, fret, and burst in twain; speak ye the truth, and the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, without fear or favor, for small as
great, stranger as Brother; and the God of Truth shall be with you, and you
shall have both the testimony of honesty for your credit among men, and the
testimony of a good conscience, for your comfort before God.

And as for you that are Jurors of the Grand or petty Quest, presumed by the
Law to be either Gentlemen of note for wisdom and integrity; or Yeomen of
good fame, for credit and honesty; hearken you likewise to your watchword, and
take this unto you for your Impresa, Ruat coelum, fiat iustitia: Though the
sky fall, and the mountains fume, and the mighty rich ill ones frown never
so much; yet let right be done; Sift well and examine all proofs and
evidences; take heed, offer no violence to your consciences; but according to
truth and equity let matters be indifferently scanned, and so let your
impartial verdict be boldly delivered.

And as for you that are Advocates and Counselors of Law, I pray (without any
Church-pinching prohibition) give me leave, in the name of him who can command
you, may condemn you, and will certainly judge you, to give you also your
watchword and Emblem, which shall be this, Pereat nummus, seruetur
innocentia: Let unjust gain of doubled trebled fees perish in the pit of hell,
and be utterly abandoned, and according to your Office of pleading your
Clients cause formally, and prosecuting his affairs faithfully, as much as in
you lies, let innocence be preserved, use your best endeavor that right may
be had with moderate expense, use the Law lawfully, that it may prove a
special and speedy remedy of wrongs, and not an Engine or trap to ensnare the
weak, as many complain; what? though for your plain and conscionable
dealing, you lose your fees and profit in the place of Judgment on earth, yet
be assured of this, your innocence shall procure you a better reward at the
Judgment seat in heaven.

And now for you the reverend Sages and honorable Judges of this Circuit; and
for you also, the praiseworthy Iusticers of this Shire: what remains to be
done? but only this, that (out of your own ingenuous disposition, without any
prescription of mine) you should join together (what in places of judicature
may not be put asunder) all these Symbolicall sentences, and quarter them as so
many Scutchions, with the Arms of your houses and offices, in this order:
Dicatur veritas, first: Fiat iustitia, next: and then in the third place,
Seruetur innocentia: whereunto, add for a Crest (to make up the complete
coat of a gracious Magistrate) Dominetur conscientia.

Thus if looking up to God, who is present and chief President in your
assemblies, you shall, in a reverent fear of his Name, see that truth be
testified and delivered, Justice done and executed, innocence preserved and
protected, and a good conscience in all things kept and preserved; then shall
the mountains and hills bring unto the people peace and prosperity; then
shall Justice, as the Sun; Mercy, as the Moon; other virtues, as the
Stars; shine about your seats of Government, to the confounding of the
wicked, and the comfort of the godly: Which God grant, by the assistance of his
grace, to the praise of his glory.

Amen. Amen.
THE CONSCIONABLE CHRISTIAN:
Preached at Taunton, Aug. 7. 1620.
The Text: Acts 24. 16. Herein therefore do I exercise my self, to have
always an upright conscience toward God and men.
AS the Prophet Jonas brought the same message to the Nineuites at his second
sending unto them: so do I bring (Right Honorable, etc.) the same Text of
Scripture, at this my second calling before you, desiring to end what the last
Assizes I began, and to add a roof to that foundation which then I laid, and
to give an account of such particulars as remain yet undiscussed, of that
general Bill of parcels, which then I exhibited to your Christian
consideration.

And having then (as you may remember) spoken generally (according to the
model of time allotted for me to speak, and you to hear) of the real
religious practice, and the actual Christian employment of Saint Paul,
prosecuting withal such doctrines and uses as the motive and manner of his
employment did offer to our observation; I come now by orderly descent to
handle more especially the matter subject, and mean business of conscience;
wherein he was thus seriously employed and exercised: And for my better
proceeding therein, and your profiting thereby, will by Gods assistance, and
your continued patience, present to the eyes of your understanding.

Diuis. 3. parts.
properties, and offices; in her power, command, and Sovereignty she is
considered to be great.



Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a good conscience toward God
and men.

Of each of these in their order; and first, of 1. Part.
conscience, according to its power and greatness; whereof my purpose is not
to make an exact Scholasticall Discourse, but to touch the tops of general
notions, and with Gideons Soldiers, Judge. 7. to lap at the brinkes of those
rivers wherein others have deeply waded, and with Jonathan, 1. Sam. 14. to
give you a taste on the tip of my rod, of that sight-cleering honysweetnesse
which therefrom may be gathered. Wherefore passing by the nicities and curious
speculations of Schoolmen, whether conscience be an Act or an Habit, a
faculty Theoricall or Practical, simple or mixed, and compounded of both,
whether seated in the understanding, will, or memory, as the proper subject
thereof, etc. and passing over with a light finger, and dry foot, the
Rhetorical Notifications and witty Illustrations thereof, drawn from its
Illustr. consc.
offices, adjuncts, effects, when and where it is deciphered to be a man's best
friend, soonest offended; or bitterest foe, hardliest appeased; a bridle before
sin, to prevent it; a scourge after sin; to punish it, domesticus index,
index, carnifex; in brief, to be the souls Schoolmaster, Monitor, and
Domestical Preacher, man's tutelar God and protector, Gods Law-Booke, Leiger,
Ambassador, Spy, Intelligencer, and the truest Prognosticatour in a man's
bosom or breast, foretelling what shall become of him hereafter, etc. As an
abstract of all the premises, I will briefly and plainly commend to your
consideration, the nature and essence of conscience, under these terms of a
definition or description.

Conscience (so called, either a cordis scientia, Description of conscience.
Bern Aquin.
in reference to the soul, reflecting and recoyling upon it self, or a
scientia cum alio; in respect to God, with whom it is a co-witnesse of
whatsoever is in man) is a noble and divine power Romans 2. 15.
and faculty, planted of God in the substance of man's soul, working upon it
self by reflection, Esa. 30. 21.
and taking exact notice, as a Scribe or Register, and determining as Gods
Viceroy and deputy, Judge of all that is in the mind, will, affections,
actions, and whole life of man.

I name it a faculty, and not a bare act, because Prob. desc.
sundry actions, as to testify, accuse, excuse, acquit, condemn, are given
unto it. I term it a noble divine power, and not an humane acquired habit,
because acts and habits too may be got and lost, deposed from their subject,
and separated from the soul; but Conscience, as it is borne with us, so it
will never leave us; it is individual, inseparable, there is no putting of it
to flight, or flying from it, nec fugere, nec fugare eam poteris: but it will
say to thee, as Ruth to Naomi, I will Ruth 1.
go with thee wheresoever thou go. To be brief, I give it room and place
in the whole soul, and do not, as some have done, thrust it into a corner
thereof, as if it were a part only of the practical understanding, because
the operation of it cannot be circumscribed in narrower bounds then the soul
it self; and therefore the Hebrews aptly call it (...) Prou. 15. 15. Prou.
15. 15.
and the Greek (...), that is, heart or soul, 1. Ioh. 3. 20.
1. Ioh. 3. Lastly, I give it the title of Gods Register and deputy-Iudge,
because it is only inferior to God, and under him holds court in the soul of
man, and is the principal commander and chief controller of all his doings
and desires, determining of all his actions, either with him to excuse and
absolve, or against him to accuse and condemn; and that for the conversion of
some, and confusion of others.

The conscience endowed with these royalties, The understanding, Metropolis of
conscience.
resideth, I confess, principally in the understanding, as her Metropolis
Palace-Throne, and thereby exercises her chief functions, but yet in the
whole soul, commonly called the consistory of conscience, she keeps a
complete court, and in the several parts thereof produces occasionally
several operations; whence, in common speech we say, My conscience tells me, I
did this, or did not that; there is an action of the memory. My conscience bids
me, or forbids me to do this; there is an action of the will. And again, It
smites me, checks me, it comforts or torments me. What are these but acts of
the affections recoyling upon the soul? And certain it is, that whenever
conscience reasons with it self, and makes a practical Syllogism,
concerning the doing of that which is lawful, and avoiding of that which is
unlawful; it has some help from all the faculties both Theorick and
Practicke, as (when that part of conscience which the Ancients call Synteresis,
because as a treasury of rules and directions, it keeps the grounds of the Law
natural, and the principles of truth and equity) shall make thus the
proposition: All adulterers and Syll. Cons.
oppressors are worthy of fearful punishment; and hereupon that other part,
called Syneidesis, as an eyewitness and remembrancer of all thy doings, shall
make thus the assumption; But thou have committed adultery and oppression, and
shall convince thee thereof, by all circumstances of persons, time and place:
(whereupon follows an inevitable conclusion.) In all this illatiue discourse,
who sees not a mutual dependency on the mind, will and memory, which moves me
to affirm Conscience to be a divine power compounded of them all? Whereat
Basil Basil.
aimed, when he termed it, Natural iudicatorium: and Origin glanced, when he
calls it, Paedagogus Origin. in 2. ad Romans
animae sociatus: and the Philosophers, when they speak of a man's bonus
genius: but he Greg.
spoke best, that called it a book, ad quem emendandum omnes scripti sunt libri,
for whose sake all other books are written: all other are but glosses upon
this Text. And cursed be that Commentary which corrupts the Text of
conscience. in thine own bosom, written by the finger of God, in such plain
Characters, and so legible, that though thou know not a letter in any other
book, yet thou may read this; nay, thou can not for thy life but read
it, and understand it too, and yield to the truth and equity thereof, when it
pleases God to turn thy eyes upon it. Open this book then, and see what is
written in this Law, how read thou? Luke 10. 26.
Ponder upon it, confer with it; it is thy cheapest and faithfullest
counselor at home, thou need not be at cost to seek advice abroad; it is
stored with singular precepts and principles concerning the knowledge and
practice of good and evil, persuading to the one, dissuading from the other.
Hearken then unto it, read it in time for thy direction, lest thou be forced
to look upon it too late, to thy destruction: it may be, the light thereof, by
thy natural blindness, is much obscured, and that the text letters thereof,
by affected ignorance and wilful malice, are more blurred, and even blotted
out. Oh then, compare it with Gods Book, and labor, by the help of Gods
Ministers, to have it reformed and rectified. Happy is that man that has a
living, feeling, and waking conscience; for this shall keep him so, that he
shall either not commit sin, or not continue long therein, but the crying
voice of his conscience will rowze him out of the bed of security, as the
crowing Cock did Peter, and bring him to Math. 26.
repentance; and blessed is that repentance and obedience which is wrought by
the power and command of a rectified conscience.

And thus having made a short surueigh of the nature of conscience, as it is
great, and Gods lieutenant in the soul of man, working more forcibly on all
the parts and powers thereof, then all other agents whatsoever, sitting in the
understanding as Judge, to prescribe, prohibit, absolve and condemn de iure;
in the memory, as Recorder and witness testifying de facto; in the will and
affections, as rewarder and punisher, pro iure aut iniuria facti: I will now,
with the like breuity and perspicuity, speak somewhat of each of these offices
distinctly:

First, conscience, as a Scribe or Notary, sitting 1. Office. Hieroglyphic.
in the closet of man's heart, with pen in hand, records and keeps a Catalogue,
or Diary of all our doings, of the time when, place where, the manner how they
were performed, and that so clear and evident, that go where we will, do
what we can, the characters of them cannot be cancelled or razed. She omitteth
no default through slownesse of hand, neither strikes she out any debt through
deceit, like the unjust Steward, that bade put down Luke 16. 6.
fifty for an hundred; she cannot be corrupted to conceal our faults, or
smothered by tract of time, not to check us for them, as appeared in Joseph's
brethren, whose consciences troubled Genesis 42. 21.
them in Egypt, for that cruelty which many years before they had showed
toward their Brother in Canaan. It is good therefore for us to agree with
conscience in time, and in all our ways to seek her approbation. And as the
reverend Martyr B. Latimer took special care to Fox Mart.
the placing of his words in his examination before Bonner, when he heard the
pen walking in the chimney behind the cloth, and describing whatsoever he said:
So ought we circumspectly to look to all our doings and sayings, and to guard,
watch and ward our senses (which are Aug.
the gates and cinque ports of corruption and lusts) since that conscience is
not only the curious super-visor, but the continual recorder of all the
actions of our life. We may cast off our garments, but not our conscience; we
may often change place and separate our selves from men, but when we are most
solitary, then shall we find conscience most familiar with us, and always
upon our secrets: Falli potest fama, conscientia Seneca.
nunquam: her approofes or reproves will never be wanting unto us. If we do
well, she will speak for us and justify us; if evil, without speedy
repentance, she will be as forward to speak against us, and to accuse us.

Conscientia mill testes.
which will surely testify, when the Lord cites it to answer, even of the
most secret sins, and Job 24. 13, 14.
so testify, that it will also terrify in such sort, that all the men and
creatures in the world shall not be able to comfort; whereof we see an example
in Adam, who immediately after he Genesis 3.
had transgressed, ran away and hid himself amongst the bushes, though no man
pursued him, no Angel reproved him, the Lord was not yet come unto him, yet
his conscience for the fact accusing him, all the pleasures of Paradise could
not avail to quiet him, or do him any good: and the like we may note in
Balthazar, Dan. 5.
who though he had about him all the worldly comforts which the heart of man
could desire, yet because the conscience of his sacrilegious villainy was
against him, nothing could remedy his grief, or mitigate the terror of the
handwriting which he saw on the wall; but therewith extremely affrighted, he
forthwith miserably expired. in them, and seek to please and praise God by
them, and then with Saint Paul, Let the witness 1. Cor. 4. 4. 2. Cor. 1. 12.
of our own conscience above all, comfort and content us, in the midst of
all slanders and uncharitable surmises which malicious men shall have against
us. To conclude this point, let us in all our intents and actions, studies and
consultations, as conscionable Christians, look unto the Lord as the searcher
of our hearts, and the tryer and rewarder of our works, not discouraging our
selves, whatsoever men think or speak of us and our doings, so God and our
conscience do approve them; nor contenting our selves with men's approbations
and commendations, when the testimony of Gods Word and our conscience is not
for them and us. To which purpose, I remember, * he spoke Secretary Cecill.
well, who in his days was accounted a worthy speaker, and in reply to some
that unjustly maligned him, spoke thus praise-worthily: I will rest
henceforward in peace in the house of mine own conscience, and if I do any
good deeds, it is no matter who know them; if bad, knowing them my self, it is
no matter from whom I hide them, they will be recorded before that Judge from
whose presence I cannot flee: if all the world applaud me, and he accuse me,
their praise is in vain. Fame may help us, conscience will not; it is an
infallible witness; if speaking for us, it cheereth more then any cordial; if
against us, it gnaweth and tormenteth more then a corrosiue.

Secondly, Conscience, as Gods Deputy 2. Office.
Judge, Oyer and Determiner of all causes and cases in the Consistory of the
soul, passes sentence, either of approbation or condemnation. on all our
speeches and actions, and that with such authority, that by all the power and
policy of the world, it cannot be revoked or resisted. Strong is the reasoning
of conscience, when it conuinceth Pagans by the light of nature, but much more
powerful, when it conuinceth Christians by the Word of God. Wherefore, as good
S. Paul sets the sentence of his conscience, 1. Cor. 4. 3. 2. Cor. 1. 12.
which did justify him against the calumnies of al men whatsoever that did
censure and condemn him, and therein rejoices and triumphs in the midst of
tribulation; so the wicked and ungodly sit down confounded at the Judgment of
conscience condemning them, and therewith are stricken dead, at it were, in the
midst of their greatest iollity and exaltation, as before, by the examples of
Adam and Balthazar, has in Dan. 5.
part been showed, and in the tragical ends of Saul, Achitophel, Haman,
Herod, Judas, and the Esth. 7.
like, might more fully and fearfully be exemplified: but I hasten, etc.

Thirdly and lastly, conscience, as inferior 3. Offic.
only to God, and chief commander, controller, and executioner under him,
even in this life executes the sentence determinate of good or evil, rendering
joy unspeakable to the righteous and obedient, but shame and sorrow, and
terror intolerable to the wicked and impenitent. The truth of the former is
clearly euidenced, in the holy conversation of life, and happy expiration in
death, of these faithful servants of God, Jacob, Joseph, Job, Josias,
Hezekiah, Genesis 49. 50. 2. Chr. 34. 2. King. 20. 1. Sam. 12. 3. Luke 2. 25.
Samuel, and good old Simeon, with others, of whom the sacred Scriptures make
honorable mention, as of such in whom righteousness and peace met so
together, mercy and truth so kissed each other, that the remembrance of their
well led life, and the conscience of their godly desire and endeavor to walk
inoffensiuely in holiness and love, exceedingly solaced them, and singularly
supported them all their days, making them confidently and courageously to run
on their Race, with an holy kind of contempt, beating back the surges of all
worldly wrongs and sorrows; Illisos fluctus rupes vt vasta refundit: As a
brazen wall does darts, or a mighty Rock the billows of the Sea. Thus
conscience, on the godly, executes the sentence of unspeakable comfort in
this life, and makes death it self welcome to them, so that tanquam conuiuae
satures mortis somno cedunt, like full fed ghests, they go willingly to their
rest in the bed of the grave: of whom, as Bernard speaks, Mors sine formidine
expectatur, Bernard.
cum dulcedine exoptatur, cum deuotione excipitur. But as for the ungodly and
wicked, a perpetual non sic is threatened unto them by their own conscience,
and on them this ruthful irreuocable sentence is passed; Non est pax impijs:
There Isa. 57. 21.
is no peace to the wicked, says my God: no true peace, either in life or
death. Lateri haeret laethalis arundo: The griping, gnawing, and never dying
Worm of an accusing conscience every where tormenteth them, and executes the
sentence of remediless condemnation upon them, so that being (...),
selfe-condemned, Tit. 3. 11.
through the guilt of their sins, as Cain, Judas, Herod, and Felix were: and
as credible Histories Acts 24.
declare; Bessus, for secret killing of his father; Bassianus, of his brother;
Orestes, of his mother; and Richard the third, of his nephews to have been:
they lead here a life euer-dying, and feel as it were a death neuer-ending,
which is no other but a forerunner of that supreme and final doom, which God
(who will justify the sentence and execution of conscience) shall, in that
great Day of Judgment, pass peremptorily on all the wilfully-disobedient
transgressors of his Commandments.

Day shall come, and it will be a dreadful Day for them, when these worldly
negotiations shall cease, and all fleshly perturbations shall be silent, and
conscience shall be so shrill, that they shall both hear it, and be thryld at
it, and gnash Revel. 16. 11.
with their teeth, and gnaw their tongues for indignation, to see how God
takes part with it against them: O what horror and confusion shall then cover
the faces of such as by a multitude of carnal pleasures and worldly cares and
affairs, drown, and cry down the voice of conscience, by which their evil
ways and works are condemned, as the Drums and Tabrets 2. King. 23. 10.
in the sacrifices of Molech did the cry of the infants which in Tophet were
burned. But on the other side, O what honor and exaltation shall crown the
heads of those which hear and obey the voice of conscience, by the light of
Gods Word rightly informed, which lend their ears, whilst this good Cassandra
spends her tongue, and by her, in all their actions are willingly guided and
directed! And so much (if not too much) may suffice to have been spoken
generally of conscience it self, as in her nature, properties, and offices; in
her power, command and Sovereignty, she is considered to be great.

Now, by Gods assistance, under the conduct 2. Part.
of his fear and your favor, I will proceed, to commend to your view and
entertainment, especially, an upright conscience, as in her causes and
effects, her proiects and privileges, she is found to be singularly good; and
that 1. Bernard. Bona conscientia and turbata. 2. Bona conscientia and
tranquilla.
not as she is in continual conflict with the flesh, rebelling against the
Spirit, and so afflicted with the sanctified dolours of the new birth, but as
it is after regeneration quieted with the sense of remission of sins, and
reconciliation to God in Christ, and so excusing, clearing, chearing, and
comforting the soul of the sound Christian. In respect whereof, some call it,
The Paradise of the soul; The Iubile of the heart, Laetitia cordis, quasi
latitia, A surpassing inward solace, so dilating and enlarging the heart for
some good in possession, more in expectation, that the joy thereof cannot well
be suppressed or expressed.

And hence in a common popular apprehension, it is said to be a joyful
remembrance of a well led life, joined with an hopeful expectation of a
comfortable death and glorious resurrection. S. Paul, in respect of the minds
tranquillity Phil. 4. 7.
inioyed thereby, terms it a peace which passes all understanding, like to
the hidden Manna and white stone, wherein a name was written, which no man
knows but he that inioyeth it, Revel. 2. 17. Solomon, that kingly Reu. 2. 17.
Preacher, pointing at the peerless pleasure and immutable comfort of a good
conscience, compares it to a continual feast, far excelling Pro. 15. 15.
Mishteh tamid.
the royal feast of Ahashuerus, which lasted but nine-skore days: for this
feast of a good conscience (whereat the Angels are Cooks and Butlers, and the
blessed Trinity gladsome ghests (as Luther boldly speaks) without intermission
Luth. in Gal.
of solace, or interruption of society, is a continual feast; A feast in life
and health, refreshing the soul with dainty cates of divine comforts; A feast
in sickness, when worldlings hopes hang down their heads like a Bulrush, and
lag like a Ruffians starcht Ruff in a storm of rain; yea, in death a feast,
when comfort is worth a world, and all worldly comforts and comforters forsake
us, yea, in the Day of Resurrection, and after that Day (when all these
shadows shall fly away) a feast for evermore. No marvel then that Saint
Bernard, being rapt and ravished heerewith, breaks forth into the singular
commendation of the admirable endowments thereof, saying, Bona conscientia est
Be^. in form. hon. vit.
titulus religionis, templum Salomonis, ager Benedictionis, hortus deliciarum,
gaudium Angelorum, etc. A good conscience is the Title and Crown of Religion,
the Temple of Solomon, the field of Benediction, the Garden of delight, the joy
of Angels, and Sanctuary of the holy Ghost, etc. But because these, and the
like allusiue notions of a good conscience, frequent in the Fathers, are magis
sloridae quam solidae, more pregnant for wit, then profitable for present use,
I will say to them, as Iehu to the messenger of Iehoram, 2. Kin. 9. 18.
2. King. 9. Turn behind me; and will take hold of that more sound description
thereof by Isiodore, affirming that a clear or inoffensiue conscience is such
a one, Quae nec de praeterito just accusatur, Isiod. in 2. l. soli. loq.
nec de praesenti unjust delectatur, nec de futuro solicit perturbatur; that
is, which is neither justly accused for things past, nor unlawfully delighted
with things present, nor anxiously troubled for things to come.

This clearing chearing conscience, and that Note.
perfectly good, Adam only had in his Creation, whilst in Paradise he walked
with God, without sin, and without fear in the state of innocence: But now
there is no way to come to it, to attain and have a quiet conscience, and that
but imperfectly good after regeneration, but only by the mediation and
reconciliation of Christ. Being justified by faith in the Blood Romans 5. 1.
of Christ (says S. Paul) we have peace with God, Romans 5. And again, The
Blood of Christ, Heb. 9. 14.
once offered by his eternal Spirit without fault, purges our consciences from
dead works, Heb. 9. Yea, so purifieth and pacifieth them, that it leaves no
remorse of sin accusing or condemning in them. Nothing else in this world has
this virtue, save Christ's Blood alone; there is no pacification of the soul,
without remission Ioh. 3. 1. Heb. 9. 22. Heb. 10.
of sin; no remission of sin without blood, no blood expiatory for sin, but
Christ's; no application of this expiation, but by faith. The consequence then
is undeniable: therefore by faith in Christ's Blood, shed for the remission of
sin, we attain peace of conscience. No perfumes of the Sanctuary or charms
of Oratory can relieve it, no strains of Music or Songs of Angels can
rejoice it. All other merriments and outward refreshments whatsoever, have no
more power to cure and quiet it, then popish holy water has to conjure the
devil. This, this is the honor, royalty, and peculiar dignity of Christ's
blood, by the hand of faith applied to the soul for the full remission of
sins. This alone can pacify and make good the conscience, and fully effect
it; whereas otherwise all the glittering appearances of happiness, which dazzle
the eyes of doting worldlings, cannot bring it to pass.

The superstitious Papist, troubled in conscience for sin, runs up and
down for relief, like an Heart with an Arrow in his side: Se rotat in vulnus
transsixam circuit hastam: he sends to the god of Ekron for help, he buys a
pardon, 2. King. 1. 2.
goes to shrift, lasheth and launceth himself, as the Priests of Baal did,
posteth to a Mass, passes 1. King. 18.
on in pilgrimage to a wooden wormeeaten Lady, or painted Image, and all this
while as an aguish man that drinks water, his disease increases; no shift of
place, or change of air can relieve him, being dogged and attended on by the
hellish hag of his conscience; Quae surdo verbere caedit, which whips him in
secret, and in silence tells him, Omnibus vmbra locis adero, dabis improbe
poenas.

The profane worldling likewise being vexed and perplexed in mind with the
horror of his offensive life, and the blood-hound of his guilty conscience
hunting dry-foot on the sent Prou. 28. 1.
of his former sins, proiecteth fearful things, ambulat in circuitu, walks
in a restless round or maze, like a sea-sicke wretch, from the ship to the
boat, and so back again; and (as Saint Augustine passionately describes it)
runs like Aug. in 45. Psa.
a Malcontent, ab agro, in vrbem, etc. from the field, into the City; out of
the City, into his house; from the common rooms thereof, to his! bedchamber;
from thence, to his study or closet; and then out again, to seek for a merry
companion, to see if he can play away his trouble, and remove the melancholy
qualme, as carnal men account it, from the stomach; he eats profusely,
drinks profoundly, sports profanely, and all to lull the conscience asleep,
and to drown her accusing voice by 2. King. 23. 10.
the clamours of needless employments. But all in vain, he does but loose his
chain, that it may be tied straighter; and smother the fire for a time, which
will afterward break forth with greater violence; a seeming truce he may
have, true peace he cannot have: for, Nocte dieque suum gestat in pectore
testem: yea, pestem, he carries night and day his bane in his bosom, and of
all earthly refreshments may truly say, as Job of his Job 16. 2.
friends, Miserable comforters are ye all. But as for the godly Christian, who
is willing to illuminate and regulate his conscience by Gods sacred Word, and
the divine Oracles of eternal truth, when scruples and troubles of conscience
do arise, whereby he is somewhat distracted or distressed; leaving all humane
conclusions untried, vntrusted; he forthwith goes to God in prayer for
direction, powers forth his soul in supplication to him, imbraceth all good
means of instruction and edification, lays fast hold, by a lively faith, on
Christ Jesus for reconciliation; and so finding Christ the great Physician of
souls, or rather being found of him, finds, with all peace and tranquillity,
his doubts resolved, his grief removed, his fear cancelled, his heart
confirmed in well-doing, his soul (as it were) ravished with the sweet savor
of his precious ointments; so that Flammas licet hic and ille iaculetur polus,
and fractus illabatur orbis, impauidum ferient ruinae: though the heavens and
earth crack and fly off the hinges, and the Mountains be removed, yet
therewith he cannot be appalled; to him, being in Christ, and feeling it to be
so, there is no condemnation, or remurmuration of conscience for sin; and
therefore with glory to God in excelsis, he sings De profundis, a requiem to
his soul.

You see then by that which has been said, how that the conscience, which Gods
Word (actuated by the Spirit) inlighteneth and persuades, and the blood of
Christ Jesus, applied by the hand of faith, purges and pacifyeth, is the only
good conscience. Know also, that truly to believe well, according to the tenor
of Gods sacred Word, and to endeavor duly to live well in a cheerful obedience
to his holy will, is both mother and nurse of the same. It is the pure inmost
blood which breeds, and the radical moisture which feeds the bright Lamp of
the soul, a good conscience. Whereof for a conclusion to the premises, and an
induction to that which follows this plain and pregnant definition, proved by
direct passages of Scriptures, offers it self to your Christian observation.

A good or upright Prou. 15. 15.
conscience is a divine Romans 2. 16.
power, and principal part of Gods Image in man, whereby he does most resemble
the selfe-sufficiency of God, which being Ephesians. 1. 7.
enlightened by Gods Word, and purged by Romans 5. 1. Heb. 9. 14.
faith in Christ's blood, from the guilt and punishment of sin, and from dead
works, to serve the living Lord, speaks Phil. 4. 7.
peace with Gods allowance, is a Job 33.
messenger of good things betwixt God and us, and cheereth up the heart with 1.
Pet. 1. 8.
joy unspeakable and glorious.

In which Definition, you may easily perceive, how that knowledge and faith,
repentance and obedience, peace and joy have their concurrence, to make up the
precious odoriferous balm, or ointment of a good conscience.







To touch the tops of these persuasions, first, Judge. 7. 1. Knowledge.
it is by too lamentable experience well known, that for want of knowledge in
Gods Book, and of faith in the Gospel (offering forgiveness of sins only
by Christ's blood) many sottish souls live in ignorance and darkness, and in
the very shadow of death, not able to discern, by reason of their blind
nature, and natural blindness, the things which concern their peace; but
thinking all religions will save, or a good meaning serve the turn, or a Lord
have mercy at last cast be sufficient: Alas, many a Fly do these swallow, many
a sin unseen, vnsorrowed for, do they digest, and in many things do they
err; as Christ told the Sadduces, Mark. 12. because they know not the
Scriptures, Mark. 12. 24.
and the power of God: The ignorance whereof, as Chrysostom notes, is the
mother of Chrysostom. in 3. Coloss.
all mischief; and therefore he earnestly exhorts all secular persons to get
them Bibles, the physic of their souls, to labor to be more Job 22. 21.
acquainted with God in his Word, that they may grow up thereby in grace, and in
the knowledge 2. Pet. 3. 13.
of our Savior Christ; without which saving knowledge, and faith grounded
thereon, which the Hebrews by an excellency call Shekel Mekodesh, sanctifying
wisdom, the conscience 2. Faith.
cannot be upright. It is sufficient unto sin to do against conscience, as
Saint Paul in Romans Romans 14. Augustine.
14. shows; whereunto that of Saint Augustine agrees, Quicquid sit contra
conscientiam, aedificat ad Gehennam. But it is not sufficient to duty and
obedience, to do according to conscience, except it be enlightened and
rectified by the Word, without which information and illumination, conscience
often resolves, where it should restrain; acquits, where it should condemn,
and so erreth and offends diverse ways.

Esa. 1. 12.
1. Who required these things at your hands?

John's, and so take quid pro quo, Chalk for Cheese, riches for righteousness,
policy for piety, who accounting gain godliness, and maintaining bad opinions
to justify base affections, do hereupon, in the error of their judgment,
practice commonly swearing, profaning of the Sabbath, Usury, Lying, Lottery,
Legerdemaine, without any regret of conscience at all.

Religious adoration is not to be given to creatures: and

For the avoiding of all which errors of superstition, profaneness and
preciseness, let us hear and obey our Saviors counsel, Search Ioh. 5. 39.
the Scriptures, Ioh. 5. for they bear witness of me, the Way, the Truth, the
Life; they give best testimony both of Gods will concerning his own service,
and of his good will in Christ to all his faithful servants. Let this Word of
God dwell plentifully in us, as Saint Paul prescribes, Col. 3. 16.
Col. 3. and that not in some, but in all wisdom, that we may think, speak,
and do wisely in all things. And for the better sharpening of our dimmed sight
in matters divine, let us not refuse the eye-salue of our better enlightened
guides, but gladly accept thereof, that so by all these, and other good means,
our consciences being rightly informed, we may express the goodness of them,
by doing or not doing confidently what God has commanded or prohibited. And to
this end, that our hearts Col. 2. 2, 16.
may be comforted and established in every good saying and doing, we are to
lay fast hold on that everlasting consolation and good hope through grace which
the Father has given us, Colos. 2. 2, 16. and by all spiritual aliments to
preserve and cherish that saving faith in us, whereby we are persuaded that our
sins are pardoned, and God in Christ reconciled to us. This indeed is the
root of a good conscience, as has been already showed: and this, Believe in
Christ's blood, is the gracious powerful Word whereby all consciences are now
stilled; as the Luke 19. Act. 16.
consciences of Mary Magdalen, Zacheus, Lydia, and that Iaylor were suddenly
and soundly thereby quieted.

Now for the cherishing and confirming of this faith, the daily exercises of
repentance and obedience are requisite; and therefore to make up the
uprightness of a good conscience, we are, in the second place, to speak of
these ingredients, as most necessary thereunto, to wit, of repentance and
obedience. Of repentance in mind, altering the thoughts from the approbation of
sin; of repentance in heart, sorrowing for the committing of sin; of
repentance in mouth, reproving and controlling sin; of repentance in the whole
man, remoouing whatsoever is known to be amiss, and bringing forth fruits of
amendment of life, etc.

This is a work impossible to nature, without grace, and so slow in the
working of grace, through the contradiction of our nature, that howsoever many
profess it, yet few practice it; but being rightly practiced, it will make
such a division betwixt our persons and our sins, that by the repairing of
the Image of God more and more in us, we shall have comfortable furtherance in
the way to salvation. This therefore must not be wanting to him, or scanting in
him, that desires a good conscience. For where there is no true repentance,
there is no true faith; no true faith, no true Christ; no true Christ, no true
remission of sins; no true remission of sins, no true peace of conscience,
grounded upon the assured sense and inward feeling of the same: But rather the
grace of Christ redeeming the love of the Father electing, and the comfortable
fellowship of the holy Ghost quieting the conscience, is far off from them
which continue in their sins, and stand out as rebels in their disobedience
against God.

The rule is ancient and true, Bona conscientia Aug.
non stat cum proposito peccandi; a good conscience cannot stand with a purpose
of sinning, or with irresolution against sin, but is armed thorowout with a
resolute determination, wittingly and willingly to sin no more; accounting it
a mockery to cry Peccaui, and mourn for sins past, with a meaning to sin
again in the like; yea, a most ridiculous folly, like to the Shipmans
continual laboring at the pumpe, without any care to mend the leake.
Wherefore as we desire to live in the lawful peace of an upright conscience:
so let it be our chiefest care to inure our selves to the practice of
repentance and obedience. The practice of which, (to speak briefly of them
jointly) consists not in pretending, as the manner of many is, a good heart,
without fruits of amendment, for that is but vanity; or in making some outward
show of reformation, without purging the heart and affections, for that is but
hypocrisy; or in exchanging of sins, to wit, of prodigality or profaneness
in youth, for covetousness and Popery in age, for that is but irreligious
mockery. But in an inward lothing from the heart, and an outward leaving in the
course of our life, of all such known sins wherein we have formerly lived
and delighted; and also in an earnest desire of the heart, and constant
endeavor in our life and conversation, to practice all duties of piety and
charity, which in our several places and callings are required. It Is not
sufficient to put off the old man, to cast away the weapons Ephesians. 4 22.
of darkness, and to abhor and remove Col. 3. 10.
what is evil: but we must put on the New man, Romans 13.
take unto us the Armor of light, and cleave to Romans 12 9.
that which is good. It Is commendable with the repentant Prodigal, to forsake
our former riotous, Luke 15.
luxurious, and offensive living, and to return to our Fathers home; for this
mends the matter: but it is much more comfortable and complete, after the
shaking off of the rags of sin, to put on the robes of Righteousness and
Garments of Salvation; for this perfecteth the match, and accomplisheth the
marriage betwixt Christ and us: and hereby shall we give testimony to others,
and to our selves, and our own souls, that we are penitent and obedient
Christians, and so bring wonderful peace and comfort to our consciences.

For when a Christian, enriched with these spiritual graces of true knowledge
and faith, shall thus proceed in the careful practice of these holy duties of
repentance and obedience; then his conscience, which otherwise would look
stern upon him, begins to smile, to speak sweetly to him, to converse amiably
with him, to clap him on the back and applaud him, and exceedingly exhilarate
and refresh him. To which purpose S. Bernard speaks excellently, Vis, O Bern.
homo, semper epulari, vis nunquam tristis esse? been viue: Will thou, O man,
never be sad; will thou turn the whole year into a merry Christ-tide? live
well then. Fiat iustitia, says Saint Austin, Aug.
and habebis pacem; Eschew evil, and do good; Psalm. 34. 13.
and thou need not seek peace and ensue it, Psalm. 85. 11.
Psalm. 34. for peace will find thee, and kiss righteousness wheresoever she
finds it. Do Justice, love mercy, humble thy self, and walk with thy God, as
Enoch did, Genesis 5. doing all things as in Gods sight; For this is the direct
Micah 6. 8.
way to the obtaining and maintaining of a conscience comfortably good; the
voice of joy and Psalm. 118. 15.
deliverance shall be in the Tabernacles of the righteous, says the Psalmist,
and the work of Esa. 32. 17.
Justice shall bring peace and quietness, Esa. 32. and it cannot be otherwise,
but that Melchisedec the King of righteousness, which walks sincerely, should
also be Prince of Salem, and walk confidently, peaceably, securely. Synceritas
Serenitatis Isiod.
matter est, sine qua tranquillitas omnis, tempestas est: Sincerity is the
mother of true tranquillity, and without it, all carnal rest is as a dangerous
Lethargy. Sincerity, as it is of all virtues the girdle, and most acceptable
to God, Ephesians. 6. 14.
whose unfeigned obedience it implies, so it is most profitable in all dangers,
trials, and temptations, to man, whose peace it works, and in whom it
begets a Lyon-like boldness, as Solomon speaks: The righteous is as bold
as a Pro. 28. 1.
Lion. This cannot be put out of countenance by the false accusations of
slanderous tongues; it throws them off, as Paul did the Viper from Act. 28. 5.
his hand, unhurt. This says with Saint Paul, I pass not for man's judgment,
1. Cor. 4. and 1. Cor. 4. 3. Job 31. 35.
with Job, Though mine adversary would write a Book against me, I would take
it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown unto me. What made Job so
confident? Surely it was the uprightness of his heart, his sincere obedience
and innocence, which he says he will hold fast Job 27. 6.
and not forsake, lest his heart should reprove him, and his conscience
trouble and check him. Aug.
tempted to sin, set before thee the weight of sin, the wound of
conscience, the wrath of God, which is as a flaming fire, and remember Romans 2.
that tribulation and anguish shall be upon every soul that sins, Romans 2.
And let this be unto thee a strong bridle, and retentiue from vice; and again,
when thou beginnest to be weary and drowzy in Gods service, think upon the
blessed recompense of well-doing, and consider that to them which by
continuance in doing well, seek glory and honor, there shall be given
eternal life and immortality; and let this be a sharpe-pointed spur and
motive unto virtue. Be timorous of doing evil and wrong, because it offends
God, though there were no hell to terrify thee; be studious of executing
Justice, and doing well, because it pleases God, though there were no heaven
to reward thee. But because there is a reward in heaven for all well-deeded
Christians prepared, and such a reward as is life eternal, Romans 6. A Kingdom
Romans 6. 23.
that cannot be shaken, Heb. 12. and an inheritance Heb. 12.
immortal and undefiled, 1. Pet. 1. Let 1. Pet. 1.
intuitus mercedis; the view of this recompense, serve as the hand to wind up
the plummets, to continue the curious clocke-worke of our sincere Christian
obedience.

John, in the Spirit Reu. 1. 10.
on the Lords Day; I trust, Gods Spirit is in me this Day of the Lord, moving
me thus to speak unto you, and to complain that this practical political
part of Christian obedience, in reproouing and repressing sin in others, is
commonly neglected of all, especially of those whom it does most concern, I
mean Magistrates, to whom, authority from God and the King is committed, if
not with Phineas his zeal, to slay sinners, ipso facto; yet with Moses his
courage, to slay sin in gross offenders, saluo iure. But alas, how do many
lukewarm neuter-passiue Magistrates now a-dayes slay it? ( aures omnium
pulso, conscientias singuloru^ conuenio; that is, I speak to the ears of all
in general, and appeal to the consciences of every one in particular) Surely
even by being content with it, or else by yielding consent unto it; If it were
not so, why then are not the hurts of the daughter Judah healed? why are not
the breaches of this our Sion stopped up? Is there no balm in Gilead, is there
no Physician there? Yes, Physicians there are some, but the most like to Jobs
Job 13. 4.
friends, Physicians of no value; Rephaims by Deuteronomy. 2. 20.
name, Zamzummims in deed, Deuter. 2. who whereas by their places and callings
they ought to be patrones of peace and piety, and patterns of temperance and
sobriety, and as Leaders of the Vantgard, to stand in the forefront of Gods
Battles, against all Canaanites and Canaanitish fashions, which bear sway in
Town and Country; they either run a race of like riot with others, or go a
foraging or boot-haling for themselves, not caring what become of the Ship of
State in general, so they may save themselves in the Pinnace or Cocke-boate of
their own fortunes in particular; not daring to strike one stroke in the war
against Gods enemies. Such as are seditious mischiefe-plotting Papists,
horrible blasphemers, shameless fornicators, incorrigible drunkards, and the
like profane, lewd, licencious livers; not daring, I say, to let them blood
with the sharp Razor of reprehension, much less to give them a downeright
blow of condign punishment for their sinful presumption. It grieueth me to
think, and I even blush to speak, how weakly the sword of Justice is, by the
Paralyticke hands of these meale-mouthed Magistrates, brandished against the
friends of Baal, Balaam, and Bacchus too.

Moses in these days, to fetch Exodus 17.
water from the rock, tears from the eyes, yea, drops of blood from the
hearts of our common drunkards, which carowse man's blood in cans and flagons,
and hardened by impunity, commit daily outrages in Town and Country! Oh for a
Phineas, to run resolutely with the Number. 25.
spear of due censure and castigation, through the very heart, as I may say, of
whoredom, and all filthy abomination! Oh for a Iehu, to 2. King. 9.
march on courageously in the Lords business, against truth-opposing
poore-oppressing Ahab and Iezabel, and all other idolatrous enemies of Gods
sanctuary! Magna quidem est in illa seueritate Greg.
pietas, per quam tollitur peccandi libertas; Great godliness indeed is showed
in that severity, where many by the exemplary punishment of a few, are
restrained of their sinful liberty, etc.

My good Lords, your places of authority, and these exulcerate times of
iniquity, require in you Moses his spirit, Phineas his zeal, and Iehu's
invincible fortitude. Oh put them all on, as complete armor, suitable to your
calling and dignity. Brandish with heat and courage, the sword of justice
against the very faces of Gods enemies. Especially, let Romish Iezabel,
howsoever 2. King. 9. 33.
she be painted, not be spared, tumble her out at window, let Babylons brats no
more be dallyed with, or dandled, but rather dashed in pieces. For they are
meditating more mischief, and it is to be feared, they will provide more
Powder, and poisoned Knives too, if they be not fettered and manacled. nisi
quantum expedit, but as it serves their turn; and therefore look from them no
good: and as for Oaths, to the most of them they are no other then collars for
Munkeyes, which upon dispensation of superiors, they slip off their necks at
their pleasure, especially if they be such State-Papists as have been
inspired with Jesuitical impostures, whom a Reverend Father Bishop King.
of our Church rightly terms (...), the falsest coozeners of the world;
(...), with whom no bond of nature, consanguinity, allegiance, alliance,
affiance, wedlock, oath, Sacrament stands good, if they list to dissolve it.
Dij terrae talem terris auertite pestem. O ye Gods of the Psalm. 82. 6.
earth, purge I beseech you, this Western region of the air, as much as in
you lies, of these pestilent exhalations; shake not only the sword of the Law
against them, but lay it close home upon them, and let all such as will not do
the Ezra 7. 26.
Law of God and the King, receive judgment without delay, Ezra. 7.

To conclude, forasmuch (Right Honorable) as your coming forth in Circuit to
minister Justice and Judgment, is like the coming forth of the four Angels,
Revel. 7. to whom Revel. 7. 1.
power was given to punish the wicked of the earth, but with this restraint,
that Gods Saints and servants sealed, should not be touched: or like the
arising up of four Carpenters, Zech. 1. Zech. 1. 20.
to cut off the four horns which scattered Judah, that is, all the
adversaries of the Church and Commonwealth, that the people of God might in
peace and piety be the better maintained. O rowze up your selves, I beseech
you, in the name of God, of the Gospel, of the King and Country, and with a
zealous conscionable affection, and a constant courageous resolution, show your
selves such Angels, such Carpenters, such Worthies in opposing the violent
stream and torrent of these vicious times, and in executing just and speedy
judgment on all malicious and seditious transgressors of the Laws of God and
the King: And for a perclose of the premises herein, exercise the uprightness
of your conscience, and the sincerity of your conscionable obedience, viz. in
cutting off, putting down, or shutting up all mischiefe-practising-workers of
iniquity, and all mischiefe-plotting seeds-men, and favorers of Schism and
soule-murthering Popery.

Thus by taking away the wicked from before Prou. 25. 4.
the King, his Throne in righteousness shall be established, your places of
authority shall in their full strength and virtue be preserved, Gods fierce
wrath be turned away, which is imminent on Prince and people, where gross
sins pass unpunished, and the peace and piety of these quarters of the Land
shall more and more be increased. All which, the Lord grant, for his great
mercies sake, for his Gospels sake, for his Glories sake, and for his Christ's
sake; and so plentifully distill the sweet dewes of his heavenly grace on the
high Hill Hermon, and all the Mountains of Sion, that there may be still a
fruitful watering, and joyful refreshing of this whole Land of Israel: and
that maugre the mischievous proiects and practices of the malignant enemies of
the Gospel, truth and peace may meet together, righteousness and mercy kiss
each other, in all the quarters thereof, as long as the earth rests in her
Center, and the heavens continue their restless motion.

Amen.
THE CONSCIONABLE CHRISTIAN:
Preached at Taunton, Aug. 8. 1620.
The Text: Acts 24. 16. Herein I endeavor my self, to have a good conscience
always toward God and men.
RIGHT HONORABLE, Rightly regarded and beloved in the Lord Jesus, etc. As good
Jonathan, 1. Sam. 20. 20.
in love unto David (whom he loved as his soul) did shoot three Arrows of
admonition, to drive him the further off from Saul's death-breathing fury: So in
love unto your souls, I am now from the as-yet bent Bow of my Text, to send
forth a third Arrow of instruction and direction, to draw you the nearer home
to Gods life-giuing favor. Whereof you shall be sure to have the stronger
hold-fast and assurance, by how much the more you endeavor and exercise your
selves in this, to have always a good conscience toward God and men. For the
care of a good conscience brings comfort in holiness; and comfort in
holiness, breeds assurance of blessedness; and blessed shall you be, if to
those diverse Ingredients which concur to the composition of an upright
conscience, whereof yesterday I spoke at large, it shall please you to add
this as the complement of the rest, viz. Eleazar was in smiting the
Philistines, 2. Sam. 23. and cleaving as fast in your 2. Sam. 23. 10.
hearts to Gods Word, the warrant of your weldoing in this, as his hand claue
unto his sword, the instrument of his well-doing in that. What if for your
zeal and religious resolution herein, you be sometimes crossed with
mischievous intentions, thwarted by mighty oppositions, wronged by malicious
detractions? yet desist not, faint not, fear not; Regium est, cum benefeceris,
Alexander.
male audire: It is a princely thing, to hear ill, for doing well. In which
course of well-doing, as I am bound to be a suitor unto God for you, that your
Bow may abide strong, and that your hands Genesis 49. 24.
and arms may be strengthened by the mighty God of Jacob: So, give me leave
also, in the name of God, to be a bold sollicitour unto you, and for the
Gospels sake, which you profess, and are bound by your best actions to
beautify, now the third time to be your humble Monitor and Remembrancer, that
according to your places of command and greatness, you would therein strive
with an holy kind of emulation, the more fully and freely to exercise your
goodness. And as it has pleased God to indow you with greater means, power
and ability, so to account it the best Christian policy, by your good works on
earth, to lay up treasure for your selves in heaven, and every day to bring in
somewhat into Gods Exchequer, as the Israelites did Exodus 25.
to the Tabernacle; the remembrance whereof may long after, both in life and
death, comfort you, and whereof you may say (in singular confidence claiming an
especial interest in Gods favor, and expecting the promised recompense)
Remember me, O my God, according to this: Neh. 13. 22. Note. Math. 5. 26.
For albeit the glory of God must be the vltimus terminus of our cogitations
and actions, and the principal motive of our good works, and the primum
mobile of our obedience; yet in the Aquin.
actions of obedience, whilst we seek the advancement of Gods glory in the
first place, we may as a secondary object or adiunct, respect Calvin.
our own commodity, and have an eye to our eternal reward: yea, it is lawful
for every sanctified Christian (maugre the spirit of contradiction in weaklings
or wranglers) whilst he remembers God in sincere obedience (as Abraham did in
sacrificing Isaac; Moses, in guiding, Gen 22. 1. King. 2. Luke 7.
and going before Gods people; Obediah, in relieuing the Lords Prophets;
Magdalen, in washing Christ's feet; Dorcas, in making garments Act. 9.
for poor widows; Philemon, in refreshing Epist. Philem. Nehem. 5. 19.
the bowels of the Saints; and Nehemiah, in doing good to Gods House and his
people) to desire God to remember him by a gracious recompense; and to say with
Nehemiah, Remember Nehem. 13. 22.
me, O my God, concerning this; but yet as conscious to himself of many
imperfections in his best actions, of defects and defaults, either in the end,
matter, manner or measure of his obedience, he is, as it follows in the same
place, to supplicate for mercy, and to pray, as there Nehemiah does, But pardon
me according to thy great mercy. For as Saint Augustine says, Nisi Aug. in
Psa. 100
Deus per misericordiam parceret, non inueniret quos per iustitiam coronaret:
Except God should spare us in mercy, he should find none whom he might
crown in justice. But yet in hope and expectation to be crowned in mercy, let
us all, as the Almners of the Almighty, remember daily to do good in our
several callings, according to our ability, to be plentiful in the works of
charity, to be faithful in the exercises of piety, that so our souls, as
fields of sincerity, being every day more and more charged with the deeds of
justice and mercy, may at length be accomplished with the Crest and Crown of
eternal glory.

To this purpose tends the precept and charge of the Apostle, Be not weary of
well doing; Gal. 6. 9. Eccl. 11. 6.
for in due time ye shall reap, if you faint not: and that of Chrysostom,
Sow with a mind to reap; Chrysostom. in opere imperf.
sight, with a desire to overcome; conquer, with an expectation to be crowned.
Wherein Perseverance (which Bernard calls, Sororem patientiae, constantiae
Bern.
filiam, pacis amicam, virtutuni consummationem. And another, Talarem tunicam,
that long white Greg.
Robe reaching down to the feet, which every good Joseph must put on: and
another, The Empress Chrysostom.
of virtues, which rewards him that runs, crowns him that fights,
brings to the haven him that saileth; without which, obedience has no
reward, a good turn receives no thanks, and fortitude deserves no glory.)
Wherein, I say, perseverance in well-doing, Note.
(which is every Christian man's duty) in hope and expectation of recompense,
(considering our humane infirmity) is commended unto us all, and that not only
in our general calling as we are Christians, but also in our particular
vocations, as we are Magistrates, Ministers, Judges, Iusticers, or any other
inferior beneficial Officers in Church or Commonwealth. So that looking for
the reward, not of debt, but of favor (as Saint Paul speaks) we are to
proceed Romans 4.
confidently and constantly in our Christian obedience to the end. Yea, it is
our duty to labor much to live so; to suffer much to dye so, as constant
conscionable Christians ought; yea, to dye in despite of death courageously
for the maintenance of equity and truth, to reign so, as constant conscionable
Christians undoubtedly shall.

Thus if we (Beloved) shall give all diligence to persevere in the practice of
the general and particular duties of Christian obedience, we shall then with
daily comfort, taste the sweetness of an upright conscience; and if we desire
and endeavor without dissimulation and hypocrisy, in respect of others,
without partiality and defection, in regard of our selves, to walk in the
ways of Gods Commandments, as he has prescribed; we shall be sure to enjoy
the continual joy and peace of a good conscience, without night of desertion,
or eclipse of change and variation, as he has promised.

To conclude this point, if we (Fathers and brethren) according to the dictate
and direction of conscience enlightened and awaked, shall both in the course of
our general conversation, and in the offices of our particular vocation, be
careful and faithful, in loving what God loves, and hating what he hates,
in doing what God commands, and eschewing what he forbids, we shall then
be both truly holy and happy too.

So shall we be exempt and free, not only from the crimson-crying sins of
Iusticewronging Magistrates, soule-staruing Ministers, face-grinding
oppressors, truth-betraying witnesses and lurors, sacrilegious rob-Gods,
desperate mocke-Preachers, and such like flagitious offenders, who with seared
and benumbed consciences, habituati sunt in malo, and faetent in peccato; lie
stinking in their sins, as Lazarus in the grave: But also from the common
sins of wantons, gluttons, liars, swearers, slanderers, Sabbath Breakers, and
the like common sinners, whose large cheuerill consciences dispense with all
corruptions and transgressions that are not capital: yea, we shall be free by
the aforesaid godly care, from the unjust morosity, and causeless anxiety of
scrupulous bird-eyd consciences, which make more Commandments then ten, and
project fearful things, where no fear is: That so our rightly-informed
quietacquitting consciences may pass (with Topsaile and Banners displaid, with
Flags of defiance to the works and workers of iniquity) through the waves of
this world, to the Harbor of eternal rest, joy, and felicity.

With such a cleering-cheering conscience, Note.
our Apostle Saint Paul, the worthy Champion Acts 27. 14. ^^ 36.
of Jesus Christ, sailed courageously in the angry Adriaticall Sea, when the
tempestuous Euroclydon raged, and meat and light was for many days denied,
and all that were in the Ship besides despaired, telling them confidently, that
none of them should perish, but all be preserved for his sake. With the wings
of such a conscience, when the Jews thought and spoke Acts 23. 24, 25.
evil of him, and plotted mischief against him, he as an Eagle, soared aloft,
and respecting their forged calumnies, no more then the chitting of Sparrowes
or chatting of Pyes, bare himself up bravely above the scourges and razors of
their tongues, and far beyond the Sphere of their malignity; with this Armor
of righteousness on the right hand, and the left being fitly cladde, he passed
through good reports and bad, through many injuries, indignities, dangers and
difficulties, as bold as a Lion, as valiant as Gideon and Samson. A good
conscience, like the Arc of Noah, bare him up above the pride and power of all
worldly surges and sorrows, undaunted, unappalled; so that at midnight Acts
16. 25.
in the dungeon, all manacled and fettered as he was in a wounded skin, we
find him praying and singing in a whole and merry conscience.

Saul could not be merry without a Musician, 1. Sam. 16.
Ahab, without Naboths Vineyard, proud Haman, 1. King. 21. Esth. 7.
without Mordecais courtesy: But he that carries the true Electuary,
exhilarans and laetificans Galeni, of a good conscience about him, he has
selfe-sufficiency, and without Music, money, lands or honor, is happy still,
and merry alone, like to the late invented Musical instruments of perpetual
motion, etc.

With this Counselor and Comforter in the bosom, to wit, a good conscience,
Jacob can Genesis 28. 11.
sleep sweetly on a pillow of stone; Daniel and Dan. 1. 15.
his fellows look fresh and fair, feeding on pulse alone; Job, in the midst
of his pain and poverty, possessed of this true Diamond, which darted many
beams of comfort upon his soul, challenged his adversaries to write against
him Job 31. 35, 36.
a Book of slander, and he would take it upon his shoulder, and bind it to
his head as a Crown of honor. Heereunto Hezekiah, near unto Isa. 38.
death, having recourse for succor, confidently thus says, I beseech thee,
Lord, remember how I have walked before thee in truth. By this Anchor-hold, all
the children of God, in the midst of manifold temptations and spiritual
conuulsions, have been ever so mainely sustained, that with Saint Paul, they
have thus constantly resolved; Whether we live, we live unto the Romans 14. 8.
Lord; whether we die, we die unto the Lord; whether we live therefore or die,
we are the Lords.

viz. the having and holding of an upright conscience within you. Do all
things as in Gods presence, cherish true sauing-faith, by often hearing and
reading of the Word, and the frequent practice of Prayer and true repentance,
inure your selves by religious exercises, to a kind of familiarity with God,
that the assurance of his love in Christ, and the comforts thereof be not
interrupted, walk carefully in your particular callings, to the glory of God
and the common good, avoiding as serpents, covetousness and ambition, which
make men set their consciences on tenters, and stretch like cheuerill, and
because at the great and general Assizes, sentence shall pass, and Judgment
be awarded, according to the things written in the Book of every man's
conscience; take we heed Reu. 20. 13.
that these Books of account be kept vnblurred, unpolluted, pure and clean
from presumptuous sins, which are the cut-throate of the soul, and offensive
in Gods sight. In a word; let this be your wish above all wishes, and herein
make sure work (come of the rest what will) that by the effusion of Christ's
Blood for you, and infusion of his Spirit into you, you may enjoy this pleasant
and peaceable portion of a good conscience, which is more highly to be
esteemed of, and held at a dearer rate, then the Merchants precious Pearl, for
which (as it is Mat. 13. 46.
in the Parable) he sold all that he had; in comparison whereof, the things
that are in the worlds eye most aduantageable unto us, are to be accounted
loss, and judged as dung, that we Phil. 3. 7.
may win it. Let others say, Who will show us any good? Yet, Lord, lift thou up
the light of thy Psalm. 4.
countenance upon us. Let others content themselves with a portion in this
life, whose bellies Psalm. 17. 14, 15.
thou fillest with thy hid treasure; but let us (O Lord) behold thy face in
righteousness, and in the glass of a good conscience here on earth: so when
we awake in the day of Resurrection, we shall be satisfied with thine Image,
ravished with seeing, and secured for retaining thy glorious presence in heaven.

All earthly joys and treasures, without this of a good conscience, are but as
so many ponderous waights, to give poize to the soul to sink it to hell. But
with this, all outward helps for present maintenance, are as so many
Promooters and Proctors for the future inheritance, giving us not only wings
of a Dove or an Eagle, but of an Angel, to ascend into heaven.

With this heavenly treasure then of an upright conscience, whosoever amongst
us (O that there were many such!) is really possessed, to speak plainly in
the phrase of the holy Ghost, he is (without controversy) richly, yea, royally
blessed. Sola conscientia virtutum praestat gaudium verum and perpetuum.
Caeterae hilaritates frontem remittunt, cor non implent. Sen. in Ep. 23.
He need not envy the rich Corne-hoorders barnes enlarged, and goods
increasing, or the Gluttons purple raiment and delicious feeding, or the
greatness of the greatest Potentate, arrayed in robes of State, powdered with
Pearl, and boasting with Nebuchadnezzar, of his power and stately building;
No: He need not envy the magnificent pomp, and usurped Oecumenicall power of
that triple-crowned ruffling Priest of Rome (that Meridianus Demon, as Bernard
calls Antichrist) who to give life to the image of the Beast, seeks, as Reu.
13. 15.
much as in him lies, to make the Lord of life, exhaeredem vineae, exhaeredem
vitae; riding on men's shoulders, treading on Emperors necks, and swimming in
his Orcipotent Sea, with the bladders of intolerable pride and insolency. No,
no: Vix vnius assis -- Nec pretio pluris mundana haec omnia ducit; For carried
in the triumphant Chariot of a clear conscience, and advanced far above
these painted Pageants of things sublunary and perishing, with Gods leave and
love he inioyeth a selfe-sufficient happiness in health and sickness, in
life and death, and after death euer-induring.

1. Cor. 1. 12.
Paul's was, so our rejoicing and glory be in the testimony of a good
conscience! if in truth we can do as in all his trials he did, hold forth
this testimony as a shield of defense, and flag of defiance, against all
scandalous imputations and Acts 23. and 24. and 25.
aspersions; if we can truly say as he said; We are assured that we have a
good conscience, desiring in all things to live honestly, Heb. 13. 18. or duly
endeavor, as he in my Text endeavored, to have a good conscience always
toward God Text. 3. part.
and men. Which words importing the latitude or extent of a good conscience, in
respect of time, and the objects thereof, come now very fitly to be handled,
wherein I will labor to prevent your weariness. First, of the time, and
duration of the Apostles endeavor and exercise to have a good conscience,
namely, (...) Always, being (...), as the Always.
Scholiast has it, being in all things every manner of way (so far as humane
frailty did not let) inoffensiue and unblameable, indeuouring at all times,
through the whole tenor of his life, Non pro vsura exigui temporis, aut pro
primis Calvin.
tantum diebus, sed omnibus diebus vitae post conuersionem, as Calvin renders
it, to be uprightly conscionable, conscionably upright.

Always) imports constancy and equality, without remissness or partiality.
In the life of man and course of his calling, there are many turnings,
references, occurrences, opportunities, importunities, and diverse respects; in
all which, at every turn to be the same man, requires the strength of a good
conscience. A child or weakeling may take two or three steps well, and walk
somewhat euenly; but to turn hither and thither, up and down with actiuenesse
and dexterity, and to maintain the through pace or race with settled constancy
and alacrity, argues the metal and making of a very strong man. Such an one
was our Apostle in the race of Christianity after his conversion, as appears
by his Triumphant Epinichion, 2. Tim. 4. I have fought a good fight, 2. Tim. 4.
7.
kept the faith, finished my course, etc. and by his confident protestation,
Acts 23. 1. I have Acts 23. 1.
served God with a good conscience (...), thorowout unto this day. Always,
without stumbling, without offense, as it is in my Text, etc. Which is not so
precisely to be understood, Reas. double.
as if he had been always endowed with an equal good disposition to godly
duties, and had never slipped or slept through humane infirmity; For as the
Spouse of Christ confesses Cant. 5. ^.
of her self, I sleep, but my heart waketh: and so condemns her drowzinesse
in the flesh, notwithstanding her watchfulness in the Spirit. So S. Paul, Romans
7. complains on himself, Romans 7. 19.
that (in regard of the combat which is betwixt the flesh and the Spirit, in
the most Regenerate) he did sometimes the evil he would not, and did not at
other times the good he would, and so was unwillingly defective, through
natures frailty and weakness, but ye not wittingly offensive, through sins
malignity and peruersenes. For the power of a good conscience preserved him so
upright, that as a square Cube, or homo quadratus, he was the same, which way
soever he were turned: to God, or man; to company, or himself alone; upon all
occasions and occurrences he held his own, and desired always, in all things,
to walk honestly, Heb. 13. 18.

turbida and lucida interualla, their good and evil days: who, like Mercury
amongst the Planets, are of a variable constitution, fast and loose, strict in
some things, loose in other; godly in one company, and profane in another; up
and down, off and on, in and out, almost at every turn; who can indifferently
brook all companies, and converse with all manner of persons. If they be
ruffians, blasphemers, drunkards, they can play the good fellows with them. If
they be good men, which fear God, they will discourse of points of Religion,
and adioyne themselves to their society; as if there were good agreement
betwixt light and darkness, righteousness and unrighteousness, God in the
one, and Belial in the other. To speak to the present occasion; In the cause
and case of Titius their kinsman, or rich friend and neighbor, they can be
precise and peremptorily forward by all means to promote it: But in as good a
suite and just a cause of Sempronius a stranger, or meane-stated-man, they will
be retchlesse and remiss, not caring how he be wronged in it. I would to
God the consciences of more then a good many of our Magistrates were not such;
but commonly such they are, who though they profess and pretend, that in
places of Judicature they will hear the suites of poor and rich with equal
patience and attention, examine and censure all controversies indifferently
without prejudice, partiality, and needless protraction; yet when it comes to
proof, they prove far otherwise, and like in truth to a fishing rod, which
stands straight when a Menow, or Gogin, or small fish is taken; but boweth and
bends, and the line sometimes breaks too, when a Peale or great fish is to
be drawn up: So when the Law has canuased and caught a poor man, being
persecuted by the rich, then just Judgment proceeds speedily; but when the
rich and mighty ones are happily taken in their ouer-takings and lawless
dealings, and brought within compass of the Laws censure; then (O cruel
pity!) there is much yielding, bending, bowing, and sometimes breaking too, to
free them from the penalty and vigor of the Law, etc.

Neither is this the fault only of some chief Magistrates and ministers of
judgment, but the usual preuarication of many mercenary Lawyers, Jurors,
witnesses, and such like instruments of Justice, whose weak consciences, at
the command of gain or greatness, (as at the view of Medusaes stupifying
head) either stretch as Chiuerell in the rain, or shriuell up as parchment
against the fire, and so give way, if not warrant, to the works of injustice,
whereby innocence is wronged, good laws are deluded, godly men dis-heartened,
and God himself dishonored.

And here I could open a mystery of iniquity, and show quibus apicibus and
appendicibus iuris, innocens torquetur a causidico, dum causa torquet nocentem:
that is, with what quirkes and tricks the innocent party is by the Lawyer
wrung and put to the worst, notwithstanding the goodness of his cause, and the
Law it self has driven his adversary to the wall. Yea, I could justly inueigh
against the dreadful license of inferences amongst our English pleaders in
cases criminal; whereby it often comes to pass, that upon very nice points
innocents have bin condemned; as Edward Earl of Warwick was in Henry the
seuenths days, and the Duke of Somerset in Henry the sixths, etc. Yea, I could
here exhibit a bill of woeful complaint, in the name of many poor, impotent,
innocent men and women: First, against those advocates, which with their
Clyents great cost, and their own small conscience, maintain contentions,
because contentions maintain them, and by English delays, worse then Spanish
Strapados, Marnix.
protract their suits in Law, till they be non-suted of life. Secondly,
against those Iurates and witnesses, which without heed-taking to their hearts,
that they conceive no malice; to their hands, that they receive no bribes; to
their ears, that they hear no false accusation; to their eyes, that they see
no wrong; to their feet, that they be not swift to shead blood (as if all these
outward senses of the body, and the inward powers of the soul too were wholly
corrupted) do, without care or conscience, fear of God, or reverence of man,
give either Prou. 19. 28.
unjust verdict in the cause, or false evidence against the persons of their
brethren and neighbors, even as by their passions they are ouerswayed, 1. Kin.
21.
or ouerwaighed by the purse, or by their friends entreated, or by their
fellows in Exodus 23. 2.
evil persuaded. These are sores which had need to be lanced, that in time
they might be cured. But because your Honors have proceeded in some degrees
of roundnesse against these inormities as you meet with them in your Circuit,
resounding only in your ears what the Smith did in the Lantsgraues, when (he
thought him too mild) Durescite durescite, for, immedicabile vulnus-Ense
recidendum est, ne pars syncera trahatur. I here refrain from further
agitation of them, or exclamation against them in particular, not ceasing yet
to admonish in general, all such as find themselves guilty of so corrupt
dealings and cursed doings, that they blot out of the book of conscience,
their sins by repentance; and by unfeigned sorrow of humbled contrite hearts,
deprecate the judgments due unto them for the same; and for the time to come,
beware of doing more harm to a man for a little pelf, then ever they can do
him good again with all their policy or power. Beware of cutting asunder the
sinews of the Commonwealth, and of poisoning the pure breath it draws, by
perverting Justice, and abuse of the Laws. Take heed by the bloody end of
Ahab and his seed, that ye seek 1. King 21. 20.
not, under color of Law, to rob your neighbor of his field and life: For
though Naboth thy neighbor be dead, and cannot be revenged of thee, yet thy
conscience, the Lords Ambassador, will meet thee, as Elias did Ahab, and tell
thee, Thou have sold thy self to work wickedness abominable, and bring thee
tidings of vengeance unavoidable. Be warned by the tragical issue of Judas his
treason, that (either to Math. 27. 5.
please others, or to profit your selves) ye dare not be agents or instruments
of betraying an innocent: For after the fact, when your conscienences shall (as
sooner or later they will) vex and gall you for it, and make your lives more
irksome to you, then the most violent death; whither will you run for
comfort and relief in this agony? will you return to your great friends, for
whose pleasure you did it, as Judas did to the high Priests and Elders for
favor, when he had sold his Master? Alas, they will revile you, and leave you
disconsolate; and when in anguish of spirit you shall confess as Note.
he did, that you have sinned in betraying the Innocent, they will desperately
reply (as not touched with the sin themselves procured and hired) What is
that to us? look thou to it? Have thou forsworn thy self in my cause, thou
unconscionable Iuror? have thou applied thy wit and tongue to maintain and
follow my lawless suite, thou corrupt Lawyer? Have thou, for lucre or favor,
stretched thy conscience to do wrong in a matter of forgery, thou false
witness? What is that to me? look thou to it? Thus if you deal hollowly with
God for men's favors, you shall find them in need but hollow friends, yea,
miserable comforters. Whither next will you betake your selves for succor, for
help, for remedy? What, to the money, or worldly benefit gotten by this
treachery, or purchased by that villainy? Indeed the thirty pieces of silver,
were Judas his Thamar, 2. Sam. 13.
the delight of his soul, and longing of his thoughts, until his wickedness
was acted; but afterward feeling that he had dearly bought them, by
betraying his Master to death, his credit to detestation, and his soul to
damnation, he took no joy in them, as an execrable thing he abandoned them;
yea, he hated them more Math. 27. 5.
then he loved them before, and could not be quiet till he had thrust them
out at door, as Amnon did Thamar; and cast them down in the Temple, as the
witness of his sin, and the burden of his soul, and so departing hanged
himself:

Dignum opus authore; est dignus and ipse opere. Since then neither your
friends, nor your gain gotten by guile, nor (to be brief) any other worldly
hopes or helps can comfort you; but rather will be corrosiues to you, when
your consciences awaked shall sting you for your wrongful mis-dealings with
those in whose matters you have had to do; what refuge now remains for you?
Will you now at last cast fly to God for redress, in this your distress? It
is likely (such is man's presumption) you will make so bold an adventure. But
alas, there can be small hope of advantage hereby: for God will not so easily
be entreated to pleasure you, since you have so easily condiscended in the
service of the devil and your own lusts to displease him: but as he sent the
Israelites in their Judge. 10. 14.
extremity, to the Idols which they had chosen, saying, Now let them deliver
you: So will he send you to your wicked policies, plots and devices, which you
have preferred before his counsels and Commandments, and bid you seek help
(but all in vain) from them: yea, your own Monitor in the bosom, will
deliver that fearful message to you, which Samuel did 1. Sam. 15. 26.
to Saul, Thou have forsaken the Lord, and the Lord has forsaken thee. You
have said, whilst you were in the pursuit of your sins, to the Holy one of
Israel, Depart from us, we desire not the Job 21. 14.
knowledge of thy ways. Therefore, now when the horror of your sins
unrepented pursues you, he will be even with you, and say, Depart Math. 7. 23.
from me, ye workers of iniquity, I know you not. O consider this in your own
souls, and refuse not in time to be made wise for your selves! Hearken to the
counsel of Jesus the son of Syrach: Say not, O man, thus and thus have I
Eccl. 5. 4.
done, and yet no evil has come unto me; for though the Almighty be a
patient rewarder, yet he will not leave thee unpunished: neither say, I have
enough for my life, I have strength, and who will bring me under for my works?
for God the auenger will revenge the wrongs done by thee. And although happily
thou art so in grace with the greatest, and so eminent in place and authority,
that thou think the persons by thee wronged, dare not lift up a finger
against thee; yet for all thy security, thou know not how near thou art to
ruin and misery: For the wronged innocents, besides a good and just King on
earth, have also a rightful Defender in heaven, and such an one as has (...),
a revenging eye and hand too, who will one day take the matters of the
fatherless, widows, and poor Innocents into his own hands, when there shall
be a new inquest; and what has bin here put off, shuffled up, and partially
judged, shall then be sentenced and judged again, together with the Judges,
Counselors, Jurors, and all inferior Officers themselves: And as they, or
any of them have sown in hardness of heart, so shall they reap in horror of
conscience, and quorum oculos culpa clausit, poena aperiet: Aug.
and as they have lived unconscionably by the Law, so shall they dye
uncomfortably without Gospel. Yea, lest any obdurate forehead, whose
resolution can laugh his sins out of countenance; or any wilful peruerter of
Judgment, Eccl. 8. 11.
and persecutor of the poor and impotent, should profanely think, that God
has lost his power, or left his providence, because he does not presently
execute Judgment on an evil work: Nouerint vniuersi: Be it known to all
such workers of evil, that even in this life God will right or revenge the
injuries and indignities of his poor oppressed distressed ones; and when, in
the anguish of their souls, they shall cry unto him, Exurgat Deus, Psalm. 68.
Let Psalm. 68. 1.
God arise: He, with an Echoes readiness will reply, Surgam, Psalm. 12. I will
arise. For the oppression of the needy, and the sighs of the poor I will up
(says the Lord) and deliver them. Psalm. 12. 5.
Yea, though the poore-oppressed swallow up their grief in silence, and cry
not for vengeance, yet res ipsa clamabit, the hire of the laborers Iam. 5. 4.
detained, Iam. 5. The blood of Abel and Naboth spilled, 1. King. 21. The stone
and beam, by Genesis 4. Habak. 2. 11.
fraud and violence placed in the house of the mighty oppressor, shall cry out
for vengeance against him, who has made his field Acheldama, and his house
Golgotha (building it with the goods of the poor, painting it with the blood
of the poor, and hanging it about with the skins of the poor, and (as I may
say) underpropping it with the bones of the poor.) And surely God shall be
avenged on him, as he was on Cain, Ahab, Iezabel; and not only avenged on the
great and mighty ill-man himself (who has discharged conscience from coming
upon his ground, and sacrilegiously intrudes himself on Church Demaines, and
fleshed therein, runs with open mouth on the Commons of the Country) but
also on all such unjust Magistrates, * suborned Witnesses, Amos 2. Pro. 19. 5.
Pro. 21. 28. Psalm. 140. 11.
corrupt Jurors, truth-outfacing Lawyers, cruel vnder-Sheriffes, and cunning
Sollicitors, as have assisted him in his bloody conquest, and triumph over his
harmless, helpelesse, distressed Minister, Tenant, neighbor. Yea, more then
so, in the 26. of Leuit. and 28. of Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 28.
you shall find a large patrimony of fearful plagues entayled to the very
posterity of all unconscionable peruerters of judgment, persecuters of the
innocent, and practisers of violence or villainy, and as well the Authors as
Actors, the Plotters as Practisers of mischief, shall come to extreme misery.
The mouth of the Isa. 1. 20.
Lord has spoken it, and his hands will bring it to pass.

through your hands, or come to your hearing, euidencing, and sentencing
hereafter, learn and labor to have and discharge a better conscience then
you have done heretofore. Whilst the Flood-gate of Gods love is opened, and his
mercy stands and knockes at your gates for amendment, be entreated, lest
otherwise Judgment lay siege to your houses and hearts too, and with terror
of mind you be constrained to do justly: be jealous over your selves, with a
godly jealousy; be suspicious of your own desires, of the customs of the
times, of the policies of the world, and of those sinful baits which Satan
couers cunningly, that the hook of ensuing dangers may not be seen, and let
none of them entice you to say thus unto your soul, Go to now, for this once
let such a man in such a matter be gratified, though against equity: but in the
point of Justice, show your selves strict and rigorous, inflexible, inexorable,
like to that Roman Cato, a quo nemo rem iniustam Plut.
petere audebat: or Fabritius, qui nec audire nec videre quicquam turpe
sustinebat; and with a full and free-hearted renunciation of all injustice,
wrong, and violence. Herein seriously exercise your selves to have and keep
Always, every day, and in every action of the day, in all places, high or low,
public or private, in all cases of rich or poor, great or small, a good and
upright conscience. It was S. Paul's Crown of rejoicing, 2. Cor. 7. 2.
that he could truly say, I have wronged no man, corrupted no man, defrauded
no man; and it was Samuels comfort, that he could clear 1. Sam. 12.
himself, and that the people with free acclamation did clear and acquit him
from all iniquity, 1. Sam. 12. And it was likewise the very joy of Moses heart,
that he could affirm confidently, he had done no man hurt, Number. 16. (...). And
doubtless, this also will be a singular solace to your souls, and an heaven
to your hearts (Fathers and Brethren) when you shall lie on your beds sickly,
or in health confer with your souls secretly, that (howsoever you may be
otherwise traduced, as Moses by the Number. 16.
sons of Belial was unjustly charged) yet you can wash your hands with David
in innocence, Psalm. 26. 6.
and your consciences can tell you, without lying or flattery, that you have
wittingly wronged no man, defrauded no man, been corrupted by no man.

Always have and hold, (to come once more with a fresh charge upon your
souls) mine humble admonition, proceeding from unfeigned affection, shall be
this, That since the Lord knows your downe-sitting and Ps. 139. 1, 2, 3.
vp-rising, and your thoughts long before, and is (together with his Deputy
conscience) privy to all your ways and works, (all things being Heb. 4. 13.
naked before him with whom we have to do, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 4.)
you would be careful therefore and circumspect to do, whatsoever Eccles. 9. 10.
your hand has to do, with all your power, and that in simplicity and
sincerity, as in the sight of God, and in his presence, from whom nothing can
be hid. Cave, spectat Cato, was an ancient Watchword among the Romans, and a
great retentiue from vice. How much more ought this to be amongst Christians,
Cave, videt Dominus? The forgetfulness whereof, Psalm. 33. 13, 14.
makes many men, especially great Ones, to dig deep, as if they would hide
their counsel from Isa. 29. 15.
the Lord; to work in darkness, as if none should or could see them, and
politickly, as they deem it, but dangerously, as the event proves it, to
contriue in secret those things, which afterward being brought to light, cast
shame in their faces, a burden on their consciences, a blot on their name; and
without repentance, everlasting confusion upon body and soul.

But I hope, this Lethargy and deadly sickness * has no way endangered your
souls, but Temerita^ aut timiditas Iudicis, vel fauoribus corrupti, vel
pauoribus territi, est calamitas innocentis, proditio iuris, proditio plebis.
Saluian.
that they are ever awaked with the remembrance of Gods presence, in all your
actions and censures of vindictiue or remuneratiue Justice: so that the reward
of virtue is not made a gift of savor, to pleasure friends; or the punishment
of vice, a means of revenge, to confound enemies: but mercy and judgment are
in their due place and time, according to the rules of equity, executed by you,
with a mind of Justice to do right unto all.

Thus I hope the best things of you: and therefore give me leave, for my
farther and fuller assurance therein, to use the same words somewhat enlarged
unto you, which Iehoshaphat did unto the Judges of his time; Take heed 2. Chr.
19. 6, 7.
what you do, ye execute not the judgments of man, but of the Lord; the seat
wherein you sit, is his; the people which you judge, are his; the authority
whereby ye judge, is derived from him. Take heed therefore that your passions
sway you not, that your friends press you not, that your followers persuade
you not (in hope of bribes) to pervert Justice: for though the Master be so
just with Elisha to refuse them, yet 2. King. 5.
commonly the servant is so wicked with Gehasi to receive them. Take heed what
you do, for the Lord will be with you in the cause and judgment; great
matters do ever require great deliberation; weighty causes, weighty
consideration; serious business, serious care and circumspection. Take heed
then what you do, be guided by Gods Law, imitate his steps, have no respect of
persons in judgment, fear not the face of any man, but let the fear of the
Deuteronomy. 10. 18. Isa. 11. 5.
Lord (with whom is no defect, no obliquity, no partiality, no iniquity) be
upon you, and remember, as at all times, so especially in Judicial places, God
is present with you, and vieweth narrowly all your doings: he stands in the
Psalm. 81. 1.
assembly of Gods (such are ye nuncupatiue (...), but ye shall die like men,
so frail ye are (...). Wherefore take heed what ye do, and make account this
day, that ye shall one day render an account for whatsoever ye have done,
before that righteous Judge of all the world, which judges all righteously. O
then gird up your loins with Justice, and put on Righteousness for an
Habergeon: Judge not according to the appearance, Ioh. 7. 24.
but judge righteous judgment, and let the fire of zeal, for truth and
equity, be so inkindled, that the Oil of mercy be not utterly consumed.

Suffer not an Abimelech, upon the malicious 2. Sam. 6. 22.
accusation of a Doeg, to be destroyed; or a Mephibosheth, 2. Sam. 16. 3.
upon the pick-thanke insinuation of a Ziba, to be spoiled; or a Joseph, upon a
wanton Genesis 39.
Mistresses allegation, to be imprisoned; or a Naboth, upon Iezabels letter,
to be deprived 1. King. 21.
and vineae and vitae. But hear the causes of your Brethren without
preiudicate impiety; iudiciously examine them without sinister obliquity; and
sincerely judge them without unjust partiality: Deuteronomy. 1. 17.
and laying aside all respect of persons and popularity, according to the Lords
Commandment, Deuteronomy. 1. Let the cause of the poor and needy come in equal
balance with the rich and mighty; defer not the hearing and determining of
their suites, from day to day, from Term to Term, lest it fare with them, as
it did with the Haemor^ese, Mark. 5. which was diseased Mark. 5. 25.
12. years together, and when she had spent all on Physicians, was not awhit
the better: or as it did with the weak person, Ioh. 5. which had Ioh. 5. 5.
been diseased eight and thirty years, and sat in the porch of the poole of
Bethesda, but might not be healed, because (for want belike of stirring Angels)
he could get none to put him into the poole immediately after the Angel had
stirred it. For as Solomon says, The gift Pro. 18. 16.
of a man inlargeth him, and brings him before great men: that is, makes
room for him, and procures him access to the presence of such as are in
authority; whereunto the poor, by reason of penny-peeking pull-backes, may not
approach. Well, whatsoever they cannot effect for want of means, perform ye
in the abundance of mercy, pity their cases, regard their complaints in love
to God, and God with Pro. 11. 17.
his all-sufficient love will certainly repay all your love showed to them.

And as for bribery, the bane of all truth and Amos 5. 12.
equity, worthy to be rewarded with Gehasies leprosy, if it dare at any time
to draw near unto you, O cast it off from you, as Paul did the Acts 27.
Viper from his hand; and as Peter did Simon Acts 8.
Magus his present, with indignation of heart; For fire shall devour the
houses of Bribes, Job Job 15. 34.
15. Contemn the wedge of gold, the molten Calfe, which so many worldly
Idolaters crouch unto: Abhor the gathering of riches by a Pro. 21. 6.
deceitful tongue, which is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek
death. Remember the end of Balaams wages and Judas his Bag, and Beware; sell
not thy countenance, thy tongue, thy silence, thy clients cause, thy neighbors
life, liuelyhood, or credit, or thine own conscience of truth, or peace of
conscience, for any benefit or Bribe whatsoever, though never so secretly
tendered unto thee. Turpe quid ausurus, te sine test time; Fear thine own
self without another witness, whenever thou art going about any wickedness.

Elisha-like, knows what is 2. King. 6. 8.
contrived in the most private counsels of the Aramites.

This saw well enough when Achan hid the Josh. 7.
wedge of gold in the earth, Josh. 7. This looked David in the face, and made
him blush, when he 2. Sam. 11.
sought to have his unlawful pleasure of Bethsheba. This beheld the Idolizing
Elders of Israel, Ezekiel. 8. 12.
Ezekiel. 8. when in their secret Oratories, offering incense to their Images,
they blessed themselves with this base delusion; Tush, God sees us not. This
beholds the blood-sucking Usurer (in stead of lending, and looking for
nothing again, as Christ commands) eating Luke 5. 35. Deuteronomy. 23. 19.
out, and consuming his needy Brother to the bare bones, which God forbids,
Exodus 22. 25. This looks upon the crafty Merchant, selling days, and
months, and years, at a higher rate then his wares, and if they be too light
or too dear, by false measures and oaths making amends for both, and secretly
checks him for making guile his gain, and holding the balance Mica. 6. 10.
of deceit in his hand, and the treasures of iniquity in his house, Mic. 6. and
if he amend not, will openly prove it upon him, that whatsoever is gotten by
craft and cruelty, the devils Alchimy) is as wildfire in the purse, and shall
at length turn to Banqueruptisme and beggary.

Amos 6. 12.
the fruit of righteousness into Wormwood, Amos 6. and by not pressing
justice on the unjust, suffers the just to be oppressed with injustice, Ier.
5. 28.
Ier 5. Esa. 5. 18.
a reward, takes away the righteousness of the righteous from him. Prou. 19.
28.
Prou. 19. And with the hired rake-hels of Iezabel, making no bones to swear
and forswear, to the dishonor of God, hurt of his neighbor, delusion of the
Judge, and confusion of his own soul, bears rash and unrighteous testimony
in matters controuersed.

Thus the conscience of these, and of every of these, vieweth and knows what
they do, or intend to do; and if it perceive that they wittingly and wilfully
do transgress, will not spare to tell them to their faces one by one, as
Nathan did David, Thou art the man: Thou, thou 2. Sam. 1*
have sown the seed of iniquity, and thou shall reap the crop of calamity:
Thou have gone on Prou. 22. 8.
in such and such unholy and unrighteous courses, and therefore can not but
come under such and such heavy and grievous curses: Thou have willingly been
led here in the bands of sins dominion; and therefore shall, against thy
will, hereafter be led captive in the chains Jude, verse. 6.
of Satan's damnation.

But on the contrary, if it feel, find and perceive, as it is nimble,
sensible, and sharp-sighted enough, that your desire and endeavor is to do
well; that you walk in justice, and speak righteous Esa. 33. 14.
things, and abstain from the gain of guile and oppression, neither making
your hands the actors, nor your hearts the inuenters of any impiety; but ponder
in your hearts, and profess with your tongues, and practice with your hands
those things which tend to Gods glory, and the public good; then will it be
benign and propitious, and no more rough and rigorous to you, but be unto you
as Jonathan was to David, 1. Sam. 20.
a comforter in all your troubles, and in all your crosses and losses, will
speak comfortably and cheerfully unto you, as Elcanah to Hannah, Am 1. Sam. 1.
8.
not I better to thee the^ many children, many Farms, many fields, many
friends? Why weepest thou? why is thine heart troubled?

The consideration whereof well concocted, should (me seems) not only check,
choke and strangle all sinful and unjust proiects and practices even in their
birth or cradle, but also mightily move and provoke all Ministers and
Instruments of Justice, yea all Christians whatsoever, to walk innocently with
a perfect heart Psalm. 10^.
before the Lord, and in their several estates and callings to give all
diligence and circumspection, with our Apostle, to have and discharge always a
good conscience toward God and men.

Toward God and men. Which being the latitude Text.
and extent of a good conscience, in respect of the objects thereof, leads us
directly, without any forced construction, to this last, plain, pregnant and
profitable observation: That, In the exercise of a good conscience, there ought
to 4. Part. Doct. 9.
be a concurrence of our holy carriage toward God, and our upright demeanor
toward men. Requisite it is (says Chrysostom) vt reuerenter se Chrysostom.
quis habeat ad diuina, and laudabiliter conuersetur cum hominibus: that every
good Christian should serve God reverently with hearty devotion, Iam. 1. 27.
and man righteously with a ready mind, and liberal disposition. Men are to
be regarded in 2. Cor. 8. 21.
the way of right and equity, propter famam. God is to be reverenced in the way
of Religion and Romans 15. 2.
piety, propter conscientiam. Laetus lubensque are necessary in the service of
both, that neither our holiness nor our righteousness proceed from a dull
heavy fear, or any servile affection; but that sincerely without faining, and
constantly without fainting, we be serviceable to God and men in a religious
and righteous conversation. Holiness and righteousness are the mean parts
Ephesians. 4* 4.
of Gods Image in man, as the Apostle shows, Ephesians. 4. Neither can we be
assured that we are truly regenerate and have a good conscience, unless we
find in our selves a meeting and marriage of them both. Remember then, O man,
to join both together, which God and a good conscience will not have to be
put asunder.

First, (because God deserves first to be served) be careful to perform all
divine duties of holiness and piety toward God, according to the contents of
the first Table; and then consequently, all humane duties of charity and equity
toward men, according to the contents of the second Table of the Decalogue,
Suum cuique. But in the prime place, give unto God the Math. 22. 21.
things which are Gods: and so for Gods sake, give unto every man his due: For
the grace of Tit. 2. 12.
salvation which has appeared, teaches us, in respect of our great and
gracious Maker and Master, to live godly; in respect of our selves, to live
soberly; in respect of our neighbors, to live justly; to use our friends with
favor, our Isod.
enemies with patience; all, with benevolence, and as many as we can, with
beneficence, etc.

Haec * tria praecipue meditare aduerbia Pauli: 1. Pie. 2. Just. 3. Sobrie.
Haec tria sint vitae regula sancta tuae. With the ouer-weening Pharise, to
have all our godliness in our Phylacteries, and fringes, and care-seruice, and
frequenting the Lectures of the Law, no matter how we live, is to seem holy,
without righteousness. Again, with the simple-seduced Sadduces, to live
indifferent honestly and quietly, but not to believe Angels or spirits, or
look for a resurrection, is to appear righteous, without holiness. Either of
these come far short of that obedience which is approved and practiced by an
enlightened and sanctified conscience, which serves not God by halues, in
holiness only, or righteousness only, but in both; desiring in all things
to please God by an universal obedience, not giving to any the least liberty
or allowance for the committing of any sin, or omitting of any duty, either
of equity or amity toward men, or of truth and piety toward God.

Indeed it most respects what it most affects, the observation of the great
Commanments, as Christ, the best distinguisher, terms Math. 22. 38.
them, but yet neglects not the least. It most of all strains at gross
sins as Cammels, yet swalloweth not the lesser as Gnats: It trembles at
wounds and blood, fears at faith and troth: It abhorres adultery and
fornication, hates dallyance and rotten communication: It cries out on bloody
violence or vengeance, dislikes all unadvised anger, and dogged eloquence: It
pays the Tith-sheafe carefully, and detaines not Mint or Annis-seed
deceitfully; and albeit for peace sake it will be indulgent, and give more
liberty to others, yet it says not to it self, An inch will break no square,
A little will do no harm, or Small faults are to be winked at: For well it
knows, that insensible decays continued, prove at length great breaches,
and sliding, leads to falling; slacknesse, to defection; and as the least
cranny or hole unstopped, Chrysostom.
is sufficient to sink a ship: so the least sin cherished and uncontrolled,
to spill the soul.

What faults in these our days more pardonable, then the remissness of a
father to untoward children? or the carfulness of a young man to hold his
own? or the forwardness of a man of parts to purchase preferment? And yet we
find, that Eli smarted for the first; and our 1. Sam. 4.
Savior touched the young man in the Gospel Mark. 10. 21. Act. 8. 23.
for the second; and the very gall of Simon Magus was broken for the third,
Act. 8. And therefore a good conscience is, and will be auerse from them all,
flying not only scandalous blemishes, but the first blushes and appearance of
evil, and having respect to all Gods Commandments Psalm. 119. 6.
in substance and circumstance, allows no man in the wilful breach of any of
them, seem they to flesh and blood never so small. For the least leaven of
wickedness, corrupts Iam. 2. 10.
the whole mass of goodness; and the rich and precious ointment of a good
conscience, is polluted and made impure, if but one dead fly, Eccl. 10.
one deadly sin be suffered, (I do not say to light on it) but if with our
will it lie, and dye, and putrify in it. Auaunt then with Naamans ^. King. 5.
^^rk. 6. (...) 5.
and Herod's exception in this, with Anania's and Saphyra's reservation in that;
with Agrippa's modicum, and persuasion almost to be a Christian, Acts 26. 28.
(for this is but almost to be saved.) Away with the glozing formality, and
sin-cloking policy of those which make silver Cawseyes for sin, that they may
go thereupon through the world dry-shod, and steal away to hell with the least
noise of the world. Away with the mock-holinesse and righteousness of those
irreligious Statists, which make man's law the scantling of their religion, and
better then that makes them, will not be; further then that compels them, will
not go, no not an inch, nor so far neither, but for fear, thinking all to be
well, if the statutes of Omri be observed. Away with Mica. 6. 16.
these, and every of these: for none of these can stand with the religion,
price, praise and peace of a good conscience.

It is but half a man's honesty to be no better then the law of man makes him,
which reformeth but that (if all that) which the world sees, out of the danger
whereof a wicked man may live. If he have not a great man to his enemy, or but a
great man to be his friend, (whose livery as the world goes, is countenance
enough to keep drunkenness from the stocks, whoredom from the post, coozenage
from the pillory, and theft too from the gallows.) The law of man does but
look to the outward facts, and pruneth (when it does best) but the outrage of
evil actions; but the rule and religion of a good conscience looks higher to
God, and pierces deeper even to the inward man, examineth the heart, reformeth
bad opinions, and base affections, and makes him in whom it bears sway, to be
a law unto himself, beyond the reach of all humane laws whatsoever, and so
binds him to serve the true God with a true heart, in a true manner; to serve
God immediately in true holiness and integrity, without exception, hypocrisy
or superstition, and men subordinately for Gods sake, in righteousness, peace
and amity, without fraud, oppression, schism and contention.

Wherefore, to apply my self to the capacities Application general and
particular.
of all in general, and to speak home to the consciences of every one in
particular: Tell me, I pray', Art thou a man of civil fashion, a reputed
honest man, of fair comportment and condition, one that live quietly with
thy neighbors, give alms cheerfully, in trading art at a word, in payments
and promises keep day and touch, in all thy dealings obseruest equity and
truth, and payest every man his due? It is well; why then, let God have his due
too, pay him the prime service of holiness, holiness Exodus 28. 36.
is his due; thou may read it in the forehead of the high Priest, Exodus 28.
and hear it from Esa. 6. 3.
the mouth of the Seraphim thrice repeated, Esa. 6. to teach what is chief in
him, what should be chief in us, and whereunto chiefly we ought to direct our
service. Pay then unto him this due, and perform this duty of holiness.
Follow peace and holiness, without which Heb. 12. 14.
thou can not see God, Heb. 12.

Give to him this holy service in secreto Sanctorum, in thy Closet, or
Bedchamber, in thy private devotion alone, at any time of the day or night, as
the good Spirit shall move thee; give it to him especially with thy family,
morning and evening, speak to him holily in Prayer, hear him reverently in
the Word, confer with him religiously in Meditation, which is the life of
hearing, the strength of praying, the mother of practicing. More especially, on
his holy Sabbath, in his holy Sanctuary, at the receiving of his holy
Sacrament, when and where thy holiness should be at holiest, come before him,
and worship him Psalm. 96. 9. 1. These. 4. 1. Tim. 2. 2.
cum decore sancto, with an holy kind of decency, or in the beauty of
holiness, with godliness and gravity, devoutly honoring the public
Ministry, and in all, carrying thy self most reverently, as Gods humble and
holy servant should do, and not in a stately surly kind of holiness, or
homely fellowlike familiarity, as many (turning their fantastical (...), into
Pharisaicall (...)) have done, and some yet at this day do, and which is
worst, think, of right they must do so, etc.

Again, on the other side, art thou a man which make more then ordinary
profession of godliness, frequentest diligently the outward exercises of
Religion, hear Sermons and Lectures, read Gods Book much and often,
communicatest with due and dutiful preparation, and art zealous in refraining
from open disorders on the Sabbath day, and in restraining thy family, and such
as depend and attend upon thee, from making it a day of bodily labor, a day of
riotous eating and drinking, a day of lustful and unlawful gaming (too common
every where) that thou may consecrate it, as glorious unto the Lord, by both
public and private hearing and reading the Word, by conference, Prayer, and
thankful praising of God? Certainly thou do well, and it is very like thou
have a good conscience toward God. But yet grow not hereupon presumptuous;
take not hence liberty, as some do, to pay no debts, to put money to Usury, to
rent-racke thy Tenants, to deny the Magistrate his due of obedience and
recompense, the Minister his due of reverence and maintenance, to be
disdainefull of thy brethren, covetous, reuengefull, and uncharitably
censorious; as if righteousness, peace, and amity toward men, were not as
well a part of Gods service, and a duty of good conscience, as well as
holiness and piety toward God. Yes, yes: He that does a good piece of Justice
downward, or tendreth his duty to his Superior upward, and deals equally
with his euen-Christian neighbors, procuring things honest and Phil. 4. 9.
Romans 12. 17.
of good report before them, and desiring, as much as in him lies, to have
peace with all men: He (I say) in so doing, does not only deal well with
men, but does God good service also, and when he comes from Church, going
about these things, may say truly; He goes to serve God: and this service of
righteousness, peace, and love toward men, a good conscience requires and
inioyneth, as well as the other of holiness, filial fear, and religious
worship toward God: and so requires and exacteth both in all, that it will
not have, either the one, to wit, Holiness, to be snuffing, Mal. 1. 13.
puffing, short-winded, and out of breath, as theirs was, Mal. 1. Or the other,
to wit, Righteousness, to be as a morning cloud, soon scattered Hos. 6. 4.
and dissolved, as theirs was, Hos. 6. But both lasting and enduring (...)
Always, for all the days of our life, that in an holy kind of
righteousness, and a righteous kind of holiness, we serve God from day to
day, as long as there is a day left to serve him in; and that so we may be
pure and without offense until the Day of the Lord, filled with the fruits of
Righteousness and Holiness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and
praise of God, Phil. 1. 11.

So then, to make a corollary of the premises, and a recollection of that which
at diverse times before you has been delivered, concerning the having and
discharging of a good conscience always toward God and men; I will now, for
your better instruction and edification, humbly commend to your sanctified
memories observation and imitation too, this Summary conclusion, as a lively
Character of a sound conscionable Christian.

The Character of a conscionable Christian.
(having his conscience enlightened by saving knowledge in Gods Word, and
purged by faith in Christ's Blood, from the guilt and punishment of sin, and
from dead works, to serve the living Lord) walks cheerfully and constantly
in the way of life, which God has chalked forth unto him, not wishing it to
be wider or smoother, but going on therein uprightly and freely, neither
stooping under the burden of a willing sin, nor fettered with the gieues of
unjust scruples.



good look to naughty Varlets and notorious offenders.



precious, leap over the pales, or go out of the Paradise of a good
conscience.



This, this is the sound Christian, which has gotten the inestimable treasure
of an upright conscience; that true Diamond, which flings beams of solace upon
the soul. This is the conscionable man, whose praise and reward is of God,
though the devil and world storm and burst for envy. Such a one, be he
Minister or Magistrate, be he Witness, Iuror, Clerk or Advocate whatsoever
his place or calling be, (as David's soldiers said of him) is worth a 2. Sam.
18. 3.
thousand of the common sort, who fear to have a name to fear God, and to be
charged with sincerity.

Such a one (as you have heard) the elect vessel of grace, and loud Clarion of
the Gospel, Saint Paul was, and, according to my Text, endeavored still to be.
Oh then, that in us the fire of ^^le for imitation of him, could so be
enkin^^^d, that herein, and therein conscionably comporting our selves in our
several vocations, we might, every one for himself, be enabled to say truly
as well as he; Herein do I endeavor my self to have always an upright
conscience toward God and men. Which that we may all, (Fathers and Brethren)
both say and do, let us humbly and heartily beseech Amighty God of his
abundant grace and mercy to grant, and for this end to give to that which has
been delivered, such a general blessing, according to our particular
necessities, that thereby such consciences as are dead and dull, may be
quickened; such as are blind and erroneous, may be enlightened; such as are in
a slumber, may be awakened; such as are tender, confirmed; such as are heavy
and pensive, comforted; and all, some way or other, bettered, through the
powerful operation of his gracious Spirit, to the eternal praise of his
glorious Name in Jesus Christ, his only Son, and our only Savior: to whom,
with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be ascribed all glory and honor, now,
and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

