Galateo of Master John Della Casa, Archbishop of Beneuenta.

Or rather, A treatise of the ma^ners and behauiours, it behooves a man to use
and eschew, in his familiar conversation. A work very necessary and
profitable for all Gentlemen, or other.

First written in the Italian tongue, and now done into English by Robert
Peterson, of Lincolnes Inn Gentleman.

Satis, si sapienter. Imprinted at London for Raufe Newbery dwelling in
Fleetestreate a little above the Conduit.

An. Do. 1576.

HONI: SOIT: QVI: MAL: Y: PENSE:
blazon or coat of arms

To the Right Honorable my singular good Lord, the Lord Robert Dudley, Earl of
Leycester, Baron of Denbigh, Knight of the Honorable order of the Garter,
Master of the Queens Majesty's Horses, and one of her Highness privy
Counsel: Robert Peterson wishes perfect felicity.
LIghting of late (Right Honorable) upon this treatise of courtesy, penned by
an experienced Italia^, and drawn for the profit thereof, in to so many
la^guages: I thought his lessons fit for our store, and sought to make him
speak English.

Wise was that Cato, that ended both his learning, and living day together.
And truly, Courtesy and Courtiership, be like Hippocrates twins, that laughe
together, and grow together: and are so one affected, that who so diuorceth
them, destroieth them. But yet, seeing more ready to condemn the least trip
then commend the best meaning, and knowing that the Scarre sticks though good
desert do hele the wou^d: and perceiving that Naeuus in arti culo pueri
delectat Alcaeu^, and To scij oculi peruersissimi catulum, That is, many dote
on their fancy: I durst not se^d this, mine Heir and first fruits of my
toil, to the view of the world, without the guarde of your Patronage, wherein
there is no presumption to teach them that are perfected, but may serve either
as Simonides Characters, to stablish memory, or as an Index, to point the^ to
other behauiours enrolled whersoeuer. Spread therefore (I beseech your honor)
the wings of wellyking over this work, which presses to you, as not only the
patron to protect, but the pattern to express any courtesy therein
contained. Mine Author reports one Maestro Chiarissimo a perfect Maso^, when
he had described the finest precepts of his art, to have made his Regolo a
pyller so exactly, as would bear the proof of every demonstration, thinking
it learned speedely, where the mind and the eye, precept and experience joined
hands together: whose steps I tread (though with better success then mine
Author, who could not find a Regolo) hoping, when others shall come to try
these precepts, not by show or sound, as fools do their Gold: but, by your
behavior, as by the touchstone: when they shall come, not token aloof, but at
hand, to view your so singular demeanor, so civil, so courteous, as makes you
renoumed abroad, and honored at home: coueted of the Noblest, and wonderful of
the learned: when they shall in the glass of your courtesy, see the blots
that blemishe the dignity of their estate: when they compare these lessons
with the Regolo, they shall herein see no less commodity, then was in
Alcibiades Sileni (whereunto Socrates was compared) which though they bare
not, in the front, any show of singularity: yet within, bare they pictures of
excellent wit and delight. This work, if it please your honor to vouchsafe as
a companion of ease to trace the paths, which you have already so well beaten,
(which presumes not to be guide for conduction) or if your honor daine at
high leisure to peruse it (which is not cu^ningly but faithfully translated)
I doubt not, but your co^untenance will so credit the Author, as will embolden
him to press amongst the thickest throng of Courtiers: And herewithall
beseech your honor, to accept the humble and dutiful meaning mind of him:
who, not satisfied, till he might by some means give show of his thankful
mind, for your honorable favors showed unto him, has offered this small,
though as faithful a gift as Sinaetes did to Cyrus: hoping, that your honor
will take it as well in worth, as Artaxerxes did his poor Persians handful of
water. Thus with hearty prayer, for the aduaunceme^t of your estate, increase
of honor, and attainement of perfect and perpetual felicity: I commend your
Lordship, to the patronage and protection of the Almighty. Your Lordships
most humble to dispose and command.

Robert Peterson.

Al Signor Ruberto Peterson, esortandolo A tradurre in Inghilese il Galateo.
Ben posson dirsi auuenturate carte
Quelle ch' el dotto, e gentil Casa spese:
Quand' in breue discors' a insegnar prese
Del honesta creanza la prima art.
Poi che tanto si apprezz' in ogni part
Quel ch' ei ne scrisse, e ch' ei si ben intese
E ch' ogn' un con maniere piu cortese
Dal bell trattato suo tosto si part.
Esso a Donn' e donzelle, and cauallieri
Non sol d' Italia: ma di Francia, e Spagna
Di gentilezza mostr' i modi very.
Venga per voi felice anco in Brettagna
E parli Inglese ne Palazzi alteri.
Del regn' inuitto che l' Tamigi bagna.
Francesco Pucci

Le creanze, e i costumi,
Tanto splendenti lumi,
Ch' a gli huomini fan l' huom superiore,
Eccoli tratti fore
De l' Italico seno
E piantati ne l' Anglico terreno.
Or se Li goda ogniun, che porta amore
A 'l suo decoro, e a 'l suo compiuto onore.
Alessandro Citolini.

Edouardus Cradoccus, S. Theologiae Doctor and Professor.
Moribus quisquis rudis est ineptis,
Nescit is vitam placidam tueri:
Nemi ni gratus, sociusque nulli
Charus habetur.
Quisquis at pulchre simul and decore
Se gerit, mentis studio repellens
Rusticos mores, popularis ille
Iure videtur.
Hoc Petersoni liber hic venustus
Praestat, ostendens habitu decoro
Possit vt quisque probitate splendens
Vtilis esse.
Idque dum magno satagit labor,
Italum fecit patria loquela
Hunc perornatas meus hic amicus
Fundere voces.
Thomas Drant, Archedeacon in praise of this Book.
An happy turn that Casa once did hatche,
Of hauiours choice this book in Ital' phrase:
An Archbishop, and writer without match
In this he was, and peereles pight with praise.
Such he his lore so well and wise does lend:
It hear ne read we can, but must amend.
This book by Tyber, and by Po has past,
Through all Italia Towns and Country lands.
Iberus, through thy Spanishe coasts as fast
It after yoade: and Gauls it held in hands,
Through Rhenus realms it spread in prosperous speed,
To Lords and Ladies reaching comely reed.
It Peterson, to Britan eyes does bring
Translated true and trim: and fit to frame
Fair manners fine for men. This pretty Ring
Bedecketh feate our life: discourse and game
It orders apt with grace. The book is grave,
Eke wise and good, for civil folk to have.
To his friend Master Robert Peterson Gent.
Thy Galateo (Peterson) does shroud him self to long,
What? shall it sleep Endymions years? thou do thy country wrong.
She has a child's part, Plato says, and with the Author cries,
That both thy toil, and this her gain, may rear his skill to skies.
What though thou think thy present small, for view of gallant ones?
This little Diamond, shall out prize, a quarry full of stones.
And Noble Cyrus (Man) will daine cold water in Sinaetaes hand:
Then fray not, if thy book, in pure, vnfiled terms do stand.
Translatours can not mount: for though, their arms with wings be spread,
In vain they toil to take the flight, their feet are clogd with lead.
This faith, that makes the Author, speak his own in language new:
Renoumes the more, then if thou blazdst it out, in painted hew.
For, serpents lurk in greenest grass, and with a garishe gloze,
The Stru^pet pounts in pride, where matrones march in comely clothes.
Go publishe it, and dread not scowling Momus poisond spite.
And though Archilochus Iambes fly, or Theons taunts do byte:
Think, winds do haunt the gallauntst trees, and Envy things of state.
And lightning checks, Cerauniaes tops, whom no hills else do mate.
The best have borne the bob, and Zoiles brutes durst give the charge:
But Zoile hangs, and Callisthen keeps in cage for talking large.
And yet, words they be wind: but as erst Plinies Draconite
No tool could pierce or carue: or as the gemme Chalazias hight,
Keeps cold, though it in Aetna fry, or Adiantons flowers
Draws not a drop, though skies distill down everlasting showers:
So good desert, does challenge good report by reasons rate,
Though often they bear the checkes and taunts, they cannot take the mate.
Yet seek Mecaenas wings to shroude thy toil: Virgilio
Found his Augustus: Ennie thou may find thy Scipio.
This trump shall sound thy praise. Sir Phoebus golden rays shall turn
To foggie mistes, and seas that bear their ysie crust, shall burn:
And lumpish lowte, with country shares shall salt Sea ^ome divide,
And sow his grain in Afrik Syrtes that wallow every tide,
Before this work shall die: which neither loves thundering threate,
Nor fiery flames shall waste, nor rustie, cankred age shall freate.
Nolo Persium nolo Laelium.
Your friend. I. Stoughton. Student.

THe vine is praisde, that dainty grape does give
Although the fruit more please then wholesome be.
Each fertile tree is fauord for the fruit,
So is the herb that gallant is to see.
If this be truth, he needs must merit well,
That gives us grounds to guide our erring ways,
And trades us truly in the golden maze,
Where virtue grows and courtlike manners stays.
Galateo first did frame this golden book
In Ital land. From thence it went to Spain.
And after came into the coasts of France.
And now at last in England does remain.
The Author sure deserves more renoume,
That so could spend his time for our behoof,
Then my poor wit or cunning can recite,
As thou thy self by reading shall find proof.
And as the Author merits passing well,
So does my friend deserve as great a meede:
That make a work so hard to understand,
So easy that each simple may it reed.
I say no more: for (lo) it were in vain
To praise good wine by hanging up a bushe,
The best will give (I hope) my friend his due,
As for the bad, I way them not a rushe.
Thomas Brown of L. I. Gent.

To the Gentle Reader.
Being very loathe (Gentle Reader) to varrie, of wilfulnes, or security, from
the truth of our written copy: we have thought it necessary, to make this
compendious and exact retractation of errors escaped in this impression.

Page* Lin. Error. Correction. 10 5 Passing passed. 17 18 fottering tottering.
26 23 neither never. 29 6 easy easily. 43 25 though^ then 46 25 our free our
own fre^ 55 5 so they bear they bear. 49 13 And To 56 26 worse were so 57 9
out one ibi. 19 bend lend 59 2 Tuttessale Tuttesalle ibi. 10 thou you 61 20 but
it 62 17 do not I do not 63 26 in a marg. note. 297 291 64 6 one the one or
the 69 25 Gli frae Et gli fece. ibi. 29 Barbadomanie Barbadomani. 74 10
Grimaldi^ Grimaldi. 75 9 I ventre Il ventre. ibi. 26 did set did little set. 94
27 in the stone in stone. ibi. ibi. for singular for the singular 98 17 do
pass 100 3 wits wills 104 26 easy much easier much 115 21 out every man
out to every man. Marginall notes misplaced. Amended. 46 12 Bocc. Nouel 6.
Gior. 5. fol. 259 Against Admeral in the 15. line. ibi. 13 Peter the King of
Aragon. Against Peter King of Aragon, line. 17 59 24 Counselling and reproving.
Against the 1. line in the 60. Page. 63 26 Bocc. Nouel. 5 Gior. 6. fol. 29^
Against Master Forese. line 12. 66 23 Bocc. Nouel. 8. Gior. 9. fol. 430.
Against Biondello in the 25. line.

The treatise of Master Ihon Della Casa, wherein under the person of an old
unlearned man, instructing a youth of his, he has talk of the manners and
fashions, it behoues a man to use or eschew, in his familiar conversation:
entitled Galateo, of fashions and manners.
FOr as much as thou doste now enter the iourny, whereof I have allredy run
forth the better part (as thou see) I mean the transitory way of this
mortal life: I have determined (such is the Love I bear thee) to show all
the dangerous straights thou must pass: For my experience makes me fear, yt
walking that way thou may easily either fall, or by some means or other go
astray. To the end thou may once, taught both by my instructions and
experience, be able to keep the right way, as well for the health of thy
Soul, as the commendation and praise of the Honorable and Noble house thou
do come of. And because thy tender Age, is unfit (as yet) to receive more
principal and higher precepts, reserving them for fytter time, I will beginn
to discourse of such things as many men will deem, perchance, but trifles: I
mean what manner of Countenance and grace, behooves a man to use, that he may
be able in Communication and familiar acquaintance with me^, to show him self
pleasant, courteous, and gentle: which nevertheless is either a virtue, or the
thing that comes very nere to virtue. And albeit Liberality, or magnanimity,
of themselves bear a greater praise, then, to be a well taught or manored man:
yet perchance, the courteous behavior and entertaynement with good manners and
words, help no less, him that has them: then the high mind and courage,
aduau^ceth him in whom they be. For these be such things as a man shall need
always at all hands to use, because a man must necessarily be familiar with
me^ at all times, and ever have talk and communication with them: But justice,
fortitude, and the other greater, and more noble virtues, are seldom put in
ure. Neither is yt liberal and noble minded man, caused every hour to do
bountiful things: for to use it often, cannot any man bear the charge, by any
means. And these valiant men yt be so full of high mind and courage: are
very seldom driven to try their valor and virtue by their deeds. Then as
much as these last, do pass those first, in greatness (as it were) and in
weight: so much do the other surmou^t these in number, and often occasion to
use the^. And, if I could well intend it, I could name you many, who, (being
otherwise of little account) have been and be still, much esteemed and made of,
for their cherefull and plesaunt behavior alone: which has been such a help
and aduaunceme^t unto them, that they have gotten great preferments, leaving
far behind them, such men as have been endowed with those other noble and
better virtues, spoken of before. And as these plesau^t and gentle behauiours,
have power to draw their hearts and mynds unto us, with whom we live: so
co^trarywise, gross and rude manners, procure me^ to hate and despise us.
Whereby albeit the laws, have enjoined no pain for unmannerly and gross
behauiours, as the fault that is thought but light (and to say a truth, it is
not great) yet we see notwithstanding, yt nature herself punishes the^ with
sharp and shrewde correction, putting them by this means, besides ye company
and favor of men. And truly eue^ as great and foul faults, do much harm:
so do these light, much hurt, or hurt at least more often. For, as me^ do
commonly fere ye beasts yt be cruel and wild, and have no manner of fear of
some little ones, as ye gnats and the flies, and yet by ye continual noiau^ce
they find by the^, complain themselves more of these the^ of ye other: so it
chau^ceth yt most me^ do hate in manner as much, ye unmannerly and untaught, as
ye wicked, and more. So yt there is no doubt, but who so disposes himself to
live, not in solitary and deserte places, as Heremites, but in fellowship with
men, and in populous Cities, will think it a very necessary thing, to have
skill to put himself forth comely and seemly, in his fashions, gestures and
manners: the lack of which parts does make those other virtues lame, and little
or nothing can they work to good effect, without other helps: wheare this
civility and courtesy, without other relief or patrimony, is rich of it
self, and has substance enough, as a thing yt stands in speech and
gestures alone.

And that you may now more easily learn the way unto it, thou must
understand, it behoues thee, to frame and order thy manners and doings, not
according to thine own mind and fashion: but to please those, with whom thou
lyuest, and after that sort direct thy doings: And this must be done by
Discretion and Measure. For who so applies himself to much, to feed other
men's humors, in his familiar conversation, and behavior with men, is rather to
be thought a Iester, a Iugler or flatterer, then a gentleman well taught and
nourtured: As contrariwise, who so has no care or mind to please, or
displese, is a rude, untaught, and discourteous fellow. For as much then, as
our manners, have some pleasure in them when we respect other men, and not our
own pleasure: if we diligently search forth what those things be, that most
men do generally like or dislike: we shall in such sort wisely and easily
find out, the means and ways, to choose and eschew, those fashions and
manners, we are to leave or take, to live amongst men. We say then, that every
act that offends any the common senses, or ouerthwarteth a man's will and
desire, or else presents to the Imagination and conceit, matters unpleasant,
and that likewise, which ye mind does abhor, such things I say be naught,
and must not be used: for we must not only refrain from such things as be
foul, filthy, loathsome and nastie: but we must not so much as name them. And
it is not only a fault to do such things, but against good manner, by any act
or sign to put a man in mind of them. And therefore, it is an ill-favored
fashion, that some men use, openly to thrust their hands in what part of their
body they list.

Lykwise, I like it as ill to see a Gentleman fettle him self, to do the
needs of Nature, in presence of men: And after he has done, to trusse him
self again before them. Neither would I have him (if I may give him council)
when he comes from such an occupatio^, so much as wash his hands, in the
sight of honest company: for yt the cause of his washing, puts them in mind of
some filthy matter that has been done aparte. And by the same reason, it is no
good manner, when a man chances to see, as he passes the way (as many times
it happens) a lothesome thing, yt will make a man to cast his stomach, to
turn unto the company, and show it them. And much worse I like it, to reach
some stynking thing unto a man to smell unto it: as it is many a ma^s fashion
to do, with importunate means, yea, thrusting it unto their nose, saying: Foh,
feel I pray you, how this does stink: where they should rather say, smell
not unto it: for it has an ill sent. And as these and like fashions offend the
se^ses, to which they appertain: so to grynde the teethe, to whistle, to make
pityfull cries, to rubb sharp stones together, and to fyle upon Iron, do
much offend the Ears and would be left in any case. Neither must we
refrain those things alone, but we must also beware we do not sing, and
specialy alone, if we have an untuneable voice, which is a common fault with
most men: And yet, he that is of nature least apt unto it, does use it most.
So there be some kind of men, that in coffyng or neesing, Neesing.
make such noise, that they make a man deaf to here them: other some use in
like things, so little discretion, that they spyt in men's faces that stand
about them: besides these there be some, that in yauning, braye and cry out
like Asses. And yet such, with open mouth will ever say and do what they list,
and make such noise, or rather such roaring, as the dumme man does, when he
strives with him self to speak. All these yllfauoured fashions, a man must
leave, as loathsome to the ear and the eye. And a man must leave to yawne
much, Yawning.
not only for the respect of the matter I have said already, as that it
seems to proceed, of a certain werynes, that shows that he that yawneth,
could better like to be else where, then there in that place: as wearied with
the company, their talk, and their doings. And sure, albeit a man be many
times disposed to yawne, yet if he be occupied with any delyght, or earnest
matter to think upon: he shall have no mind to do it. But if he be lumpishe
and idle: it is an easy matter to fall into it. And therefore, When a man
yavvneth, in place where there be slothful and Idle folks, that have
nothing to do, the rest, as you may see many times, yavvne again for company
by and by: as if he that yawned, had put them in mind to do it, which of them
selves they would have done first, if he had not begoone unto them. And I have
many times heard learned and wise men say, that A yavvner means as much in
Latin as a careless and Idle body. Let us then fly these conditions, that
loathe (as I said) the eyes, the Ears, and the Stomach. For in using these
fashyons, we do not only show that we take little pleasure in the company, but
we give them occasion withal, to judge amiss of us: I mean yt we have a
drowsye and heuie nowle, which makes us ill wellcom, to all companies we come
unto. And when thou have blown thy nose, Blowing of the nose.
use not to open thy handkercheif, to glare upon thy snot, as if you had
pearls and Rubies fallen from thy brains: for these be slouenly parts, enough
to cause men, not so much not to love us, as if they did love us, to vnloue us
again. As the Sprite of Labirintho does testify (who soever he were that made
it) who (to quench yt heat wherewith Master John Boccase burned in desire and
Love of his Lady unknown) tells, Look in the beginning of Corbaccio.
how she cowred her tail over the ashes, sytting upon her heels, and coughed
and spatte out Collops.

It is also an unmannerly part, for a man to lay his nose upon the cup where
another must drink: Dropping of the Nose.
or upon the meat yt another must eat, to the end to smell unto it: But
rather, I would wish he should not smell at all, no not to that which he
himself should eat and drink: because it may chance there might fall some
drop from his nose, that would make a man to loath it: although there fall
nothing at all in deed. Neither, by mine advise, shall thou reach to any man,
that cup of wine whereof thy self have first drunk and tasted: without he be
more then a familiar friend unto thee. And much less must thou give any part
of the pear or the fruit, which thou have bitten in thy mouth before. And
esteem not light of my talk, for that these things be of little account: For
even light stripes (their number may be such) be able to slaye fast enough.

Now you shall understand, there was in Verona, a bishop a wise man, a learned
and of a singular good wit by nature, whose name was Gioua^ni Giouanni.
Matheo Matheo.
Giberti: Giberti, bishop of Verona.
Amongst many good parts yt were in him, he was very courtious and liberal, to
all gentlemen and noble men that came unto him, doing the^ all ye honor he
could in his house, not with over much pomp and cost, but with convenient
entertainment and measure, such as besemed well a man of the Clergy. It
chanced in his time, a noble gentleman called Count Richard, Count Richard.
passing that way, to spend a few days with the Bishop and his householde
together: which was thoroughly furnished with honest gentlemen and very well
learned. And because they found him a Noble gentleman, courteous and well
beseene in all good behavior, they praised him much, and made much of him,
save that one unmannerly fashion they much misliked in him. When the Bishop was
advertised of it, consulting with some of his familiars about it (as he was a
wise man in all his doings) strait they concluded, it should be necessary to
let ye Count have knowledge of it: albeit they feared, they should offend him.
Upon this, ye Count taking his leave, and ready to ride away the next morning,
the Bishop called one of his servants unto him, (a man of good discretion) and
gave him in charge to take his horse, to bear the Count company, some part of
his way: And when he saw his time, after an honest sort, to tell him, that
which they had determined between them selves. The same gentleman that had this
charge, was a man well strooken in years, very learned, and marvelous
pleasant, welspoken, comely, and had much frequented in his time, ye Courts
of great Princes: who was (perhaps) and is, called Galateo: Galateo.
at whose request and council, I first took in hand to set forth this present
treatise, Ryding with the Count, he found him plesaunt talk enough, and
passing from one matter to another, when he thought it time to return to
Verona, in taking leave at parting, with a gentle and cherefull countenance,
he used this speech unto him. Sir Count, my Lord yealdeth you many thanks for
the honor you have done him, in that it has pleased you to vouchesafe his
poor house: and that he may not be unthankful, for this your great courtesy
shevved unto him, he has given me in charge, that I must leave a present with
you in his behalf: and he sends it unto unto you with earnest request, that
you please to take it in good worth: and this is the gift. You are a goodly
gentleman, and the best manered man my Lord has ever seen: So that very
heedefully beholding your behauiours, and particularly considering them all,
he finds no one that is not very comely and comendable, only one unseemly
trycke alone excepted, which you make with your lips and your mouth
together, feeding at your meat with a certain strange noyes, unpleasant to
all men that hear it. This my Lord willed me to tell you, and prays you to
endeavor your self to leave it, and vvithall to accept in levve of a beter
present, this loving admonition and council of his: for he is sure, there is
none in the world, would make you the like present. The Count (that never
wist of his fault till now) hearing himself reproved, changed his countenance
a little, but (as a man full of stomach enough) taking heart at gras^e, he
said: Tell your Lord, that if all the gifts that men wont to give each other,
were such as his, men should be much more rich then they are. And for his
great courtesy and liberality to me, give him many thanks I pray you, and
let him be sure, I will not fail from henceforthe to mend my fault, and God be
with you.

Now what shall we think this Bishop, his modest and honest company about him
would say, Greedy feeding.
if they saw these whom we see other while, (like swyne with their snouts in
the wash, all begroined) never lift up their heads nor look up, and much
less keep their hands from the meat, and with both their cheeks blown (as if
they should sound a trumpet, or blow the fire) not eat but rauon: who,
besmearing their hands, almost up to their elbowes, so bedawbe yt napkyns,
Fyling the napkyns.
that ye clothes in the places of easement, be other while cleaner. And to
mend these slouenly manners, be not ashamed, many times with these filthy
napkyns, to wype away the sweat that trickleth and falls down their brows,
Sweating with feeding.
their face and their neck (they be such greedy guts in their feeding) and
otherwhile to, (when it comes upon them) spare not to snot their sniueld nose
upon them. Truly these beastly behauiours and fashions, deserve not alone, to
be thrust out of this noble bishops house, that was so pure and clean: but to
be thoroughly banished all places, where any honest men should com. Let a man
then take heed, he do not begrease his fyngers so deep, yt he befyle the
napkins to much: for it is an ill sight to see it: neither is it good manner, to
rub your gresie fingers upon ye bread you must eat.

The servant that be appointed to wait upon the table, must not (in any
wise) scratche and rub their heads, Precepts for servant.
nor any part else in the sight of their Lord and Master: nor thrust their
hands in any those parts of their body that be covered, no not so much as
make any proffer: as some careless fellows do, holding their hands in their
bosom, or cast under the flappes of their coats behind them. But they must
bear them abroad without any suspicion and keep them (in any case) washed and
clean without any spot of dirt upon them. And they that carry the dyshes, or
reach the cup, must beware at that time, they do not spit, coughe or neese:
for in such doings, Suspicio^ is as great, and offends as much, as the very
deed it self: and therefore, servants must forsee, they give no cause to
Masters to suspect: For that which might chance, anoyeth as much, as if it
had chanced indeed.

And if thou do roaste any fruit, or make a toaste at the fire, thou must not
blow of the ashes, (if there be any) for it is an old saying, that, vvinde
was never without water. But you must lightly stryke it upon the the plate,
or after some such sort or other beat of ye ashes. Thou shall not offer thy
ha^dkerchiefe to any man to use it, albeit, it be very clean washed: for he to
whom thou do offer it, can not (perhaps) away with it, and may be to curious
to take it.

When a man talks with one, Breathing in a man's face.
it is no good manner to come so near, that he must needs breathe in his face:
for there be many that can not abide to feel the air of another man's breathe,
albeit there come no ill savor from him. These and like fashions, be very
unseemly, and would be eschewed, because their senses, with whom we acquaint our
selves, cannot brook nor bear them.

Now, let us speak of those things which (without any hurt or anoyau^ce to the
senses) offend the minds of most men, before whom they be done. You shall
understand, that The appetites of men, (through a natural instinct and
inclination) beverie strange and diverse: Some be cholerike and hasty, and may
not be satifsied with out revenge: other do give them selves clean over, to
pamper the belly: this man sets his delighte in lust and sensuality: that man
is carried away with his covetous desires: and many such appetites more there
are, to which man's mind is too subject: but you shall not in any company,
easily judge or discern between them, where and in what, they be most
affected. For, these matters do not consist in the manners, the fashions and
speech of men: but rest in some other point. They seek to purchase yt which
the benefit of mutual conferrence may yeald them, and that do (as I ween)
good will, honor, comfort and pleasure, or some other thing like unto these:
and therefore we must neither say or do the thing, that may give any sign of
little loving or esteming them, we live withal.

So that, it is a rude fashion, (in my co^ceipte) yt some men use, to lie
lolling a sleep in that place, where honest men be met together, of purpose to
talk. For his so doing, shows that he does not esteem the company, and
little rekoneth of the^ or their talk. And more then that, he that sleeps
(and specially lying at little ease, as he must) wonts (for the most part) to
do some foul thing, to behold, or hear: and many times they awake sweating
and driueling at the mouth. And in like manner, to rise up where other men do
sit and talk, and to walk up and down the chamber, it is no point of good
manner. Also there be some that so buskell them selves, reach, streatch and
yawne, writhing now one side, and then another, that a man would ween, they
had some fever upon them: A manifest sign, that the company they keep, does
weary them.

Likewise do they very ill, yt now and the^ pull out a letter ont of their
pocket, to read it: as if they had great matters of charge, and affairs of
the common weal committed unto the^. But they are much more to be blamed,
that pull out their knyues or their scisers, and do nothing else but pare their
nails, as if they made no account at all of the company, and would seek some
other solace to pass the time away. These fashions to, must be left, yt some
men use, to sing between the teeth, or play the dromme with their fingers, or
shoofle their feet: For these demeanours show that a body is careless of any
man else.

Besides, let not a man so sit that he turn his tail to him that sits next
to him: nor lie fottering with one leg so high above the other, that a man may
see all bare that his clothes would cover. For such parts be never playde, but
amongst those to whom a man needs use no reverence. It is very true, that if a
gentleman should use these fashions before his servants, or in the prefe^ce of
some friend of meaner condition then him self: it would betoken no pride, but
a love and familiarity.

Let a man stand vppright of him self, and not lean or loll upon another
man's shoulder: and when he talks, let him not pounche his fellow with his
elbowe, (as many be wont to do) at every word they speak, saying: Did not I
say true Sir, Master. N. It is Master. H. And still they be iotting with
their elbowe.

I would have every man well appareled, Apparel.
meet for his age and calling: for otherwise, they seem to have men in
contempt that be better attyred then themselves.

And therefore the Citizens of Padua, were wont to take it done of spighte unto
the^, when any gentleman of Venice walked up and down their city in his
coat, as though he thought him self in the country. And a man's apparel,
would not be made of fine cloathe alone: but he must frame it, all that he may,
to the fashions that other men wear, and suffer him self to be lead by
common use: although (perchance) it be, and seem to be less commodious,
less gallant, and less fair in show, then his oulde.

And if all men else, do wear their heads powled: it shall be an ill sight for
thee alone, to wear a long bushe of hair. And where other men, make much of
their beardes and wear them long: thou shall not do well to cut thine of, or
shave it. For that wear to be ouerthwarte in every thing: which thou must (in
any case) beware of, except necessity require it, as thou shall hear
hereafter. For this singularity, beyond all other ill customs, makes us
generally spyted of all me^. Thou must not then go against common custom in
these things, but use them measureably: that thou may not be an odd man a
lone in a country: that shall wear a long Gown down to the foot, where
other men wear them very short, little beneath the waste. For as it hapens to
him, that has a very crabbed ylfauoured face, (I mean such, as is more hard
and sower the^ most men's be, for nature does mostly shape them well in most
men) that men will wonder and (with a kind of admiration) gape most upon him:
So fares it with the^ that attire them selves, not as most men do: but as they
are egged by their own fantastical heads, with long hear spread down to
their shoulders, their beardes short and shaven, and wear quaiues or great
cappes after ye Flaundres fashion: that all men do gaze upon them, as
wo^dering at such, whom they ween have taken upon them, to conquer all
countries wheresoever they come. Let your apparel then, be very well made, and
fit for your body: for they that wear rich and coastly garments, but so
illfauouredly shaped, that a man would ween the measure had been taken by
another: give us to judge one of these twain, that either they have no regard
or consideration how to please or displease: or else have no skill to judge of
measure or grace, or what does become them.

Such manner of people, with their rude behauiours and fashions, make men with
whom they live, suspect, they do esteem them but light. And that causes
the^ worse welcome whersoeuer they com and ill beloved amongst men.

But there be some besides these, that deserve more then bare suspicion: their
deeds and their doings be so intolerable, that a man cannot abide to live
amongst them by any means. For they be ever a let, a hurt and a trouble to
all the company, they be never ready: ever a trimming: never well dressed to
their minds. But when men be ready to sit down to the table, the meat at
the boorde, and their hands washed: then they must write or make water, or
have their exercise to do: saying, It is too early: we might have tarried a
while: what haste is this, this morning? And thus they disquiet all the
company, as men, caring for them selves alone and their own matters, without
consideration in the world of other men. Besides this, they will in all things
be preferred above others: they must have the best bed, and best chamber: they
must take upon them the highest place at the table, and be first set and
served of all men. And they be so deintie and nice, that nothing pleases them,
but what they them selves devise: they make a sower face at any thing else. And
they be so proud minded, that they look that men should wait upon them when
they dyne, ride, sport, or solace them selves.

There be other so furious, testie and waywarde, that nothing you do can
please them: and what soever is said they answer in choler, and never leave
brauling with their servants, and railing at them, and continually disturb the
company with their unquietness: using such speeches: Thou cauledst me well up
this morning. Look here how clean thou have made these pynsons. Thou
beast, thou did wait well upon me to Church. It were a good deed to
break thy head. These be unseemly and very foul fashions: such as every
honest man will hate to death. For, albeit a man's mind were full fraught with
all humility, and would use these manners, not upon pride or disdain, but
upon a rechelesse care, not heeding his doings, or else by means of ill
custom: yet notwithstanding, because his outward doings, would make men
think him proud: it cannot be chosen, but all men would hate him for it. For,
Pride Pride.
is none other thing, then to despise and disdain another. And as I have
said from the beginning: Each man desires to be well thought of, Albeit
there be no valor or goodness in him.

It is not long, since there was in Rome a worthy gentleman, of singular good
wit and profound learning, whose name was Vbaldino Bandinelli. Vbaldino
Bandinelli.
This gentleman was wont to say, that as often as he went or came from the
Court, although the streets wear ever full of gallant Courtiers, of Prelates
and Noble men, and likewise of poor men, and people of mean and base
condition: yet he thought he never encountered any, that was either better or
worse then himself. And without doubt he could meet with few, that might
be compared in goodness to him: respecting his virtues, that did excel beyond
measure. But we must not always in these things measure men by ye Elne: We
must rather way them in the millers scoles, then in the goldsmythes balaunce.
And it is a courtious part, redily to receive them in to favor: not because
they be woorthe it: but as men do with coins, because they be current,

To go further, we must do nothing in their sight whom we desire to please,
that may show we covet, rather to rule and to reign, then to live in a
familiar equality amongst them. For hautines of heart and ambitious
disposition, as it kindles an ill opinion: so it ministers much cause of
contempt, which in conclusion will so work against thee, yt thou shall be
clean cast out of honest company. But our doings must rather bear a sign
and show of reverence, A lowly mind.
meekenes, and respect to ye company, in which we fellowship our selves. So
that, what so ever is done in meet and convenient time, may hapely deserve no
blame: but yet in respect of the place and the person, it may be reproved
well: although for it self, ye matter deserve no rebuke. As to brawle and to
rail at your servant (which we have talked of before) but much more to
beat them. Because these parts, are as much as to reign and to rule: which
no honest and civil gentleman will use, in presence of them he does respect
with any reverence or courtesy. Besides this, the company is much offended
with it, and their meetinges are broken, and especially, if it be done at the
table, which is a place of solace and myrthe, and not of brawle and scolding.
So that I must needs commend Currado Gianfigliazzi for his civil behavior in
yt he multiplied no words with Chichibio to trouble his guests: Boccacc^o.
Cior. 6. nouel. 4. fo. 194.
albeit he deserved to be sharply punished for it, when he would sooner
displease his master then Brunetta. And yet if Currado had made less ado
about it then he did: it had been more his praise. For then he should never have
neded, to call upon God, to witness his threatenings so much as he did.

But to return to our matter: it is not good for a man to chide at the table
for any cause. Chiding at the Table.
And if thou be angry, show it not, nor make no sign of thy grief, for the
reason I have told thee, and specially if thou have strangers with thee:
because thou haste called them to be merry, and this will make them sad. For, as
the sharp and tarte things yt other men do feed upon in thy sight, do set
thy teeth likewise on edge: so to see other men vexed and out of quiet, it
makes us unquiet too. I call them FROMVVARD Fromewarde.
people, which will in allthings be ouertwhart to other men: as the very word
it self does show. For, Fromewarde, signifies as much, as Shorn against the
wool. Now, how fit a thing this frowardnes Frowardenes.
is, to win the good will of men, and cause men to wyshe well unto them: that
you your self may easily Judge, in that it consists in ouertwharting other
men's desiers: which quality never maynteineth friendship, but makes friends
become foes. And therefore let them that desire to be well thought of and welcome
amongst men, endeavor themselves to shun this fault: For it breeds no good
lyking nor love, but hatred and hurt. I would council you rather to measure
your pleasures by other men's wills: where there shall come no hurt nor shame of
it: and therein always to do and to say, more to please other men's minds and
fancies, then your own.

Again, you must be neither clownishe nor lumpishe: Clownishe and Lumpishe
but pleasant and familiar. For there should be no odds, between the
Mystell and the Pungitopo: but that the one is wild: the other grows in
gardens. And you must understand, that he is pleasant and courteous: whose
manners be such in his common behavior, as practice to keep, and maintain
him friendeship amongst them: where he that is solleyne and waywarde, makes
him self a stranger whersoeuer he comes: a stranger, I mean, as much as a
foreign or alie^ borne: where contrariwise, he that is familiar and gentle,
in what place so ever he comes: is taken for a familiar and friend with all
me^. So that it shall be necessary for a man, to use him self to salute, to
speak, and to answer after a gentle sort, and to behave him self with all men
so: as if he were their countryman borne, and of their old acquaintance.
Which some can ill skill to do, that neither give a man a good countenance:
easily say, No, to all things: never take in good worth, the honor and
courtesy that men do unto them (like to the people I spoke of before, rude
and barbarous) never take delight in any pleasant conceits or other
pleasures: but ever refuse it all, what soever is presented or offered unto
them. If a man say: Sir, such a one willed me to commend him unto you: They
answer strait: what have I too do with his greetings? And if a man say:
Sir, such a one your friend, asked me how you did: They au^swer again in
choler: Let him come feel my pulse. These carterlyke and clownishe aunswers
and manners, and the men them selves that do use them: would be chased and
hu^ted away, out of all good and honest company.

It ill becomes a man when he is in company, to be sad, musing, Museing.
and full of contemplation. And albeit, it may be suffered perchance in them
that have long beaten their brains in these Mathematical studies: which are
called (as I take it) the Liberal Arts: yet without doubt it may not be
borne in other men. For, even these studious fellows, at such time, when they
be so full of their Muses: should be much wyser to get them selves alone.

Again, Nycenes and Deyntines.
to be to nyce or to deyntie: it may not be abiden, and specially in men. For,
to live with such kind of people: is rather a slavery then pleasure. And
sure there be some such, so soft and tender: yt to live and deal with such
people, it is as dangerous: as to meddle with the fynest and bryttelest glass
that may be: So much they are affrayde of every light touch. And they will be
as testy and froward, if you do not quickly and readily salute them, visit
them, worship them, and make the^ answer: as some other body would be, for the
greatest injury yt can be done unto them. And if you do not give them all
the due reverence that may be: they will presently take a thousand occasions to
quarrel and fall out with you. If you chance to Master him, and leave out his
title of Honor or worship: he takes that in dougeon, and thinks you do mock
him. And if you set him beneath as good a man as him self at the table: that is
against his honor. If you do not visit him at home at his house: then you
know not your duty. These manner of fashions and behauiours, bring men to such
scorn and disdain of their doings: that there is no man, almost, can abide to
behold them: for they love them selves to far beyond measure, and busy
them selves so much in that, that they find little leisure to bethink them
selves to love any other: which (as I have said from the beginning) men seek
to find in the conditions and manners of those with whom they must live: I
mean, that they should apply them selves to the fancies and minds of their
friends. But to live with such people, so hard to please: whose love and
friendship once won, is as easy lost, as a fine scarf is lightly carried
away with the wind: that is no life but a service: and, besides that it
yealdeth no pleasure, it geues a man great disdain and horror. Let us
therefore leave these soft and wanton behauiours to women.

In speech a man may fault many ways. Talk and Communication.
And first in the matter it self that is in talk, which may not be vain or
filthye. For, they that do hear it, will not abide it: as ye talk they take
no pleasure to hear: but rather scorn the speech and the speaker both.
Again, a man must not move any question of matters that be to deep and to
subtle: because it is hardly understood of the most. And a man must warely
foresee, that the matter be such, as none of the company may blushe to hear
it, or receive any shame by the tale. Neither must he talk of any filthy
matter, albeit a man would take a pleasure to hear it: for, it ill becomes an
honest gentleman, to seek to please, but in things that be honest. Nei-Neither
in sport nor in earnest, Holy things must not be ^easted at. Cicero. Mala
and impia est Consuetudo, contra deos disputandi: sieve serio sit, ^iue
dissimulate.
must a man speak any thing against God or his Saints, how witty or pleasant
so ever the matter be. Wherein, the company that Giouan Boccaccio has brought
to speak in his Nouelles and tales, has faulted so much: that me thinks
every good body, may justly blame them for it. And you must think It is not
only a token of great detestation and Impiety in a man, to talk in iestinge
wise of God: but he is a wicked and sinful man, that will abide to hear it.
But you shall find some such good men, as will fly as much as the plague,
the company of such as talk so irreverently, and without respect, of the
incomprehensible Majesty of God. And we must not alone speak religiously of
him: but in all our talks we must avoid what we may, that our words may
not witness against our life and our works. For me^ do hate their own
faults otherwhile, when they see them in another.

Likewise it is unsavory, Talk out of time.
to talk of things out of time, not fitting the place and company: although
the matter it self, and spoken in time, were otherwise both good and godly. We
must not then rehearse Friars sermones to young gentlewomen, when they are
disposed to sport themselves: as yt good man did, that dwelles not far hence,
nere to S. Brancatio. And in feasts and at table, we must beware we do not
rehearse any sorrowful tales, nor put them in mind of wounds, of sickness, of
deaths, of Plagues, or of other doleful matters. But if another man chance
to move such matter: it shall be good, after an honest and gentell sort, to
exchange that talk, and thrust in some other, yt may give them more delighte
and pleasure to hear it. Albeit, not long since I heard it said to a worthy
gentleman our neighbor, that Men have many times more need to weep then to
laugh. And for that cause he said, these doleful tales, which we call
Tragedies, were devised at first, that when they were played in the Theaters (as
at that time they were wo^t) they might draw fourth tears out of their eyes,
that had need to spend the^. And so they were by their weeping, healed of
their infirmity. But albeit it be good to do so: yet it will il beco^e us to
drive men into their dumpes: especially where they be met to feast and to
solace themselves, and not to mourn. For if there be any, yt has such
weeping disease: it will be an easy matter to cure it, with strong Mustard or
a smoaky house. So that, in no wise, I can excuse our friend Philostrato, Bocc.
G^or. 4. fol 183. In the beginning.
for his work that he made full of dule and of death, to such a company as
desired nothing more then myrthe. We must the rather use silence, then
discourse of such sorrowful matters.

And they do as much amiss too, that never have other thing in their mouth,
then their children, their wife, and their nourse. My little boy, made me so
laughe yesterday: hear you: you never savve a sweeter babe in your life: my
wife is such a one, Cecchina told me: of troth you would not believe what a
wit she has: There is none so idle a body, that will either intend to
answer, or abide to hear such foolish pryttle prattle. For it yrcks a man's
ears to harken unto it.

There be some again, so curious in telling their dreams Dreams.
from point to point, using such wonder and admiration withal, yt it makes a
man's heart ache to hear them: and specially because (for ye most part) they be
such kind of people: as it is but labor lost to hear, eue^ the very best
exployts they do, when they be most awake, and labor most to show their best.
Wherefore we must not trouble men with so base and absurd matter as dreams
be: especially such foolyshe things, as most times men have. Albeit I have
heard say many times, that wisemen in times past, have leaft in their books
many sorts of dreams, containing matters of deep knowledge and
understanding: it follows not yet, that we, the unlearned and common sort
of people, should use it in our familiar and common talk. And sure of all the
dreams that ever I heard (albeit I hardly listen to any) in my conceit, I
never heard any, that was worth the hearing but one alone, which the good
Master Flaminio Tomarozzo M. Flaminio Tomarozzo.
a gentleman of Rome did see, a man not unlearned and gross: but full of
knowledge and singular wit. And thus was his dream, This ge^tlema^ Master
Flaminio Tomarozzo, thought he was sitting in a very rich Apothecaries shop, a
near neighbor of his. And after he had been there a while (what soever the
occasion was) the people were up in a rore one a sudden, and fell to spoilyng
of all that was in the shop. One took on Electuarie, another a Confectio^,
some one thing, some another, and presently eat it up all: So that within a
while, there was neither virell glass, ertherne pot, wodden box, nor any pot
else of drugges, that was not emptied broken, or overthrown. But amongst them
all, there was one very small glass, full to the top of very clear
water, which many did smell to, but no man would taste. He stood not there
long, but there came in a tall man, an aged and very grave man, to look unto.
This Aged father beholding this unfortunate Apothecaries boxes and pottes, and
finding some emptyed, some overthrown, and the better part broken: at lenght
casting his eye aside, he chanced to see the small glass I spoke of before,
and setting the same to his mouth, he drank it up so clean: that he leaft
not one drop. And this done, he went from thence as the rest did before.
Master Flaminio was abashed and marueled much at this matter. And therefore
turning to the Apothecarie he said unto him: Sir, who is this that came
last? and why did he drink up so sauourly, all the water in that little
glass, which all the reast refused. To whom the Apothecarie seemed to make
this answer. My son, this is the Lord God. And the water, that he alone
drank, and all the reast refused and would not taste as you savv: was
discretion: which, you know well enough men will not taste of, by any means.

Such kind of dreams, I hold well a man may rehearse, and hear with much
pleasure and profit. Because they do more resemble, the Cogitations and
thoughts of an awakened mind: or better, I should say, the virtue sensitive:
then the visions and syghts of a drowsy head. But those other dreams, without
shape, fashion or sense: (which the most part of such men as we are, be
wont to have) would be forgotten clean, and lost with our sleep. Howbeit, I
do not deny but the dreams of good men and learned, be better and wiser then
theires of the wicked and more unlearned sort.

And albeit a man would ween, there can be nothing in the world more vain
then Dreams: yet there is one thing more light then they, and that are Lies.
Lies.
For there is yet some shadovve, and, as it were, a certain feeling of that
which a man has seen in his dream. But there is neither shadovve nor body
of a truth in a lie. And therefore we should less busy men's ears, and their
minds to harken to lies, then to dreams, because they be otherwhile received
for truethes. But time, in the end, discouers such pelf: that liars, not
only do gain no credit, but no man vouchesafes to harken unto them, in
otherwise (as the men that carry no substance in their words) then if they
had said nothing or blown a little wind. Men have a pleasure to lie
othervvhile.
And you shall understand, there be many yt use to lie, not minding any ill
purpose in it, or to make their own peculiar proffit by it, to hurt other men
or shame their neighbor: only they do it, for a pleasure they take to tell a
lie: as men that drink not, all for thirst: but for a pleasure they take, to
taste of the wine. Other some do tell lies, to make a vain glorious boasting
of them selves: vaunting and telling in a bravery, what wonderful exploits
they have done, or bearing men in hand, they be great doctors and learned
men.

In Silence too, after a sort, without speech, Lesinges and Counterfectinges.
a man may tell a lesynge: I mean with his gestures and grace: as some you
shall see, that being of mean, or rather base condition and calling, use such
a solemnity in all their doings, and march so stately, and speak with such
a prerogative, or rather discourse like Parleament men, setteling them selves,
as it were, in a place of Judgment, proudly prying about the^ like Peacockes:
that it is a very death to behold them.

And some such you shall find, that allthough they be combered with no more
wealth then easily serves their turn: yet will they never appear unless their
necks be laden with chains, their fingers full of rings, their cappes beset
with agletts, and enery other part bespangled, as though they would defy ye
King of Castiglio. Whose behauiours be full of follies and vain glory, which
comes of pride, growing of vanity it self. So that we must eschew these
faults, as foul and unseemly things. You shall understand, in many Cities,
and those of the best, the laws do not suffer, that rich men should go much
more gorgeously attyred, then the poor. For poor men think they have a
wrong: when me^ seem, but in countenance alone, as it were Imperiously to
reign over them. So that we must carefully beware we fall not into these
follies.

Neither must a man boaste of his Nobility, his Honor or riches: much less
vaunt of his wit, Glorious bostinge and braggeing.
or gloriously rehearse to much of his deeds and valiant Acts, or what his
Ancestors have done, nor upon every occasion, fall in rehersall of such
things, as many men do. For in such case, a man would ween, they seek,
either to contend with the Company, (if they be, or will take upon them to
be, as good Gentlemen, and of as much wealth and worthiness, as they be:) or
else to ouercrowe them, (if they live in meaner condition and calling, then
they do) And as it were to vpbraide them, their poor and base condition of
life.

A man must neither embase, nor exalte him self to much out of measure:
Exalting and embasing.
but rather bury in silence some part of his merits, then arrogate to much
unto him. Because Goodness it self, when it excedeth much is ever enuyde of
some. And you may be sure, they that embase them selves thus beyond measure,
refusing that worship and honor that is but duly their own of very right:
show more pride in this contempt, then they that usurp those things, that
are not so due unto them. So yt a man perchance, might say, Giotto has not
deserved those Co^mendatio^s yt some believe, (...)Nouel. 5 Go^r. 6. fo. 29^
in yt he refused to be called Master: being not only a master but without
doubt a singular and cunning master in his art in those days. But be it blame,
or praise yt he deserved: it is most sure, he that refuses that which every
man else does hunt for: shows therein, he reproves or contemns the common
opinion of men. And, to contemn the honor and renown, which other me^ gape
for so much, is but to glory and magnify him self above other. For as much
as there is no man (without he be mad) will refuse and reject things that be
dear and of price: unless he be such, as has plenty and store of those
dear and deintye things.

We must not boast of those good things that be in us, nor set them to light:
for in ye one, we do vpbraide men their faults: In the other, we scorn to
much their virtues. But it behooves every man to speak his own praise, as
little as he may. And if occasion drive him unto it: it shall be good, modestly
to speak the truethe, as I have told you before.

And therefore, they that desire to do me^ a pleasure: must needs leave one
fault, yt is to common with all men: they must not show them selves so
afraid and fearful to speak their minds, when a man does ask their
advise. For, it is a deadly pain to here the^, and specialy if they be me^, in
ye Judgment of ye world, of good understanding and wisedo^e. What a fetchi^g
about is this, ere they come to yt matter? Sir I beseech you pardon me, if I
do not say well. I will speak like a gros man as I am: and grossly according
to my pore skill. And Sir, I am sure you vvil but mock me for it. But yet, to
obey you: and they draw their words forth so long, and put the^ selves to
such pain: yt, while these ceremonies be a doi^g, ye hardest question yt is,
might have been determined with fewer words and shorter time: because they
cannot get out of these protestations, when they be in.

They be also very tedious to men, and their conversation and manners are very
troublesome: who show too base and abject a mind in their doings. And where
the chefest and highest place, Abiecte Mind.
is apparently due unto them: they will ever creep down to the lowest. And it
is a spiteful buisynes to thrust them up: For they will strait iogge back
again, like a resty Jade, or a Nagge that startleth a side at his shadow. So
that, there is much a do with them, when we meet at a door. For they will
not (for all you can do) in any case enter before you, but so trauerse their
ground, go ba^ke, and so fray and defend with their arms and their hands:
that at every third step, a man must be ready to wage battle with them: and
thus they break of, all solace and pleasure, and otherwhile, the buisynes they
meet about.

And therefore, Ceremonies, Ceremonies.
which we name, as you hear, by a strange term, as lacking a word of our
own, because our elders, having no knowledge of those superstitious fashions,
could not well give them a proper name. Ceremonies, I say, (in my Judgment,)
differ not much from lies and dreams, for their own very vainesse it self. So
that we may couple and join the^ together in this our treatise, sith
occasion serves so fytt to speak of them here, As a good man has often showed
me: those solemnities that church men do use at their Altars, and in their
divine service both to God and his holy things, are properly called
Ceremonies: but after, men did begin, to reverence each other with curious
entertaynements, more then were convenient, and would be called masters and
Lords, amongst them selves, yealding bending, and bowing their bodies, in
toke^ of reverence one to another, uncovering their heads, using high titles
and Styles of honor, and kyssing their hands as if they were hollye things:
some body, by like considering all these things well, and finding these new
found curious follyes without any name: thought good to Christen and call them
Ceremonies, but sure in a jest as I take it: as to be merry and make good
cheer, we term it in sport, a triu^ph: which custom, no doubt, took not his
being at us, but else where, as barbarous and strange: and not long since,
from whence I know not, transported into Italy: whose deeds being wretched,
and effects base and vile, has gotten increase and honor, in vain words
alone, and superfluous titles.

Ceremonies then, if we consider well their inte^ts that use them: are but
vain shows of honor and reverence, toward him to whom they be done:
framed of semblance and words touching their titles and courtious offers. I
say vain: In that we honor me^ to their face, whom we reverence not in
deed, but otherwhile contemn. And nevertheless, because we may not go against
custom, we give them these titles: The most honorable Lord such a one: the
Noble Lord such a one. And so otherwhile we offer them our humble service:
whom we could better vnserue then serve, and command then do them any duty.

The^ not Lesinges alone, but also Treacheries and Treasons, shall be called
Ceremonies. But because these words and these titles above rehearsed, have lost
their strength: and waste, (as a man may say of Iro^) their te^per, with such
continual occupying of it as we do use: we must not so precisely way them as
other words, nor so strictly construe the meaning of them. And, that this is
true, that which always happens to all men, does show it plain inoughe.
For if we meet with a man, we never saw before: with whom, upon some
occasion, it behoues us to talk: without examining well his worthiness, most
commonly, that we may not offend in to little, we give him to much, and call
him Gentleman, and otherwhile Sir, although he be but some Souter or Barbar,
or other such stuff: and all because he is appareled neat, somewhat
gentleman like.

And as men in times past, Titles by Privilege.
were wont to have under the Privilege of the Pope and Emperor, peculiar and
distinct titles of honor, which might not be untouched, without doing wrong to
the priuileged men: nor again attributed and given without a scorn, to them
that were no such priuileged persons: So at this day, we must more freely
use those titles, and the other significations of honor, like to those titles:
because Custom the mightiest Lord has largely therewith, priuileged men of
our time.

This use and custom, though so fair and gallant without, is altogether vain
within, and consists in semblance without effect, and in words without
meaning. But this notwithstanding, Custom must not be altered
it is not lawful for us to change it: but rather, because it is not our
fault, but the fault of our time, we are bound to follow it: but yet we
must discretely do it.

So that we are to noate, The end why ceremonies be used.
that Ceremonies are used, either for a Profit, or for a Vanity, or for a
Duty. Ceremonies for profit.
And every lie that is told for a man's private profit: is a deceit, a sin,
and a dishonest part: for, in what so ever it be, A man can never honestly
lie.

And this is a common fault with flatterers, that counterfeit them selves to be
our friends, and apply them selves ever to our desiers, what soever they be:
not because we would have it so, but to the end we should do them some
pleasure, for it. And this is not to please us, but to deceive us. And albeit
this kind of fault be, peradventure, by reason of custom sufferable: yet
notwithstanding because of it self, it is foul and hurtefull, it ill becomes
a gentle man to do it. For it is no honesty to seek a pleasure by the hurt
of another. And if lies and false flatteries, may be termed Ceremonies (as I
have said before:) so often, as we use them for respect of our gain and profit:
so often we do hazard our good name and credit: so that this consideration
alone, might move us well to leave all Ceremonies, and use them no more.

It rests now that I speak of those yt be done of Duty, Dutiful
ceremonies.
and of those that be done of a Vainesse. As touching ye first, We must not
leave them undone in any wise. For he that fails to do them, does not only
displease, but does a wrong to him, to whom they be due. And many times it
chances, ye men come to daggers drawing, eue^ for this occasion alone, that
one man has not done the other, that worship and honor upon the way, that he
ought. For to say a truth The power of custom is great and of much force,
Custom is a law.
(as I said) and would be taken for a law, in these cases. And that is the
cause we say: You: You.
to every one, that is not a man of very base calling, and in such kind of
speech we yealde such a one, no manner of courtesy of our own. But if we
say: Thou: Thou.
to such a one, then we disgrace him and offer him outrage and wrong: and by
such speech, seem to make no better reconing of him, then of a knave and a
clown.

And although the times past, and other countries, have used other manners: let
us yet, keep our selves to our own: And let not us dispute the matter, which
is the better of twain. For we must observe, not those, that we Judge in our
own conceits to be good: but such, as be current by custom, and used in our
own time: as laws, which we be bound to keep, though they be not all of the
best, till such time, as the magistrates, the Prince, or they that have power
to amed them, have changed them to better.

So that It behoues us, hedefully to mark the doings and speech, wherewith
daily practice and custom, Bocc. Nouel. 6 Gior. 5. fo. 259
wonteth to receive, salute, and name in our own country, all sorts and kinds
of people, and in all our familiar communicatio^ with men, let us use the same.
Peter the King of Aragon.
And notwithstanding the Admerall (as peradventure the manner of his time was
such) in his talk with Peter the King of Aragon, did many times: Thou him:
Let us yet say to our King: Your majesty: and your highness: as well in speech
as in writing. And if they have followed the use of their time: then let not us
break the fashions of ours. And these do I call Duetifull Ceremonies, because
they proceed not, as we would, or of our free wills: but are laid upon us
by the Laws: I mean, Common custom.

And in such things, as carry no evil meaning in them, but rather some face
of courtesy: reason would and commands, we should rather observe common
Custom, then dispute and lay the law for them.

And albeit, to kiss in show of reverence, of very right appertains to the
relics of Saints and there holy matters: yet if it be the manner of your
country, at parting, to say: I kiss your hand: I am your servant: your slave
in chain.
Signori, Io vi bascio la mano. Or: Io son vostro seruidore: Or else: vostro
schiauo in catena: you must not disdain it, more then other. But, In
farewelles and writings, you must salute and take leave, not as reason, but as
custom will have you: and not as me^ wont in times past, or should do: but as
men vseat this day: for it is a chorlishe manner to say: What great gentleman
is he I pray you, that I must master him: Or: is he become master parson, that I
must kiss his hands? for he that is wont to be (Sird) and like wise (Sirreth)
other: may think you disdain him, and use some outrage unto him, when you
call him to his face, by his bare name, and give him no addition.

And these terms of Seignory, service, and duetye, and such other like unto
these, as I have said: have lost a great part of their harshnes, and (as
herbs long steepte in the water) are sweetened, and made soft and tender, by
reason of much speech in men's mouths, and continual use to speak them. So
that we must not abhor the^, as some rude and rusticall fellows, full of
foolish simplicity, do: that would feign begin the letters we write to
Kings and Emperors after this sort. vz. If thou and thy children be in
health it is well: I am also in health: saying, that such was the beginning
of the letters, the Latins did write to the magistrates of Rome. If men should
live by their measure, and go back to those fashions and manners, our first
fathers did use: the world the^ by little and little, would come so about, that
we should feed upon acornes again.

And in these Duetifull Ceremonies, there be also certain rules and precepts,
we must observe: that we may not be touched with Vainesse and Pride. Vanity
and pride.
And first of all, we must consider the country where we do live. For all
customs be not current a like in all countries. Respect of country.
And peradventure that which they use in Naples, which is a City replenished
with gentlemen, of good houses and Lords of great power, were not so fit
for Florens and Luke: Which are inhabited, for the most part, with Mercha^ts
and plain gentlemen, without any Prince, Marquis, or Barone amongst them. So
that the brave and Lordelike manners of the gentlemen of Naples transported to
Florence: should be but waste, and more then needs: like a tall man's gown
cast over a dwarf: as also the manners of Florence should be to pinchinge and
strait, for the Noble natures and minds of the ge^tleme^ of Naples. And
although the ge^tleme^ of Venice, use great embracings and entertainementes
amongst themselves, and fawn without measure the one on the other, by reason
of their offices, degrees and favors they look to find when they meet and
assemble and choose their officers: yet for all this, it is not convenient,
that the good men of Rouigo, or the Citizens of Asolo, should use the like
sole^nities, embraceings and entertaineme^ts one to another, haueing no such
kind of cause amongst them: Albeit all that same country (if I be not
deceived) is fallen a little, into these kind of follies, as over careless and
apt enough by nature, or rather learning those manners of Venice their Lady and
Mistress: because Every man gladly seeks to tread the steps of his better:
although there be no reason for it.

Moreover we must have a regard to the time, to the age, and the condition of
him, Time, age, condition and calling must be respected.
to whom we use these ceremonies, and likewise respect our own calling: and
with men of credit maintain them: but with men of small account cut them of
clean, or at least, abridge them as much as we may, and rather give them a
beck the^ a due guard: Which the courtiers in Rome can very well skill to do.

But in some cases these Ceremonies be very combersome to a man's business, In
what case Ceremonies be cumbersome.
and very tedious: as, Cover your head, says the Judge, yt is busied with
causes, and is scanted of time to dispatche them. And this fellow so full of
these Ceremonies, after a number of legs and shuflinge curtesis, aunswers
again: Sir I am very well thus. But says the Judge again, Cover your head I
say. Yet this good fellow tourning twice or thrice to and fro, making low
conges down to the ground with much reverence and humility, aunswers him,
still: I beseache your worship, let me do my duty. This business and trouble
lasts so long, and so much time is trifled: that the Judge might very nere
have dispatched all his business within that space. Then, although it be every
honest man's part, and the duty of every meaner body, to honor the Judges,
and me^ yt be called to worship and honor: yet, where time will not bear it:
it is a very troublesome thing to use it, and it must be eschewed, or measured
with reason.

Neither be ye self same Ceremonies semely for young me^, respecting their Age:
yt old me^ do use together. Nor yet can it become men of mean and base
condition, to use the very same, yt ge^tleme^ and great men may use one to
another. And if we mark it well, we shall find, yt the greatest, ye best men,
and me^ of most valor, do not always use ye most Ceremonies the^ selves, nor
yet love nor look a man should make many goodly curtsies unto them, as men
that can ill spend their thoughts one matters so vain.

Neither must handy crafts men, nor me^ of base condition, buisie the^ selves
to much, in over solemn Ceremonies to great men, and Lords: it is not looked
for in such. For they disdain them, more then allow the^: because it seems
that in such, they seek and look, rather for obedience and duty, then
honor. And therefore it is a foul fault in a servant, to offer his master
his service: for he cou^ts it his shame, and he thinks the servant does make a
doubt, whether he is master or no: as if it were not in him to employ him, and
co^mau^d him too. These kind of Ceremonies would be used frankely. For, What
a man does of duty, is taken for a debte, and he finds him self little
beholding to him that does it. But he that does more, then he is bound to: it
seems he parts with somewhat, and that makes men to love him, and to
commend him for a liberal man. And I remember me well, I have heard it
said, that a worthy Graecia^ a great versifier, was ever wont to say: that
He that could skill to entertain men with a small adventure, made a great
gain.

You shall then use your Ceremonies, as the tailer shapes his garments, rather
to large then to little: but yet not so, that he cutteth one hose large enough
to make a cloak. And if thou do use in this point, some little gentle
behavior, to such as be meaner then thy self: thou shall be counted lowly.
And if thou do as much to thy betters: thou shall be said a Ge^tlema^ well
taught, Vanity.
and courtious. But he that does herin to much, and is over lauishe, shall be
blamed as vain and light: and perhaps worse thought of too: counted a busy
body, a fidging fellow, and in wife men's sight, a flatterer: which vice, our
elders have called, (if I do not forget me) dowble diligence. And there is no
fault in the world, more to be abhorred, or ye worsse beseemes a gentleman,
then this. And this is the third manner of Ceremonies, which simply proceeds
of our own will, and not of custom.

Let us the^ remember, that Ceremonies, (as I have always said) were not so
necessary by nature, but a man might do well enough without them: As for
example, our country lived (it is not long since) in manner clean without any.
But other men's diseases have infected us, with these infirmities and many mo.
So that, custom and use observed: the rest that is more, is but waste: and
such a sufferable leesing, as if it be more in deed then is in use, it is not
only insufferable, but forbidden: and so upon, the matter, a cold and
unsavory thing to noble minds, that cannot brouse upon shrubbes and shows.

And you shall understand, that trusting my own skill but little, in writing
this present treatise: I thought good to consult with many, and to take the
Judgment of better learned men then my self. And this in my reading I find.
There was a King, they call him Oedipus: Oedipus.
being banished and driven out of his country (upon what occasion I know not)
he fled to King Theseus Theseus.
at Athens, the better to save him self and his life, from his enemies, that
mainely pursued him. This Oedipus now coming before the presence of Theseus,
by good chance hearing his daughter speak, (whom he knew by her voice, for
he was blind and could not behold her with his eyes) he was so presently
stricken with joy, that, not tarying to do his allegeau^ce and duty to the
King, he did presently embrace, and make much of his daughter before him: his
fatherly affection so led him, and ruled him so. But in the end finding his
fault, and better aduising him self of his doings: he would needs excuse it to
Theseus, and humbly prayed his grace to pardon his folly. The good and wise
King, cut of his talk, and bad him leave his excuses, and thus said unto him:
Comfort thy self Oedipus, and be not dismayed at that thou have done. For I
will not have my life honored with other men's words, but with my own
deeds. Which se^te^ce a man should have always in mind.

And albeit men be well pleased, that me^ do give them worship and honor: yet
when they find them selves cuningly courted, they be soon weary of it, and
also disdain it. For these glauerings, or flatteries I should say, to amend
their knaueries and falsehoodes, have this fault withal: that these glauering
fellows do plainly show, they count him, whom they court in this sort, but
a vain, and arrogant body, an ass of gross capacity, and so simple, yt it
should be an easy matter to bayte him and take him too. And these Vain and
Curious Ceremonies, besides that they be superfluous: so they bear with all a
shape of flattery, so slenderly covered, that every man does openly see them,
and know them plain: in such sort, that they that do them, to the end to
make a gain, besides that ill that is in them, whereof I spoke before: show
them selves also, gentlemen ill taught, without good manner or any honest
fashion.

But there is another sort of Ceremonious people, who make it an art and
merchandise, and keep a book and a reconing of it. One these men (they say)
they must smile, on such men they must laughe: and, ye better man shall sit in
the chayr, and the other upon a low stool: which superstitious Ceremonies, I
believe, were transported out of Spain into Italy. But our country, has given
them but cold entertainment, and as yet they have taken but slender root
here: for this precise difference of worship, and gentry, is not liked of, with
us. And therefore it is but ill manner, for a man to make him self Judge, which
is the better man.

But it is much worse for a man to make a sale of his Ceremonies and
entertainme^ts, (after ye manner of harlots) as I have seen many gentlemen do
in the court, giving good words and fair countenaunces for a reward and
recompense, of the goods and the time, their servant have spent in their
service.

And sure they that take a pleasure to use over many Ceremonies, more then
need: show they do it upon a lustines and bravery, as men that have nothing
else in the^ of any valor.

And because these follies are learned with ease enough, and carry withal a
little fair gloss in show: they bestow all their whole minds none other
way. But grave matters they can not abide to weelde, as things to far above
their reach: and could find in their hearts to dwell in these toys and
tryfles, as men whose capacity conceiueth naught of Importance: like tender
mylkesops that can be are no bru^t: or that, beside a glorious outside, have
not metal enough in the^ to abide a flea biting. And therefore, they could
wish it worse: that these entertainments and acquaintance with me^, should go
no further then the first sight. And of these there be an infinite number.

And some again be to full of words, and abound to much in curtious gestures
to cover and hyde the defects and faults of their treacheries, and their vile
and base natures: For they see, if they should be as bare^ and rude in their
words, as they be in their deeds and their doings, me^ would in no case abide
them. And to say a truth, you shall find yt (...)of these two causes, draw
most men one, to use these wast and needles Ceremonies, and nothing else: which
lightly most men cannot away withal, because they be hindered by them, and
their means, to live as they would, and lose their liberty: which a man
does prefer above any thing else.

We must not speak ill of other me^, nor of their doings: although it
plainly appear, that men do willingly be^d good ear to hear it, as easily
moved thereto, by ye nature of malice and envy, that pynes at our Neighbors
prosperity and rising to worship and honor: for at length me^ will eschew the
acquayntau^ce of Slau^derous Slaundering.
people, as much as they shun the Ox, yt goreth with his horns, or strikes
with his feet: making their reconing, that what they tell them of us, as much
they will tell us, of them.

And some there be, Quareling.
that so quarrel at every word, question, and wrangle, Wrangling.
that they show they have little skill in other men's natures: Ouerthwarting.
for, Every man desires the victory should go one his side: and hates it
as much, to be mastered in words, as to be vanquished in any other act that he
does. So yt, wilfully to ouerthvvart a man, it workethe no Love and good
will: but rather displeasure, ^ancoure and malice. And therefore, he that sekes
to be well thought of, and would be taken for a plesaunt and good Companion,
must not so redily use these speeches: It was not so: And, Nay: it is as I tell
you. I will lay a wager with you: But he must rather take payns, to apply
himself to other men's mi^ds concerning such things, as have matter of small
importance: Because the victory, in such cases, is dangerous: for, the
gayninge the cause, in try^^ing questions, does often loose the Love of a
faithful friend. And men are so far out of love and liking, of such hot
fellows: that they will by no means grow acquaynted with such, least they
be driven every hour to bralle, to chide, and to fight with them for it. And
such kind of people do purchase these names: Conqueror.
Master Vniciguerra: Or, Ouerthwarter.
Sir Contraponi: Or, Sir Tutte^salle: And sometime: Know all.
il Dottor suttile. The subtle Doctor.


And if you chance otherwhile, to be entreated of the company to speak your
mind: I would have you do it after a gentle sort, without showing your self
so greedy to carry the bucklers away, as if you would eat them up for haste.
But thou must Leave to every man his part: And be it right or wrong,
consent to the minds of the most, or the most importunate: and so leave the
field unto them: that some other, and not your self, may beat and sweat, and
chase in the winning of the cause. For these quarelous contentions, be foul
and ill favored fashions for gentlemen to use: and they get them ill will and
displeasure of all men for it: and they be uncomely for their own
vnseemelines, which of it self offends every good honest mind, as it may
chance you shall hear hereafter.

But the common fault of men is such, Counceling and reproving*
and each man is so infected with this self love and liking of him self: that
he has no respect or care to please any man else.

And to show them selves five headed, of much understanding, and wise: they
counsel, reprove, dispute, and bralle, to daggers drawing, and allow nothing
else but that they say them selves.

To offer advise unrequested: what is it else but to vaunt your self wiser
then he is, whom you do counsel: nay rather, it is a plain check to him, for
his Ignorance and folly. And therefore, you must not^^ so; with all your
acquaintance generally: but only with your very friends, or such who^ you are
to govern and rule: or else, when a man hapely stands in danger and peril,
how much a stranger so ever he be. But in our common Acquaintance and
conversation, Let us not busy our selves, and meddle to much with other men's
doings. In which fault many do fall: but most of all, the men of least
understanding. For, Men of gross Capacities, consider but little: And they take
no long time to debate with them selves, as men that have little business to do.

But how so ever it be, He that counsels has ever a good conceit of him
self.
he that offers and gives his counsel: geues us to think, he has this
conceit of him self: that all the wit is in him, and other poor men have
none at all.

And sure there be some, that stand so much in conceit of their wit: that
they will be in manner, at wars, with him, that will not follow the counsel
they give them. And thus they will say. Very well: a poor man's counsel will
not be taken: such a one will do as he list: such a one geues no heed to
my words. As though there were not more Arrogancy in thee, that sekest to
bring a man to follow thy Counsel: then there is in him, that follows his
own advise.

And they do also make the like fault, Reproving and correcting of faults.
yt take upon them to reprove and correct men's faults, and to give a definite
sentence in all things, and lay the law to all men. Such a thing would not be
done: You spoke such words: Do not so: say not so: The wine that you drink
is not good for you: but would be red wine. You should use such an
Electuarie, and such pills: And they never leave to reprove and correct. And
let us pass that over, that otherwhile, they busy them selves so much, to
purge other men's grounds: that their own is ouergrowen, and full of thorns
and nettles. For it is a marvelous pain unto them, to hear one that side.

And as there be few or none, whose mids can frame, to spend their life with a
Physician, a Confessor, and much less a Judge that has iur^^diction and
power to controwle and correct all criminal faults: so is there not one, that
can take any pleasure to live, or make himself familiar with such Censors: so
hard, and severe. For, every man loves liberty: and they would rob us of
it, and get to be our masters. So that it is no good manner to be so redye to
corect and give rules unto me^: we must give Scholemasters and Fathers leave to
do that. And yet that notwithstanding, experience does show, the childeren and
scholars both, do often hide them selves from them, you see.

Do not allow, that a man should scorn or scoff Scorns and Scoffs.
at any man, what so euerhe be: no not his very enemy, what displeasure so ever
he bear him: for, it is a greater sign of contempt and disdain, to scorn a
man, then to do him an op^ vvro^g: forasmuch as wrongs may be done, either of
choler, or of some covetous mind or other. And there is no man will take a
displeasure with that, or for that, he does not set by: nor yet covet that
thing, he does altogether contemn.

So that, a man does make some account of him he does wrong: but of him that
he scoffs and scorns, he makes no reconing at all, or as little as may be.

And the Nature and effect of a scorn, The Nature of a scorn or a scoff.
is properly to take a contentation and pleasure to do another man shame and
villainy: though it do our selves no good in the world. So that, good manner and
honesty, would us beware we scorn no man in any case: wherein they be much to
be blamed, that reprove men those blemishes they have in their person, either
in words, as Master Forese da Rabatta did, laughing at the countenance of
Master Giotta: or in deeds, as many do, counterfeting those that stutter,
haulte, or be crooked shoulderd. And likewise, they that scoff at any man,
that is deformed, ill shapen, lean, little, or a dwarf, ar much to be blamed
for it: or that make a gybing and jesting at such follyes as another man
speaks, or the words that escape him by chance: and with all, have a
sport and a pleasure to make a man blush: all these spiteful behauiours and
fashions, worthily deserve to be hated, and make them that use them, unworthy
to bear the name of an honest gentleman. Bocc, Nouel. 5 Gior. 6. fo. 29^. ^.


And such as use to jest at a man, be very like unto these: I mean them that
have a good sport to mock Mockes.
and beguile me^, not in spite or scorn, but on a meriment alone. Difference
between a scorn and a mock
And you shall understand, There is no difference betvveene a scorn and a
mock: but the purpose alone and intent a man has, in the meaning the one the
other. For a man mockes and laughes otherwhile, in a sport and a pastime: but
his scorn is ever in a rage and disdain. Although in common speech and
writing, we take the one word sometime for the other. But He that does
scorn a man: feels a contentation in the shame he has done him: And he
that does mock, or but laughe: takes no contentation in that he has done:
but a sport, to be merry and pass the time away: where it would be, both a
grief and a sorrow, perchance, unto him, to see that man receive any shame,
by any thing he said or did unto him.

And although I profited little, in my Grammar in my youth: yet I remember
that Mitio, who loved Aeschines so much, that he him self had wonder at it:
yet other while, took a sport and a pleasure to mock him: as when he said to
him self: I will go to give him a mock: so that, I must infer, that the
self same thing, done to the very self same body: according to the intent of
him that does it, may be either a mock or scorn.

And because our purpose, cannot be plainly known unto other men: it shall
not be good for us to use such parts, as bring men in doubt and suspicion, what
our intent and meaning is in them: but rather let us eschew them, then seek
to be counted Iesters. For, It many times chances, in boording and Jesting,
one tackes in sport, the othet strykes again in earnest: and thus from
playing, they come to fraying. So, he that is familiarly mockte in pastime,
recons it, otherwhile, to be done to his shame and dishonor, and thereat he
takes a disdain. Besides this, A mock is no better, then a deceyte. And
naturally, it greueth every man to err and be deceived. So that, many Reasons
there be to prove, That He that seeks to purchase goodwill, and be well thought
of: must not make him self to cunning in mockes and Iestes.

It is very true, we are not able, in no wise, to lead this paineful life,
altogether without some pleasure and solace: And because Iestes do give us some
sport, and make us merry, and so co^seque^tly refreash our spirits: we love
them that be pleasant, merry conceited, and full of solace. So that a body
would think, I should rather persuade the contrary: I mean, I should say:
It is convenient and meet in company, to use pretty mockes, and otherwhile some
Iestes and taunts. And without doubt, they that can slint after a friendly and
gentle sort, be much more made of, and better beloved then they that cannot
skill or have no wit to do it. Howbeit, it is needeful in this, to have a
respect to many things.

And forasmuch as it is the intent of him that does Jest: to make a sport and
pastime at his fault, whom he does love and esteem, and of whom he does make
more the^ a common account: it must be well lookte to, that the fault, wherein
his friend has fallen, be such, as he may sustain no slander or shame, or
any harm by any talk or Ieste he makes upon it: otherwise, his skill does ill
serve him, to make a good difference between a pleasant Jest, and a very
plain wrong.

And there be some men, Bocc. Nouel. 8 Gior. 9. fo. 430
so short and so testy, that you must, in no wise, be merry, nor use any
jesting with them. And that can Biondello well tell, by Master Philippo
Argenti in the gallery of Cauiccioli.

And moreover, It cannot be good to ieaste in matters of weite, and much less
in matters of shame. No Jesting in matters of weight or of hame.
For, men will ween that we have a good sport (as the common saying is) to
brag and boast in our evil: Bocc. Nouel. ^ Gior. 6. fo. 294.
as it is said, the Lady Philippe of Prato, took a singular pleasure and
conte^tation in the pleasant and pretty au^swer she made, Lupo is the proper
name of a man as well as a wolf.
to excuse her loose and wanton life. And therefore, I cannot think that Lupo
of Vberti did any thing extenuat or lesse^ his shame: but rather increaste it
greater, by the Ieste that he made to excuse his fault, and qualify the
opinion of his cowardly mind. For, where he might have kept him self safe
without danger in the castle of Laterin, wherein he was besieged round about,
and shut up: he thought he had plaide the man good inoughe, in that he
could say at the yealding it up: that A wolf does not love to be besieged and
shut up. For, where it is out of time for to laughe, there to use any Iestes
or daliaunce, it has a very cold Grace.

And further, you shall understand, there be some Iestes yt bite, and some yt
bite not at all. For the first sort: Bocc Nouel. ^ Gior. 6. fo. 288 Iestes and
Taunts.
let yt wise counsel that Lauretta gave for that point, suffice to teach you:
That Iestes must bite the hearer like a sheep, but not like a dog. For if it
pinche, as the byte of a dog: it shall be no more a Ieste but a wrong. And
the laws almost in all countries, will, that who says any villainy unto a
man, shall be grievously punished for it. And, perchance, it were not amiss, to
provide with all, some sharp correction for him, that should byte in way of
jesting, beyond all honest measure. But gentlemen should make account, that the
law that punishes wrongs, extends as far to iestes, and that they should
seldom or very easily nyp or taunt any man.

And besides all this, you must understand, that a jest, whether it bite, or
bite not, if it be not fine and full of wit, men take no pleasure at al to
hear it, but rather are wearied with it: or at least wise, if they do laughe,
they laughe not at the jest, but at the iester him self, that brings it forth
so cold.

And because, Iestes be no other thing but deceites: and deceit (as a thing
that is framed of subtilenes and craft) cannot be wrought but of men, that have
fine and ready wits, and very present: therefore they have no grace in men
that be rude, and of gross understanding: nor yet in them always, that have
the best and floweing wits: as, peradventure, they did not altogether beco^e
Master John Boccaccio.

But tau^tes and Iestes be a special redines and aptnes of wit, and quicken the
motions of the mind: wherefore they that have discretion, do not in this
point, consider their will, but their disposition of nature: and after they
have once or twice tried their wits, and find them unfit for such purpose:
they leave to labor them selves any further in that kind of exercise: that it
may not chance unto them, Bocc. Nouel. 2. Gior, 6. fo. 287.
that hapt to the knight of the lady Horetta. And if you look in to the manners
of many, you shall easily see, this that I tell you is true: I say, that To
Jest or to taunt, is not current with every man that will, but only with them
that can. And there be many that for every purpose, have in their mouth ready,
many of these words, which we call Bicticcichi: that have no manner of sense
or meaning in them. And some, that use very foolishly and fondly to change
Sillables into words. And some you shall hear speak and make answer, Because
these speeches have no grace in our English tou^ge, I leave them in the
Italian. But our tongue has such absurd jests as plentifully as any other tongue.
otherwise the^ a man would lightly look for, without any wit or pleasure in
the world in their talk. And if you do ask them, Dove e il signore? they
answer again. Dove egli ha i piedi: and likewise. Gli frae vnguer le mani con
le grascia di signore Giouan Boccadoro. Dove mi manda egli? Ad Arno. Io mi
voglio radere, Sarebbe meglio rodere. Va chiama il Barbieri. Et perrhe non il
Barbadomanie. Al which be to gross, to rude, and to stale: Bocc. Nouel. 10.
Gior. 5. fo. 281.
and such were almost, all the pleasant purposes and iestes of Dioneo.

But I will not take upon me at this time, to discourse of the best and the
worst kind of iestes, what they be: as well for that other men have written
treatises thereof much more lernedly and better the^ I can: as also, because
iestes and tauntes, have at first sight, a large and sure proof of their grace
or disgrace: such, as thou can not do much amiss in this point, without thou
stand to much in thy own conceyte, and think to well of thy self: for where
the jest is pretty and pleasant, there a man strait is merry, and shows a
liking by laughi^g, and makes a kind of admiration of it. So that, where the
company geues forth no liking of thy sportes and conceits, by their mirthes
and their laughing: hold thy self still then, and jest no more. For it is thy
own fault thou must think, and not theirs that do hear the: forasmuch as the
hearers, as it were allured, with the redye, pleasant, and subtle aunswers or
questions (do what they can, will they or nill they) cannot forbear their
laughing, but laughe in spyte of their teeth. From whom as from our right and
lawful Judges, we must not appeal to our selves.

Neither must a man, to make other men merry, speak foul and filthy words,
nor make ill-favored gestures, distorting his cou^tenau^ce, and disfiguring his
body. For, No man should, for other men's pleasures, dishonest and dishonor
him self. Bocc. Nouel. 10. Gior. 5. fo. 281.
It is an art for a Iuggler and iester to use: it does not become a gentleman
to do so. It is the beginning of a so^g.
We must not then, imitate ye common and rude behauiours of Dioneo. Madonna
Aldruda Alzate La coda.

Nor we must not cou^terfet our selves to be fools and unsavory doltes: but
as tune and occasion serves, tell so^e pretty tale or so^e news, never heard
of before, he yt ca^: and he yt cannot, let him hold his peace. For, these be
ye parts of ye wit: which, if they be sudden and pretty, give a proof and a
show of ye quicknes of ye wit, and the goodness of ye manners of him ye speaks
the^: which thing does very much please men and makes the^ our lovers and
friends. But if they be otherwise, they work the^ a contrary effect. For, man
would ween the ass would play his part: or yt so^e hody dody and louberly
lout would friske and dau^ce in his doublet. There is another plesau^te kind of
co^municatio^: Long talk and discourse.
and yt is when ye pleasure and grace does not consist in one merry co^ceite
alone, but in long and continued talk: which would be well disposed, well
uttered, and very well set forth, to show ye manners, ye fashio^s, ye gestures
and behauiours of the^ we speak, of so properly and lively, as ye hearer should
think that he hears the^ not rehearsed, but sees them with his eyes do those
very things he hears them to speak of: which be very well observed by the
gentlemen and gentlewomen both, in Boccace: although yet otherwhile (if I be
not deceived) they do affect and counterfeit, more the^ is sightly for a
gentleman or gentlewoman to do, like to these Comedy Players. And to do this
well, you must have the matter, the tale, or the story, you take upon you to
tell, perfect in your mind: and words so ready and fit, that you need not
say in the end: Bocc. Nouel. 2. Gior. 6. fo. 287.
That thing, and the other thing: This man, what do you call him: That matter,
help me to term it: And, remember what his name is. For this is just the trot
of the knight of the lady Horetta. And if you do rehearse any chance, in which
there be many speakers: you must not say: He said and he answered: because
this word (He) serves for all men. So that the hearer that harkens unto it,
is easily deceived, and forgets who^e you mean. Then, It behoues them that
discourse matters at length, to use proper names, and not to change them after.

And more over, a man must beware that he say, not those things, which vnsaide
in silence would make ye tale plesau^t inoughe, and, peradventure, give it a
better grace to leave them out. As to say thus. Such a one, that was the son
of such a one, that dwelt in Cocomer street: do you not know him? he married
the daughter of Gianfigliazzi, the lean scragge, that went so much to Saint
Laraunce. No? do not you know him? why? do you not remember the goodly straight
old man that ware long hair down to his shoulders? For if it were nothing
material to the tale, whether this chance befell him, or him: all this long
babble, and fond and folishe questions, were but a tale of a Tubbe: to no
purpose, more then to weary men's ears that harken to it, and long to
understand the end. As peradventure our Dant has made this fault otherwhile,
where he says: And borne my parents were of yoare in Lu^bardie,
And eke of Ma^tuaes soil they both by country be.


For, it was to no purpose, whether his mother were borne at Gazuolo, or else
at Cremona.

But I learned once of a stranger, a Rethorician very learned, a necessary
lesson concerning this poinct: that Men must dispose and order their tale,
first with by names, and then rehearse them (as need is) that be proper. For,
the bynames always bear the respect of the persons quality: but the other
are to be used at the Fathers discretion, or his whom they concern.

And therefore, that body whom in your thought and imagination to your self,
you do conceive, Bocc. Nouel 6 Gior. 1. fo. 41.
might be Lady Covetousness her self: in speech you shall call Master Erminio
Grimaldi^: if such be the common opinion, the country has of him. And, if
there be no man in place where you dwell, so notoriously known as might serve
the turn fit for your purpose: you must then imagine the case further of, and
set him a name at your pleasure. It is very true, that With much greater
pleasure we harken, and better behold (as it were with our eyes) what soever
is told us of me^ of our acquaintance, if the matter be such as touches their
manners: then what we do hear of strangers and men unknown unto us. And
the reason is this: when we do know, that such a man is wont to do so: we
do easily believe, he has done so indeed: and we take as much knoweledge
of him, as if we were present: where it chances not so with us, in the case
of a stranger.

Our words (be it in long discourses or other communication) Must be so
plain, Words would be plain.
that all the company may easily understand them: and withal, for sound and
sense they must be apt and sweet. For if you be to use one of these two
words: you shall rather say, Il ventre: The, Belly.
then L' Epa. And where your country speech will bear it, The Liver.
you shall rather say: The Paunche.
La Pancia, then L' Ventre: Or, il Corpo. The Belly.
For, by these means you shall be understood, The Body.
and not miss understood, as we Florentines say, nor be dark and obscure to
the hearers. The which thing our Poet, meaning to eschew: in this very word
it self (I believe) sought to fide out another, not thinking much of his
pains (because it lyked him well) to seek far to borrow it else where. And
said: Remember how the Lord a man was feign to be,
For man's offense and sin in Cloister of virginity.


And albeit Dant the learned Poet, did set by such kind of rules: I do not
think yet, a man should allow well of him in doing so. And sure, I would not
counsel you to make him your Master in this point, to learn A Grace:
forasmuch as he him self had none. For, this I find in a Chronicle of him.

This Dant, was somewhat proud for his knowledge, scornful and disdainful,
and much (as Philosophers be) without any grace or courtesy: having no skill
to behave him self in company.

But to come to our purpose again: I say, our speech must be plain: which
will be easy enough to do: if you have wit to choose those words that be
naturally bred in our soil: and with all not so old with Age, that they are
become rotten and withered: and as ouerworne apparel, leaft of and cast a
side. Old words out of use,
As, Spaldo, and Epa, and Vopo, and Sezzaio, and Primaio. And moreover, the
words you shall use, Gergo is a very doubtful manner of speech, as it were
in Riddles: and very ambiguous.
must have no double understanding, but simple. For by coupling such words
together: we frame that speech that is called Aenigma. And to speak it
plainer in our own language, we call it Gergo. As in this verse: ^o vidi un
che da set passatoi
Fu da un canto all' altro trapassato.


Again, Ap^ words and proper.
our words would be, (as nere as they might be) aptly and properly applied to
that thing we go about to deliver, and as little as may be, common to other
matters: for, in so doing, a man shall ween, the matter it self is openly
laid before him: and that it is not expressed with words, but pointed forth
with the finger. And therefore we may more properly say: A man is known by his
countenance, then by his figure or counterfeit. Dant. 23. Infer.
And Dant did better express the matter, when he said. The weightes
That peize the weight do make the bala^ce creek,
Then if he had said
Cry out and make a noise.


And it is a more proper and peculiar speech to say, The shiuering of an ague,
then to call it The cold. And flesh that is Tidie, to term it rather, Fat:
then Fulsome.

There be some words more in this place to like effect, which I mean not to
stand upon now: because our English tou^ge cannot hansomely deliver their
perfect meaning. For the Italians have (as we have, and all other Countries
else as well as we) certain peculiar words and terms, so naturally and
properly their own, as it is not possible to express them aptly and perfectly
in any other Language. And therefore the Author him self, fearing, or knowing
as much in the sense of these words, which he has inferred in this place (as
it were preventing a blame) in manner excuses and speaks as much as I say, as
the matter it self that insueth does show. For, the Author him self
following his purpose says thus.

I am well assured, if some stranger should, unhappily for my credit, hit
upon this t^eatise of mine: he would laughe me to scorn, and say that I
taught to speak in riddles, or else in Ciphers. For as much as these words,
be almost so properly our own, that other countries have no acquaintance
with them: or, if they vvoulde use them, yet they cannot tell how to
understand them. For, who is it that knovves what Dant meant in this verse.

Gia veggia per Mezzul perdere o Lulla. Dant. 28. Infer.
Sure, I believe no man else but we that are Florentines can understand it.
Notvvithstanding, for any thing that I have said, if there be any fault in
this text of Dant: it is not in the words. But, if he have faulted, it is
rather in this: that (as a man somevvhat vvilfull) he would take upon him, a
matter hard to be uttered in words, and peradventure vnplesaunt to hear:
then that he has expressed it ill.

It is not then for a man to use any talk, Talk in a foreign Language.
with him that understands not that language you talk unto him. Nor yet,
because a Douche man understands not the Italian tongue, must we (for that
cause) break of our talk, to hold talk with him, to make our selves
counterfets, as Master Brufaldo did, and as some other be wont, that fondly
and coldly, without any grace, thrust them selves in to Chat in their language
with whom they talk, what so ever it be, and chop it out every word
preposterously. And many times it chances, the Spaniard talks Italian with
the Italian, and the Italian babbles again in a braueuery and gallantnes, the
Spanishe tongue with the Spaniard. And yet, it is an easier thing to know, yt
they both talk like strangers: then to forbear to laugh at the folish follies
that escape them both in speech. Let us not therefore use our foreign
language, but when it is needful for us to be understood, for some
necessity or other, that appertains unto us: And in common use, use our own
tongue, though not altogether so good: rather then a foreign language,
better then our own that is natural unto us. For a Lumbarde shall speak his
own tongue more aptly (which is, notwithstanding, but base and barbarous) then
he shall speak the Tuscane, or other language: even because he has not so
redily, so proper and peculiar words, although he study much for them, as
we our selves that be Tuscanes.

But yet, if a man have a respect to them with whom he talks: and for that
cause forbear and leave out those singular words, (which I have spoken of)
and instead of the^ use the general and common: his talk, by such means,
shall have the less pleasure and delight.

Besides this, Words that have no honest meaning in them.
it becomes every honest gentleman, to eschew those words that have no
honest meaning. And, The goodness of words consists either in their sound, or
pronouncing: or, in their sense and meaning. For a much as some words speak an
honest matter, and yet, perchance, there is a certain dishonest sense
perceived to stand in the pronouncinge of the word it self: Rinculare, is to
draw backwarde, arselonge.
as Rinculare: which, notwithstanding, is daily used of all men. But if a man
or woman should speak after this sort, and at that very warning do it in
sight of any (I mean shuffle backwarde upon their tail) then would the
grosenesse of the word plainly appear unto them. But our Palate, through
Custom and Use, happily tastes ye wine (as it were) and the bestnes of the
sense of the word, and not ye Dregs or Leeze. She gave the Spanish fig
with both her thumbes at once. Dant. 25. infer
Says Dant. Fiche, is the thrusting of the thumb betvveene the forefinger:
which either for the word or the remembrance of somthinge thereby signified,
is reputed amongste the Italians as a word of Shame.


But our women, would be much ashamed to speak so: yea to shu^ne this
ambig^ous word, yt signifies a worse matter, they rather say Le castagne.
Albeit yet some of them at unawares, many times, name that unadvisedly, which if
another man had spoken to try them, would have made them blushe to hear that
remembered in way of blasphemy, which makes them women. And therefore, such as
be, or would be better mannered or taught, (...)me
take good heed they do eschew, not only things unclean and dishonest, but
words also: and not somuche those that be evil indeed, but those that may
be, or do but seem to be dishonest, foul and filthy: as some men say these
areof Dant. Dant* 17. (...).
She blewe large blastes of wind
Both in my face and under.


Or else these.

I pray thee tell me where about the hole does stand. And one of the Spirits
said.

Then come behind and where the hole is, it may be scand. And you must know,
that albeit two, or more words, otherwhile chance to tell one self thing,
yet the one is more cleanly then the other. As for example, to say: She lay
with him: and she satisfied his desire with her person. For this self same
speech, if it were in other terms, would be to broad before and to filthy to
hear it. And speaking of Endymion, you may more aptly say: Il Vago della Luna:
then you can say Il Drudo, although both these words do import and signify
A lover, and a Friend. And a much honester speech is it, if you talk of
Aurora, to call, her. Tritons pretty gerle and lover, then Concubine. And it
better becomes a ma^s and woman's mouth, to call Harlots, vvome^ of the world
(as Belcolore did, who was more ashamed to speak it then to do it) then to
use their common name: Thais is a Harlot. And as Boccac^ declared yt power of
whores and boys. For, if he had termed the males, by their beastly occupation,
as he termed the women: his talk would have been foul and shameful. And
withal, A man must not alone bevvare of dishonest and filthy talk* Base
words and Vile.
but also of that which is base and vile, and especially where a man talks
and discourses of great and high matters. And for this Cause, perchance,
woorthely some blame our Beatrice, sayeing: To pass through Lethes flood, the
highest Fates would blott,
If man might taste the Viandes such, Dant. 30. Purgato.
as there do fall by Lot,
And not pay first a due repentance for his scott.


For, in my conceit, these base words that come out of the Tauernes, be
very uncomely for such a worthy discourse. And when a man has like occasion
to speak of ye Sun, it shall not be good to call it The Candell or the Lamp
of the world: because such words do put us in mind of ye Oil, and the
stuff of the kitchyn. Neither should a man that is well advised, Drudo,
signifiethe a lascivious lover.
say that Saint Dominicke was Il Drudo della Theologia: Nor yet talk, that
the glorious Saints have spoken such base and vile words: As for Example
to say. Dant. 22. Infer.
And leave to scratche whereas the scabs of sin break out,

For they savor of ye dregs, and ye filth of ye common people, as every man
may easily see.

Again, in your long and large discourses, you must have ye like
co^sideratio^s and cares, and some more: ye which you may more co^modiously
learn of your Masters yt teach you yt art, that is commonly called
Rhetorike.

And amongst other things, You must accustom your self, Gentle words in
Communication.
to use such gentle and courtious speech to men, and so sweet, that it may
have no manner of bitter taste. And you shall rather say, I cannot tell how to
say it: The^ say: you ar deceived: Or, it is not true: Or, you know it not.
For, it is a courteous and friendly part to excuse a man's fault, even in that
very thing, wherein you know how to blame him. And withal, it does well, to
make the proper and peculiar fault of your friend, indifferent and common to
you both: and first, to take one piece to your self, and then after, to blame
and reprove him for it. We were deceived and failed much: we forgot our
selves yesterday to do so. Although such negligence and error, or what
soever it be: be altogether his fault and not yours. And Restagnone forgot him
self much, when he said to his companions: If your words do not lie. For,
A man should not bring another man's faith and honesty in question and
doubt. But, if a man promise you any thing, and do not perform it: it shall
not do well, for you to say unto him: You have lost your credit with me:
without some necessary cause do drive you to say so, as to save your own
credit and honesty. But, you shall rather say: You could not do it: Or, you
did not remember to do it: The^, you have clean forgotten me. For, these
kind of speeches, have some prickles and stinges of Complaint, Anger and
Choler. So that, such as use them selves to speak such churlishe and
fu^^ishe words, are taken for sharp and sower fellows: and men do as much
shun their acquaintance: as to thrust them selves upon thorns and thistles.

And because I know some, of this naughty co^ditio^ and quality: I mean some
yt be so hasty and greedy to speak, yt they take no^ the sense with them, but
over pass it and run before it, as the grehound, that does not pinche by
ouershooting his game: therefore I will not spare to tell you that, which may be
thought needeles to touch, as a thing to well known: and that is, that You
shall never speak, before you have first considered and laid the plot in your
mind what it is you have to say. Parto and n^^ Isconciatura.
For in so doing, your talk shall be well delivered and not borne before the
time. I trust, strangers will easily bear with this word: if at least they
vouchsafe to read these trifles of mine. And it you do not skorne my
precepts: it shall never chance you to say: vvelcome Master Agostino, to
such a one, whose name is Agnolo, or Bernardo. And you shall never need to say,
Tell me your name: Nor say again, I said not well: Nor, Lord what do I
call him: Nor to hack and to stutter long together, to find out a word,
Master Artigo: no Master Arabico: Tushe, what do I call him I should say,
Master Agabito. These fond and foolish behauiours and fashions, pain a man
as much to hear the^, as to be drawn and haled with cords.

The voice would be neither hoarse nor shrill. Voice and Tongue.
And, when you laugh and sport in any sort: you must not cry out and criche
like the Pullye of a well: nor yet speak in your yavvning. I know well it is
not in us, to give our selves a ready tongue or perfect voice at our own will
and pleasure. He yt does stutter, or is hoarse: let him not always babble and
gabbe, and keep a court alone: let him rather a mend the defect of his tongue
with silence, and hearing: and withal (if he can) with study diminishe the
fault of Nature. It is an ill noise to hear a man raise his voice high, like
to a common Crier. And yet I would not have him speak so low and softly, that
he that harkens, shall not hear him. And if he be not heard at yt first time
he speaks, he must speak, the next time, somewhat plainer: but yet, not
yoape out aloude, that he make not men think he is wood and angry with them:
for he shall do but well, to rehearse that again he has spoken, yt men may
understand what he said.

Your words would be disposed, Manner of Speech.
even as the common use of speech does require and not vnsorted, disordered
and scattered co^fusedly: as many be wont to do upon a bravery, whose manner
of talk is more like a Scriuener (me think) that reads in his mother
tongue, the Inde^ture he has written before in latin: then a man that
reasons or talks in his Natural language: as this for example. They draw
by sent of false and fained steps of truth.

Or if a man should preposterously place his words thus. Those times did
blossoms give before their time of soothe.

Which manner of speech, may be otherwhile allowed in versifiers: but it is
utterly forbidden in common talk.

And, it behoues a man, not only to shu^ne this versifying manner of speech,
in his familiar and common discourse, or talk: but likewise eschew ye pomp,
bravery, and affectation, that may be suffered and allowed to inriche an
Oration, spoken in a public place. Otherwise, me^ that do hear it, will but
spyte it, and laughe him to scorn for it.

Albeit perchance, a Sermon may show a greater cunning and art, then common
talk. But, Every thing must have his time and place. For, he that walks by
the way must not dance, but go. For, every man has not the skill to dance,
and yet every man ca^ skill to go. But, Dancing is meet for feasts and
weddings: it is not to use in the streets. You must then take good heed you
speak not with a majesty.

It is thought by many Philosophers. And such is all Filocolo, and the other
treatises of Master John Boccace, except his greater work, and little more
perchance Corbaccio.

I would not for all this, that you should use so base a speech, as ye scum, as
it were, and the froth of the meanest and vilest sort of people, Launderers
and Hucksters: but such as gentlemen should speak and talk, which I have
partly told you before, in what sort it may be done: that is, if you talk of
matters that be neither vile, vain, foul, nor lothesome. And if you have
skill to choose amongst the words of your own country speech, the purest
and most proper, such as have the best sound, and best sense, touching nor
remembering, in no case, no matter that is foul, vile and base: and if you can
place your words in good order, and not shoofle them together at randon, nor
yet, with over much Curious study, file them (as it were) one your beads.
Moreover, if you do dispose such things as you have to say with discretion. And
take good head that you couple not unfit and unlikely matters together: as for
Example. As sure as God is in Heaven:
So stands the staff in the chimny corner.


And if you speak not so slow, as if you were unlusty: nor so hasty, as if
you were hu^grie: but as a wise and a temperate man should do. Likewise, if you
pronounce your words and your ^illables with a certai^e grace and sweetness:
not as a Scholemaister yt teatheth young Children to read and to spell. Neither
must you mumble them nor supp them up, as if they were glued and pasted
together one to another. If you remember these and such other rules and
precepts: your talk will be liked, and heard with pleasure eno^ghe: and you
shall well maintain the state and countenance, that well besemeth a gentleman
well taught and honest.

Besides these, there be some, that never hold their tongue. Talkatiue
Fellows.
And as the ship that sails, does not presently stand still, by taking down
the sails: So do they run forward, as carried away with a certain brayde:
and loosing the matter of their talk, yet leave not to babble, but either
repeat that again that is said, or else speak still they cannot tell what.

And there be other so full of babble, that they will not suffer another to
speak. And as we do see otherwhile, upon the flowers in the country where
they thresh corn, one Pullet pull the corn out of the others beak: so do
they catch the tale out of his mouth yt began it, and tell it them selves.
And sure, such manner of people, induce men to quarrel and fight with them for
it. For, if you do mark it well: Nothing moves a man sooner to anger: then
when he is soudainely cut short of his will and his pleasure, be it of never so
little and small importance. As when you gape wide with yawning: another
should thrust his hand in your mouth: or when you do lift your arm ready to
hurl a stone: it is soudainly stayde by one that stands behind you. Even
then, as these doings, and many more like unto these, which tend to hinder the
will and desire of another (albeit but in way of sport and of play) are
unseemly, and would be eschewed: So in talk and communication with men, we
should rather pull one, and further their desiers, by what means we can, then
stop them and hinder them in it.

And therefore, If any man be in a redines to tell his tale: it is no good
manner to interrupte him: nor to say that you do know it well. Or, if he
besprinckle his tale here and there, with some pretty lie: you must not reprove
him for it, neither in words nor in gesture, as shaking your head, or scowling
upon him, as many be wont: gloriously vaunting them selves, that they can, by
no means, abide the taste of a Lie (...)* But, this is not the reason of this,
it is the sharpenes and sowernes of their own rusticall and eager Natures,
which makes them so venomous and bitter in all companies they come: that no man
cares for their acquaintance.

Likewise, It is an illfauoured condition to stop another ma^s tale in his
mouth: and it spites him as much, as if a man should take him by the sleeue and
hold him back, even when he is ready to run his course. And when another
man is in a tale, it is no good manner for you, by telling the company some
news, and drawing their minds to other matters, to make them forsake him
clean, and leave him alone. For, it is an vncourtious part for you to lead
and carry away the company: which the other (not you) has brought together.

And, when a man tells his tale, you must give good ear unto him: that you may
not say otherwhile, O what? Or, how? which is many a man's fashion to do. And
this is as much trouble and pain to him that speaks: as to shoofle against ye
stones, to him that goes. All these fashions, and generally, that which may
stop, and that which may trauerse the course of another man's talk, must be
shunned.

And, if a man tell his tale ^lowe like a drawelatche: you must not yet hasten
him forward, nor lend him words, although you be quicker in speech then
he. For, many do take that ill, and specially such, as persuade themselves
they have a Ioly grace in telling a tale. For, they do imagine you think not
so well of the^, as they the^ selves do: And that you would give them
instructions in their own Art: as Merchaunts that live in great wealth and
plenty, would count it a great reproach unto them, that a man should proffer
them money, as if they lived in lack, and were poor and stood in need of
relief. And yo^ must understand, that, Every man in his own conceit, thinks
he can tell his tale well: although for modesty sake he deny it. And I cannot
guess how it comes to pass, that the veriest fool does babble most: which
over much prattle, I would not have a gentleman to use, and specially, if his
skill be but scant in the matter in talk: Not only, because it is a hard
matter: but, He must ru^ in many faults that talks much: but also, because a
man weenes, that, He that talks all the talk to him self, would (after a
sort) prefer him self above them all that hear him, as a Master would be
above his scholars. And therefore, It is no good manner for a man to take upon
him a greater state, the^ does become him. And in this fault, not men alone,
but many countries fall into, so cackling and prattling: that, woe be their
ears that give the^ hearing.

But, as over much babble makes a man weary: so does over much Silence Silence
procure as great disliking. For, To use silence in place where other men
talk to and fro: is in manner, as much a fault, as not to pay your share and
scot as other men do. And as speech is a mean to show men your mind, to
whom you speak: so, does Silence again make me^ wene, you seek to be
unknown. So yt, as those people which use to drink much at feasts, and make
them selves drunk, are wont to thrust the^ out of their company, that will
not take their drink as they do: So be these kind of mute and still
fellows, coldly welcome to pleasant and merry company, that meet to pass
the time away in pleasure and talk. So that, It is good manner for a man to
speak, and likewise to hold his peace, as it comes to his turn, and occasion
requires.

As an old Chronicle makes mention. There was in the parts of Morea, a very
good workma^ in y^ stone: Who for ye si^gular good skill he had in his Art, was
called (as I take it) Maestro Chiarissimo. Maestro Chiarissimo.
This man (now well strooken in years) made a certain treatise, and therein
gathered together al ye precepts and rules of his art: as the man yt had very
good skill to do it: showing in what sort the proportions and lineaments of
the body, should be duly measured, as well every one a part by it self, as
one respecting another: yt they might justly and duly be answerable ye one to
the other: which treatise of his, he named Regolo. Regolo.
Meaning to show, that according to that, all the Images and pictures, that
from thensforth any workema^ should make, should be squared and lined forth: as
ye beams, and ye stones, and the walls, are measured by ye rules and precepts
of that book. But, for that it is a much easier matter to speak it, then to
work it, or do it: and besides that, The greatest number of men, especially
of us that be profane and not learned, have our senses much quicker then our
understanding, and consequently, better conceive particular things and
Examples, then the general propositions and Syllogismes (which I might term
in plainer speech, Reasons) for this cause this worthy man I speak of, having
regard to the Nature of workmen: whose capacities are unfit and unable to
weeld the weighte of general Precepts and rules: and to declare more plainly,
with all his cunning and skill: having found out for his purpose, a fine marble
stone, with much labor and pain, he fashioned and shaped an Image of it, as
perfectly proportioned in every part and member: as the precepts and rules of
his treatise had before devised. And as he named the book, so did he name that
Image, and called it by name of Regolo.

Now, (and it pleased god) I would I could but one part of those twoe points,
which that noble Ingrauer and worckeman I speak of, had perfect skill and
knowledge to do: I mean, that I could gather together in this treatise, after
a sort, the due measures of this Art I take upon me to treat of. For, to
perform the other, to make the second Regolo: I mean, to use and observe in
my manners, the measures I speak of, frami^g and forming, as it were, A Visible
Example, and a material Image of them: it were now, to much for me to do.
For as much as, It is not enough to have knowledge and Art, in matters
concerning manners and fashions of men: But it is needful withal, to work
them to a perfect effect, to practice and use them much: which cannot be had
upon the soudaine, nor learned by and by: but it is number of years that must
win it: and ye best part of mine be run fourth already, you see.

But for all this, you must not make ye less reconing of these precepts. For,
A man may well teach another the way: although he have gone out of the way
himself. And peradventure, they that have lost their ways, do better remember
the hard ways to find: then they that never went a miss. And, if in mine
infancy, when minds be tender and pliable, like a young ^wigge, they that had
ye charge and government of me, had had the skill to smoothe my manners,
(perhaps of Nature somewhat hard and rude) and would have polished and wrought
them fine: peradue^tute I should have been such A one, as I travail to make
thee Now, whom I love no less then if thou were my son. Nature must be
maystered by Reason.
For albeit, the power of Nature be great* yet is she many times Maistered and
corrected by custom: But, we must in time begin to encounter and bea^e her
down, before she get to much strength and hardines. But most men will not do
so: but rather yealding to their appetite without any striving, following it
where so ever it leads the^, think they must submit themselves to Nature:
As though Reason were not a natural thing in man. But, Reason has (as a Lady
and Mistress) power to change old customs, Reason does change old
Customs and helps Nature.
and to help and hold up Nature, when she does at any time dec^y and fall. But
very seldom we harken unto her. And yt for ye most part, makes us like unto
the^ whom god has not endued with Reason: I mean brute beasts, in whom
notwithstanding, something yet works: not their own Reasons (for they have
none of them selves) but ours: as in horses you see it: which by nature would
be ever wild, but yt their ryder makes them tame, and withal, after a sort,
ready and very well paced. For many of them would have a hard trot, but that the
rider makes them have an easier pace. And some he does teach to stand still,
to galopp, to tread the ringe, and do the carreere: And they learn to do it
all well you see. Then, if the horse, the dog, ye hawk, and many other beasts
besides, more wild then these, be guided and ruled by Reason, and learn that
which their own Nature cannot attain, but rather repugneth: and become after
a sort cunning and skillful, so far as their kind does bear it, not by
Nature, but by custom and use: how much then may we think we should excel
them, by the precepts and rules of our Reason, if we took any heed unto it.
But, The Se^ses desire and cover present delights, what soever they be: and
can abide no pains, but puts them of. And by this means, they also shake of
Reason, and think her unpleasant, forasmuch as she sets before them, not
pleasure, many times, hurtful: but goodness and virtue, ever paynfull, sower
and unsavory in taste. For, while we live accord^ing to the Sense, we are
like to the selly sickma^, to whom al cates never so deinty and sweet, seem
untoothsome: and he chideth still with his Cater and Cook, in whom there is
no fault at all for it. For, it is the Nature of his disease, and the
Extremity of his sickness, and not the fault of his meat, that he does not
sauourly taste what he eats. So Reason, which of it self is svveete and
sauourie: seems bitter in taste unto us, though it have no ill taste in deed.
And therefore as nice and dei^tie fellows, we refuse to make any taste of her:
and cover our grosnes, with saying that Nature has no spurs nor raines yt can
prick her forth, or hold her back. Where sure, if an Ox or an Ass; or a
Hog, could speak: I believe, they could not lightly tell a more foul and
shameful tale the^ this. We should be children still all the time of our
riper years, and in our extreme age: and wax as very fools with gray
heary heads, as when we were very babes: if it were not that reason, which
increases in us with our years, subdueth affections in us, and grown to
perfection, transformeth us from beasts in to men. So that it is well seen,
she rules our senses and bridleth our wits. And it is our own Imperfection
and not her fault, if we do swerve from virtue, goodness, and good order in
life.

It is not then true, that there is not a bridell and Master for Nature. Nay,
she is guided and ruled by twain: Custom and Reason, tvvoe brydles of Nature.
Custom I mean, and Reason. But, as I have told you a little before: Reason
without Custom and use, cannot make an uncivil body, well taught and
courtious: Which custom and use, is as it were, bred and borne of time. And
therefore they shall do well, to harke^ betime unto her, not only for that, by
this means, a man shall have more time and leisure to learn to be such as she
teaches, and to become as it were a household servant of hers, and one of her
trame: but also because The tender age, as pure and clean, does easily receive
all Impressio^s, and reteineth more lively, the colors vvherevvith she is
dyed: then when a man comes to ryper years: And also, because The things
wherein we have been nourished and trained from our youth, do ordinarily
please us, above all other things. And for this cause, it is said that Diodato,
Diodato.
a man that had a singular good gift and grace of utterance, would evermore be
the first that came fourth upon the stage to show his Comedy: allthoughe
they were all but cou^terfets unto him, whosoever they were that should have
spoken before him. But he would not his voice should occupy other men's ears,
after they heard another man speak. Although, in respect of his doings, it
were a great deal Inferior to his. Seeing then, I cannot agree my works and
my words together, for those causes I have showed you before, as Maestro
Chiarissimo did: who had as good a skill to do it, as he had knowledge to
teach it: let it suffice that I have told in some part what must be done,
because I am not by any means able to do it in deed. He that lives in
darkness, may very well Judge what comfort it is to enjoy the benefit of
light. And by an over long silence, we know what pleasure it is to speak:
so when you behold my gross and rude manners: you shall better Judge, what
goodness and virtue there is in courtions behauiours and fashions.

To come again then to this treatise, which grows now to some end: we say
that Those be good manners and fashio^s, which bring a delight, or at least,
offend not their senses, their mynds, and conceits, with whom we live. And
of these, we have hitherto spoken inoughe.

But you must understand with all this, that, Men be very desirous of
bevvtifull things, well proportioned and comely. And of counterfeit things
foul and ill shapen, they be as squemish again, on the other side. And this
is a special privilege given to us: that other creatures have no capacity, to
skill what beauty or measure means. And therefore, as things not common with
beasts but proper to our selves: we must embrace them for them selves, and
hold them dear: and yet those, much more, yt draw nerest to ye knowledge of
man: as which are most apt and inclined to understand the perfection which
Nature has left in men.

And albeit, it be a hard matter, to show precisely, Bevvtie, Bevvtie.
what manner of thing it is: yet yt you may have so^e mark, to know her by: you
must understand, yt Where jointly and severally, every part and the whole
has his due proportion and measure, there is Bevvtie. And that thing may
justly be called fayer, in which the said proportion and measure is found.
And by that I did once learn of a wise and a learned man: Bevvtie he said,
would consist but of one, at the most. And Deformity Deformity.
contrariwise, measured her self, by Many. As you may see by the faces of
fayer and goodly women. For, the even lineaments and due proportions of every
of them: seem to have been created and framed by the judgment and sight of one
force alone. Which cannot be thought in them that be foul and deformed. For,
when you behold a woman, that has, peradventure, big and bowl eyes, a
little nose, blubbe cheeks, a flat mouth, an out chinne, and a brown skin:
you think strait that that face is not one woman's alone: but is molded of
many faces, and made of many pieces. And yet, you shall find amongst them,
some such, whose parts considered alone by themselves, be very perfect to see
to: but all set together, be foul and ill favored: not for any other cause,
but that they be lineaments of many sayer women, and not of one: So that a man
would ween, she had borrowed her parts, of this and that woman. And it may
be, that Painter that had all the fayer maids of Calabria, naked before him:
had none other intent therein, then to judge and discern in many, ye parts yt
they have, as it were, borrowed here one, and there another, of one, alone: to
whom restoring from each yt was her right: imagining yt Venus bewty should be
such, and so proportioned: he set him self to paint her.

And, you must not think, yt this is to be seen the faces, the parts, and the
bodies of women alone: but it happens more or less, in speech, in gestures
and doings. For, if you should chance to see a Noble woman gorgius and
gallant, washing of cloutes in a River by ye high way side: Although if this
were not, you might hapely pass away by her, with little heed to her person or
state: yet this would not brook you nor like you, yt her servile doings do
show her more the^ one. For her state should answer her honorable condition
and calling. But her work is such, as is meet for women of base and servile
life: and although you shall feel, neither ill savor nor sent come from her,
nor hear any noise that should offend you, nor any thing else to trouble your
mind: yet the foul and filthy manner of doing it, and the unseemly act it
self: will make you much to loathe it. You must then beware of these foul
and uncomely behauiours, as much, nay, more then of those other, I have spoken
all this while. For, it is a harder matter a great deal, to know when a man
faulteth in these, then when he faulteth in them. Because, It is easy much,
we see, to feel then to understand. But yet, it may chance otherwhile, that
even that which offends the senses, may also offend the mind: though not
altogether after one sort, Apparelling according to the Time.
as I have told you before: showing you that A man must apparel him self,
according to the fashions that other men use: that it may not be thought he
does reprove and correct their doings: The which thing offends most men that
seek to be commended: And the wisest me^ that be, mislike it too. For, the
garments of the old world, have lost their date, for men of this age and this
season to wear. And it is such an ill shapen sight, to see a man clad with
other men's clothes: that a man would ween there would be a fray between the
doublet and ye hose: their clothes do sit, upon them so unto wardly.

So that, many of those matters I have spoken of allredy, or peradventure all,
might be aptly rehearsed here again: forasmuch as this measure I speak of here,
is not observed in these things: nor the time, nor ye place, nor the work, nor
the worker, accorded and fitted together, so well as it should be. For men's
minds and fancies do like it, and take a pleasure and delight in those things.
But I thought it good to apply and speak these matters, rather under ye badge,
as it were, of the Senses and desires: then properly assign them to the mind:
that a man may the more easily perceive them: because It is a natural thing,
for every man to feel and desire: but every man cannot so generally
understand, and especially that, which we call beauty, gallantnes or
entertainment.

It is not inoughe for a man, to do things that be good: but he must also
have a ca^e, he do them with a good grace. A Grace, what it is.
And a good grace is nothing else, but such a manner of light (as I may call it)
as shines in the aptnes of things set in good order and well disposed, one with
another: and perfectly knit and united together. Without which proportion and
measure, even that which is good is not fair: and the fairenes it self, is not
plesaunt. And as meats, though they be good and sauourie will give men no
mind to eat the^, if they have no pleasant relish and taste: So fares it
with the manners of men other while (although in them selves in no respect they
be ill, but foolish a little, and fond) if a man do not season them with a
certain sweetenes, which you call (as I take it) Grace, and Comlines.

So that, every vice of it self, without any further matter to help it (it
cannot be chosen) must needs offend a man. For, Vices be things so foul and
filthy: that honest and modest minds, will grieve to see their shameful
effects. And therefore, it shall behoue them that seek to be well thought of,
with their familiar acquaintance, above all things else to eschew vices, and
especially those, that be foulest and worst: as Leachery, Covetousness,
Cruelty, and other. Of which, some be beastly, as Drunkenness, and Gluttony:
some unclean, as Leacherie: other some horrible, as Murder, and such other:
all which for them selves, and for the very naughtines, that is properly in
them al, all men eschew more, or less: But, as erst I said, generally al, as
things of great disorder, make a man misliked much of all men.

But, because I have not taken upon me to show unto you, men's sins, but
their Errors: it shall be no part of my charge at this time to entreat of ye
Nature of vices and virtues: but only of the seemly and unseemly fashions
and manners we use one with another. One of the which unseemly fashions was,
that Count Richard Count Richard.
did use: of which I told you before. Which, as unseemly and unfitting with
those other his good and fair manners he had besides: that same worthy Bishop
(as a skillful and cunning Master in music will ea-aesily here a note out of
Tune) had quickly found out.

It shall be then, necessary for gentlemen and men of good behavior, to have a
regard to this measure I speak of: in going, in standing, in sitting, in
gesture, in port, in apparel, in talk, in silence, in rest and in action.
For, a man must not apparel him self like a woman: that the Attire may not be
of one sort, and the person of another: as I do see it in some that wear
their heads and their beards curled with bodkins, Beardes and Heads curled
with bodkins.
and have their face, and their necks, and their hands, so starchte and
painted, that it were to much for a girl, nay harlot, that makes a
mercha^dize of it, and sets her self to the sale.

You must smell, Sweet smeles
neither of sweet nor of sower: for a gentleman would not savor nastily like
a beggar: nor yet should a man carry a savor and sent about him, like a harlot
or whore. I do not by this forbid, but you may very well use some sweet
smelles of sweet waters.

Your apparel must be shaped according to the fashion of the time, Apparel
according to the fashion and ^^lling.
and your calling, for the causes I have showed you before. For, We must not
take upon us to alter customs at our will. For time does beget them, and time
does also wear them out.

Every man may apply those fashio^s, that be in common use, ye most to his
own advantage, that he can. For, if perchance your legs be very long, and
men use but short garments: you may use a mean, not to long, nor to short. And
if your legs be to small, to great, or crooked: make not your hosen of to
light and garishe a color, that it may not call men to look and to gawre
upon your deformity. Thou must wear no garment that shall be to light, or
ouermuche daubde with garding: that me^ may not say, thou have Ganymedes hosen,
or wearest Cupides doublet. But, whatsoever it be thou wearest, let it be fit
and well made for thy body: least thou seem to brave it, in another man's
clothes.

But with all, thou must in any case respect thy condition or estate. For, A
man of the Clergy, must not be attired like a Soldier: nor a Soldier go
like a Player. When Castruccio was in Rome with Lodouico Bauero at a great
Pomp, and triumph: who was both Duke of Lucca and Pistoia, and Count of
Palazzo, and Senator of Rome: this Castruccio, being Lord great Master of
the said Lodouico Bauero his househoulde: for his bravery, made him a coat of
crimsin, upon the breast whereof, there was this devise, in letters of Gold It
is even as God will. And upon the back behind. And it shallbe as God will.

I believe, you think this garment, would have become Castruccio his Trumpeter
better, then it could become him.

And although Kings be free from check, and may do what they list: Yet, I
could never commend King Manfrede, Who ever more used, to suite him self in
green. We must then have a care, that our apparel be not only well made for
the body: but that it be meet for our calling. Apparel acording to the
Country
And withal, it be such, as the country does use, where we live. For, As in
diverse places be diverse measures, and yet bying and selling every where used:
So in sundry lands be sundry customs, and yet every where a man may behave
him, and apparel him self, soberly and comely.

These same feathers, which the Neapolitanes and Spaniardes be wont to wear,
and braueries and Embroderies: have but ill place amongst grave gowned men,
and theattires that Citizens do wear. But their Armor and weapons become
such place a great deal worse. So that, look what hapely might be allowed
in Verona, would not, perchance, be suffered in Venice. For as much as these
gallants, all begarded, and huffing in feathers, and warlike fellows, would not
do well, in this Noble City so peaceful and Civil. Such kind of people be
rather, in manner, like nettles and burres, amongst good and sweet garden
flowers. And therefore, they come out of season to me^ that meddle with grauer
matters then they do.

I would not have a gentleman to run in the streate, Running and going in the
streat and other such gestures.
nor go to fast: for that is for lackies, and not for gentlemen to do. Besides
that, it makes a man weary, sweat, and puff: which be very unsightly things
for such men to do. I would not yet have a man go so soft and demurely, as a
maid or a wife. And when a man walks, it is no good sight to see a man shake
his body to much, nor to hold his hands bare and empty: nor yet cast and
sting his arms up and down, in such sort as a man would ween, he were
soweing of Corn in the field: nor Stare in a man's face, as if he had spied a
mares nest.

There be so^e again, in their gate pull up their fete as high as a horse yt has
ye spaue^: yt a man would think they did pluck their fete forth of bushel.
Other again stamp their feet so hard on the ground: that they make allmoste
as much noise as a carte. Another goes as if he were splay footed. And such a
one quiuers with his legs, as he sta^ds. Some other again, at every foot,
stoop to stroke up their hose as they go. And so^e set their hands to their
sides, and iet up and down like a Pecocke: which fashions do much offend
men: not as well, but as ill beseeming a man to use them. For, if your horse,
perchance, do champe and play on the hit, and gape or lill out his tongue,
albeit this give little proof of his goodness: yet it commends him well to the
sale: and you should find a miss of it, if it were otherwise: not because ye
horse should be there fore the worse: but because he should show the less
courage and pleasure. Now, if it stand so, that Comelines and Grace, be so much
made of in beasts, and also in things without life or sense, as experience does
show, that, Two things of equal goodness and commodities, bear not for all
that, a like price, if a man do behold a finer proportion and beauty, more in
the one then he sees in the other: How much then more, should it be esteemed
and commended in men, capable of Reason.

It is a rude fashion for a man to clawe or scratche him self, Gestures and
Fashions, at the Table.
when he sits at the table. And a man should at such time have a very great
care yt he spit not at all. Spytting.
But if need enforce him, then let him do it, after an honest sort. I have
heard tell, many times, of such countries that be so sober: that they do
never spitt. And what should then let us, but we may well forbear it for such
a little while. Greedy Eating.
We must also beware we do not eat so greedily, that we get the hicket, or
belche withal: as some that feed so fast, that they noy the company with it:
they blow and puff to loud. Scovvring of the teethe
Likewise, you must not rub your teeth with your napkyn, and much less with
your fingers. For these be tricks for a slouen. Washing the mouth.
Neither must you openly rynce your mouth with the wine, and then spit it
fourth. Neither is it gentleman like, Carrying a Stick, in the Mouth.
to carry a stick in your mouth from the table when you rise, like ye bird
that builds her a nest: or put it in your ear, for that is a Barbars trick.

And to wear a toothpicke, To wear a Toothepicke about your Neck.
about your neck: of all fashions that is ye worst. For, besides that it is a
bauld Jewel for a gentleman to pull forth of his bosom, and puts me^ in
mind of those Toothdrawers, that sit one their benche in the streets: it makes
men also to think, that the man loves his belly full well, and is provided for
it. And I see no reason, why they should not as well carry a spoone, about their
necks, as a toothepicke.

It is a rude fashion besides, Chearing at the table.
to lean over the table, or to fill your mouth so full of meat, that your
cheeks be blown up wtall: neither must you by any manner of means, give
another man to know what pleasure you take, in the meat or the wine. For yt is
for Tauerners and Bousers, to use such fashions. And to entertain men yt sit
at your table, with these words: You eat nothing this morning. There is
nothing that likes you. Or, taste you of this or of that: I do not allow of
these fashions, although they be commonly received and used of all men. For,
albeit by these means, they show they make much of those they have invited
unto them: yet, many times, they make me^ to leave to eat where they would.
For, it geues them to think, they have their eyes, always upon them, and
that makes them ashamed to feed.

Again, Carueing.
I do not like it, that a man shall take upon him to be a caruer of any meat
that stands before him: if he be not much the better man, that is the caruer:
that he to whom he carues, may think he receives some credit and honor by
it. For, Amongst men that be of like co^ditio^ and calling, it makes a heart
burning: that he that plays the caruer, should take more upon him then
another. And otherwhile, yt which he carueth, does not like him to whom it is
given. And more the^ this, by this means he shows, that the feast is not
sufficiently furnished, or at least not well disposed in order, when some have
much, and other none at all. And ye Master of the house, may chance to take
displesure at that, as if it were done to do him shame. Nevertheless in these
matters, a man must demeasne him self, as common use and custom will allow,
and not as Reason and duty would have it. And I would wish a man rather to
err in these poi^ts with many, the^ to be singular in doing well. But
whatsoever good manner there be in this case, thou must not refuse it,
whatsoever is carved unto thee. For it may be thought thou do disdain it,
or grunt at thy caruer.

Now, Drincking and Carrovvsing.
to drink all out every man: which is a fashion as little in use amongst us, as
ye term it self is barbarous and strange: I mean, Ick bring you, is sure a
foul thing of it self, and in our country so coldly accepted yet: yt we must
not go about to bring it in for a fashion. If a man do quaffe or carrouse unto
you, you may honestly say nay to pledge him, and geueing him thanks, confess
your weakness, that you are not able to bear it: or else, to do him a
pleasure, Drincking much used in Graecia: and by So^rates.
you may for courtesy taste it: and the^ set down the cup to them that will,
and charge your self no further. And although this, Ick bring you, as I have
heard many learned men say, has been an ancient custom in Greece: and that
the Graecians do much commend a goodman of that time, Socrates, Socrates.
by name, for that he sat out one whole night long, drinking a v^e with
another good man, Aristophanes: Aristophanes.
and yet ye next morning in the break of the day, without any rest upon his
drinking, made such a cunning Geometrical Instrument, that there was no manner
of fault to be found in the same: And albeit they say besides this, that Even
as it makes a man bold and hardy, to thrust him self venterously otherwhile,
in to dangerous perils of life: so likewise it brings a man in to good temper
and fashion, to enure him self otherwhile, with the dangers of things not
ever chauncing: And because the drinking of wine after this sort, in a vie, in
such excess and waste, is a shrewde assault to try the strength of him that
quaffes so lustily: these Graecians, would have us to use it for a certain
proof of our strength and constancy: and to enure us the better, to resist
and master all manner of strong temptations.

All this notwithstanding, I am of a contrary mind: and I do think all their
reasons to fond, and to foolish. But, we see that Learned men have such art
and cunning to persuade, and such filed words to serve their turn: that wrong
does carry the cause away, and Reason cannot prevail. And therefore let us
give them no credit in this point. And what can I tell, if they have a secret
drift herein, to excuse and cover the fault of their country, that is corrupt
with this vice. But it is dangerous, perchance, for a man to reprove them for
it: least as much happen to him, as chanced to Socrates him self, for his over
lavish controuling and checking of every man's fault. For, he was so spited of
all men for it: that many articles of heresies and other foul faults were put
up against him, and he condemned to die in the end: allthough they were false.
For in truth, he was a very good man, and a Chatholike: respecting ye Religion
of their false Idolatry. But suer, in that he drunk so much wine that same
night: he deserved no praise in the world. For, the hoggshead was able to
hold and receive a great deal more, then his companion and he were able to
take: if yt may get any praise. And though it did him no harm, that was more,
the goodness of his strong brain: the^ the continency of a sober man. And let
the Chronicles talk what they list of this matter, I give God thanks, that
amongst many the Plagues that have creapt over the Alps, to infect us:
hitherto this worst of all the rest, is not come over: that we should take a
pleasure and praise, to be drunk. Neither shall I ever believe, that a man can
learn to be temperate, of such a Master as wine and drounkennes.

The Steward of a Noble man's house, Inuiting of strangers.
may not be so bold to inuit strangers, upon his own head, and set them
down at his Lord and Masters table. And there is none that is wise, will be
entreated to it, at his request alone. But otherwhile, the servant of the
house, be so malepert and saucie, that they will take upon them, more then
their Master: of which things we speak in this place, more by chance, then
that the order we have taken from the beginning, does so require it.

A man must not uncase him self, A recapitulation of sundry precepts.
Uncasing.
in the presence of any assembly. For it is a slouenly sight, in place where
honest men be met together of good condition and calling. And it may chance he
does uncover those parts of his body, which work him shame and rebuke to show
the^: besides yt, it makes other me^ abashed to look upon the^. Washing of
hands and combyng of heads.
Again, I would have no man to comb his head, nor wash his hands before me^.
For such things would be done alone in your chamber, and not abroad: without it
be, I say, to wash your hands when you sit down to the table. For, there it
shall do well, to wash them in sight, although you have no need: that they
with whom you feed, may assure them selves you have done it. A man must not
come forth with his kercheif, or quaife one his head, nor yet stroke up his
hosen upon his legs in company.

Some men there be, Gestures of the face and Countenance and other parts.
that have a pride or a use to draw their mouths a little awry, or twinckle
up their eye, and to blow up their cheeks, and to puff, and to make, with
their countenance, sundry such like foolish and ill-favored faces and
gestures. I council men to leave them clean. For, Pallas Pallas.
her self, the Goddess, (as I have heard so^e wise me^ say) took once a
great pleasure to sound the flute and the cornet: and therein she was very
cunning. It chau^st her, on day, sou^ding her Cornet for her pleasure over a
fontain, she spide her self in the water: and when she beheld those strange
gestures she must needs make with her mouth as she played: she was so much
asha^ed of it that she brake the corner in pieces and cast it away. truly she
did but well, for it is no instrument for a woman to use. And it becomes men
as ill, if they be not of yt base condition and calling, that they must make it
a gain, and an art to live upon it. And look what I speak, concerning the
unseemly gestures of the countenance and face: concerns likewise, all the
parts and members of man. For it is an ill sight, to lill out ye tongue, to
stroke your bearde much up and down (as many do use to do) to rub your
hands together: to sighe, and to sorrow: to tremble or strike your self,
which is also a fashion with some: to reatche and stretche your self, and so
retching, to cry out after a nice manner, Alas, Alas: like a country cloune, yt
should rouse him self in his couche.

And he that makes a noise with his mouth in a token of wonder, Mopping or mowing.
and other while, of co^tempte and disdain: counterfeteth an ilfauouredgrace.
And Counterset things, differ not much from truethes.

A man must leave those foolish manner of laughings, Unseemly Laughinges.
groase and uncomely. And let men laughe upon occasion, and not upon custom.
But a man must beware he do not laughe at his own gestes, Laughing at his
own Gestes.
and his doings. For that makes men ween he would feign praise him self. It
is for o-other men to laughe that hear, and not for him that tells the tale.

Now, you must not bear your self in hand, that because each of these
matters considered a part, is but a small fault, y^ hole therefore together
should be as light: but you must rather persuade your self yt Many a little
does make a mickle, as I told you from the beginning. And how much less they
be, so much the more need a man has to look well in to the^: because they be
not easily perceived a far of, but creep in to us by custom, before we be a
ware. And, As light expenses often used, in Continuance of time, do covertly
waste and consume a great mass of wealth and riches: So do these light
faults with the multitude and number of the^, in secret overthrow all honest
and good civility and manner. So yt we must not make a light reconing of them.

Moreover, Mouinges and gestures of the body.
it is a needful observation to bethink your self, how you do move your
body, and specially in talk. For, it many times chances, a man is so ernest
in his tale, that he has no mind of any thing else. One wagges his head.
Another looks bigg and scowles with his brows. That man pulls his mouth awry.
And the other spittes in and upon their faces with whom he talks. And some such
there be that move their hands in such a sort, as if they should chase ye
flies as they go: which be very unhandsome and unseemly manners to use. And I
have heard it said (for you know I have been familiarly acquainted with
learned men in my time) that Pindarus Pindarus.
that worthy man was wo^t to say: that Whatsoever it were that had a good and
fauourie taste: was seasoned by the hands of the Graces. Now, what shall I
speak of them yt come forth of their studies with their pen in their ear:
and nibble their hankercheifs in their mouth, or ly lolling with their leg
over the table, or spit one their fingers,and of a number of other blockishe
gestures and fashio^s more then these, which cannot be all rehearsed well: nor
shall not, I mean, put me to further pains to tell the^ al if I could. For,
there be many perchance will say this is to much, that I have said allredie.

FINIS.

