A brief Treatise, published by Walter Carry 1587. and now the fifth time 1609.
newly imprinted:

Wherein are to be found diverse good and special helps for many Diseases. And
for any thing herein mentioned, as heretofore I refered the patientes to M.
Gray, so now (he being dead) I refer them to M. Clapham, at the sign of the
Blew bell and the Unicorn in Fanchurch street.

Ecclus. 30. 15. Health and Strength is above all Gold; and a sound Body above
infinite Treasure.

Imprinted at London by W. White, for the company of Stationers. 1609.

The Authors Verse.
WHo lives in health, and does despise
The mean to keep and gain the same,
Let him be sick, force not his cries,
His folly makes him too too blame:
Else pinch his Pursse, and teach him say,
This Physick's vain, away, away.
Shall he that is flush and feathered,
Say moolting time shall never be?
The doleful Mew does not he dread,
Who sores as hie as thou can see:
Man's health is frail, Physicians love,
Health got they keep, and griefs remove.
Walter Carry.
TO THE READER.
FOR that I am now fully resolved (gentle Reader) for sundry causes, to leave
the practice of Physic, co^tenting my self with that small portion,
wherewithal God has otherwise blessed me: I have thought it my duty to use
some means, whereby I may either in like, or more ample sort (according to my
poor talent) benefit my Country. Whereupon I have published this short work,
therein revealing diverse good and perfect remedies, for many common and
ordinary Diseases.

My meaning was not to write of all, but of those only, in the which I have
had greatest experience. And though both in the description (desiring to be
more plain) and cure thereof, I digress somewhat from many writers: yet I
wish thee not rashly to condemn me. But if thou mislike any thing herein
contained, write thy mind, and deliver it to the Printer, and I will be very
willing, by writing again, to satisfy thee: or otherwise thankfully to accept
thine advise, and confess my fault.

FINIS.
The Table.
FOr the Headache Cap. 4. For such as are much bound or costiue, and have their
excrementes always hard and dry. cap. 4. For the Swimming of the Head. cap. 4.
For sore and red Eyes cap. 4. For re^d faces cap. 5. For the Morphew cap. 5.
For those that are troubled with Biles, Scabs, Itches, or such like cap. 6. To
prevent the Pockes and Measels in Children cap. 6. For those that are full of
Fleame cap. 7. For the Cough, and for the shortness of Breath cap. 7. For an
Heat and a Cold cap. 7. For those who are toward the consumption of the Lunges
cap. 7. For a Surfeit cap. 8. For the Heart-burning cap. 9. For continual Vomit
cap. 9. For those that have no appetite to Meat cap. 10. For those who are
troubled with the gnawing of the Guts or Stomach; also for the Collicke and
for Wind, and all corruption which causes Wind cap. 11. For the Rheum cap.
12. For the Yellow Iaundise cap. 13. For the stopping of the Liver cap. 13. For
the Black Iaundise cap. 14. For the hardness of the Spleen cap. 14. For the
Piles cap. 14. For the Green sickness cap. 15. For the quotidian Ague cap.
16. For the quartane Ague cap. 17. For the tertian Ague cap. 18. For the Plague
cap. 19. For the Crampe cap. 20. For Burning or Scalding cap. 21. For a Felon
and Whitblow cap. 22. For a Ring-worme, Tetter, or such like, cap. 23. For the
Toothache cap. 24. For the disease of English wantons ca. 25. For Worms of all
sorts cap. 26. For presumption of health cap. 27. Three stays of health cap.
28.
FINIS.
Of a Potion which is to be used in sundry cures.
The first Chapter.
IN this first Chapter, I mind to speak of a Potion, or Purgation; which in
sundry cures (as hereafter does appear) is to be used. And whereas Nature
has brought forth Purgers of diverse kinds, according to the diversity of
corruption in man's body; some purging one humor, and some another, etc. I have
made choice of the best and safest, to be taken in every kind: also in such
sort prepared and corrected them, as they shall be found very fit without all
danger, pain, or vexation whatsoever, to answer the necessity of such, whose
bodies of any manner of corruption require to be purged.

I first devised this Potion about eight years since, and seeing the gentle
working and good success thereof with few, I grew in further liking of the
same. And thereupon having given it to many, and that in sundry diseases, I
found it to be of such excellency, the virtue thereof so wonderful, and so
well pleasing my patien^es, that I did prefer it before all the rest. For it
cures diverse griefs of the Head, also red and watering sore Eyes; it
cleanses the Stomach, and cures the Heart-burning, it provoke a good
appetite, and helps digestion; it is good against the Rheum, the obstruction
of the Lunges, the Cough, and shortness of breath; it cleanses those who are
troubled with Biles, Scabs, Itches, or such like; it cures the Collicke, and
preuayleth greatly against Wind; it is good in the black and yellow Iaundise;
it helps the inflammation of the Liver; in the Green sickness it is a
present help, and excellent against al Fevers, and diverse other Diseases. And
to conclude, my long experience has so persuaded me of the goodness thereof,
that I think I should do my countrymen much wrong, if I should any longer
keep from them so great a treasure.

The use thereof, shall be declared in every Chapter, where I entreat of the
Diseases particularly.

I have delivered my Bill for the making of the same, and other things, unto
Master Clapham in Fanchurch-street at the sign of the Blew-bell and Unicorne,
Apothecarie; of whose good dealing since M Grayes death, I have made very
sufficient trial.

It may be kept good, and in perfect virtue, three weeks, or a month, contrary
to the nature of other Purgers. If any man mind to carry it far, let him
signify so much to M. Clapham, that it may be provided of purpose.

And here I have thought very requisite to show the causes why I have not
published the manner of making this Potion, for that I am charged by some, that
I have a yearly benefit by the same; and for mine own gain, do keep it
from the multitude: which is most untrue. For, (as I have a faith unto God) the
Apothecarie has the whole profit thereof. Neither is it such, as that any man
ought to grieve thereat.

1 The first cause is, for that the composition of Medicines does properly
pertain to the Apothecarie, and that it is great reason every man have the
benefit of his own profession.

2 The second cause is, the ignorance of the multitude in chosing the simples
or ingredients, wherein is such skill, that the Apothecarie himself (except he
be of great judgment) is often deceived.

3 The third cause, their ignorance in making the Potion, yea, though happily
they have good Simples. But because some, dwelling far from London, find
themselves grieved, that they cannot have the Potion conveniently without great
charge, having sudden occasion to use it, neither keep it so long good as they
would; I have now devised a Sirup of Lignum aloes, The Sirup of Lignum aloes
which may be kept one whole year and longer, in perfect strength and virtue.
This Sirup is of the like nature with the Potion, and is to be used as the
Potion. But by the addition of diverse things it is of greater virtue,
especially against Melancholy, the infirmities of the Spleen, and the Diseases
proceeding of wind. For the use hereof, and the quantity, I refer thee to
the observations in the third chapter, and especially to the 12. Observation.
Only this I will thee not to forget, that now being a Sirup, it must be
dissolved in some liquor, and taken warm, either in Broth, Wine, or Ale,
clarified: in Ale or Broth made thin, and without all Spices, when the disease
is hot and choleric: when the patient is gross and full of Phlegm, in Wine;
also in like sort, when the patient is cold, dry, and full of dead melancholy.

Answers to such Objections as may be made against the use of this Potion.
The second Chapter.
IT will perhaps be objected against me, that it is very unlikely, that one
Medicine should be good for so many diseases.

To which I answer, that we have received of our old and excellent Writers,
diverse Confections, wherein are contained sundry Purgers; whereof some purge
Phlegm, some Choler, and others Melancholy. So that I conclude, of necessity
they are good in all flegmaticke, choleric, and melancholicke Diseases; which
are infinite. And following their example, I have made my Potion of like nature.

2 Further it may be objected, that some require to be purged with strong
Purgations; others with gentle: for children, and they which are brought to
great weakness either by age, or by sickness, must be mildly used: but others,
as the person and disease require, more roughly. Wherefore, how can one Potion
serve for both? Has it two contrary natures? Is it both strong and gentle?

I answer, that where the disease or person require a strong Purgation, I give
it in the greater quantity, and the oftener: (...) where a gentle Purgation is
required I give the less; as hereafter does appear.

3 Thirdly, it may be objected, that in some diseases of the Stomach,
especially, the patient is to be purged with Pills, Electuaries, or such like,
which being of more gross substance then a Potion, continue longer in the
place where the corruption is, and work effectually: whereas a thin Potion
slippeth away, leaving the work undone.

I answer, when I prescribe my Potion for purging the Stomach, I wish my
patient to take it one hour before he rise: for lying in his bed, it cannot
more suddenly pass the Stomach, then your grosser sort of purgers; and then
no doubt it will far excel Pills, Electuaries, etc. For being a thin
substance, it will very easily join with the corruption which it finds in
the Stomach, and dissolve the same: whereas these grosser Medicines require
first to be dissolved themselves; which is no small trouble to nature.

4 Fourthly, it may be objected, that I prefer my Potion before the Receiptes
of diverse excellent and famous men, which have been always esteemed even as
Fathers of Physic.

I must needs confess, that whatsoever I have, I have it from them. But
notwithstanding, I hope no man thinks nature barren, or that she has spent
her self in our Fathers, and left nothing for their Children. I have read and
practiced, according to that which I found in these excellent men, and have
herein only added to their inventions. So that if you receive any benefit by
this Potion, or by ought else which here you shall find, ascribe the honor
unto them: I crave nothing, but accept my labor as a sufficient recompense for
my pains.

Certain Observations.
The third Chapter.
IN taking of my Potion, thou need not keep thy Chamber, nor House
strictly, as in strong Purgations; but may walk abroad, if otherwise thy
Disease be no let unto thee.

2 Thou need not make any curious observation of times for the taking
thereof: I only advise thee to forbear every change and full of the Moon, in
which are contained the Eclipses. For the Eclipse of the Sun is but ye change
of the Moon, (although of more force then the ordinary change) neither the
Eclipse of the Moon, other then the perfect opposition or full.

3 It may be taken cold, of such whose stomaches cannot bear the savor of
physic, but have their natures glutted with often taking of Medicines.

4 If a Child and an elder body be sick both of one Disease, in which the
Potion is to be taken, let the Child take less, and have fewer stools; but
the elder more. For as a small Uessell is sooner emptied then a greater,
containing a greater quantity: even so is the body of a Child sooner purged,
then ye body of one of riper years; specially, for that in a Child the humors
are more moist and fluxible.

5 They, whose bodies are full, and as it were laden with corruption, shall find
wonderful ease, if they take it ten days in the fall, and ten days in the
spring; as also now and then one good spoonful before supper, which will
gather together the relics of digestion, with other corruption, and cause the
patient to have the next morning one great stool.

6 Take some broth within two hours, or less, after the taking of the Potion,
or a Cawdle, or some like supping.

7 The Patient ought not to sleep, within three hours after the taking of the
Potion.

8 A child of three years old may take of it very safely.

9 If it offend thy taste, use Sugar, or wash thy mouth with Wine, or some
other like thing, which I refer to thine own discretion.

10 If thy body be dry, and such as a Purgation will hardly work withal; thou
must take the greater quantity.

11 If thy body be very moist, and over apt to be purged: thou can not take
too little.

12 To find a proportion between thy body and the Potion, take thou first
three, four, or five spoonefuls fasting, and mark how many Stools that
quantity gives thee. If it give thee more than thou would have, take less
the next day: if it give thee fewer, take more. By this mean, when I shall
hereafter, in any Disease, advise thee to take so much as shall give thee
four, five, or six stools, more or less; thou shall be able, by this rule,
to prescribe thy self the quantity. But for the most part (thy body being
neither very dry and melancholy, neither over moist and exceeding easy to be
purged) every good spoonefull will cause and provoke one stool.

13 During the time of taking the Potion, especially if thou take it long, to
cause a general euacuation of thy body, abstain from those things which are
very hot; as Wines, Spices, Salt, and salt meats, etc: and also from raw
fruits, green herbs, and all cold things; or at the least, use of these as
little as thou may. For thy body being emptied, it is very requisite thou
make supply with those things, which are of good nutriment, and fittest to
breed good blood: For otherwise, it is but vain to take away that which is
bad, and to fill the place with that which is worsse. Wherefore let thy Drink
be Ale, thy Bread of the finest of good Wheat; whereof also eat very little
thy Meats for the most part boiled, and such as are fine and light of
digestion.

14 In any wise read and mark well these rules, before thou take of the potion.

For the Headache, and for such as are much bound, and have their excrement
always hard and dry: also for the swimming of the Head, and for red and sore
Eyes.
The fourth Chapter.
THe Headache proceeds of diverse causes: First of heat, and chiefly of the
Sun, which heateth the Brain and blood about the Head: and this kind of
Headache is said to be of heat alone, without the mixture of any Humor causing
the same.

2 The second kind of Headache (contrary to the first) is of cold alone, and
happens most unto those, who having long used to keep their heads warm,
suddenly take cold. But because these two kinds happen seldom, also for the
most part stay not long, and the causes being known, may easily be prevented,
I write nothing touching the cure of the same.

There are also diverse other griefs of the Head; but mine intent is to speak
here only of the cure of those which follow.

3 The third kind of headache is of fulness, when the party living in great
security, some and some feeds his body excessiuelie, even until his Eyes
swell with fatness, and his whole Body be puffed up like a bladder,

4 The fourth kind is of corrupt humors, which abounding in great quantity,
are the very present cause alone of the Headache, without any other accidental
matter.

For cure of this third and fourth kind, take of my Potion, so much as shall
give thee three, four, or five stools a day for eight days or longer,
until thy head and body be well emptied. In this sort shall thou use the
potion for the cure of the swimming or giddiness of the head, and for sore and
red watering eyes.

5 The fifth kind is of the fume of corrupt humors, and not of the humors
themselves: for that the corruption lying in the stomach, only casts up to
the brain evil fumes, which offend the same, being of all other parts the
most sensible.

For cure of the fifth kind, take of my Potion so much as shall give thee four
or five stools a day, for three days, and keep thy bed one hour after the
same; but sleep not.

6 There is also one other kind of headache, which proceeds of the excrement,
continuing ouer-long in the body; whereof I think it very necessary to
speak. After thou have received thy food, first* Nature sucketh from it that
which is thin and pure, leaving the rest as gross and corrupt. And if then it
remain longer in the body, the noisome fumes thereof (it being now an
excrement, and having lost the nature of a nutriment) ascend up to the Brain,
and cause the Headache: also otherwise (nature being as yet forced to feed
thereupon) it greatly infecteth the body: So that it is in reason a thing
impossible for him to be long in health, who is much costiue or bound in his
body. For cure of this sixth and last kind, take for ten or twelve days
together (or longer) every morning fasting, so much of my Potion, as shall give
thee one stool a day more then ordinary. And when thou have brought thy body
to good order, take always less and less: for by that means thou shall toll
nature on to do her work without help. And in any wise remember, that every
morning, both whilst thou use the Potion, and afterward also, thou offer
thy self to the Stool, although thou feel no provocation.

For Pimples, or other itching humors rising in the face, and for all itches of
the body, a very rare ointment.
The fifth Chapter.
FOr the Pimpies or other itching humors rising in the face: when you go to
bed anoint the place lightly every night, and in the morning moisten it with
a little new milk, and wipe it, for your body annoint when you go to bed by a
fire four or five nights, which will kill an itch be it never so old.

For those that are troubled with Biles, itches, scabs, and such like,
proceeding of inward infection.
The sixth Chapter.
SOme by nature, from their Parents, some by long and evil diet, others by
company have their bodies inclined to Biles, Scabs, itches and such like: all
which I will teach thee to cure euenin as perfect an order as thou ma^est wash
a foul vessel with fair water.

Take of the potion, so much as shall give thee four stools a day, for three
days. The fourth day take of the roots of Briony, which thou shall have at
master Claphams, and boil half an ounce thereof, and one whole mase in a
pint of ale gently half an hour: then add thereto a little Sugar: And let
the Patient drink a good draught thereof warm, and keep his Bed, and sweat
three hours; and during his sweat now and then let him take more of this Ale,
until he have taken the whole pint: but if it be a Child, less; as the age
does require. Use this order three days together, and longer, if the disease
have been of long continuance.

Note, that in Sweating, the patient must rub his body with warm clothes,
to take away such corruption as comes out by sweating.

Note also that by this means thou may prevent the Pockes and Meazels in
Children, and others, in such sort, as they shall be unapt to take them, as
they which have had them.

For those that are full of Flegeme, also for the Cough and shortness of
breath, for such as have taken an heat and cold, and for those which are
toward the consumption of the Lunges.
The Seventh Chapter.
THey, whose bodies are full of phlegm, and have their Lunges stuffed with the
same, or other corruption; so that thereby they are troubled with the Cough,
are thus to be cured. Take of my Potion for three days every morning fasting,
so much as will give thee four or five stools a day: for thereby thou shall
find thy body unladen of much Phlegm. Then take one handful of the herb
called Tussilago, or otherwise Vngula caballina, Lickerish scraped and bruised
2. ounces, Aniseed bruised half an ounce, I soppe four branches: boil these
in three pintes of water gently, until half be consumed: then strain and
put thereto three ounces of Sugar or Sugar-candie, which is better: Drink
hereof a reasonable quantity, well warmed every morning one hour before you
rise, for ten days after your purging, or longer: for it will cause the phlegm
to come up easily, and is a wonderful preservative for the lungs, keeping them
from putrefaction.

But otherwise, if you will have a thing of like or greater virtue, also more
ready, more pleasant, and which will last longer in perfect force; take the
things above mentioned, in such quantities as before; that is of the leaves of
Tussilago one handful, Lickerish scraped and bruled two ounces, Aniseede
bruised half an ounce, I ssop four branches, and of the Herb commonly called
Ros solis, half an handful. Steep these in a quart of very good Malmesie,
and let it stand in a reasonable heat by the fire side, close stopped 24.
hours or more. After take it from the fire, and when it is almost cold,
strain it, and put thereto a pound and a half of fine Sugar well beaten, and
then let it stand in as gentle an heat as you can, upon a chafing dish with
embers, in a fair Pewter vessel, until it be very thick always stirring
it now and then: It will be well in eight or nine hours. But if thou will
have a certain rule; when it grows to be thick, drop two or three drops on
a cold Pewter vessel; and if when it is perfect cold, it be as it were a
gellie, and will not run, then it is well. Keep it in a gallie pot close
stopped, somewhat near the fire.

For the cough, thou shall use it in this order. After purging as before,
clarify a draught of Ale, and put to it a spoonefull thereof, drinking it
warm and fasting.

If any man be sick of any disease, wherein he is also troubled with tough
and slimie fleame; let him take now and then a little hereof upon a knives
point, and hold it long in his mouth: so that it melt down some and some: For
thereby the fume thereof, and part of the substance will pass with the breath
into the lunges, loose the fleame, and cause it to void easily.

For those that are troubled with the shortness of breath, having their lunges
dry; so that it is a continual labor for them to fetch their wind: it is
good first to take of my Potion, now and then for a day or two, as much as will
give them three or four stools at a time; and afterward to use the Medicine
before rehearsed made with Malmesie, in this order following. Clarify a
draught of Ale, and put therein the yolk of a new laid egg, and one spoonefull
of the medicine, when you are ready to take it from the Fire: and let the
patient drink it fasting, and fast one hour after it. Although thou have
been troubled with this grief many years, yet if thou use this medicine it
will moisten and open thy lungs or lights, and cure thee. Thou can not use it
too long, for it is both a nutriment and a medicine. In this sort also shall
thou greatly ease them which are entering into the consumption of the Lunges.
But if they will be cured, they must withal abstain from all Spices, Wines,
and Salt meats, which fret or inflame their bodies. Also they must have a
great care, that they use no violent Exercise to over heat their Bodies; and
that in Coughing they strain their Lights as little as possible may be,
least by violent Coughing they tear them. Cheese, nuts, and all raw fruits
also are very evil for them. They cannot have too great care in their diet
and usage. For this disease is very hard, and almost impossible to be
perfectly cured.

If any man, by vehement labor or exercise, heat his body excessiuelie, and
during his heat, either by Drinking, by rest, or any means, suddenly cool
himself extremely, for the most part he falls sick unto death: and if he
escape, yet he remains weak and sickly during his life, for nature
misliketh nothing more than a sudden passage from the one contrary, which is
extreme heat: unto the other, which is extreme cold. Now, if the party thus
heating his Body, do keep himself so warm that he abate the extremity by
little and little; until he come to that state, in which he was before his
heat: then he falls not sick, neither does nature complain at all.
Whereupon I think by great reason, and I am sure by long experience I may
conclude, that the best mean to cure a man in this extremity, is to bring his
body orderly again to the like heat, wherein it was when he took cold, and
to suffer the same some and some as it were by degrees to pass away: which
thou shall do in this order.

Take a pint of ale, clarify it, and dissolve therein as much treacle as a
walnut, and a spooneful of the medicine before rehearsed, made with malmesie.
Let the patient drink a good draught hereof warmed fasting, and keep his bed,
and sweat, four or five hours after it; and during his sweat, now and then let
him take of the Ale thus prepared until he have taken all. If it be a Child,
less quantity will serve: and in any wise abate his sweat very gently,
and beware he take no cold. For three mornings following, let him take one
draught of the like, two hours before he rise, and keep his body warm
without sweating.

Note, if in the beginning of his sickness, thou use the order prescribed for
the first day, he will presently recover. But if he have been long sick, and
so weak that he be not able to sweat as before, there is no hope of life.

Note, that if the patient be much bound, I wish thee to give him five or six
spoonefuls of my Potion, to ease and disburden nature: and let him drink often,
mild and thin Broth warm.

For a Surfeit by over eating.
The eight Chapter.
WHen any man, either by long fasting, being very hungry, or otherwise, coming
to such dainty meats as he is not used unto, eat over much, and cloyeth
nature; she refuses to digest at all: like as one seeing a burden far too
heavy for him to bear, does not so much as once offer to lift it.

This grief is in the quantity of things taken. But there is also the like in
the evil quality of meats, although they exceed not in quantity, as in eating
of fresh-herings, fat Pies, Piecrust, heavy Cakebread, and such like: whereof
eating but so much, as may well be eaten of better meats, oftentimes grows
greater sickness.

For cure, if the Patient complain, as yet the cause or matter of his grief
being in the stomach: give him a draught of water warm as milk from the cow,
with two spoonefuls of Sallet oil, which will cause him to Uomit: but if it
work not quickly, let him help it with his finger, by offering it to his
throat. And after his vomit, give him three or four spoonfuls of a Cawdell;
or some Broth reasonably hot; and let him have great care of his diet, for
five or six days following: first, that he eat nothing but what is warm
and easy to digest; next, that he eat not at any time much in quantity.

But if the matter pass the stomach, with very slight or no digestion, so
that a Uomit will not pleasure him; give him a draught of sack fasting, well
burned, putting thereto as much Tr^acle as an Hazell Nut, and Sugar as you
think sufficient; and let him keep his bed, and sweat four hours; more or
less as you think good, according to the strength of the patient: and in his
sweat, now and then let him take Ale clarified with a little Mace, wherein also
dissolve some sugar: for thus shall you make perfect digestion, through the
whole body, of that whereof he did surfeit.

For the Heartburning.
The ninth Chapter.
I Think it good together with the multitude, to content my self with the
ordinary name of this disease, which is, the heart burning: although it be a
disease of the Stomach, and not of the Heart. They which are troubled with this
grief, are for the most part at ease, after they have eaten, but when their
meat is digested, they feel a continual heat or bitterness in the mouth o^
their stomaches; they often belch, and have a continual readiness (as it were)
to vomit. In some it is of long continuance, in others it rises upon every
light occasion, especiasly by eating of fat, salt, and choleric meats.

As touching the cure, first I wish thee to mark very diligently, after what
meats and drinks thou art most troubled with this disease, and forbear the
same: for assure thy self, that they are either very unfit to make good blood,
or otherwise thy nature has some special mislike thereof. I wish thee also to
take this for a general rule, that what grief soever thou may help by
good diet or abstinence; in any wise take no Physic for the same. But if thy
long evil diet has laden thy stomach with hot, salt, and choleric humors,
which do cause the heart burning: then take of my Potion for three days every
morning, so much as shall give thee four or five stools: so shall thou
cleanse thy stomach perfectly: which is a very sufficient and perfect cure.

For those which Vomit continually after meat.
THere are two special causes of this Disease* the one is, when the first
veins which receive the nutriment from the stomach, are stopped: the other,
when the body is long bound, and the excrement very hard, so that the patient
goes scarsely once in ten days to the stool. In some it grows to such
extremity, that they never go to the stool: but that which remains after
digestion, passes from them by Uomit.

For cure, take four spoonefulles of my Potion fasting; and if that work not,
take more the next day; and so forth, always increasing the quantity, until
it work.

The next day, after it has wrought, boil a pint of good White Wind, with one
handful of Parsely, a quarter of an hour or better; then strain it, and put
thereto a little Sugar: and let the patient drink a reasonable quantity
thereof warm, and keep his bed, and sweat three hours: and during his sweat,
let him take now and then more of the same, until he have taken all.

Afterward, let him take fasting, so much of my Potion as will give him one
Stool a day. This he must continue in such sort, that he suffer not his
excrement to stay long, or to dry in his body; but that he be always soluble.

Note, the White Wind thus prepared, together with the sweating, opens the
first vein, and makes good passage into the body. The purging dissolueth, and
draws down the excrement, and some and some brings nature to her usual
course: also cleanse^h the stomach of such corruption, as happily is some cause
of the grief.

For those that have no appetite to Meat.
The tenth Chapter.
THere are diverse causes of this Disease: but I will rehearse only two, which
are most usual. The one is, when the first Ueines do not suck, which is
their natural action, whereby they receive food for the whole body: and this
is found in men of diverse constitutions. The other is proper unto fat and
gross bodies, which are always stuffed, (as it were) and so full, that nature
seems contented with that she has, and has little desire of more. For cure,
take of my Potion every day as much as will give thee two or three Stools, and
in few days thou shall feel thy self exceeding hungry: But if thou have not
good appetite presently after thy purging, take White wine boiled, in such
sort, as in the Chapter before is prescribed.

For those, who are troubled with the gnawing of the stomach or guts: also
for the collicke and wind, and all corruption which causes wind.
The xi. Chapter.
THese griefs rise of such corrupt and slymie humors, as cleave to the inner
part of the Stomach and Guts; and are thus very easily to be cured. Take of my
Potion so much as shall give thee three or four Stools a day, for five or
six days, more or less, respecting the age and body of the patient. For when
his Stomach and Guts are cleansed, he is very perfectly cured. Then learn to
avoid all windy and slimie meats, whereby thou shall be able to prevent these
diseases. I muse at the madness of such as in this case use Pepper, Ginger,
and other hot spices: also Coriander seed, or any thing of like nature: for
that in reason it is far better to take away the matter of the Disease, in
such sort as I have said, then to join one contrary with another, and to let
them both remain. These hot things are fitter to warm a cold Stomach, and
to make it apt to digest* being moderatly used, then to cleanse it, being full
of corruption; and good chiefly for those who are in years, and have natural
heat so decayed, that by Art they are forced to seek help, where Nature
fails.

For the Rheum.
The twelfe Chapter.
FOr the Rheum, I chiefly prescribe thee three Rules following: for that the
cure thereof consists more in the patientes own good government, then in
much taking of Physic.

The first Rule.
Use labor and exercise; for thereby thou shall stir up natural heat, and
consume the waterish humors, which do cause the Rheum: but if the weather be
such as thou can not go abroad, either ^osse a great yarne Ball against a
wall, or drive a great wooden Top in some convenient place: for both these are
very good exercises. Use them twice a day, and continue always one hour; but
make an end an hour before meat: and in the beginning, as also a little
before thou end, use gentle labor, that thou abate thy heat by little and
little: this is the chief and principal mean, both to prevent and cure this
grief. Which does appear manifestly: first, for that they, who labor much,
are never troubled with the Rheum: next, that students, and such as use little
stirring or motion of their bodies, are most subject thereto: for while they
sit still, the outward parts of their bodies are cold; so that their blood,
together with their humors, remain within: Neither have they any such
euacuation by the Pores, as nature requires, to consume the Rheumaticke
humor, which then seeks another vent: and either the Patient is forced to
spit it out, or else it runs out at his Nose: or thirdly, it slily
trickeleth into the Lungs. Here also may thou gather, why Students are
commonly so lean; for by neglecting exercise, which should disperse the
blood, they starve the outward parts of their bodies.

The second Rule.
Feed most upon hot meats, and especially such as are well roasted: for hot
meats warm the Stomach* and stir up natural heat through the whole body,
which digesteth the humors; chiefelie, if at thy meat thou talk and be merry.

The third Rule.
Keep thy Head and Neck warm, and thy Feet dry.

The fourth Rule.
Drink little; and touching thy drink also, observe these Rules following.

1 Let thy Drink be reasonable strong, and not small in any wise: for the
smallest Drink is most waterish. And if thou take of that continually from
time to time, which yields always new matter of thy Disease, it is very hard
for thee to have help.

2 Either drink not at all, or very little toward the end of thy meals: for
so shall thou suppress the moisture, which otherwise would ascend.

3 Let not thy Drink be over stale, sower, or sharp.

4 Drink not White or Rhenish wine.

5 If thou drink Claret wine, first look it be no small or hedge Wine: next,
take it well Sugered, and in the midst of thy meat one draught. There are
diverse other rules, but I will not persuade thee to any curious observations of
the same: yet will I rehearse them, least I should seem to contemn that which
is allowed of the learned.

The sixth Rule.
6 Fast and watch. The reason alleged is, that both these dry the body. But
these alone being observed, rather hurt then help: Whereof I take witness;
earnest Students, which rise early, fast long, eat little, and sit up late,
yet most troubled with the Rheum of all others. Wherefore in steed of these,
eat freely, but drink sparingly: also sleep hard, but lie very warm:
For then is thy body in like state as when thou use exercise. But watching
is unnatural, makes a dry senseless Brain, caus^th sore Eyes, and a cold
waterish Stomach, which are worse then the Rheum.

The seventh Rule.
7 Keep thee in a warm Air, and go warm.

The eight Rule.
8 Hold thy Breath hard now and then, which forces the Blood to the outward
parts of the Body, and turns withal the course of the Rheumatike humors.

The Cure.
Now, to help those which afterward by these Rules mean to continue their
health themselves (for otherwise it is but vain to seek help) first I wish
them to take of my Potion two days, and so much at a time, as will give them
six or seven stools: the third day toward bed, burn a good draught of
Sack, with a branch of Rosemarie: and when you have done burning of it,
presently brew it with a good quantity of Sugar, and the yolke of a new laid
Egg. And let the patient drink it in bed, and keep his body very warm all
night: for so shall he digest and consume the Rheumatick humors: use this three
nights together.

Note, if he be a thin lean body, and full of blood, either delay the Sack
the better with Sugar; or use Ale in stead of Sack, least the Sack inflame
his blood.

For the Yellow Iaundise, and stopping of the Liver, a very easy and perfect
cure.
The xiij. Chapter.
THE yellow I aundise proceeds of choler, being mixed with blood, and
therewith also dispearsed over the whole body. There are diverse causes of this
Disease, which make diverse kinds thereof.

1 The first kind is by the biting of some venomous Beast, whose Poison joins
with the blood, and makes the same choleric.

2 The second kind is chiefly in the declination, or going away of an hot
Fever: for when Nature has got the upper hand, she dispearseth ye yellow
choler, which was the matter of the Fever, and drives it out of the body, by
urine, by stool, and by the pores: which are the three special and most
natural means, whereby she emptieth the body. So that in this kind, the skin,
which is full of pores, or insensible holes, the urine and Excrementes of the
Patient are very yellow.

3 The third kind is through the inflammation of the Liver, which being over
hot, works too vehemently upon the nutriment, which it receives, and
conuerteth it not into good blood, according to his office and duty: but it
self being distempered into a matter of like heat, which is Choler, or rather
very Choleric blood.

4 The fourth kind is through the weakness of the Gall, which is not able to
su^ke or draw from the Liver the choleric humors; but suffers them
together with the Blood to pass into the Body, which thereby is colored
yellow.

5 The fifth kind is through the obstruction or stopping of the vessels, that
are between the Liver and the Gall; which being stopped, the Choler cannot
pass into the Gall, but is carried with the Blood into the body, and stayneth
it.

6 The sixth kind is through the obstruction of the passage, from the Gall, into
the bowels; for that being stopped, the Gall is not able to empty it self.
But the Choler is repelled, and passes back into the Body, which otherwise
should color and stain the Excrement yellow. In this fifth and sixth kinds
therefore, the Excrement of the Patient is white, also he feels an heaviness
in his right side. These two last kinds of Iaundies are most common, which are
thus to be cured. As for the rest, I write nothing: for (to confess a truth)
since I knew the use of the root of the white Uine, otherwise called Brionia,
a thing not known, and yet of special virtue, I never used other mean to
cure the Iaundise. Whereby I gather, that either altogether, or most commonly,
the grief rises of obstruction. Take of the roots of Brionia half an ounce,
and Parslie half an handful: boil these very gently in a pint of White or
Rhenish wine half an hour, close covered, then strain it, and let the
patient drink a good draught thereof reasonable hot, fasting, and keep his
bed, and sweat three or four hours, as the continuance of his disease does
require, and his strength will permit, which I refer to his own discretion: and
during his sweat, let him drink of the rest, until he have taken all: and if
he desire to drink yet more in his sweat, give him Ale clarified, putting
thereto one whole Mace, and a little Sugar.

Note, the more he sweateth and drinks, the more the vessels stopped are
opened, the matter digested, and his Iaundise the sooner cured. The next day
take so much of my Potion as will give thee seven or eight Stools: for thy
sweating does but open the vessels, and digest the corruption which lies in
them: but the purging does take it away. It were also more agreeing with
physic and reason, if thou purge a little before thy sweating, to cleanse thy
stomach and guts, least such corruption as lies there, be carried into the
body. But in the meaner sort, who ever do expect sudden help, I often have
omitted the first purging: yea, and sometimes also, they feeling ease, have
never sought for the second.

Note, if the Iaundise in short time after, show not himself perfectly cured:
let the patient sweat again, as before.

Note also, hereby thou shall cure the obstruction of the Liver.

But the most easy and ready cure of the Iaundise, is by the conserve for the
Iaundise; of which take every morning fasting, for ten days together, as much
as a Walnut, and fast one hour after it.

For the Black Iaundise, for the hardness and swelling of the Spleen or
Milt; also for the Piles.
The xiiij. Chapter.
LIke as the Yellow Iaundise proceeds of Choler; so the Black Iaundise of
Melancholy: which joining with the Blood, is dispearsed over the whole body.
It is known by diverse signs, but chiefly by this token, which will serve for
all. They that are troubled with this Disease, have always dry, withered, and
black bodies. It is very hard to be cured, and requires great diligence of
the patient: for Melancholy is a very stubborn humor, and (without great
digestion) will not yield to any Purgation whatsoever. For cure, take
Ceteracke, the inner rine of the Ash, the roots of the white Uine, Parsely; of
each four ounces: hoyle these gently in three gallons of Whey clarified one
hour at the least, and being cold, keep it in some clean vessel until the
same be well settled. Take hereof well warmed a great draught or two, every
morning fasting (for thou can not take too much) and walk after it, until
the body be hot: or else use some other exercise, to stir thy blood, that the
Whey may be the better dispearsed within thy body. Take it at ye least thirty
or forty days together, especially in the Spring and Fall. But always
remember to take so much of my Potion with the Whey, as will give thee daily
one stool more then ordinary.

Note, that the Whey thus prepared, does digest some and some the melancholy;
and the potion does take it away from time to time, as it is made fit to be
purged.

Note also, that it is good for thee to annoint thy left side about thy girdle
stead, where the Spleen lies, with oil of Wormwood warmed, or oil of
Brionie* which is far better.

Note thirdly, that in this sort thou may cure the swelling and hardness of
the Spleen: also the Piles or Hem^rrhoides.

For the Greene-sicknesse.
The xv. Chapter.
THis Disease happens, when the Liver is also weakened, that it is not able
to convert the nutriment into blood; but the digestion thereof is raw, so that
the whole body is filled with water and fleame, in stead of good blood. It is
found most in Maidens, who either of folly desire to abate their color, and to
be over fine; or otherwise of childish appetite, feed upon such things, as
change the state of their bodies, which are these: Apples, Pears, Plums,
Cheries, and generally all raw Fruits and H^^rbes: also, Otemeale, Wheat,
Barlie, raw Milk, and many other things of like nature. They that have this
Disease, are very pale and greenish: if they chance to cut a Finger, no Blood,
but Water will rather follow. They feel a great pain in their heads, with a
continual panting or beating. They are faint also, with shortness of breath; and
have their natural course stayed.

For cure, take of my Potion, for four or five days, every day so much as
shall give thee five or six stools. The next day after thy Purging, boil
half an ounce of the roots of the white vine in a wine pint of Ale gently, a
quarter of an hour, and drink a good draught thereof, and keep thy bed, and
sweat three or four hours, more or less, as the body of the patient will
bear: and in thy sweating, drink of thy Ale now and then, until thou have
taken all, or as much as thou can. The day following, take a good draught of
thy Ale in like sort prepared, one hour before thou rise, and keep thy body
warm without sweating use this last order twelve days: But it were far
better to walk after thy draught, or to use some other exercise; whereof I
have spoken in the Chapter for the Rheum, for one hour to heat and stir the
humors in thy body. Use withal, only meats of good nutriment and easy
digestion, and thou shall have very speedy help, and also perfect health.

For the quotidian Ague, which comes every day.
The xvj. Chapter.
TAke Centurie, Burrage, and Betonie; of each three handfulles, Fumiterrae one
handful, Iuie berries one pint: choppe all these very finely together, and put
them into a fair Stillatorie, with one pint of White Wind; and distill them
with as gentle a Fire as is possible, until thou have all the Water: which
keep in a Glass close stopped with yellow Wax.

For the Quotidian Ague, let the patient take seven or eight spoonefuls of
this Water warmed, two hours before his fit, and keep his bed, and sweat
three or four hours: and in his sweating, let him drink Ale clarified
reasonable hot, now and then: and into every draught put two spoonefuls of the
Water.

The next day, in like order two hours before his fit, get him into a sweat:
and do in all things as before.

Note, that the Water is more perfectly made, if the things be first digested
in a close vessel, in Balneo Marie, or Fimo equino, eight or ten days.

Note also, that these things orderly done, and the patient well kept from
the air, the Ague is cured in two days. But if by some oversight, it chance
to continue longer, begin again, and use the like order for two days, as
before.

Note thirdly, it will be more easily cured, if thou purge before thy sweating,
with so much of my Potion as will give thee five or six stools.

If a Child be sick of a Quotidian or Tertian ague, which being young will not
be persuaded to take inward things: take an ounce of the Roots of the white
Uine, beat them to Powder; also, take half so much wheat flower, and boil
both in a little milk until it be thick: then spread it upon two linen
clothes, and bind it warm to the Wristes of the child; when it is dry, take
fresh. In four days for the most part the ague is thus cured, it helps much
also for all others, and in all agues.

For the quartane ague.
The 17. Chapter.
THe Quartane Ague is a disease so hard to cure, that it has been always
accounted the reproach and shame of the Physicians. For it resists the fore
of all their usual medicines, and does in despite of them triumph over their
patient. Wherefore I shall now take a hard matter in hand, and I know my
slender receipt shall be greatly suspected, for the working of so rare an
effect. But notwithstanding, being greatly encouraged by experience, and
reason, her good Lady and Gouernesse; I will boldly proceed herein. Take on
thy two good days, every day so much of my Potion fasting, as will give thee
six or seven stools: The third day, which is thy fit day, pass over, as thou
think good; for I prescribe thee nothing. The fourth day, take of the Water,
whereof I spoke in the Chapter before, a reasonable draught warmed, early, and
keep thy bed, and sweat moderatly five or six hours; and during thy sweat,
drink now and then Ale clarified warm, and into every draught put three
spoonefuls of the Water, and one spoonefull of good wine vinegar. Use this
order four days together.

If the Quartan forsake thee not in that time (which I think almost
impossible) upon thy next fit day, two hours before thy cold, take the like
quantity of the water as before, and sweat until the time of thy cold be
past, and in thy sweat drink Ale clarified, as before also. Use this order
three times, only upon thy fit days. After thy fits have left thee, take ten
days together of my Potion, so much as will give the^ daily two stools.

Note, that this Water being dispearsed in thy body, by natural heat stirred
up in sweating, does in wonderful sort ripen and digest the matter of the
quartane Ague: so that it far excels all the preparatiues of the world: For
thereby alone I have cured many without purging; but it is far better to
purge.

For the Tertian Ague, which comes every second day.
The 18. Chapter.
TAke of Centuary six handfuls, Endive twelve handfuls, distill these with a
very gentle fire, and keep the water close stopped in a Glass; but let the
Glass be but half full, for so it will keep the better.

For cure, first let the Patient take so much of my Potion, as will give him
five or six stools on his good day: the next day, two hours before his fit
will come, give him a reasonable draught of the Water warmed well, whereunto ad
a little sugar, and let him keep his bed, and sweat three or four hours:
and in his sweat, let him drink Ale clarified; and in every draught of Ale,
put two or three spoonefuls of the water: use this order also the second fit,
and thou shall give the Fever such a check, that it dares not assault the
patient any more. Be careful, and thou may cure many extreme hot Fevers
with this Water, even in one fit: but after the fittes be gone, purge, and so
shall thou deal very orderly: thou may make a Water of Celendine alone,
which will cure the quotidian, tertian, and quartan Agues, is this sort. Take
this Herb when it blows, and is in greatest force, chop it very small, and
digest it in a close vessel of Glass ten days, in Balneo Mariae; which done,
thou shall find it black and of a very sweet and pleasant savor; then
distill it with a gentle heat: and when in thy judgment thou have half the
Water, take it away, and keep it by it self; then increase the heat of the
fire, and get as much more Water as thou can. These Waters are to be used as
the others, whereof I have spoken in the cure of these agues: but the first
water being of the colder nature does cure only the Tertian, the second being
hotter, cures the quotidian and quartan.

A general cure for all Agues.
The 19. Chapter.
TAke a good draught warmed of the Iulip for Agues one hour before your fit,
and keep your Body very warm, and within half an hour, take as much also in
like sort, take also in the same order the third draught: in three fits this
cures all Agues orderly used. If the Patient keep his Bed, and sweat in
taking the Iulip, he may be the sooner cured.

For the Plague.
The 20. Chapter.
THere be three special causes of this disease. The first is the just
judgment of GOD, for the sins of the people: And herein I consent with the
Divines, that in this case the Plague comes as it were by the commandment of
God; and then in vain works the policy of Man unto health, where the power
of the Almighty works to destroy. Wherefore repentance and amendment of
life, is the only salve for the sore. Yet withal, for that we are ignorant of
the determination of God; I wish no man to omit such natural means, as he
has provided for the preservation of our natural bodies, least thereby he
tempt him.

The second kind proceeds of the corruption of the Air, which is of two
sorts; the one general, the other particular. The Air is generally infected,
by the distemperature of the Heavens, which thou shall know in this sort. The
weather is long dark, cloudy, foggy, stifeling, very hot and moist: also our
bodies faint, we loath the breath we draw, for it brings a most sensible and
present offense; it is hard to keep Flesh sweet, little Frogs and Todes, also
flies, Lobchesters, and Worms of sundry sorts (such as commonly proceed of
putrefaction) do greatly abound: and to conclude, the Heavens do as it were
refuse to draw the corruption from the Earth, but rather seem to yield down
again such as they had taken away before. The Air is particularly infected by
the savor of dead Carcases; as it happens often in battle, where many are
slain, and lie unburied: which infecteth the particular ^lace, only where the
bodies lie: also, by the evil and putrified savor of a fennie or marish
ground, or such like. And further, by the breath and savor of the bodies of
such as throng together in a taynting or stifeling sort, especially in some
close or sluttish place: as it happens (no doubt) often in London, and such
like Cities of great resort, that many lodge together in one small room,
having perhaps as many Beds as the place will well contain. And then, after
one hour or two, how may any of these draw fresh or sweet breath, but such as
his fellows have drawn often before, as also the rank fume of their bodies?
Both which, are so contrary to Nature, that some and some with continuance,
they infect the vital spirits, and breed such corruption as bursteth out into
the Plague.

The third kind of Plague rises of the corrupt Humors in man's body, by evil
diet engendered. And these last sorts come by the permission of God, like as ye
first by his commandment. To prevent this heavy grief, first I wish one old
order to be renewed; which was, to make Fires in all great Cities and Towns in
ye open streets, upon certain days every year: which no doubt does greatly
cleanse and purify the air. And although this order was diligently observed
by the followers of the Pope: yet I think they did it rather of policy then
of religion, and therefore being good, it is not to be rejected. Secondly, I
think it very necessary for Citizens, and such as live in a close air, now
and then to assemble themselves together in the fields in some sweet and open
place, there also to use moderate exercise; which will greatly purify their
bodies: and in the mean time, to leave a good huswife at home to see the house
made clean and sweet, by sweeping, by strowing good Herbs, by ayring the
bedding, by opening the windows, to let fresh air into every room, etc.

Thirdly, I wish that through all London, in every Ward, there may be certain
appointed to see, that no House or Room within any house, be over pestered
with lodgings or people, and to drive out of the City such as upon examination
they shall find to be vagabondes, or unnecessary members. For this is no
less requisite for such a City, then a Purgation for him whose body is full
of corruption.

For cure, take Endi^e water a quart, Centuarie water a pint, Iuie berries
half an handful bruised: Boil these together gently a quarter of an hour,
and when you take it from the fire, dissolve therein as much Treacle as a Nut,
and a little Sugar; also put thereunto three spoonefuls of Uineger.

As soon as ever the patient does complain, and nature being yet strong, give
him fasting one good draught thereof warm, and let him keep his bed, and
sweat ten hours or less, as the strength of the patient will bear. And in
his sweating, give him now and then Ale clarified, and into every draught put
two or three spoonefuls of the decoction. When he rises, give him some Broth
not made over strong, neither with much Spice; and be very careful to keep
him from the air. This decoction thus used, will either force out the sore; or
else if the patient sweat thoroughly well, cure him without any sore. And if
thou find he be not greatly eased within viii. hours after his sweating, the
next day use the like order. But whereas in this, and diverse other diseases
heretofore, I have prescribed the patient to drink in his sweating, I know it
does not agree with many Writers: neither do I take it to be absolutely good;
but herein rather I admit a small evil, to avoid a greater.

For the Crampe.
The 21. Chapter.
FOr the Crampe I wish you to use Vnguentum Brioniae, (by which name ask for
it of M. Clapham, warm it well, and annoint the place where you are commonly
troubled, and rub it until it be dry, by the fire side. It is a very present
help: once or twice annoynting, will serve for a long time. This is also of
marvelous force for Sinews that are shrounke, and stiff Joints: and good
for those which have their Faces drawn awrie, or any other Conuulsion.

For Burning and Scalding.
The 22. Chapter.
TAke of your ordinary gray Soap, and annoint the place burned or scalded
presently: once annoynting will serve, if you take it as soon as it is done,
both to take away the Fire, and to heal it without any further matter.
Assuredly, it far excels all other Medicines. I have often seen such
help hereby only, as before I thought impossible. But if it be not within a
quarter of an hour or less anointed with Soap, then take Goose-grease, which
has been kept from Salt, for it must be such in any wise, and annount the
place therewith well warmed twice a day: for this alone will heal it; and so,
that it shall never be seen, except it be burned very deep.

For a Fellon, and Whitblow.
The 23. Chapter.
TAke Wine-vineger, and Wheat branne; boil them together in such quantities
as you think good, till it be thick, always stirring it well: it is made in
half a quarter of an hour. Spread it thick upon a linen cloth, and lay it
to the Fellon, and above it, as hot as the patient can well abide: dress it
once in xii. ^oures: use it iii. or iiii. days, or longer, if the Fellon has
been of long continuance. The like order, but less time, will serve to cure
the Whitblow, or an angry and burning Swelling: it draws out the corruption,
being applied hot, and drives it not in, although the Uineger be cold. If the
Uineger be very sharp, so that it will get off the Skin, annoint the place
first with a little sweet Oil, lightly over.

For the Ring-worme, Tetter, and such like.
The 24. Chapter.
TAke the juice of Celendine, and bath the place twice or thrice a day, and in
very short time it will help thee.

For the Toothache.
The 25. Chapter.
TAke the juice, or rather milk of the garden Spurge, and temper it with
Wheat flower until it be an hard Past or Dough. If thy Tooth be hollow, put
the quantity of a Barley corn thereof into it; also put of it in a cloth, and
lay it to thy Iaw or Gummes. But if thy body be very moist, and Rheumaticke
withal, then I refer thee to that Chapter, where I have spoken of the Rheum:
for in that case is required a more general euacuation or emptying of thy body.

Of the Disease wherewith our wantons of England are troubled.
The 26. Chapter.
THere is yet one other disease, whereof it is very requisite to speak;
wherewith our Wantons of England are much troubled. For (not respecting the
force or help of Nature) if they feel never so small or little a grief, they
must presently to Physic; until they have so filled their bodies with drugs,
that they are sicker of their Physic, then of any Disease. In this grief, a
little more wit will be a present help: for so shall they have heavier
Purses, lighter Hearts, and sounder Bodies.

For the Worms of all sorts.
The 27. Chapter.
TAke of the powder of Centuarie leaves, one ounce, powder of Sen. Alex. half
an ounce; Wormeseed finely beaten, one ounce; then take good Malmesie a quarter
of a pint or better; of the best Honey three ounces; dissolve the Honey in the
Wine with a gentle heat, and then put in all the Powders, an^ stir it well
together: which done, put i^ into a clean Bladder, knit i^ close, and hang it
in the chimny, until it be an hard lump. You may use it as the Worseseed
alone is commonly used: give a Child the weight of a groat at a time; to the
elder sort more, as you think good: it kills the Worms, and causes them to
void.

For those which have their health.
The 28. Chapter.
HE which has his health, and would so continue, I wish him either to
forbear, or little to use those things which greatly digress from that
constitution or mediocritie, in which man is created. Our Physicians do call
every thing hot, or cold, in respect of the nature of man. For if it be some
what hotter then his nature, then it digresseth, and they term it hot in the
first degree: if yet hotter, hot in the second degree: and in like manner to
the third and fourth. Which because it does so far exceed his constitution,
by daily proof is found to be unto him flat poison. The like consideration on
the contrary side have they of cold things. Whereby you may gather, how like
always desires like, and abhors the contrary. The things which are like,
and best agree with the nature of man, are good wholesome usual meats and
drinks: a dry, fresh, and sweet air; moderate sleep and travel, or labor:
which although it were allotted to us as a punishment by God, yet mercifully
withal he has made it a mean to preserve our health. The things which
greatly disagree, are wines, spices, salt meats, and all very hot things:
which thou shall know by taste. For either they bite like Pepper, fret like
Salt, or else show some manifest great heat in the mouth. Also on the other
side, all raw fruits, and cold herbs, with diverse things of like nature.
Much use of sauces, devised by belly Gods, whom God has puni^hed, as much by
want of appetite, having meat at will; as the poor by want of meat, having
good appetite. To live in a thick or foggie Air, to live idly, and to
exceed in eating, drinking, sleeping, watching, or venerie. I would not have
any man to think, that I do utterly condemn all very hot and cold things:
but seeing they are rather of the nature of medicine then nutriment, I wish
them to be very discreetly and moderately used: for hot things are to be used
when a man's body is over cold; and cold things when his body is over hot: but
to use either, the body being not distempered, is mere madness.

Now further, for so much as all men are subject unto death, and our bodies (as
yielding thereunto) from time to time always gather corruption: to preserve
our health as much as may be, until we have run that race which God has
appointed, I commend unto you this receipt.

Take Borage and Parselie, in like quantity; boil them in Whey clarified, and
keep it in some earthen vessel. Use of it warm, in the Spring especially,
every morning fasting, a good draught: and in every draught, take so much of my
Potion* as will give thee two stools a day more then ordinary. Some may use
it ten days together, others fifteen, or twenty, as the body does require.
By this means thou may prevent many diseases, and keep thy body in very
good state. It makes women apt to conceive, if (during the taking hereof) they
live chaste: and it has many other special virtues which for brevity sake I
will omit.

FINIS.
Here follows an Addition by the same Author, wherein be declared three
special stays of health.
The first, by the use of a new kind of Worme-wood wine. The second, by
Bathing. The third, by Anointing of the body.
The first Chapter.
FOr that Lignum Aloes is one of the chiefest Simples, which is used in the
making of this Worme-wood Wine, and such as yields the greatest virtue
thereto; I may not let to speak (yet in brief sort) what I read thereof.
Lignum Aloes is the wood of a tree, which according to some writers, grows in
diverse parts of Babylon; and others affirm, that it is one of the Trees of
Paradise, growing by one of the waters there* whose arms ^alling into the
waters, are carried by the swiftness thereof into other places far from
thence, where the inhabitants find them, and send them into diverse parts of
the world.

Being cut in small Chips and laid upon roles, this wood yields a fume
somewhat pleasant, and most healthful: For it comfort the Brain and all the
senses woonderfullie: Also entering into the Lunges with the breath preserves
the same, and expels al evil and infectious air. It has been ever very
rare, of great value, and in effect of the same price with silver, weight for
weight. Princes and great States did use long since to burn it in their
Chambers, and to Perfume their bedding therew^th, to the intent that sleeping,
they might draw the savor of the same into their bodies. Also the great
Prelates (who neue^ were behind for preservation of them selves) used the
like, in Perfuming the (...), and the vestments which they wear* and gave the
meaner sort-leaue to use onl^ Frankincense, being a thing of far less value. I
found in a book made by a Friar, an Englishman, in Magdalen college Library
in Oxford, a great discourse touching the nature and virtues of Lignum aloes,
which he prefers far before all the known simples of the world. He
commends it wonderfully, being steeped in Wine, and so taken.

Further, he writes of an Oil made therewith, which was sent from Prince to
Prince for a most precious Jewel; but in exceeding small quantity.

The making thereof he shows not, which somewhat grieved me, and I think
therein he was ignorant. He reports of certeaine Priests which had it, where
with they would anoint the Noses and Lips of such as by sickness were in
great extreamitie, using also devout Prayers, and often thereby only revived
them; whereupon in the sight of the People, they were thought to work great
miracles, and were had in marvelous estimation; for they were dee^ed very Holy
Men, and to work these ^ffects cheefely by their prayers, which was (...) be
attributed unto the Oil, and yet as (...) natural mean provided by God; For
^he wonderful virtue thereof entering at the Nostrils and Mouth, directly unto
the Lungs and Heart (the two principal Members of Man's Common wealth (I mean
his Body) makes a very strong supply in the conflict between. Nature and the
Disease, which is the cause of so sudden re^ouerie. There came at the length
of this Oil unto the ^ope, who kept it as a wonderful treasure, and sent
thereof to diverse great Princes; whose virtue indeed was such, while it was
well and truly ma^e, that both the fame and price thereof was great. But
after, within a short time, it (...) counterfaited, that there was (...) whole
worlds, and the Priests (...) had of it from Rome; (...) the Priests used as
a very holy (...) unto those that were sick; but (...) virtue being gone, they
ceased to work (...) thereby. And yet continuing their (...) of extreme
unction, which they (...) vnctionis, (...) diverse Prayers, did annoint (...),
mouth, ears, eyes, the palms (...) hand^s, the soales of the feet, and (...)
of the sick body. For these are (...), whereby sin enters (...) s^ule of
man. But to conclude, who(...) will know more of the nature of (...) Aloes, let
him read the old writers in Physic.

This Chapter entreats of the nature of Worme-wood wine, and how it is to be
used.
The second Chapter.
THe virtues of this Worm wood-wine, are both great, and many. First, it
keeps the body solub^e, and is good for such as seldom go to the Stool, it
cleanses the Stomach, opens the Liver and the Sp^eene, and causes a good
and clear Complexion, it strengthens the Heart and m^keth (...) it cleanses
the Brain and k^epeth all the senses perfect; also preserves the Memory, it
is good for women's weak backs; it is generally an excellent and most ^amiliar
Medicine, and cleanses the Body of such corrupt humors as gather therein from
time to time. It is a very good preservative against the Plague, and may be
taken from the quantity of half a pint or better at one time, unto the
quantity of a quarter of a pint, or less: it is good to fast one hour after
it, and to use it only in the morning; which being observed, I restrain you
from no further liberty. Master Clapham the Apothecarie has direction for
the making hereof.

The 3. Chapter.
OUr Fathers long since, were wont to use a very slight kind of Bathing. Now
and then they boiled Herbs in water, and therewith did bath and rub their
bodies toward bed; which now, is greatly neglected. It is a far greater
mean to preserve our health, then that we should so lightly esteem thereof.
For it takes away such corruption as Nature casts out by the pores, which
otherwise would happily cause Scabs, Itches, or such like, and keeps the body
sweet from all rank sauors of sweat. Wherefore I prescribe one general
Bath in this sort, and to that effect. Take Rosemarie, Balm, Isop, and
Mallows, of each two handfuls, boil these in four gallons of Spring water
until there be a third part consumed, then strain and put thereto one gallon
of new Milk: bathe your body herewith warm by the fire^ side two or three
hours after supper. It is very good to use it four times in the year at the
least; and in the Summer once or twice every month.

The 4. Chapter.
AFter your Bathing, rub your body very dry with a Linen cloth; and presently
upon, anoint it over very lightly with this Ointment: yet use no more but that
you may easily dry in.

Take Balm green in the beginning of June, or in May, when you shall find it
in chiefest strength, and chop it very small: take further very sweet Oil,
and the fact of a Bucke killed in the chief of Summer; or that which is
better, the fat of a Stagge, in equal quantity: let these stand in a very
gentle heat together eight or ten hours, then strain and keep the
Ointment in some clea^e vessel. It keeps the Joints souple, making the
Sinews nimble and plain^: also it cures the dryness of the Skin. They
which use it after Bathing, as before, shall find themselves the stronger, and
more lusty. For it defends the body from coldness of the air, and
thereupon auoydeth Aches of the Joints and Sinews.

FINIS.
The Hammer for the Stone: So named, for that it shows the most excellent
remedy that ever was known for the same.

Lately devised by Walter Carry master of Arts, and student in Physic.

Imprinted at London by W. White for the company of Stationers. 1609.

TO THE READER.
COnsidering with my self (gentle reader) how common a disease the Stone is,
and how little help the parties grieved have by usual means in this our
time, and of long time have had: and also hearing it diverse times objected,
that the most learned Physitia^ can neither prevent the Stone in those who
naturally are inclined thereunto, neither cure it in those in whom it is
engendered, I did endeavor my self with all study and diligence, to find out
some special thing, which might far excel the remedies now daily used, for
the cure of that grievous disease.

Whereupon taking mine invention from Etius, who used very much the powder of
Goats blood for cure of the same: also being further persuaded thereunto by
authority of diverse writing of the nature of Goats blood: I did draw a pure
and clear liquor out of the blood of the male Goat, which I have thought good
to name the Quintessence for the Stone.

And having made experience thereof now two years and better, with diverse, I
thought good to publish the same, to the relief of many, which are grieved
with that infirmity, and that in such sort, as it shall appear unto the world*
that I rather seek herein to benefit my Country, then any private gain to my
self.

For whereas no man troubled with that disease, can have the help of the
Physician, without his great charge: I have devised that mean, that any man so
diseased, may have such ease with very small charge, as I dare boldly avouch,
can not be had by any usual means.

But^ for the commendation hereof, I leave it rather to be commended by the
help and ease of those, who fear and feel the passions of that most terrible
disease, then use any long rethorical perswasio^s, knowing that the good Wine
needs no Garland; and that the fairest Garland can be no long credit to sower
Wine.

And now that this my Quintessence may take the better effect, I think it very
necessary, to signify unto such as are inclined to the Stone, and to those
that are already troubled with the same. First, the causes of the Stone, and
whereof it is ingendered. Secondly, the difference of Stones engendered in man's
body. Thirdly, the usual way both to prevent and cure the Stone. And fourthly,
the way or mean now late devised, for preventing and curing of the same.
Wherein being somewhat instructed, they shall be the better able to govern
themselves in avoiding and curing the disease, as not needing the Physicians
continual counsel, but being Physicians to themselves. Yet I would not have
any man think that I mind to make any long or curious discourse of the Stone,
touching all the deepest points of the same, as indeauouring to make the
readers perfect Physicians herein; but only to show them a superficial
knowledge, sufficient to direct them in the taking of my Quintessence.

And thus (gentle Reader) have I divided that, whereof I mind to write, into
four parts; wherein I will not endeavor my self to speak whatsoever may
conveniently be spoken: but rather to speak nothing that may conveniently be
le^t out.

W. C.
The Author to those that are vexed with the Stone, in verse as follows.
1
THy Silver, Gold, thy precious Stone.
Thy Mucke, thy worldly wealth,
Naught helps now thy grievous groan,
No ease it gives to Health.
Now do thou lie.
2
Amidst thy friends a prisoner,
a piece of pining Clay:
Thy hope for want of hearts desire,
Does fail, and vade away.
Thou seek'st to die.
3
Thy friends eye-teares, thy hearts drops blood,
Thy limbs and joints do quake:
Thy stomach vomites that is good.
Whose force makes bedstead shake.
An endless woe.
4
Thy doleful life, is but a death,
And death were life to thee:
For pain death cease with thy last breath,
But life heaps misery.
Come death; why so?
5
What, what, sendes God a malady,
And not a mean for ease?
No Physic good? No remedy
This raging grief to appease?
Though Physic fail.
6
Behold a faithful friend unknown,
(To do his Country good)
Will ease this grief and heavy groan,
With water of Goats blood.
Then do not quail.
7
Though dreadful Death an actien brought,
This Goat thy bale will be,
And though the cause be slily wrought,
The verdict goes with thee.
Lift up thy heart,
8
His harm, thy hope: his woe, thy wealth:
His heart receives the knife:
He yeeldes his blood to bring thee health,
His death, shall be thy life.
And end thy smart.
Lo thus the Author greetes thee well,
Thy friend without desert:
He craves but thanks, and so does sell
A salve for wounded heart:
He seeks good will, gives ease of pain,
Good words for ware: an easy gain,
Vale.
The causes of the Stone, and how it is engendered in man's body.
The first Chapter.
IT is not unknown unto such as have bestowed any time in the study of
Physic, that as well the old, as the new Writers, with one consent agree, Two
causes the Stone.
that there are two causes of the Stone: the one material, the other formal.
The material cause is an earthy, gross, thick, and slimie humor: the
formal cause is the heat of man's body, digesting or baking the said humor,
until it be hard, which then remains in the nature of a Stone: this will I
make more manifest to you by a familiar example.

Clay of it self is an earthy and slimie substance, which I will compare unto
the humor whereof the Stone is ingendered. Also the Fire I will compare unto the
heat of man's body; whereby you may see how the Stone in engendered. For this
Clay, being baked in the Fire, is made a Stone, and loses his nature of Clay.

Here also I think it good to note, that Nature requires always a fit matter
to work upon. For one only action of Nature at one time works diverse and
very contrary effects: which happens, because of contrariety of the matters
whereupon she works, and not by any diversity of her action. For as by Fire,
Clay is made a Stone: so Chalk being a Stone, by Fire is converted into
powder. And as Clay by Fire is made a cast and firm substance, which before
was soft, and easy to be dissolved in Water: so Chalk being before, a fast
and sound lump, is by the same fit to be dissolved in Water, because of the
discontinuitie or separation of his parts.

Whereby you may gather, that this slimie humor, being in man's body, has a
nature very apt to be turned into a Stone, and yields it self to the speedy
generation thereof, whereunto it is naturally inclined, which otherwise by so
small heat, could hardly be. And therefore I would wish every man to have a
special care in refusing Mea^es, and other things, which are apt to breed the
Stone, and in using the contrary; which hereafter in place convenient, touching
the preventing of the Stone, I will not omit,

The difference of Stones engendered in man's body.
The second Chapter.
I Have (according to my promise) briefly spoken of two causes of the Stone.
Now with like brevity, I will speak of the difference of Stones engendered in
man's body; which I find by experience, to differ in place, color, form,
quantity, and hardness.

1 As touching the first, there are two usual places where the Stone is
ingendered; the Kidneys, and the Bladder. Unto the stone of the Kidneys, the
middle-aged, and they that somewhat decline, are most subject. And these Stones
of the Kidneys are also of two sorts. For they are either engendered in the
hollow vessels of the Kidneys; or in the substance or fleshie parts. But unto
the Stone of the Bladder, Children are most inclined: which happens, for that
all Children (for the most part) first eat often, ere that which they eat
before be digested. Next, after they have eaten, they use violent exercise, and
motion of their bodies continually, whereby they force a thicker and more
gross juice or nutriment, from the stomach into the body, then Nature
requires: and that gross substance, settling in the bottom of the Bladder,
by the temperate heat of the child, is converted into a Stone. As in the
making of the artificial Wmes, if you let them pass through the strayner
gently of their own accord, they come clear: but if hastily you force them by
wringing, they come thick, and being settled, will be full of Grounds in the
bottom.

2 Secondly for color, there are some Stones white, some black, others
yellow; some red, some of ash color, and some mixed of diverse colors. Which
diversity happens chiefly by difference of the matter, whereof the Stones
were engendered: and somewhat by digestion of the Stones, either by smaller or
greater heat, with either longer or shorter time.

3 The third difference of Stones, is in form or fashion. For some are round,
as a Ball: some like an Egg, some like a Pease, some like a Barlie corn: some
sharp, some piked, and of diverse and sundry other forms, whereof I need not to
speak.

4 The fourth difference is in quantity: for the Stone differs in quantity
from the bigness of a pins head, or less, unto the quantity of an Egg, or
greater. And the smaller sort of Stones are (for the most part) engendered in
the Kidneys, and that either in the hollow vessels of the Kidneys, as I said
before: which being but small, the Stone cannot exceed the bigness thereof,
and therefore must be small also. Or else in the substance or fleshie parts
of the Kidneys, here and there dispearsed, which also are seldom found to be
great. But the greater sort of Stones are always ingendered in the Bladder,
for that the vessels being great, will also admit the generation of a great
Stone.

5 The fifth difference, is in hardness. For there are some (as I have often
seen) scant congealed or baked, so that one may break them to grite with this
finger and his thumb. Others somewhat harder, and not easy to be broken. And
others so hard, as they will not easily yield to the Hammer. The Stone that
breaks gently, is (for the most part) red, or yellow. The middle sort, is of
diverse colors. The hardest, white. There is also a mixed kind of Stone, compact
of hard stones lightly knit together by soft Gravel; and this kind is most
dangerous and painful in voyding.

The usual way how to prevent and cure the Stone.
The third Chapter.
IN the two former Chapters, I have briefly touched the matter whereof the
Stone is ingendered, and the difference of Stones. Now I will show the usual
means, both to prevent and cure the Stone, which (amongst the Physicians of
our time) are now daily practiced. The Stone in those who only fear the
Disease, and are not yet troubled therewith, is prevented by two special
means. The one is, by abstinence from Meats, and things which are apt to
breed the Stone. Which are of 2. sorts also. For either they breed in the
body of a fit matter, easy to be converted into a Stone: as Ueale, Pigge,
Lamb, Ling, Greene-fish, Eeles, Cheese, Milk; and generally, all very gross,
slimie, sweet, and fat Meats. Or else, they cause an unnatural heat in
the Body, and inflame the Kidneys, and other parts: as, heating the Back at
the Fire, lying much upon the Back; also great use of Pepper, Ginger, and
other Spices, or any thing of like nature. The other by purging that humor,
which being in the body, is not yet digested to the nature of a Stone: which is
done by two means also. Either by Purgation, and lexatiue Medicines; or
otherwise, by those things, which being of a very subtle, thin, and piercing
nature, do pass suddenly through the Liver, the Kidneys, and the Bladder, and
violently carry with them such slimie and gross humors, as they find by the
way: as White Wind, and Rhenish-wine, with such like, taken fasting: which
being not taken fasting, work not this effect. For being used either with, or
soon after Meat, they hasten the digestio^, and carry gross and raw humors
into the body, whereby they work a very contrary effect, and engender the
Stone, being much used.

But the Stone being already ingendered, by the usual means is to be cured;
chiefly by things which cause the Stone to break and void: as Saxifrage,
Parsely, Pellitorie of the wall, Gromwell, and other things infinite; whereof
I have named four good, pleasant, and easiest to be taken. There are also
diverse other means: as letting Blood, Purging, Glisters, Uomits, and
mollifying or distending the narrow and strict vessels with Oils, etc. wherein
the Stone sticks. But for brevity sake, all these I let pass.

The preventing and curing of the Stone, by a new mean lat^ devised.
The fourth Chapter.
I have hitherto briefly touched the causes of the Stone, the differences of
Stones, and the usual means for preventing and curing the Stone. Now I mind
to show the way, both to prevent and cure the same, by the Quintessence of
Goats blood.

The use whereof, for those that are from their father and mother, or either of
them naturally inclined thereunto, or otherwise fear the Disease, and would
prevent the same: is, to take twenty or thirty days in the Spring, and
likewise in the Fall of the Leaf, two spoonefuls thereof in a good draught of
their accustomed drink fasting, and to fast one hour after it; which will
without all question preserve them from the disease.

But unto those, who are troubled with the Stone, and feel now and then a
passion thereof, I have thought good to prescribe this order. Cause four or
five gallons of Drink to be brewed and tunned up in a little vessel fit for
the same: and when it is new tunned, add thereto bound together, one good
handful of Parselie, and one handful of Pellitorie of the wall; but for want
of Pellitorie, take the more Parselie, though the other were better. And when
your Drink (being either Ale or Beer, as you like best) is stale enough,
drink thereof every morning fasting a good hearty draught, adding thereto two
spoonefuls or more of the Quintessence (for in great quantity you cannot err)
and fast one hour after it, as before. But whiles you take it, use no violent
motion of your body, but gentle walking, or such like: least the Stone
beginning to break, the pieces thereof fall into the narrow vessels between
the Kidneys and the Bladder; or from the Bladder into the Yard, to your great
torment: and this order I wish you to use, as long as you find any Gravel to
void. But because oftentimes the Gravel does void, and yet not to be
discerned, as my late experience has taught me, I think it requisite here to
show the strange working of the Quintessence. If you put into a cup of Wine a
piece of light, hollow, and soft Sugar, the Wine presently enters into all
parts thereof, and causes it to fall like a sandy substance. But if you put
into the same cup of Wine, a piece of white, hard, and perfect good Sugar, it
resists the Wine, and suffers only the outward parts in long time, some
and some to be dissolved. So likewise, if the Quintessence find in the body an
hollow, soft, and grittie Stone, it enters presently into the same,
dissolueth it, and causes it to void in Gravel, being not able to suffer the
long action or working of the Quintessence. But the Stone being hard, long
digested, and having his substance fast and soundly compact together, the
Quintessence can not enter into the same, but works upon the outward parts
thereof; and the more strongly it abides and resists, the more perfectly the
Quintessence resolves the same. For manifest proo^e thereof, if in taking the
Quintessence, you find no gravel to void, (...) your Urine first m^de, after
the taking of the Quintessence, in some open vessel, upon the Embers in a
temperate heat; and suffer it so to stand until all the Water be breathed
away, and that which remains be perfect dry, which you shall find a grittie
substance, if you were troubled with the Stone. And this is a very perfect
trial. Now I think it good to note, that if the Stone be great in quantity,
and in the Bladder, you must use the Quintessence the longer, and not look to
be cured miraculously with the use thereof a week or two. And against this
kind specially, I wish that Parsely be used (as before) for that it is a great
opener, and will help ye Quintessence to pass more swiftly unto the Kidneys
and the Bladder, where it ought to work; which otherwise continuing long in
the stomach, loses part of his virtue, and works no^ so effectually. But if
the party be very old withal, and has his Kidneys and Bladder exulcerat, or
either of them, yet chiefly the Bladder; then I wish him not only to use the
Quintessence as before, but also to observe very diligently this Diet. Abstain
from all Wine, Aqua vite, Aqua-composita, Be^re, Ueriuice, Uineger, Aliger,
Perrie, Cider, Salt and salt Meats; all Spices, Orenges, Lemmons, Mustarde;
and all raw Fruits, and generally from all things which cause the Urine to be
hot, sharp, or fretting. For then, although the Stone be cured, yet the party
has little ease, for that the sharp Urine, having access to the soreness and
rawnesse of the Kidneys or Bladder, will not suffer the parts infected to
heal, but rather increases the grief. If you be troubled with the
exulceration of the Bladder, the manifest and continual pain thereof will
declare the same: also, the grief in making water, and hardiness of making
water, which rather droppeth then runs, because the force expuisiue is
decayed: and if with the exulceration of the Kidneys, then have you pain in
your Loins. But if you be grieved with either of any continuance, with your
Urin, there voydeth often slimie corruption, like the white of an Egg, or
filthy Blood, and such like: I wish those who remain in this case, especially
troubled with the exulceration of the Bladder, not to torment their bodies with
much Physic. For although eased, yet cured they cannot be. Only I counsel
them (as before) to remove the Stone, and to avoid (by abstinence from the
things before recited) the sharpness of Urin, which are the causes efficient
of their grief; and that done, to use for healing of their sore Kidneys and
Bladders, as near as may be, a reasonable quantity of Gotes milk, every
morning fasting: also, the sirup of Plantine is a special thing in these
griefs, using one spoonefull thereof in the morning in Ale clarified.

And now to end this my short work, I let pass that which a number of writers
set forth of the nature of the Got, and the virtue of his blood against the
stone. Only I allege one sentence of Fuchsius* an excellent, wise, and
learned Physician, which I find in his Book De medendis morbis. Writing of
the Stone, and the cure thereof, after he had showed diverse remedies, he ends
thus: Sanguis denique hircinus, ad calculos cum renum, tum vesicae praesens
remedium est. Nam praeexistentes soluit, and per vrinam excernit, and vt alij
amplius non generentur prohibet, ac dolor^m sedat. And to conclude, Goats
Blood is a present remedy, both for the Stone of the Kidneys and the Bladder.
For it dissolueth those that are there already, and voydeth them by Urine, and
suffers no more to engender; also takes away the pain.

But least this most excellent Medicine should be slaundered, I have thought
good to signify, that if any person having used the Quintessence, in such sort
as is requisite, both for time and order, find not such remedy as I have
promised, and he looked for: let him (if it seem good) repair to my house in
Wickeham aforesaid, where he shall find me ready without either penny (...)
to do what possible I may (...) cure. And if by taking ought ^^^^n, I break
my promise, let me be rather thought a deceauer, then one seeking to benefit
my Country.

FINIS.

