VINDICIAE DECIMARVM. OF TITHES, a Plea for the IVS DIVINVM.

Drawn from the Text, BY JOHN CARTER Diacon.

ECCLES. 35. 9. Dedicate thy Tithes with gladness.

Div Augustine Sermon. 219. Decimae ex debito requiruntur, and qui eas dare
noluerit res alienas invasit.

Isidor. Hispalens. in Genesis cap. 12. Patriarcha magnus decim as omnis
substantiae suae Melchizedec Sacerdoti post benedictionem dedit; sciens
spiritualiter melius sacerdotium futurum in Populo Gentium quam Leviticum.

Printed at London by T. Cotes. 1640.

VINDICIAE DECIMARVM. Of Tithes, a Plea for the Divine Right.
Heb. 7. 8. There he receives them, of whom it is witnessed that he lives.
AS of the whole Epistle, So of the Verse now read: Aaron and Christ; the Law
and the Gospel; Death and Life; of it and that; these the (...), they are the
Sum. In it then, this Verse, ye have Priesthood, compared with Priesthood;
upon the (...). Oecumem. h^^.
appearing of the one, of the other ye have the falling down; (...) here, in
this Levi's dying: in that, (...) there, Melchizedec's living; of the one the
declining, it serves to set out the dignity of the other. When among many
arguments of Saint Paul's, this portion of Scripture it is Hic ponitur terita
ratio quae talis est. Ille qui semper vivit major est eo qui ^o ^^ur. Sed
Sacerdotes vet. testam. erant mortales, non sic autem Melchizedec. Ergo major
est, and Sacerdotium ejus majus est Sacerdotio Levitico. Lyra hic Cum filii
Levi sint morientes and iste vivens, apparet quis sit praeserendu^. Anselm hic.
One by which he intimates to the Jew, What a great Priest in respect of Aaron,
Melchizedec was; that the Excellency of the Leviticall Priesthood, it was
nothing to that of the Messiah: if an Hebrew could but tell him how much for
worth living did excel dying; then happily he might guess in glory and in
repute, how exceedingly the Priesthood of the Gospel does transcend that of
the Law. For touching the Priesthood Judicial, it was of no other Make than
its Priests, in its condition merely mortal: a Life indeed it had, but such a
life that was but as a span; in it it is Priest were (...) Men that dye: and
this is that which the meandness does denote, of this Priesthood the
worthlessenesse. But now as for Christ: Hic ver. 4.
(...) Consider how great this man is; who is a Priest, Psalm. 110. 4. Non dici
potest Leviticum Sacerdotium subintrasse ut cessaret illud Melchizedec.
Occurrenseni* Apostolus declaravit Melchizedec, esse vitae insolubilis
Pontificem. Leviticum igitur Sacerdotium subintravit post promissem, non ad
abrogandum illud Melchizedec, sed ad ^oborandum potius and illustrius
reddendum. Le^ eo modo (...) promissionem Patrinostro Abrahe factam subintravit
ut non evacuaret promissionem, sed ut Legis in utilitate cognita clarior fieret
promiscia. Erat enim Sacerdotium non secus ac ipsae Legis promissiones;
videlicet non spirituale sed carnale sacrificium, non ex ore Altissimi, sed per
os Mosis secundum mandatum carnale. Catharinus in priorem partem hujus capitis.
(...): for ever after the order of Melchizedec: and in respect of this, his
eternity is inferred over the Legal, of his Priesthood the praeeminentie: for
this order of Melchizedec, as it was before that of Aarons, so it is after; when
the e Mosaicall in such sort it entered in, that in no wise it should abolish
that of Melchizedec; sed ad r^borandum potius and illustrius readendum: but
rather to be its Strength; and in a greater luster to set it forth: for this it
came in that in publishing its own unprofitablenesse to the Excellency of that
under which we are, it might give a grace; Hoc ideo additum est, ^e videatur
posterior Le^ (ut moris est) priori quic quam derogasse. Eucipi enim al^^qui
poterat, jus illud quo cl^m potitur ^rat Melchizedec, esse jam obsol^tum, qu^^
aliam legem Deus per Mosen tul^sset, qua illud tran^^^rebat ad Levitas* Sed
occurrit Apostolus cum dicit ad tempus decimas Levitis sol^tas suisse, quta
semper non viverent. Melchizedec, vero qui immortali^ ^it retinere usque in
fi^em* quod a Deo semel illi datus est. Calvinus h^c.
and so, no need for us now in point of Tithe to look at Levi; no need to urge
a duty from a Law that is dying; when from the Law first in force, the latter
Law did no way derogate; Aarons claim touching these did no way prejudice
Melchizedecs right. Ad tempus decimas Levitis. Tithes to Levi, they were but a
temporary due; the Men that did receive, they were men that dye* to ^^em,
these, they became dead, their order once laid in its grave. But now
Melchizedec, Christ; in the text, the He who receives with disconsolate Job he
could nere say, Job 17. 14.
To corrupiion thou art my Father, to the worm thou art my Mother. Romans 6. 9.
Death over him it had nere power. hic ver. 16.
(...). He, made he is a Priest after the power of an endless life. Tithes
then to receive, He it is who is alive; for he says it, Rev. 1* 18.
(...), I am he that lives and was dead; and behold I am alive for evermore.
Thus the eternal debt of tithes to make it good, to him it is that we betake
us; to no other than of Christ the everduring Priesthood: for (...) there, in
the Priesthood of Melchizedec, of the Gospel; (...). There he receives them,
of whom it is witnessed that he lives.

The Soveraigntie of Christ's Priesthood in the Text over the Jewish, being
manifested from it is eternity; jus decimarum, the right too of Tithes, sub
Evangelio, it does manifest to be as Lasting: a necessity there is of having
these under the Gospel, since of it is Priest we have such certainety: when
(...) there, in the Priesthood of the Gospel; He, Melchizedec, Christ
receives Tithes; of whom it is witnessed, that is, Witnessed by the
Scriptures: for so Contestatur; so. Scriptura, ut Anselmus, Lyra, Dion. Carth,
Cajetan, Catharinus, Estius, Just nian, Lodovic. ^ena, Cornel. a Lap. hic. Vel
ut al i Contestatur, i. mecum testatur, vel Contestatur, idem in multis locis
contestatur. Gen 14. Psalm 109. Hug. Card. Gorran. ibid.
expositors give the meaning of testatum est. In the Scripture it is witnessed,
that he, Christ, Melchizedec lives; who there, in the Priesthood of the
Gospel receives Tithes. Of these words therefore for the clearer handling, I
am to deliver them under a threefold Quaere: Quis, who receives? Quantum, how
much he receives? Quare, why he receives?

1. Quis, who receives? for here we do begin; the Original of Tithes, fetch
it we must from the condition of the party, whose of these was the first
recept: then Quis, who receives? Is He; for his kind of life, in the Text, He
who receives; Is He; a Priest he is: for He whose dues these are, (...);
Chrysostom in ver. 5. Quidecimas accipit Sacerdos est. Catharin. ubi supra.
Sacerdotis est proprium decimas accipere. Salmeren in ver. 2. Tota decima^
perceptio, est Sacerdotum propria Ludov. Tena. in ver. 4.
(...). None but a Priest he is, whose of these is the right primordiall:
Tithes and a Priest, they are much of a standing; of the Genesis 14. 18.
Office no sooner the appearance but unto it of the deserved reverence ye have
the performance. He then who receives in the Text is a Priest; and is to be
considered two ways; either

1. (...), in the figure, or for the work sake which he underwent, and by way
of subserviencie; and so, Is He, is Melchizedec; who was of Christ the type;
the Priest presentative, He receives Tithes: or else consider this Priest.

2. (...) in the truth, and of these dues as He is the Proprietarie; so none
but Christ, who is Chap. 4. 14.
(...) the great high Priest, Is He, Jesus Christ receives Tithes. This the He
who in the Gospel is the tithe-taker. In the Law, the Text (...) here, it is
(...) Men; hic. ver. 23.
(...), they were many Priests to whom this portion was delivered: but under
Grace, in the Texts (...) there (...) no more than one He, one Priest. He who
receives there, is (...): the Priest God-man, He receives. This the first
Quaere, Quis; who receives: the second follows, which is

II. Quantum; how much it is this Priest receives? for that a right he has to
somewhat of each ones goods it will pass unquestioned: yet his right runs not
at large: for the muchity of that he receives it t'end left at random: that he
should take so much now, and thus much then; here this, and there that; more at
one time, and less at another; nor, does the Priest refer himself for what
he receives, to the pleasure of those who are bound to give; but of that he
takes the Quantum: So much it is, as he once and for ever has been pleased to
determine of; in the text it is (...) Tithes: of what is yours, he has severed
for himself a special, a peculiar part. What he had of Abraham he requires
now of you: You must give, as Abraham gave; As he, so the ^u^ Abraham id est
fidelis dat decimas omnium. Gloffa ordinar. in ver. 2.
faithful. Now for the quantum which Abraham did impart, praecise^ it was
(...) a tenth; so much is the tithe in the Text. Franc. Sylvius in Aquinat. 2.
2. quae. 87. Act. 1.
Decima vocatur ex december alicujus rei portionibus una: one portion in any thing
of ten, this is that which we call a tenth. Of what the Priest receives this
the quantum, the tithe; no other it is than what they had who were of Levies
order, the dues of Men that die, to him always they were and are alive.
Therefore, it is our part now to weigh them, just so, in no otherwise then at
first appearance, as by Abraham into the hands of Melchizedec they were
delivered: in the handling then after a two fold manner they are to be treated
on. Extensive quoad res; Intensive quoad personas.

1. Extensive, in regard of the matter, or the diversity of severalls, out of
which they are to be taken; so your Tithes are (...). Tithes of all: to him who
in the Text receives, Abraham as it is at the second verse, (...), He gave a
tenth part of all. Any thing of which your self makes a gain, it is matter
for a tenth; all being good, nothing this way is to be refused; but in respect
of the specialties, (...), Of all that ye possess, out of Each your Priest is
to receive a tenth; tithes in their latitude, being of all a tenth part: thus
they are to be preached Extensive: but beside this they are to be weighed.

2. Intensive; that is, they are to be treated on, as they respect the frame
and disposition of his soul; who, to him who receives is to pay tithes of all:
thus the tenth it is hic ver. 4.
(...); the tenth of all, in each sort, it should be the best of all; for so of
old runs the reading at the fourth verse. Cui and decimas dedit de praecipuis
Abraham Patriarcha. See the right reverend Lord Bishop of Norwich against
Seldom. chap. 1. page 173.
To whom the Patriarch Abraham gave even the tenth of the chiefest: to
translate it decimas spoliorum, as you have it, the tenth of the spoils; is a
construction too restrained: when (...) primarilie in respect of chiefenesse,
it has reference to the quality of a thing, and for the sake of this, the
quality does import the matter, or subject. If then of spoils it be translated
to the meaning of (...) it will come nearer, to render it Grace de primitiis
frugum. Nam (...) significat principale quod est in frugis cumulo, id quod est
in vertice cumuli, etc. Et regrediens triumphator Abraham, spoliorum optima
quaeque in dec^mas obtulit Melchizedec. Michael. de Palacio in ver. 4.
de praecipuis spoliorum; a tenth of the best or chiefest of the spoils. This
reading (...). Theophylact, in ver. 4. Non constat (...) exuvias significare,
and si constar, etc. Dris Prideaux orat. de decimis. Number. 5 (...) Socrat Hist.
Ecclesiast. lib. 1. cap. 5.
unto the Greek Church is not unknown; and in the Latin (...) went ever for
praecipua till the Centurie that is last past. As then of all is to be received
a tenth, so too, that tenth of all it should be the most especial. By Abraham
what in tithes was rendered to Melchizedec, of all it was the primest; all and
of all the best it is that must be for tithes. Now thus stands the point
touching the quantum: it is a tenth that does determine the how much the Priest
receives; concerning which was our second Quaere: there is yet the third and
the last which is

III. Quare; why he receives? the reason why; (...) It is witnessed that he
lives: therefore the Priest receives tithes, because it is witnessed that he
lives. Of him here (...) the life, it is ratio proxima, the very reason or
cause immediate, why these are now due: of tithes, this the why durative. Under
the Gospel, the claim for these it is still of force, in that the Gospel to
receive Tithes, has a Priest that lives: of this portion for the receipt, ye
may see it in the Text; the very ground or warrant, it is from the perpetuity
of the Priests life. Therefore his dues ever tithes, he a Priest ever being;
from his ever living, is the cause that tenths are never-dying. For, (...).
There he receives them, of whom it is witnessed that he lives. Thus of these
words the severalls; the Quaere we begin with, is Quis, who receives? expressed
in our text by the particle, Is he, a Priest receives.

I. Is he; a Priest receives. Now this Priest no other wise in this Quaere, ye
are to behold him, than as Abraham's tithing sets him forth: not Ex supra dictis
vidistis qualis fuerit Melchizedec sed nunc Intuemini quantus sit hic, id est
quantae dignitatis, sanctitatis, and perfectionis, etc. Anselmus in ver. 4.
Qualis, such as he is qua Priest, but quantus in his Office how great he is,
ye a^e to take notice of him: for this it is from his receiving at Abraham's
hands in the fourth verse, Saint Paul would have considered. (...). Consider,
says he there, how great this man was, in the text the He, unto whom the
Patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the chiefest. That then for which tithes
serve, it is of,

Priesthood to set out the greatness; to signify unto us of how eminent a
quality this holy function is, this it is for which at first tithes had their
institution. Chrysostom. Ipse Abraham nullo modo decimas Alienigenae dedisset,
nisi plurimus et excellens ejus Authoresso^. Ambrosius. (...) Oecumen. Abraham
(...) Alie^igenae decimas non dedisset nisi excellentiorem esse sciret. Anselm.
Abrah. decimas non dedisset, nisi ^o major fuisset. Dion Carthus. Iste
Melchizedoc tantus est, quod ipse Abraham Pater Sacerdotum Regalium and totius
Populi dedit ei decimas. Cajetan ut priores in ver. 5. See the Lord Bishop of
Norwich. p. 174. Ipsa decimarum oblatione Abraham minorem se Melchiz. professus
est. Estius in ver. 4.
(...). It was for the houour of Melchizedec, that these dues Abraham paid. The
Finis ultimus then why tithes were ordained, it was to manifest of the Priest
the excellency; to denote of how great digni^y He who receives, for this cause
it is that they were appointed; to point out unto us the Priests (...); his
Praerogative to be very great. For tithes they are the medium by which our
Apostle proves, in the person of Melchizedec, of Christ's Priesthood the
sublimity; in that Abraham who paid tithes, Abraham dans decimas Melchizedec,
hoc ipso confessus est se illo esse minorem, and hoc ipso se illi subjecit.
Cornel. a Lapide, in ver. 5.
hoc ipso in this very thing, he was made lower than Melchizedec, who received.
What then in this part we must pursue, it is that for which tithes had their
rise: in the beginning these they were assigned to discover unto us what high
esteem is due unto Priesthood; yea even to that of Moses. For this was the
ground, as from the fifth verse (...). Oecumen. in ver. 5. Iudai non dedissent
Sacerdotibas decimas nisi propter excellentiam Sacerdotum, quam ex divina
ordinatioue habebant. Dion Carthus. ibid. Omnes Hebraei in subjectionis fignum
subministrabam and Levi^is and Sacerdotibus decimas. Mich. de Palac. ibid. In
lege populares Sacerdotibus Levitici generis tanquam majoribus decimas
persolvebant, qua ration^ Populus ille fatcbatur Sacerdotes esse cujusdam
excelsioris dignitatis. Justinian. ibid Deus jussit omnibus Iudaeis etiam
Levitis ut decimas darent Sacerdotibus Aaronicis, volens hac ratione honor are
ac praeferre Sacerdotes. Cornel. a Lap^de, ibid.
the learned do observe, Why to Aaron the children of Jacob in this duty stood
obliged; when this portion which beneath Melchizedec, did argue Abraham, above
any of the Hebrews, Levies tribe they did praepose: as him, who received their
tenths, with those of Israel, none so honorable; though one with another
People and Priest, all alike honorably descended; yet with these the honor due
to the Office outstrips the honor had by the birth. Tanta erat Sacerdotij
excelleatia, ut qui similes essent honoris progenitoribus, and enudem haberent
progenitorem, tamen ut multo meliores essent fratribus suis quo Sacerdotio
digni effi^erentur. Ambros. Chrysostom. Theodor. Ans^lm. Glos. ordin. Hug. Card.
in ver. 5
Tanta enim erat Sacerdotii ^xcellentia, etc. say the Fathers. Even of Levies
Priesthood the excellency it was so ample, that all of such a kind, it exalts
them above all of the same kin: to Aarons order, paying of tithes, their
dignity, that it did surpass any of the race of Jacob it does ascertaine. But
to let pass the Legal Priesthood; to that of the Gospel it is, that I must
keep me; and must tell you from the rendering of tithes, over all whomsoever of
its Priest the superexcellency; this to be it which is inferred. For our
Evangelicall Doctor says. I^tuemini quantus sit hic. He who receives, Consider
how great he is to whom the Patriarch Abraham gave etc. Mark well who gave.
(...), Abraham the Patriarch; this eminent Christian in the top of his dignity
is set before you to usher in the greater dignity of the Christian Priest; it
is the Patriarch Abraham: Vi habent Anselm. Lyra. Hugo Cardin, Estius,
Justinian. Gorran. Co^. a Lap. etc. in ver. 4.
that is, Abraham the chiefest of Fathers, the very first Father; Princeps
Patrum Abrahamus. If literally the term Patriarch be taken, then such a Father
he from whom all the Fathers in Israel had their beginning: but if Mystically
and Spiritually, then Abraham he is, Romans 4. 11.
(...): the Father of all them that believe: which of the two was the greater
glory. Now then, let the renown of Abraham, nere so much exceed, be his fame
nere so flourishing; it is but that which the Apostle would, that none among the
Israel of God in glory should be so great as he: for in that one so glorious
did tithe it to Melchizedec, how glorious then must Melchizedec be? This is it
which Saint Paul would have considered: and too, he would have all hence to
learn the lesson which Abraham tithing reads unto them; which is this, that
when

Tithes ye give of your selves to your Melchizedec, it teaches you the
humbling; that wherein it instructs you, it is naught else than of your selves,
unto him in the lowly submission: for these they are the test of the awefull
reverence that to the Priest is due; in giving up of these as Abraham, so every
man else, to his Melchizedec, he does declare his subjection; Oecumen in ver. 5.
(...): Offerre decimas alteri fignum est subjectionis and inferioritatis.
Ludo. Tena difficul. prim. in hoc cap. Decimas persolvere certum est symbolum
ejus subjectionis cui nullam parem homines hominibus debent. Probat Apostolus
hanc decimarum oblationem signum esse subjectionis ab ex^mplo Levitarum, qui a
caeteris tribubus hoc veluti tributum ex mandato Dei accipiant, quod ultro
Abraham Melchizedec obtulit. Bezae majores annotat. in ver 4 and 5.
Signum subjectionis; Scultet. in ver. 4. Quod Melchizedec Sacerdoti primarius
Dei servus and Propheta Abraham obtulit decimas, eo confessus est honoris gradu
supra se excellere. Calvin in ver 4.
testimonium erant reverentiae erga eum cui pendebantur. He still passes a
great deal for the better man, to whom Quod Abraham Dea debebat propter partam
victoriam, Deo s^lvit per manum Melchizedec. Salmer in ver. 5. Quod debebat
Abrah. Deo, solvit in manum Melchiz. decimarum ergo solutione se minorem
professus est. Calvin. ut ante:
Gods dues, his tenths they are delivered: of a whole people the man most
chief, tithes sets him below the Priest; the charge it warrants to be right
high, to which of these the payment is referred: between man and man they put
a difference, but the receiver, still they assure him to be the more worthy:
that here which is inferred from the Patriarchs paying of tithes, it is before
himself of his Priest the preferring: for it is (...). etc. Confid. etc. It
tells him that gives, that he is not like to him who takes for dignity, before
any other, these tithes, they are the seals of the Priests promotion; here
above the Patriarch they set Melchizedec. Your rendering then of these to your
Priest; they are the real the manifest profession of your submission. For of
whom Religion requi^es this fe^liy, over all such it shows its authority; and
learnes them their own humbling, in this sort enjoining their obedience. Ioh.
6. 60.
(...). This is an hard saying, I dare say to the most that hear it; to hear
that honor's due to an outcast Priest, and that by tithes; to you, to whom the
very sound of Priest is even ominous, is not this a theme that is sour? It
exacts therefore the closer pressing. Know, then know, that the reverence had
to those who are entrusted with the dispensing of Sacred verities, tithes
denotes it to be of a more del cate strain, than what is borne to other men;
though men to be admired for their condition, amiable for their graces, and for
their piety even imirable of the Priest himself; yet of these with the Priest,
none to be compared. For as the Patriarch among men, for dignity none so
supreme; Yet to the He who receives, here he stoopes and lets down his sail;
to Melchizedec, Abraham, be (...) it in his glory; in honor unto God before
himself, he preferres his Priest, and did publish to the world his own
lowliness when he tithed it to Melchizedec. With a serious eye then of the
Gospel Priest, weigh now the Superexcellency: that Abraham, that he who for
his glory of all his posterity was the most unmatchable; that he, who for his
worth had never any that could ever equal him: but all, at all times he did
surpass: yet this man who did outstrip all; that Melchizedec the He, who in
the text receives, that the Priest should surmount him? (...). etc. Consider
how great this man is; this He of how great perfection. Cui non solum multas
alias venerationes sed and decimas dedit Abraham. Vade maximus apparet and
inestimabills magnitudinis, cui Pater aliorum Patrum decimas dedit, in quose
long inferiorem isso esse reputavit. Anselmus. in ver. 4.
That besides many venerable respects that Abraham bore him, that to him too he
should give tithes; it was an argument more than prevailing, that of
Melchizedec, the dignity it was non-pareil: of devouter Abraham this devouter
act, (...) by many, very many degrees, it puts him below Gods Priest, though a
Patriarch than any in Israel much more illustrious. This, of tithes the effect;
of their payment the issue, it is to confirm how great a Priest, the Priest of
the Gospel: for Abraham to the He who receives, these argue him much unaequall
Abraham for dignity to Melchizedec; and make the Patriarch too mean to come in
balance with the Priest; since to this great man these they do subject
Abraham: this deed preaches aloud, that Melchizedec to this loyal Saint he
was superior; and declares the good man obsequious to Gods Priest, though he
triumphed it over Kings. Thus Melchizedec the figure; for all that was done,
verily to him it was done who was the type, and did the service for him who
indeed in the text receives. Now then, if Melchizedec for repute even to
astonishment was so wondrous as that to his sheafe Abraham's must bow? then
Christ, the great high Priest, Jesus Christ, how he? If the semblance does
bear down all before it, then the substance what? (...). Chrysostom. in ver. 4.
Occum. in ver. 4. and 5.
(...) etc. If of command so powerful be the appearance; then of the truth it
self how glorious the royalty; Vnde (...) veritatis in Christo majestatem.
Iunius lib. 3. Paral. in hoc cap.
its Majesty how perspicuous? to Jesus Christ, in what to him did Abraham stand
bound? in what? verily by the current of our text in naught else but in that
which he receives, that is, (...), tithes; that which Abraham owed here it is
them, (...): He receives them, tithes. The upshot then of that, which as
hitherto has been promiscuously delivered out of this first Quaere;
distinctly it is but Quis and Quare.

1. Quis, who receives? in respect of Service and assignement Melchizedec he
receives; but in regard of Lordship and propriety, the He who receives is
Christ* for He is Lord of the soil, out of which these fruits are gathered;
of these his is the right original; tithes in the primary claim they are his,
who (...) is the Priest; to none but to him they appertain in their primier
Seizint his jus decimandi in the first tenure, by way of selfe-owning and title
indubitate he receives tithes who is Ioh. 1. 41.
the Christ, our Jesus. This the (...) who will satisfy you, whensoere in this
point ye put forth Quis. But then

2. Quare, it may be demanded for what cause at first this Priest received
tithes? I have told you the cause why; in the beginning it was no other, but of
Priesthood by the payment of these that the greatness might be declared; and
so, this of tithes is the why institutive: of the Priesthood of the Gospel to
set out the great honor which is due unto it, to this they are appointed; unto
Christ's Yoke, the badges and tokens they are of his subjection, who soere
pays: for this cause at first ordained, that at all times by these the people
might witness what reverent abearance they owe unto their Priest: over all
from whom he receives his Superiority they are to denote. And this of the first
Quaere, in its several branches is the Sum: we proceed now to the second,
which we proposed in the term.

II. Quantum; how much this Priest received? in the Text definitely set down
to be (...) tithes or tenths: so much by Abraham was given to Melchizedec.
These tenths then they are to be treated on either,

First in respect of the things offered; and so Abraham's tithes, they were
(...) tithes of all: or else,

Secondly, in respect of the persons offering, and so the Patriarchs tenth,
(...), of whatsoere his tenth was, of the Chiefest it was a tenth. Of these
two, that which must first be set before you, it is that which shows how large
a spread Abraham's tithing had; to all it did extend. (...) Hic. ver. 2.
He gave unto Melchizedec a tenth part of all; which is the first part of our
second Quaere, touching the Quantum, and comes now to be handled.

1. (...): of each ones goods his Extensive qu^ adres.
part who lives, it is a tenth part of all: for this quantity of his Priests,
this the claim; this Melchizedec did receive, this Abraham did impart, of all
the tenth.

Of any thing then you do possess, of this portion there is no exempting:
with what ye are blessed no stinting of Christ, otherwise than he has been
pleased to stint himself. His command is Luke 11. 42.
(...), Ye ought to tithe all manner of herbs, Genesis 28 22.
Et Omnium decimas. Of all that thou shall give me I will surely give the tenth
unto thee: of blessed Jacob this was the righteous vow. (...). Chrysostom. 54. in
Genesis
(...). This of Jacob by no means the Christian let it pass: (...); but what
he before the Law, under Grace, it is ours to do as much: decimas omnium Jacob.
And under the Law, Deuteronomy. 14. 22.
it is Omnem proventum sement is tuae. Thou shall truly tithe all the increase
of thy seed that the field brings forth year by year. And again, the
Israelites upon the charge of King Hezekiah: 2 Chronicles. 31. 5. 6.
Copiose decimas omnium. The tithe of all things brought they in abundantly.
yea tithe of Oxen. It Is too in the Prophet. Inferte omnem decimam. Malac. 3 10.
Tobi. 1. 7. Luke 18. 12.
Bring ye all the tithe into the storehouse; which could not be all the tithe,
if not of all. Thus precept as well as practice makes it good, that the tenth,
his dues who receives, Of whatsoere was to be tithed to be a renth; implying
Abraham's duty whiles to Melchizec; Ex omnibus, of all that religiously he
might, he paid tithes. For Touching the extent of (...), See the Bishop of
Norwich against Seldom chap. 1. p. 140. etc.


(...) of all, it is set down in the largest sense; and so not to be confinde
by any particular. That then some would have all of these, and others all of
those, of all to be the all; this their opinion pass it does with me for the
instance of the Patriarchs action, not for the restraint. It is not I that deny
Abraham to have imparted of the spoils a tenth; Decimas praedae atque victory
Ambros. (...). Chrysostom. Praedae decimam Theodoret. (...). Oecumen.
the Fathers say he did: nor yet is it I who dare gain say him to have tithed
all Decimas omnie substantiae suae. Isidor Hispal. De omnibus re(...) su^s
dedit decima^. Tossed. in Genesis 14.
the goods that were his own: Bish. Norw. page 150.
when he who says of all excludes nothing. Decimas omnium non solum frugum
sed and praeliorum. Hugo. Cardi in ver. 2. De omnibus spol^is aut etiam aliis
rebus. Dion. Cart. in Ge. 14.
Decimas praeliorum, a tenth of the spoils that he got in battle that he did
pay, I do believe it; and too, decimat frugum, with the tithes of the fruits
of the Earth that were his, with these that he did present his Priest, I am
verily persuaded. If then any say, An de facultatibus suls, an etiam de spoliis
hostium? Sic Apostolus, Heb. 7. 4. Patri archa dedit ei decimas ex spoliis.
A^^ui hit ver. 23. Abraham recus^^it ex spoliis vel cor: igiam accipere. Non
ergo ex his dedit et decumas. Respondeo disting^t^da sunt spolis. Hostibus non
solum praedam Sodomiticam, sed and reliquam aliunde compilatam eripuit, quoniam
castris penitus eos (...). Ex Sodomitica prada quicquam ac^ipere recusavit, ex
coigitur Melchizedec non dedit, quia non suam sed alienam duxit. Hostium vero
spolia (...) dixit. Ex his igitur Melchizedec tribuit. Pareus in Genesis 14
Quoniam in lib. Genesis recus^vit Abraham quicquam de spoliis ex hostibus
detractis, mirum videri possit quomodo ex manubiis dicimas obtulerit? An
Abraham cum dixit, Levo manm, etc Non de (...) spoliis, sed de ipsius Regis
Sodomae bonis loquebatur, de exuviis omnibus qua ad se pertinebant decimas
dederit Melchizedec. Justinian. hic in ver. 4.
that

1. Abraham gave these dues out of the spoils that he gained from Chedorlaomer
and those other Kings against whom he raised the war; that of all these as
included the (...) should be meant, it is confessed: for as our tithepayer jure
belli Bish. Norw. page 147.
had a right to these, in that they were the peculium of the Assyrian Princes
whom he vanquished; so to the tithe of these in respect of him who gained them,
Melchizedec also had a right, Or if as it pleases 2 (...) Vel quod video aliis
platere, oblatio decimarum prasente Rege nec contradicente facta est, atque
ita, iis si^t dubio exceptis, ut etiam excepta sunt illa quae tulerant s^^ij
Abrahae, cuncta Regi restituit. Justinian ut ante. De omnibua puta quae
recuperaverat ca sis belle Regibus. Iunius in Anal. Genesis 14. Videtur de suis
rebue decimas dedisse; nisi intell gamu^ eum priusquamid diceret Regi Sodomorum
ut ordo Historia postulare videtur, has Melchizede^ obtulisse, ut postea
decimis exemptis reliqua pradaprater id quod excipi voiuit Abraham, restitita
fuerit Regi Sodomorum. Mercerus in Genesis 14. De quibus rebus decimas Abraham
obtulerit Melchizedec? Pro solutione notandum est duo genera honorum posse hic
confiderari: Primum eorum qua a quatuor Regibus Verisimile est accepisse
Abraham. quanquam sacra Scriptura id non declarat: quoniam ad comple^ entu^
victoriae sufficiens fuit declarare bona Sodomorum fuisse recuperata. Secundum
genus est eorum bonorum quae quatuor Reges a Sodomis acceperant eisq Abraham
postea restituit; and haec omnia vere sunt spolia. De quorum primis at Pe^iera
quod Abraham decimas dedit. Meliu tamen asserit C^jetanus de his omnibus
spoliis decimas dedisse, quia hic omnia su runt ve^e spolia ill us victoriae,
and ita melius salvatur quod Genesis 14. dicitur absolute El dedit ei decimas ex
omnibus. Lud. Tena difficul. 4 in hoc cap.


2. Others; the spoils to be those which Abraham recovered from the conquered
Kings, and were the very goods of Lot, and of the Kings of Sodom and Gomorrah;
such there are who say, these to be the all, of which he paid tithes. With
these men so of all, these spoils might go for one part, I Would join hands:
when (...) is large enough to comprehend these also. For consider, that albeit
Bish. Norw. page 176. Pie and Sancte Abraham hanc partem Deo dicatam excepit
ip^e, quia plora poterat exeipere, Deumque ex officio hac part muneratus est.
Nam cum etiam just and honest sibi suisque mercedem servare potu^ss^t, ea
liberaliter cesserat: tantum quod debebatur Deo, de cujus potestate nihil
volutt aut potuit cedere illud ex pretatis and religionis officio pralibavit
sive praecerpsit Iunius ut supra.
Abraham's Iuravi elata manu mea ad Iehovam, etc. That himself would take
nothing of the King of Sodom; yet his vow did not tie him, nor could it
withhold him from giving to the Priest of the most High God, that which
belonged to him; even the tenth part of all the spoils that were recovered.
Once more, be there Quod additur de omnibus dedisse decimas, id neutiquam ad
praed most referendum. quia textus paulo post clare do^et neque cordulam neque
corrigiam voluisse Abraham a^cipere de prada cum offerretur a Regibus. Igitur
particula (de omnibus) non ad praedam est referenda, sed ad f^cultates Abrahae.
Luther in Genesis 14. Incertum est spoliorumne decimas an honorum quae domi
possidebat ob^u^erit? Sed quia Verisimile, non est liberalem suisse de alteno,
and praedae decimam partem largitum esse, ex qua ne filum quid matting (...),
potiut Coniicio Sumptas foisse decimas has ex propriis ejus fructibus. Cal^mus
ibidem.


3. Others who put aside the spoils, and deliver the all to be Abrahae
facultates; this with me of the all, as another (...) all it will (...) (...)
belly, all this it will hold and (...), burst. That Abraham paid tither of all
where: with himself was enrich't, I gladly yield it, and of all that he gave,
it was too of all that was his own: for if the Patriarch did pay. tit be (...)
all the spoils; shall we deny him to have discharged, this debt with the the
of all that he had, out of his certain and standing possessions? About what
then our Moderner tugge, and to; the exempting of all the rest, for such a
specialty would conclude: go it may, not for the bound; but for that which of
the all may help to the making up. In brief of all that the Patriarch gave,
would you have the totull? Touching it, Bish. (...) page 150.
what I have received, that I deliver to you: in all humble obedience to his
Priest he gave a tenth part of all; that is, of all whatsoere be had; Of all
the spoils that for himself of the enemy he gained; the tithe of all the
spoils of Sodom, and substance of Lot, which he brought back and recovered;
of all that he carried out with him, and of all that he left at home; even of
all that any way he possessed. Thus, his decim^^ omnium without any the least
violence offered to the text, to all tithe able stuff whatsoever that was
within his power, it may be stretched.

Well then, to make no hue and hue after any who has stole from Abraham's
(...): oneone-onely we will put forth a Si quis. If then there be any manner of
man, who cannot be induct to allow Abraham's piety of his goods to be so lavish;
but that it stood better with his wiser thrift to have offered once, and no
more, to his Priest a tenth of the spoils, out of that so renowned a victory;
if there be any such that can be found? such a foundling, for my part let him
have his will: for once to the theology that is municipall we will endeavor
meekely to subscribe; that only of the spoils, and of nothing else, but of
these only, a tenth part was only imparted: as by the Moncke of the order of
Cleroborus it has been only said, so be it; that what Abraham gave was of
only spoils, merely spoils: if only so, what then follows? In so saying,
this divine Solus, he did not prejudice the Priests right, but only of the
Patriarch, from the wellknowne zeal he does detract: he only delivers to the
world Abraham to Godward, to have been pitteously penurious; that of his dues
to Religion he was a niggardly micher, that he was an Abraham clunchfisted; and
all that this way went, he thought it only ^aste; that the good child Judas
that he did, he did learn of his father Abraham, Mar. 14. 4.
Quorsum perditiohaec? Not at all from Melchizedec he does withdraw. For once
then, in this pinching sparing, scraping wise, let it be admitted; that Abraham
gave a renth of nothing but only of the spoils, which at such a time he got
at such a battle: but withal then let it be admitted what Saint Chrysostom
has left; for indeed he says (...) Hom. 35. in Genesis Abraham decimas Melchize.
dedit, viz. omnium manubiarum quas secum ferebat: his sc. Melchizedec secretis
vicem (...) rependit; (...) facto mortales omnes docet ut se gratos erga
Sacerdotes exhibeant, (...) decimas omnium dent, qu^ Deus ipse (...): Elias
Cretensis e Catalogo Dri^ Tilleslie An. 1020
(...): and we say so too: if you will, let the father say, that only with the
spoils: for, does he not say in that famous Homily de Autolico made to the
Legists of Praedonia; there, does he not say there that Abraham was the first
who put in practice modus decimandi? Be it so then, that Saint Chrysostom
says that only with the spoils, which Abraham brought back, he gratifyed
Melchizedec, But then of this holy Father the (...) we would have you to take
home unto you: for says he (...), by his giving a tenth of the Spoils; (...);
Hence, to all Abraham is made a teacher; (...). This Abraham in giving a tenth
of the spoils, preaches unto us, that as he, so each man else should give
unto God, the first fauites of what he gives unto him. (...), etc. of all
which he did bring back a tenth he severed for Melchizedec: hence to all
Abraham is made a teacher; Now to no more we urge you, than from Abraham's deed,
Saint Chrysostom enjoynes: be it a tenth part only of the spoils that he
got; we press you to no more, than only to the rendering of a tenth part of
that you get. Thus the payment from the spoils, Melchizedec's dues it does no
way impeach; for unto him as to each Priest else, there was no more due than
the tenth of all that did anew come in: of your latest incre^se, so much that
ye should contribute, from Abraham's fact this it is of the golden-mouthed
Greek that is required. And therefore now to proceed, your

Duty, suit it should with his practice; of all that you get bound it is to the
giving up of a tenth part. For Ambros Ser. 33 fer. 2. post. Dominic prim.
Quadra. tom. 5
Decimas nostras annis singulis decunctis frugibus, pecoribus praecipit
erogand^s Dominus. Of all fruits, of all cattle, each year the Lord commands
a tenth to be given out. And De grano suo aut de vino suo, out de fruct (...)
arborum, aut de pecoribus, aut de horto, aut de negotiis, aut de ipsa venatione
sua. Quia de omni subst etc. Idem fer. 3. ut ante. Vide Doctris Tilleslie
catalogu^s, Annis. 430. 6. 0. 630. 786. 791 812. 813. 940. 1050 1191.
De omni substantia quam Deus homini donat decimam partem sibi servavit, For
himself God keeps the tenth of all the substance which he gives to men. 1.
Cor. 9 11.
If we have sown unto you, says the Apostle, spiritual things, (...), Is it
a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? (...), your carnal
things. De (...) re est judicandum secundum ejus radicem. Radix autem
solutionis decimarum est debitum quo seminantibus spiritualia debentur
carnalia, secundum illud Apostoli, 1 ad Cor 9. Si nos vobis seminav, etc. Super
hoc enim debitum fundavit Ecclesia determinationem solutionis decimarum. Omu^a
autem quae homo possidet sub carnelibus continentur; and ideo de omnibus
decimae sunt So vendae. Aquinas. 2. 2. quae. 87. art. 2. in corp.
Super hoc debitum, upon this debt of returning things carnal for receiving
things spiritual, says Aquinas, does the Church ground its determination for
the paying of tithes. omnia quae homo possidet, all that a man has sub
carnalibus continentur, under carnal things it is contained: and therefore de
omnibus possessis, it is inference, Of all that a man has, he must pay
tithes. De Si jus Scriptum (...). Lessius. lib. 2. de Iur. and Just. cap. 39.
dub* 3.
fructibus and quasi fructibus omnium ^erum quae quodam modo nobis sunt
frugiferae: of fruits and of each thing fruite-like, that brings in
increase; Omniumque negotiorum lucrosorum: Unto your Priest, the manifest of
your subjection it must be from all your affairs, whence ye have your gain.
Chrys^st in ver. 4.
(...). Out of the very fruits of his very labors these dues Abraham raised
for his Melchizedec. Carnalium nomine continentur omnia quae possidemus, neque
est (...) quare ex (...) (...) praebeantur deci^^^, and non ex aliis. Franc.
Sylvius in praed. Aquinat.
Neque est ratio: neither is there any reason since all that is yours, comes
under things carnell, why of some of these you should pay tithes, and not of
others. Of the trade then that any of you drive, thence it is to your Priest in
this matter that your obedience ye must make good; of each one from each thing
righteously got, thence Heavens quota pars. With Abraham he gives not tithes of
all, who is conscious of any one thing to the keeping back. Therefore, Si
decimas non habes fructu^m ^errenorum quod habet Agricola; quodcunque te pascit
ingenium, Dei est; and inde decimas expetit (...) viv^; de militia, de negotio;
de artificio read decimas Augustine. Sermon. 219. Tom. 10.
Si decimas non habes fructuum terrenorum quod habet Agricola. If of fruits of
the earth ye hand tithes as the Husbandman; yet quod cunque te pascit ingenium,
whatsoere craft sustaines thee, inde decimas expetit, unde vivis; our tenths
are to be demanded whence ye live: Courtship, Camp, Or Bar; Shop Or Plow;
all in these are alike engaged. Sicut decima praediales debentur ex fructibus
praediorum, ita personales ex (...) personarum; qui fructus sunt actiones and
labores ipsius personae and l^cra illorum.
Be then thy gains from the earth, that is thy possession, or from the very
labors of thy very person; if of thy Suarez. lib. 1. tract, 2. de Virtut.
Religi. cap. 31. number. 7 Cum non minus fructus nostrorum laborum sint a Deo quam
fructus terrae, non minus decet ut ex illis Deum colamus quam existis. Ibid.
ca. 32. number. 2.
pains thou find the fruits, thence with a tenth Melchizedec must be
served; in these matters of your travail tithes follows the success; nor of
what sort of calling the tithepayer be, so a lawful, upon that Religion does
not stand, but to all that a man gets its dues it does extend: for as of
Abraham, so of each man else that which he has obtained, it is titheable: even
those minutula, things which in themselves are little worth, and seem of no
account; as Rue, Annise, Cumin, yet of these for tithe no omission, Mat. 23.
23. Vide dilegentius quomodo sermo Domini vult fieri quidem omnimode quae
majora sunt Legis non tamen, omuti and haec quae secundam literam designantur.
Quod si dicas, quia haec ad Pharisaeos dicebat, non ad discipulos: audi iterum
ipsum dicentem ad discipulos. Nisi abundaver^^ justitia vestra plusqu. etc.
Quod ergo vult fieri a Phari^^is multo magis and cum majore abundantia vult a
Discipulis impleri, quod autem fieri a Discipu^is non vult, nec Pharisaeis
imperat faciend^^. Origin Hom. 11. in Number. Commendat Deas haec sacienda ubi ait
Vae Vobis Scrib and Pharis. Cum ilico subjungit Hecoport. facere.
Oporterigitur, and semper oportet quod Deus oportusse testatur; neque
parvi-pendendum suit, aut erit unquam, quod Deus vel furi fussit, vel factum,
facientis devotione commendavit. E catalog. Doctris Tilleslie. An. 828.
These ye ought not to leave undone. For though in his Licet singula in his
videantur esse parva, and nullius aestimationis, tamen omnium cumulus magni
aestimari debet, and necessarius vel valde commodus ad convenientem
sustentationem Ministrorum. Rapinel de la Torre. ^n praedicta Aquin. disput. 3.
singula, of these each several may seem of little or no moment, yet omnium
cumulus, in their heap and sail, they may amount to much: now that cannot but
stead the Priest which to the owner is advantageous. It is a tenth then, and a
tenth of all that is sub manu, which of the Priest is the portion. Gal. 6. 6. 7.
Let him that is taught in the word, says the Apostle, communicate to him that
reaches in all good things. Here is a Text for you of London: Men much
addicted to him that teaches, but nothing to the Priest, to Melchizedec; For
you then; What we hear of you it is no good report; in the business that we
are now about, it is too well known that ye deal double. Therefore (in the
behalf of the Curates of London, to keep close to that taking device of the
incomparable Seldom, and withal to bring you to your duty) that he who
teaches may be provided for of sufficient living: we advise you that ye do
not deceive, and your selves be not deceived, for God is not mocked. For him
then whom ye would have, your teacher; what for him that teaches, ye are
commanded to set aside, somewhat it is, (...), in all good things. Now as a Cum
hac verba audio, (...): similis mini sonus videtur atque illorum ad Heb. 7.
(...); ut conjectura sit, nec Illa levis (...) Apostolum ad illud Genes. recte
illam (...) insinuare qua usus est Abraham, fidei suae filiis per omnia ubi and
quantum datur imitandus. Quid si autem sic? Praeceptum illud quod vel optime
consalit (...), antiquandum non est. Ist^c autem quin sit sanctio de decimis
dubium non est. Per eam namque vera est, and (si per vos liceat dicere dicam)
realis communio bonorum omnium, tum fractuum, tum fatuum, terrae, plantarum,
animalium; vos ipsi apud vos reliquam inductionem contexite. Stipem ejus loco
ponite, Capite censionem, taxationem aedium: multi errores; pars celatur, pars
subducitur, aufim dicere (...) Lancelot. Epist. Winton. de Decimis inter
opuscula posthuma page 147.
Right Reverend of our own has it, this all of Saint Paul, in all good
things; no other it does insinuate, than the al of which we have hitherto
treated; naught else but Abraham's all: it would that you of the City, as well
as those of the Country should impart to him that teaches in all goodthings,
one part in ten. For attend; as Christ in our Text must be honored, So are ye
to communicate; now the tenth is that which he receives, and the tenth is that
which ye of London ought to give. For otherwise than the Priest takes in all
good things, should we allow ye to contribute. We should make Saint Paul to the
Galatians thwart and clash with Saint Paul to the Hebrews: but, my beloved
Londoners, no such matter; since the Text that is loose, is to be bound by the
Text that is strict: what then in one place in all good things, he leaves
unlimitted, that is to take quantity from the place that does determine; the
Scripture tith'd, is to be the rule to the Scripture which is unti^hed: and so,
the part in our text Christ's right being a tenth; it remains in the behalf of
him; as Abraham, so ye Citizens to him that teaches, ye should ensure your
subjection in all good things of a tenth, by the communicating. Of tithes
touching the extent thus stands the case: (...), in each kind it ought to be a
tenth part of all coming in. But here we rest not; all is not all, unless as
Abraham's all it be de praecipuis, of all the most chief. Abraham's all, which
for the quantity was the tenth; that too for the quality of all, it was the
most principal.

II. (...); the tenth of all than any of the other nine parts, was much were
Intensive quoad Personas.
choice: for this term (...), Bish. Norw. page 181. b 171. 194. Touching the
diverse modification of this word (...). See this right worthy Author. page 163.
164. and 165. Bish. of Chichest treat. of tith. chap. 2. page 7. Graca vox
(...) significat praecipua; qua five de singibus, sive en spol^is Deo offerri
solent. Estius in ver. 4.
the Apostle uses to extend it to all ordinary tithes of increase; b and unto
that eternal duty of paying tithes it will fetch in the best and principal of
men's possessions. Hence then we urge; each one of this duty whiles he is in the
performance, of each parcel that he offers unto a diligent survey: in these
matters not to deal with God hand over head; but as for himself in every
thing he would that which is most singular, so in point of tithe to be as
studious; not to set apart that for him who receives with which himself can
not away; to the Priest no offering of that, which so it be gone, we care not
much who has it. Such dealings as these they never stood with the fidelity of
Abraham. God who Neh. 9. 8.
found his heart faithful before him, for the choysenesse of that wherewith he
ministered to his Priest, no doubt but he found him very Solicitous; to give
that which did more excel right industrious. He who loved so much what was of
little or no value for his Priest, a meet present he could nere think it: but
what in honor to his Melchizedec he did perform, (...) no other from Abraham
could proceed than of the chiefest even a tenth. Ye may then believe me, to pay
his Savior with his trash to his believing soul it was abhorrent; nay rather,
his tenths though nere so precious, of what they should in his own esteem,
did they not fail? Indeed, to give tithes of any thing, no matter what, so it
be a tenth; it denotes a fear had to him who does command, but of the Son
not the fear: the Son-like fear, if this way a work; for the sort it is
dainty, it severs, and culs, and pickes, and weighes, and chooses that which
is most pleasing for him who has its reverence, its love puts its God before
it self in each part of its substance. As then in all moral duties it fares
with each agent, so with him who tithes it. Chrysostom. Hom. 18. in Genesis
(...). Tithing aright has a strong and most especial regard to the mind and
purpose of him that offers; that he do it out of a willing and ready
disposition, with all strength of affection: which near so well appears as
when his subjection to him that lives savours of all his soul; as when his
tenths shows that for his Redeemer, he thinks nothing too good; when the
tenth of every thing is better than that which he reserves for himself; and
his own profit is put behind his dues to Religion; not ought more worth, and
that no present for the Priest: in a word, when a man gives a bare tenth, he
gives of his goods, but he gives himself whom his tenth gives up the best. Now
whosoere does thus, does no more than to what he stands bound. Number. 18. 29
Out of all your gifts, optima and electa cuncta; ye shall offer, says the
Text, of all the best thereof. Genesis 4. 4. Mal. 1. 8. 13. 14 Jude 11.
Righteous Abel, ex primogenitis and pinguissimis; unto the Lord hee-brought
the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof. On this offering of
Abels, will ye hear Saint Chrysostom to descant? thus then he (...).
Chrysostom. ut supra.
(...): unto the Lord merely o his sheep Abel did not bring: but What? (...),
of the first of his flock, he; (...) that is, (...), of those that were
prize-worthy, of the delicate; (...): and after that out of those firstlings
which were choice, again did Abel select the choyser. Now did Abraham in his
oblation come behind the pious Abel? Non Anselm. Dion, Carth. Hug Card.
Salmer. Gorcan. etc. in ver. 4.
devilioribus, he, sed de praecipuis ac melioribus dedit ei decimas. To give
unto Melchizedec the refuse of his store, it nere stood with Abraham's piety.
He, whose Lord had long before his heart, in his tenths unto him he could nere
be heartlesse; but what he paid with a deal of care he did all; not set apart
he, and of what not fore think; but what was of most esteem he did first
discern, and then let it go; with a busy eye be over-lookt all; but naught
his Priest he did assign, but what for worth the rest did overtop. Abraham's
tenths, they were (...), the richest of the spoils, the most liking of his
cattle, the purest of his gold, of his silver the most refined. For Genesis 13. 2.
Abraham, as the letter has it, was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in
gold. Touching the matter then of this present duty how much it is? that it is
decima a tenth; and too, a tenth of all, ye are not ignorant: but as for the
manner, how good it must be? the Apostle tells you that it must be (...), the
prime, something more surpassing in that kind any of the rest; this at least it
must be: but whether? to put that to the question which indeed is out of
question. As it is then,

Whether nothing so good? of all whether it should be the best; look you to
that? such as is your offering, such is your devotion; if ye fail not of so
much as you are commanded, for you give a tenth; yet render not so good as ye
are able: Mar. 22. 37.
(...); with all the heart, as ye should, do ye love the Lord your God? If in
what ye tithe, ye give Christ what is good, yet in that kind keep back
somewhat that is better, above all, is Christ then, is he preferred before all?
Anselm. in ver. 4.
Cui meliora, ille melior. That Is better than God, for which is reserved a
better thing; and whiles of your estates ye return him the common stuff, no
affection it denotes but what is common; slightly served he, and as slightly
prized. In your tithes then the choysenesse of what you bring; What reverence
ye bare him who receives, hence is the lively evidence: in religion cold and
frozen, nay dead is that Soul, which could set out his gleanings, and withdraw
his sheaves; make show of the gudgeon, but to conveigh away the Salmon; that
he might gainsay his timber would flatter you with the chips; when he should
pay the pearl, does very frankely set down the pibble. But not so Abraham, of
what he made up his tenths, of that he was curious for the kind; God was first
in his soul, and too first in his possessions; still the best that a man has,
it is for his service, who has the best of a man. naught too dear for God, if
once in our better part, we are indear'd to him: Tithes then cannor but be de
praecipuis, unless in our selves the High Priest be end praecipuus. Thus did
Abraham, and ye must no otherwise: his tenths they were of all, and of all the
most choice; your duty of no other stamp; of your increase the tenth of all in
each several, and in each of all no other than the chiefest. Of ^i^hes this
the condition, when Abraham tith'd it to Melchizedec; so much they were, and in
such a manner to be delivered up: and in this matter at this day no change: for
the old honorary, the old clame, since no Priest now, but the Priest of old;
when your Priest than Abraham's Priest he is no other. Heb. 13. (...)*
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever: it was Gospel then,
it is Gospel now, therefore the same tithes, since the very self same Priest;
there being no other Priest, there needs no honor of a new Edition: So that
your dutie's not a whit altered; his dignity being full as fresh, he as great
as he was before. To him then even in these times by tithes the same subjection
holds firm; in that in office he the same continues: that, which unto us and
all that come after us brings down the why institutive; it is of tithes the
why durative: for the awefull reverence, which by this tribute Abraham showed
to the greatness of the Priest; why at this day it must be observed, it is at
this day of the Priest from the endurance. In the very way then of Abraham's
payment, we come now to the reason for which tithes are to be continued; for
touching your duty, wherefore in conscience to render these ye are obliged, and
that we have authority upon the peril of your souls to command the
fulfilling; in the text the ground, of the Priest is (...): of your obeying and
our enjoining, the life it is the warrant; for, He who receives tithes, (...)
Of him it is witnessed that he lives: of the Priest the life, why tithes are
now due it is the Quare; and of the three Quaeres as the last proposed comes to
be considered (...), that he l^veth.

III, On (...). Helives, and he lives a Priest, for under Quisest qui vivit?
Ille factus est Sacerdos in aternum secundum ordinem Melchizedec ^ypum gerentis
Pontificis nostri, qui se metipsum obtulit hostiam Deo placentem, non ex
necessitate qualibet sed ex voluntate propriae potestatis: qui nihil morti
debuit, ideirco pontificali sacrificio sui corporis omnium abluit peccata.
Ambros hic. Bish. Chichest. treat. of tithes. chap. 2. and. 3.
this notion it is, that we are to present him to you; and in the kind you wot
of, why Abraham's duty to Abraham's Children it should descend; the grand quaere
is; not in that simply belives; but because he always lives a Priest. What
then is of notice most especial, why tithes still are your debt; of his life
it is the diversity of consideration: which is to be set before you either
primitive or dispensative.

First primitive, ye are to behold it, as Christ, he who lives for your
eternal profit, puts it into action; and so, this his life, being unto you the
life of a Priest; hence it is that in the first rise unto him, from you tithes
are due; (...), in that for you he lives now a Priest.

Secondly, this his life is to be weighed dispensative; as the Melchizedec's
here below have the manageing of it, to discover what precious fruits do
accrue unto you from this his life; it being a life for your spiritual good,
wholely behoofefull: and this is the Quare why of the Gospel the now Priests,
they of tithes are among you made the receivers; it is because the word which
they bring, it is the Phil. 2. 16.
word of life: for thus, (...). etc. Of him it is witnessed that in them he
lives. What then in the first place warrants unto him Abraham's performance to
be your service, it is in that

1. Primitive and in se, in his own personlie l^ves a Priest: and no mean
motive this from all Christians for the pleaded-for subjection, if but duly
thought on: when this Priest, (...), in that he lives; it is to pray, and Esaias
53. 12:
for the transgressors to make intercession. 1 John 2: 1.
If any man has sinned, says Saint John, (...), We have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. For, Iere. 30. 21. Zach 1 12. Romans 8. 34. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Apoc. 8. 4.
who is this but he who has engaged his heart to approach unto the Lord? In
respect then of him for the abidance of tithes, this the Quare: in that in
himself a Priest he lives; even now to be our spokesman, to plead, and sue
out our pardon, to reconcile and set us at one with him, whom our sins has
set at odds. chap. 2. 17.
(...): It is for us that he is at this present, the merciful and faithful
High Priest, in things pertaining to God: When none of us without this life
that dares deal above; that can go to God, and yet go without Christ; who is
it that can appear an offender before his Judge, and not provided of a
satisfaction? would a release of his bonds, and neglect the life that paid the
ransom; stands in need of mercy, and yet Dan. 9. 17.
for the Lords sake does not petition it? Behold then the life I set before you
this day, and of the Priests clame, yield to the Justice; hence in Abraham's
way, ought ye not to apply your selves to Abraham's subjection? for as to
Abraham, so to you he lives a Priest; this his life in your behalf he wholely
employes it; where he is, the manageing of your affairs altogether takes him
up: On (...) that he lives, as a good Priest should he abides our suitor, and
that thither we may come whether he has ascended, for this he lives to request
the Father. Prayers then he does offer up, and in (...). Oecumen. in ver. 25.
this a Priest: but this is not all at which we are to look; (...), that he
lives and intercedes; but too, the sacrifice, we must regard, hic. ver. 25.
which he did once when he offered up himself: since this also in se, as in
himself he is a Priest, it is to be considered. That then Esaias 53. 5, 6. John
1. 19. Tit. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19 2 24. 1 Ioh. 1. 7. Gal. 3. 13.
for our transgressions he was wounded, and bruised for our iniquities; as
ever, so now, Officium Intercessionis and Redemptionis ita sunt conju^cta, ut
dignitate^, virtutem, se^ efficaciam intercessionis Christi ex meritis.
Redemptionis pendere ostendat Apostolm ad Heb. c. 7. and. 9, Chemnit. ex. am.
Council. Trident. de In. vocat. Sanct. p. 169. col. 1. intercessio nihil allud
est quam Redemptionis applicatio, and continum quasi vigor (...) apud Deum
concilians, etc. Mediatoris nostri apud Deum Intercessio nisttur ejusdem
satisfactione and merito: unde in Sacerdota^i Christi officio satisfactio,
meritum and intercessio indivulso nexu conjunguntur. Gerardi. loc. com. tom. 8
de Morte. 385. 4, 389. 5.
this is that which makes him a powerful Orator: when from the redemption that
he wrought, is the life of his intercession; the strength of his interpleading,
it is from the dignity of his merit; from his passion, of his prayers, is the
prevalency. So then, for the point in hand, ye see upon what warrant we ground
the urging; this homage of yours what now commands; but that in which consists
your bliss eternal? from that which of the Gospel is the very pith; ab
Evangelii Evangelio, from the life of a Savior, hence the now Quare: his
Priestly being is the why at your hands this service why now he must receive;
from a perpetual benefit, it is that the bond is perpetual when for us it is
inse, (...), that a Priest be lives in himself: for our sakes, it is that the
Deity is still solicited; to appease the wrath that we have provokt, this the
cause that before justice eye his precious sufferings are still set; that the
remembrance of his fore-past Chastisement this Priest renues, it is to effect our
peace; and now powers out the desires of his soul for that only which we all
desire. Yet further; that which adds to the worth of this his executing his
Priestly office; and so, unto you makes the enforcement the more strong; it is
(...) that now he lives a Priest enthroned: for, chap. 9. 24.
(...): into heaven it self he is entered now to appear in the presence of God
for us. Therefore, all his doings ye are so to construe them, as of his
infinite glory they suit with the present condition: weighwell ye should of the
now Priest, the now state; an allglorious life it is of an all glorious Priest.
Christ's then Vnigenito filio pro homine interpellare, est apud coateruum Patrem
seip sum hominemdemonstrare; etque pro humana natura rogasse est ean them
naturam in Divinitatis suae celsitudine suscepisse. Gregor. magn. Moral. lib.
22. cap. 13. Illa interpellatic Christ. Doctorum omnium vera assertione, non
summissa est postulatio, sed ejus passionla quae semel suscepta, semel pro
nobis in sacrificium oblata est, aeterna commemoratio, etc. Rupertus de divinis
officiis lib 9 cap. 3. Vide Estium hic in ver. 25.
pro humana natura rogasse; at this day his mediating for us, no other it is
than in the stateliness of his Divinity his taking to him our nature; and
thus, in his own Person having assumed it, in our behalf what he will he
obtaines of this by the presenting; all things then to him are granted, not
from the submissenesse of his desire, but upon the knowledge of his desert; as
a supplyant he does not now crave, but as a conqueror he procures. What I say
ye may believe, when Chap 8 1.
we have such an High Priest, who is set, (...): on the right hand of the
throne of the Majesty in the heavens. To his clame then unto the debt we preach
for, ought ye not to have regard? when this Priest though he lives so Phil 2.
9.
highly exalted; yet in naught fallen from his office; but the Priests work,
it is still his Estius ut ante.
Non otiosum gerit Christus sacerdotium: from the business due to the
Priesthood, though he be in heaven he is not discharged; but for your heal it
is that even there, he abides a Priest all-sufficient: since, Hiever. 25.
He is able to save, (...), to the uttermost them that come unto God by him,
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. The remission then of
your sins; unto a better hope, the acceptance of your persons; for your time
of being here, your Priests plighting of his word for your upright abearing;
upon his own back his taking of your load; his fulfilling whatsoere you fail
in; of his now being the now majesty: in a word, all that the Gospel reveals
touching this Priest, all serves but to make the continuing Quare the more
weighty; that ye may be the more easily induced by ^ithes to evidence your
submission. Thus, to the Sons he that lives being the same Priest that he was
to the Father, Abraham's dues, that they should be your debt is it any more than
right? Tertul. lib. 4. contra Marcion. cap. 9.
Christus Jesus Catholicus Pa^ris Sacerdos. He being of his Father the
Catholic Priest, is there any reason that he should be denied a Videtur totam
tribum Levi confer cum Melchizedec in hunc modum. Cum Levitis Deus
concesserit jus exigendi decimas, Israelitis omnibus eos praefecit, licet en
eodem essent omnes progeniti. Atqui Abraham qui omnium est Pater Sacerdoti
alienigenae decimas solvit; ergo omnes Abrahae posteri huic Sacerd^^i sunt
subjecti. Ita jus illud reliquit quod in fratres delatum est, in Levitis. Sed
Melchizeder, sine exceptione Deus in omnes praesecit. Salmeron in ver. 5.
Causam non reddit Apostolus, ac si decimas ideo Sacerdotes accipiunt, quod sint
ex Filiis Levi, sed totam illam tribum consert cum Melchizedes in hunc modum
Cum Levitis Deus concesserit jus exigendi decimas a Populo ita Israelitis eos
praefecit omnibus, and si ex eodem Parente essent omnes simul progeniti. Atqui
Abraham qui omnium Pater est Sacerdoti Alienigenaesolvit decimas; ergo huic
Sacerdot; omnes poste^i Abraha sunt subjecti. Ita jus Leviticum particulare
suit in reliquos fratres; sed Melchizedec sine enceptione summoloco statuitur
ut sibi subjiciat omnes Calvinuss. ibid.
Catholic subjection? according to that he receives, of all is it not
necessary that there be rendered to him one and the same obedience? since as for
Abraham so for all, (...): Of him it is witnessed that a Priest he lives: from
him qua Priest, there flowing an universal good, unto him ought there not to
be returned a duty universal? Of tithes for the permanency in this manner
stands the Quare, in regard now of the right primitive: in se, he who receives,
as he is in himself if beheld; ye find unto you (...), that he lives still a
Priest: and therefore for this cause it is by tithes your allegiance unto him
ye ought to make apparent. But yet, in the spring head and ascent upmost,
though his they are: yet as he lives otherwise, than in himself a Priest, so
too, for the lasting of tithes, an other sort of right, his life it does
produce, a right derivative; when

2. Dispensative; in a second way we told you, that in those he lives to whom
of this his life he has committed the dispensing. Thus we are fallen upon the
point wherein we are to discover how to tithes the now Priests of the Gospel
they lay clame: when tithes not only primarily as they are owned; but too,
Secundarily they are to be treated on as they are assigned: indeed it is in
heaven that the receipt is ratified, though the payment nere were but upon the
earth; ye give here to the hand, what is there due to the body. Now then, to
come to those to whom tithes sub Evangelio are to be delivered: of these
touching the endurance to handle the Quare as it concerns us. The reason why
also tithes are our dues, for these in a surer way we cannot lay the ground,
than in the Text upon the (...): since to the now Melchizedec's, of the Priest,
of Christ here (...), of all their labors it is the life: that which makes us
bring Romans 10. 15.
glad tidings of good things unto you, is it not in that with this life we come
fraught? for 2 Cor. 2. 16.
(...): of life unto life we are the Savor; and our now charge Act. 5. 20.
it is to stand and speak to the people (...): all the words of this life.
Hence then it is that we receive tithes, since of his life, the saving benefits
effectually to impart we are enabled: for their Work sake here below to the
Melchizedecs, of the Gospel the now Priests, Romans 15. 16.
whose it is (...), to them this honor, hence it is that they have it
warranted; the Priest lives in them to communicate his life; and of his living
Priesthood these sacred annexa in them he receives. But that we may take the
whole Scripture which concerns this matter along with us; it does well be
seem us in the old way to set our footing: and so, it is our duty to set
before you of Melchizedec and of Aaron the Quare; that from their why for ou^
constant receipt of tithes, we also may fetch our Why: which may so be done, and
yet of the Priest from the life we not all together turn aside. What then
first of

1. Melchizedec was the Quare; that which was the reason wherefore of this
standing tribute, he was daigned the honor; the cause was a benedicendo: from
the blessing, which on Abraham he did confer. Melchizedec hic. ver. 1. 2.
blessed him says the Text, to whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all. Now
then, mark; if Melchizedec of the Patriarch upon his Quaero de jur^, quo jure?
non sacrificii, nullum enim obtulit. Benedictionis ergo. Coharent enim iste,
Benedixit Melchisedec, decimas pendit Abraham. I am assumo. Melch. benedicenti
debentur decimae. Idem jus sub Christo manet. Qui id constare potest? ex ver.
12. ad 7. Heb. Non sit (...). Ius non transfertur nisi translato sacerdotia.
Atqui idem Christi sacerdotium and Melchizedec (pro quo si opus est Deus ipse
jus jurandum interponet) Psalm 110. Ergo idem sub utroque jus. Christo igitur
debentur, in quo, and a quo, and per quem omnes benedicti sumus benedictus ipse
in secula. Quas aequum est ut illi Christi nomine percipiant, qui Christi
nomine nobis benedicunt, etc. Manet ergo sub Ch isto decima^um jus. Episc.
Winton. de decimis page 143. and. 144.
blessing did receive tithes? in his way in the behalf of us for the same debt
is there not the same cause? since as he to Abraham, so we to all that are of
Abraham do impart the blessing; Genesis 14 19.
even the blessing of the most high God Possessour of heaven and earth. This
blessing we dispense; which is no other in the richness of it, than the life
of him, of whom in the text it is witnessed, etc. For the Quare then, why unto
us of Melchizedec tithes the endurance; there being from us naught now but the
same blessing, what should be to us, if not the same subjection? when whose at
this day is the very office, is not theirs too, the very rights, tithes? for
Melchizedec blessed, and Tanquam sacerdos and Propheta ordinarius benedixit illi.
quo nomine etiam Ab^a. illi decimas ex omn bus impertitus est, and ille ab co
non dubitavit accipere tanquam fretus autoritate Dei, and ex ea rite perfungens
Sacerdotis officio. Iunius lib. 3. Paral. in hoc cap.
eo nomine, of a tenth part of all he was made partaker. To the same purpose
then that by Abraham these dues were given to his Priest; the same end in your
rendering of tithes it ought to be observed: now to him the tenth it was
assigned to set out hom great a Priest he was. And for our parts, since we are
to you, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
(...). in stead of him that lives; and naught do, but (...). 10.
(...), in the person of Christ what we do; and if any where received, Gal. 4.
14. Luke 10. 16.
as Jesus Christ we are to be received; and since, Obad. 21.
Servatores sumus, we are the Saviors that come up on mount Sion: this being
considered; as tithes did from Abraham to Melchizedec, so from you being paid;
are they not to demonstrate of our Callings excellency, your dreading
approvement? In respect then of each particular duty, our high function
enjoynes, these are to ensure your obedience unto us, who have Heb. 13. 17.
the rule over you. To this tithes serve, that to the world they may declare,
what great men they are, who now are Evangelicall Priests; in that the honor
which for himself Priest-Christ commands, to us he vouchsafes, his tenths, In
token then of your submission to our authority, of all increase, of all your
substance the best in tithes is to be imparted: when Melchizedecs superiority
does follow the charge of Melchizedec; the life which in the blessing of
Melchizedec, was the very cream, the life of the Priest, this is the blessing
we bring: with the Bread and with the Wine; with the Body and with the Blood:
with an (...), and a (...), we come. From Melchizodec then unto us for the
continuance of tithes we infer the Quar^: being enjoined his task, this the
why in dis

(...) Even so has the Lord ordained that they should live who Preach the
Gospel. Oecumen ^n 1 Cor. 9. 13. Bish. Chich. treat. of tith. chap. 1. page 3.
chap. 4 page 23
(...). In matter of maintenance the Apostle does not bring in, any new,
strange, unheard of thing, he innovates nothing at all; with a new egg of his
own addling he does not present the Corinthians: but the old practice upon
former precept to be continued that it is ordained this he preaches. The power
that he had 1 Cor. 9. 4.
to eat and to drink, it was (...), Even so, as that of Levies, who hic. ver.
5.
to take tithes had a commandment. Touching those then who sub evangelio
officiate for him, Of whom it is witnessed that etc. Aarons portion why their
pay ye have the Quare; the style of the now Law warrants it to be according to
the Law before; (...) to be no other than even so. Thus look which way you
please; to the subjection due to Melchizedec, or to the maintenance owed to
Aaron; to hoc fac, or to Creed hoc; to the Romans 3. 27.
Law of Faith, or to the Law of works; to the rule by which ye are justified,
or to the line by which ye are sanctifye; of these take which ye will; and of
the Priests life the now dispensers, of these rents how they authorized to be
the takers up, ye will easily discern. Or, if either of these plea's the now
Priests should let go; yet in the Text a hold they have impregnable; when out
of all danger of assault is: (...), of the Priest the life: Of a right then
unto these dues, 1 Cor. 4. 1.
(...), those who unto you are the stewards of the mysteries of God; of a title
unto tenths, these they can nere fail, unless our Text fail: keep then to
this, and keep up tithes: when this assures you of an (...) there, where
tithes are ever to be received; for (...) there, in the Priesthood of the
Gospel, (...). There he receives them, of whom it is witnessed that he
lives. And here, to our discourse a period it might be put; but that other
things are yet behind needful to be observed, As first,

1. All this while, by the Text what is received, and what is paid, it is but
tithes, than a tenth, it is no more. Therefore, as if this portion were too
exceeding; or that, in the requiring of these we went beyond our commission,
that ye may not repine, or what we write with a head hung down entertain: we
are further to acquaint you, and as the troth is deliver it; that to the

Now Priests of the Gospel, Populus novae legis ad majora obligatur Ministris
Dei qua^ Populus vet. etc Si dignitas Ministrorum attendatur plus ila debetur
quam Ministris Legis. Cajetanus in praedict. Aquinat. solut. ad dub. secundum
Populus Christianus accepit a Christo majora beneficia quam Israelitae, ideoque
ad plura Deo obligatur, Sylv. ibi. Conclus. 4 rat. 2.
tithes to be the least of that which justly they may clame; but a very
pittance of that greater sum in which ye all stand engaged. Indeed if we
look at Scriptum est, and jus strictum in respect of a part determined; than a
mere, a bare tenth, no more can be chaleng'd: but if the worth of that we
bring were it possible to value it; how little then of that great deal ye owe
would a tenth prove? for consider, thus much, tithes, the Christians gave who
were before the Law; and those who were under the Law paid tithes, all which
had the Priest that lives in a promise only, and in a sigure; so much as this
they imparted, and all upon the belief that he was to come: now that he is
come, and Romans 8. 32.
in giving of himself has freely given all things unto us: to be returned
than the wonted tenth whether there be no more? judge ye. In this matter to
your selves I do appeal: does not Nature teach, that the better ye are used,
the deeper ye are obliged; and such as is the fare, such should be the pay; and
that a more abounding crop, should follow a more plenteous sowing; and that we
should receive in, according to that we have laid out? Bethink your selves; in
the breast within, have ye not a thing that to this bears witness? But to
keep to Scripture: for the legal Priests then, if first fruits and tithes,
and what not were due to those, whose Heb. 9. 10.
Service stood in ordinances that were carnal; and all that they did, tended
no further than 13.
(...), to the purifying of the flesh? if of such the Ministry had so ample an
endowment? then to him 14.
whose blood from dead works is able to purge the conscience, that ye may
serve the living God: to him, I say, in his now Priests, can a tenth be a tax
so intolerable? (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 4. in Ephesians. Si is qui dat dim dium (...)
operatur, quanti erit is qui ne decimam quid^m praebet. E catalogo Anno. 544.
(...) (...). If under the Old Testament such doings there were as these, then
much more should there not be under the New? This quantity of Levies order, to
set out the excellenty it was apppointed, whose Work was but the 2 Cor 3 7, 8,
ministration of death; and to those of our rule, whose is the ministration of
the spirit, to us than a tenth shall there be due no more? Our Priesthood then
as it is Levitis jus decimarum. At ministerinm nostrum ut est natura
praestan^^^^ dignitate eminentius, ita usu fructuosius. Et plura and majora
Populus noster a nobis commoda percipit; debentitaque majora rotio siation
dictat. Quis pudor est Christianos qui debent majora non solvere pavia?
Vberiores fructus recipere possimus si ratio audiatur, tennior^s non possumus.
Episc. Winton de deci. page 155.
Natura praestantius, dignitate eminentius, ita usu fructuosius. As in its
nature that of Aarons it does far surmount, and in its exercise being far
more fruitful, and in that we of the Gospel come loaded to our people with
better commodities, and far more precious than those of the Law: this being
so, in your offering to us, your reverence how should it exceed that of Israel;
how outstrip that? Quis pudor est Christianos qui debent majora, non solvere
paria? Oh the fhame! that Christians who owe more, should nere be found to
return so much. What shall we say? Did not the Scribes and Pharisees pay
tithes of all that they possessed? Now Mat. 5. 20.
Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees: -- from What follows God defend; but except your righteousness,
etc. (...) ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Deceive not
your selves; of these miscreants the righteousness how does yours Quomodo
abandat justitia nostra plusqua^ Scribarum and Pharisaorum? fi illi de
fructibus terrae suae gustare non audent priusquam Sacerdotibus primitias
off^ranrant, and Leviti^ decimae separentur: and ego nihil borum saciens
fructibus terrae ita abutar ut Sacerdos* nesciat, Levites ignoret, divinum
altar non Sentiat Origin Hom. 11 in Numer.
exceed? if in that ye are ever peccant wherein they were never guilty? Exime
aliqua^ partem reddituum (...), decimas vis? decimas excipe; q^anquam parum
sit. Dictum est enim quia Pha^s^i decima^ dabant, etc. Et quid ait Dominus?
Nisi abundaverit, etc Et ille super quem debet abundare justitia tua decimas
dat, tu autem ^ec mille^imam das. Quomodo superabis eum, cui non aequaris?
August. in Psalm. 146. tom. 8.
Qnomodo superabis eum, cui non aequaris? In this duty if these ye do not
aequall, that ye go beyond such when will be the time that it may be found? Of
the Scribes and Pharisees ye are yet to learn; these though too bad, yet to
teach you truly to (...) it wondrous and Sufficient: of your profession is not
this the blot; that to Scribes and Pharisees ye should be to go to School? Now
then, if it be tithe, and more than a Tithe to which the now Priests have now
right,

2. What warrant then for that unwarrantable competency that every where is in
practice? or what conscience will allow you to abide by a moldy custom fetched
from time out of mind? or for your teacher to think that right meet which
comes from the raw discretion of an upstart Vestry? or what ground is there for
a Judge. 17. 10.
Be unto me a Father and a Priest, and I will give unto thee ten shekels of
silver by the year, etc. Ezekiel. 18. 2.
Have not our Fathers eaten sour grapes; and the childrens teeth are they not
set on edge? As if the now Priests were the accursed progeny of unhappy Eli. 1 Samuel 2. 36.
Do they not come and crouch for a piece of silver? and for their putting into
one of the Priests offices; for the most part is it not the end, Vt panis
frustum, that they may eat a piece of bread? when tithes which were ever due,
they are now no where paid. It Is in the text a Priest and tithes; of the
blessing upon Abraham's receiving, of these is Abraham's rendering. To the
goodwill then of the many no referring of the Priest for that which must
sustain him; and upon the hearing of the man, no giving accordingly as you
like him; and amend his pay, thereafter as he mends his Preaching; for if in
your wifedomes he chance to improve his talant, perhaps he shall be considered
for it: or if for his bigger preferment he can hire out himself for more, then
to trucke it with him for his longer tarriance: as if, He who lives should not
all this while receive tithes? or for those who of his Gospel are the setters
forth he had no way provided; only their allowance he has so left it, that
nothing's theirs but what it pleases you to give. Now is this the honor that
ye do your Priest? Zach. 11. 13.
Thirty pieces of silver, a goodly price that I was prized at of them: ye know
full well of whom it is said. In the name of God then, from the beginning of the
World to this praesent time, and ever after; from the bond of tithes have ye
had a general acquittance? that concerning the worship due unto your Priest,
ye are so sapinely negligent? It is witnessed that he lives? and here on Earth
must he be so abased; that those who negotiate for him must stand to your good
liking for what they have? naught receive, but what wherewith to part ye think
fit? was this the awefull regard that Abraham bore to his Melchizedec? that ye
should handle your 1 Cor. 4. 15.
Instructours in Christ, as ye do those who have the charge of your bounds?
the man now in the Stable, and him in the Church between one and other is
there any difference? for what must keep them, both alike do they not rely
only upon that which your own inventions have imagined behoovefull? the
Kitchen and the Pulpit do they not Work as you and they, thereafter as ye
have agreed? As if tithes had nothing to do with conscience; nor God ere call
to a reckoning, of this Sacred Revenue for the vile unhallowing. So long then
as ye hear of a tenth, and of one who lives tithes to receive, so long as ye
have tidings; so long know it is not left to you to dispose of the Priesthoods
dues according as you last: but that it is yours first to quit you of your
debt, and then to talk of your gratuity; till ye have performed your bounden
duty, let alone your benevolence: if what ye owe, ye fail to pay, with a
largess of the n'one coming to d' of God, nere dream; nere build upon a
piece of selfewilled charity, till in what justice would ye have satisfied your
Priest, in his tithes. Indeed a freewill offering it may not be denied, that to
the now Priests it is due: and over and above your tenths that much more ye
owe, we grant it to you: for, Except your righteousness exceed, etc. We
confess too, that the overplus which to render ye are enjoined, in respect of
a fixed, a set part, in this ye are left to your own liberty; as a tenth; so
more than a tenth is necessary upon praecept; but than a tenth how much more ye
ought to give? In regard of you this is the matter only arbitrary; to your
own power, ye are to be referred to define of that which must exceed; free in
this ye are at your own choice for the muchity to offer to your Priest.
Seriously but weigh this, and will ye not find it damnable and deadly to your
Souls; when to the prejudice of tithes, to carve as ye list to your
Melchizedec ye nere fear to presume? For whiles by contributing less than a
tenth, of your debt ye fancy the discharging: what do ye but run more upon the
score, and make your burden the more grievous? In diminishing the Sum, ye
add to your disobedience; and eternally undo your selves in impoverishing the
Priest. To draw to an end; on your parts, what then remains now, but to the

3. Priest, Iudeorum imitemur e^ordia, ut Sacerdotibus and Levltis bonorem
debitum deferamus?. Hierom. in cap. 3. Malac. tom. 6.
ut honorem debitum deferatis? naught but of your faithful service this humble
tender; that in paying of tithes, as tithes require ye make good your
subjection; it is true, with a great deal of goods ye must part; but too ye
must do it with a great deal of submission: because ye enrich the man, by no
means your selves exalt. The Priest fares well, and indeed must: (...). etc.
(...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 9. Homil. 22.
yet for the fliece never a whit beholding to the Sheep; because of the Parish
sustained, he is not therefore brought under of the means ye have it is that
he lives, but not of you; at the peoples hands it is that he does receive, yet
on the people it is not that he does depend; but only thence his livelihood,
whence his Office. Oecumen. ibidem.
(...). For the work of the Gospel it is that he is appointed; and too, not
of those he teaches, but that he live of the Gospel it is ordained. Ambros.
Ipsa naturalis ratio hoc habet, ut quis inde vivat ubi laborat. This of nature
it is the dictate, that of each one thence be the support, whence is the ground
of his employment. Ye give then, and ye give to him; yet what he receives, it is
that which of you the Gospel clames; the duty which ye owe him, it is for the
service which he does it. Hence of the Priest your obeying; by your substance
his subsisting does not make you his Good Masters; but in what he takes, in
that ye declare your selves debtors. In the behalf then of the Priest that ye
are put to charges. Non Fecit (D Paulus) securit castum Evanglistam (sc.
Timotheum) etc. ut intelligeret quod necessarium sibi sum bat ab it is, quibus
tanquam provincialibus militabat, and quos tanquam vi^e^m caltura excreebat,
vel tanquam gregem pascebat, non esse mendicitatem sed potestatem. Augustine.
lib d^opere Monachorum cap. 15. tom. 3.
est mendicitas, sed potestas. In this ye relieve not his penury, but bear
witness to his authority; in so doing, ye do not help his wants, but yield
to his power. It would be his sin then to crave, that which of right he may
command; and in you a foul fauli to expect his asking, when it is your duty to
deliver up. For so long as your tithes ye do with hold, so long of your
Priest from the dignity ye do withdraw; ye lessen his reverence, in denying
his maintenance; and make him little, in keeping from him tithes which should
make him great; whiles ye defraud him of his portion, ye avile his function; ye
Malac. 3. 8.
rob and steal from God, in depriving him of his goods. It is high time then
to betake you to your charge, and of this debt in the performance, as it would
thereafter to demean your selves: Ever remembering that this way whiles ye
advance your Religion, your obedience thereunto ye do but anew testify, and
that all is for the honor of your Priest, when this part ye do so devoutly
dedicate; to make apparent his praeeminence over you, to this it is that tithes
they were allotted: for that which made Melchizedez greater than Abraham, was it
not tithes? To shut up all: I only exhort you of these to the payment; ye have
a Priest who lives to receive, and whom may ye better follow than him whom ye
have for your Father. Abraham, he paid tithes of all, and the best of all in
honor to his Melchizedec: now, John 8. 39.
If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham: what he
performed that of you it is required. Therefore, Ambros. Fer. 3. post Domin.
prim Quadrag. tom. 5.
Quicunque recognoscit in se quod fidellter non dederit decimas suas. This of
Saint Ambrose it is wholesome counsel. Whosoever among you does acknowledge
that in matter of tithe he nere dealt faithfully: modo emendet quod minus
fecit: now, let him now amend that of which before he fell so short. Quid est
fideliter dare decimas: to give tithes faithfully wherein does it consist? nisi
ut, nec minus nec pejus aliquando Deo offerat. But that to God of whatsoere ye
have, ye offer neither worse nor less. Abrahami actio, est nostra institutio,
Abraham's action, it is our instruction.

March. 16. 1639. Imprimatur,

Tho. Wykes.

Errata.
Page 13. line. 3. (...). l. 14. (...). p. 17. l. 28. (...). p. 24. l. 16.
(...). p. 25. l. 26. court, or ship; p. 29, l. 26. (...). p. 30. l. 26. who in.
p. 32. l. 10. best? that 3 p. 40. l. 25. receipt. p. 44 l. ult, their b medium.
p. 45. l. 8. through. p. 52. l. 20 coining.

Margin.

Page 2. c Non dici po. p. 3. Promissio. p. 6. Art. i. p. 17. (...). p. 25
Elocatarum. p. 27. Episc. p. 31. (...). Dion. Carth, Gorran. p. 4^ (...).

FINIS.

