A brief Apology of THOMAS CARTWRIGHT against all such slanderous accusations
as it pleases Mr Sutcliffe in several pamphlettes most injuriously to load
him with.

A righteous man abhors lies: But th'vngodly shameth him self and is put to
silence, Pro. 13.5. 1596.

To the Reader.
IF thou be desirous (good Reader) to see the right pourtraiture of Innocence
truly laid forth unto thee in her proper lineaments, then read this
discourse which is not long. Being thou see thus provoked as she is, or
rather, to speak the truth, thus violently drawn into the encounter by the
wretched assaults of an unleavened mouth, yet mark, I pray thee, how she
caries her self, and how she comes armed into the field, Patience,
Mildness, Truth, and a good Conscience. This is her armor, these be her
weapons, and with these only she fights, repelling and striking back all the
bitter darts that are thrown against her, only with, The Lord rebuke thee,
and none otherwise. Far unlike to that babbling declaimour who left us this
lesson of old: Si quam maledice^do voluptate^ coepisti, eam male audiendo
amittes, etc. That is, If thou have taken any pleasure in speaking that thou
should not: Thou must loose it again by hearing that thou would not.
Well knew the defendour, that howsoever this might be pleasing to the fleashe,
or keep descant with our corruption, yet he that says, Mihi vindicta, had
taught him another lesson, namely, That it could in no sort suit with the
sincerity of the Gospel, to give check for check, and rebuke for rebuke: And
therefore it is that in his whole Apology he has not given his adversary so
much as one glaunce of reproach.

Let this then be thy Pattern (good Reader whosoever thou art) how to wreastle
with thy affections in the like assaults: It is lamentable I confess, that
such unclean mouths as this should thus take their liberty to disgrace at
will. But muze not at it, good Reader, it has been so in all ages and will be
so still: For so long as the Lord gives Satan leave to buffet and assail his
church, so long thou may be assured there will never want a Rabshakeh, a
Shimei, or a Senacherib to play their parts. Nevertheless, herein thou
may comfort thy self, if thou mark how and in what sort this reviling
generation is curbed, as it were, snaffeled and restrained by the powerful and
righteous hand of God, that in the midst of their forwardness and boldness
to blunder out what they list without blushing, they can hardly for their lives
blunder out a truth, as if the Lord in his secret judgment had purposely and
apparauntly blasted their pen with a lying and distempered spirit. All which
if thou find verefied without all gainesay and exception in the writings of Mr
D. Sutcliffe and others of that hair, and withal if thou see these men that
do thus headely and desperately lash on in disgrace of others, to be them
selves in their several accusations so palpably taken tardie, that the very
walls and stones of the streets may convince them of untruth: if I say thou
find this to be true (and for proof thereof I refer thee to this short and
modest defense) have patience in thy self and give the glory to God, who does
thus, thou see, in his wisdom make a way and passage for the clearing of
the innocent, even thorough the mouth and malice of th'accuser him self.

Concerning such things as it pleases him so earnestly to father upon Mr Cart.
and others by heresay and report, I can not but muze that a man of his coat
and calling is no more smitten and abashed at it then he is, For presuppose
that one should hear by report that Mr Sutcliffe was once taken with false
dice at Geneva, and thereupon being forced to fly the Town, should ever since
bear a kind of inveterate hatred and malice to Mr Beza and th'Elders there:
This being known only to us by report (how true soever the thing might be in
it self) I would feign know for my learning, whether this were aequalance, or
how it might suit with any measure of indifferency, forthwith without any
farther examination to spread it abroad in print. And yet this you shall find
to be an usual and ordinary course with Mr Deane of Exeter, in his solemn
informations and personal pleadinges against good men: Mark it who list in
him, if the case concern any of these Disciplinarians, he is of that good
nature and ready wit, that rather then he will be to seek for matter, he will
not stick to rake the channel sometimes and take whatsoever comes next to
hand, though it lie all to be trodden and tra^pled on in the streets: yea and
of that which I believe the poorest Scavenger in a town would be loath to
stoop for, he with a little help and forbishing of Mr Surveiour of
Discipline, frames for the most part some irrefragable and tempestuous
conclusion against these new plot-formers, and then forsooth to the Press it
must in all post have with some rhetorical varnish of Innovation: as if
Quidlibet ex quolibet, or as if the poorest and most patched Record under the
sun (that blusheth, it may be, to see the light) were evidence strong enough
against a Precisian.

Now there be that think that of all other charges thus strangely and
unworthily imposed upon this Reverend man, the charge of ignorance, and that
his works should be a fardle of fooleries, is the most out of joint and
approaching nearest to impudency. But sure for mine own part I do not think
so, neither do I see why his adversary might not with as great reason, yea
and every way with as good a conscience appeache him of ignorance as of
disloyalty. For allow that our Universities together with foreign Nations
and Churches may sufficiently control the Reporter in the one, yet this
lets not but that the Countries and places of the Man's resiance, can, for
need, give as plentiful testimony in the other. And therefore why a man of
that easy gift and rolling vein, so slipper in the sear as Master Sutcliffe
is, should make it more dainty to spare Mr Cart. in his learning then he does
in his loialty (having the like warrant and authority for both) I see neither
reason nor sense. The best is, thou have here by this means (good Reader) (in
th'euennesse and equabilitie of the Dostors hand toward this man) an
infallible line laid before thee, whereby thou may measure all the rest of
his reproaches so vnconscionablie thrown upon others. For has he dealt truly,
modestly, charitably, and christianly with this man? Then make thou no doubt or
question but he has afoorded full as good measure to others. On the contrary,
has he made no bones hand over head and that beyond all compass of
christianity to speak his pleasure of this man, being a man so notably
graced in gifts, and one that has so many uncontrollable evidences of his
wise and duetifull carriage of himself? If he have done this (as the reading of
this Apology will make it clear unto thee) Then what reason have thou to
marvel or think strange if thou see him now and then most fowly and
shamefully ouer-reache him self against others that are far short of this
man in judgment and sufficiency?

It is written of Socrates, that being unjustly put to death without cause:
while he was going to execution, his wife followed him aloof of howling and
weeping and crying aloude: O my husband dies guiltles, dies guiltless.
Whereunto the good old man (looking back upon her with a frowning and angry
countenance) replied thus: Why, thou foolish woman, would thou have me dye
guilty? This being the speech of a heathen man, voied of the true knowledge of
God, will rise up, I fear, in judgment against many of us that profess
christianity in this age, whose common corruption is such, that when we are
wrongfully burdened with any matter of disgrace, we frette at nothing more then
that the thing is false that is so charged upon our heads. Why, if I were
guilty (says one) or if it were true that they report of me, it would never
grieve me: whereas in truth (if we did rightly consider of it) it should
grieve us and humble us most to be guilty, or that those things should be
true that are thus blown abroad against us. Will thou know then (good Reader)
how to carry thy self when thou art thus injuriously dealt with by any false
charge or imposition? Look upon the example of the holy Saints and servants
of God in the Scriptures, and as thou see them do, so do thou. Anna when
she was charged by Eli to be drunken, did not frette or snuff at it, or
look upon the man with a disdainful eye, but in much patience and modesty
made aunsweres Nay, my Lord, not so, 1 Samuel 1.15.16.
I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have powered forth my soul
before the Lord, count not thy handmayde a wicked woman, for of th'aboundance
of my grief have I spoken, etc. Saint Paul likewise, when he was charged by
Festus, to be besides him self, was, we see, no whit distempered or inflamed
with it, but made answer in all wisdom and reverence: I am not madd, most
noble Festus, Act. 26.25
but I speak the words of truth and soberness, etc. This then must be thy
course (good Reader) and these be the steps that thou must tread in. Thou
know whose counsel and admonishment it is, not to suffer as a malefactor:
1 Pet. 4.15
Look thou to that then in any case.

Hic murus aheneus esto
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.
Keep thou still a good conscience, and let the clearenesse of thy heart, and
innocence of thy hands be as a wall of brass unto thee, and leave the rest to
the Lord, to do what seems good in his own eyes, And then if Satan do
rage, or his instruments do revell or revile never so much, tearming thee a
drunkard, a madd man, a Traitor, a Conspirator, an Innovatour, or what they
will else, be not thou troubled or dismayed with it, but rather rejoice and give
God thanks. For if thou be able truly to say with The Apostle in the testimony
of thine own heart, By honor and dishonor, By good report and evil report, 2
Cor. 6.8.
as deceyuers and yet true, etc. Then (howsoever the bloudthirstie may gnashe
and grind their teeth at thee) thy conscience may be at peace: and thou may
chearefully answer thy good friends (that are peradventure agrieued to see
the falsehoode and indignity of th'impositions laid upon thee) as Socrates
did to his wife, Why my Masters would you have me suffer guilty, or be
slaundered and ill spoken of deservedly?

Thus doing what know thou, whether the Lord (who has the hearts of all
men in his hands) will make thy condemners to be thy clearers, and thy enemies
thy friends, yea and turn all this storm and tempest of untruths to thy
farther peace, clearing, and security in the end? For was there ever a more
bitter and malicious enemy then Saul was to David? And yet we see how the Lord
forced this wretched man (after many false surmises and unjust ielousies of
treason and conspiracy against him) to pronounce sentence for David's acquitall
in these words: 1 Samuel 24.17.
Thou art more righteous then I. And who knows whether the Lord may work
the like effect and remorse in Mr Sutcliffe ere he die, even to force him in
like manner (after all his bundle of outcryes and unjust accusations) to pass
the white stone on the behalf of th'accused, and him self to pronounce: That
certainly Tho. Cart. and Steph. Egerto^ are much more righteous the^ he, and
therevppon to add farther as the same Saul did afterward, I have sinned, 1 Samuel 26.21.
I have played the fool, I have erred exceedingly, in slaundering and belying
the innocent. Sure I am, it were happy and thrice happy for him if he might
live to do this of conscience. But whether he do or no, labor thou always
(good Reader) so to walk as thou may not justly be touched, with any
thing that may be a stain to thy holy profession. And so harboring still in
thy breast the comfortable guest of a good conscience (as an asswagement of all
the miseries and discontentmentes of this life) cease not to pray in the spirit
for the peace of Jerusalem, and for her right excellent Majesty that has been
so long Gods good instrument of that happy peace, That as Joshua commanded the
sun to stand till he were avenged on his enemies, So the Lord would command
this Sunshine of our peace to stand and never to go down, till all the
Enemies of his church be brought low to the dust. And as that was the longest
day that ever was, so this (having been already by the mercy of God the
happiest) may also prove by the power of God to be the longest reign that
ever was: That the date of her life may (if it please the Lord) and with the
last date and dissolution of this earth, to the continual bliss and renown of
this Land, to the terror and amazing of the wicked, to the comfort and
rejoicing of the godly, and to her own everlasting peace and happiness in the
life to come.

A brief of Thomas Cartwright to the printed slau^ders of Mr D. Sutcliffe,
Deane of Exeter, so far as they concern the same Tho. Cartwright.
HIs slanders are either in breach of necessary duties imposed upon all
Christians: or in things which, in their nature being indifferent, are by him
(in respect of mine estate) given out as things of no good report.

Mr D. Sutcliffes charge.
In the former kind is his charge of Conspiracy with Hacket and Copinger to a
mutual communication with Copinger by word, writing and consenting, Fol. 10.
p. 2. and fol. 44 p. 2. And that he did not dissuade him, but rather willed him
that he should attempt nothing but by advise, and that he should be wise and
circumspect: which words he sets down in a diverse letter from the letter
of his own book: as if they were words of a letter of Thomas Cartwrightes to
Copinger, fol. 48. p. 2.

T'hanswere of Thomas Cartwright.
Hacket was a man whom, to my knowledge, I never saw: so was Arthington, until
he was freed of his prison he endured for his misdemeanor: with Copinger I had
acquaintance upon occasion of Mr Ambrose Copinger, chief officer to the right
Honorable, The Earl of Warwike; For, coming to his house necessarily for the
settling of the estate of th'Hospital of the right Honorable The Earl of
Leicester: there I met with this Copinger sundry times some three or four
years before his lewed practice brake forth: with the former two I had never
conference either by Letter or otherwise by message sent from them to me, or
from me to them. Between Copinger and me touching this matter I am charged
with, this only passed which follows: Whilst I was in prison in the Fleere,
Mr Rafe Hockenhull propounded unto me, as things he desired to be resolved of
in the behaulf of one of his acquaintance, Hockenhull telling me that it was
Copinger which had entered into such conceit of him self: I desired him to
deal with him for diswading him from such frantike opinions, which he told me
he did accordingly. And afterward, some while before his lewed practice brake
forth, he admonished some of his kindred before Copinger him self, that if he
belonged to him, he that day before the morrow would make him fast either in
Bridwell or Bedlem. After some space of the demand of these questions, he sent
by Mr Hockenhull to entreat that he might come to me into the Fleet: For that
if he might so do, he did not doubt but he would show me such evident tokens
of an extraordinary calling, as I should have no power to deny it, and that
he would for further security in this matter, come waiting upon Mr Hockenhull
in a blewe coat. To whom I returned this answer, that if he came to me, I
would not once so much as speak with him: For that his disease was of that
kind as needed some other remedy then disputation. And if he desired to be
resolved of the truth in that matter, there were other both for their learning
and liberty more fit to deal with him then I was. Not long after this, the
same Mr Hockenhull told me that because Copinger might not come unto me, he
had written me a letter, which he had sent by him, to whom I said, I would
receive none from him, and so returned his letter without so much as once
taking it into my hand or looking upon the superscription: Whereby may appear
how untrue it is that I and Copinger had mutual conference by word and
letters, to whom (in my knowledge) I never wrote in my life: assured I am,
never since he entered into this wretched practice. After this I heard of Mr
Hockenhull, that Copinger would inform her Majesty of certain horrible
treasons committed by personages of high calling, both in Church and common
wealth: which as I always esteemed vain, knowing the broken wit of the man,
so, when by report I understood the particulers thereof (which argued one
bereaved of common sense) I desired old Mr Michil that if Copinger came to the
right Honorable my very good Lady the Countess of Warwick for her mediation
unto her excellent Majesty for such matters as he would deliver: He would
signify that, although I knew her wisdom otherwise able easelie without any
writing to sound his folly, yet that it would please her to take this notice of
me (which otherwise she might be ignorant of) that he was overtaken with
strange conceits of some extraordinary calling and gifts he was farthest
from. Again this whole matter of Hackets Conspiracy, being by commission to
certain of her Majesty's most honorable Counsel and other wise and grave men
commended to be examined: I leave it to be considered whether Mr D. Sutcliffe
be so quick sighted as by him self and his Inquisitours, having (for any
thing I can learn) but the same grounds her Majesty's Commissioners had, to
find out that which men of so great wisdom and circumspection, with so great
means as they had of commandment over all that might bring any light unto
that matter, could not find out: And whether this dealing of his be not some
charge of want in them either of wisdom in not finding it out, or of
fidelity in not once calling me to th'answere of it. Moreover, Arthington
being compacte in this conspiracy with Hacket and Copinger, if there were any
hand of mine in that wretched practice, in all likelihoode Arthington must
needs be privy unto it: he is a man alive let him be examined, and a man also
whom I never spoke too, nor caused to be spoken with in my life. His reasons to
induce his reader to think his accusations to be true are (so far as I
remember) these: The first is touching our mutual conference by letters, which
is already answered: Another, my concurrance wtih Copinger in fasting. I
confess that, as there was just cause of humbling my self in fasting, in
feeling the displeasure of her excellent Majesty and others in great
authority under her, so did I sometimes bestow my self in that exercise. But
that I did it the same day that Copinger and his accomplices, or at the least
with any notice either given to him of my fasting, or received from him of his
fasting, I utterly deny as a thing most untrue. A third reason is, that Hacket
and his fellows commended me at the cross in Cheap above the writers of our
age: I acknowledge their great folly in that commendation or madness rather,
who am scarce worthy to bear the books after many that have lived, and yet
do live in this age, yea and in this Church of our land. But Mr D. Sut.
report herein is not upright, for although I was not present, yet I heard of
diverse (and therein refer my self to the remembrance of those that were
standers by) that their excessive praise was of Thomas Cortwright, that had
been sometimes when he first wrote in the cause of the Discipline of the
Church, but not of him as he now was, for that (as was said) he was feign away
from his former love. Lastly, that Mr Cartwright (says he) was a medler in
those matters and well understood them, it appears by a letter of Io. Bowmans
(servant in Oundle) to Wigginton: I desire you (says he) to send me the copye
of a writing which you had from Mr Cartwright upon the Court matters, when
goodman Hacket was with you the first time. Mr Wigginton, I am assured, never
received from me any writing during the time of my imprisonment or afterward,
or at any time of my life, to my best remembrance, whereof let Mr Wigginton
that lives be examined. But if he had received a writing of the court matters
in the star Chamber, how thereof it can be concluded that I was a medler in
this matter, let all men judge, for my part I understand no sequel of it, upon
all which both witnesses and reasons I leave it to be judged, how untrue it is
that Mr D. Sutcliffe does charge me with touching the matter of Hacket and
Copinger, etc. both in words, writing and consent, which never spoke with them
of it in my life, never wrote unto them, nor received writing or message from
them further then I my self have confessed: whereof let it also be further
judged whether I was consenting to that wretched practice.

Mr D. Sutcliffes accusation fol. 13. p. 1.
Yea and Thomas Cartwright (they say) does work extraordinary miracles: And
fol. 58. p. 2. A legend of Mr Cartwright his miracles, which passes from hand
to hand and is much esteemed amongst the brethren is promised to come forth.

Th'answere of Tho. Cartwright.
Being (as I feel my self) short of th'ordinary works of my calling both in
general duties of christianity, and in the particular way of the government
of mine own family: woe should be unto me if I should vainly boast of
miraculous works, which my self have especially written against, in condemning
extraordinary callings whereof miracles are the seals: yet Mr D. Sutcliffe
seems to insinuate thus much (I say insinuate) for that the brethren he
brandeth to have them in estimation (I doubt not) he means to be men so
favoring me as they would be loath to do it if they thought it would not
stand with my good liking. Now let the town wherein I dwell be examined,
whether any voice te^ding hereunto did ever come from me. And, as I think,
none can be produced that will glory in this folly: so my desire is, that when
this Legend shall come forth, there may be for the credit of him that sets
it out, the names of the reporters, and likewise of the brethren laid down
that are guilty of the dotage he speaks of, that thereby they may be
cleared, or otherwise pass condemnation of the folly he charge them with.

Mr D. Sutcliffes accusation, fol. 45. p. 2.
Thomas Cartwright examined in the star Chamber upon certain points of her
Majesty's Supremacy, refused to answer, and pleaded that he was not bound.

Thomas Cartwrightes answer.
I refused it as esteeming it impertinent unto that cause, not otherwise, unto
which afterward, upon commandment I gave answer in writing unto her Majesty's
most honorable Counsel. And to her Majesty's supremacy I have been sworn (at
the least) five or six times, and if there be doubt of any change of my
judgment, I am ready to take th'oth again.

Mr D. Sutcliffes accusation.
M. Cartwright highly commends Fenners book, which gives authority to
superior persons to restrain their Sovereign, as th'Ephori in Sparta.

Thomas Cartwrightes answer.
I take it Mr Fenner gives no such authority, but only where the laws of the
land do establish such an authority as the Ephori in Lacedaemonia had. And
if Mr Fenner did, yet how does my Epistle commendatorie set before his book
make me of his judgment, as if he that commends a book justifies what
soever is in the book, or as if, notwithstanding Mr Fenners singular learning
(which for his age many, I doubt not, both at home and abroad do esteem) I
might not or do not differ from him in some things contained in his book:
besides he him self confessing, that by oath in the star Chamber I have
disavowed th'alowance of any such opinion which he fathereth of Mr Fenner, let
it be considered with what mind he so often rubbeth upon this point. And both
for this and the former charge, I leave it to be considered with what
christian modesty Mr Sutcliffe may now the second and the third time (and that
in print) move question of those things to our discredit, which her
Majesty's most honorable Counsel was pleased, should be no further proceeded
in, and that he is not contented with that imprisonment we endured, which their
Honors are satisfied with. Lastly, my judgment in sundry matters of the
Discipline excepted, wherein differing from sundry learned men in our Church, I
have the consent of many worthy Churches and godly learned both of this and
other ages, I would be ashamed for that singular mercy God has showed me by
her Majesty's most gracious gouuernment to come behind Mr Sutcliffe in any
duty that my poor hand is able to reach unto. And that he dares me not once
but sundry times to answer touching these matters of Discipline, I think it
not so fit for me to undertake it, there being so many better able thereunto
then I, especially in this declyning and forgetful age of mine. And yet if my
answer might have either that alowance of print, or passage that his has, and
none other were found: I my self in this weakness I am in, would not be behind
with answer to any thing that he has been able to allege in this behalf:
If there be any thing in his writings, the answer whereof is not already set
down by such as have written in that cause: And that my silence in the cause
of Discipline is not altogether either of th'inhabilitie or fear, Mr D.
Sutcliffe would so willingly fasten, or rather force upon me, let this be for
an Argument, that where I was set on work by the right honorable Sir Francis
Walsingham for th'aunswere of th'annotations of the Jesuits upon the new
testament, and had traueled therein to a rude and first draught of a great part
thereof: understanding from some in authority that I might not deal with it,
I did not only not set any thing out my self, but also earnestly labored by
letters and friends here and in Scotland both the And if he stayed the
publishing of that whereunto he was once allowed by authority, it is not in all
likelihood to be thought that he would hastily publish any thing of him self,
how soever he migt be persuaded of the truth of it?
hinderaunce of printing some parts thereof, which being brought to Sir
Francis afterward (much against my will) came into the hands of diverse to
whom I would never have let them come.

Mr D. Sutcliffes accusation.
Mr Cartwright upon the coming forth of Martin is reported to have said that
it was no matter, if the BB. were so handled, seeing they would take no
warning. fol. 48. p. 1.

Thomas Cartwrightes answer.
Let it be judged what christian love it is to commit such things to print
upon a bare report. And if the reporters had been named as in other cases where
he does call out the persons by their names, the truth might have the better
appeared: For me, I am able to produce witnesses, that the first time that ever
I heard of Martin Marprelate, I testified my great misliking and grief, for so
naughty, and so disorderly a course as that was. And therefore where fol. 51.
pa. 1. he asks when I will condemn th'vnlawfull and uncivil practice of
Martin and Penry? I ask again what office or charge I have to publishe
condemnation upon every unlawful and uncivil writing that comes abroad? And
yet I have witnesses, that even publicly when I was allowed to preach, I
condemned all dealing in that kind.

Mr D. Sutcliffes accusation, fol. 61. p. 1.
Extemporall prayers Tho. Cartwright commends most highly, as being uttered
by the holy Ghostes secret inspiration: and scarce would be induced (when time
was) to like of a prescript form of prayer. And in the margen is added, Thomas
Cartwrightes reply.

Thomas Cartwrightes onswere.
Where, in my reply, or in treatise of what matter I remember not, nor Mr
Sutcliffe (I believe) shall ever show that Thomas Cartwright has so little
knowledge of divinity as to affirm that the extemporall prayers of any (how
able soever in these days) are uttered by the holy ghostes secret inspiratio^.
And in what place or time and in whose hearing could I scarcely be induced to
like of a prescript form of prayer? The noting of these circumstances, which
he does diligently, yea curiously (where he thinks they may serve the turn)
would easily have bewraied, th'vntrueth hereof. My continual practice in the
ministry witnesses against it, for in the space of five years I preached at
Antwerpe and Middelborogh, I did every sunday read the prayer out of the book:
And all the while I preached at Warwike there were few sermons I ever made
there but (to my remembrance) I did shutt up the prayer either before or after
the sermon with the Lords prayer: Besides that the prayer before the sermon
ordinarily was a set and accustomed form of prayer howsoever I read it not out
of the book, and likewise was that after the sermon some small part excepted,
where in my prayer I applied some principal points of the doctrine the
handled: All which I would not have done, if I had not allowed, yea well liked
also a prescript form of prayer. And hitherto of the former kind of slanders
concerning the breach of necessary duties imposed upon all christians. The
second of things indifferent in their own nature follows: For as touching his
charge of odious and ignorant railing, etc. I refer my self to indifferent
judgment upon the books which are extant.

Mr D. Sutcliffes accusation in his former book, the effect whereof is.
That notwithstanding Thomas Cartwright condemns Executorship in other
Ministers of the word, yet that he was content to be Executor to his brother
Stubbes his will: Look also fol. 69. page 2. of his last book.

Thomas Cartwrightes answer.
I was not so much as named in my brothers will, and to put of Mr Sutcliffes
shift of answer he has made to excuse him self in his latter book, that by
the word of last will he would understand any conveiance lately made before
his death, wherein trust was committed unto me: I answer, that my brother
Stubbes did never either long before or soon after his death put me in trust
with any of his worldly estate either by word or writing. Neither is there
(as Mr Sutcliffe surmiseth) any unkindness of my Brothers toward me, in not
putting me in trust which would not that way be employed, or my unkindness
toward him, who trusted him with my whole estate that way. And that my
Brothers wife and kindred rested not satisfied with my dealing: either is an
untruth of Mr Sutcliffes report, or a most causeless complaint of their
behaulf. For where in regard of my wifes portion of two hundred pound, I had
an annuity in fee-simple, for default of payment whereof after his death,
(besides th'annuity and arrierages) I had a lease of a hundred years granted
me of certain pastures to the yearly value of six pound by estimation for a
pepercorne only I was content, to the end that the lands might be sold for the
satisfying of my brothers creditours, freely and for naught to release my
interest in that lease, which the law, for want of paiement of th'annuitie, did
evidently cast upon me: also to yield up mine annuitie for the same sum of
money I had paid to my Brother, without both which my Brothers land would have
found no convenient sale for the paiement of his creditors until this day. And
of my dealing herein, I take witness of Sir Robert Iermin of Suffolk, Mr
Atkins and Mr Tindall of Lincolnes Inn: who were (in deed) the men my brother
trusted with his worldly estate: and who (in my judgment) acquitted the trust
my brother reposed in them accordingly.

Mr D. Sutcliffes accusation.
In his former book he says, that I purchased three or four good Mannours
with the spoil of the Hospital, and that only with the sale of a cottage and
three or four Acres of land: or (as to my remembrance he speaks in another
place of his former book) as much land as would graze three or four
Goselings. Look also fol. 68. p, 2. of his later Book, and fol. 69. He may
mend the matter if it please him, by conveying his lands and leases to his
Hospital: By which the law intends he has got them for the most part. And
fol. 70. He has two leases at Welborne, he bought of Mr. Alexander Morgan,
yearly worth two hundred marks: His lands in Norfolk* part whereof he had of
his brother Stubbes, amount to half the sum: the value of that he bought in
Warwikeshire he knows best him self, some benefit he has made of the
leases of the Hospital.

Thomas Cartwrightes answer.
Here is a charge of a purchase of three or four good Manors, and two good
leases, and both got (for the most part) by the spoil of t'Hospitall, except
the price of some small Cottage, etc. For the purchase of three or four
Mannours, I never purchased any Manor in my life but the Manor of
Saxmundeha^ in Suffolk, whereof I have yet but he moitie, nether shall have
these fourtene or fiftene years, if one Mr Iohnsons lease be availeable, as
hitherto he has enjoyed it by me: who have not disturbed his possession. The
rent that he yields for the one half of the Demaines is but xxx. shillings by
year. The rent of the demeines that I receive (although enhanced as far as
the Tennant may live thereof) is yet but xxvi. pound by year. The Other rentes
for Copieholdes come yearly to a iij. pound or thereabouts, as I remember. So
that the whole of that I receive comes to little above xxx. pound by the year.
To purchase this I sold of the inheritance my Father and grandfather left, as
fair a house for a farm, not only as is in that town where it stands, but
in diverse towns about, which had between eight or nine skoare Acres of
arrable land belonging unto it, with commons, meadow and pasture agreeable to the
Farms in that country, by year more then three times worth the value that
either my father or I received for it, and yet we received between eight and
nine pounds yearly of clear rent discharged of all quitte rentes. That Mr
Sutcliffe may the better enquire into it, the Farm is situate in Waddon in
the county of Cambridge, seven miles from Cambridge, where I had also a coat
with a close adjoining unto it, which I sold when I did sell the other. Now
where he says I purchased my lands with my Hospital, I know not why he
should so often term it my Hospital, rather then (as it is truly called) the
Hospital of the Right honorable the Earl of Leicester: But this I know and
profess constantly, that neither I nor any for me purchased one foot of
land since I came to the Hospital: I soulde an annuitie in fee-simple of xii.
pound x. shillings by year since I came thither, as my L. chief Justice of her
Majesty's common pleas does well know, before whom I acknowledge a fine: Leases
of the Hospital I never made but one only, for which the house and not I
received thirty pounds. And because he draws me to these accoumptes of
th'Hospital, I will offer, and in the hearing of any equal and indifferent
Auditour will make it clear, that besides my continual travel for the
settling and suites of the Hospital, which I (never brought up thereunto) would
not have undertaken for any money, but only for conscience and duty to the
poor Hospital my L. trusted me with: I have laid out of mine own purse
forty marks over and above that which I have received or am like to receive,
unless the stock which is holden from the house be recovered. This partly
may appear by an Accoumpt I gave up unto her Majesty's Comissioners who had
charge (amongst others) to enquire and certify the whole estate of the poor
Hospital. Now for the two Leases in Welborne, They were bought by a friend of
mine, who being the principal dealer is left out, whether to draw more envy
to me, let it be judged, especially of that which hereafter shall appear: I
confess I should have had a part therein, but they were never enioied either of
him or me, but were released to Mr Morgan, for that he was not able without his
utter undoing, to perform them. And where he says they were worth to me
two hundred Marks by the year, They never have been nor will be worth to us
both two hundred farthings in all: More then that (albeit my L. chief Justice
of England deals very honorably with us) yet I refer it unto his judgment
(if his Lordshippe will be pleased to speak in so private a matter) that we
are great loosers by Mr Morgan. And Mr Morgan (if he have but a spark of good
nature) shall be constrained to confess our kind and christian dealing with
him, both in releasing his bargain for a sum far underneath the value it
was worth, and forbearing him many years with much patience, after the
forfaiture of his Recognoisance and many promises broken with us. Now where
he excuses these two last charges of being Executor to my Brother Stubbes,
and of purchase of Lordships (as he does excuse many other things) in that he
does propounde it only in a question, it is unworthy of any answer, not
only because a question does more strongly sometimes avowe, then a bare
affirmation, but because he is so violently and bitterly carried against the
petitioner for the things he has set down by way of question. And for his
excuse of being mistake^ by the report of others, I refer it once again to
judgment, how it fitteth with the credit of a Minister of the Gospel, to
publishe (and that in print) what soever he receives by report, to the
discredit of a Minister of the Gospel, and unless Mr Sutcliffe will bring
forth his reporter, some will happily conceive that it is the invention of his
own head. And if he did receive it by report, yet seeing he would blow it
abroad by so strong a blast, as is the print, at the least he should not have
simply affirmed it, but set it down as a report. Lastly, where he says that
he desires not to be acquainted with my estate, He forgets him self. For
in his former book (as I remember, for I have not the book at this present)
he promises to be a diligent Surveiour or Auditour of mine and others men's
Lands. And in deed he is over diligent that can find Lands of mine in
Warwikeshire and Norfolk, whereof I my self nor any of my friends know not
one foot, yet Mr D. Sutcliffe admonished in this behalf of his untruth set
forth in his former book, and occasioned thereby to correct him self,
fears not in this later to affirm boldly that if he have done amiss, it is
because he has set down to little, to much, (says he) I have not set down,
fol. 69. pa. 2. fol. 70. p. 1.

Mr D. Sutcliffes accusation.
Having good store of money he has good skill to make good use of it, Mr
Francis Michell should have paid him three hundred pound. And for the
forbearing of it he received double vsance.

Thomas Cartwrightes answer.
What stoare of money I have, I am not bound to give Mr Sutcliffe accoumpt,
what skill I have to make use of it may partly appear by the leases of Mr
Morgan. And now it will further appear by my dealing with Mr Francis Michell,
where first, as before he would make me alone the owner of the two Leases,
shutting out the principal dealer, so hear for the end before rehearsed, he
makes me Mr Michells Creditor for three hundred pound, whereas the
Recognoisance he forfeited was to my friend and not to me, and his principal
debt was only two hundred pound, and not three hundred pound. Now when the
day of paiement approached, he came to me in the Fleet, and offered me interest
to forbear, which I utterly refusing, did notwithstanding at his earnest suite
and complaint of his distress yield to forbear the debte. And gave him a
writing of my hand to this effect, that I was for mine own part content to
forbear him, with these conditions, first that my grant should not be
hurtful to my friend, not then in town: and secondly, that it should not be
prejudicial to the principal sum of two hundred pound. And where as he
says in the Margen, that he will prove this Interest by showing the note of
mine own hand, let him show the Here Mr. Sutc. is put to the iumpe of a piece
of his credit.
note and shame either me or him self; And if that be not sufficient to clear
my righteousness in this cause, I appeal to his own father Mr Mickiell, who
was privy to the whole course of our dealing with his son. And we are so
far of from taking Interest of him, that to this day being about five years
at the least since the money was due, we have not received so much as the
principal which we only demanded of him, although we had sued out the
forfeiture of his Recognoizance. And touching the matter of Interest, albeit I
have always been of judgment for the lawfulnes of it, so it be with such
caution as Charity (the rule of dealing with our neighbor) be not broken: yet
in the time of my greatest necessity, when I was beyond the sea, I receiving
assurance only for the bare money I left in the hands of my friends, did never
covenant with them for the value of one penie: But was content with what soever
they them selves of their own accord did allow, whether any thing or nothing.
Which dealing allowed of those which are the most bitter adversaries of
Interest, Mr Sutcliffe may think with him self how untruly he deals with me
in his accusation of Double Vsance.

FINIS.

