Contemplations For the institution of Children in the Christian Religion.
Collected and published by John Carpenter.

Prou. 1.8. My son hear thy Fathers doctrine: and forsake not thy mothers
Law.

Imprinted at London by R. R. dwelling in Fleet Lane. 1601.

To the right worshipful Nicholas Wadham of Meryfield Esquire, the grace,
mercy and peace of God the father in Jesus Christ.
ALthough your worships friendly courtiousnes toward me have sufficiently
merited my grateful mind, as your gentle affablitie with all persons has
deserved of them to be commended: Yet, considering how far (beyond some
others) I am bound (by reason of my cure in Bra: where I have often received of
your temporal things) to bestow on your worship things spiritual, the
which, was I might not of duty deny, I have never been unwilling thankefully
to render: I perpended yet more deeplye what to excog^tate, as wherein I might
best declare the one and perform the other, or at the least express a
good will to either. But finding that I could not any way else so well answer
to the one and satisfy the other in all parts and points, I gladly resolved
to present unto your worship this my Contemplations, as that which I esteem a
Present not unworthy a Right worshipful presence and like acceptance, that in
regard of the excellency of the matter, howsoever it seems shaddowed under
my poor Pen. For verily therein (as your worship reading the same may
perceive) are summarily collected and briefly cowched the principal Grownds of
Christian Religion, selected and drawn forth (as certain sweet streams)
from the pure Fountain of the most sacred Scriptures, the which not only the
most Mighty in his Grace and mercy has both ordained, preserved and commended
to his Church: but also we (which are of the household of Faith, and have the
warrant of his spirit, which gives testimony thereof to our spirits) do
constantly believe to be the very Touchstone whereby the diversity of
spirits is known the perfect line, by the which the Temple is measured: the
rod whereby a man's ways are corrected: the Angle with the which the
spiritual Fishers use to take men: and to be brief, the Lantern for our
feet, the light to our paths; and that blessed Table whereon is proposed to
us in Christ, the powerful food of souls, whereby men are fed and nourished
to life everlasting. In regard whereof, as all men are bound to praise the high
excellency of that heavenly fountain, and therein to gloryfie God: so am I
justly occasioned to protest for the verity and sweet savor of these
streams, which in the divine fear and due regard of duty, I have not only
thence diryued: but also produced to be always examined and tried by the
authority of the same: and therefore do now with the more boldness presume to
present unto your worship: praying you to vouchsafe both this my present, your
worshipful acceptance, and my good will therein, your gentle estimation: for
the which I shall be no less thankful, then for other your friendly
courtesies. And even thus I commit you with your right worshipful Partener to
the Almighty.

Norleigh in Deuon the 28. Nouem. Anno Dom. 1601. Your Worships poor Neighbor
and perpetual well-willer. JOHN CARPENTER.

Ad Parents atque Liberos Hexastichon.
DIsce, parens, pueros pietate ornare tenellos:
Disce, puer, verum Relligionis opus.
Quae doceas, discas facili, hic coprensa labor:
quae discas, doceas, gratus vter que labor.
Du^ pater et gnatus sibi munera debita praesta^t
per sancte summo seruit vterque Deo.
To all Children of a Christian towardness: the fear of God, and eternal
health in Jesus Christ.
AS a certain Noble and excellent King was neither ashamed nor grieved to ride
sometimes on a rod or staff for the instruction of his young Son: So
neither am I ashamed or grieved (good Christian children) both to collect and
frame for your sakes, though with so slender a quill) and like style, as best
fitting your tender capacity, certain Christian Institutions, hoping ye will
both accept the same, and gratefully esteem of my good meaning and loving
affection therein expressed toward you. But I know well, it will seem very
strange unto some, that I have given this my collection the title of
Contemplation: for that (after the opinion of the Philosophers) contemplation,
which is defined either the Godly motion of a divine mind: or the diligent and
deep consideration of heavenly things, does not properly appertain unto
children. Therefore as they placed the contemplative life, in the co^templatiue
good, and the contemplative felicity in the contemplation of God: so the
younger sort (say they) have not (as yet) attained to those three things which
are thereunto necessary: that is, Understanding, which is an Act of the highest
power: Wisdom which is the most noble habit: and God himself, which is the
worthiest object. Whereof it was, that they reserved the last age of man's life
for the conte^plation of divine things, and would that all the former ages should
be employed on some other Sciences, as from the which they might proceed and
grow more able in the end to attain to the consideration of things divine.
But those persons neither begin where Christ commands you to begin, where
he says (...): Seek ye first the kingdom of God: nor do they teach, as he
teaches when he says, that the kingdom of God appertains to children.

And that indeed was no little cause that too many (the more pity) applying
themselves to these terrene and worldly things (which Solomon worthelie
comprehends within Vanities kingdom) have most vainelye spent out the flower
of their youth, and could never taste the sweetness of this thing so necessary
and profitable for man in their life, being indeed cut off, and unhappily
prevented by an untimely death: for as it is a common thing for men once to
dye: so neither does cruel death spare children, of the which too many in
those their vain studies and childish delights, expect and look for at the
length, but all too late the most happy time of searching for and enjoying
those heavenly and profitable exercises. Therefore, as it is good for you
(dear children) to withstand such beginnings of mischiefs, least the medicine
for the desired cure be prepared and applied too lately: so ought ye to know,
that it is not meet ye should consume the virtues of your mind in the only
knowledge of those earthly things: but rather to keep the same preserved for
the use of things heavenly and divine, the which are ever more profitable and
necessary in your life; to the which ye are taught and invited even by the
Lions and Eagles, which when when they go, do turn their tallents inward,
to the end they may not wear out, but be preserved sharp and fit for the
pray. And so should ye likewise fill your green vessels with that wholesome
Water whereof ye should most long-somly retain and keep the sent and savor,
to the glory of God, the benefit of his Church, and your own health. Neither
ought ye so much as imagine that the holy Contemplation of divine things
nothing belongs to young children. Moreover consider what is taught you in
the sacred Scriptures: Solomon the wifest of all the Kings thus counsaileth
you: Remember thy maker in the days of thy youth. And omitting other places,
Christ Jesus says: Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them
not. Habel being thus schooled by his Parents Adam and Heuah, being yet but
young, offered up unto God a right acceptable Sacrifice. So Enoch in his
childhood walked with God, and pleased him: so Isaac the son of Abraham, and
Jacob the son of Isaac, were religious and godly affected even in their young
and tender years. Samson being a Nazarite, was an absteiner from his birth
sanctified unto God; Samuel, as yet but a little boy, was by Hannah his
mother brought forth and dedicated to the Lord. Thus also both David, and
Solomon: thus Josiah and Daniel, and Jeremy, and Tobiah, and many others the
children of God, whiles they were very young sauoured of the holy religion.
Lastly for a perfect example of your imitation, Christ Jesus being yet but
twelve years of age exhibited and declared himself most learned in the divine
contemplation, even in the midst of the learned doctors in Jerusalem.
Therefore have I the sooner, on these my brief Institutions imposed the title
of contemplation, the same being (indeed) godly contemplations, with the which
if ye shall be first seasoned, ye shall (by the grace of God) prosper and prove
more able to all virtues in the same Jesus, who being the true understanding,
wisdom, Immanuell, is to be sought for, imitated and followed of all, as well
children, as elder persons, toward the father Almighty in godly
contemplation. Wherefore (good Christian children) use you these contemplatio^s
both godly and happily to your natural good, and to the eternal glory of the
highest Jehovah.

And if it shall follow, that this my labors shall be any thing profitable
unto you, by the which the sooner ye shall prosper (through the operation of
the blessed Spirit) in the right Service of God and holy religion, I shall be
during my life most glad and joyful thereof, and I will withal both freely
and thankefully acknowledge that I have received that recompense and reward for
those my labors which thereof I might have expected. And thus fare ye well,
and prosper in all Godliness in the Author of our salvation, and finisher of
our faith.

More yours then mine own in Christ Jesus. IOH: CARPENTER.

Christian Contemplations.
THE Child being called of his father asks the question to learn: and his
father briefly answers and teaches him.

Father. Come hither (my son) and learn of me.


Son. I am here present (my father) what will ye, that I should learn.


F. I would that thou should learn the fear of the Lord.


S. What is that fear of the Lord.


F. The fear of the Lord is that reverence of God and godliness, The fear of
the Lord. psalm. 111.10. p 10.1.7.
wherein God is worshipped, and the same is the beginning of wisdom.


S. Most gladly would I be learned in that fear of the Lord; that thereby I
may attain to wisdom, therefore I pray you (father) teach me the same.


F. The duty of a father and of a son.
Most willingly will I teach thee (my Son) that thou may learn: for thus
it becomes me to instruct thee: and it is no less thy duty to learn of me.


S. Well then (my father) As I am here present before you, harkning unto your
words of instruction: so am I ready to learn and observe the same
accordingly: wherefore speak in the name or God.


F. The holy Scriptures are full of good lessons.
The holy Bible is a plentiful Sea of wholesome lessons, of the which I have
chosen one especial place for the Theme or Argument of our present talk.


S. What have ye found there written.


F. Thus says Jehovah to his people the Children of Israel; consider this, O
Jacob, The Argument.
Isa. 44.21.
and Israel: for thou art my servant. I made thee, that thou should serve
me, O thou Israel forget me not.


Son. Out of what place of the Scriptures have ye taken this Argument.


Fa. Out of the prophecy of Isayah chap. 44. verse. 21.


S. And are those the words of God (my father)?


F. Yea doubtless (my son (they are the words of God.


Son. How spoke God to his people?


Father. God has used in those times to speak unto the people by the happy
means and Ministry of his servants. How God ^peaketh to h^s people.



Son. Who are Gods servants?


Father. God has many servants: Who are the servants of God.
for all the creatures serve him in their kind: but in this he has used the
holy Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists and Martyrs.


Son. Whom uses he in this time?


F. The faithful preachers and ministers of this word.


S. How must we esteem of them and of their words.


F. The estiemation of the minister of the word. 1. Cor. 4.1.
We must esteem of them as of the ministers of Christ and disposers of the
Senets of God.


S. How speaks God to them, and by them to the people.


F. Mat. 10.20.
God speaks to them in the Spirit inspiring them, which Spirit also speaks
in them with the tongue of man unto the people.


S. Then, he that hears them in this their ministry hears God himself:
and who so contemns them, contemns God.


F Thou have rightly said it: as they are the ministers of Gods word.


S. Thus far I understand you: but how appertain these words to me, which
were spoken to the Isralites.


F. The application of the Prophets words to us.
Although they were spoken to the Israelites, as chiefly appertaining unto
them: yet do they likewise belong unto all the people of God from whose number
and society I would not thou should be excluded.


S. Who are Gods people Heb. 4.9.
But who are those people of God?


F. By this name I understand all them which do confess the name of God, and
have dedicated themselves wholly unto him, especially the Elected sons of God
newborn in Christ by the holy Ghost, whom the Lord himself possesses for
his own eternal inheritance and chosen lot for ever.


S. So I acknowledge those words of the Lord to be both spoken to them, and to
me likewise to appertain: persuading my self to be one of that number and
holy society: but what shall I learn out of those words?


F. There be many good things to be learned thereof, and namely four most
notable things.


S. What is the first: tell me, I beseech you.


F. Thou must learn to know thy self to be made and formed.


S. And that is very needful to be known, what is the second point?


F. That thou consider well who made and formed thee?


S. And this is no less necessary to be known then the former: what is the
third thing?


F. That thou know to what end and purpose thou art made and formed.


Son. Neither indeed should we be ignorant thereof if, we think to live
well. What is the forth thing which is to be learned out of that text.


Fa. That thou forget him not which made and formed thee: but that thou
invoke and remember him with all thankfulness.


Son. And meet it is we should so do, else were we too ungrateful and
wicked. But let it please you that the perticulers be briefly examined for my
better instruction?


Father. With all my heart: for I am most willing to teach and resolve thee in
all things: and what say thou my Son.


S, As for the first point (my father) what am I taught by this, that I am made
or formed?


Father. Thou art taught that thou have not this thy being and sufficiency of
thy self (as God Allmightye is of himsele) but that thou art made and formed
by the work and wisdom of another.


S. What is meant by this making or forming.


Father. The word which the Prophet Isayah here uses, notes, and that not
vnaptlye, sometimes election, sometimes creation or forming: sometimes
regeneration, redemption, sanctification and conformation of man to the Image
of God, for it is applied as well to the Soul, as to the body, and so to the
whole man.


Son. Then by this word, I must learn that I am elected, created,
regenerated, redeemed, sanctified, and conformed to the Image of God; howbeit,
not of my self, but by the wit and wisdom of another.


Fa. Yea, and whatsoever blessings, graces, or benefits else thou inioyest in
this life, or hopest to have in the life to come, they are not of any thine own
deserts, industries, studies, power or worthiness, but of the grace,
goodness, and power of another.


S. Then am I utterly excluded from all merit or desert, Man is excluded from
all merit of goodness.
having in my self no manner of right of those effects whereof I find not
within me the causes.


F. Thou have said the truth: and this teaches thee to be poor in spirit,
and not to arrogate to thy self that which is not thine own: nor to derogate
from another that which only to him belongs.


S. Teach me therefore (I pray you) to whom I must refer the operation of
those good things in me, and ascribe the praises of the same.


F. God is the author of our health.
Thou must refer all this to him alone who has said: I made or formed thee:
that is to God, to whom only this thing with the glory thereof belongs.


S. Ye have thus far right well instructed me (my father) and seeing this
work and the praise thereof must be ascribed to God, teach me also somewhat
both of the name and of the nature of God.


F. The name of god. psalm 82. 1 cor. 8.8. Ioh. 10.32.
This word or voice, God, which we so commonly use, is not the propper name of
the highest essence: but a name of power, and is common both to the divine
Nature, and to all such as have any lawful authority and honor above others.


S. What is that proper name of God, then?


F. The proper name of the Deity is JEHOVAH: Jehovah.
for this best fitteth his most excellent nature: neither is the same rightly
attributed to the nature of any thing else, or is or may be common to others.
This the Jews called the Name ineffable: for that the degree thereof is
exceeding high: and thereof was it, that they should neither write, nor name,
nor use this most holy name in things common or profane: And therefore the
Greeks also according to the number of the letters thereof called it (...) the
name written with four letters.


S. This is then a most glorious and reverent Name: but how will ye expound it?


F. The signification of this name is taken from that essential and substanall
verb HAIAH, and it signifies that one divine Essence or Existence, He has
been, or He is.
which has been from everlasting, which is, and which shall be without any
change forever the same, of the which all creatures in their creation had and
have their first Essence, and according to his most free will, are either kept
in being, or abolished or changed, who also has declared and will dedeclare
himself such and the same indeed and action, the which he has promised and
manifested himself in his word, wherein he has said: I will be, the which I
will be. Exo.2.14.


S. There be some, who for this word, Jehovah, do put, Lord, and others put
God, in their translations.


F. It is true howbeit, this is the proper name of God Jehovah, for ever*
neither by any other word whatsoever, can either the divine Essence or his
proper signification be so well expressed. Therefore, it is to be wished that
this most holy name might be only pronounced according to those letters and
points? in the which the same is written in the holy Scriptures, and not so
translated Lord, or, God, the which words indeed stand rather amongst his
attributes to be considered.


S. But the word) as ye said) was ineffable and not to be pronounced, either
among the Jews or among the Graecians.


F. It was so indeed before the coming of the most holy Messiah: from and
after the which time, the name is both expounded and pronounced of all
Christians in the reverend name Iheschuh, or Jesus: which is made of the former
name and effable by the interposition of the Hebrew letter wherein is contained
a sovereign ministry of godliness. Tim: 3.16.



S. And may we not think the like of the Hebrew word Iahh? for it seems to
spring of the same root?


F. Indeed we may so think thereof, not withstanding this difference is
interposed that Iahh is a diuinitiue of Jehovah and signifies God, diminished
(as spoken improperly) that is Jesus the son of God who was abased, crucified,
and dead in the flesh: in like sort as of that full name Eloahh, or Elohim is
made ye short voice El. which signifies God touching his presence: as Iahh
does concerning his essence: And hence was it that in the elder time the Son
of God and very God used this word of the futuretence Ehieh I will be, before
that he had assumed the humane flesh, that thereby he might fore show himself
to be the same which should come: So being made man and constituted in his
ministry and work of man's redemption, he says not of himself, Ioh. 8.58.
I will be, but he says (...) I am.


S. Ye have uttered great and high matters my father, in this ministry of
Godliness: the Lord give me wisdom rightly to understand the same. Now I pray
you to show me what thing God is


F. I can much sooner tell thee what thing God is not: then I am able to show
thee what thing God is.


S. Why say you so my father?


F. It cannot be fully showed what thing is God Exo. 25.10. Ezec. 10.
Because that as God is without measure incomprehensible, not only of all men,
but also of all the bright Angels that stand before his face: so is it not
possible that he should be either included in words, or comprehended by humane
meditation.


S. What then should I do in this hard point.


F. Seeing that thou may not conceive him as he is indeed, thou ought
religiously to suspend thy search of him and his most high nature
incomprehensible: and rather consider that which God is not: namely his works:
for by this thou may the better understand and consider what thing God is.


S. What thing is that which I should consider God is not.


F. That God is neither the earth, What thing God is not.
nor the Sea, nor the heavens, nor the Angels, nor man.


S. And what should I gather of thet.


F. Seeing thou doubtest not of the being of God, thou should lift up thy
mind and heart to that which is yet far greater and above al these things


S. How will ye define this nature Divine.


F. God may better be described by his attributes and properties, The Divine
essence cannot be defined.
then defined: howbeit, mark what I shall say touching this thing.


S. In this I am attentive: proceed therefore (may dear father) and teach me.


F. When thou hear God to be named, understand thereby that substance
Invisible, A description of the divine nature.
uncreate, simple, perfect, inco^prehensible, unchangeable, immortal, eternal,
incorporall, infinite, the common father, the Lord and King of althings: the
creator and Governor of the world, unmeasurable, without place: yea God,
which is most true, most mighty, most heigh or supreme, most righteous, most
merciful, and the Blessed for ever.


S. Surely, ye have uttered many great matters in few words: Now, is it
lawful for me to examine those Attributes and properties of the d^ty, for mine
own better understanding.


F. Christian modesty.
Christian modesty will not urge too far in such heigh matters, least
paraduenture the heigh excellency thereof justly confound such as too
curyously seek to comprehend that which is incomprehensible.


S. Ye say well (my father) neither will I presumptiously adventure that, but
in the fear of that divine nature, have I said that which is said.


F. Yea, and in this be thou well advise (my son) that thou speak nothing
rashly, either of God, How to reason of God.
or before him.


S. And I will be well wary thereof. But why is God said to be a substance?


Father. Because he is so indeed: God is a substance.
for were he not a Substance, he were nothing at all: for that is said to be
a substance, which has his Essence or being.


Son. Why is he said to be invisible.


F. Because he is a spirit, God is invisible.
that is a Spiritual Essence. Neither can we behold his fullness with the
eyes of either our body, or our mind.


S. Has not this essence sometimes appeared unto men?


Father. Men are not capable thereof: therefore, albeit that God has appeared
in some kind of forms either in dreams, or in the day time to men: yet has
his Essence been ever hidden from their sight.


Son. Wherefore is God called uncreate?


F. Because God is always the same, creating all things, God is uncreate.
not made, nor created himself: the beginning or ending of whose age cannot be
remembered.


S. Why is he called simple?


F. Simple.
For that he is manifestly true, without foulding, circumstances and wembes.


S. Perfect.
Wherefore is he said to be perfect.


F. For that he is absolutely upright, firm, and has knows and works
althings perfectly.


S. How is he said to be incomprehensible?


F. Incomprehensible.
It is certain, that neither the nature of God, nor his essence, nor his
counsels nor his works, can of us be comprehended: yea, and he dwells in
that light which is accessible. 1. Tim. 6.16. Psalm.145.


S. And why call ye him mutable?


F. Unchangeable.
For that he cannot by any means be changed from that which he is: and for
that neither anger, wrath, repentance: forgetfullnesse, recordation nor any
such like, can properly fall into the nature divine: nor in his eternity, nor
in his verity, nor in his will: is there any thing changeable. To be brief,
being immortal, eternal, and true, neither his nature, nor his being, can
at any time by any means perish or decay.


S. Why is he called eternal?


F. By the same reason that he is without beginning as well touching the time,
as the cause and thing: Eternal.
he is eternal, for he is wholly life, and the life cannot be death: Psalm. 36.9.
therefore neither was there any time, or any other imagined space before time,
in the which God was not, or lived not.


S. Why is he called immortal? Immortal.



F. For that as he had no beginning, so neither shall he have ending, living
the same for ever


S. Why is he incorporall? Incorporall.



F. For that he is an invisible spirit, Ioh. 4 Act. 7.24. Isa. 60.
not compact of any bodily lineaments, nor is contained in any certain place.


S. Wherefore is he called infinite? Infinite



F. He is without limits, Heb. 4.13. Ier. 23.24. Amos. 9.2^ Isay. 66.
and therefore every where. Wherefore from him there is nothing hidden: but he
knows all things, being absent from nothing: he is all in heaven, he is all
in earth: he is diffused through, and in all, and every thing, yea
comprehending and working all and every particular thing whatsoever.


S. Wherefore is he the common father?


F. The common father.
For that he is a benefactor not only to his chosen: but also to other men,
and to all creatures: yea, truly, as he is the Creator, 1. Tim. 4.9. Psalm.
36.6. 1. cor. 8.6. Ephesians. 4.6. Mat. 5.4. psalm. 1.47. genesis 33.11.
the susteiner, the conseruer, and the nourisher of all things: howbeit, he is
especially the father of his elect in his son Jesus Christ our Lord.


S. Why call ye God, the Lord and king of all things?


F. The Lord and king of all Isay. 45.9. 1. tim. 6.15. Iam. 2 19.
Because he is full of majesty, by the which he astonisheth all creatures,
having the rule in all things, and the same, to whom the knee of every thing
boweth.


S, And wherefore is he named the Creator and governor of the world.


F. For that the same God omnipotent, the father, the son, and the holy
Ghost, one and three, that is to say: one in nature, and three in person: has
both created heaven and earth, Creator and governor of the world. genesis 1.1.
act. 17.14.
and formed all things in the same, the which also he governs wisely for ever.


S. Why do ye call him unmeasurable?


F. For that neither his quantity, Without measure. act. 7.48.
nor his quality, can be measured by any of his creatures.


S. Why is he said to be without place?


F. Because he passes not from one place to another: Illocall
neither may he be contained in places, for he fills all places: act. 7.49.
2. chro. 6.18.
in that he is said sometimes to be changed, or to go, or to dwell, or to be
contained in this or that place: it is to be understood not touching his
nature or essence: but of his graces, virtues, operation and effects in his
Creatures.


S. Moreover, I remember that in the description of God: ye said that he is
most true, most mighty, most high or supreme, most righteous, most merciful,
and the best of all for ever. And why said you so? I pray you teach me?


F. He is indeed Most true: God is (...) true,
for he is most faithful, Psalm. 89.^5. 2. Tim. 13.
seeing he is for ever immutable, both in his nature, in his truth, in his
will, and in his euerlastingnesse: whereof it is that he performs and
perfecteth whatsoever he promises or threatens: Heb. 10.13.
neither is it possible that God should lie.

Most mighty
He is most mighty, yea omnipotent: for he has all the powers, Psalm. 89.14.
and ability of executing, performing, and effecting all things, Ioh. 16.2.
not of us, nor any other of his creatures, Mat. 19.26.
but of himself, and nothing unto him is impossible to be done.

Most high.
He is Most high or supreme, for wh^ he diuelleth in the heavens, Genesis 14.
Psalm. 73. and. 77. and. 91.
and in respect of Angels and men, as of all other creatures, he is in the
highest degree, dignity, and glory, subject to nothing, grieved with no
passions, and whose essence, name, glory, and kingdom, excels all humane
understanding.

Most righteous.

1. Sam. 16.17 Isay. ^.16. genesis 18.

Most merci^^ll. P^^. 36:7. To. ^.3. 2. Co^ 1.^.


He is most righteous: both in himself and in the execution of his judgments.

He is most merciful: not only toward his chosen people, but also toward
all, although not after one sort: to his chosen for their health: to the
reprobate in this life for their greater condemnation, of their own desert:
Most patient. Psalm. 86.7. To. 9.22. 2. pet. 3.9.
and as he is most merciful; so is he most patient even toward the vessel of
his wrath

Lastly, God is the best forever, The B^st forever.
for why? he is most holy: and this is no less true, if he respect either God
himself or all his work, for as well in himself, as in all his works he is
the Best, Isay. 6.3 mat. 19.17. Apo. 1^.1. Eze. ^0.12.
and whatsoever things are holy, the same has God sanctified: and being the
Best, he is the giver of all good things.


S. All these things have ye well taught me: what else remains for me to be
learned my father?


F. Now (my soon) I will that thou consider well three especial good things,
3. things to be considered."
which are of the promises to be gathered.


S. What are those things?


F. The first is, that God is that divine nature which is not created: but the
same which has created all things whatsoever. The next is, that God is that
chief good thing, above the which there is nothing. The third is, that God is
the same, the which the conscience of man acknowledges to be the chiefest,
romans 11.36.
the greatest, the most perfect, and infinite, of whom, in whom, and by whom,
are all things.


S. I have by these words conceived much more in mind, then my mouth is able
to utter?


F. But I shall approach yet more near to their understanding, when I shall
tell thee how this divine nature is distinguished into certain persons.


S. Plurality of persons in the deity.
And are there more then one person in the deity?


F. Year: and this has been taught us not only by that God himself is
sometimes heard to speak in the plural number, but also by that word Elohim,
which is interpreted God, besides other authorities and testimonies in the holy
Scriptures.


S. Where is God heard to speak in that sort?


F. In the book of the creation, Chap. 2.26. God said, Let us make man, in our
image, after our liknesse. Again, Chap. 3.22. This man (says God) has been
as one of us. Again, Chap. 11.7. Come on (says God) Let us go down, and
there confound their language. In the which manner of speaking, is noted the
plurality of persons in the Godheade.


S. That seems manifest indeed, but how gather ye this of Elohim?


F. Elohim is one of the names of God, and a word of the plural number: by
the which must be understoode the plurality of persons: howbeit, to note the
unity of consent and joint operation of those persons, it takes a Verb or
Pronoune of the singular number.


S. Where find ye that my father?


F. In the very beginning of that book of the creation, it is said by Moses,
genesis 1.1.
that Elohim created the heavens and the earth: where we find that Elohim is
of the plural, and the word Created of the singular number.


S. Ye have well said: but then how many persons have ye found to be in the
Godhead?


F. I have found three persons in the godhead: Three persons in the godhead.
ye which also has been rightly gathered by the most ancient doctors of the
church, of the very letters of the most holy name JEHOVAH, besides many other
pregnant testimonies in the word of God.


S. Declare me the reason thereof I pray you?


F. By the first letter of that name, which is IOD, IOD.
and is the number of ten which notes perfection, is signified the first
person: by the second letter HE, HE.
which signifies the Essence, is understood the second person, by whom indeed
all the creatures have their Essence and being, and by the doubling of the
same letter is noted a double nature, namely the divine and humane in the same
person inseparable: by the third letter which is VAV, VAV.
a copulative, is signified the third person, being that substantial Ardour
and love between that first and second person: and of this triplicitie of
persons, the Godhead is called the Trinity.


S. The Trinity.
Then the Trinity is the name of the Dietie or Godhead, as the same is
distinguished or considered in three persons?


F. Yea, and there withal as we may understand him in his diverse and sundry
properties and workings even here in the world.


S. What is he named in the first person of the Trinity? First person.



F God the Father.


S. What is he called in the second person? Second person.



F. God the Son.


S. What is the third person named? Third person.



F. God the holy Ghost.


S. Then the Father is God, the Son is God, and the holy Ghost is God.


F. Thou have therein well said.


S. But are there not then three Gods?


F. Not so: but one God in Essence, One God.
the which is neither divided, nor separated, though the Godhead be
distinguished into three distinct persons.


S. Then ye would that I should believe, Trinity in Unity.
three to be in one, and one to be in three: that is, three persons in one
divine Essence, and one divine Essence in three persons?


F. Yea truly, and that in this Trinity there is the Father, and the Son,
and the holy Ghost: but in the unity only one God, and the same forever.


S. I like well of your plain manner of teaching whereof I have taken no mean
instruction and comfort. Now tell me father (I beseech you) how God is called
the father?


F. God is called the father.
Although God be the common father, the creator, the author, the governor, and
the susteyner of all things: yet here he is called a father in respect of the
son, whom he has begotten before all worlds, very God of very God.


S. How is he called the son?


F. God the Son.
He is called the son in two respects: first, as having a relation to the
father of whom he was begotten, to who^, and with whom, he is coessentiall,
coequall, and coeternall. Secondly, in that he became man, and was borne of the
virgin Mary.


S. The son was made a perfect man
And was the son a perfect man, as he was a perfect God?


F. Yea, for as he is perfect God of the substance of God his father: so is he
perfect man of the substance of the virgin Mary his mother.


S. So then ye say that he had a reasonable soul, as he had a humane body:
for this necessarily follows.


F. Yea for as a perfect man consists both of a humane body, and a reasonable
soul: so thou must believe that this second person in the Trinity had not
only such a body, but also such a soul, as he was man.


S. And was that his divine nature, combined with his humane nature in this
person?


F. Yea doubtless, The godhead and manhood conjoined in one Christ.
and thereof being God and man, he became one Christ.


S. Who was his mother, as he is God: and who was his father, as he is man?


F. Is he is God he has no mother: and as he is man he has no father.


S. And yet he has both father and mother, must I not believe so?


Father. Yes: for as he is Christ, he has God his Father in heaven, and the
Virgin his Mother on earth.


S. How then was he begotten, as he was man?


F. Of the holy spirit, inspiring the holy virgin, without the knowledge of
any man. Luke 1.35.


S. This is a wonderful conception?


F. So is it indeed: howbeit with God it was nothing impossible.


S. The holy Ghost.
How is God called the holy spirit?


F. Not only in that he is that spiritual Essence: but also in that he
powers forth of his virtues and graces, wherein he is said to proceed from
the father and the son.


S. What is that holy spirit then?


F. That divine person in the Trinity which proceeds from the father and the
son, to whom, and with whom, he he is both coeternall and coessenciall, which
replenisheth the faithful with all good things.


S. Then this I learn, that the father is the first person in the divine
Trinity, not made, nor created: The son is the second person begotten of the
father: the holy Ghost is the third person proceeding from the father and the
son?


F. Thou say well, and it is needful that thou thus believe, as touching
the Trinity.


S. What do you distinctly attribute to those three distinct persons?


F. Although that neither the Godhead is divided nor the persons separated in
substance, or working, Distinct operations of the three distinct persons.
howsoever they be distinguished: yet to every one of those persons is
attributed a proper work, in and for the good of the chosen.


S. What is that which is properly attributed to God the father?


F. Election and creation.


S. What is there attributed to the son?


F. Redemption, justification, and salvation.


S. What may we attribute to the holy Ghost?


F. Illumination, regeneration, and sanctification.


S. What is that which ye call election? Election.



F. Election is that divine choice and sure mercy of God, whereby before he
made the world, he did foreknow them whom he would glorify, that they might
stand before him without blame, and become his adopted children through Christ,
according to the good pleasure of his own will. Ephe. 1.


S. Was there no good thing then in man, which God foresaw to merit or
deserve this choice?


F. Nothing at all: for whatsoever he did therein, God elected his, of his own
accord, and that freely.
was of his own accord.


S. And is not man able to deserve for this?


F. Never, albeit he should live ten thousand years, neither (indeed) dath
God expect it: for God elected him of his own will, so he elected him freely,
knowing well that man could never be of power to requite him.


S. Then we have no merit whereof to challenge heaven, or to justify our
selves before God?


F. None at all, therefore we are said to be servants unprofitable, and sinners*


S. The approbation of man before God
By whom are we accepted and justified then?


F. By Christ Jesus our Lord, who dyed for them, whom the father had known
before and chosen.


S. Creation.
Ye attributed also to God the work of creation, what has God created and of
what matter has he created, the same?


F. God has created heaven and earth: yea, and that of no former matter: for
to create is properly to make something of nothing.


S. Then, so in them has God created me?


F. Yea and he has made and formed thee.


S. Of what matter has he made me? The matter whereof man was made.



F. As touching thy body, of the dust of the earth: as touching thy soul, of
the breath of life.


S. What thing was I then made?


F. A living soul.


S. In whose image was I formed?


F. In the Image of God. Genesis 1.27*


S. What Image is that; for God is a spirit.


F. Wisdom, holiness, righteousness, The image of God.
and all perfection.


S. Now what say ye of the proper office of the son. The proper office of
Christ.



F. As God the father elected and created: so the son redeemeth, justifies,
and saves.


S. What is that which ye call redemption. redemption.



F. The recovering again, buying and freeing of that which was sold, the price
thereof being paid: so he redemption of mankind is the recovering, freeing
and taking home again of mankind from the bondage of hell, death, and the
devil, his ransom being paid.


S. How was man sold away into that misery.


F. Through his own sin and rebellion against the law of God.


S. The malice of the devil.
Who moved him to that rebellion?


F. The Devil by his subtle temptation.


S. How did the Devil tempt him?


F. He abused the body of the serpent in whom he spoke, and thereby beguiled
first Heuah, and afterward Adam. Genesis 3.


S. But what is that to all other men?


F. The propagation of sin.
So effectual, that through Adam they be all dead, infected with this
hereditary malady, grafted in the nature of man to his destruction, and
eternal damnation, were it not that Christ has redeemed them whom his father
had chosen.


S. The price of our redemption.
With what ransom did Christ redeem me?


F. Not with gold or silver, or ny such like thing, but with his own precious
blood, as of a Lamb undefiled and without spot.


S. But think ye this ransom was sufficient to redeem all the Lords elect.


F. Yea doubtless it is sufficient for them all.


S. How then was this applied to them of the old Testament?


F. By the mercy of God who enabled them to believe in Christ then to come,
The Fathers of the old testament.
as we now believe in him being past.


S. Then the effect of his death was extended as well to them as to us?


F. Yea, and therefore he is called a lamb, slain from the beginning of the
world, to be an effectual sacrifice for all the elect.


S. And is not the death of Christ sufficient and effectual unto all?


F. We may not derogate from the death of Christ any thing of the sufficiency
or effect thereof, for the same is both sufficient and effectual unto all:
though not to all alike.


S. Teach me this more plainly? The sufficiency and efficacy of Christ's
death to all.



F. The death of Christ is sufficient and of power to redeem all, if al have
grace with faith to apprehend his righteousness: and his death is not only
effectual to the chosen of the Lord to redaeeme them: but also to the devils,
reprobates, and all the powers of darkness, and children of perdition, to
condemn, confound, and utterly to destroy them.


S. Thus have I learned (my father) how the son of God has redeemed me: what
say ye of Justification, the which ye did also properly attribute to Christ?


F. Justification.
Justification is that approbation of a man before God the father.


S. Whereof consists this Justification.


F. Of the remission and putting away of sins, and of the imputation of the
righteousness and innocence of Christ.


S. How is this applied unto me?


F. It is applied unto thae of the mere love, and mercy of God in his son.


S. How must I apprehend the same?


F. By faith only, which is the hand of the soul, to accept such a benefit.


S. How the righteousness of Christ is made ours.
How has he wrought this righteousness for me?


F. He satisfied for thy sin* which deserved death, by his own death: he
justified thee which had no merit, by his own justice, the which he declared
in his resurrection from the dead. Act. 13.38.39.


S. What profit have we by this?

F. As he was esteemed a sinner in that he bare our sins: The use of our
justification.
so are we esteemed righteous by the imputation of his righteousness unto us:
and as he died for our transgressions: so do we live here and for ever through
his righteousness.


S. Then is he no less worthy to be called a Savior, to whom ye also ascribed
the salvation of souls?


F. It is true, Salvation.
and thereof is he rightly called Jesus Christ, as he is both God and man:
neither is there any other name under the heavens, in whom, or by whom we be
saved.


S. What is signified by the name Jesus? Jesus a Savior.



F. That he is a Savior.


S. Whom has he saved?


F. His people.


S. Who be they?


F. The same whom the father has chosen before, and are rightly called the
people of God as I said before.


S. From what does he save them?


F. From sin and the reward thereof.


S. What sin is.
What is that which ye call sin?


F. That is called sin, whatsoever is not according to the law of God, and
thereof be two sorts, namely, original and actual sin.


S. What is that original sin.


F. Original.
Original sin is that hereditarie desease which is descended from Adam, as
namely the ignorance of the mind, the concupiscence of the flesh, and the want
of original righteousness: in the which sin, a man is borne the child of
wrath, and cannot possibly please God.


S. What is that actual sin?


F. Actual.
Actual sin is that what soever a man either thinks, or speaks, or
works against the law of God, and against his own conscience.


S. Whereof comes this sin?


F. This sin proceeds of the corrupt nature of man, and is an effect of the
former.


S. What is the reward of sin?


F. The reward of sin.
The reward of sin is death, not only of the body, but of the soul also,
which is called eternal damnation.


S. Then from this has the son of God saved his people, and therefore is
worthily named Jesus our savior: but show me also I pray you, why is he called
Christ?


F. He is called Christ, What the name Christ signifies.
because he is the holy anointed of Jehovah before al yt rest,


S. With what oil is he anointed?


F. With the oil of gladness.


S. What is that?


F. The Virtue of the holy ghost.


S. To what dignity, function, or office was he anointed with this oil?


F. To be a king, a priest and a prophet.


S. Wherein is he a king?


F. Not only in that he is the very king and Lord of heaven and earth: Christ
is our King.
but also in that he has to himself endued all the powers of darkness, from
the which he has reduced us, and with his great power does govern and
sustain us.


S. Wherein is he our priest.


F. In that he has not only offered up himself to God for us, He is our
Priest.
but also strandeth at the right hand of the father making intercession for our
health.


S. Wherein is he our Prophet.


F. In that he has both revealed unto us the divine mysteries, and also that
he might dired us the way to life, has happily gone before us toward the
kingdom of heaven.


S. Then worthily is he called a redeemer, a iustifier, and a savior: but by
whom am I drawn unto him?


F. Who draws us to Christ. Ioh.
By God the father: for no man comes to Christ, but such whom the father
draws*


S. How does God the father draw me to Christ?


F. Ierm. 31.3.
By his mercy he draws thee unto him.


S. And is there any cause in man that moves God to this mercy?


F. None at all, but that which God does in this, he does it of his own love
in his son.


S. Wherein does god express this mercy.


F. In many and great things: and here in the ordinary calling of a christian:
for who^ he predestined, them also he called.


S. What is the calling of a Christian?


F. The calling of a Christian.
It is that whereby he is invited to the kingdom of Christ, faith, remission
of sins, righteousness, holiness, and to a new life, and life everlasting.


S. How then am I called?


F. God being merciful unto thee, allureth thee externally by his word
preached, and inwardly by the motion of his spirit.


S. Are both these, namely the outward and inward calling necessary for a
christian.


F. Yea, and therefore we ought not to neglect the one, nor contemn the other.


S. Thus far have you disputed in order touching the son: howbeit one thing
remains yet doubtful (my father) the which I would gladly ye should discuss?


F. What is that (my son.)


S. Ye said, that the father, the son, and the holy Ghost are one thing, and
that the divine Nature cannot essentially be divided: and yet, that neither the
father nor the holy Ghost was made flesh, but the son only, which also was
the alone redeemer of mankind: Not the father nor the holy Ghost was incarnate
but the son. August de incarna cohu. Iudaeos.
how (I pray you) may this be?


F. Let him resolve this question, who has for an example thereof so elegantly
produced the harmony of a musical instrument: consider (says he) the
musical instrument, as it yields the harmonical sound: therein, three things
seem to be present together, as namely, the art or cunning, the hand, and the
cord: the art does suggerate, or indite: the hand strikes, and the cord
sounds, three here work together, yet only the cord sounds: neither the
art nor the hand yields sound, but then only when they work together with
the cord: even so, neither the father, nor the holy ghost has taken flesh,
yet have both wrought together with the son: the cord only yields the
sound: Christ only has been incarnate. The operation consisted of all the
three: but as the yielding of the sound appertains only to the cord, so the
taking of flesh, appertains only to Christ.


S. Ye have excellently resolved me in this doubt, and so have sufficiently
instructed me touching the son the second person of the divine Trinity. Now
at length I remember, that to the third person, ye attributed illumination,
regeneration, and sanctification.


F. The works of the holy Ghost.
It is true, for these three things are proper to the holy ghost, albeit that
in the same, the whole Trinity has his operation.


S. What mean ye by this illuminatio^. Illumination.



F. Illumination, as it is generally taken, notes sometimes the new birth,
sometimes the vivification, sometimes the freedom, sometimes the justification
of a man: but in this place, by Illumination is meant that lightning of reason
and judgment wrougth in the faithful by the divine virtue, whereby the eyes
of the soul being opened, they both see God, and learn to walk in his ways.


S. Then it appears that sometimes they have been darkened in their
understanding, and know not at all how to order themselves?


F. It is most certain, and thereof did men run into so many gross errors
in the world, as a punishment for their sins.


S. Right needful then was it, that Christ after his departure from his
disciples, sent the holy Ghost unto them?


F. Thou have said the truth, for by the virtue thereof they were lightened, and
led into all truth.


S. How is this holy spirit said to be given or received.


F. How the holy Ghost is said to be given.
As concerning his graces, virtues operations, and effects: for otherwise,
being God incomprehensible, and replenishing al things he is neither given nor
taken, nor said properly to remove, to go, or to come from one place to another.


S. Ye also attributed to the holy ghost regeneration? what mean ye by that.


F. Regeneration.
Regeneration is of that, which is engendered again, or newborn.


S. Show me this more plainly?


F. Every man is spiritually dead, by reason of sin, therefore it is needeful
that he be reduced to that Image of God, which is in him defaced, by a new
birth, and hereof is he made a new man.


S. The old man
What is the old man.


F. It is the fleshly man.


S. Who is that fleshly man.


F. It is he which is not endued with the spirit of God, but by nature without
the holy spirit: which is also called the outward man: that is he, which
consists of the body and the senses, which is given to affections, and is
mortal. The same is also called the body of sin, that is a body subdued to
sin, flesh, sensual, and earthly.


S. What is that new man? The new man.



F. It is that spiritual man.


S. Who is he.


F. The man inspired with the graces of gods spirit whereof he is a new
creature, and spirit, or the spiritual and inward man: that is one regenerated
by the work of the holy ghost, yt very soul and the image of God, which
through faith and grace does flourish even in the midst of afflictions,
neither may he be by any means extinguished: to this also belongs the first
and second man: To. 5.8. 1. cor. 15.
Adam is that first, Christ is that second: the first is terrene or earthly,
the second is celestial or heavenly.


S. How does the holy Ghost work this in us.


F. He conuerteth us unto God, conforming us to the image of his son, in the
renewing of our minds: the which in the scriptures is often understood in the
word Repentance.


S. It was not then for naught, that both God and his prophets in the old
Testament, and Christ and his apostles in the new, have so often excited and
called the people to repentance.


F. Well said, neither without this can a man enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Io. 3.5.


S. What opportunity takes the holy ghost in the working of this regeneration.


F. The hearing of the word of God, whereof faith is engendered in the heart of
man.


S. Ye also attributed (as I remember) to the holy spirit, sanctification: and
what is that?


F. Sanctification.
Sanctification is the purifying of a man from all prophanitie: the cleansing
of a man, by the mortificatio^ of the flesh, and the confirmation, and
application of us to God, by the vivification of the spirit, the which
(indeed) is the end of our deliverance from hell, death, and the devil.


S. Thus have I learned what are the chief attributes or properties of those
three distinct persons in the divine Trinity: now what remains else for me to
learn (my good father?)


F. What God requires of us.
Yea, thou have hard what Jehovah has done for thee. Now also must thou learn
what he requires thee to yield unto him.


S. And what is that (my good father.)


F. Repeat the Theme or argument of our talk, and thou shall thereby know it.


S. I made thee (says Jehovah) that thou should be my servant: therefore,
thou Israel, forget me not?


F. Well then: The end of our creation and redemption and regeneration.
to what end did Jehovah make thee? answer me to the words of our Theme.


S. That I should serve him (as I take it) and that I should not forget him?


F. Thou have said the truth, and this is the end of creation, redemption, and
regeneration.


S. What is meant by this word service?


F. The word generally notes that condition of a man, whereby he lives under
the will and rule of another.


S. What is that ye call Gods service? God service.



F. The Service of God is no servile condition, but that divine worship and
true execution and performance of those good works which are prescribed and
commanded to be done in the word of God, and namely, in those two tables of
the law, wherein are briefly contained the Ten Commandments of Almighty
God.


S. And what are those te^ co^mandeme^ts.


F. The same which God spoke, and are written in the 20. chapter of the second
book of Moses, which is called Exodus.


S. I beseech you my father, to recite them all unto me in order.


F. Then hearken (my son:) God spoke all these words saying.

The ten commandments of God.
1 I am Jehovah thy God, which have brought thee out of ye land of Aegipt, from
the house of bondage: thou shall have no strange Gods before me.

2 Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the similitude of any
thing, that is either in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water
under the earth: thou shall not adore them, nor worship them: for I Jehovah thy
God am a jealous God, The first Table.
visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the children, in the third and
fourth generation of them which hate me: and showing mercy to thousands of
them that love me, and keep my commandments.

3 Thou shall not take the name of Jehovah thy God in vain, for Jehovah will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

4 Remember the Saboth day, that thou sanctify it, six days shall thou
labor, and do all thy work: but in the seventh day is the Saboth of Jehovah
thy God, in it, thou shall not do any work, thou and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manseruant, and thy maideseruant, thy cattle, and the stranger
that is within thy gates: for in six days Jehovah made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: and therefore
Jehovah blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.

These four commandments are contained in the first table: the six that
follow are of the second table.

5 Honor thy father and thy mother that thy days may be prolonged in the land
which Jehovah thy God gives thee. The second Table.


6 Thou shall not kill.

7 Thou shall not commit adultrie.

8 Thou shall not steal.

9 Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10 Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house: thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, or his servant, or his maid, or his ox or his ass, or any
thing that is thy neighbors.


S. The Sum of the te^ commandments.
How many things do these commandments generally concern?


F. Two things: first thy duty toward God: next thy duty toward thy
neighbor.


S. Ye have sufficiently taught me concerning the nature and essence of God.
Now briefly in the way, I beseech you to show me who is my neighbor?


F. Who is my neighbor.
Generally, all men borne of Adam and Heuah are thy neighbors: but chiefly
they which are of the family of faith be thy neighbors: for all which are of
the same family are also of the same body in Christ, and coheires of the
kingdom of heaven.


S. Which of those commandments do concern my duty toward God?


F. Those four which are contained in the first table.


S. Which do concern my duty toward my neighbor?


F. Those six contained in ye second table.


S. Wherein are those commandments perfected.


F. In love, The perfection of the law.
namely that thou love God and thy neighbor.


S. How must I love God?


F Thou shall love Jehovah thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy mind,
Love God.
and with all thy strength, and with all thy thought.


S. How must I love my neighbor?


F. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Love thy neighbor:



S. Howbeit it seems unto me, that some of those commandments do not
prescribe unto us any singular work, but only do forbid the doing of some
certain things?


F. Here thou must observe (my son) that those commandments wherein we are
forbidden that which is evil, In those commandments, wherein we are
forbidden the evil, we are commanded to do the good.
we are commanded to do the contrary, that is, that we do that thing which is
good: and that in those other commandments, whereby we be commanded to do
those works which are good and honest, we are forbidden to do the contrary,
that is, such works as be ungodly and dishonest.


S. I pray you teach me this matter more plainly?


F. Must gladly, howbeit, ask of me and I will certify thee of all things.


S. The first commandment.
Go to then first God has said I am Jehovah thy God etc* what has God
commanded herein?


F. First, he commands that we should take and esteem him the only Jehovah
for our God: next that we should not feign unto our selves any strange gods.


S. The 2.
What commands he in the second commandment?


F. First he forbids all idolatry and feigned worship: secondly that thou
worship him, and serve him only, not in the likeness of any form, but in
spirit and truth.


S. The 3.
What commands he in the third commandment?


F. In this he commands thee to abstain from al vain oaths, and from the
profane abuse of the name of God: moreover he teaches thee to call on, and to
swear by his name, with all reverence, and in the fear of God.


S. The 4.
What wills he in the fourth?


F. First that six days thou shall labor in the work of thy vocation: next
that thou presume not on the seventh day to do any servile labor: but that
thou keep holy the seventh day.


S. What has he enjoined me in the fifth commandment? The 5.



F. That thou honor and obey thy parents as well spiritual as bodily, with
love, reverence, modesty, fear, and duty: and on the other side, that thou
dishonor them not, nor irreverently abuse them, nor in any sort neglect them.


S. What has God prescribed me in the sixth? The 6.



F. That thou kill not any man in thought, word or deed: next, that thou
think well of thy neighbor, and report him well: and that thou endeavor to
profit all persons, and relieve them, and preserve the life of them to thy
power.


S. What commands he in the seventh commandment tell me? The 7.



F. First, he commands thee to abstain from all fleshly lusts and
vncleaues of ye body: secondly, that thou walk honestly and soberly in this
life.


S. What says he in the eight commandment? The 8.



F. First, he forbids thee to take away from thy neighbor by stealth, or
any unlawful means, either his external good and possessions, or his good
name, fame, and reputation: Next he bids thee to express and exercise
toward they neighbor the virtues of liberality, aims, deeds, and mercy,
according to thy power, and that thou be beneficial to him, his goods, and
fame.


S. The ninth.
What is prescribed me in the nynth commandment.


F. First, thou art therein forbidden al lying, periuries, back bitings,
contumelies, brawlings, contentions, and flatteries: next, that thou report
well of thy neighbor, and that thou testify, and speak the truth of him in
all things.


S. The ten commandment.
What bids he in the tenth commandment.


F. That thou do not so much as covet that which is an others: secondly, that
thou endeavor that every one may retain his own, yea, and rather to wish him
some part of that which is thine, then unjustly to desire that which is his.


S. Thus have ye fully satisfied me in this point. But is a man able of
himself to observe and perform these commandments of Almighty God?


F. By no means, and yet this notwithstanding, Man is not able to fufill these
commandments.
the Lord has in his mercy ordained man a mean the same to perform, after
his good pleasure.


S. What is that mean; (my father)


F. Christ Jesus, Christ is the perfection and end of the law.
in whom the father is very well pleased, and in, and by whom, all such as
believe in him do keep and perform the whole: for he is both the perfection
and end of the law.


S. How many things requires he of us thereby.


F. Two things, whereof the one is faith, Faith and obedience.
the other is obedience, in the which also is contained the sum of religion,
neither without these two things can any one of these te^ co^ma^dements be
observed.


S. Which of these two things does orderlye proceed, and go before the other.


F. Faith goes before, obedience follows after, faith is at the root,
obedience is as the fruit: faith is as the cause, obedience as the effect: the
one promises, the other performs: and this latter is a testimony of the
former, expressing that in word and deed, which was in believing conceived in
the heart by the operation of the holy ghost.


S. What thing is that which ye call faith?


F. What faith is.
Faith is defined to be yt which makes those things to be, which are hoped
for, and demonstrateth that which is not seen.


S. What kind of faith is there required in this service of God?


F. That which is called the Christian and Lively faith: the same which is
proper to the true Christians and fruitful in godly virtues.


S. And what is that?


F. It is the gift of God engendered in the soul of the spirit of God, by the
preaching of the word: and is defined a firm opinion, Christian faith.
and constant conscience of righteousness, and salvation, obtained by none other
means but only by the free mercy of God in his son.


S. What are the things which are chiefly objected to this faith?


F. The Obiectes of faith.
Those things which here follow in order, as first God that divine nature in
the unity: next the same God in the Trinity: thirdly the holy Catholic
Church: and lastly all those Articles of the Christian faith, whereof we must
not doubt, but be absolutely and certainly assured in our belief,


S. What are those Articles of belief?


F. The same which are comprehended under the title of the simbole of the
Apostles: that is.

I believe in God the father almighty, marker of heaven and earth, The Simbole
of the Apostles.
and in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy
ghost: borne of the virgin Mary: suffered under Pontius Pilate: was crucified,
dead and buried, he descended into hell: the third day he rose again from the
dead: he ascending into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father
almighty: from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I
believe in the holy Ghost, I believe the holy Catholic church, the Communion
of saints the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the
life everlasting.


S. Must I the^ believe in all these things? To bleeue 1. that God is. 2. that
which God says. 3. In G^^



F. It is needful, that thou believe all these things to be, but it is not
requisite that thou believe in them all.


S. Seeing therefore that this particle (In) makes such a difference, in what
thing then must I believe?


F. Believe in the holy Trinity.
In that holy Trinity, namely in God the father, in God the son and in God
the holy ghost, which is in nature one thing.


S. And what must I believe without this particle. In?


F. Believe the holy Church. etc.
The holy Catholic church, and those other things contained in the Articles
which follow in ye same simbole, to be true.


S. Ye have before this sufficiently taught me, to know the former obicte of
my faith, namely God in the trinity, and the Trinity in the Unity: now I
pray you to declare unto me those latter points: and first what is that
Catholic church, which ye would that I should constantly believe?


F. What this Church is.
By this church is meant the universal company, or faithful assembly of Gods
people, of the which some having passed the troubles of this life, are with
Christ in heaven, and other some (as yet) are millitant on the earth, where in
the unity of the true doctrine, and the lawful use of the Sacraments, they
cleave together.


S. What is that communion of saints? The communion of Saint



F. The fellowshippe, familiarity, and amity, that the godly have one with
another in one faith, one hope, one charity, as children of one father in one
house, exercising mutual beneficience, works of mercy and christian duties,
The forgiunesse of sins.
one toward another.


S. What is that forgiveness of sins the which I must also believe?


F. It is the loosing and releasing of that band of obligation, wherein we be
tied to eternal death and damnation: yea, and a pardon of that pain which our
sins had deserved, and that by the only death and merit of our Lord Jesus
Christ.


S. What must I believe touching the Resurrection of the flesh. The
resurection of the flesh.



F. That in the last day, all men shall rise again with their bodies: the
godly to eternal life: ye wicked to eternal pain.


S. What is that eternal life?


F. That blessed felicity and happy condition which the elected saints shall
have and enjoy after their resurrection from death in all eternity, The life
everlasting:
with Christ the son of God.


S. Thus have ye taught me (my good father) what this Christian faith is, and
what, and wherein I must believe: now let me know also how this Faith comes?


F. Faith comes by hearing of Gods word.
As faith is a free gift of God, as I said before: so God will, that this faith
should come by hearing, and namely of the word of God.


S. How is that wrought?


F. By the operation of the holy ghost, which engenders faith right happily in
the heart of him, who is a fruitful hearer of the word of God.


S. What is that word of God.
What is that which ye call the word of God?


F By the word of God, in this place is understood the holy scriptures, both
of the old and new Testaments, the which with many strong arguments does
demonstrate the will and works of God, and especially those promises which
concern the redeemer, and eternal life, for those scriptures we call the
word of God, which being comfortable, happy, effectual, and sufficient to
man, does both instruct him in his duty in this life, and also derect him to
that everlasting word of God, which was with god before al worlds.


S. How must this word be unto me applied?


F. By the ministry of the preachers, How this word is to be applied unto us.
and ministers of the same.


S. Who be the preachers and ministers of this word?


F. Those parsons, The Preachers and ministers of the word.
whom the Lord sends forth furnished with meet gifts and lawfully called
into the church, which chiefly regard to celebrate, to praise, and to commend
with feuencie of spirit, and that openly before all men, the name of God, and
the word of his grace, and the kingdom of God.


S. What shall I do when there is not a preacher, nor a meet minister of the
word?


F. First thou must pray the Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers into
his harvest: then, What is to be done there where the pastor is absent.
it is meet that thou read both dilligently, and reverently, the word of God,
and meditate therein with a pure mind every day.


S. What if I cannot read?


F. It behooves thee to repair to them that can read, and instruct thee
concerning God, and thy duty toward him.


S. How must this word be preached and read.


F. How this word is to be preached and heard.
Faithfully, distinctly, discreetely, wholly, diligently, constantly and
reverently.


S. How must this word be heard?


F. With faith, diligence, reverence, fear of the Lord, and hearty desire to
learn it, to understand it, and to reform this life thereby.


S. Thus have ye taught me the ordinary means to obtain faith: now tell me
also how this faith is confirmed?


F. How faith is conformed. Ioh. 4.
There was a time when that faith which came by hearing, was confirmed by
miracles, and works of wonder.


S. In what time was it confirmed?


F. In the time of Christ and his Apostles, and in the primitive church: and
needful it was then, when ye truth of the Gospel began to be published the
which being now sufficiently confirmed unto us, miracles are no longer
needful.


S. Whereby is faith confirmed in us now?


F. The use of ^ Sacraments.
Even in ye exercise of the same word by the which it was begone, but chiefly in
the true use of the Sacraments.


S. How may I beter understand this.


F. As the Sacraments themselves are the seals of Gods promises made to us: so
the right use of them ratifieth in us that faith by the which we apprehend that
which is promised.


S. What is that which ye call a sacrament? What is a Sacrament



F. Not only the seal of those things of which God has promised us (as I have
before said) but also an external sign of some internal virtue or grace.


S. Whereof is a Sacrament made?


F. Of these two things, Whereof a sacrament is made.
namely the word of God, and the Element.


S. Whereunto serves the word?


F. To the ear in the lawful ministetrie thereof, and to the inward man by
the operation of the divine spirit.


S. Whereunto serves the Element?


F. To the eye, the fast, the feeling, and eternal man: for as a man is of two
natures, namely of the soul and body, of the spirit and flesh: so is he of
the grace and mercy of god, edified in either of them.


S. How many Sacraments be there in christian use? There be two ^acramentes.



F. Two, which are called Sacraments of the new Testament.


S. What are those two?


F. Babtisme, and the Supper of the Lord, both the which are also signified in
that water, and blood which issued from the side of Christ on the cross.


S. Baptism.
What is that sacrament of Baptism.


F. This sacrament of baptism or washing, is diversely defined, for it is said
to be either the badge of regeneration into a new life, 1 Ioh. 2.
and eternal health, or the sign of our purgation in Christ's blood: or the
scale of the promise of remission of sins, in the name of Jesus Christ.


S. The eleme^t in Baptism.
What is the Element whereunto the word adioineth to make this sacrament.


F. Water which washes only the body without.


S. What is the inward grace which is therein signified.


F. The cleansing of us from our sins.


S. And are they thoroughly cleansed which are washed in that water.


F. No, for that inward washing comes not of that work wrought, but of the
holy ghost in the faithful, which use this element as a simbole of this
washing, and not as the cause.


S. Who instituted and commanded this to be done and used in the church.


F. Our Lord Jesus Christ, who has promised life unto them which believe, and
be baptized, and has threatened death to them which believe not. Mat. 16.



S. What is that sacrament of the Lords supper?


F. The Supper of the Lord is a spiritual banquet, The Lords Supper.
whereby Christ witnesses himself to be the bread of life, by the which our
souls are fed to the true imortalitie of the soul: or it is an holy Simbole
or sign, wherein Christ offers and communicates his body and blood thereby
to certify us of the remission of sins, and life everlasting or, it is the
happy memorial of the death of Christ; and an whoalsome and memorable sign of
that Sacrifice which he made once for all on the Altar of the cross.


S. What is the outward Element of this sacrament? The eleme^t.



F. Bread and wine, which feeds and cheareth the body.


S. What is the inward grace, which is signified thereby, and given to the
worthy receivers thereof?


F. The body and blood of Christ, by the which we are nourished and cheared to
eternal life.


S. Thus have I hapely learned how says is conformed in me: Now also would I
gladly learn, how the same is increased.


F. How faith is increased.
This faith which comes by hearing, and is confirmed in the use of the
Sacraments, is also happily increased by godly cogitations and meditations, but
chiefly by good conference and talk of those things which the word does both
suggerate and teach us.


S. With whom we must talk
With whom must I confer and talk?


F. With the learned, godly, and such as fear God.


S. Of what thing must we talk?


F. Of God, of Gods word, of the kingdom of heaven.


S. How must I confer thereof.


F. In what sort we ought to talk of those matters.
Not arrogantly as they use to do, which endeavor to maintain vain
arguments, and frivolous questions, but with all reverence, sobriety, wisdom,
and the fear of God.


S. How faith is fructified.
How is this faith fructified and made fruitful both in my self and others?


F. Partly by godly examples: partly by devout prayer and religious meditatio^s.


S. Whose examples must I place before me to be followed?


F. The holy examples of the faithful, whom it behooves thee to follow, and
thereby also to exhibit thy self an example of godliness unto others.


S. How is faith fructified by prayer?


F. In thy self, as faith is furthered, strengthened, and made fruitful in
thy heart: in others, as faith is strengthened and propagated in them, by thine
holy life and religion, to the glory of God.


S. Thus have ye right well instructed me in the one part of that service which
God requires: namely faith: now what say ye of the second point?


F. The second part of this service is obedience. Obedience what it is.



S. What is that which ye call obedience?


F. Obedience is that submission of the mind, whereby a man yields himself
to the word and will of him that commands, and does without any
contradiction perform the same to his power: obedience toward God is that
submission, whereby the faithful mind gladly yields himself to the word
and will of God: and this is that new obedience, which otherwise is called the
fruit of righteousness, or good works commanded by the certain and express
word of God, wrought in them that be regenerated by the help of Gods spirit,
faith shining in their hearts, to this end, that therein God may be glorified,
and our neighbor benefited, and they are the testimonies of a true faith.


S. Where are these works to be learned?


F. In that written word of God, wherein they are prescribed, is for our
learning.


S. Then have I thoroughly learned wherein this service of God consists: Now
teach me also the manner of this service I beseech you my father?


F. How we must serve God.
God being a spirit will be served in spirit and truth.


S. How may that be?


F. In holiness and righteousness, even before him without fear all the
days of thy life.


S. Declare this more plainly I pray you?


F. It behooveth thee to serve God purely, because he is pure: justly, because
he is just: that is with a faithful heart, and sound life, that not only
before men, but also before God himself, and that not doubtingly, nor
negligently: but constantly and continually unto thy lives end.


S. And is a man able in this sort to serve God?


F. He has not of himself any power so to do: A man has not the power to
serve God and yet may well serve him by faith.
and yet is it possible that he may serve him.


S. How can that be?


F. By that lively faith, whereby it pleases Christ to imparte unto man his
righteousness and sufficiency, and thereby grants him to walk in his
vocation.


S. But seeing I have none ability of my self, but that which enableth me
must come from Christ? by what means shall I obtain it?


F. By a good faith (as I have before said) but so that as faith is
strengthened and fructified by prayer: so is obedience by inuoca^ion.


S. And does the Lord command this to be done?


F. Yea, Isa. 44. Forget me not.
and the same we find among other things included within this commandment.
Forget me not.


S. How many things requires the Lord by this?


F. Two, ye first whereof is this, that knowing, his goodness toward us, and our
duty toward him, we should neither ingratfully forget ye one, nor negligently
omit ye other, To be thankful to God.
but always gratefully remember his goodness, and serve him in our lives, in
holiness and righteousness: the second is, To crave help of God.
that we desire of him aid, and things necessary for us, for the sake of
Christ our savior: and these two points are contained in devout prayer.


S. What is that prayer?


F. Prayer what it is.
It is a part of divine addoration, wherein we have both conversation and
familiar talk with God. Or it is the same whereby the godly mind is turned
unto God, with a certain humble and spiritual affection: (or according to the
words of our theme) it is the same, whereby the faithful mind is humbly and
fervently powered forth unto God, either in praising him for his benefits
received, or in craving of him those good things which are thought necessary
for us.


S. To whom ought we to pray?


F. To whom we must pray.
To God in the Trinity and in the unity: to God I say, which is three and one.


S. And may we turn our selves to none other in prayer?


F. No indeed, for in so doing we derogate from the Lord that which to him is
due: and give it unjustly to another.


S. What form of prayer has he prescribed me?


F. That which Christ has appointed us for an example, The form of a
Christian prayer.
and has commnded his Apostles and disciples with all diligence to observe.


S. Teach me to know that form of prayer?


F. When ye pray (said our Lord Christ unto them) say ye.

Our Father which art in heaven, The Lords prayer.
hallowed be thy name: thy kingdom come: thy will be done in earth, as it is
in heaven: give us this day our daily bread: and forgive us our tresspasses, as
we forgive them that trespass against us: and lead us not into temptation:
but deliver us from evil, for thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory,
for ever. Amen.


S. What do we in this prayer?


F. First, The Sum of this prayer.
we lift up our minds to God with whom we have familiar talk.

2 Secondly, we call, and reverently acknowledge him, for our heavenly father.

3 Thirdly, we confess his highest excellency and power.

4. Fourthly, we praise and glorify his most holy name.

5 Fifthly, we desire the increase of his supreme kingdom every where, both in
our selves and others.

6 Sixthly, we rely wholly on his good will, and pleasure.

7 Seauenthly, we crave of him such things as we want in this world, both in
body and soul.

8 Eighthly* we humbly desire pardon of al our sins, as we are ready to pardon
them that offend against us.

9 Ninthly, we beseeth him not to deliver us over into the hands of our deadly
enemy the Devil, but to deliver us from his tyranny.

10 Tenthly, we add the reason that moves us to run unto him with these our
petitions, the which is rightly taken from the consideration of his dominion,
might, and high glory: and for the ratification and confirmation of all the
which, we say in the place of a conclusion and of the assent to the same, Amen.


S. What is signified by Amen?


F. Amen, what the word signifies.
It is so much to say, as So be it: let it be ratified and faithfully effected
accordingly, which said voice (yt I may yet more plainly express the emhpasis
and force thereof, according to the Hebrews, is formed of the first letters of
three several words, whereof the first letter, namely A: is taken from the
word A L which is interpreted God: God.
the second letter that is M, is borrowed of the word Melech, which is a king:
King.
the third letter being Nun, is the first letter of Neeman, which is so much
to say as faithful, Faithful.
and true: Therefore of those three letters A M N is gathered that voice Amen:
which is as much to say, as God, the King, Faithful and true.


S. O very well said (my father) and thus have ye right well taught me to
what end the Lord has formed me, and has made me a living soul, and restored
me to his own image?


F. Yea (my son) and in those two points, namely faith and obedience, The
sum of religion.
I have taught thee the sum of Religion.


S. And (I beseech you) teach me also what that Religion is?


Father. True Religion is that amity, combination, and league of ours, True
relig^on.
with the true, living, and eternal God in the unity, and trinity, whom
only (being unto him in Christ conjoined) we do adore, invoke, and worship,
on whom we wholly depend, according to whose will, or after the prescript and
law of whose word, we live in all things.


S. Thus are we formed to serve God, and to live in his holy religion: but what
is the end of this service? and what profit shall we find thereby?


F. Two principal of Gods service.
This service has two principal ends: the first whereof is the glory of the
everlasting God: the second is the profit and benefit of man.


S. What is that glory of God?


F. As glory is the public and often praise of good report of any person, so
the glory of God, is the preaching of his noble acts and virtues, the extolling
and setting forth of his name, with high praise and thanksgiving: and this is
the principal end both of man's life and death.


S. Then also should a man wholly live and die to glorify God?


F. It is true, so long therefore as a man may in his life express and spread
forth the glory of God: so long let him desire to live, and not to die: How
long a man should disire to live.
but when he can no longer perform that, but rather to glorify God in his
death, let him desire rather to dye, then to live.


S. Ye have well said (my father) God grant we may both live and die to his
glory. Now, I pray, let me hear the reason of that second point, the which
(as ye said) respected man's profit and benefit?


F. Thy labors in the Lord shall not be in vain, The reward of Gods service
for through the merit of the most holy Messiah, ye wrath of God which was
enkindled against thee, by the means of sin, shall be removed far from thee:
the graces of God shall be establised toward thee: thy conscience shall be
quieted within thee: thou shall find preservation and safety against all
thine enemies, both bodily and ghostly: thou shall not come into condemnation:
thou shall not fall into the death eternal: and lastly, thou shall enjoy the
highest felicity in the life to come.


S. What is that wrath of God, Gods wrath.
the which ye say shall be removed?


F. This wrath is not to be esteemed for any perturbation of mind in God, but
for the pain of the sufferer, Lam. 3.10.
being the worthy revenge of sin. The wrath of God therefore is the
retrebution of sins, which is said to be two ways, that is say, Hebr. 12.
either then when he punishes the sinner for his amendment: or then when he
casts him into hell fire to be destroyed for ever.


S. What is that grace of God whereof ye also made mention?


F. Gods grace.
The grace of God, is his loving favor and good will toward us, by the which
being merciful, he does affect us wretched and damned sinners, while he
pardons both the pain and the fault of our transgressions, and adopteth us
for his children: or it is that remission of sins, or mercy promised for the
sake of Christ our savior: or our free acceptance with God, the which the holy
ghost necessarily acco^paneth for our eternal good.


S. I have thus far well understood you, what is that good conscience ye speak
of.


F. A good consience.
As conscience generally is defined, the knowledge, judgment, and sense of
man, whereby his mind being acquainted with every thing that has by himself
been done or not done, he does either condemn or clear himself, and
stands unto him instead of a 1000. witnesses: so a good conscience is the
spiritual face of the soul, the candle of ye mind, the incorruptible judge,
and brazen wall, and impenitrable, ever absoluing him which reteineth it
through the only mercy of Gob, and defending him against al ye stroks of sin
and death.


S. What is that preservation of man?


F. It is that safe keeping, The preservation of a man
by the which the Lord does preserve and nourish both the souls and bodies of
the righteous, to the which he gives his angels charge to keep them in all
their ways through the merit of their redeemer.


S. What is that condemnation?


F. It is that most dreadful sentence, Condemnation.
the which Christ the most righteous judge shall pronounce against the
reprobate, devil and his wicked angels in ye last day.


S. Vhat is that eternal death?


F. It is that final seperatio^ of man form Christ, Death eternal.
whereby he may not thence forth enjoy his presence: this is the second death,
which is the confusion and destruction of both soul and body, whereof ensues
a perpetual horror of conscience conceived of the divine wrath.


S. What is that highest felicity of man?


F. It is that everlasting life, whereof I speak before, Man's heighest
felicity.
the which after this life we that be true believers shall enjoy with Christ,
and all his chosen saints in the most blessed peace, and happy society for
evermore.


S. Now (my good father) as ye have been willing to teach and nurture me in
the right fear of the Lord, The coclusion.
which is the beginning of wisdom (as ye have said) so well discussed al those
doubts, and satisfied me at full, so will I both endeavor to retain in mind,
what so every have taught me: and also continue right thankful unto you, for
all those your godly lessons, institutions, and contemplations, and there
withal ascribe unto our best and highest God, the praise and glory due to his
most holy name?


F. So be it: and thus that most good and supreme God, bless thee (my son)
and grant thee the right wisdom and grace, to live prosperously in thy
vocation after his will, to the comfort of thy parents and friends, to the good
of ye church and common wealth, to the discharge of thy duty, and to his praise
and glory, who has made and formed thee to serve him, through his dear son
our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.


A godly prayer for Children to use.
O Almighty God, and our most gracious Father; we thy dear children (being
taugth by thy word (do know the nature of thy goodness to be such, that as
thou art always ready to give, glad to forgive, and willing to bless and
prosper them, that appertain unto thee: so thy will and pleasure is, that we
should learn thy laws, to ye end we may know how to glorify thee, and walk
in thy ways: and that because there is no man able to perform this without
the assistance of thy spirit, thou have promised to send forth ye same unto
them that faithfully desire, and run unto thee: now therefore (O good father)
we acknowledging our faults, and our unworthiness, do come unto thee and
prostrate our selves before thy footstool, in the hope and assurance of thy
tender mercies: to who^ should the child come, but unto his father? and to
whom should we come but unto thee? for howsoever we have faulted against
heaven, and against thee, and are unworthy to be called thy sons: yet art
thou our father, and we hope that in the name of thy most dear son Jesus, thou will not deny us to be thy children. Let it be thy good pleasure (O father) to
pardon all our defects and ignorances, to look on us in thy love, to embrace
us with thy favor, and to bless us in thy mercy: that on us the sweet
influences of thy spirit (with the which thou use to grace thine elected
children) may be bountifully powered forth graciously increased, and longsomly
continued on us for our perfect instruction, for the benefit of thy church, and
for thine eternal glory; Teach us (O father) in the right use of thy word, to
know thee the only true God, to know Jesus Christ our savior, and to know our
selves: that howsoever we be schooled and catechized by our bodily and
spiritual fathers, who^ thou have in thy wisdom made means of our better
instruction, we may be all taught of thee, which give an happy increase to
Paul's planting, and the Apostles watering. Sanctify us (O father) that we may
be holy, as thou art holy, and confirm us, that we may be perfect, as thou art
perfect: then shall we rightly know thy will and walk in thy ways: then shall
we indeed fear thee, and serve thee (as we are bound) to holiness and
righteousness before thee, without fear, all the days of our life, and finally
pleasing thee, we shall enjoy that everlasting inheritance of thy children in
the highest felicity, through the worthy merit of thy most dear son our
savior Jesus Christ, in whose name only we presume to come unto thee, praying
as he has taught us. viz.

Our Father which art in heaven. etc*

Hereafter follow certain godly graces for children to use before and after
meat.
Before meat.
O Most gracious God, we beseech the to sanctify and bless all these thy
creatures, which at this time we shall receive at thy bountiful hand, give us
grace (good father) to take and use the same with right thankfulness to thy
worthy glory, and to our comfort, both in body and soul, through thy dear
son Jesus Christ our Lord and savior, Amen.

After meat.
O Lord God our heavenly father, most good, gracious, and merciful, we yield
thee praise, honor, and glory, for these and all other thy benefits and
bounties powered forth on us: and and now we humbly beseech thee to be
merciful unto us, and forgive us all out sins, and to grant that thy loving
graces and blessings may be both increased and continued unto us thy high glory
and our happy comfort, in Jesus Christ our savior. Amen.

Another.
AS we have now received those thy gifts (O God) whereby we be refreshed in our
bodies so grant that the may be also spiritually fed, and nourished with thy
word, and divine graces in our souls: that so both in body and soul
(tasting in both the sweetness of thy loving mercies) we may praise and
glorify thy most holy name, through the son Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Before Supper.
O Lord, our father celestial,
Bless us, and these thy creatures all:
That we may rightly use the same,
And therein praise thine holy name.
After Supper.
O Gracious God, we glorify,
Thy name, and supreme majesty:
For all thy gifts, which from above,
We have received in thy great love:
Oh grant us grace, therefore to be,
For ever thankful unto thee.
Amen.
FINIS.
Fol. pa. lin. Faults. Corrections. 2 a 3 courteousnes courtesies b 13 this
these 6 a 7 (...) (...) 8 a 14 natural sovereign 10 b 3 senets secrets 14 a
13 ministry mystery b 11 ministry mystery 15 b 10 blessed Best 15 duty deity 16
b 29 accessible inaccessible 22 mutable immutable


