AN Answer made by Oliver Carter, Bacheler of Divinity: Unto certain Popish
Questions and Demaundes.

1. Cor. 11. Be ye followers of me, even as I am of CHRIST. Imprinted at
London, for George Bishop. 1579.

To the right Honorable and his very good Lord, Henry Earl of Darbie, Lord
Stanley and Strange, Lord of Man, and of the Isles adjoining, and Knight of the
most noble Order of the Garter, Oliver Carter wishes continuance of health,
with increase of honor.
COnsidering (right Honorable) the brittle and frail state of man's life,
being subject not only unto manifold miseries by natural inclination, but
also in continual danger and ieopardie, through the assaults of Satan, and
sinister practices of his ungodly members: I think it the part of all the
children of God, so much the more to imploye all their travel, both for the
reclaiming of these decayed affections in man, and also for the suppressing and
beating down (by all means possible) all wicked and sinful attempts, whereby
Gods glory may be hindered. And although I amongst many am most unmeet,
both for want of knowledge, and lack of experience, to take any such
enterprise in hand: yet for satisfying the expectation of a godly learned
friend, as also for the comfort of my poor neighbors, (whom I perceive to
be over much seduced (the more it is to be lamented) by these and such like
Popish devises: and thereby not so willing to yield their dutiful and loyal
submission to God and to their most Noble, virtuous, and godly Sovereign) as
most especially for the advancement of Gods honor and increase of Christ's
kingdom. If his heavenly wisdom think good, to work by such simple
means: I have thought good (at the least) to bestow my labor, referring the
success thereof, wholly and only unto God. I am given to understand, and I
do partly know it for truth, that these Interrogations and Questions
(invented by some papist) be secretly spredde abroad in sundry places. And
albeit I do certainly know, what great care and pains godly Magistrates
for their parts do take, to advance and extol the true service and worship of
God, to further the free passage of his most holy word and Gospel, to
suppress the rage of such as do obstinately and stubburnlie resist the
truth: yet notwithstanding there be not only close and secret enemies, which
wander abroad in corners, seducing the simple by wicked doctrine, sedicious and
traitorous libells, and false tales, alienating their minds by all means,
from true religion unto superstition, but also the rabble of the Romish
merchantes with their masking wares, do so increase and multiply, that unless
redress be had in time, I do fear least great inconvenience and mischief
will ensue thereof. For partly by these Popish whisperers, and partly for
lack of true and faithful Teachers, shippewracke is made of the Gospel of
Christ. I do not wish their punishment, but desire their reformation: for my
conscience bears me witness, how earnestly for my part, I have labored to
reduce them, where I have had charge, from the gross errors in exercising
that small talent, which GOD of his goodness has bestowed upon me, and what
inward love I do bear unto them, if I were able to do them good.
Nevertheless, I cannot but lament their miserable state, perceiving in the^
such a readiness to embrace every fond idolatrous tradition invented by man,
to accept the advice and counsel of every ignorant, and lurking rebellious
priest, to persist in their old doting customs, and heathenishe ceremonies:
and such slacknesse, or rather dullness, to receive the undoubted truth of
Gods most holy word, which is the very pathwaye to Christ's eternal
kingdom, and the power of God unto salvation to all that believe. But it is
not my purpose to make any long discourse of these matters: Only I beseech
your Honor to pardon my bold enterprise, in presenting this little Answer unto
you, and to accept my good will herein, in good part. So you shall not only
encourage me, (if the like occasion be offered) to take greater pains
hereafter: but also bind me daily to pray unto GOD for your Honor, that all
your actions may tend to the honor and glory of GOD, and to the discharging
of that office and function, which God has called you unto: which God grant,
for his mercy sake: To whom be all praise, dominion, and power, now and for
ever.

Your Honors Oliver Carter.

To the Papist, which made this offer and challenge.
Whereas you may seem unto the simple, and unlearned, in this your offer which
you have spread abroad in sundry places, to have made a bold and large
challenge, for the proof of your Romish church, and in defense of your
religion: yet it is night no longer, then until the day does spring, for
light expels darkness. Though gold be of all metalles most precious,
though the Diamond, Saphyr, and Margarite, be stones of great value and price,
yet truth passes and surmounteth all these, and carries away the bell without
comparison. Things which often seem precious, and have a resemblance and show
of goodness, may be but cou^terfeite, and faulty, and have need of the
touchstone, or furnace: nevertheless the verity and truth can not
dissemble, she can not gloss, she puts on no vizard, nor uses any
coloring. And albeit falsehood may oftentimes blind the truth, as an harlot
may appear in apparel to be an honest matron, a thief bear the countenance
of a true man, and the devil change him self into the shape of an Angel of
light: yet in continuance of time, gold will be severed from dross, the darnell
from the fine wheat, and truth from falsehood: For truth is great, and
prevails. Dagon 1. Sam. 5. 3.
is not able to stand before the Ark of the Lord. But for that you affirm
the truth to be on your side, and we persuade our selves in like manner, that
we hold the truth, let us not be our own judges, but observe that order and
rule, set down by our Savior Christ, for the trial of these controversies.
Christ Jesus bids us, to search the Scriptures, for there is life
everlasting, and Io. 5. 3 9.
they are they, which testify of him, which is the truth it self. And
again, he prays his father, to sanctify in the truth those whom he had
chosen, in renewing their Io. 17. 17.
minds with his heavenly grace, that they might seek his will set forth in
his word: which word (says he) is the truth. This is that word, against
which we may Gal. 1. 8.
^ot hear an Angel, though he come from heaven, as the Apostle says. Which
words the godly father Chrysostom expounds thus: Saint Paul says not,
Chrisost. in Epist. ad Gallat. cap. 1.
^f they teach the contrary, or if they o^erthrowe the whole Gospel: but he
^aith, If they preach any little or small thing besides the Gospel that ye
have ^eceiued, or if they loose, or shake down any thing whatsouer it be,
accursed be August. cont. lit. Petilian. lib. 3. cap. 6.
^hey. Saint Augustine says: [If an Angel from heaven preach unto you any
other thing, than you have received in the scriptures of the Law, and of the
Gospel, accursed be he.] Whether you have received it by tradition, by
succession, by Council, or by your elders: Let ^s (I beseech you) neither
dally with God, nor dissemble with the world: ^et us neither be led by self
will, nor ^e blinded by our own affections: Let no friend (be he never so
dear unto us) hold us back, nor any remora, or stop stay us from seeking
this truth unfeignedly where it is to be found: we have but a short race to
run in* our journey draws to an end: we have a great account to make, even
before the great judge, who knows al secrets: the day approaches, which will
be gloming, fearful, and terrible, except we present our selves before him,
with a clear conscience, and have on our marriage garment. Therefore tender
your own salvation, seek the glory of GOD, come out of Sodom with Lot, look
not back with Gene. 19. 16.
Lottes wife, least you perish. Now is the accepted time, now is the day of
salvation: 2. Cor. 6. 2.
now does God offer his graces unto you, if you will embrace the same. It is
lamentable, that you should separate your self from GOD, sith he has
^^ech. 33. 11.
no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent and
amend. Call to remembrance even the principal points of your Romish
religion, and you shall see, how weak a foundation it is to build upon. You
seek to be justified, not by faith in the mercies of GOD offered in Christ
Jesus, but by your own works, and your meritorious deeds, and ther^y you
utterly reiecte the death and ^assion of Jesus Christ. For if any ^ing had
been in man, whereby he ^ould have satisfied the wrath of God, and have
attained perfect reconciliation with GOD, what should Christ need to have
taken upon him our nature, and to have suffered such grievous torments for our
sins? Nay rather you ought to say, that seeing mankind was destitute of all
hope of salvation, seeing that man was by nature the child of wrath, not able
to deserve the least of Gods mercies, being adjudged to hell ^re, except he
could fulfill the Law, which was impossible for him to do, Satan being the
accuser, and God the just judge, man had been altogether remediless, unless
Jesus Christ had wrought his redemption, and in his own body had ^ustained that
punishment, which was ^ue unto man for sin. You say, That ^ur sins are
forgiven us, and that we are deli^ered from the same, not only by the Popes
^ardons, whom you call God in earth, but also ^y holy water, made by your own
brain. As one of your principal Doctors says, [It is no vain invention
(says Aug. Ste^chus in lib. Number. cap. 19.
he) that we hallowe water with salt and prayers, that by the sprinkling
thereof, our sins may be forgiven.] And so says Platina, [That Alexander
the first Platina.
Pope of that name, ordained water mixed with salt, to be hallowed, and to be
kept in churches and private houses, to chase away devils and evil spirits,
not only out of houses, where they dwell, but also out of the hearts of the
faithful.] Mark (I pray you) how contrary the doctrine of your Church of
Rome is to the undoubted word of god. Esai the Prophet, speaking of Christ, Esai
53. 5.
does say, that he was wounded for our sins, he was broken for our
iniquities, the chastiseme^t of our peace was laid upon him, and by his stripes
we are healed. So S. John says, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes Ioh. 1.
29.
away the sins of the world. S. Peter also says, That there is salvation in
none Act. 4. 12.
other: for among men there is given none other name under heaven, whereby we
must be saved. Likewise Saint John says, That 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
the blood of Jesus Christ does purge us from all sin. So that by these
testimo^ies of the holy Ghost, it evidently ap^eareth, that neither pardon,
nor holy ^ater, neither any other devise of man, i^ able to procure the
forgiveness of our sins at the hands of God, but only Jesus Christ, being a
faithful witness, Apoc. 1. 5.
the first begotten of the dead, and Prince of the kings of the earth, who has
loved us, and ^ashed us from our sins, in his own blood. You say, that the
Mass is a propiciatorie ^acrifice for the quick and the dead, and yet Saint
John says, that Jesus Christ is the 1. Ioh. 2. 1.
p^^piciatio^ for the sins of the whole world, that is, of all those that
believe. Again, Christ by one sacrifice of him self once offered, Heb. 10. 14.
has made perfect for ever, those that be sanctified. There is no mention made
of your Mass, either in the old, or new Testament, and it being compared with
the institution of our Savior Christ in his last supper (which Saint Paul
does ^all, the communion of the body and blood 1. Cor. 10. 14.
^f Christ) they differ as much as black and white: light and darkness:
heaven and hell. You affirm, that the souls of ^uch as have not made full
satisfaction for their sins here in this life, do after their death, go into
Purgatory fire, as you call it, a place (by the judgment of your own
writers) of as great torments, as hell fire it self, and no difference betwixt
them, but that the one endures for a time, and the other for ever. And in that
fire the silly souls must remain until they be delivered from thence by
your trentals of Masses, but for every Trentall, your Priest must have x. s.
so that the poor which have no silver to give, must lie still: for no penny,
no Pater noster. Mark now, how this doctrine agrees with the doctrine of
Christ, and of the Apostles. Christ says, He that believes in me, has life
everlasting, and shall never see death, but Ioh. 5. 24.
shall pass from death unto life. He says not, He shall go when he is
dead, unto purgatory. The Evangelist says, Blessed are those that die in the
Lord, for from henceforth Apoc. 14. 13.
(says the holy Spirit) they rest from their labors. If they be in rest,
then not in Purgatory: For there is little rest or ease, by your own
confession. And for that you blind the world, in persuading them, that some
men are able ^ make full satisfaction for their sins in ^is life: It is a
perilous, and a most dangerous doctrine, and does make the satisfaction of
Christ, of no force. Compare this your assertion with the word of God, and you
shall see* how ^ntrue it is. The Apostle Paul says, that God has made
Christ unto us, wisdom, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. The thief that had no time to
make satisfaction, was pertaker of the righteousness of Christ, unto whom
Christ said not, Thou shall go into Purgatory, but thou shall be with Luke
23. 44.
^ee this day in Paradise. Lazarus who was in the same case, was not carried
into Purgatory, but into Abraham's bosom. Luke 16. 22.
What shall I speak of your inuocating or calling on Saints: of your prayers
for the dead: of the authority of your Church of Rome: of your pray^rs, and
service in an unknown tongue: of your crouching before idolles: of the placing
of the said idols in your Churches: of your worship done unto them: of your
pilgrimages: of the supremacy of your holy father the Pope, of your unwritten
verities, and of all the rabble of your ceremonies, ordinances, and traditions,
which have no warrant of Gods word, in which you repose salvation, and by
which you greatly deceive Gods people. Will not the Lord call you to an
account, for abusing and deceiving thus his people, in giving them darnell and
chafe for wheat, in feeding them with your own inventions, without any
warrant or authority of Gods word? Has not GOD set down a platform in his
holy Scriptures how he will be worshipped and served, commanding, That you
shall neither add, nor diminishe, turn neither to the right hand, nor to the
left, but syncerelie to walk in the Deuteronomy. 5. 32.
ways of the Lord. And has threatened moreover, That if any man shall add
unto the things which be written, GOD shall add unto him, the plagues that
be written: And if any man shall Apoca. 22. 18.
diminishe from the words of GOD, his part shall be taken away out of the book
of life: But either sufficient is spoken, ^r enough will not serve. Only this
thing I require of you, that you will ^ot take in ill part, whatsoever I ^aue
written: the Lord is my wit^esse, that I have not been moved hereunto,
either of malice, or of vain ^lorie: neither have I written or set ^owne any
doctrine, but only that, which in my conscience (as I shall answer at the
dreadful day of judgment) I am persuaded to be the very ^ueth. If you
think, that I have not ^llie and absolutely answered your Interrogations and
Demaundes, which you have set down so diffusedlie, and out of order, repeating
some one thing often, and in heaping one upon another, without any reason or
judgment, in charging us, and laying those heresies to our charge, which we
are so far from mainteining of them, as that we do utterly abhor, detest,
yea, and flatly condemn them. I would have ^ou to note and plainly set
down, in what things I have failed, or what things I have omitted, or in
what you be not fully resolved, and I not to have sufficiently answered
you. For I am most willing, according to that small talent and gift, which God
has of his goodness bestowed upon me, to imploye my travel, and spend my
time in this kind of exercise. Let us join together in building God his
Church, for that many souls be in danger by reason of controversies and
contentions which be betwixt us, in that they halte, as they did in the time
of Elias the Prophet, betwixt two opinions, doubting what way were best to
take. Let us seek to advance Gods worship, which is spiritual, and must
be done in spirit and truth. GOD is dishonored, either when we woorshippe
any other then him alone, giving his honor to any other creature, or when we
give him not that honor, which he requires of us in his sacred and holy
word, or woorshippe him otherwise than he appoints.

The Lord grant you a penitent heart, indue you with true and perfect
knowledge, that you may seek the saving of your own soul, the profitte of
Gods ^urch and Congregation, and the ad^ncement of his kingdom, that ^h one
heart, and one mind, we ^y worship and serve GOD the ^her, and his Son
Jesus Christ, in ^irit and truth: To whom with the holy Spirit, three
persons, and one invisible, and immortal God, be all glory, now and ever.

Anthony Gilbie, unto the Reader.
THE miserable Jews and proud Papists are both alike deceived, by these and
such like carnal cogitatio^s, as appears in these popish questions: The Jews
will (...) have an earthly Messiah, to whom all ^^^s shall be in subjection
corporally and vi^^^ or else they will have none: The Papists will have an
earthly church and visible kingdom of the same Messiah, to the which al
nations ^halbe subject or else they will have none. (...) poor Christ and his
persecuted church ^espised of both twain. The Jews will (...) of this poor
Nazarite for their king: (...) ^apists will not have his contemptible (...) to
be their church. The Papists boast ^^^ir antiquity and succession: but the
^^^s (if that would serve) have better cause ^ast of both: for their antiquity
is far ^^^ter by many hundred years, and their suc^^^on is allowed in the
scriptures: but the (...) is successor in nothing, save in that ^^^er de^^ed
his master, or when as he (...) Christ carnal and worldly counsel, not to
suffer, but to spare him self. Otherway^ he succeeds not Peter (I say)
neither ^ place nor in doctrine, neither in form of g^uerneme^t, nor in manner
of living, so that t^ popish church can in no wise be the tr^ church of
Christ, as may easily be proue^ The papists talk of Fathers, and of
consent, but what is that without the warra^ of Gods word? The papists will
not be of t^ contemptible church, they say, that is desp^sed in the world:
Christ says that his chur^ must be so: They shall deliver you up ^ Mat. 24. 9.
be afflicted, and shall kill you, and yo^ shall be hated of al nations for my
nam^ sake. Again he says, If the world ha^ John 15. 18.
you, know that it hated me before hated you: if ye were of the world, the
world would love his own, but becau^ you are not of the world, but I have
ch^sen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. Remember the wor^
that I said unto you, The servant is n^ greater then his master: If they hau^
persecuted me, they will persecute yo^ also. These things have I said unto yo^
John 16. 1.
that you should not be offended: The^ shall excommunicate you: yea the tim^
will come, that whosoever kills you^ I think that he does God service. ^
this is the state of the true church here ^n earth: whereby it is evident,
that the ^she Romish Synagogue is not the true ^rch, seeing it is so* loved
and honored in world. Christ the head of the true ^rch, went up into heaven by
manifold ^ctions: his members the Prophets and ^ostles entered by the same
door of afflic^s, not by the window of promotions. ^d holy Paul affirms,
That whosoe^r will live godly in Christ Jesus, must ^fer persecutions, That
our faith being ^d like gold in the furnace (as Peter ^th) might be found
precious. There^re 1. Pet, 1. 7.
Christ and his Apostles are poor in ^is world, and like servants ready to
serve ^ers: the Pope and his Prelates like world^e Princes, rich, wealthy, and
lordly: Christ ^d his, humble and lowly: the Pope and his, ^oude, pompeous
and haultie: Christ and his ^aied tribute to Caesar, the Pope and his take
Peter pence and other payments from Princes and nations: Christ and his
suffered humbly afflictions under Princes, the Pope warreth against Princes,
treads on their necks, and causes them to kiss his pantaphles, and to hold
his stirrops, like a Lucifer and child of pride: Christ and his went about
continua^lie preaching the Gospel: the Pope is carrie^ about upon men's
shoulders, to show h^ pride, and he and his labor continually t^ suppress
the Gospel. Behold how the Pop^ and his Prelates are in all things contrary
t^ Christ, so that it is in vain to setle our fait^ upon them, or to count
them the catholik^ church. As for their universal consent, whereof they boast so
much, what is it, but as they them selves are blind, so must al their priest^
needs lead a blind people in a blind way, consenting together in this, that
they know nothing of God, neither will learn any thing? and therefore babble
they al their church service in that tongue that they do not understand, least
the people should hear the word of God in their known tongue, understand it
and believe it. Thus are they like a sort of blind men, who may easily consent
together, that they see nothing. And I would to God that they would confess,
that they see nothing, (...). 9. 41.
for then their sin were pardonable: but now they say they see with the old
Pharisees, therefore their sin remains. The Papists consent (we grant)
but against the truth, not in the truth. They consent ^ the Jews and Turks
consent to walk the blindness of their own hearts. ^ey speak not
according to the word GOD: therefore there is no light in Esa. 8. 20.
^em says the Prophet Esaias. And as ^emie the Prophet testifies, and
says, Ierem. 8. 9.
^at they have rejected the word of ^e Lord, and what wisdom can ^e in
them? They know not God, and who ^eth not know, that all truth must be ^ied
by his holy word? They are blind ^d know not GOD, and in this point are
^orse then either Turks or Jews, that ^are (c^ntrarie to his word)
woorshippe and serve God in Images and idols. They ^nowe not GOD, that dare
account him ^ther not perfectly just, or not perfectly ^ercifull. These
blind Papists say, that GOD will be satisfied and pleased with hu^aine justice
and satisfactions, which the Prophet Esaie does call menstruouse Esa. 64. 6.
cloutes: so take they from God his perfect justice, and for his mercy they
say, that it only supplieth that which wants in man's merits. What a
patching is this of justice, of mercy, and merits? Again, they say, that GOD
has not set down in his Scriptures, a perfect rule to all good works, but
that they must add thereto their devises of serving and honoring God, which
never came in his remembrance, neither were ever mentioned in his holy word,
wherein they must either make God not perfect in wisdom, but ignorant of such
things, or not perfect in love, that would not declare such necessary points
unto us: and so by their doctrine his infinite wisdom, and infinite love is
denied: whereby in effect they do deny him to be God. Again, these poor
blind papists know not Christ, nor the scriptures, when they make him a body
infinite, that may be in many places in heaven and in earth, and in ten thousand
places at once: where the scriptures do plainly teach us, That he would not
take the nature of Angels, but our human nature, and became like us in all
things (sin only excepted:) and that the heavens (...). 3. 21.
must contain him, until the time that all things be restored. They know not
Christ to be the only Mediator of intercession and redemption, the only
Priest that prays and sacrifices for sins, our only King and Prophet:
for they teach the clean contrary. They knowledge none of these offices of
Christ, to belong to him alone, but give the power thereof to other creatures.
Therefore are they but only by name Christians, ^ow may we saffelie join to
such a church? ^hirdlie, they know not the holy Ghost to be the only
satisficer and certifier of the conscience: they have so many other
satisfactions and certificates of their own devises, and so ^^nie, that a man
can be certain of his salvation by the spirit of God. They know not that the
whole Scripture is given by the Spirit of God, and is profitable to teach, 2.
Tim. 3. 16.
to improve, to correct, to instruct, in righteousness, that the man of God
may be made perfect to all good works: But being led with a contrary spirit,
eue^ the spirit of error (as Paul says) they do 1. Tim. 4. 3.
teach the doctrine of devils: forbidding meats, and forbidding to marry.
Thus the papists in their doctrine, erring in the principal articles of our
Christian faith, as also in their other commandments cannot be the true
Catholic church. As for their outward form of government whereupon they do
so much boast, let all men consider what it is: They neither have the names nor
the offices, nor the discipline appointed by Christ and his Apostles, or
practiced in the primative Church, Christ our savior commanded his twelve
Apostles to publish the Gospel, the which these men labor to suppress. As
for their discipline and government in their courts, it is not to suppress
sin: but by feeding upon the sins of the people, to make them selves fat
and rich. They call their Courts spiritual, but they be carnal, earthly,
and devilish. Their suspensions, excommunications, and absolutions for money.
Their dispensations for marriage and quarter sermons, are all for money. All
sins in that court may be bought and sold for money. What have they now to
boast of, when they neither have the right order of government, neither
retain the right offices and functions, nor so much as the names allowed in
the scriptures? As for us whom they account so co^temptible) we confirm the
antiquity and succession of the church from Christ and his Apostles because we
teach the self same doctrine and none other, but that which we received of
them, and which is written in the old and new Testaments. This is the
succession which God him self promised to remain for ever. My (...) 59. 21.
words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy lips, nor
out of the mouth of thy seed for ever, says the Lord: so that we may justly
approve our succession in the word and the sacraments, which are the chief
marks of the church. Neither use we as they do any more sacraments then Christ
him self ordained. As for the names of our officers, we call them the ministers
of Christ, or like names, according to the scriptures: and they do the offices
appointed by our Savior Christ and his Apostles. And we use, when we may, and
do require always that discipline, that our master Christ taught, and his
Apostles practiced: to wit, first brotherly admonition in private, then before
some others, afterward, if there Mat. 18. 15.
be no repentance, to tell the church, last of all, if the offender do remain
obstinate, to excommunicate from the sacraments. Lo in few words the names,
the offices, and our church government we use, all grounded upon Gods holy
word, and not upon the fantasies of men, as yours is. O ye Papists, repent
therefore, and imagine no more such motives and subtle questions, least your
shame be more and more discovered, as in this answer to your questions, will
appear. God grant you eyes to see it and hearts to repent. Where you demand
quest. 1. what church it was that converted the churches and nations to the
faith? you seem to answer your own objection: for you say, that that Church
was Christ's Apostles, and a few mo, who by their preachings and others,
planted Christian religion, etc. In the which saying you do well agree with the
Apostle Paul, who says to the Colossians, That even in his time the Gospel
Colos. 1. 6.
was fruitful in all the world. Now you know, that your gorgious synagogue
of Rome had not then received this gospel, but did persecute it many years
after. So then it was the poor perse^^^ed church, that brought the Gospel into
Antioch, into Rome, or whersoeuer it was yet truly planted upon the earth.
Again where you demand, quest. ^. what church has had the custody of the
Scriptures, and most safely has preserved them? The Jews would most easily
answer the papists, that it is their church: For the Jews have kept them so
warily, so many a^ were before Christ's coming, that they durst not alter
any letter or title: But if there seemed some cause of alteration by the order
of the gra^mer rules, as sometimes there did both in the ancient writings and
old printes, there was acipher set down, to cause men to consider it* but no
man amongst them was so bold as to a^^er any one iotte. Such was Gods great
providence toward us, that the v^^^ ^mies of Christian religion should be the
^epers and preseruers of those books, wher^on our christian religion is
grounded: so ^at we should always be able (by divine pro^dence) to confute both
the Jews and the ^istes, by the same books, which by divine ^er have bin
preserved. The Jews more ^ely and religiously, and the papists through
^rupting some places for their purpose, yet ^er permitted so far to corrupt the
scrip^es, but that all their errors may easily be ^futed by any of those
textes, that they re^ed. Where you demand, quest. 3. why be^e ye our church,
telling you this to be ^ds word and book, and will not credit her, ^uouching
it to be the true and undoubted ^se of Gods book? The Jew might ask ^^ and
us also this question: but we that ^ue heard Christ him self speak in his
^ting them in our hearts by his holy Spi^, do answer both Jews and papists,
as the ^maritanes did the woman, that brought ^em the strst tidings of Christ:
Now we ^eleeue (say they) not because of thy say^ngs, for we have heard him
our selves, and know that this in deed is the Christ and Savior of the world:
we believe ^im because of his own word. This is true, faith only to depend
upon the word of God, and neither upon the interpretation of the Jew, or
Papist, or any man's else, further then he can manifest his sense by some
manifest place of the self same word. The 4 and 5. quest. may easily be
answered, by that which is already written. Again, where you demand
tauntinglie, O Papists, where our principal pastor does sit in judgment,
quest. 6. we answer, that he always has don so, he now sits in the
heavens, and does pronounce sentence against that Antichrist of yours, who
does sit as God in the temple of God upon earth, and he will shortly come to
take a straight account of all inferior pastors, who are fellow elders and
fellow pastors, as Peter affirms, And upon the 1. Pet. 5. 1.
earth he has made some Prophets, some Apostles, some Evangelists, some
Pastors, some Doctors, or Teachers, as Ephe. 4. 11.
Paul says: but no Popes, no principal Pastors, to put him self forth of
that high office. The which office, if it had been so necessary upon earth, as
your papists do make it, neither would Christ him self, neither all his
Apostles utterly have forgotten it. As for the place that you continually
demand for: where shall we seek this, ^here shall we find that? Your
Question ^o small purpose, for our master Christ ^e warns, that in these
latter days, ^ere should be such, as should say, Lo, here ^ Christ, lo,
there is Christ, as it were bin(...) Christ, and the grace of his spiritual
^er to a certain place: but he says, be^e them not. The church, the vineyarde
of the Lord, and the true religion is never (...) to place, but as the people
of any place ^e grown in open contempt, the Lord (...) taken away the
Vineard of his church (...) the evil husbandmen, and given it to an other
people, that would yield better ^^^es. So was the place removed from Ier^^lem,
which had so many promises, to ^^^oche, to Ephesus, to the Galatians,
Colo^^ans, Thessalonians, and to sundry places ^ ^he earth besides,
wheresoever there (...) few or many gathered in the name of Christ: Christ
was among them, Christ ^ their principal pastor, whose voice ^e they would
hear, and thereby were Ioh. 10. 1.
^wne to his sheep: So became they his ^rch and people, though it were but
soul one household or family. So became they his sheep, and he their Pastor
and principal shepherd and Archpastour, though in all congregations he had h^
vndershepheard always, who fed the sheep^ and fought for the lambs against the
wolu^ And both these churches and pastors we^ many times known to the true
children ^ the church, when they were unknown ^ the wicked world. For the
children of Go^ who are called the children of wisdom, d^ always take hold
of the heavenly wisdom^ and have that mark to know one another and rest upon
Gods word, without any respe^ of person or place, or any earthly thing: ^ the
families of Noah, Abraham, Lot, Is^ac, Jacob, etc. having Gods word to warrant
them, cared not for all the world beside^ whereas all they that depend upon the
ou^ward show of place or persons, have fal^ continually from God, and so from
the tr^ church, as both before Christ, at Christ's ^ming, and since Christ's
coming, it is man^fest in the Jews, in the Samaritans, in t^ Turks and
papists, in Agar and Ismael, ^ all those, that challenge authority by the
auncientie and eldership, without Gods pr^mise. Now, we contrariwise depending
on^ upon Gods word, are the children of prom^ ^ the manner of Isaac. But as
then, he ^ was borne after the flesh, persecuted that was borne after the
spirit: even so ^ow. Nevertheless, what says the scrip^ Cast out the bond woman
and her Gal. 4. 13.
^e: Our mother church Sara, which ^th only the word of promise, seems ^
barren, desolate, and forsaken in the ^ but God will not forget his promise.
before, we will neither ask him of the ^^or of the time, nor of the means, how
^ll perform it: but knowing that he ^ begotten his church by his word, we ^
also, that thereby he will nourishe it, ^ultiplie it, and preserve it for ever,
shall the world rage against it. And ^ where his word sounds, we must ^f^r
his church. And because the Ro^ynagogue has cast away Gods holy ^ worshipping
images and idols, and go^horing from God, after her own in^ns, and has
rebelled against the words ^ Lord, and despised the counsel of the ^ high:
Therefore came the just iudge^ of God upon her, as it did upon the ^sh church
of old. Where the Lord says: your iniquities are ye sold, and for ^r
transgressions is your mother forsaken. Esai 50. 1^
Again: Plead with your ^ther ^se. 2. 2. 3. 4.
plead with her: for she is not wife, neither am I her husband: bu^ her take
away her fornications, etc. I make her like a wilderness, and ^ her for
thirst, and I will have no pitie^ on her children, for they are children
fornication. Lo, this is the iudgeme^ that Romish harlot, which has her
d^ling in that great city, which rules ^ the Kings of the earth: who has ^
Apoc. 14. 8.
the kings of the earth drunken with cup of her fornication: who is the ^rie
mother of whoredom, and of all the hominations of the earth: which is dru^
with the blood of the Saints, and with blood of the martyrs of Christ, who
with ten kings does fight against the La^ But the Lamb shall overcome them,
^ they that be on his side, the chosen ^ faithful: for he is the king of kings,
and Lord of lords, To him be all honor and glory for ever.

^ An answer unto the* Papist, which made this Offer, or Challenge.
Papist.
CHrist did commit, at his departing hence, the testimony of that truth,
which he (...) for, and the c^^uersion of all nations to the belief in him,
^^tr^^ church of God, which then stood ^^pally, and almost only, in the
perso^^ of ^ Apostles and of a few more: that, by their ^ching, and others
afterward of their ^ng, the Christian religion might be plan^^ all nations,
coasts, and corners of the ^^: Wherefore, I ask the Protestant, ^t Church
that was, which converted all ^s^ countries, that now be Christen, to the ^th
of Christ? and let him show me that ^er his Church converted any people, or
^nde in the earth, from Idolatry, or Genti^^ or Iudaisme, to the true religion
of Christ: or that this his faith was taught to any nations, in steed of true
Christianity: or any other Church, but the known Catholic Church to have
done this: And I recant.

Answer.
TRue it is, that Christ did commit the Mar. 16. 15.
preaching of the Gospel unto the Apostles, and unto a few more, and gave them
this commandment: That they should go unto all the world, and preach the same
Gospel unto al nations, who very painfully executed their office, and converted
many of sundry countries, to the truth. Nevertheless, such was the rage of
the wicked Emperoures and Tyrants of that time, that the doctrine of the
Gospel, was not universally received, nor generally taught, as it appears at
large by the history of the Acts of the Apostles: as by the assembling of the
Apostles in corners, and by their preaching in the night season, in private
houses: Yet we confess, that the voice of the Apostles was sounded abroad to all the world, so that as Tertullian says, the Parthians, Tertul. cont. Iudaeos.
the Medians, the Elamites, the people of Mesopotamia, of Armenia, etc and many
other nations, and provinces known and unknown, have received the Gospel of
Christ. Saint Paul took comfort, Phil. 1. 13.
and rejoiced in his imprisoment, for that there were some, even in Neros
court, that began to give ear to the Gospel. Of the same matter writes
Eusebius, that the court of Valerian the Emperor was now become the church of
god: so he says, because that some of his family believed the truth, albeit
the Emperor himself was a tyrant. Even in that sense it might have been
truly said, that the church of God was in king Achab his house, when 3.
Reg. 18. 3.
wicked Iezabel his wife did most of all persecute Gods children, and when
Elias complained, that he only was left alive, seeing that Obadiah governor
of Achabs house feared God, and fed an hundred Prophets, with the meat which
came from Iezabels table. But for bre^ities sake, I will answer to your
que^ion, which seems to consist on these two ^ointes: First, What Church it
was, which ^onuerted all countries, that now be Chri^ten to the faith of
Christ: Secondarilie, whether the religion, or faith of the Protestants, was
ever taught to any nations in steed of true Christianity. Whosoever shall
diligently peruse the ecclesiastical histories, or the books of the ancient
Fathers of the church, they shall easily perceive, with what difficulty
Christianity was embraced, since that the name of Christ was so odious to the
Emperor of Rome, (whose Empire was exceeding large) tha^ whosoever professed
himself to be a Christian, was tormented most cruelly unto death. So that it
cannot be proved, that many nations or countries, were wholly christened, or
received the gospel of Christ, but in secret manner, until the time of
Constantine the great, which was three hundred years after Christ, or
thereabout. For before that time, whosoever sincerely preached the Gospel,
he was forthwith accused of sedicion, of preaching heresy, and of new and
strange doctrine. They were charged commonly by the Heathen, to be adulterers
against kind, Manquellers, Killers of children, Churchrobbers, most wicked,
most hurtful, the enemies of mankind, Tertul. in. Apologetico.
guilty of all kind of wickedness, Enemies against the Gods, against the
Emperoures, against the laws, against good order, against nature it self, and
whatsoever mischief happened, the Ethnikes (...) impute it always to the
Christians. The city of Athens, which had been the ^^^taine of all knowledge,
was become the sink of most horrible idolatry: Where P^ule preaching Christ,
the Philosophers ^^^e Epicures and Stoikes resisted him, (...) said, what will
this babbler say* Others Act. 17. 18.
said, he seems to be a setter forth of strange Gods: Others said, may we not
know what this new doctrine, wher^^ thou spekest, is? in such rage the Ethniks
and Infidels continued against the Christians, until God of his mercy, raised
up that worthy Emperor Constantine, who advanced mightily the Gospel,
suppres^^^ the enemies thereof, and gave the truth free passage, throughout his
dominion and ^mpire. In his time all nations were called from Idolatry,
Gentilitie, and Iudaisme, and so continued many hundred years, until the
Devil was let loose, and supersti^on invaded the church: so that, albeit ^e
name of Christianity remained after^arde under the Popes government, yet
Christ's religion was abolished and aban^oned. It is faith in Jesus Christ,
and ^he profession of true religion, which makes a Christian, and not the
outward name, and therefore such as were fall away from Christ his Gospel,
unto the inventions of man, or such as were co^uerte only in name, not being
instructed in tr^ doctrine, were no more Christians then the shadow of a man
is a man, or^ picture, the thing which it does represen^ so that it was, Nomen
sinere, Christian i^ name, and not in deed. By the Turk a^ so both the name
and profession of a Christian, was altogether vanquished. Thu^ much for this
part. You ask moreover whether the religion or faith of the Protestants, was
ever taught to any nations in steed of true Christianity. I beseech you
examine well the doctrine of the Protestants, and compare it with the doctrine,
of Christ, of the Apostles, of the primitive church, and with the religion set
forth by the godly writers, which wrote about the time of Constantine, or
shortly after: And if you can prove, that we do not in all points agree with
the religion of Christ and of the apostles, as it is set down in the old and
new Testament, (Choose what translation you will) or that we consent not in all
things, concerning faith, and the substance of the true doctrine, which the
ancient fathers, as appears in their books (a few erroures by them
maintained, only excepted) then we will willingly yield (...) you. As for
example, I will note a few capital points of religion, because I will not
wander in generalities.

First we confess with them, one way to ^e justified and saved by, which is,
by ^^^ free mercies of God, granted us by the only death and passion of
Christ our only Lord and Savior, and that faith is the only means and
instrument, to apprehend this our justification and salvation: That Christ is
our Mediator both of redemption, and intercession: that we ought ^^ pray only
unto God, not to any Saints ^^ parted, and that in the name of Christ, and not
in the name of any Angel or ^^int, whatsoever: To pray for those that be
alive, and not for those which be dead: That in the Lords Supper, according
to his institution, we do spiritu^^ly by faith, feed upon the body of Christ,
and that Sacrament truly and faithfully received, as the remembrance of the
^eath and passion of Christ, is a spiritual food and sustenaunce unto our
souls, and a pledge of eternal life to satisfy our consciences: We say
further that Christ, his natural body, flesh blood and bone, is no^ in the
Sacrament under the form of bread, it being only in heaven, on the right
hand of God, according to the articles of our faith, where in body he shall
remain, until the day of judgment, though Christ our Savior, as he is God
in his divine nature, fills all places, and is with his children, pouring
daily the abundance of his graces upon them: Lastly we say, that man has no
free will of himself, to do any good thing, no not any Phil. 2. 13.
good thought, but that it is God, that works in us both the will, and also
the deed, according to his good pleasure, even of his free grace. If you will
either give ear to the doctrine which we do preach, or peruse the books which
we have, and do write, you shall see that the Protestants, did never vary
one ynch from these points of true religion, which I have recited. But because
you make mention of a known catholic Church, it behooves (for that an Harlot
may have the countenance of an honest woman) to distinguish betwixt the true
church of God, and the counterfeit Church, and to show how they both may be
discerned, and known. We must needs avouch with the holy spirit of God, that
the true Church of Christ, being the congregation and company of the faithful
dispersed over the face of the whole earth, is discerned and known by the
word of God: For the true Sheep do hear the voice of their Pastor Christ.
Neither is there any other sign or mark John. 10. 3.
to know the Church of God, saving only the Scriptures of God, which are the
treasury of all truth. For the city of the Ephesians. 2. 20.
Saints, and household of God (as the Apostle says) is builded upon the
foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself, being the
chief Corner stone. So then, that is the true Catholic Church, consecrated a
spiritual Temple (...) God, which is guided and ruled by the doctrine of the
Apostles, and Prophets. Therefore the Church of God is called the Spouse of
Christ, for that she ought in all ^inges, to harken unto the voice of the
^idegroome. In like manner, the church ^ as a pillar, which the Lord God has ^
in the earth amongst men, therein so to little his truth, that all storms and
Tempests, even the gates of hell and all the fernall powers fighting against
it, yet she they not prevail, because she stays ^ self only upon the
word of God, a^ thereby stays others, and therefore a g^ly father says, The
pillar and strength ^ the Church is the Gospel, and the spi^ of Iraene. lib. 3.
cap. 11. Aug. de Vinitate Eccle. cap. 3.
life. Likewise Saint Agustine, sa^ther be certain books of our Lord, vn^ the
authority whereof, each part agrees there let us seek for the Church, therb^
let us examine and try our matters. An in the same Chapter, I will (says he
have you to show me the church, not b^ the doctrines of men, but by the woor^
of God. Saint Chrysostom says, it cannot Chrisostom in opere imperfecto hom.
44.
by any means be known, what is the true church, but only by the scriptures*
what the counterfeit Church is, it appears by the promises: truly even that
Church, which consists only in outward show, challenging authority over
the word and spirit of God, prescribing a rule of woorshiping of God, by her
own devise, without any warrant of the word of GOD: which deuiseth other
means to be saved by, then only Christ: which feigneth that her faith can
never fail, notwithstanding ^^e never aspired unto the true faith of Christ,
but has persecuted the same, keeping the son of righteousness, as under
^^^ile or cloud, not suffering him to shine in simple men's minds and hearts,
by his holy Scriptures, which are the keys of Romans 1. 16.
knowledge, the very power of God, to salvation, to as many as believe. If we
cannot understand the scriptures, the fault is in us, and not in them. As no
man may condemn the brightness of the son, because his eye is not able to
sustain the clearenes thereof: so the hardness of the mystery, which we can not
sometimes compass, or perfectly understand, in the scriptures, ought not to
take away from us the use of the scriptures. Now ^^^ing you depend much upon
the aunci^^^ doctors and fathers, I purpose, for the satisfying of the reader,
to knit up this diffe^^^ce betwixt the church of God, and the counterfeite
Synagogue of Satan, with these words of S. Augustine, Whether they have the
church or no, let the^ show Aug. de venitat^. Eccle. cap. 16.
^ the Canonical books of the holy ^riptures: we must know the Church of
christ, even as we likewise know Christ, which is the head of the church in the
ca^nical scriptures. And what can be more ^laine, then that which is spoken by
the Evangelist John, disseuering the t^^^ Church from the false, the true
Christian from hipocrices, and the faithful ministe^, and preachers of the
Gospel, from fa^ prophets, and counterfeit teachers, in the few words:
Hereby shall ye kno^ 1. Ioh. 4. 2.
the spirit of God: every spirit which c^fesseth, that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh, is of God: and every spirit which c^fesseth not Jesus Christ to have
come ^ the flesh, is not of God: wherefore the sam^ is not of God, which denies
either the d^uine or human nature of Christ, and t^ true uniting of them
both, or derogateth any thing, from the office of Christ, beeing^ king, who
only has all spiritual rule an^ authority committed unto him, being
Prophet, who only is appointed, to del^uer unto us his fathers mind and will^
and to teach us all truth, and being a Priest^ who has offered a sweet
smelling Sacrifice for us unto God the father, even his own body upon the
Cross, once for all: which only Sacrifice is of force, and value to purge,
and cleanse the sins of all those that believe. But who be they, which deny
Christ in person or in office* even that Church, that would have Christ, as
he is ^n, to be in any other shape and form, then that, which he received of
the virgin Ma(...) in sundry places at one time, contrary the nature of a true
body: or affirms ^at mankind lost through Adams fall and ans^ression, could
be saved by any other lea^es, then only by Christ, whether it be ^y man's
merits and works, or by the par^ons and indulgences of the Pope, or by ^nie
other devise of man. Finally, that Church which teaches any other media^^^
betwixt God and man, either of re^emption, or intercession, then only Christ,
^he same Church denies Christ to have ^ome in the flesh, and therefore is not
the (...) Church of God. The bare name or title of the Church, is not
sufficient: but as gold is tried by the Touchstone, so we must prove the
Church by the word of (...) which is the Touchstone of all truth. This Church
by the preaching of the Gospel, by the Lodestarre of Christ his holy lord,
has from time to time, brought the ^le of God, from Gentilitie, from Iu^me,
from the gross Idolatry, which ^ have used in your Church, and from ^ dark
dungeon of ignorance, and blindness, into the clear light, and shining
brightness of true knowledge: Yea this same religion, and doctrine, which now
we d^ teach, was delivered first by Jesus Chri^ unto the Apostles, then
preached by them afterward (yet not without bloodshed taught from time to
time, for the space ^ six hundred years, as the writings of a^ the ancient
Fathers do witnesse^ and so forward until by little and little your
superstitious patched religion increased, by fire and Faggot and other extrem^
tortures and cruelties. These things being manifest, I, tendering your
salvation ^ which do call your self a Catholic or Papiste, do most earnestly
admonish you that according unto your promise, yo^ would yield your self unto
the eternal God, who knows all secrets, and abhors all hypocrisy. Let
Christ Jesus by the scepter of his word rule your conscience, and direct your
heart in his truth, suffer the holy spirit of God, to instill the sweet taste
of Gods holy word into your mind, that you may hate your own ignorance, and
blindness, and study to attain the true light, and to be guided by the
motions of the same comfortable spirit of God, which the Lord grant to you for
his Christ's sake.

Papist.
Ask of him, what Church it was, which ^ has induced the Christian people
tho^row out the whole world, to give most ^ humble credit in all points to
the holy ^^^kes of the Bible? what Church has had (...) discerning and
seuering them from o^^^ writings of all sorts? what Church ^^th had the
custody of them, and most safe^^ has preserved them, for the necessary use of
Gods people, and from the corruption of adversaries, as well Jews as Heretics
of all sorts: and let the Protestant declare unto me, that this congregation
has had from time to time, or ever had any right herein, ^^ any other Church
saving the catholic Church: and I recante.

Answer.
I Do merueile with what face, you can ^rrogate unto your Church, that you have
moved the people throughout the ^orlde, to give credit unto the scriptures,
(...) that your Church has deterred the ^^^ople, from reading them, affirminge
^^^m to be hard and difficult, daunge^^^us Pigghius Libro. 3. Cap. 3.
Hetarchia.
to the simple, and unlearned, a nose (...) wax, a shippmans hose, a dead
letter, and either of envy, unto the poor sou^ whom you call dogs, and
hogs, a^ sing this text: give not that which is h^ unto dogs, or of hate
unto the scripture you have kept the key knowledge, wh^ is the holy word of
God, under a va^ in an unknown tongue: fearinge (a^ judge) lest the misty
clouds of your persticious devises, would vanish aw^ if the bright beams of
Christ his G^pell might shine in simple men's mind^ What humble credit do you
give unto Scriptures, seeing that one of the piller^ Eckius De Ecclesia.
your Church, says, That the Scripture are not autenticall, or of credit, b^
only by the warrant, and aucthori^ of your Church of Rome: an other your
Doctoures, has these woorde^ The Apostles, says he, when they deliu^red the
Creed, never said, I believe t^ holy Bible, or the holy Gospel: but the Hosius,
in confessione Petri. cap. 80.
said I believe the holy Church: A^ likewise, in an other place, he says. ^
any man have the exposition of the Church of Rome, touching any plac^ Hosius.
De Expresso Dei verbo.
of the Scriptures, although he neithe^ know nor understand, whether or how^
it agrees with the words of the Scriptures, yet he has the very word of God.
and how doubtful and uncertain al your in^^^pretations be, Cusanus a Cardinal
(...) the Church of Rome shows: It Nicholaus Cusanus de autoritate
ecclesiae, et concilio supra et contra Scripturam.
(...) no marvel, (says he) though the practice of the Church expound the
^^^iptures at one time one way, and at ^^^other time another way: For the
vnder^^^nding or the sense of the scriptures, run^^^h with the practice, and
that sense, so agreeinge with the practice, is the quic^^ninge spirit: And
therefore the scrip^^res follow the Church, but contra^iewise, the Church
follows not the Scriptures. And whereas in very ^eede, the scriptures be the
light, that ge^^^th sight to the blind, and rightly called (...) candle,
whereby the thief is taken, the truth which does disclose all errors, (...)
rule to square, and frame man's life, (...) power of God unto salvation: I muse
^^^uely, how you da^^ presume, to keep his hid treasure, from Gods
inheritance, and yet pretend, that you do persuade them ^^^stantly, to give
most humble credit there^^^to: And forsomuche as you do challeng, ^^^e
discerning, and seuering the Scriptures, ^^^om other writings of all sorts,
you have in very deed not only corrupted the tr^ sense of the Bible, but also
abased the authority of the scriptures, and have mad^ equal, or rather
preferred your own decrees and constitutions, before the hol^ Bible: the
errors in your old translation o^ the Bible, (which you falsely ascribe vnt^ S.
Jerome) be so manifest, and so gross tha^ every child may easily espy them:
as i^ the third chapter of Genesis these worde^ Genesis 3. 14.
are to be found, Ipsa conteret caput tuu^ She shall break thy head, meaning
the woman. Which text the Louanistes would seem to reform, do put in ipse,
referring it to Christ. You may see into what miseries you would bring us, to
have us to believe, that the Virgin Marie, should brus^ the Serpents head,
whereas the words are to be understood of the seed of the woman. Likewise in
the Epistle unto the Corinthians, your old translation has these words.
Omnes quide^ resurgemus* 1. Cor. 15. 51,
sed non omnes imutabimur: We shall all rise again, but we shall not all be
changed. Which words be untruly translated: for all shall not rise again,
because that at Christ's coming, some shall be found alive: yet
nevertheless, All must 1. Cor. 15. 53.
be changed, and this corruptible flesh must put on corruption. But you will
perhaps say, that the fault is not in the translation, but in the Printer. Why
then has your Church suffered the same translation, to have been printed so
often, and has not corrected these faults. Nay, why with your Tridentine
general council Council. Triden.
precisely say, Let no man be so bold or presume by any manner of color to
refuse the old common translation of the Bible. To conclude you persuade the
world if you have authority, not only to allow what translation ye list, but
also as your own Canonistes do avouch, that the Pope the head of your
Church, can at (...) pleasure, dispense against the Law of God, against the
Law of nature, against Extra. de constitutionibus statuta Canon. felici.
the Apostles, against all the commandments of the old and new Testament:
That he is Christ's Lieftetenaunt, not only over things in heaven, over
things in earth, and over things ^^ hell, but also over the angels both good
and badde: whereas the true Church of God, has not at any time made her self
^ judge over the word, and law of God, (...) always has used subjection
unto the ^^^e, grounding all her religion and faith ^^on the same word. And
this you must needs confess unless, you will deny a known truth, that we
(whose religion you do so vehemently withstand) have always persuaded the
people, not to believe us one iotte further then we bring the word of God for
our warrant. And whereas you further enquire, what Church has had the custody
of the Bible, and has most safely preserved it: I must needs say, that God of
his singular mercy toward his Church, by his divine providence, has
always preserved his word, to the comfort of his children: as he preserved
Elias in the wilderness, Daniel in the Lions den, and the three children in
the furnace. How, I pray you, has the Bible been preserved by your Church,
since the whole world can testify, how you have burned the old and new
Testament, which thing is yet fresh in man's memorie^ Did not Cutbert
Tunstall, being then Bishop of London, cause the new Testament to be burned at
Pawles cross in London: as your Church learned of Iehoakim king of Judah, who
threw the book Ierem 36. 23
which the Prophet Jeremy by Gods commandment had indicted (containing the
wrath of God, against Judah) into the fire? But you will say, the Testamentes
were falselie and untruly translated, and therefore were burned: If that had
been the cause, it had been your parts, rather to have disclosed, and quoated
forth the erroures, and to have amended the faults. Does the mother cast away
the milk, wherewith the children, should be nourished, for that sometimes
motes do fall into it? but rather culleth forth the moates, and gives the
Milk to the children: even so you ought to have done. What faults were, I
beseech you, in that translation? you never noted any, if there had been, as
indeed there were none, why have not you set forth a better: what doctor of
your Church or fauorer of your Romish Religion has written, in whose works
can not be found some error? yet we burned them not, but are content to give
them the readinge, and do reverence them so far as they agree with Gods
truth. Further if ^n Angel should speak or write, we ought Gal. 18. 1.
not to believe him. Judge you now (laying away all affection) whether your
Church ^^ ours do better esteem of the Bible, or ^^ the better preserve the
same.

Papist.
Show me why our common known church did not as well corrupt the text of the
Testament, as the true religion contained in the same? Show me why she kept
not as truly and as faithfully the true sense of Gods word, as she preserved
the word it self? Show me why we should believe the Papists (as ye term
them) for the word it self, and yet we should believe you Protestants for
the meaning of the word, rather than them? Show me why you believed our
Church, telling you this to be Gods book, and will not credit her,
aduouching this to be the true and undoubted sense of the same book? and last
of all, show me why you believed the elder known Church, affirming this to
be the word, and do not believe her, affirming Luther to be an Heretic? Show
me good reason or Scripture for these points? and I recant.

Answer.
IF you mean by your common known Church, the Church of Rome (as you will
easily assent thereunto) then your Church, is more common than true. For trial
whereof, it is plain, and that by Saint Barnarde, that the pastoures of your
Church of Rome, keep not the spouse of God, which is his Church but they
destroy her: They keep not the flock, but they kill, and devour. And one
which writes of your Church, in that great and solemn assembly at
Constance, says, They did quench the spirit, they did despise the voice of
the prophets Barnat. in synod Ramensi.
they persecuted Christ in his members, and it was altogether a persecuting
church, Barnard in an other place, likewise cries out, O miserable Rome,
which in the time of our Elders, have brought forth the lights of worthy
Fathers: Parali. Vspergens page 396.
but in our days have brought forth the monstrous darkness, shameful, and
slanderous to the time to come. An other calls Rome, a school of error, a
temple of heresy. And your old friend Barnar. in concilio Ramensi.
Thomas Becket, whom you have canonized for a Saint, says: Our holy mother of
Rome, is become an harlot, and has prostituted her self, that is, has set her
self open to every man for reward. Petrarch.
And what need we go far? one of your Tho. Becket. ad Episco. Moguntinum,
own nest, in the late council of Trent, shows his judgment of your
Church of Rome. They have brought to pass, (says he,) that godliness is
turned into hypocrisy, and that the sauoure of Cornel. Bitonti^^s in c^ncilio
^ridentino.
life, is turned into the savor of death. Would to GOD they were not gone,
with one general consent, from religion, to superstition: from faith, to
infidelity: from Christ, to Antichrist: from God to Epicure, saying, with
wicked hearts, and filthy mouths, there is no God. Truth seeks not to be
shrouded in corners. I have noted before a few places amongst many, in which
you have corrupted the text of the Bible. You seem to urge this matter
instantly, that your Church has kept, and avouched truly and faithfully the
true sense of the Scripture, and do merueile very much, why we will not give
credit unto you. I will give you a taste of a few places, which your Church
has foully wrythed. Where the Apostles (yet so Luke. 22. 38 ^e maiorit. et
o^ed. vnam sanc^am. Psalm. 8. 6.
rude, that they thought with outward weapons to withstand the enemies) do
offer unto Christ two swoordes: Pope Boniface does expound these words, saying:
behold two swords, that is to say, the Pope has the power, both of the
spiritual sword and of the temporal. So they apply corruptly the psalmist, thou
have made al things subject unto him, that is to say, to the Pope: the catel of
the field, that is to say, men living in Antoni. in sum. ma. p. 3. Titul. 22
cap. 5.
the earth: the fishes of the sea, that is to say, souls in purgatory: the
birds of heaven, that is to say, the souls of the blessed in heaven. Pope
Alexander treading most cruelly upon the Emperor Frederiks neck, Psalm. 91. 13.
abuses this part of the Psalm. Thou shall walk upon the Aspe and Basilisk,
the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou tread under thy feet. What need many
testimonies, seeing that your church has wrested the whole book of the
Psames, which concern God the father, and his son Christ, to magnify the
Virgin Mary withal: that whereas she acknowledges Christ to be her Savior,
and herself to be the handmaide of the Lord, you go about to make her a
Goddess, and say; that she is fidelissima Dei socia, a fellow mate with God. As
also another of your Cardinals calls her Domina^ and Dea^ nostra^, our Lady
and Goddess. Where you Ambrosi. Catharin. council. Tri. Session. 2. Bemb.
Cardi. in Epist. ad Charol.
say, that your Church gave us knowledge ^f the holy Bible, it is most untrue,
for that you hidd the same in an unknown tongue, and would not suffer the
unlearned to have the use thereof. And albeit you very rashely impute heresy
unto Luther, truly all the heresies, which ever he maintained, he sucked
forth, out of the nurcerie of your Church, and treasury of your Pope. I^ you
know any other in his writings, saving that he defended with you the real
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, I would have you to name it. But it
is you^ accustomed wont, to call us heretics, although you be not able to
prove, that w^ defend any one heresy. Nevertheless, w^ must be content to
bear your words, for so the old Prophets were charged with ^^dition and
heresy: and so Tertullus charged Paul the Apostle, beginning his oration with
flattery, and ending the sam^ with a manifest untruth. We have (sait^ he)
found this man a pestilent fellow, ^ mouer of sedition among all the Jews,
throughout the world, and a chief maintainer of the sect or heresy of the
Act. 24. 5.
Nazarets: (for so the wicked termed the true Christian religion, as you do,
and to answer you fully, we say with the Apostle,) That after the way which
you call heresy, Act. 24. 14.
so woorship we the living God, and his son Christ, believing all things
which be written in the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel.

Papist.
Again, what Church is that which has exercised by Christ's appointment
discipline upon offenders in all degrees: and for that purpose has continually
executed laws and canons ecclesiastical, with excommunication, degradation,
suspension, and such like? Prove me this gear to have proceeded from
Protestants, or from any other Church, then from the Catholic, and Irecant.

Answer.
Concerning discipline. First you allege excommunication, the true use whereof
you never had in your Church of Rome, sichens it first declined from the
ancient Church of Rome. Now, as a bloody mother, you send out the
thunderboltes of excommunication, against all those, which reject your
superstitious traditions: even like your grandfathers the Pharisees, who Ioh.
9. 34.
in the time of our savior Christ, did excommunicate all those, which did
truly con^^^se Ioh. 16. 1.
Christ, and yet thought they pleased ^^d highly. John truly did prophecy of
Apoc. 13. 15. 1. Cor. 1. 3. 1. Tim. 1. 20.
(...) Church, that she should exco^muni^^^e and kill, all such as would not
worship the image of the beast, that is, ^^^eiue the ordinances, and decrees
of the sea of Rome. Excommunication w^ not used in the primitive Church, but ^
grave offenses, as appears by the Ap^stle Paul, who did excommunicate one ^
incest, and Himeneus and Alexander, ^ making shipwreck of the faith of Chri^
They did not in the primitive Church ^ communicate without the consent of t^
clergy and people: which discipline deca^ing in Saint Ambrose his time, at the
least in the church where he was, he lam^teth in these words: The old
congregation (says he,) and the Church following Ambros. in. 1. Ti. ca. 5.
had Seniors, without whose counsel, nothing was done: but I know no^ by what
negligence, it did grow out o^ use, unless it were, either by the sloth
fulness, or rather the pride, of the pastors whilst they only would seem, to
have the pre-eminence. Saint Cyprian, disputing this matter at large, speaks
after Cyprian. lib. 3. Epist. 19.
this manner: Ever since I was Bishop, I determined to do nothing, without the^
council of the clergy, and consent of the people. But you do use this kind
of discipline, or rather abuse it privately, in every light money matter: but
chief^ie against such as will not embrace your Romish traditions. Johannes
Scotus alias Duns one of your Capitaines, who lived about the year of our
Lord 1336. complains Lib. 4. sent. did. 18.
of the abuse of your excommunication, and of the Papes keys, sayin^^, That
excommunication before his time, was not used but upon great and just
causes, and therefore feared: but now (says he) it is broched and published
for every trifle, and therefore grows in contempt. Furthermore you do
neither excommunicate, degrade, or suspende (except it be a very great
chance) for any other cause, then is aforesaid. You have rules to dispense
with your gelding Priests: Si non cast, tame^ caute. If that thou can not
live chaste, yet play the whoremonger cunningly. You degrade some, and when you
have taken your Popish robes from them, you turn their bodies to ashes, by
cruel fire. But to knitte up all in few words, our Savior Christ did not
promise, to ^^ue behind him a Church, which should ^^ecute such
ecclesiastical discipline, as ^^u have prescribed: or should always
^^twardly in great pomp appear to the ^ewe of the whole world. But he calls
Luke. 12. 32. John. 16. 20.
^^s Church a little flock, showing them before hand, that in the world, They
shou^ John. 16. 20.
weep, and lament, and have tribulat^on: that the world should rejoice, b^
they should be sad: and that as all the wicked persecuted him, the Lord: so
shou^ they persecute them, his servants: d^ prove this: and I recant.

Papist.
AND because Christ (as Saint Pau^ says,) has established in his Chu^che,
some Apostles, some Preachers some teachers and Doctoures, eue^ till his
coming again, I ask the Protestant, what Church that is, which is abl^ to
show, and prove the continuance and vs^ of those functions ever since Christ
his time, by plain account of orderly succession, and is able to name by the
hystories of all ages, the notable persons of all the foresaid states in their
government and ministry? And if he can prove unto me, that their Church
has never lacked the same appointed officers, or that any other Church or
congregation besides ours, has always kept that charge: and I recant.

Answer.
TRuth it is, that Christ gave some to Ephe. 4. 11.
be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastoures, and teachers:
but where do you read, that our Savior Christ ever promised all these
functions to continue successively, to the worlds end? Show unto me any,
which was called apostle, or prophet, after Christ his Apostles. Saint Paul
the blessed Apostle, makes mention of false Apostles, which always withstood
the doctrine of the Gospel, maintained the ceremonies of the Law, and the
inventions of their own brain, and set them selves opposite unto the true
Apostles, and if you will claim your succession from them, I will easily agree
unto you. There has been Preachers, and teachers at all times, save only when
they have been kept under by your tyranny, which have preached Gods truth, and
reproved your gross Idolatry, whom your Church has always persecuted unto
death: and even until this time, there has been and are Christians in
Graecia, and Asia, which have euer^^^e, and do yet, utterly detest the Pope,
the head of your Church, with all your de^^^s, and traditions. But show me in
one place, I pray you, of the Scripture where ever Christ promised any such
Paulus Aemilius.
succession, to continue in all ages. Y^ were so, that the truth of Gods word,
^ the functions in Gods Church should ^ceed always by ordinary succession: t^
you had a good foundation, to build y^ succession upon: Then Christ our Saui^
by right, should not have controuled ^ Scribes and Pharesies, which sat^ Moses
chair, which bragged of succe^on, as well as you do, saying: We are the seed
of Abraham, we are the discipl^ Io. 8. 33. Io. 9. 28. Luke. 20. 4.
of Moses, unto us God has made ^ promises, as for Christ we know n^ from
whence he came: And theref^ they asked Christ, By what power he d^ Acs. 20. 28.
such things, and who gave him that au^thoritie? and so they might very well
ha^ said, in respect of their outward succession For so Annas and Caiphas were
Bys^ops, as well as Aaron. But that warni^ and admonicion, which Saint Paul ga^
unto the congregation of Ephesus, touc^ing succession, might satisfy you. I
know this (says he) that after my departinge^ Romans 10. 17.
there shall grievous Woolues enter in amoung you, not sparing the flock
moreover of your own selves, shall m^ arise speaking perverse things. And
again he says, That true faith, comes (not by succession) but by hearing
(not Romans 10. 17.
the Bishop of Rome) but the word God. If Christ had appointed any such
succession, would he have forewarned us, Mat^. ^4. 15*
that desolation of abomination should sit ^^^he holy place: and that
Antichrist should ^^^rude him self, into the room of Christ? If you look
well about you, you have no cause to glory in succession, for that by your
writers sufficient is spoken, to discredit your succession: for one says, That
many Popes have fallen into heresies: that ^ira in Matthew. cap. 16.
Hildebrand (in whose time defection from the faith took place) was charged by
a general council, to be an adulterer, a Churchrobber, a perjured person, a
Platin. in Romans 1^
ma^queller, a sorcerer, and an apostata. Another calls the Popes monsters
and (...) shapen creatures. If your head and chief of your Church be such,
what shall we judge of the rest? I will take for proof of your succession, even
the confession of Pope ^drian the fourth: Succedimus non Pe^^^o Adrian. 4.
in pascendo, sed Romulo, in parrici^^^o. Aug. cont. Donatist. lib. 6.
We succeed, says he, not Peter in ^^^eding, but Romulus in killing. To be
^^^t, what avails the succession of your Church, unless you could prove,
that she has always maintained, the doctrine of Christ: For Saint Augustine
says, Tha^ many do give the outward mark of a Aug. cont. Donatist. lib. 6.
Bishop to wolves, and be wolves them selves. That the truth of Gods word man
be the touchstone of lawful succession, giu^ ear to the godly council, of a
learned father. It becomes us (says he,) to obe^ Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 43.
those Priests in the Church, which hau^ their succession from the Apostles,
an^ together with the succession of their Bishoprikes, according to the good
will o^ God the father, have received the undoubted gift of the truth. An other
being pressed with the like succession says If any of my predecessors, have
not observed, Cyprian. lib. 2. Epist. 3.
and kept the same that our Lord has taught us, both by his example an^ also
by his commandment, his simplicity may be pardoned: but we, if we do^ the
like, can hope for no pardon, being now admonished, and instructed of ou^ Lord.
And comparing all other Churche^ with the primative church, the same fath^
says: If the pipes of the conduit, which before ran with abundance happen ^
fail, do we not use to search to the hea^ The Pristes of God keeping Gods
commandments must do the same, that if the truth have fainted or failed in
any point we return to the original of our Lord and to the tradition of the
Gospel, and of the Apostles, that thence we may take the discretion of our
doings, from whence the order it self and original first began. Thus much
concerning the succession of your Church, having no warrant by Gods word,

Papist. 6.
AND for the necessary use and execution of the foresaid offices, they must
further be asked, what sacraments the Protestants ministered for the space of a
M. years together, in which they confess their congregation to have been
near or wholly hid: what correction or discipline they kept for offenders,
to whom they did preach their heresies: Where did (...) principal pastor
sit in judgment? ^^^re did they gather, as in a council, ^^^ye the truth
in doubtful matters? H^^e might Christian men iustelie, of^^^d with some of
their Brethren, have sought out your officers or congregation, to make
complaint of him? or how if it lacked any man to have been baptized of them or
to have received the communion of them or have joined them selves in faith and
religion unto them? How might (I say) that co^temptible and unknown company
ha^ been found out in this case? If therefo^ you can show me, that ever any
man soug^ justice or knowledge of truth, sacrament^ faith, or any help of
salvation at the Pro^stants secret and close Church, or any oth^ where else,
but of Gods known Cathol^ Church: And I recant.

Aunsweare. 6.
TOuching Sacraments, we fin^ two appointed expressly by the wor^ of God,
namely Baptism, and the Lord Supper. The one does signify our ne^ birth and
regeneration, that as by wat^ the filthe of the body is washed clean: through
faith in the blood of Christ, o^ souls are cleansed from all sin, and w^ are
incorporat, and ingraffed into the b^ of Christ, and made members of his bo^ of
which he is the only head: the other do^ put us in remembrance, that Christ
Jesus is our spiritual food and sustenaun^ that he is the celestial Manna,
which came down from Heaven, and we (faithfully r^ceiuing the visible, and
external signs, according to Christ his institution, in remembrance of his
death and passion) spiritua^ly do feed upon the body of Christ, a^^ receive
the fruits of his death, even remission of our sins. Other sacraments we
have no warrant for, in the word of God. These sacraments were only used by
Christ and his Apostles, and by all their true successors. The sacraments in
the old Testament, unto which any promise was annexed, were these two only,
that is circumcision, and the Passover: which do rightly and aptly represent
(...) two sacraments set forth in the new ^^^ament, as Baptism, and the
Lords ^^^er: which have been used always ^^^e true Church, ever since Christ,
and ^^^ued of the ancient Fathers, as the only known sacraments, appointed
by ^^^rist. So Augustine affirms, That August. de Doct. Christian. lib. 3.
cap. 9.
(...) Lord and the Apostles delivered unto ^^^ewe sacraments, in steed of
many: (...) the same to be most easy in doing, ^^^st reverend in
understanding, and in ^^^eruation most pure: to wit, the sacraments of
Baptism and the celebratio^ of the sacrament of the body and blood of ou^
Lord. Likewise another says, The sacraments Paschasius de coena domini.
of Christ, in the catholik^ Church, are Baptism and the bod^ and blood of
our Lord. Which sacraments also, and all the principle point of our true
religion, Constantine the Christian, and godly Emperor, and al^ his noble
successors mightily defended and set forth the same. The same Constantine, was
christened, not by the Pope, bu^ by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, no^ Hierom.
in Chro.
in a corner, but in the presence of many other, not popish, but Christian
Bishopes He overcame Licinium his sisters husband, Onomasticon.
who persecuted the Christians The same Constantine summoned a council at
Nice, against that blasphemous heritike Arrius: And as the history says the
Emperor before named wrote unto all Sozomen. lib. 1. Cap. 17.
the rulers of the Churches, that they should be at Nice by a day, to the
Bishop of the Apostolic sea, to Macarius Bishope of Jerusalem, and to Julius
the bishope of Rome. In that flourishing time lived sundry godly writers, whose
books now extant, do show that they embracced the same faith and religion,
which we at this day do profess, touching the Sacraments, justification by
faith only, invocation to God alone, salvation only by Christ, and all other
chief points of doctrine, whose works if your Romish Church, had kept
inviolable, and had not corrupted, as you did in like manner, with the
Canonical books of the Bible: you might have learned a difference betwixt
truth and error.

And if you would yet hearken to the doctrine which they do deliver, they will
teach you that your Romish church is a cage of unclean birds, and that your
religion is mingled with all heresies (though you charge others with the same
fault) and that you have no true discipline, but rather cruelty, no principal
pastor, saving Antichrist, no officers, but Bloodsuckers, and no Church in
deed, but the Sinagogue of Satan, that cruel mother, which will needs have
the Child to be cut in pieces, which spares no Sex or kind, no Infant,
though it be in the mothers belly, no hoare head, nor aged person: finally
your church has no truth, but falsehood, and i^ wholly imbamed with the
heresies of a^ ages. You take part with the Jews an^ Pagans, you care not
with whom yo^ shake hands, so it be not with Christ or his holy Gospel, unto
which you do bear ^ deadly hate. And yet you stand upon you^ reputation, and
would have men to beleeu^ you, whatsoever you speak. Whereas you call our
Church, A contemptible, unknown, close, and secret company, at thi^ day, the
Lord be thanked, the greater part^ of Europe, besides the countries I spak^ of
before, do join together with us i^ one truth of doctrine. I would have yo^
to prove by the word of God (for you^ words be no warrant, to auentur^ our
souls upon) your Romish Church to be the ancient and true Catholic Church,
and to profess the same faith and doctrine truly, which Christ and his
Apostles left behind them, and that which was in the time of those godly
Emperors of Rome, and a long time after: or that Christ did promise to leave
such a Church, as should have on^ general and chief Pastor, to sit in
judgment to punish offenders, and to call a general council to try the
truth, or else we cannot join with you against God and against his son
Christ. For we acknowledge no other principal Pastor, but Christ Jesus, whom
the heavens must contain, until the time that all things be restored, which
God has spoken by the Act. 3. 21.
mouth of al his holy prophets, since the world began, who nevertheless is
ever present with his Church.

Papist. 7
Again, I require of the Protestant, to declare by good histories, or by
reasonable likelyhod, when the true church (as they account theirs to be)
decayed: or in what year, the religion of the Papists came in and prevailed?
Whether all their true Church was so soundly sleeping, that none would preach
against it: even at the ty^e when it first entered. Whether all nations,
sodeinly, and in one year, were moved unto the doctrine of the Papists, no
one man of all their true church, either preaching, teaching, wri^^^g, nor
attempting any thing against it, ^ making mention of it? Whether all ^^^kes of
service were altered? Whether (...) a moment the mass was said in steed of
their Apostolic communion: Whether suddenly men began to pray for souls
departed, suddenly required the help of Saints in heaven, sodeinly the tongue
of common prayer was altered. Tell me in what year of our Lord, under what
Emperor, under what Pope, upon what occasion, this merueilous mutation was
made, by whom all these things were wrought, who preached against it, what
story makes mention of it, who of al your Pastoures preached against it. Was
Gods Church so void of the spirit of truth, and strength that even then,
when it most flourished, it had none that durst open his mouth against such
corruption of religion at the first entering in of it, and when it might
soon have been repressed? If it could not have been stayde, tell me in what
year of our Lord, this mutation was made and who of the true Preachers
withstode our doctrine: and if we note you not by the names, every one of
your captains, and the several errors, which they taught, and the time and
year when they rose against the received truth, and the councels, wherein they
were orderly condemned: If I say this can be done on your side toward us,
and we do it not for improofe of your Church and religion: I recante. And for
that purpose because the government of the Bishops of Rome, is most
misliked of them, And yet most notoriously known by every History, let them
note the Pope that first brake of the course of his forefathers belief, and
Regiment in any Articles of faith, or necessary Christian usage: And I
recant.

Answer. 7.
MY meaning is not to make any long or large discourse or rehearsal as
concerning the Original and offspring of your holy Church of Rome, whose
beginning was with most detestable and heinous murders poysoninges, and other
such like means and practices: neither yet to dilate upon the proceading
succession or continuance thereof, from time to time, and until this present
day: neither do I mind to remember you of the honor and reverence, which by
the color of your succession, you have won thereunto from God, unto whom
only such honor is due: But to answer you in few words the true Church of
God began first to decay, when as your Bishops of Rome, not contented with
their dioces and their peculia^ charge, usurped other men's rightes an^
interest: or when they challenged authority, above their fellow Bishops. Thi^
was in Phocas time, who flew his Maist^ Mauritius the Emperor, and (to curr^
favor with the Pope) yielded unto hi^ that superiority, that he should be
calle^ the universal Bishop, and head of the Church. And so says Platina:
Bonifa^ (says he,) the third of that name obtained Platin. in Bonis. 3.
of Phocas the Emperor, ye^ not without great contention, that h^ should be
called, the head of the Church. So says Sabellicus: The Pope Boniface
Sabellicus.
the third (says he) at his beginning, entreated Phocas the Emperor, that
the Roman Church might be the head of all other Churches: and that was
granted unto the Apostolic Sea, not without great strife: the Grecians
claiming that honor, saying, that they ought by Christian piety, to be
chiefest, in respect of the Empire, which long before that time, was at
Constantinople. Yet it appears by the writings of Gregory the great, that
this challenge should rather be a sign of Antichrist, then of a true minister
of Christ: and therefore he writes unto John Bishop of Constantinople,
saying, It is not my ^.
cause, but it is Gods, not I only but the whole Church is troubled, because
godly laws, reverend synodes and the very commandments of our Lord are
overthrown, by a certain proud and pontifical name or word of
universality. And again he says, Whosoever Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 36.
does call him self an universal Bishop, is either Antichriste, or the
forerunner of Antichrist. And again, None of our Roman Bishops ever
chale^ged this name of singularity, none of my predecessors ever agreed to use
this profane word, we will not receive this honor, though it were offered
unto us. And, to speak the plain truth, even from this time Gods true
Church began to decay, and the superstitions of your Church of Rome, by
little and little to increase: and as your August.
Church grew in wealth and riches, so it waxed proud and careless, as a
good writer spoke of it: Ecclesia peperit diuitias et filia deuorauit matrem.
The Church brought forth riches, and t^ daughter devoured the mother. For even
this same Gregory who lived six hundred years and odd after Christ, not
wtihstanding his own books do witness against him, to all posterities: yet
in his latter age, he claymed this name of universality, though he could never
attain it: for not only he, but all before him, and many after him, yielded
them selves unto the Emperors, refusing to be called universal bishops, or
heads of the Church. Marcellus, Meltiades, and Siluester Bishops of Rome,
were in subjection unto Constantine the Emperor, Sirilius in subjection to
Theodosius Anno domini 388. Hilarious unto Justinian, Anno Domini. 528. Gregory
the first unto Mauritius, Anno domini 600 Adrian and Leo to Ludouicus Pius,
Anno domini 830. Sergius unto Lotharius, Anno. 840. Benedict. 3. and John 9.
unto Ludouicus the Emperor Son of Lotharius, Anno domini. 856. But some of
these bishops with their successoures peeced and patched with certain
superstitious ceremonies your Church, even until ^ildebrandes time, otherwise
called Gregory the. 7. at which time (as it was prophesied long before)
Antichrist ^d begin his full reign. Which Hilde^ande by a council of
nineteen bishops ^olden at Brixia, was condemned for a Abbas vrsperg, Anno.
1083.
^riured person, and a Necromancer. As for your mass (which was and is a more
abominable Idol then the idol at Delphos, though the Devil himself was
worshipped there in personal form) it was seven hundred years in setting
together, and in framing. And transubstantiation the pillar of your mass not
hatched until your Lateran council began which was after Christ. 1215.
years: and some 1215.
even the chiefest doctoures of your Church cannot tell, whether it be true,
or false, certain or uncertain, or a very dream, or no. For Petrus
Lumba^^us rehearses these doubts, and thereunto he adds his answer.
Quibusdam ita videtur, Quidam dicunt, quidam Sentenc. 4. did. Si autem.
tradunt, quidam concedunt, alii putauerunt, substantiam ibi panis et vini
remanere: Some men judge thus, Some say thus, Some have written thus, some
grant this, some other have thought thus, that the very substance of the
bread and wine remains still. But mark your doctors judgment and
answer. Si autem queritur, qualis sit illa conuersio, an formalis, an
substantialis, an alterius generis, definire non sufficio: If a question wear
moved, what manner of conversion or change this is, whether it be in form, or
in substance, or of some other sort, I cannot define. You may see your great
doctors to be as ignorant, and as doubtful, as the rest. An other of your
doctors says. How Gabriel. Biel. in canon. lect. 40.
the body of Christ is there, whether it be by chau^ging of something into it,
or Christ his body begin to be there to gither with the bread, both the
substance and the accidents of the bread remaining still without change, it
is not found expressed, in the canon of the bible. Behold your Church: Behold
your doctors: Behold your uniform assent and agreement, which untruly you
so much boast of. What time prayers for the dead souls, Invocation to Saints,
service in an unknown and strange tongue began in your Romish Church, it is
not much material, seeing they be all expressly against the word of God. The
continu^unce of an error, does not make the er^our, a truth. You may know by
the scrip^ures, that the souls of such as depart his life in the faith of
Christ, be with La^arus in Abraham's bosom (as Saint Luke. 16. 22.
^ohn says) in rest, and need not your prai^rs. Apo. 14. 13
Such as end their life in wickedness, ^ dye without true repentance, be in
hell, ^here as the scripture says, that there is ^o redemption. Concerning
invocation, and prayer, which is a part of gods wor^hip, you rob God of his
due honor, if ^ou give that to any creature, which is ^roper to the creator:
For God says by ^is prophet, Honore^ meum alteri non ^abo: I will not give
mine honor to ^nie other. And again: Call upon me ^n the day of thy trouble,
and I will hear Io. 16. 23.
^hee. So likewise our Savior Christ ^aith, whatsoever you shall ask my father
^n my name, he shall give it you. And Saint John says. If any man sin, 1.
Io. 2. 1.
^ee have an advocate with the Father, jesus Christ the righteous, and he is
the propiciation for our sins: and not for ^urs only, but for the sins of
the whole world. By the which words we ^ taught, that Christ our savior is not
on^ the mediator of our redemption, but also ^ our intercession, and does
plead our cause w^ god. Why would you have us to take Chr^ his office from him,
as you do by inuocati^ and praying to saints, in making the^ mean^ for us,
seeing that the Saints depart^ know not our estate, and understand not o^
infirmities? as Esaie the prophet does w^nesse, saying: Though Abraham be
ignorant Esai. 63. 16.
of us, and Israel know us not, yet tho^ O Lord art our Father, and our redeme^
thy name is for ever. Wherevppo^ S. Augustine gives this note: Tho^ see here
(says he) that neither Abrah^ Aug. lib. de cura pro mortuis agenda. Cap. 14.
nor Israel knew after their death, wh^ the estate was of their posterity.
And i^ the same chapter (he says) I am certainly persuaded, that the dead
know^ no more what we do here in earth, the^ we being in earth, know what they
do^ in heaven. Touching service in an unknown speech, how can it stand with
the Apostles doctrine? If the Trumpet (says Saint Paul) give an uncertain 1.
Cor. 14. 8.
sound, who shall prepare himself to battle? Also in the same Chapter. Let
^ things be done in the congregati^ to edifying how are the people ^lified
which understand not, what is ^oken? But to make the matter more ^aine, the
Apostle says further: I had ra^er in the Church, to speak five words 1. Cor.
14. 19.
^th my understanding, that I might ^so instruct others, then ten thousand
^ordes in a strange tongue. You ask ^so who preached against the Church ^
Rome, for the space of a M. years? ^uly even from time to time, God had his
^hurche, which reproved your gross ido^tries. And for a taste, I will name you
a Reinulph. C^^^.
^we. The Monks* of Chester, which ^ere not idle bellied Monks, but payne^ll
Preachers, and lived not upon the ^eate of other men's brows, but by their ^ne
handy labor, whom your Monkish ^ugustine (sent into England by Pope ^regorie)
did find means to murder ^ost cruelly, by incensing the king to make ^arre
against them. Sabellicus says, in the Sabellicus.
^are of our Lord 1111. the Bishop of Flu^ce began to teach and preach
Anti^rist then to be born, and to be manifest. ^rnulphus a godly Precher,
inueying against Anno. 1131*
the abominatio^s of your Church was privily hanged in Rome by you^ Sabellicus.
Platina.
clergy men: This is no tale but reco^ded by your own histories. A counc^
was holden in king Steuens time, vnd^ Theobaldus Archebyshoppe of Caunte^ Anno.
1133.
bury, charging the Bishops, that the people should learn the Lords
praye^ and the Creed in English. Gherardu^ and Dulcinus, both being
preachers, affi^med Anno. 1280.
the Pope to be Antichrist, and Rom^ to be Babylon. In the same year, king
Henry the second made Laws at Claredowne in Normandy, abolishing the Popes
authority, taking away appellations, and Peter pence. In the city of Tolouse
in the year of our Lord. 1178. a Anno. 1178.
great number, both men and women professoures of the true religion, were by
the Popes commissioners condemned to death. There were certain christen
people, called Valdenses or Leonistes, true professoures Roger Houeden.
of the Gospel, as appears by the articles of their religion, which lived in
the year of our Lord 1170. And of these godly Christians, speaks one of
your Laziardus. Anno. 1170.
own writers: who says thus, The sect of these Leonistes has a great show
of piety or godliness, because they lived justly, and uprightly before men,
Reinerius.
and do believe all things very well, which concern God, and all the
arti^es, which be contained in the Creed: ^nelie they do speak ill of, and
do ^ate the Church of Rome. I will not ^eake of king John, who detesting your
Romish doctrine, was poisoned by a ^ayterous Moonke, at Swinested Abbey, ^n
Lincolneshier. I let pass John Wick^iffe person of Literworth, who read the
^iuinitie lecture in Oxenforde, a zealous ^rofessour of all the points of
doctrine, which we now maintain: Whose bones, your clergy took up many
years after his death, and burned them. I could name John Husse and Jerome of
Prage Bohemians, whom the Emperor, and your Pope sent for, unto the council
holden at Constance, under their safe Conductes, Council. constan.
to come and go in safety, yea, though they proved very notably their
faith, which word by word agrees with the true religion, now set forth:
Nevertheless contrary to promise and their own hands and seals, most
violently they condemned the^ for heretics, and burned them. And to salve this
sore, and bleare the worlds eyes, they afterward decreed, that Fides cum
haereticis non esset seruanda: that is, That faith ought not to be kept with
heretics. Gods name be thanked, it may sufficiently be proved, that in all
ages there were some, which defended the truth, against your tyranny. But to
come to the Pope, this word Papa is a general name unto all learned men: and
therefore does not pertain only to the sea of Rome. Saint Augustine and Saint
Hierome, writing one to another, calls each other, Papa: though one of them
was conversant in Iewrie, and the other at Hippo in Aphrick. But to the matter.
You would know, what we mislike in the Popes government, and what Pope
declined first from his Forefathers faith and steps. The Popes, or Bishopes
of Rome, for the space of three hundred years after Christ, did for the most
part suffer martyrdom under the wicked Emperors, for the testitimonie of
Christ, and the doctrine in these days published: At which time they did not
rule, but were ruled: After that, they lived other three hundred years, and
more in a calm time, and in great quietness, by Gods providence under
Constantine the great, and the god^ Emperors his successors. Which time
^eeing expired and accomplished, they ^eeing pricked forwards through pride
and ambition, did begin to claim supe^ioritie over their fellow Bishops,
and also to decline by little and little, from ^he perfect rule of God his
holy word and verity: And in steed thereof magnified, and extolled them
selves and their own inventions and traditions, not stry^ing and contending who
should excel or ^oe before one an other in pure and ^incere doctrine and
holiness of life: But ^ather who could work most mischief and injury one
toward an other of them seeking one to deprive an other of their
Bishopprikes, and often times of life, in taking one an other out of their
Platina.
graves, and also cutting of one an others ^ingers, and poisoning one another,
and ^n making Laws decrees and ordinan^es one against an other: there being
sometimes two or three Popes at one time, in doctrine unsound, in life wicked,
and in this hurley burly, the Church of Rome continued a very long time, both
before, and after Hildebrande. Nevertheless, this Hildebrande being yet
Cardinal (as one of your own Cardinals ^enno Cardinalis
reports) did beat Pope Alexander with his fist, and kept him in prison (for
that he would not take upon him to be supreme head of the Church) which
Hildebrande poisoned six Popes, was Auentinus.
a coniurer, and raised up Diuelles, and threw the Sacrament into the fire.
Another says, that they were many, that both privately and openly cursed Pope
Hildebrande, and said, that with his hatred and ambition, he troubled the
world: and that under the color of Christ, he wrought the feats of
Antichrist. This was he, in whose time Satan was let loose, and when your
Church of Rome, 2. These. 3. 4. 5.
might truly be called the seat and harbor of Antichrist, the man of sin,
which sets himself against God, which sits in men's consciences, and is
even that whore which Saint John speaks of, Which Apoc. 18. 3.
should make the nations of the earth drunken with the cup of her
fornication, and has imbrued her hands in the blood of Gods Saints. Surely,
I must needs say, if that these Poten^ates had been but a little whitled, and
^ot beastly drunk, they would never have been so deceived by Antichriste, and
received the mark of the beast. What Lord, King, or Emperor would have
kissed the Popes foot, holden his stir^ope, and served him at the table. To
conclude, besides their wickedness in life, (as many of them being coniurers,
adulterets, namely Siluester the second, who gave him self body and soul
to the Devil, that he might be Pope: and Pope Ioane the woman Pope, who
traueled with Child, as she was carried on four men's shoulders Platina.
about in procession) their doctrine is most damnable and repugneth in all
points the Gospel of Christ: As one saying of Agryppa, speaking of the Pope,
and and Church of Rome, plainly shows. Agrippa. devanitate scientiarum.
They command (says he) the Angels: they have power over the dead: they
use violence against the Scriptures to have the fullness of authority: The
Pope him self is become intolerable: There was never Tyrant, like unto him in
pomp and pride: The Legates of the Bishop of Rome, do so riotte in their
(...) the Pope to be Antichrist, as Irenaeus a godly father shows: Antichrist
(says he) Irenaeus.
being a runnegate, and a thief, yet he will be woorshipped as a God: And
being but a bondseruant, yet he will be proclaimed and published as a King.
Ancelm. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Another says: Antichrist shall faigne him self to be holy: that he may
deceive men under the color of holiness, yea he shall call him self God, and
shall cause him self to be worshipped, and shall promise the kingdom of heaven.
An other Gregory in Job. lib. 25. cap. 14.
says, Whereas he is a damned man, and no spirit, he pretends him self, to
be a God, and whatsoever he does no man may ask him, Domine, cur ita facis?
Sir why do you so: Enter now into your own conscience, examine these sayings
uprightly, look upon them with a single eye, and the^ judge you
indifferently. And I trust that you will recant, according to your promise.

Papist. 8
ITEM I ask what kind and order of service or common prayer, what way of
ministering the Sacraments, your Church had, before papistrie (as you call it)
prevailed in the world? show me one book or coppie of communion, or what
else you list, that was in english, or lacked praying for the departed, or
invocation of Saints in heaven, or that wanted oblation or sacrifice, or that
charged a number to receive, else the Priest could not consecrate or say
Mass, receiving alone, or show any note in a communion book, that people
should take the sacrament for plain bread, or that they should give no honor
unto it? show this book, or any Church or congregation that ever had ani^
^utenticall service, but ours: And I recant.

Answer. 8
I Shall not need to stand long in reciting what kind of service was used,
before papistrie began: verily even the same which our Savior Christ set
forth, which is recorded in the four Evangelists, and in the Epistles and
writings of the Apostles: from which, the Apostles and the congregations unto
whom they had preached the Gospel, departed not one iotte. And so the Apostle
speaking of the institution of the Lords Supper, says: That thing 1. Cor. 11.
23.
which I have received of the Lord, the same have I delivered unto you. As
though he should say, even he which ought only to bear authority in the
Church has prescribed a way, and orders of celebrating his last Supper: of
which these are the chief parts: That the Minister should show the Lords
death, by preaching his word and Gospel, by calling upon the name of the
Lord in prayer, in delivering the bread and wine, to be received with
thankesgeuing, that the congregation should for their parts prove and try
them selves touching the knowledge of GOD, faith in the mercies of God offered
in Christ, and true sorrow and lamentation for their sins past, endeavoring
them selves to lead a new life, and to show forth the Lords death in
consenting to his word, and institution. It is manifest that the people, to
the number of three thousand souls being of diverse countries and nations,
converted unto the Gospel by Peter's preaching, continued (for so the holy
Ghost speaks) in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and breaking Act. 2.
42.
of bread, and prayers. This order of service was used in all congregations
from time to time, amongst true Christians, and remained perfect for the space
of six hundred years and odd, yea, until the same was altered by your
Popish Clergy, who not being contented with that, which Chris^e, his
Apostles and the ancient Doctoures and Fathers of the Church had set
forth, devised a new way of worshipping GOD, a new ^order of ministration, a
strange and new ^ devised form of prayer, and so turned all vpside down.
But in defense of the truth, we may boldly and truly answer you, that we
hold and maintain the same order of service, the same ministration of
Sacraments, and the same prayer that the true Apostles and faithful
Christians used in all ages. And whereas you ask for Books in English, which
were written before Papistrie began, in which there is no mention made of
praying for the dead, of invocation to saints of private Mass. It is plain
that there were sundry godly books of Scripture, which Dioclesian that
wicked Emperor did burn in open markettes, whose steps your Church of Rome
has followed evermore in suppressing the truth by such means:
Notwithstanding, God be thanked, there be many volumes exstant, written both
by the ancient and godly fathers of the Church, as also in the Saxon tongue
and in very old^ English of which I have seen one, veri^ lately found in a
very old ruinons wall which forbids prayers for the dead which teaches
us only to invoke the name of God, which makes mention o^ no mass, but of
the communion in bot^ kinds, and to conclude does aduouche i^ all points the
same Sacraments, the same principles of religion, and the same manner of
worshipping God, that we do, and proves the same by the scriptures. I^
appears in histories that the Bohemians made peticion unto the council
holden a^ Basil, that they might be permitted to have still, the Gospels the
Epistles and the Creed in their vulgar tongue: i^ which peticion they
affirmed, that in the Sclauon language, it had been used of old in the Church,
and likewise in their own kingdom. Charles the great called five councels,
namely at Mentze, Rome, Remes, Cabilon and Arelate and also decreed that only
the canonical books of the Ex primo Tom. Conciliorum. Anno. 810.
Scripture should be read in the Church and none other, as it was decreed
long before in the council holden at Carthage. He

^ame one of them in the whole Church, either erected for your faith, Church
and ser^ice, or not prepared for all sorts for catho^ke practices: prove to me
that it was done, ^or any other service and religion, then ours, ^r that they
be monuments of any other faith ^r church, then that common known catho^cke
church: And I recant.

Answer. 9.
WHereas you demand, What furniture our Congregation ever ^ad, etc. I must
needs tell you, that either ^he having of such furniture, or the want ^hereof
are but weak and feeble arguments ^ prove the true Church of God by. In
^utwarde pomp, in superfluous orna^ents, in unnecessary toys, in vain
dec^ing of your Churches with gold and sil^er, and other precious and costly
attire, in ^nprofitable rites, in furnishinge your ^mples with abominable
idols, in plea^ng the ear, in delightinge the eye, in ^uginge, in roaring, in
toying, in trif^ng, in nodding, in becking, and in ducking, ^ all such
heathenishe shows, and sensles significations, we think your Romish^ Church
excelled all idolatrous Ethnicks before, and therefore in such superstitiou^
trifles, we will not compare with you, but willingly give unto you the
pre-eminence, because they be not signs of true religion, but badges of
Antichriste, and furniture to deck the whore of Rome withal: For all such kind
of trumperie, be her very marks. As these was none of these toys in the
primitive Church, neither in any true reformed Church, sithence that ^^ine*
so there was no Churches until the time of Constantine the great, who builded
churches and moved others to do the like, for the people of God to repair
unto, for to hear the word of God truly preached, to receive the Sacraments
faithfully ministered, according to Christ's institution: and for the same use
and purpose, we have builded Churches, and do continually repair and reedifie
such as be decayed and ^u^nous. But unto the time of Constantine, the
Christians were violentely and extremely put to death, and persecuted of
tyrants having no public places, to resort unto, but privately assembled
themselves, Ra^^lphus Ces^^iens.
sometimes in dwelling houses, sometimes in hollow caves and dens, ^or fear
of the cruel, and bloody torments. I aurentius vall^ de donatione Constantini.
Laurentius Valla says, that in times past before the reign of Constantine
the great, the Christians had no temples, but secret and close places, holy
little houses, but no great and gorgeous buildinges, chappelles, no Churches,
oratories within private walls, no public and open Churches. For your
chalices I will only use the saying of Pope Boniface. Bonifacius.
In time past (says he,) golden Bishops used wooden chalices: but now
wodden Byshopps use golden chalices. In like manner in Constantine his time
there were no altars of lime and stone, but communion tables of wood and a long
time after, as it may easily be proved by ancient writers. Athanasius
writes, Athanasius in Epist. ad sol^taria^^ vitam agendam
That the Arria^ Heretics in their fury and their rage, did carry forth and
burn the seats, the pulpettes, the wodden table and boorde, and such other
things, as they could get, out of Christian Churches. S. Augustine writes
the Augu. ad Bonif^ cium. Epist. 50.
same of the Donatistes. Concerning your vestimentes, your catholic practices,
and all your trumperies, and beggarly Ceremonies, for which you have no warrant
in Gods book, we way not one rushe. We hold us contented with that, which
Christ our savior, his Apostles, and other catholic godly Fathers used. Did not
our savior Christ, I pray you, minister his last supper Math. 26. 26*
unto his Apostles at the table, without any further ceremony, even as the
Apostles, and 1. Cor. 10. 21.
all true Christians have done ever more* whose example the Lord grant us to
follow.

Papist. 10
I Ask of them, whether the Lutherans, Zwinglians, Illirians, Caluinists,
Confessionists, Zwingfeldians, Anabaptists, and such like be all of one church.
And if either they can prove unto me, that these being of such diversity in
faith and religion, make one church, or that each of these sects may give
salvation to their folowers being so disagreable one with the other, in high
points of our religion: or that I should believe all these, rather then the
catholic church, or one of these more then an other, all making such a bold
challenge, for the truth and Gospel, Let the protestants of all these conferr
together, and show me of these things, and with all, among them selves agree to
what sort of these sects, they would have me, and I recant.

Answer. 10
I Do merueile greatly, that you impute Aug. contra Anabaptists. B^llinger*
contra Anabaptistas.
unto our religion, the heresies of the Anabaptists, and Swingfeldians, seeing
that we do not in our daily sermons inueigh against their blasphemous
errors: but also have written sundry books, to confute the the same. You do
ask a very hard and difficult question, which you do utter, either for want
of wit, or lack of knowledge: to wit, Whether Calvin, etc. were of one
Church, and whether they gave salvation to their followers. It is not in man
precisely to define, who is of Gods Church, for that they only be of Gods
invisible church, Whom God has elected unto salvation in his son Christ
before the fou^datio^ of the world Ephe. 1. 4.
was laid, and God only does know who are his. But it may be that you
understand it of the visible church, and then I will answer you accordingly
that we are certainly persuaded, that they were Gods children, and that they
ended their life, and closed up their eyes in the true faith of Christ, and
do rest now in Gods Kingdom. Where you seem to charg them with manifold
scismes, and diversity of judgments, the truth is, that they agreed in all
points with the scriptures, saving that Luther in the real presence dissented
from the rest: which heresy (as I have noted before) he received of your
church of Rome. I would not have you to think, that we ground our faith and
religion, or repose any part of our salvation upon any particular Church, or
Council, or upon any mortal man, as you do. We receive men's judgments, and
writings, as they are men, and so may err. And so the godly Fathers in times
past Aug ad Fortuna^ianum. ^pist. 3.
were reputed and taken. S Augustine has these words. We ought not (says
he) to accept the disputations, and writings, of any one be they never so
Catholic, and praise worthy, as we do receive the canonical scriptures, but
that sauinge their reverence due unto them, we may well find fault with, or
reject some things in their writings, if it happen we find, they have
otherwise thought, then the truth may bear them: so am I in other men's
writing, and so would I have others understand mine. It is most true that
Origem, Ambrose, Augustine, Hierom, and the other fathers of the Church have
their several errors, and one does write against an other most vehemently.
What marvel is it, that these did differ, seeing that ^he Apostles the^ selves
could not agree always in all points. Paul did withstand Gal. 2. 11.
Peter in the face before all men. Platina, one of your own story writers,
affirms that the Popes them selves, whom you brage so much of, did repugne
one an others decrees. The next Pope (says he) Platina in Stephano and Romano.
either breaks, or utterly repealeth his predecessors decrees: For these
little petie Popes, had no other study to occupy them selves with all, but
only to deface, the name of the former Popes: of which church were not only
these Popes, but also your own scholemen, and pillars of your religion: How
came it to pass, that these things were uttered in your own boks. Barnardus
non vidit omnia: Barnarde did not see all things. Hic magister non tenetur:
Here Tho. Aqu. in quodlibet q^articulo vltimo.
one master is not to be received. Thomas Aquine, says, that we are not
bo^nd upon the necessity of salvation, to believe not only the Doctors of the
Church, as Hierom. and August* but also neither the church it self, saving
only matters concerning the substance of faith. But let all men's authority
pass, and receive that (...) remaining in eight Persons, the which which the
holy Apostle wriceth. Whosoever brings not the Doctrine of the Gospel,
receive them not. And again: If we or an Angel from heaven do Gal. 1. 8.
preach any other doctrine, the^ you have received, hold him accursed. To
conclud we ought not to lean either to this man, or that, to the right hand,
or to the left, to this church, or that church in any thing whatsoever, further
then the truth of Gods word does direct us. Neither does our salvation depend
upon any earthly man, but we ascribe it wholly to our lord, and savior
Christ, by whose stripes only we are healed.

Papist. 11
Moreover I ask of the Protestants, whether in the time, on which they hold
the true Church to have been hidden or lost, the people, that learned this
article of their Creed, I believe the catholic Church, was bound to go from
the church, which they saw, and which taught them both that article and all
other things touching their faith, by which they were christened and received
al other sacraments and commodities of salvation? And whether they were bound
to seek for this unknown and closse congregation, which they could neither
come unto, nor by which they never received any benefit, nor ^ould receive any,
and so forsake the church, ^y whom and in whom they received both their faith
and sacraments. Show me therefore that the Christian men of those dates were
charged to believe any other church or seek for any other church, the^ that
which taught them the articles of the church, and baptized them: And I recant.

Answer. 11
YOu further demand, Whether the people, when the Church was hid, were bound
to go from the church, which they saw, and seek the unknown church, and
believe the same, If you will vouchsafe to peruse that, which I have noted:
heretofore, which is also confirmed by sundry learned authorities, viz. that
the true church of God is to be sought for, and to be found only by the
scripturs, which are the foundations of the same church, you may be satisfied
herein, that the people ought to stay them selves upon the scriptures, and not
to believe any further, then Gods word leads the^. The true church of God, is
not always most apparent in earth, or consistinge of the greatest number. This
appears by Noah, in setting him self against all the world Genesis 9. 1.
(the true Church only excepted) then were saved in the arc, and all the
world else drowned. Was not Lot and his small family, the true Church of God
delivered by Gene. 19. 16.
the Angels, and the five whole cities destroyed* where was the Church in the
time of Elias, when he complained most bitterly, 1. Reg 19. 10.
and said, I have been very ielous, for the Lord God of hoastes: For the
children of Israel, have forsaken the covenant, broken down the altars, and
slain thy Prophets with the sword, and I only am left, and they seek my
life to take it away. Where was the Church Esaias 1. 21.
when Esaias the Prophet cried out. How is the faithful city become an harlot?
it was full of judgment, and justice lodged therein: but now, they are
murderers, their silver is become dross, their wine is mixed with water,
their Princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves. Where was the Church,
when David the Prophet did break for the into these words, there is not one
that does good, Psalm. 14. 4.
no not one. If there were any Church of God, in these times, in which these
Prophe^es lived, no doubt it was in very few or else hid altogether, otherwise
they would not so greeuouslie have complained of the want thereof. And yet
there was in all ^ese times, a Church in outward form, and ^ewe, to the
judgment of man supposed to ^ the true Church, where the Jews the ^^e Church,
at what time they bosted most ^ the outward beauty of their Church, ^ying: We
are the temple of the Lord, or Ierem. 7. 4.
^hen they said, we are the children of God: whereas even at that time, they
went ^ whoring after their own inventions. Io. 8. 41.
But as the Scribes, and Pharisees vaunted ^em selves, that they were the true
Church ^f God, the Disciples of Moses the sons Io. 8. 33. Marc 7. 7,
^f Abraham, where as in deed by the te^^imonie of our savior Christ, they
wor^^ipped God in vain, teachinge the pre^eptes and doctrines of men, and
erred, for that they know not the scriptures, and were Math. 22. 29. Matthew.
23. 14
^ypocrites and dissemblers, devouring wi^owes houses, under a color of long
prai^r: even so you, with your Church of Rome, though you brag never so much
of your ^uccession, and authority, the holy ghost Apoc. 18. 10
^lainly shows, that your Babylon shall ^aue a fall. Our savior Christ
tells both Luke 19. 46,
^ou, and the pharisees, that you have made (through your own devises) the
temple of God adenn of thieves. Triumph never so much, that you are the
catholic church* that you are in the arc of Noah, you are none of Gods,
neither shall be, till you renounce, and abolish your vain ceremonies ^ false
worshipping of God, and other things which you do contrary to his holy worde^
The true church of God, is compared to the Moon: which sometimes is full clear
a^ bright, sometimes in the Eclips is wan ^ dark: so the church of God is now
great now small, now calm and in quietness, now subject to tempests, and
troubles, now in many, now in few. And therefore you are greatly deceived,
in that you do think, the Church utterly extinguished, when it appears not
at your pleasure. Thus you may learn by sundry writers, that God has had,
and will have always his church, whether it be more or less. One which has
written the Forte of faith, sayth^ thus: In this battle of devils,
notwithstanding Fortalitium fidei, lib. 5.
the godly Princes, the soldiers the Ecclesiastical Prelates and subjects be
overthrown, yet evermore some remain, in whom the truth of faith and the
righteousness of a good conscience is preserved. And although there remain
but two men in the world, yet in the same

church then al me^ young and old for those years perished with out hope of
mercy, because they could not unite them selves and be incorporate to the
company and congregation whereof they never heard, nor could by any means
surmise. Therefore let any man alive prove me, that either any man could ever
out of the true Church be saved, or that any other company could be known
for the true and only Church, but our common catholic society, or that all
men were damned for a thousand years together, because they could not surmise
of any other Church, then that which practiced all holy functions which
Christ left for our salvation ^n the world: And I recant.

Answer. 12
Concerning your question, whether any man for the space of a thousand
^eeres of blindness could be saved out of the Protestants Church, we do
not yield so much unto you, that your blind Church continued a thousand
years, but of that I have sufficiently spoken before, and have showed in what
manner it began, how^ i^ grew, and increased, and when it came to full
perfection. You have moreover framed (albeit vncunningly) a dilemma or captious
proposition, wherein you mean^ to intrappe us, in these words: If (say you) for
the space of a M. years, the people could be saved by the popish sacraments,
then the^ was away to heaven, without Gods church: ^ then al are damned which
died, within the ^^^ pass, of these M. years. Which argume^ is untrue in
either part: for we neithe^ can ascribe salvation to your sacramente^ neither
do we condemn those, which died ^ the time of ignorance, but refer them ^
Gods secret judgment. Furthermore ^ answer that without the Church of Go^
there is no salvation, but this Church ^ not bound, nor tied to place, time,
or person, but is invisible, not known, save onl^ to GOD, who causes his
light to shin^ forth of darkness, who does by his hol^ spirit breathe where
he thinks good^ Who is no accepter of persons, as P^ter Ioh. 3. 8. Act. 10.
34.
says, But in every nation, he that fears God, and works righteousness is
accepted of him: Who is sure in his promises and cannot deny himself. And
Saint Paul groundinge upon Gods election and man's faith, says That the
foundation 2. Tim. 2. 19.
of God remains sure, and has his seal, that the Lord knows who are his.
Man cannot judge whom God has chosen. For although Elias supposed all the
children of God in Israel, to have been murdered, by wicked Iesabell, and cried
out, I only am left alive: Answer was 2. Reg. 19. 1^
made him by God, That he had seven thousand in Israel, that had not bowed
there knees unto Baall. And therefore we will not judge those, which have died
in ignorance for want of knowledge, but referr al to Gods secret Judgment, who
knows whom he has chosen. Touching the visible church, Saint Augustine
says, August.
That acording to gods secret predistination, there be many sheep without the
Church, and many wolves within the Church, for he knows them, and has them
marked, that know neither God nor them selves. So that we neither condemn
old, nor young, rich nor poor, noble nor simple, but leave them unto the
Lord, who knows his. God is able in a moment to turn man's heart. The theife
that did hang upon the right hand of our savior Christ when he desired him
to remember him, when he should come into Luke. 23. 42.
his kingdom, was most lovingly received. I have known sundry persons which
have been trained up al their life time in your popish religion, and upon their
deathbed when they did see no way but one, they have renounced all your
trumperie, and popish woorship and have dyed faithful Christians to man's
judgment. Therefore I end this matter, with that saying of the Apostle: That
Christ is able to have Heb. 5. 2.
compassion upon them that be ignorant. So we refer all things unto Christ
as unto our only head and Captain, who has conquered all our enemies, and
reconciled us to God his father. You repose a trust and confidence in your
Sacraments, whereunto you do ascribe salvation using them as a way or means
to climb up to heaven, as though they could sanctificand, confer grace,
which, albeit you did use them according unto Christ's institution, which you
have clean altered, and do not agree therewith in any one point: yet they
were but visible signs of August.
invisible grace, So we say that they be true significations of Gods eternal
grace, being ministered according to the rule, which Christ has left. But if
grace were necessarily joined with the outward Sacraments, then the wicked
receiving the Sacramental signs, should also receive grace which is far
from them. I will not urge you with many authorities for the proof hereof,
whether the sacraments contain grace or no: Read but your own writers, and
they can satisfy you herin, Bonauenture one of your own side says:
Bonauentura in 4. Senten. did. 1. 4. 3.
We may not in any case, say that the grace of God, is contained in the
Sacraments substantially, as water in the vessel, or medicine in the box
(for to understand it so, it were erroneous:) But the Sacraments are said, to
contain the John de Parisus. de potest. Regia. cap. 26.
grace of God, because they signify the grace of God. An other of your
schooledoctors says: The special grace of the passion of Christ is contained
in the Sacraments of the Church: even as the power of the woorkeman is
contained in the instrument or tool, wherewith he woorketh. Even as the
children of the 2. Reg. 4. 40.
Prophets said to Elizeus the Prophet: O thou man of god, death is in the pot:
for that they feared, some poisoning herb to be in the pot, because of the
bitterness. Proves. 18.
And as the wise man says, Death and life are in the power of the tongue and
they that love it, shall eat the fruit thereof. His meaning is that by the
well, or evil using of the tongue, comes either good or bad. But thus much
of these matters.

Papist. 13
Again show me any church, or immagin, if you can by good reason, a Church of
Christ, in which there is no gathering together for preaching, no spirit of
prophesying, no rod of correction, no order of ministering, nor any
spiritual function that can be named: prove me that there can be a true
Church for a thousand years together, and lack all th^se things, and
withal, that there was one untrue Church, which for those many years only
practiced these offices to the salvation of many, And give me a good reason,
why this church that always has had these functions should be a false Church,
and the other that wanted them all, should be a true Church, and I recant.

Answer. 13
THese be very base, and childish reasons to prove the true Church of God by,
as though Christ's Church should be always known and disceened by outward
offices, and functions. I have showed before at large, that the true church of
God might be so hidden, and the true religion so suppressed, that it might in
man's judgment seem that god had no church at al, or else a very small Church*
yet nevertheless God has from time to time sent some Moses, some Elias, some
Jeremy, some Baruch, or some one or other, to represent his true Church, to
publish his true law and gospel, and to waken the people from sin, that the
world might thereby be without al excuse, as I have named some, which lived in
the time of ignorance, which diligently preached the Gospel and reproved the
idolatries of your Church. There was moreover Crantrius. lib. 8. cap. 16. and.
18. Anno. 1240.
certain godly preachers in Sueuia, in the year of our Lord. 1240. which
preached against the Pope, affirming his authority to be usurped, and the
doctrine of the Church of Rome to be corrupt. Arnoldus de noua villa a
Spanyarde complained, that Satan had seduced the Lib. de testibus Veritatis.
Anno. 1290.
world, by your Church of Rome, from the truth of Jesus Christ, and said, That
there ought to be no sacrifice for the dead. Which your Church earnestly
mainteineth. Anno. 1390
At Brugis were. 36. citezens of Moguntia burned for the doctrine of Christ,
affirming the Pope to be Antichrist. Militius a Bohemian, a famous and godly
Preacher, inueighed against the Church of Rome, saying, That Antichrist was
already placed. Marcilius Patauius, Extrauagant cap. Licet. intra doctrinam.
Anno. 1300.
Gulielmus Ockam, Johannes Gandauensis, Luitpoldus, Andraeas Laudensis,
Aligerius, Gregorius Arminensis, Andraeas de castro, Buridianus maintained
Francis. Petrarch. Epist. 20. Illiri. de sectis.
all the Gospel against the Popes proceedinges. Dantes an Italian writer in
his book called, The canticle of Purgatory, declares the Pope to be the whore
of Babylon. Tauterus a Preacher of Germany preached against man's merits and
Invocation to Saints. Franciscus Petrarcha, about the same time did write an
Italian meeter affirming Rome to be the whore of Babylon, the school and
mother of error, the temple of heresy, the nest of al treachery. Johannes de
Rupe scissa Anno 1340. did write, that Rome was Babylon, and the Pope the
minister of Antichriste. ^x bulla Gregorii ^nno. 1364.
Conradus Hager taught twenty four years together, the mass to be no
sacrifice: and that money taken for Masses, ^nno. 1384.
was very robbery and sacrilege. Johannes Mountziger Rector of the
university of Vlme, disputed in open schools against your Popish doctrine.
And at the same time, Nilus Bishop of Thessalonica Nilus. Anno. 1384.
preached, and also wrote a book against the Pope and the Church of Rome,
which book is now extant in English. Truly there passed no age since Christ,
as it appears by the histories, in which Christ's Gospel has not been
preached by some one or other, either privately in the times of persecution, or
publicly in the Chrisost. in Mat. 24.
peaceable times, and tranquillity of the Church, when propheciyng of which
Paul speaks, and other godly exercises has been used. But how the true
Church may be known, it is manifest: surely even in the Scriptures of God, in
which we learn Christ, in which we may learn the church, and by which we may
know the difference betwixt the true and false Church. S. Chris. says: At
this time all Christians ought to flee unto the Scriptures: Because since
heresies invaded the Church, there can be no trial of true Christianity,
neither can Christians, which be willing to know the true faith, have any
refuge saving the Scriptures. Again he says, he that coueteth to know which
is the true Church, how shall he know it, but only by the Scriptures? The
Church of God, I mean, every faithful congregation, in the time of peace and
quietness, does use preaching, Christian and profitable exercises and
discipline, as (Gods name be thanked) we have at this day, especially in all
reformed Churches, and we have had since Christ's ascension: your Church has
always persecuted the true Church by fire, and faggotte and other exquisite
torments. If I may be so bold, I would ask one question of you: Whether the
true Church of God did ever from the beginning persecute, or that it has been
persecuted. You will I think confess with me, that Caine (a figure of the
malignant church) did murder his innocent brother Abell, an image of the true
Church: that Ismael persecuted Isaac: Esawe, Jacob: Saul, David: Genesis 4. 8.
Genesis 21. 21. 9. Genesis 27. 4.
the false Prophets, the true Prophets: the ungodly Pharisees, Christ the
Messiah: the false Apostles, the true Apostles: the cruel tyrants in the
primitive Church, the faithful Christians: and to conclude, your Romish
Church, the true Church, and professoures of the Gospel. And this thing was
forewarned by our sa^iour Christ, That in the world his church should have
tribulation: that John. 16. 20.
the world should rejoice, and his children John. 15. 20.
should be sad, that if the false Church had persecuted the Lord, it John.
16. 2.
should in like manner persecute the servant: and that they which should
Aug. de ciui. Dei lib. 22. cap. 6.
persecute the Church of God, should persuade themselves, that they do God
good service. Saint Augustine speaking of the persecution in the primitive
Church, says: They were bound they were imprisoned, they were beaten, they
were ^acked, they were burned, and yet they multiplied. And Justinius Martyr
shows what he thought of those which suffered, being yet an Ethnike. When
Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 8.
(says he) I herd that the Christians were accused and reviled of all men, and
yet saw them go to their death, and to all manner terrible and cruel
torments quietly, and without fear, I thought with my self, it was not
possible, that such men should live in any wickedness. But to return to
your Church, we may say truly, that you never had, nor used in your Church
rightly according to the word of GOD, either preaching, prophesiyng or
discipline: as for prophesying used by the Apostles, and all other godly
reformed Churches, your Church of Rome never used. If you mean by the spirit
of prophesiyng, which you challenge as of right to your church, the forewarning
of things to come, which office was ceased in the Church: then take heed
least by your own confession, you bewraye your church to be that Sinagogue of
Satan, of which our Savior Christ gives us warning, that with signs and
wonders if it were possible should deceive the elect. You preached very
seldom, not in time, and out of time, as Paul admonished his scholar 2. Tim.
4. 2.
Timothy: and when you preached, you preached not Christ and his death, to be
the only ransom for our sins, but your own works and meritorious deeds:
not Christ's Gospel, but your Legend of lies, and your vain and supersticious
traditions, for which you had no warrant in Gods book. The law of God and his
true worship was either altogether abolished, or else most wickedly corrupted
before the times of king Josias. Helias did also renew the same being before
his time decayed. ^t seems in like manner that the people of ^e Jews were
fallen from God, when ^s they said unto Jeremy, The words that ^ou have spoken
unto us in the name of Ierem. 44. 26.
^e Lord, we will not hear them of thee, ^ut we will do whatsoever thing goes
^orth of our own mouth, as to burn ^ncense unto the Queen of heaven and ^o
pour our drink offerings unto her, as we have done, both we and our fathers,
our kings and our princes in the ^itie of Judah, and in the streets of
Jerusalem. Whereas in deed they woorshipped, Ie. 7. 17.
and sacrificed to the Son Moon and Stars, and committed gross Idolatry,
against God. Even as you have learned by that idolatrous people, and grounded I
think upon this place, to call the Virgin Mary Queen of heaven, and to sing
Salve Regina, and again, Regina coeli laetare. Rejoice O Queen of heaven. And
even from this same time wherein Jeremy lived and for the most part, until
the time of our Savior, there were false Prophets, and men of great learning,
which preached idolatry in steed of Gods law, yet imagined that they served
God, shall we say that these were of Gods church because their religion
continued so: long a time, would that excuse them? or the Pharisees in
pleading that they were the true John. 8. 33.
successors of Moses, the children of Abraham, and that they taught the Law of
God, when as in deed they had corrupted the Law: Even so albeit you boaste
never so much of succession, or that your Church has continued thus many
hundre^, or thus many thousand years, or that your Church is the known
Catholic Church, if that you be not able to prove by the word of God, that
your Church is the true Church, and the religion and doctrine of your Church is
fully and wholly in every point grounded upon the Gospel of Christ (which you
shall never be able to do) then you boaste and brag in vain.

The Turk himself by this argument of succession and continuance, may approve
the Alcaron and religion of Mahomet, and this to be as true a Church as yours.
This reason might the Egyptians, the Persians, the Romans and all Esawes
brood have alleged for themselves. So that to end this matter, it is
neither the title or name of a Church, neither the succession of Officers, or
the continuance of the same, or the authority of any man, that makes the
difference betwixt the true and false Church, but only the true word of
God, which discetneth them.

Papist. 14
Moreover let any Protestant show, how that can be the pillar of truth,
which durst not for a thousand years together, claim either the preaching
of Gods word, or ministering the Sacraments, or would utter her self against
falsehood and superstition. Let any man show that all the gifts of the Spirit,
and functions of the holy Ghost have been taken from her for a thousand
years together, and only practiced for the peoples use by the adulterous
Church: Let it be declared how the gates of bell have not prevailed, and
Christ's words, promise, and warrant for her has not been void and
frustrate of a bastard church exercising perpetual idolatry (as they say,)
has spoiled the true church of all holy actions, and of the whole
government, and of the whole name of Christianity almost ever since Christ's
time. Let me see therefore how the only dareling and spouse of Christ
should be neglected so long of him: so long let the Adversary show that the
Church should ever by superstition and falsehood committ adultery, or deserve
to be deuorced from him, or that Christ should ever want his spouse in earth,
or that he should be either a head without a body, or of such an unknown
and small body: or that Christ his onel^e kingdom should become so
contemptable, or that his spouse in earth should ever lack the singular
prerogative of Gods spirit, Show me these things, and I recant.

Answer. 14.
COncerning the principal matter comprised in this your demand, it is
sufficiently answered before, how that all the Christians in Greece and Asia
have ever refused to agree with your Church in faith and doctrine, and that
God has raised up from time to time, since your Church declined from the true
and Apostolic faith, some which have inueighed against your superstitious
traditions, even as it is recorded by a learned writer, who affirms, That
there has been some in every ^ras. Paraphra. in. Johan.
age which have honored, and embraced the Gospel: but that within the space of
these four hundred years, the zeal thereof has decayed in many men. And
whereas you ask, How the holy Ghost could be kept so long from this close
^hurche, how the gates of hell have not pre^ayled against it, how Christ's
dearling ^ould^ be neglected, how Christ should ^e head of such a Church,
as has either ^o body at all, or else a very small, and ^tle body* I
answer, that albeit to your ^do ^mea^ the Church of God, which ^s the
congregation of the faithful, be con^mptible and despised, yet nevertheless ^
Gods eyes it is precious.

The holy Ghost comes not in visi^le form unto the children of God (as the
Owl or Howlet presented himself in the ^ytime, and stared your Pope John in
^e face, when he and his Clergy were Nicholaus Clemaugis.
^t in a general Council holden at Rome, by which occasion the Council was
dissol^ed*) but he is the comforter, which shall ^wayes remain with the church
of God, which dwells with such as be faithful, which guydeth and rules
their minds, John. 14. 16.
which does sa^ctifie them inwardly, which ^pirite does breathe his graces,
where ^e lists, and when he pleases. And therefor it is a great fault in
you, to utter such ^ashe judgment, and to propounde such vain questions, or
rather as you seem, to define where Gods spirit remains, as though you had
him in a string, or that he should be at your beck and appointment. The words
of Christ be true, That Hell gates (which is the power of Satan and
Antichrist, which stands in craft Math. 16. 18.
and violence) shall not prevail against the Church of God. For you may burn
their bodies, rack them in pieces, tear them in sunder with wild Horses,
boil them in cauldrons, roaste them on spittes, broyle them upon gridyorns,
stabbe and prodde them in with bodkins or penkniues, throw them unto wild
beasts, or other ways to torment them, as your Church o^ Rome has used the
children of God, even this close Church, which you so often do skoffe at.
Nevertheless, their names are written in the book of life. When yo^ have
consumed the body, you have no further power, you have done all that you ca^
for Christ's Church is Christ's darling in deed, whom he will not forsake,
because he is always faithful, and sure in his promises. The mouth of God
has promised them help, which cannot lie. Christ i^ deed is the true
andonelie head of his Church, which be the faithful children ^f God, truly
called the temple of God, because that GOD is resident in them by ^is holy
spirit: and these faithful are the ^tones of the new Jerusalem, which is the
Apoc. 21. 10. Ephesians. 2. 20.
^niuersall Church of God, of the which ^uilding Christ is the chief corner
stone, though you have taught the people of God ^therwise affirming, the Pope
to be head ^f Gods Church, and to be of equivalent ^ucthoritie with Christ. One
of your schole^octors Panormitan. de election^ cap. licet. abb.
says, That Christ and the Pope ^ake one consistory, (and sin only
^xcepted) the Pope can do whatsoever God himself can do. And even as you
^eale with Christ for the pre-eminence and rule: so you will appointe him a
body, ^r no body, or alter or change his body, ^s you list. You cannot
limit GOD ^is Church, for his Church is in many or ^ewe, as his heavenly
wisdom appoyneth. And therefore Christ says That when^oeuer Mat. 18. 20.
two or three are gathered togea^her in my name, I am in the midst of them.
And as one does say, as is before Fortaliti. fidei lib. 5.
^lledged. Although there were but two ^en remaining in the world, yet in them
two, the Church of God, which ^s the unity of the faithful should be
saved. Therefore, though man be ignorant whom God has elected unto salvation,
and who be of Christ his body: yet God who understands all secrets, does
know who are his. And every member of Christ has the spirit of God to
assure his conscience, that he is the child of God. God grant you that
inward testimony, and the comfort of the same spirit, grounded upon the
Gospel, which they do feel in themselves. Then will you never be so careful
for these outward shows.

Papist. 15
Show me that the church which ought to be a Christian man's stay in troubles*
and tempests of doctrine, might become so hidden, or so close, that no man
could find her, or so hartlesse that she could succor no man, nor instruct
any man in h^ doubt of conscience or distress in faith Prove me that there
may be such a decay ^ Gods spirit, truth, and church: And I recant.

Answer. 15
IT seems that you are harping alwaie^ upon one string, but if you would
dil^gently way with your self the frailty man, who is daily slipping away
from d^tifull obedience toward God, and consider what bridles and bittes God
has ordained to pull him back from the liberty of sin, and to preserve him
from dangers: You shall find other stays to ground ma^s faith, and settle
his conscience, then any such outward show of a visible Church, as you
imagine. The ground work, and foundation of faith, and the stay, and buttresse
of man's conscience are the holy scriptures, which David the blessed Prophet
calls the Mountains, unto which the faithful Psalm. 121. 1
should lift up their eyes, which are the only comfort to the^ in their
troubles. Ioh. 5. 39.
Christ exhorts us To search the scriptures, for they do bear witness of
him, 1. Cor. 1.
who is our peace our justification our sanctification, and our redemption. The
Apostle Romans 1. 16.
assures, us That the scriptures are the power of god unto salvation, to as
many as believe, whether they be Jews, or Gentiles. What need we any further
proof to teach us, that faith is stayed upon the scriptures, then that which
is spoken by Paul Rom, 10. 17.
the Apostle* Faith (says he) comes of hearing, and hearing by the word of
God. How shall we know God* How shall we know Christ? How shall we know Gods
spirit, how shall we discern true faith from a fond opinion, but only by
the scriptures. Faith (as Saint) Augustine affirms) does stagger, if the
aucthority of gods scriptures do fail. True faith, true knowledge, and a right
conscience, are grounded upon the word of God. Constantine that worthy
Emperor Tripartit. His. lib. 2. Cap. 5.
spoke openly in the Nicene Council to the like effect: The writings (says
he) of the Evangelists, and Apostles, and the oracles of the ancient
Prophets, do instruct us plainly, what we ought to understand and believe of
Gods will and 1. Tim. 3. 17.
pleasure: and therefore all contention set aparte, let us seek the solution of
those things, which be propounded out of the scriptures of God: which by the
testimony of the holy Ghost be able to instruct unto all good works. The
doctrine of the scriptures teaches especially these four principles:
Knowledge, Faith, Godliness, and Justice true branches of a christian man's
life. It is the part of every Christian, to learn to know God, the Creator
and maker of all things, to know Christ the the redemer of mankind, to know
the holy Ghost the spirit of sanctification, and what benefits he has, and
does receive by these ^hree persons, united in one Godhead: which ^noweledge
the wise man calls, Perfect Sapi. 15. 3.
righteousness, and the root of immoralitie. Also our Savior Christ says,
That ^his is eternal life, that they know thee, ^he only true GOD, and Jesus
Christ John. 17. 3.
whom thou have sent. Man created according to gods Image, may not be like the
Psalm. 32. 9.
Horse and Mule, in whom there is no understanding, or to be such as God by
the Esai. 1, 3.
Prophet complains upon, That the ox knows his owner, and the Ass his
ma^ters cribb: But Israel has not known, any people has no understanding. It
be^oueth him to believe, in these three persons, and all things, which he
knows out of gods book. It is his part, and duty moreover, to practice
piety and godliness tow^rdes God, justice and vprigh dealing toward man.
But I know what you ^hoote at: Verily to have us to believe, and ^o stay our
selves upon the authority of your Church of Rome, and the unwritten ^erities
of the same Church. Because the true Church of God, has not always appeared
to the view of the whole world in outward pomp or show: Therefore your
endeavor to persuade (yet I trust in vain) that man doubtful in conscience
and wavering in faith, could receive no comfort by that close, invisible, and
hartles Church, as you call it. I have proved before, that God has raised up
in all ages, since the beginning of the world, such as have given a
testimony of their zeal, and true religion, unto the world. You must not
limit, and appointe God his Church, or upon whom, he shall power out his
graces, or in what measure he shall bestow his spirit. God by the ministry
of his word does cure and heal such as be broken in heart, gives medicine
to heal their sickness, makes strong the weak faith, Psalm. 147. 3
and does comfort the feeble mind of man by his holy spirit. Gods spirit
cannot decay, or be of less power, or Gods church and spouse less
honorable, albeit there were but one simple man in the universal world, to
man's judgment, which does embrace the truth of God. Though Abell was but
one, though Elias in his time was but one, Noah and his household but a small
number, Christ our Savior and his simple Fishermen his Apostles, men of no
reputation, a very few in respect of all the world besides, had God therefore
^o Church in these times? Notwithstanding the law was corrupted before Christ,
the true worshipp of God clean extinguised, all the people given for the most
part ^o idolatry, yea, and no prophet to reprove the people from Malachie his
time, until the coming of Christ, saving John Bap^iste, and he thirty years
of age before he preached: was there no church or was Gods spirit decayed,
and his truth van^uished all this while* God forbid, that ^ee should be so
rash in judgment, as ^nce to think so. For Gods spirit, which ^s the
co^forter of the faithful, has instruc^ed the church of God, whether it has
appeared, or been hid, whether it has been close or open, whether in many
or ^n few ever since the beginning. So Christ Jesus has promised that his
spirit should remain with the children of God, though the wicked would not
receive him, because they see him not, neither know him. The comfortable
Spirit of God does work salvation, ^oth adopt into Gods favor, does
puri^^e our hearts, does move us to all good John. 14. 16.
and godly actions, does comfort us in all dangers, and confirms us to
expecte the coming of our savior Christ. Therefore to this spirit with the
Father and the Son, be all honor laud and praise.

Papist. 16
Show me again whether any man can be saved, except he believe the catholic
Church, and that is it, which in the face of all the world has practiced
preaching the conversion of nations to the obedience of the Gospel, that has
always had the ministering of the Sacraments the hearing of matters in
controversy the orderly succession of Bishops, uniformity in solemn
ceremonies, unity in faith, that has in her self all holy functions of the
spirit a woorking of miracles, remission of sins, the true sense, and
interpretation of Gods word, that is beawtified with diversity of states,
commended by Christ in the Gospel as with virgins, martirs, with confessors,
and the rest, Prove unto me, that this is not the true Church, or that we be
bound to obey this Church and none other in all controversies and doubts
raised by the difficulty of the scripture, or by the vain contention and
pride of heresy: And I recant.

Answer. 16
Suppose that there was never any man, which would look to have salvation by
^ods mercies in Christ, that ever denied ^e Church of God. So we believe that
^od has had his Church ever since the ^ginning, which Church is the Company ^
the faithful dispersed through out the ^ce of the whole earth, which church is
the ^ouse of Christ, builded upon the doctrine ^ the Apostles, and Prophets,
Christ him ^fe being the head corner stone. Yet ^e utterly deny your Church
of Rome to ^ this true Church of God. The reasons ^d causes, why we will not
close hands, ^ agree with your Church be these: First, ^ur Church does refuse
Christ Jesus to ^ her head in that she sets up her Pope ^ be her head,
wherein she will be governed ^ all things, even against gods holy word: ^erefore
your Church is not of God. That christ is the head of the true church, not
Ephesians. 2. 22.
^ but the spirit of God testifies, that God ^ath appointed Christ over all
things, ^ be the head to the Church, which is ^s body: And again, The husband
is the Ephesians. 5. 23.
^yues head, even as Christ is the head ^f the Church, and he is the same,
which ^eueth salvation unto his body. Your church appoints otherways to be
saue^ by, then only Christ's death and passion yea, does persecute Christ in
his members takes away the key of knowledge, whi^ is the word of God from
Gods people for that ye will not suffer them to have it ^ their known tongue:
you feed them n^ with the sweet pastures of the holy scriptures, but with the
dregs of your blind Ceremonies, and vain traditions: yo^ teach them to pray
in a strange languag^ to woorship the creature, in steed ^ the Creator: you
mix the word of Go^ with your own devises, not to the benefit of Gods
people, but to get money, an^ to enrich your selves, with the spoil ^ their
souls, You set out all your practices (as you call them) to sale: For of you^
church it is said: Omnia Romae vaenalia^ Baptist Manttan.
All things are to be had for monye a^ Rome. The Poet says, That Temple^
Priests, altars, sacrifices, crowns, fier^ Barnard. Clunacens. in Satyra.
frankencense, yea heaven is to be sold^ and God him self. But you give smal^
credit unto this author: Will you hear^ what one of your approved doctors
says Roma dat omnbus, omnia dantibus Decretale.
omnia, Romae cum praecio. Rome does: ^iue to al men, which do give all things
^o her; all things are there to be had for ^ony at Rome. Your own decretales
^y, That Rome is the head of coueteous^esse, and therefore all things are
there ^o be sold. Your Popedom is in part ^ainteined, with the tribute of
Curtesans ^r common stues, which is the reward of ^niquitie, Thus you forbid
lawful matri^onie, and maintain open lechery. And ^hereas you would have the
world to be^eeue that your Church of Rome has always had the due and right
administrati^n of the Sacraments, unity in faith, or^erly succession of
Bishops even from Peter, uniformity in solemn ceremonies, ^ebating of
matters in controversy, all holy functions commended by Christ, as virgins,
martirs, and confessors, and that all Churches are bound to obey the Church of
Rome in all controversies and doubts, raised by the difficulty of the
scriptures, it shall appear to all men, that these are but vain ostentations,
and shows without truth. But you will ask me, who shall judge this matter? for
sometimes you stay upon Counceles, sometimes upon Fathers and sometimes upon
customs. Truly I would but wish you, and every indifferent reader, to examine
whether your mass do agree word by word with the last supper of our savior
Christ. You have culle^ ^at. 26. 26. ^ark. 14. 24. ^uk. 22. 19. 1. Cor. 11. 23.
forth these words, Hoc est corpus meum: This is my body. And therevppo^
have framed your mass. The words be comfortable, if you would take the^ in a
spiritual sense and meaning to signify unto us the body of Christ, as the
godly Father Augustine does expouude those same words: Non dubitauit dominus
dicere, hoc est corpus meum, cum daret signum Aug. contra Adamantum. Ca. 12.
corporis sui. Our Lord (says he) doubted not to say, This is my body, when
as he gave a sign of his body Likewise Tertullian says. Hoc est corpus
Tertul. contra Marcion. lib. 4.
meum, hoc est, figura corporis mei* This is my body, that is to say, This is
a figure of my body. But what shall I speak of all the abuses of your mass, as
the consecration, the elevation, the aduocation, the private receiving the
unknown tongue, the ministration in one kind, keeping the ^uppe from the Lay
people, making it a propiciatorie sacrifice, for the quick and dead, which all
are most contrary unto Christ his institution, in his last supper.
Furthermore, you have corrupted Baptism, and have devised five other
Sacra^entes more then Christ has ordained, ^d appointed in his word.

Touhcing your succession of bishopes, ^d unity in religion, they are two
things which sound very well together, If so be ^u can prove your succession
out of the ^orde of God, and your unity to agree ^ith Christ's verity, and
Gospel. But is ^t this rather truly verified of your suc^ssion, which was
uttered by Pope A^ria^ Adrian. 4.
Succedimus non Petro in pasce^do, ^d Romulo in parricidio. We succeade ^aith
he) not Peter in feeding, but Ro^ulus in murdering. Succession of place
^uaileth not one straw, if you cannot in ^ke manner prove the succession of
Christ ^s true doctrine. The idolatrous priests ^ al ages, might very well
have boasted of ^ccession of place: And so might the Pha^sees, which bragged
so much of their tem^le, and of their succession, even from Mo^es, and yet they
were foully fallen away ^ro^ the sincere and pure Law of God and wor^hipped god
in vain, teaching the precepts, and doctrine of men. You claim your suc^ession
from Peter the blessed Apostle of Christ, for that (as you say) he was Bishope
of Rome: If now you can prove that your religion is the same, that Peter
taught, written by the spirit of truth, for the comfort of the true Church of
God, contained in the new testament of Christ: Then not only I, but all which
defend the same truth with me, will willingly join hands with you. But and
if you can not prove your doctrine by gods word, you must the^ pardon us, in
that we will not take your part against Christ. I would to God that you would
unfeignedly sect forth to the use of gods people, that religion, which the
Apostle Paul, I will not say Peter (for that there is no warrant in the
scriptures for his being at any time in Rome) planted amongst the Romans.
Which faith, and true religion, the Apostle commends in the^* Then surely we
would not only go, but Romans 1. 8.
ru^ne with you to the building of gods temple, and would lay to our hands,
and our hearts. To this effect spaketh S. Ciprian, Cyprian.
that always we build our faith, succession, and whole religion, upon a sure
and steadfast foundation. If (says he) The pipes of the cundit, which before
ran with abundance, happen to fail, do we not search to the head etc* The
priests of God* ^^^ing gods commandments, must do the same, that if the
truth have fainted or failed in any point, we turn to the very original of
our Lord, and to the traditions of the Gospel, and of the Apostles, that from
thence the reason of our actions, or doings may arise, from whence the order it
self, and original first began. Thus we may say of your unity in faith,
your vniformi^ie in ceremonies, and your holy functions: If you can prove, and
confirm these things by manifest places, of the holy scriptures, for my
part, I will recant, and be of your religion. But though you, ^r an Angel
would persuade me to the contrary without the testimony of Gods word: God
assisting me with his spirit, I will not believe you. I marvel why you will
seem, to maintain these matters, se^ng it is most repugnanc to the truth. The
^eade Capitaines of your religion, and Doctors of your Church do not agree in
^he unity of your religion, but do dis^ent in the principle points thereof.
Some ^aye, That Christ's natural body, even ^he same, which was borne of the
vir^in Marie, is received in the Sacrament, ^ome deny (saying) that so soon
as the form of the bread, is grated with the teethe, straight way the body of
Christ De conse. did. 2. Tribas gradibus in glossa.
is caught up into Heaven. One says, That a mouse may eat the body of Christ:
an other says, That a mouse can not eat it, and to dissolve these questions,
the chief pillar of your church, even Petrus Lombardus says: What the mouse
Petrus Lombar. Sent. 4. did. 13.
does take or what she eats, God knows: I can not tell. And noting further
the disagrement of your church men, he says: Some men judge thus, some say
thus, some have written thus, some grant thus, some others have taught thus,
that the very substance of the bread and wine remain still. And if a
question, says he: were moved what manner of conversion, or change this is,
whether in form, or in substance, or in some other manner, Gabriel niel in
can. lect. 40.
I am not able to discuss. An other says: How the body of Christ is there,
whether it be by changing of something into it, or Christ's body begin to
be there together with the bread, both the substance, and the accidents of the
bread remaining still without changing, it is not found expressed in the canon
of the Bible. Innocentius the third Pope of that name, says: Innocent. 3.
that there were some which said, that as after consecration there remained
the very accidents, or forms of ^reade: so likewise the very substance of
the same bread remains still. Mark how the pleas^^nt, and sweet ^armonie,
and concordaunce of your church of Rome, does agree and hang together, as
concerning these weighty cau^s. I think you judge this transubstan^ation, a
matter of faith: You may see ^en, how you agree, or rather disagree ^ the
unity of faith. Concerning your ^iformitie in your so many superstitious
^uiteles and tedious Ceremonies and ^aditions of your own inventions, it ^ay
easily be veiwed and seen by the ma^fold sects of your religious stoare and
^ble of your heremites, your Ankers, ^d Ancresses, your recluses, your holy
^onkes of Benettes order, of Cluniacen^s order, of Lazarits order, of Saint
^ieronimus order, of Saint Gregory's ^der, the order of the shadowed valley, of
^saphattes order, of the Humiliats or^r, of the Celestines order, of Gilber^nes
order, of Justinians order of the Charter house, Monks of the Templaries order,
of the Iacobites order, the Monks of Mount Oliuete, Mary's brethren, the order
of the Flagellatours, the Starred Monks, some white, some black, some graie,
some maled, so called for tha^ they did wear male cotes next their skin, the
order of Jesuits, and a great company of orders besides these: Of Friars,
some were called cross bearers, some Carmelit^ or white Friars, some
Minorities, or gre^ Friars, some obseruant Friars, some Mendicant, or begging
Friars, some Dominicke, some Franciscans, so called of Saint Frances, whose
coule, as Thomas Aquine The. Aquiz.
faith, had power to remove sin I omit your Channons, your Virgi^ Nuns of
all sorts, but such as had n^ oil in their Lamps, your Nominals, your reals.
I might make a long discourse here, in describinge the variety of this
religions crew and company, not only in ceremonial matters, but also in
matters of faith and doctrine: But I trust all the world does know, how they
have been bewitched with such kind of sorceries, and therefore I should but
wast labor, and lose time. You ask further: Whether we be bound to obey
your Church of Rome, and none other in all controuesies and doubts raised by
the difficulty of the Scriptures, or by the vain contention of heresies.
Hereby you seem to challenge two things, not only a prerogative, or
pre-eminence above all other churches, but also the interpretation of the
scriptures solely and wholly to appertain unto you. But I pray you tell me,
from whence you had this privilege: I am sure you will say, that you received
it of Peter the Apostle of Christ, because that hereupon you do ground all
your church and religion: For that (as you say,) Peter being the chief, and
head of the Apostles, having the keys of the Kingdom of heaven Math. 16. 19.
committed unto him, and being Bishop of Rome, it comes by descent and
orderly succession unto all the Bishops of Rome. But this your supposition I
utterly deny: that either Peter was the chief of the Apostles, or that the
keys were solely and only given unto him by Christ: or that Peter ever was at
Rome. That Peter was not the head of the Apostles, it is plain by the
testimony of S. Paul, who says, That he which was mighty by Peter in Gal.
2. 7.
the Apostolic over the circumcision, was also mighty by him toward the
Gentiles. And again he says, when James Cephas and John knew of the grace,
that was given unto me, which are compted to be pillars, they gave to me, and
to Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, that we should preach unto the
Gentiles, and they to the circumcision: And your ordinary gloss upon this word
says, That Paul did not learn of others, as Glossa. ordinaria in Gal. ca. 2.
of his superiors, but did confer with them, as with his friends, and
equals. When the. 2. sons of Zebede, desired to be exalted, and that the
other ten disdayned therefore at them, our Savior Christ called them all
before him saying: Ye know that the Lords of the Gentiles Math. 20. 25.
have dominion over them, and that they be great, and exercise authority over
the^, but it shall not be so among you, but whosoever will be great among you,
let him be your servant: and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be
your minister. When the Apostles disputed Mar. 9. 35.
by the way for superiority, our Savior Christ said: If any man desire to
be first, or chief, the same shall be last of all, and servant unto all. And
oftentimes 2. Cor. 6. 1.
the Apostle Paul calls all the Apostles, Fellow laborers, Workers
together, and Companions. That godly Cyprian. de si^plicitate prebatorum.
father Cyprian says: Peter was even the same, that the other Apostles were,
endued with like fellowshippe, both in honor, and also in dignity. And
Chrysostom Chrisost. in Gal* cap. 2.
writing upon the Epistle to the Galathians, says: Paul had no need of
Peter, neither did he lack his consent, but was his fellow companion in
honor. Now for the keys: you say that Christ gave them only unto Peter.
Math. 16. 29.
When he said: Unto thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven. First
you must understand, that the keys, of which our savior Christ hear makes
mention, are the word, and scriptures of God: And so Saint Chrysostom does
Chrisost. in Mat. hom. 44.
expound these words saying.

Clauis est scientia scripturarum, per quam aperiturianua veritatis, The keye
is the knowledge of the holy scriptures, by the which the gate of the truth is
opened. And these keys were not proper to Peter, but common to all: For Saint
Augustine says, That when Christ did ^g. in Johan. ^ct. 124.
say unto Peter, I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, he
meant his whole church: An other says, The keye beareres, are the ministers of
^risost.
Gods word, unto whom is committed the teaching of the word, and the
interpretation of the Scriptures. An other says: This saying, unto thee I will
give ^igen. in Mat. ^ct. 1.
the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, is common also unto other, and the words
which follow, as spoken unto Peter, are common to all. Thus you may see, that
Peter neither has any divinity above the rest, neither the keys, which be
the scriptures, do belong more unto him, then to the other Apostles, and
faithful ministers of Gods church. Now to prove that Peter was never at Rome:
It appears evidently, that our savior Christ gave Peter and the rest a
charge, to tarry at Jerusalem Let. 1. 4.
after his ascension, who continued there preaching the Gospel, insomuch that
he converted at one sermon, three thousand Act. 2. 41.
souls. He is put in prison, and being delivered, was charged not to speak
any more in the name of Jesus. Notwithstanding, he with the rest did preach
still, Act. 4. 17.
and being put in prison again, was delivered by an Angel, who sets open
the prison doors. The Apostle Peter with Act. 5. 19.
his fellows, cease not to preach both daily in the temple, and also in
private houses. Paul is converted the first year after Christ's ascension and
receives the holy Act. 9. 17. Gal. 1. 18.
Ghost: yet he remains at Damascus, and in the countries adjoining, for the
space of three years after his conversion: in the fourth year he comes to
Jerusalem to see Peter, where he aboade with him fifteen days. Peter then
goes to Ioppa, Act. 9. 34.
where he heals Aeneas, which had kept his bed eight years, and was Act.
10. 44.
sick of the palsy: he rayseth Tabitha from death: He is sent for unto
Caesarea, where he conuerteth Cornelius. Peter returns to Jerusalem, where
having some contention with them of the circumcision, he shows the cause, why
he went unto the Gentills. Peter is put in Act. 11. 2.
prison again by Herodes commandment, and sleeping between two soldiers,
bound with two chains, the Angel smot him on the side, and the chains fell of,
and Act. 12. 3.
he was brought forth of prison, and entered into the city, the iron gate
opened to them by it own accord, and they came to Mary's house. Shortly after
he goes again to Caesaria, where he abides. I ^ct. 12. 19.
showed before that in the fourth year after Paul's conversion, he came to
Jerusalem to see Peter: Then fourteen Gal. 1. 18.
years after that, he comes to Jerusalem again, where the Apostles held
Act. 15. 6.
a Council together, where Peter was present: where James, Peter, and John
gave unto Paul and Barnabas the right hands of felloweshippe, that they
should preach unto the Gentills: And Peter, and his fellows, unto the Jews.
For Gal. 2. 9.
Paul had said before that the Gospel over the uncircumcision, which were
the Gentilles was committed to him, as the Gospel over the Circumcision, which
were in the Jews, was committed unto Peter. Then Paul goes unto Antioche,

Whether Peter after a short time did also come, whom Paul rebuked before all
men, because he caused the Gentills to Gal. 2. 7. 14.
live after the manner of the Jews. These things should be done about
nineteen years after Paul his conversion: in which time it is manifest, that
Peter had not been at Rome. Whereby they be deceived which affirm, that
Peter was Bishop of Rome five and twenty years, for that now he should have
been in the midst of his Bishoprike, and that he could not after this time,
be five and twenty years there, it is most plain, for that he lived in all
after Christ's ascension, but three and thirty years.

But now to proceed to my purpose, that is, to prove that Peter was never at
Rome, by such coniecturall arguments, as will hardly by the Scriptures be
disproued. About two and twenty years after, Paul his conversion,
understanding Act. 18. 11.
that Claudius the Emperor, had commanded all the Jews to depart from Rome,
he being eighteen months together at Corinthe, afterward writes this
Epistle unto the Romans, in the which Epistle he saluteth Priscilla, and
Aquilla, and the rest of the Congregation, Romans 16. 3.
being then in their private houses, and also saluted many other by name, and
makes no mention at all of Peter, therein. Who, if he had been there, as you
say that he was, he should no doubt have received salutations, as well as the
rest of the faithful. There fell some contention betwixt Paul and Barnabas at
ct. 15. 39.
Antioche, so that Paul took Siluanus otherwise called Sylas, with him, into
all cities, where they had preached the word ct. 16. 36.
of the Lord. Peter departed from Antioche (where he had remained seven years
together) into Assyria, yet further from Rome. Ye writes an Epistle unto the
dispersed Jews, and sends the same by Siluanus, sending salutations therein
from the Church at Babylon, a famous city in Assyria, 1. Pet. 5. 12.
where Peter was then the Apostle of the Circumcision. But it may be, that you
will say, that I mistake this place, because some writers do interpret this
Babylon to be Rome: and in deed, it is the only place, whereupon you do
ground Peter's being at Rome. But this does not sound with reason, neither is
it likely, that a man should use the name of one city, when he subscribeth
his letter, being written at an other city, or to use any Metamorphosis, in
naming the city, as though he were either ashamed of the place, or else that
he would not have had it known, where he had his aboade, and so he might
better have altogether omitted it, and not to have named Babylon at all. But if
you will needs have Babylon, to signify Rome in this place, sith it agrees
neither with sense, reason, nor truth: then I beseech you, let Rome be that
Babylon, of which the E^angelist Apoc. 14. 8.
speaks, Which is the whore, that has made all nations, to drink of ^he
wine of the wrath of her fornication. Forasmuch as the sins, and vices which
^eined in Babylon are found in Rome ^ great abundance as persecution of the
^rue Church of God, oppression and destruction of Gods people, confusion,
super^ition, idolatry, and all kind of impiety, and ^ickednesse. But to my
purpose: Christ commanded Peter, and the other Apostles (of which they had
their name) to go unto all the world, and to preach the Gos^ell to all
nations, and said that they should ^e his witnesses, both in Jerusalem, and ^n
all Iudaea and in Samaria, and unto the Act. 1. 8.
^ttermost part of the earth. By which it ^ppeareth, that if he had been a
resting Bishop, and tied unto the seat of Rome five and twenty years (as
you ^ontruly affirm) he had broken his mai^ters commandment, and had
answered, neither to his name, nor office. It may be that you will allege the
Histories against me, for the proof of Peter's Bishoprike: but I may truly
answer you, that for so much as the Histories do imitate, and follow one an
others opinion, and in that the same were committed to printe very lately in
respect, and in such a time as no books might be printed, but such as the
Pope, and his clergy would ratify and allow: how may it then seem strange,
albeit the truth of this matter agreeing with the scriptures were concealed*
For if they would have suffered the truth of this cause to have been opened it
would have dashed altogether your Popes succession, and authority. But to
conclude, you say that Peter was Bishop of Rome, at such time as Paul was
first committed there unto prison, which was two and thirty years after his
conversion: but how untruly, let every simple man judge. For Paul
complains, that at his coming unto Rome, when he was first called unto his
aunsweare, No man assisted him but all forsook him. 2. Tim. 4. 16.
No doubt if Peter had been the Bishop of Rome, he would not have forsak his
fellow ^aule. Moreover he exhorts Timothy to ^ome unto him, showing that
Demas ^ad forsaken him, and had embraced ^is present world, and was departed
unto Thessalonica: That Crescens was ^one unto Galatia, Titus unto Dalma^a, 2.
Tim. 4. 11.
he adds this clause, saying, Only ^uke is with me, If Peter had been ^en
in Rome, Paul would not have ^ed these words, Only Luke is with ^ee: For
neither fear of imprisoment, neither present death, would have kept ^acke
Peter, from Paul's company. and if Peter had been in like authori^e, as you
affirm his successors, the Pope now to be in, having the necks ^f all
Emperors, Kings, and Prin^es under his girdle, he would surely ^aue devised,
either some means, where^y Paul might have been delivered ^om that filthy
prison, or else would ^aue obtained, nay granted him a par^on for his life.
So that this can not be ^idden or cloaked, but that either you ^ust deny the
Popes a^cthoritie, and ^premacie in that time, or else plain^, and freely
grant and confess, that Peter was not then Bishop of Rome, as you may, I
warrant you (without any damage, or hurt to your soul) agree unto both. Thus
much touching the prerogative of your Church. Now you say: Tha^ the scriptures
be difficult and hard, and therefore your church of Rome must have the
interpretation thereof. I have showed heretofore, that the Scriptures ^ God be
not hard, but very plain and easy, Psalm. 19.
That they are an undefiled law, which conuerteth the soul, and gives wi^dome
to the simple. They be a candle to Psalm. 119.
our feet, and a light to our steps. The ophilact says: That nothing can
deceiu^ Theophilact. de Lazaro.
those, which do search Gods scriptures, for that they are the candle, whereby
the thief is taken. An other ancient Do^tour says: That all things are
clear, and plain in Gods Scriptures, whatsoeue^ Chrisost. in These. hom. 3.
Clem^ns Alexan.
things are necessary, the same be manifest. Clemens Alexandrinus a grau^ and
wise man in an oration, that he made to the Gentiles says: Harken ye that
befarre of, give ear ye that be near, the word of God is hidden from none,
it is a common light, it does lighten all men, there is no darkness at all in
the world. Yet this comes into question, whether the interpretation of the
scriptures do depend upon the Church of Rome, or no. Pigghius one of your
own doctors says, That the scriptures (as a man, both truly Pigghius Hierar.
lib. 3. cap. 3. fol. 103.
and merely says) are like a nose of wax that easily suffers it self to be
drawn backewarde, and forward, and to be framed and fashioned this way, and
that way, and how soever you list. An other Lyra in. Deuteronomy, cap 17.
faith of your Church of Rome: Although they tell thee, that thy right hand, is
thy left hand, or that thy left hand, is thy right hand, yet such a sentence
must be holden for good. Thus you make the word of God, which is easily and
plain, to the understanding of the simple, and a ^ertaine rule to direct the
true Christian, ^ut a dumble schoolmaster, and dead letter, and that you must
set the holy spirit of God ^o school, as though he had set down the
Scriptures, in a defuse and hard sense, and ^ere not able to expound and
interpret his ^wn meaning Saint Paul says, That we Gal. 1. 8. Aug. contra
lite. r as Petilian. lib.
must to not hear an Angel, if he bring a^ie thing contrary to the Gospel.
Augustine expounding these words says, Whether it be of Christ, or of his
church or of any thing else whatsoever, pertaining either to our life, or to
our faith, I will not only say, if I my self, but if an Angel from heaven shall
teach us otherwise, then we have received in the books of the Law, and the
Gospel, hold him accursed. An other godly father says, As Origin in Mat.
homel. 25.
what Gold soever is without the Temple is not sanctified: so every sense and
interpretation, which is without the holy scripture, although unto some it
seem wonderful, yet it is not holy, because it is not contained in the sense
of the Scripture. Call to remembrance, I pray you, how untruly and clean
contrary to the true meaning of the holy Ghost, your Church has interpreted
the Scriptures: As upon these words, Fiet vnum ouile, et vnus Pastor: your
Church gives this exposition to these words, There Ioh. 10. 16. False
interpretations. Apo. 5. 5.
shall be one fold, and one shepherd: we may not understand it of Christ, but
of some other minister that rules in his room. One said unto Pope Leo in the
Counsel holden at Lateran: Behold, the Lion Council. Lateran. sess. 6.
of the tribe of Judah is come, the root of David, etc. O most blessed Leo, we
have waited for thee to be our Savior. So it is likewise said, The Pope
being the light is come into the world, and men have loved the darkness
more Ioh. 3. 19.
then light, every man that does evil hates the light, that is to say, the
Pope, and comes not to the light: These words are to be understood of our
savior Christ, who in deed is the Lion of the Conc. Tride^^*
tribe of Judah, and comes of the root of David: who is the light, that
comes into the world: and see how blasphemouslie your Church does wrest these
words, and applies them unto the Pope. Again, Pope Sextus affirms, That
he can never Council. Lib. Tom. 1. in purgatione Sixti
be forgiven, whosoever he be, which accuses the Pope. And thus he reasons:
He that sins against the holy Ghost, that is to say, Against the Pope, shall
never be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world to come: These Mat.
words of the Scripture are thus to be taken: That they shall never have
forgiveness at Gods hands, which sin against the holy Ghost: And the Pope will
have them to be meant of him: I could rehearse infinite places to this same
effect and purpose: But let the indifferent reader judge, by these few
places, how untruly the church of Rome does interpret the holy scriptures.
But let them beware betimes of the heavy judgments of god. Woe be unto the^ that
call good euel, and euel good: ^sal. 5. 20.
darkness, light, and light, darkness, sower, sweet, and sweet sower. What is
this, but to diminish the authority of the heavenly word of God? God does
sharply Apo. 22. 18.
threaten, That if any man shall add unto these things, GOD shall add unto
him those plagues, that are written in this book: and if any man shall
diminish of the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his
part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from those
things which are written in this book. God grant you true repentance, that you
may embrace Christ and his word; and escape these threatenings of God.

Papist. 17
Moreover let any man prove unto me, that the true and only church of god may
at any time be void of a spirit of falsely interpret any sentence of holy
scripture, or induce any errors among the people, or approve any unprofitable
or hurtful usage amongst Christians, or that she suffers any damnable abuse in
her religion without open reprehension thereof prove any of these proofs: And
I recant.

Answer. 17
I Have proved before at large, that the true Church of God is never without
the comfort of gods spirit: which spirit does not visibly, and openly in any
form or substance reveal and show him self, but inwardly ingraffe in the
hearts of the elect, whether they be many or few, the doctrine of the
Gospel: does increase true knoweledge in them: does work true sanctification
and holiness: and does guide, and lead them in all good actions. I have proved
also that gods true church does not corrupt, and falsely interpret the holy
scriptures, as your Church of Rome does, in wresting and wringing the sense of
the scriptures, in comparing it to A nose of wax, and a shipmans hose, or in
calling it A dead and dumb letter. But the true sheep does gladly here the
voice of the shephearde: do acknowledge all things to be contained in the
scripture necessary for man's salvation: do confess no hardness, or
difficulty to be in the word of God: But that the holy Ghost does
sufficiently expound himself, and one place express another: The true Church
does not teach the people any errors, any unwritten verities, any inventions
of her own brain, or any thing touching doctrine, or life, which she
finds not written in the canonical scriptures: does not approve any
unprofitable vsages, any fond customs, or suffer any damnable abuses in
religion without open reprehension: does find fault, and does openly
inueigh against all things, which be mixed with Gods true worship and service
by the devise of any man whatsoever, and will allow nothing to be used amongst
gods people, but only that which is warranted by the word of God. In this
your treatise, albeit you speak generally, yet you have a special meaning:
But truly even in that thing, wherewith you charge us, you be most guilty your
self. For if those be worthily called Abuses in religion, which be matters of
faith, and used in the Church, contrary to the express word of God (so that
Christ may be vmpeere) let al indifferent persons judge, whether your Church
of Rome, or we which profess the Gospel, do more abuse true religion, and
induce erours amongst the people. We say that we must pray only unto God, in
the name of Christ, and unto none other: your Church of Rome says, That we
must pray unto the saints departed, and use them as means for us unto God.
Nevertheless God says, Call upon me Psa. 120. 1.
in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee. David The Prophet says, When I
was in trouble I called upon the Lord, and he heard me. And again, he says, I
will confess my sins unto the Lord, and Psa. 50. 15.
so he forgave me the wickedness of my sin. Christ says, Whatsoever you
ask my Father in my name, he will give it you. Show me now by what
authority of scripture, you can disprooue this, and prove your invocation of
Saints: we Ioh 16. 23. Luke 5. 21. 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
say, That it is god only which forgiueth sins and that for Christ's sake,
whose blood does purge us from al sin. You say that the Pope can forgive
sin, and give pardon for many hundred, yea thousand years, and that he can
do whatsoever God him self can do. For in name, you give him no less
prerogative, Dominus Deus noster, Papa. Our Lord God, the Pope. We say that we
are justified freely by Gods special grace, and mercy offered in Christ, and
that faith is the instrument to apprehend this our justification and so says
the Apostle: Ye are saved by Ephesians. 2. 8.
grace, and that through faith, not of our selves, it is the gift of god, not
of works: least any man should rejoice: And again Abraham believed God, and
it was counted Romans 4. 3.
to him for righteousness. You say, that we are justified by our own works
yea and that we have works more then we need, which you call works of
supererogation, or superfluous works.

We say that we must confess our sins only unto God, and so says David. I
will ^sal. 32. 5.
confess, even against mine own self, mine unrighteousness unto the Lord.
You say, That we must confess our sins to the priest, and receive
absolution at his hands: And this you call Auricular confession: We say that
the people of God, be they never so simple or unlearned, ought to have the use
of the scriptures of GOD in their known tongue, and both hear them, and read
them: So Christ bids al men. To search the scriptures. ^hn. 5. 39.
David says. That they are a light to our feet. Saint Paul says, That
^sal. 119. 105
whatsoever things are written they be ^om. 15. 4.
written for our learnin, and eugery scripture sent from God is profitable to
teach to instruct, to reprove, and to exhort, that the man of God may be
perfect prepared to every good work. He says 2. Tim. 3. 16. 17.
further, Let the word of God dwell in you abundantly. Whereupon Saint Col.
3. 16. Hierom. ad Col. 3. 16.
Hierome notes, That even the Leye peoshoulde read the Scriptures, and teach
and admonish one an other: Your church says, That the unlearned people ought
not to have the Scriptures in their vulgar tongue, and that they are hard and
full of difficulties. We say that no Images are to be brought into the Temple
of God, or to be woorshipped: God has forbidden it by Exodus 20. 4.
express commandments, ^oth the making and the woorshipping. God curses
^oth the maker thereof, the tool that ^eth it, and him also that worshippeth
^t. Christ says, Thou shall woorship the Sapi. 14. 8.
lord thy God, and him only shall thou ^erue. The Apostle says, that
Idolaters, ^all have no inheritance with Christ and Mat. 4. 10. Galat. 5. 21.
Apoc 19. 10.
^ith God. The Angel of God refuses ^ be woorshipped, and says moreover,
^oorship God.

You say, that images are to be made, at they ought to be placed in the
tem^es, that they are to be worshipped and that they are the Lay men's books,
yea, and that not only images of Saints departed, but also of Christ and of
GOD himself: which image of God, you set forth in the similitude of an old
aged man, having a long gray beard and a hoare head, albeit God has given a
straighte charge Ioh. 1. 8. Aug. de fide et symbolo. cap. 7.
to the contrary. And Christ says, that no man has seen God at any time,
but the only begotten son of God. Saint Augustine says, That it is
abominable to set any such picture in the Churches of Christians. If a man
had come into any of your Churches in times past, and had used your images, as
Epiphanius a godly writer did use the like long since, you would have
cursed him with Epipha. ad Iohana nem Heerosol. Apud Hiero. Tom. 2.
bell, book, and candell, and would have burned him to ashes in the end. I
will repeat the words contained in an Epistle, which Epiphanius did write
unto the Bishop of Jerusalem, which be these: I found says he a veil
hanging at the entry of the Church stained and painted, and having the Image
as it were of Christ, or of some Saint, (for whose picture it was in deed I
do not remember) Therefore when I saw the image of a man to hang in the
Church of Christ, contrary to the commandment of the Scriptures, I toare
it in sonder, and gave council to the wardens of the Church, that they should
wind and bury some poor body in it. etc. ^ beseech you, charge the Priests
of that place, that they command that such ^ailes as be contrary to our
religion, be ^o more hanged up in the Church of Christ: it behooves your
reverence to ^aue care hereof, that this superstition ^nmeete for the Church of
Christ, and ^nmeete for the people, which be committed unto you, be removed. I
might ^ande long in displaying and manifesting ^he erroures and superstitious
trifles of your Church of Rome, not only in secret ^ractises and devises,
most expressly against God and his truth: but also even in matters of faith
and in the principles of ^rue religion, how far you disagree from Christ,
and his Gospel, and from all ^odlie writers of ancient time. But these ^ay
serve for a taste, saving that I will ^peake one word of your Popes great
^hallenge. We say that all men of what calling soever they be, ought to yield
their obedience unto such as are in authority. Math. 17. 27. Math. 22. 21.
Romans 13. 1.
Christ our Savior paid tribute, he said, Give unto Caesar, that which is
due unto Caesar. Saint Paul says, Let every soul be subject unto the higher
powers, for there is no power, but of GOD: whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the ordinance of god. Saint Chrysostom upon these words
says, Chrisostom. in Romans 13.
Although thou be an Apostle, although thou be an Evangelist, although thou be
a Prophet, or whosoever thou art, for this subjection does not overthrow
godliness: and he does not say simply, let him obey, but let him be subject.
And Theophilacte writing upon The ophilact in Romans 13.
the same place, says, That the Apostle teaches al men, whether he be a
priest, or Monk, or Apostle, that he be subject unto Princes. Your Church
does challenge this authority from Peter, to be above Kings and Emperoures,
which also you say Peter received from Christ. For these be the very words of
Pope Nicholas: Did. 22. Mediolanensis.
Christ (says he) has given to blessed Peter the right, as well of the
^orldly, as also of the heavenly Em^yre. Whereupon you ground these ar^ments:
De mai^ritate and obed.
The Son is higher and grea^r then the Moon, Therefore the ^ope is higher,
and greater then the ^mperour: The soul is above the bo^e, therefore the pope
is above the ^mperour. Thus you take upon you, not ^elie to have the
superiority over Em^erours, but also to put them forth of their ^ates, and to
remove the Empire at your Auent. Adrian. 4. Anno. 1154.
^easure. And thus did Pope Adrian write ^to Frederike the Emperor, My seat
^saith he,) is in the city of Rome: The ^mperoures seat is at Acon in Arden,
which is a Forest in France). Whatso^uer the Emperor has, he has it of ^s,
as pope Zacharias translated the Em^ire from Graecia into Germany: So ^ay we
again translate the same from ^e Germans to the Greeks: Behold, ^ is in our
power, to bestow the Em^ire, upon whom we list. But note how ^he writings of
Saint Peter do agree ^ith this proud popish style. Submit your 1. Pet. 2. 13.
^elues (says Peter) unto all manner or^inaunces of man, for the Lords sake,
Whether it be unto the king, as unto the chief: And to conclude he says.
Honor Tertul. ad Scap.
all men, Love brotherly fellowship fear God, honor the king. Mark^ also how
Tertullian a godly Father agrees with the Apostle against your sup^rioritie:
We honor (says he) the Emperoures majesty, as a man next unto GOD, for so is
the Emperor greate^ then all men, while he is less then only the true God.
Of this mind wa^ Pope Gregory, as he shows in an Epistle, Grego. lib. 3.
(...). 61.
which he writes unto Mauritiu^ the Emperor. Behold (says he) Thu^ will
Christ answer you by me, being both his, and your most humble seruant^ I
have committed my priests into you^ hands, as for my part, I being subject
unto your Majesty's commaund^ment, have caused your order to be sen^ throughout
diverse parts of the world* So that by the premises, it plainel^ appears,
what dangerous errors, and corrupt doctrine most repugnant to Christ, your
Church of Rome has taught the people of God.

Papist. 18
LET any Protestante in the whole world prove unto me, that their Church
could rightly be called Catholic, which was so particular, that ^ man alive
could name a place, where ^y such church was: or that it might be ^lled
holy, which had neither Baptism, ^r any other sacrament to sanctify any ^
her fellows withal: or that it could be ^e, which as it grew up in the
world, was ^uided into so many sundry sects* or that ^ might be called
Apostolic, which could ^uer make an account by orderly successi^, from any
apostolic man: or that the se^ete, base, and disordered congregation was ^er
of that majesty, that it might require ^e obedience of all nations: or that it
was ^er able to gather general councels, or ex^cise discipline upon
offenders: or that ^hese titles proper by scripture and doctors ^ the true
church could ever be chale^ged by ^ght to their congregation, I mean these
^itles following: Corpus Christi, the body of Christ: Sponsa Christi, the
spouse of Christ: ^nice dilecta Christo, the dearly beloved of Christ: Amica
Christi, Christ's lover: Do^us dei, Gods house: Columba speciosa, the
beautiful Dove: Columna veritatis, the pillar of truth: Ciuitas Dei, the city
of God^ Ciuitas super montem posita, a City set upon a hill: Hortus conclusus,
a close garden Fons signatus, a fountain sealed up: Sponsa agnt, The spouse of
the Lamb.

Answer. 18
YOu do v^ge often this Catholic Church, and do seem as of right to
challenge i^ to be your Church of Rome, but how untruly, I have partly
touched before: This word (Catholic does signify universal, as in deed the
true church of God is universally spread and scattered abroad in all coasts
and countries of the world, and so do di^erse good writers Aug. ad Seuerinu^
Epist. 170.
speak of it. Saint Augustine says, That the catholic Church is dispearsed
throughout the whole earth. And i^ another place (he says:) That the Church
is called Catholic, because she is universally perfect and halteth in nothing,
and is poured throughout the whole world. An other says: That the Isichius.
in Leuit. lib. 4. cap. 14.
universal Church is Jerusalem, the city of the living God, which
comprehends the congregation of the elect and chosen, written in heaven. An
other says, That the church is truly called catholic, which is separated
by sincere, pure, and unspotted communion or fellowship, from all unfaithful
persons, and from their successors and companions. These things of duty
appertain ^elasius ad An^^ Augustum.
unto the Church. First, that it is universal, and therefore (as I have said
before) it is not limited, either to place, time, or person: Secondarily, that
it is of ^he elect, whom God in his secret and ^rcane knowledge has sealed
unto life e^erlasting: Thirdly, that it has no felow^hippe with the
unfaithful, and with such ^s will not believe the truth. Neuer^helesse in the
visible church, there be of ^ll sorts mixte together, both good and ^adde:
believers, and hypocrites: dar^ell, and pure wheat. But to answer ^our
interrogation: You would know, How the Protestants church, can be cal^d
the true Catholic and Apostolic ^hurche? And I would demand the like ^f
you: how your Church of Rome can ^ known to be the true church of God.
^ruly there is an infallible rule set down ready, how the true Church of
God, may be known, and how this controversy may easily be decided. For if we
will believe the holy Apostle of God: he tells the Ephesians, That they are
no more Ephesians. 2. 19.
strangers and Forrenners, but citizens with the saints, and of the
howshould of God, and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, in whom all
the building coupled together, grows to an holy temple in the Lord. So that
you may see, that the true Church of God is discerned and known by the
Scriptures. The true sheep do hear the voice of Christ, and will not hear a
stranger. John. 10. 27.
And so the godly father Augustine says, That in the scriptures we learne^
Aug. Epi. 166.
Christ, in the Scriptures we learn the Church: Wherefore do we not then
retain in them, both Christ and his Church? And writing against the
Donatists, Aug. Tom. 7. con. Epist. Peulian. ca. 2.
being notorious heretics, he says, Betwixt us and you, this comes in
question: where the church is? what shall we do now in this matter* Shall
we seek for the church in our own words, or in the words of her head, which
is our Lord Jesus Christ? Aug. Tom. 7. c^^ Petil. tra Epi. cap. 2.
I think that we ought to seek it rather in his words, who is the truth,
and does best of all know his own body. So Chrysostom says, That since the
time that Heresies invaded the church, there can be no trial of true
Christianity, neither any other refuge of Christians, which would know the
Chrisost. in Man. Hom. 49.
true faith, but only the scriptures of God, and therefore he which will know
the true Church of God, how shall he know it, but only by the Scriptures?
Thus it appears, that the true Church of God does defend her self only by
the Scriptures and word of God, which your Church of Rome does utterly
refuse, for that you boldly affirm, that the Scriptures have not their
strength, neither receive their authority from God. But from the Church of
Rome. Yea, moreover you say, That the holy Church of Council. Tom. 1. de primatu
Romans Eccle.
Rome, has power by a singular privilege granted unto her, to open, and to
shut up the gates of the Kingdom of heaven, from whom she lists, and that
this power of binding and loosing, is no less in your church of Rome, then it
is in Christ. But you will say, that I do sclaunder you in saying, That you
affirm the Scriptures of God, to have their strength and authority from the
church of Rome. Truly one of your own writers has these words, Who soever
leans not (says he) to the doctrine of the Roman church, and to Siluester
Prieri. cont. Luther.
the authority of the Bishop of Rome, as unto the infallible rule of God, of
which Doctrine the holy Scripture takes her force, and authority, he is an
heretic. He says further, That the authority of the Roman church, and of
the Bishop of Rome, is greater then the authority of Gods word. An other
says: That this Nicholaus Cusa. de auctho. Eccle. ^t council. supra and contra
Scriptur.
is the judgment of all them, that think lightly, that ground the authhoritie
and understanding of the Scriptures, in the allowance of the Church, and not
conrariwise, ^lay the foundation of the church in the authority of the
scriptures. There be no co^maundeme^ts of Christ, but such only as be taken
so, and holden by the Church: Therefore the scriptures follow the Church, but
contrariewise, the Church follows not the Scriptures. An other says, That
the Apostles have written Albert. Pigghi. in controuers. de Ecclena.
certain things, not that their said writings should rule our faith or
religion, but rather that they should be under, and be ruled by our faith: the
scriptures are dumb judges: the scriptures are like a nose of wax. I might
allege many authorities out of your own writers, which go about to extol
your church of Rome above God, and his holy word: ^ut these may persuade all
men, which be not wilfully blinded, how arrogantly and Luciferlike, you do
prefer your Church, both contrary to the manifest and express word of
God, and also to the opinion, judgment of the Godly learned fathers, whose
authorities I have cited. But let the indifferent reader judge, whether our
church (which groundeth her self wholly and only upon the heavenly Scriptures,
and submits her self to the spirit of God, as the true interpreter of the
same; hearkeneth only unto the voice of her Pastor Christ, and acknowlegeth
him only to be her head, according as we are taught by the scriptures) be
the true Church of God, the Catholic and Apostolic church: or your church of
Rome, which innketh her self equal with god, and usurps authority above his
most holy word, will not have Christ, but the Pope her head, which will be
judge in all causes, whether Christ will or no, which mainteineth, no not in
one point, the Apostolic doctrine, and faith, but does persecute even unto
death, the true professors of the same. Whereas you do ask, How our Church
can be one, For that (as you say) it is divided into so many sects? I have
showed before that we do not disagree, now at this day in matters of faith and
true religion, as your Church of Rome does in matters of great weight and
importance. It has been a vulgar, and common proverb of long time used, that
the Devil will have his Chapel near^ Gods Church. Among the old Prophets
was some one Balaam, or other. In the small number which accompanied our
Savior Christ, was one Judas, and many carnal Capernaites, which sought rather
their belly, then the advancement of Gods truth, which pretended a zeal, and
followed Christ, yet depended upon old customs and ceremonial traditions,
and held other Math. 24. 24.
fond opinions. Among the true Apostles, were false Apostles, which (though not
altogether, yet in some part) preached either circumcision, or justification
by works, repugnant to the doctrine of the true Apostles, as you do. Our
Savior truly prophesied, That there should arise false Christ's, and false
Prophets Saint Paul 1. Cor. 11. 19.
says, yet in an other sense, There must be heresies eue^ among you, that they
which are approved among you, might be known. By which he notes, that Gods
Church is not only subject to striffe and dissension, as touching orders and
manners, but also to heresies, as touching doctrine. We do not stand so stifely
upon our reputation, but do confess, that as we are men, so we may err. But
we try our judgments and opinions by the touchstone of Gods word, not
respecting the person, but the doctrine which we allow of, so far, as the
holy scriptures do approve the same, in which is no error at all. We do not
deny, but that there may be amongst us some carnal and fleshly Gospellers:
some Epicures, and Athistes: some given to maintain unprofitable, and strange
opinions, as there are in your Church of Rome. The like there were in the
Apostles time, some which held of Paul, some of Apollo, some of Peter, yea
some which seemed to have been of the number of the faithful, because they
occupied a place in the Church, of whom the Apostle speaks, saying: Babes it
is the last time, and as 1. John. 218.
you have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many
Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time: they went out from us,
but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would have continued
with us. It is manifest, that in the primitive church therewere false brethren,
which were Aug. Tom. 6. in Ser. contra. Arriano^.
cloaked with the name of Christianity. Arrius that damnable heretik and the
favorers of his sect, which deny Christ to be God, bosted themselves, That
they only were Catholics, and called others, which maintained the truth
against them, sometimes Ambrosians, and sometimes Athanasians: as you do call
us, now Lutherans, now Caluinists, now Zwinglians. Ebion that Heretic, who
affirmed Christ to be only man, and says that the observation of the Law was
very necessary to salvation, and would needs be called a Christian.

All other heretics, which were many in the flourishing time of the church (as
appears by the stories) bragged, that they held the true faith: and that they
were the true Church. Shall we therefore conclude, and say, that the Prophets,
the Apostles, the godly Christians and fathers of the primitive Church were not
of the true Church of God, for that in their times there were many sects,
which covered them selves with the cloak and color of true religion? Saint
Paul forseing, through Gods spirit, what would come, gave this watchworde
Colos. 2. 8.
to the Colosians, To beware least that any should go about to spoil them
through phylosophie, and vain deceit, through the traditions of men, acording
to the rudime^ts of the world, and not after Christ. He also forwarneth 2.
These. 2. 4.
the Thessalonians, that Antichrist the son of perdicion shall sit as God,
in the temple of God, showing him self to be God. It is wonderful to see how
you are blinded, seeing you stumble at a straw, and do leap over a bloke: You
strain at a gnat, and do swallow a Camel, You see a moath in another man's eye,
and perceive not the beam, which is in your own eye: You are most guilty your
selves in that, which you would have to be a notorious crime in others. For you
agree not in the principal points of religion, as I have noted before: but in
that you demand, Whether our Church was ever of that majesty, that it might
require the obedience of all nations, or gather general councelles, and how
the titles which you set forth by name, can be applied to our Church? I say
that our Church has, and does enjoy such privileges and pre-eminence, as is
limited unto her by the word of God: Nevertheless we do not challenge any
such authority, to the obedience of all nations unto our Church, but do pray
in the name of Christ, unto the Lord of Heaven and earth, to pour forth the
abundance of his spirit, upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Papists, that
they may embrace the glad tidinges of the Gospel, and become obedient children
unto the majesty of almighty God. Where we have peculiar charge in our
several congregations, we exhort with John Math. 3. 2.
Baptist, all men to repentance: We say with the Apostle, That we are
messengers from Christ, to move the people to 2. Cor. 5. 20.
be reconciled unto God, that we are fe^owe laborers, to beseech them not to
^eceiue the grace of God in vain, shew^ng that now is the accepted time, and
2. Cor. 6. 1.
the day of salvation, in the which, the God of all mercies does offer them
^ardon of their sins, for Christ's sake, though they be never so many in
num^er, if they will repent and believe the gos^el. We have no warrant in Gods
word ^ which ought to be the square, or rule to ^^re^t all Christians) to
claim, or chaleng ^nie such authority over other nations. Christ our savior
does deny that superi^ritie unto the Apostles, saying, It shall Math. 20. 26.
^ot be so among you. In deed your Church of Rome does vsurp this, that she
^s above all other Churches, that all nati^ns do owe their obedience unto her,
and that all Kings and Emperors do owe their subjection unto her, as in
Peter's right ^ou have sought, and do seek the same su^eriority, as appears
by the saying of Frederike the Emperor, unto Pope Alexander the third, most
tyrannically treading upon him, and setting his foot in his neck: Non tibi,
sed Petro: This submission (says the Emperor) belongs not to thee, but to
Peter. To whom the Pope answered, Etmihi, and Petro: It is both due unto me,
and to Peter. The like proud behavior showed Pope Hildebra^d unto Henry the
fourth Emperor, who caused him, his wife, and his son to attend and wait
three days, and three nights barefoote, and barelegged before his palace at
Canntium, or he would vouchsafe to speak with him. But to let these things
pass, of which like examples the histories be plentilull, which do argue the
ambition and tyranny of your church: As you have made oftentimes this offer,
That if such and such things could be proved, you would recant: So say I
again unto: you, if you be willing to play the Proctoures part in the behalf
of your church of Rome, and prove these high dignities, which she does
challenge, by the word of God, not only I, but many thousands will join
hands with your church. But you shall never be able to prove by the
scriptures, that God either in the old or new Testament ^ath promised to
establishe any such one ^hurche in earth, which should appear in ^utwarde
pomp and external show, to ^e view of the whole world, continually ^
endure by orderly succession of any Apo^olike man in one place, or to be of
such ^uthoritie and majesty in earth, that it might ^equire the obedience of
all nations, sum^oning and citing them, upon pain of ex^mmunication, to
appear at her general ^essions, or Councelles called by her: Nay ^ther the
church of God, as I have decla^d before, has been for the most part sub^ct
to persecutions, and of small countenance ^ the eyes of man, and so small, that
often^mes she could not be seen, as in Elias is time it plainly appears,
as also in ^e time, in which our savior Christ was ^uersant here on earth. But
of this matter, ^ have spoken at large in other places. You ^eme to take it as
granted to you, that you ^aue authority to call all nations to your ^uncells:
yet it appears by the ecclesi^ticall histories, that you have no such
pri^ledge or commission, but that of right it apperteineth to the temporal
magistrate. Constantine the great being Emperor over all the world did call,
and summon general councell^ for the establishing of true religion, without
the consent of the Pope, For so a good writer affirms: Constantine Eusebius. in
vita Constant. oration. 3.
(says he) as if he had been a common Bishope appointed by God, called
together councels of gods ministers, and disdained not himself to sit in the
midst of the^, and to be partaker of their doings. Your own Popes in like
manner do confess Leo. ad Theodo. Epist. 24.
this: For Pope Leo writing unto Theodosius the Emperor, has these words:
All our Church (says he,) and our Priests most humbly beseech your
majesty, with sobbes and tears, that you will command a general concell to
be holden within Italy. I do not deny but that your Bishopps of Rome traueled
earnestly, that no council should be called without their consentes, and to
have this prerogative of calling counsels: but yet they could never bring it
to pass, until they had gotten the Emperoures heads under their gyrdelles,
and that appears by the saying of Pope Pius. 2. otherwise called Aeneas
Syluius who ^doeth also note the inconueniencie, which would ensue thereof:
By these authorities (says he) they think them selves armed, that say Aeneas
Sylu. de council. Basilien. lib. 1.
no council may be kept, without the consent of the Pope: Whose judgment, if
it should stand as they would have it, would draw with it the decay and
ruin of the Church: for what remedy were there then, if the Pope him self
were vicious, destroyed souls, ouerthrewe the people with evil examples,
taught doctrine contrary to the faith, and filled his subjects full of
heresies* should we suffer all to go to the Diu^ll* Verily when I read the
old ^tories, and consider the Acts of the Apo^les, I find no such order in
those days, that only the Pope should summo^ councels. And afterward in the
time of Constan^tine the great, and of other Emperoures, when counsels should
be called, there was ^o great account made of the Popes ^onsent. Moreover he
says, that before ^he council of Nice, each Bishope lived se^erally, and
little regard was then had to ^he Church of Rome. But concerning ^hefe titles,
wherewith the word of God does beautify, and adorneth the true Church of God
calling her, The spouse of Christ, the dearly beloved of Christ, the city of
God, etc. Let the scriptures and Gospel of Christ it self contained in the
old and new Testament be judge in this matter, whether these titles do
belong and appertain to your Church; or unto ours. Our Church affirms Christ
Jesus only to be the head of the Church his Spouse: your Church does
affirm, the Pope to be her head: our Church does not maintain any doctrine,
Sacrament, or any tradition, which is not grounded upon the doctrine of
Christ, and expressly set forth in the holy Bible: your Church depends upon
the decrees of man, does teach such ecclesiastical ordinances ^chi. in Enchi.
and constitutions, to be of equal authority with the Scriptures of God:
sets forth five Sacraments more then ever Christ ordained, and corrupts
the other two Sacraments only appointed by Christ: for these five Sacraments
devised by your church of Rome, were brought into England by Otho the
Cardinal, in Otho Cardinal. Anno. 1236.
the reign of King Henry the third, in the year of our Lord. 1236. To
conclude, our Church does feed Christ's people, and flock with the
Scriptures of God only, which are called by Godly writers and Fathers, the
Pastures for the Children of God to feed in: it does teach Christ only to
be our Savior, And no name to Act. 4. 12.
be given unto men under heaven, in which we may be saved, but only the name
of the only begotten son of God, Jesus Christ: and that his blood does purge
us from all sin. Your Church of Rome 1. John. 1. 9.
does tell the people, that they must seek their salvation in Trentalles of
Masses, in pardons, in their own works, in the blood of Hales, in the blood
of Thomas, For these be your own words:

Tu per Thomae Sanguinem,
quem pro te impendit:
Fac nos coelum scandere,
quo Thomas ascendit.
Which is as much to say, O as, Christ make thou us, even for the blood of
Thomas, which he shed for thy sake, to climb up into heaven, whether Thomas
is ascended. Seeing therefore that your Church does not uphold and manteine
the truth of God, but her own inventions and devises, how can your Church be
called The pillar of truth? How can your Church be called the City of God, or
you Citizens of God, since that you will not submit your selves unto the Laws of
God, set forth by his word? How can your church be called, The spouse of
Christ, seeing as a bloody mother you divide the child, and do persecute and
crucify a fresh Christ in his members. These titles alleged by you, (are no
doubt) to be understood of the invisible Church of God, which is the number
of Gods elect and faithful children, scattered abroad throughout the whole
world: neither can they be applied unto your church of Rome, which is no
part, or parcel of Gods Church, for that (as I have said before) she
neither holds the true doctrine of the Gospel, nor hears the voice of the
only begotten son of God, the true and only pastor and teacher, as he
himself says, John. 10. 27.
My sheep do hear my voice, and do follow me: neither ministers the
Sacraments truly, according to the institution of Christ: neither observes
the voice in verity, powered forth by the spirit of God into the hearts of
the faithful, and true ^embers of Christ: neither does im^race the true
Catholic and Apostolic ^aith, as necessarily the true church of God ^oth,
with full consent and agreement. Wherefore to conclude this my answer, I
wish you not to claim and challenge ^hese glorious names and titles unto ^oure
Church, unless you were able to ^o prove the same by the holy word of God:
^or the truth of Gods Gospel shall pre^ayle, will you, nill you, yea in spite
of Mahomete, and Antichrist your Pope, ^ud the more that you shall spurn
against ^, the greater harm shall redownd to your ^lues. Though I am unknown
unto you, ^et this good will I do bear you, that I ^oste heartily do pray
unto God for you, that your eyes may be opened, to vnder^ande what his will is,
set forth in his ^oorde, and knowing the same, that you ^ay employ all your
study, to advance and extol the glory of God: which God grant you for
his Christ's sake: To whom with the holy spirit, be all honor and glory, now
and for ever.

Amen.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vine-tree, by Thomas Dawson,
for George Bishop 1579.


