CHORAZIN AND BETHSAIDA'S Woe, or warning Piece.

A judicious and learned Sermon ON MATH. 11. verse. 21.

Preached at St. Mary's in Oxford, by the renowned and famous Divine, Mr.
Nathanael Carpenter, Batchellor in Divinity, sometime Fellow of Exceter
College; late Chaplain to my Lords Grace of Armah in Ireland.

Printed at London by T. Cotes, for Michael Spark, dwelling at the blue Bible
in Greene-Arbor, 1633.

To the worshipful Thomas Winneffe Dr. of Divinity, and Deane of St. Paul's in
London.
The blessings of this life, and that which is to come, etc.
THere is nothing in this Continent, or within the Content of the vast world,
that has not in it some quality which may benefit other creatures; The air
yields fowls, the water. fish, the earth fruits. Much more may it be verified
of persons than of things; of creatures intelligible, than of insensible; of
learned men, more than ignorant: who may edify and profit many by their own
knowledge. The Author hereof was unto me both a Tutor, and a near affine:
somewhat therefore may, much ought not (without entrenching on the bounds of
modesty) be said of him. He was a Microcosme, a little world within the
Hemisphere of this greater, that seemed for his natural endowments of
knowledge, reason, judgment, wisdom, and all supernatural gifts, to
outstrip many of his equall-contemporaries, and superiors both in age and
place. He it was whom Oxford so much admired for industry, ingenuity,
rationability, and judicious solidity in things pertaining to the liberal
sciences; And the Church at this day in Achitophel the wicked Politician
(composed by this Author) stands stupefied and amazed, wondering at the
subtility and policy humane, together with the knowledge and speculations
divine, which the God of Heaven exhibited unto him in such an exuberant and
abundant measure. Disastrous occurrents attempted often the stifeling hereof
before the birth: for had not a kinsemans (Io. Ca.) friendly hand given it safe
conduct over the Surges of the Ocean, in all likelihood it had perished on the
Netherland shores, (as his indefatigable labors, witnessed by his industrious
vigilance in the Optics; made shipwreck in the Irish Sea, the irrecuperable
loss whereof is much to be deplored. Well, I Will welcome this the more,
objected to my view, and peruse. Now having read it, and perceiving by the
style thereof, as also by the testimony and certain approbation of that famous
and learned Divine Mr. Matthias Style, the Authors most indeared and intimate
friend, that this is not any adulterate and illegitimate, but genuine and
natural brood, his offspring; (to speak in the Poets, and Apostles phrase) I
thought my self (by a blessed enjoyment of tuition and instruction from him)
not more by gifts enabled, than in duty and conscience obliged; to endeavor to
illustrate the good parts of him, whose fame (maugre malignity) will with great
designements contend for perpetuity. This Sermon, or rather two days work;
preached before the learned University at St. Mary's in Oxford, being
afterward reviewed, and contracted, was intended (as may be supposed by the
passages therein) for a Pauls-Crosse Sermon: And had not deaths properation and
dismal approach in a strange land prevented the Authors preparation, and
anticipated a seasonable opportunity, it would not at this time have stood in
need, of a Scholars, friends, or kinsemans help and assistance, either to
have fitted, or furthered it for the Press. Now although the vast universe
might present unto my considerate choice, many renowned worthy Patrons that
would receive this Orphane to house, and give it habitation, countenance, and
protection; yet after consultation, and some deliberation, I humbly dedicate
these Excogitations, and divine oratories of my kinseman and Allie the Author,
unto your learned self; which I should not (to confess ingenuously) have
done, had not your Schollership, soundness, sincerity, and integrity bin more
eminent than your Deanery or dignity. That I have prefixed your name, was it
because sometimes your Worship was of the same College with the Author, and
contemporary with him, and consequently might be thought an approoved
instrument, if not to propagate, yet preserve this offspring? Or was it a fond
supposall of adding ought to your (not more desired than deserved) exaltation?
Nothing less: but of gaining somewhat from your self unto the work, that
being so inscribed, it might carry with it some show of innate worth, which
shines so apparently from the splendour of your learned bosom. Let the eminency
of your place and person give it luster, reputation, and authority: so shall
not after-ages find a grave to bury it in the darkness of oblivion.
Anspiciously regarding it, be you a patron and guard unto it: imitating the
goodness of the all-sufficient-and-efficient-blessing and preserving essence;
who unto his beloved ones, though not meriting favorites; is a Sun and a
Shield; a Sun to comfort, and a Shield to protect. So I commend you to God,
and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance amongst all them that are sanctified. The God of heaven perpetuate
not only your present exaltation, but improve it to your further advancement
here: The Lord guide you by his Counsel, and after that receive you to glory.

Your Worships in his sincerest affections, and utmost endeavors to command,
N. H.

MATTHEW. 11. 21. Woe unto thee Corazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida: for if the
mighty works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sydon, they
had repented long ago, sitting in sackecloth and ashes.
SHame, albeit the daughter of sin, becomes sometimes the mother of
conversion: Those whom neither afriends advice can rectify, nor a Magistrates
sword correct, only shame makes sencible of transgression: and where all good
motions else seem mere strangers, this one is admitted as a profitable though
unwelcome guest. This disposition perhaps found our Savior in the stubborn
and stiffnecked Jews, whose frozen heartstrings when neither gentle admonition
could thaw, nor prodigious miracles work to a conversion; shame and reproach
step in, as ready to undertake a reformation. He whose omnipotence could out
of these stones have raised up children unto Abraham, and at the first touch of
his gracious influence have kindled the sparkels of contrition, seems in this
place, rather to expect, than to prevent their inclination to make them
sensible of sin, ere they obtained mercy. Wherefore deriving his reproof
from a gentle expostulation some 4. verses before my Text, he proceeds to tax
in them, two capital and heinous enormities: the one of Infidelity, the other
of Ingratitude. Whereof the one descovers it self in their neglect of those
sacred Prophets, which from Moses to John have traced the line of our Messiah:
for all the Prophets (quoth our Savior) and the Law prophesied until John,
and if ye will receive it, this is Elias which was for to come. The other in
their contempt, in shutting their eyes against the sunshine of the glorious
Gospel, to which he alludes in the 16. v. the comparison of little children
sitting in the market place, and crying, We have piped, and ye have not
danced, we have mourned, and ye have not wept. But finding at length the shaft
of his rebuke, and commination either slightly lodged in their breasts, or
contemptuously reflected back; is enforced at last to draw home to the head,
and enforce their stiff necks, either to submit to the truth, or stand it out
to their own destruction; Wherein he seems to play the sound Disputant,
which puts his best strength on the last push; or the wise Orator; who is
taught by his art to crown his conclusions with the most urgent motives.

Having therefore hitherto couched in a general reproof what he left to each
man's private application, he descends in particular to tax those Cities,
wherein he had preached so many Sermons, and acted so mighty Miracles: Then
began he to upbraid the Cities near about him, wherein most of his mighty
works were done, because they repented not. Where we may observe first as a
preface to my Text.

1. That our Savior sought not the means of bitterness and sharp
exprobration, but when he found by long experience all other helps to fail,
and his best purposes rackt on the last extremity: When neither preaching
enforced attention; nor the gift of Miracles engendered faith; when neither a
friendly advice could purchase a good acceptance, nor a general reproof
challenge interest in their disposition; finally when sin was grown to that
head and height, that like the Sea it disdained all show of opposition, then
began our Savior to upbraid these cities wherein most of his Miracles were
done, because they repented not.

2. That Christ upbraiding the Jews slackenesse, seasoned his sharp Message
with such a Moderation, that he neither roved far off in generalities, nor
too nearly designed the particulars, but only named the Cities and taxed
their transgressions. He showed not himself like the Andabates of our time:
who fight with their eyes shut: or like unskilful gunners who discharge their
Artillery are they approach the mark. On the other side, he less affected
their fashion, who directed rather by spleen than conscience, are ready to
strike at him that stands next, as though they mistook the man for the fault,
and intended to spare the vice, and wound the person.

3. Knowing well that reformation must begin at home, he roves not abroad to
foreign Countries, under the veil of other men's deformities to shroud their
weakness; but begins with the Cities near about him, wherein most of his
miracles were wrought, as the first and fittest subject of reprehension.

4. Lastly, he takes not advantage of the least slip, nor runs thorough a
catalogue of humane imperfections, but at the first blow strikes at the root
it self, to wit, their stupid and gross impenitence.

Having hitherto by Gods assistance and your Christian patience, drawn this
curtain to my Text, your favorable affection will, I hope, hold the candle,
whilst I on this 22. of the 11. of Matthew read on this our Saviors pithy,
and patheticall Exprobration: Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida;
for if those mighty works had been done in Tire and Sidon, which have been
done in you, they had repented long ago in sackecloth and ashes.

2. Which parcel of holy Scripture, naturally shuts into these two branches.
First, a commination in these words, Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee
Bethsaida. Secondly, an exprobration in the words following: For if those
mighty works had been done in Tire and Sidon, etc. The Commination again
divides it self into these two parts.

1. A woe threatened. 2. The persons to whom, the inhabitants of Bethsaida and
Chroazin. The exprobration or upbraiding part, consisting in a comparative
opposition between Bethsaida and Chorazin on the one part, and the Tyrians and
Sidonians on the other part, points out unto us these three circumstances.

2. The persons compared with Chorazin and Bethsaida, to wit the Tyrians and
Sidonians. 2. The things wherein they are compared, the acceptance of Christ's
actions. 3. The effects which might have followed on the good use of these
means, to wit, Repentance; which latter directs us to two other points. 1. The
time of their conditional repentance, They had repented long ago, 2. The
manner and degree of their repentance, In sackecloth and ashes. Which places of
this plentiful and fruitful Text, being opened, the whole sense is ready to
flow into this patheticall expostulation.

3. More ready and willing (O Bethsaida and Chorazin) has my mercy showed it
self to second your conversion, than the Rigor of my justice to threaten your
confusion: and had the vehemence of my frequent preaching purchased your least
attention, or the expression of my wondrous miracles awaked the least
contrition: long since had your punishment been remitted, and your pardon
sealed. What City ever overslipped so fair and large advantages which lay
open to Salvation, or trod out so direct a path to their own perdition? What
Nation could ever vaunt of a surer footstep in God promises; or challenge to it
self a firmer confidence in my protection? The seat of your nobility, derived
from the race of worthy Patriarks; your happy plantation in a Land slowing with
milk and honey; the Garnisht sepulchers of so many Prophets, the fruitful
stock of Iesse derived through so many kingly Branches; your pre-eminence
above the Genriles, in whose opposed wants you may read the abundance of Gods
favor: Your learned Scribes and Doctors of the Law, whose penns were the
Secretaries of truth, and their hearts as so many Temples to enshrine, the
Oracles of wisdom might have long since taught you to trace out the true
Messiah, and have found your safety. But when the substance of those shadows
appears in his own likeness to check uncertainty, and your own eyes become
the witnesses of my wonders, what curiosity can expect a fallacy, or promise to
it self a more evident demonstration? My woes therefore must I double on your
infidelity, and from your ingratitude will I shut up the bowels of my
compassion. Had Tire and Sidon maritime Cities, (the Seas offsprings and
off-skumme of Nations) heard my Sermons, or found a means to see my Miracles;
had fame at least stood so propicious to have performed a faithful message
between my offers and their Indigence, their acceptance had long sithence
smiled on my favors; long since had their repentance shown it self legible
in sackecloth and ashes, the apparent characters of contrition.

Weigh a little in the scale of a judicious censure, their wants and your
endowments, how short comes your providence to apprehend your opportunities?
How far had gone their diligence in improoving the means to their best
advantage? Set face to face opposite, on one stage their barbarous and
Sea-borne disposition, undisciplined to wholesome Laws, and untutoured to
civility; your settled and well weighed policy, promising no less than the
severest practice of piety and religion; The dawning light of nature disdaining
as it were to shine to their instruction; the clear Sunshine of our Savior,
and his miracles every where opening to your conversion, Those coozening
impostures of Satan always pressed to their perdition; those divine Oracles of
Truth whose mouths are daily open to your Salvation: What cunning advocate can
step in, to excuse your sins, or slack my sentence? I oppose not the
examples of the worthiest to surmount you, but of the weakest to shame you; A
nation which has not known me shall serve me, and a people which you have
beheld with scorn, ye shall record with envy. The slaves of my contempt shall
become the subject of your admiration, and where you sought the glory of
precedence, shall you scarce find the grace of Imitation. A path shall be
broken open even from the Gates of Barbarism to Abraham's bosom: and those
whom you have barred from your communion, shall you find the sweet children of
my adoption. From the East and from the West, a fair rode way lies open to the
City of the Saints; and the door of repentance, which your perverse
stubbornness has shut up, shall the light of nature discover unto the
Gentiles.

The greatest shame of a generous temper, is to stoop to the subject of his
own misprision, and who but a coward without great reluctance can strike
sail, when he hoped a conquest? In the very brows of those opposites which
fail of your advantages, yet are ready to out strip you in proficiency, may
you read my just sentence, and your deserved condemnation. My impartial
Justice gives no hope of better, nor your transgression leaves room for worse.
Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, etc. Hitherto have we rivell'd
out that line which we find twisted together in my Text as in one clue:
whilst I by Gods assistance descend to each particular, my weakness I hope
shall purchase your indulgence, or at least the matters excellence deserve your
best attention.

4. The first part in this general division proposed to our discourse is a
Commination, wherein you may be pleased to observe with me these two
circumstances, first the manner, secondly the matter.

The manner of our Saviors speech in his commination, shows it self in his
Rhetorical expression, consisting both in an apt Trope, and an elegant figure;
the one Metonymicall, wherein the places are taken for the inhabitants: the
other an elegant doubling or repetition of the same word, which the
Rhetoritians call Anaphora. Hence might we draw a doctrine for the profitable
and good use of eloquence in public exercises, as that which is commended to
us by Christ himself, as the handmaid of religious policy, and mother of
persuasion. But to venture my discouse upon so large a subject, as the sacred
Oracles of the Prophets might suggest, I should show my self like S. Austins
child, who labored with a little spoone to exhaust the boundless Ocean. Who
so list to transport the eye of his observance through the wise writings of
Moses the Lawgiver, the stately and high dialogues betwixt Job and his
friends, the passionate raptures of Esaias and Jeremy, the harmonious strains of
David the sweet Psalmist; shall find the gravitie of matter, the variety of
invention, the Majesty of phrase, as so many strings meeting in one consort,
and tuned to the hearers admiration. No marvel then, if wisdom taught the
Preacher the wisest amongst men, to seek out acceptable words, as the
directest means to propagate the bounds of his glorious Empire. Neither had
Moses with some other of the Prophets excused their backward disposition, out
of the slownesse and defect of language, had not the gift of eloquence stood
highest in their estimation. Was it ever taxed in Apollos as a crime, that he
was reputed a man eloquent in the Scriptures? or were the tongues of the
Apostles dipped in the sacred fountain to any other end than artificially to
work upon men's affections, and stir up their Successors to imitation? The
Nerves of persuasion I confess are hid in the strength of reason, and
fruitless is that eloquence, which is not grounded on sufficient matter, That
vessel must needs suffer shipwreck, whose sails carry more wind than the
Bulk has ballast to countermaund. And what other shall we esteem of such
elegance, but as of a Curtizan trimmed up in royal garments? But where these
ornaments are fitted to their true owner, where Art and Eloquence as two
handmaids serve their Mistress Divinity, what can they expect less than the
best observance, or promise herself more than the greatest admiration? Fair
and comely (I confess) was the Spouse in the Canticles, as the Tents of Kedar,
as the Curtains of Solomon: yet discovered by her lover in her gorgeous attire
of state and majesty, her looks challenged a more lovely grace, and her
presence found greater acceptance. Religion as a fair Damsel, how soever
clothed, never wants her comely feature; and the face of Truth howsoever
masked, never wants her true luster: yet when seems she more amiable, than
when she comes ushered in by her best servants, and attended by her proper
Equipage? There Art and Eloquence moove in their proper sphere, here
seasonable and acceptable words challenge their true grace, and hang like
Apples of gold in pictures of Silver.

I speak not this (beloved) to ascribe overmuch to humane faculties, or
prefer the enticing words of man's wisdom before Gods holy grace and Spirit.
Where Gods Spirit sanctifies not the speaker, and his divine grace assists not
the hearer, little shall the one deserve, or the other purchase. Where the
light is wanting, little can the fairest object present, or the most curious
eye discover; And what availes the cheifest seed cast into the ground, where
the God of nature denies his blessings to the sower, or increase unto the
Harvest? At his almighty hand then must the most exactest Artist seek that
Vrim and Thummim, that light and perfection; in his garden the holy Scriptures,
shall we only crop those flowers of true Eloquence sufficient to puzzle the
happiest Invention, and stagger man's greatest Industry. Well might I loose my
self in this Labyrinth whereto Nature never taught an entrance in, nor Art
ever discovered a passage out. But the sight of this Assembly seems to
challenge the greatest interest in my discourse; and diverts my meditations to
a more seasonable subject. Wherefore passing by the manner of our Saviors
Commination, we will next descend unto the matter, discovered unto us in these
self same words; Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida.

The first branch of doctrine, which offers it self to our Examination, is the
Regular and just process observed by Almighty God in Bethsaida and Chorazins
punishment. Plainly we see that the Lord as an Ingenious Combatant vouchafed
a Parley, ere he drew his sword: or rather as an indulgent Father over his
disobedient child, shakes his rod ere he inflicts his sharp correction.
Justly might he have inflicted punishment, who from all eternity foresaw their
guilt; and what greater hope of future evidence could that Judge expect, to
whom all hearts and secrets are laid open: yet vouchsafes he first to threaten
ere he inflicts his vengeance, as one who in his wisdom thought it most
convenient, as to approve the righteous, so to make the wicked inexcusable; yt
either the word preached outwardly to their ears, or written inwardly in their
hearts, should either correct or condemn, speak their comfort or confusion.
Betwixt man's transgression and Gods Justice a space is wide open for Repentance
to make atonement. Ere the Lord rained down fire and Brimstone on Sinful
Sodom, Abraham had his turn to play the Advocate, and the Sodomites a time of
mercy: Ere the Ninivites expected their just destruction, a truce of 40. days
was granted for Repentance to gather forces. Hence might every true Christian
draw a doctrine for Gods mercy, and judgment, in that he usually threatens
before he strikes, and sends his Comminations as the Heralds to proclaim his
vengeance. The sharpest curb to headstrong affections is the fear of
censure, and far too predominant should we find the swinge of our carnal
desires, were there not a sharp whip at their own girdles. Where
transgression ends, there judgment and accoumpt begins; and there of necessity
must arraignement commence the first action, where guilt left his last
Impression. But yet the greatest prerogative of a Judge is mercy; he strikes not
ever where he ought to spare, nor spares always where he ought to strike: at
least, he lightens where he thunders, he displaies his red flagge of defiance,
ere he gives the onset: he speaks at least unto the conscience of every
wretched sinner, ere he seal his black warrant of death and destruction: So
that not without good cause might our Savior in this Chapter take up the
complaint of little children sitting in the Market place, and crying: We have
piped unto you, and ye have not danced, we have mourned unto you, and ye
have not wept: At least might God speak unto them, as Job in another sense
unto God; Once have I spoken, but I will speak no more, yet twice, but I will
proceed no further. Spoke not God to the conscience of profane Esau through
his fathers neglected blessing, the childish loss of his own birthrigh? Spoke
he not to the sinful Sodomites through the month of Lot, a careful and
religious Preacher? Spoke he not to Joseph's brethren, through the remorse of a
guilty conscience, and their own Confession? Spoke he not to the idolatrous
Israelites, through sundry punishments, and the fiery indignation of his
servant Moses? Who more proud and contemptuous than Nebuchadnezzer, the founder
of admired Babel? yet was his courage suddenly cast down, at the sight of his
own vision, and Daniels propheticke comment. Who more stately than Royal
Blashaser sitting at a costly banquet, and crowned with a troop of Princes?
yet was he taught in the fatal inscription on the wall, to read the Lords
Judgments and the subversion of his stately Empire. Who more perverse and
tyrannous than Pharaoh to the servile Israelites? yet might he hear the
Almighty speaking through Moses unexpected Message and prodigious miracles? Who
more frozen to piety than the furious Philistims in David's admired victories,
and Goliahs shameful overthrow? Who more senceles than the old worldlings
before the deluge? yet might they understand Gods holy Majesty in Noah's
unregarded Embassage? who more stubborn than the hard hearted and stiffnecked
Jews? yet heard they daily in their streets and temples (as it were) the
prostituted voice of many Prophets; and to descend a little lower in this
stream of sacred History, wherein all changes and actions give testimony:
Judas that Epitome of all impiety, never wanted a master to forewarne him of
his sin, and a worm of conscience (as it were) to prepare him to eternal
torments. And what Pagan so drowned in the ditch of ignorance, and so nusled up
in the school of impiety, to whose soul and secret apprehension God himself
dictates not a law of nature grounded on certain and undoubted Principles?

This might teach every true Christian not to spurn at Gods judgments, or
wilfully to kick at his Invitations. It is the Almighty who threatens a
grievous punishment, and shall we not tremble at his displeasure? He sends out
his summons for our appearance, and shall we not provide against the time of
our arraignement? By his Ministers he daily cites us to the bar of justice;
by his works, by his word, by his wonders, he is wont to awaken us from
security and rouse up our attention: and shall we as the deaf adder stop our
ears against so wise a charmer, or return back his messengers with a
sleevelesse answer? What other can we expect but that the Lord at length
finding all his shafts of judgment and commination, either slightly lodged in
their breasts, or contemptuously reflected back, will be enforced at the
length to draw home to the head, and enforce our stiff-necks to acknowledge his
power, or stand it out to their own destruction? A wronged patience among men
soon degenerates into furious indignation: and in the couse of ordinary
conversation what greater motives of unkindenes than contempt or ingratitude?
But with one who in the precise scale of justice waighes all unrighteousness,
what greater motive can happen to stir his indignation, or hasten our
destruction, than to neglect his threats, and carelessly to slight his
judgments?

Two sorts of men are here found subjected to reprehension; the first are such
as carelessly neglect, the other are such as contemptuously reject, the
sovereign means of their salvation. In the former rank are numbered all such
carnal Christians, who too boldly trespass on Gods patience, and like those
unworthy guests whom our Savior invited to his great Supper, never want
excuses. One has bought a farm, and must go see it; the other a Yoke of
Oxen, and must go try them; the third has married a wife, and therefore
cannot come; as if Repentance were always at hand to serve their humors, and
the Holy Spirit of God obliged to prostitute his graces to each hours
importunity. In these men's hearts is the Word of God sown as seed amongst
Tares, which the cares of this world are ready to choke up in the first growth
to prevent all hope of fruit, or mature perfection. Speaks the holy Spirit of
God to the soul of the swinish drunkard, and shows him the shame of his
lavish expenses, his riotous reyeling, and lewd conversation? A cup of wine is
near at hand to quench and extinguish his ungrateful melancholy. Speaks he
to the lustful leacher, and presents unto his conscience his lustful and
wanton behavior and Goatish fornication? Some bewitching Lais is not far
off, to ransom his soul from pensiveness, and drown his senses in delicious
and voluptuous pleasures? Speaks he to the covetous Cormorant, and discovers
to his secret thoughts his griping Usury, his base Lucre, and tyrannous
oppression? The very sight of his golden Coffers proves as strong, as one of
Circes charms to bewitch his senses, and inchant his Judgment. Speaks he not
to the conscience of the careless Pastor, and shows him his half starved
flock straying on the barren Mountains? The pursuit of a vacant Bishopric
gives him scarce leisure to look about; or at least, the love of his carnal
ease lulls his soul asleep in sensual security. Speaks he to the soul of
the formal hypocrite, and presents as in a painted Sepulcher the inward
rottenness of the heart, clothed over with a shining veil of sanctimonious
piety? Policy straight plucks him by the sleeve, and tells him, Qui nescit
dissimulare nescit vivere. Finally all of them as those base and hoggish Gerge
sites, (who had rather suffer the devil in themselves, than in their swine) no
sooner enjoy Christ's presence, but entreat his absence; imitating herein the
childish affections of young Scholars, who seldom solace themselves in the
sight and society of their careful Master: A true pattern of which men we
shall find represented in Grillus recorded by Plutarke, who by one of Circes
charms transformed into a swine, could not by all Ulysses eloquence be
induced to depose his hoggish nature, and resume the person of a man. More
desperate is the state of the second sort of men who are not contented for a
time to put off their repentance, and shadow their sinful actions with some
excuse; but oppose (as it were) in hostile manner the Majesty of their Creator,
and shoot out their Arrows even bitter words. Such was the spirit of malicious
Pharaoh in the fifth of Exodus, who currishly answered Moses and Aaron the
Lords Ambassadors, Who is the Lord that I shoud let Israel go? And to let
pass sundry other the like examples, as fearful to remember, as tedious to
relate; such was the spirit of that Apostate Julian, who shut up all the
tyranny of his wicked and irreligious reign with a Vicisti Galilae. But such
men I rather leave to Gods mercy than common censure: And so I pass along to
the Inhabitants of Bethsaida and Chorazin, to whom this commination was
directed, as that which comes next in order to be handled.

7. Greatness and authority in a generous temper are the spurs of a noble
resolution, these are the best touchstones to try what Metal our thoughts are
made of: whether they carry the touch of a golden courage, or leaden baseness.
On this last men set the magnificent Cities of Chorazin and Bethsaida, the
strength of Syria, the pride and glory of the Jewish Nation: Two Cities as
well admired for strength and riches, as reverenced for antiquity and
authority. Two Cities readier to lend to others, than borrow of them the
dainties of this Earthly Paradise. Two Cities wanting nothing less, than
worldly pleasures, nothing more than Divine graces: Finally two Cities which
our blessed Savior had blessed beyond many other, as well with hearing of
Sermons, as with the sight of his wondrous miracles. These places
notwithstanding, neither improving those means to their own profit, nor
seconding their opportunities with religious industy, but stretching all to
their worst advantage, are here found worthily taxed by our Savior of contempt
and infidelity, of impenitence and disobedience: whence we may withgood warrant
collect this profitable and useful observation, That States and persons high
and eminent, ought to conform themselves to most eminent and worthy actions.
Heroicke and eminent virtues, take their luster as well from the subject
wherein they grow, as the object whereon they work: for as the persons
excellence in the one gives the habit a more gracious acceptance; so the fit
occasion of the other sets a more plausible stamp on the intended action;
whereas oftentimes on the contrary part, the prejudice of baseness in the man,
or the scanting of fit occasions in the matter, unseasons many a noble
resolution. A great Spirit shrouded under mean fortunes, sooner becomes the
subject of contempt, than admiration.

Nec facile emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat, Res angusta domi, says the
Poet. And howsoever the Characters of virtue in the meanest subject are always
legible; yet never more perspicuous to popular estimation, than where they
find themselves written in the forehead of greatness and authority. Whence
Aristotle our great Philosopher accounts those men best accoutred to play their
prize in virtues school, to whom fortune gives the right hand of riches and
reputation. Then must it needs follow on the other side, that trivial
affairs, and base endeavors seem too light a ballast for the sail of
greatness. Princes and great States in such actions seem like Hercules
mannaging a Pigmies reed, or a kingly Eagle hunting after Gnats or flies: but
where majesty of state, and magnificence of mind, where great riches and great
resolution like the twins in Rebeccahs womb strive for precedence, what other
actions can the world expect, but such as are stamped for eternity, and crowned
with admiration? How far may that Sickle be thrust into to the harvest of
virtue and religion, which is managed by magnanimity, and countenanced by
authority. Is not the voice of a King like the roaring of a Lion, and greatness
a Torrent which carries all before it, and disdaines opposition? Can any man
arrive sooner or safer at his desired port, than he that sits at the stern?
Can any travailor better make way for his riches, than he that holds the Reins
in his own hands, and prescribes a measure to his own motion? How readily
than ought such men to second their opportunities, and improve their places to
their best advantage, whom God has advanced, either in Church or Common wealth
to high and magnificent Estates? Whom God has endowed with riches, adorned
with honors, backed with strength and friends, fortified with authority, and
graced with opinions. What fitter weapons to poize the hand of greatness, than
that which finds the best object, and tries it self in the greatest
opposition. Here, stood it with the time, and your patience, might I enlarge
and specify the limits of Heroical virtues: Aristotle limming out this Tree,
expressed thereof only two maine Branches, the one of Magnanimity, the other
of Magnificence; that from the print of Hercules foot, men might give a
probable guess unto his stature. And howsoever many seeds of piety and
religions are purposely scattered by that great sower, some by the way side, as
a prey to the fowls; some on stony ground, wanting both root and growth; some
among the tares of vicious affections to be choked up in the womb, whence it
springs: Yet who will find it in his true prime, must seek it in the garden
where all virtues flourish, the Holy Scriptures; in the soil where it receives
true nourishment, the heart of a Christian.

Such actions best deserve to be esteemed great, and sway the affections of
great men, which begin with Gods love, and end with his glory; such as further
the advancement of learning and religion, of wisdom and devotio^: concerning
all which we may observe in holy Scripture, as well the precepts and promises of
God to give warrant, as the examples of worthy men to provoke our imitation. No
sooner had Moses his warrant sealed for the Children of Isreal's convoy, but he
new mints himself for great projects and valorous attempts. He thought
himself borne to higher matters than Pharaohs favor, neither regarded he a
gracious servitude, while he hoped a glorious infranchisement, Nobler he
supposed it through the jaws of danger to pursue liberty, than in the bed of
ease to embrace Captivity. A short scambling in the Wilderness, seems sweeter
than all the full fleshpots of Egypt: Neither cares he to how sharp an edge,
hunger might whet his appetite, whiles he expects a land flowing with milk
and honey. The Arabian deserts before him, the Egyptians hostility behind him,
the roaring Sea beside him, the scorching Sun above him, the barren soil
beneath him, his pensive cares within him, the Israelites murmuring without
him, might have taught many a tall Captain, rather to purchase his peace with
some baseness, than his freedom with such disasters. Yet goes he on
courageously in the path which the Lord treads out unto him, and esteems that
state of life sweetest, which is bought with so many dangerous adventures. But
for me to carry the worthies, and all their actions before me, were to leave
the day behind me, yet scarce attain my home. But why stand I gleaning these
few ears in a full harvest? David's struggling with Goliath, and yoaking the
rough hewn Philistims. Solomon's magnificence in the erection of his Temple,
and promotion of wisdom; Hezekias zeal and industry in chasing away
superstitious Idolatry; the Maccabees valor and constancy in vindicating the
right of their Religion, with sundry other the like examples, would easily
persuade a Christian to stake his life in Gods cause, and set the whole stock
on his fruitful industry. To whom much is given, of him much shall be required
(says our Savior:) and who finds worse acceptance at his masters hand than
he that buries his Talent in the earth, and makes his dignities and riches a
pillow for his sordid ease and carnal security?

A good lesson to check the degenerate strain of many in the world, who like
dunghill Crows and carrion Kites, fly they never so high in preferment, look
always downward to the Earth, as the beginning and end of their ambition. How
many have we amongst us who like dastardly snailes, can show their horns on
all occasions, promising great matters, yet suddenly pluck them in at each
fingers touch or sense of opposition? Heraclitus himself would laugh to see
some among us like Aesops Ass laden with gold, but fed with thistles,
arrogate to themselves that respect which is only aimed to the golden Image,
the burden under which they groan. A great shouting heard Moses of the
children of Israel coming from the Mount; but approaching near, found all the
stir to be raised about a golden Calfe. On such Golden Calves, the world is
too apt to fawn, as those whose Imperfections are gilded over with golden
Titles. Such men are well characterized in Pliny, by a certain beast in
Scythia; which, as he reports, can turn himself almost into all colors and
shapes, according to the things adjacent; but when he resumes his proper
figure, he carries the likely resemblance of an Ass. Too many such have we
amongst us, who reflecting the beam of greatness, or enlightened with the
impression of some other object, can shine as the Rainebow in diverse colors
of choice graces and eminent perfections. But should the Suune hide but his
gracious aspect, or deny his influence, they might be as well deciphered by
their actions, as an Ass by his Ears. The world never groaned more under such
Scarcrowes: Who living without merit, and dying without honor, can leave
behind them no other Epitaph to be read of posterity, but that they lived and
dyed. Their base and sordid life could deserve no more; a beast can challenge
to it self no less. Here could I strike home, but that I find my self
suddenly surprised with the blushing temper of Elihu the Buzite in the story of
Job: I am young (says he) and ye are old, wherefore I was afraid, and durst
not discover my opinions: I said, Days should speak, and multitude of years
should teach wisdom; too grave a part for my years to act, has my discouse
unwittingly embraced. Enough it is for me to stand aloof and give aim, while
the forenamed Elihu throws this rugged censure, on the rugged forehead of age
and authority; Great men are not always wise, neither do the aged always
understand judgment. Enough it is for me to lie on the ground* and rest me
silent, while I hear the Lord thundering through the mouth of Micah this sharp
exprobation: Hear O ye heads of Jacob, and hearken ye Princes of the house
of Israel, is it not for you to know judgment? I am no shameless Cham to
uncover a fathers nakedness, no remorslesse Nero to open the entrails of my
mother. The veil of Charity is in my hand to cover a multitude of sins; and
meet it is with Noah's two modest sons, I look awry and go backward, while
I approach so near an object. I fear to wander in this forest, least I find
Diana naked, and meet with Acteons destiny, or at least encounter the horrid
face of Medusa which might strike me senseless. Afraid I am almost to open
mine eyes and look forward, least I find Bribery and Oppression usurping the
place of justice; Pride and Dunsery fitting in Moses chair, Craft and
Covetousness dispensing the affairs of our richest merchants, Luxury and lust
serving in the Court of Princes: yet leaving each man to his own censure and
application, I may (I hope) with modesty oppose to common view the dumb
pictures of Tire and Sidon, two inferior Cities, wherein every understanding
eye may read the disparity as well of opportunity, as will, and perfection:
which being the common reason or motive of the commination, offers it self in
the next place to our discourse.

For if those mighty works, etc.

The surest Anchor whereon our floating opinion takes hold first, is the
strength of reason: the surest Rock whereon this anchor grounds it self is
the knowledge and enquiry of the cause. Where nature began, man's reason ends:
and the highest pitch of our discourse sets his last footing, where the cause
had his first working* whence Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers so much
admired for his logical wit, has by some bin characterized in three especial
Epithites. First that he was (...), a lover of universalities; Secondly he was
(...) a lover of method: Lastly and chiefly that he was (...) a subtle
searcher out of causes. That exquisite method of discouse, which the glimmering
light of Nature showed to those Philosophers, shall a Christian find expressed
to the life in our Saviors sweet and elegant oration. For no sooner had this
great Judge of Heaven and earth in the former part of my text threatened the
backsliding Jews with a voice of judgment, and as it were with a warning
piece awaked their sleeping apprehension, but he strait backs his commination
with the discovery of the cause or motive: For if (quoth he) those mighty
works had bin done in Tire and Sidon which have been done in you, they would
have repented long ago sitting in sackecloth and ashes. The motive grounded on
the comparative opposition betwixt Bethsaida and Chorazin on the one party, and
Tire and Sidon on the other, leads our enquiry to these circumstances. First,
the parties opposed to Bethsaida and Chorazin, to wit Tire and Sidon. Secondly,
the things wherein they were opposed, the acceptance of our Saviors actions.
Thirdly, the effect or consequence which might or should have followed the good
use of those means, to wit, Repentance or contrition. Through these points
while I by Gods assistance and your Christian patience shall usher forth your
attention: May it please you in the first place to take a short survey of Tire
and Sidon, standing (as it were) with Bethsaida and Chorazin in competition.

10, Cities bordering on the Sea, as they are enriched with great virtues, so
are they commonly subject to greater vices. For there is a trafficque as well
of manners, as Merchandise: for where the conflux of foreign nations by
ordinary conversing, makes the inhabitants seem (as it were) so many
domestique Travailours; a great advantage, is offered of advancing knowledge,
and suppressing ignorance. But great opportunities are commonly seconded with
great temptations, and nothing more dangerous than armed madness. This perhaps
gave occasion to Aristotle and others to pronounce Sea-borderers, of all the
most dissolute; and Plato in his book De republica, to forewarne his Citizens
the Sea, as the mother of wickedness. And on this ground (for ought I know)
has Strabo derived the first offspring of Robbery, Pillage and murder from
the sea: and howsoever Themistoles would by all means have a City to depend
from the Sea, to the end (as Coelius Rhodiginus imagins) he might transfer
the power from the Nobility to the shipmasters: Yet the old Athenians by his
great wisdom and experience, were persuaded to draw their inhabitants as much
as they could from Sea traffic to tillage of the ground and husbandry: whence
(as some suppose) grew that fable of Neptune striving with Minerva for
pre-eminence and victory, wherein Neptune is said to have the worst. This
Seaborne disposition affecting the Cities of Tire and Sydon, might seem much
to disadvantage them in performance of such offices of piety and Religion,
which in Bethsaida and Chorazin the occasion of opportunities, and expectation
of others might seem to challenge. Finding then their conditional repentance
supposed to follow Christ's Miracles, had this then been acted, and opposed to
Bethsaida's and Chorazins backwardness, we might hence aptly have collected
this observation, That men which with less means go further in the progress
of Religion, shall be better accepted, than those which have greater, yet come
shorter of performance.

Nature, Art, and Exercise are the three first stones in learnings Edifice,
whereof the former commends our Makers bounty, the second our Teachers care,
the other our own industry. Consonant to these three lights of humane science,
are discovered to us in holy Scripture the three first grounds of Religion; An
apprehensive Grace to receive, a certain Law or precept to direct, and a
religious practice to perfect. And howsoever all three without the divine
assistance prove lame and impotent, unable to support us before God, or lift us
to salvation: yet may the neglect of those offered means, or the abuse of our
free will, even in our morrall actions, wherein our industry claymes his
interest, set a bar between us and Christ's acceptance. No man can deserve or
work out his own immunitie, neither is Gods Spirit confined to outward
means, or our endeavors; yet ought we to measure his will by his word,
wherein he requires our diligence, and condemns our negligence. Neither is
Gods proceeding in this kind opposite to humane justice, which (as our
Philosophers have taught us) is wont to poize the scale of distributive justice
in a Geometrical proportion, and measure our natural gifts by no other weight
than their own improvement. He that rows not with the tide of his own
opportunities, comes as far short of desert as expectation. Rewards and
punishments sooner follow the opportunities of our means than the importunity
of our action; and what diligent Master in his careless Scholar can content
himself with a Mediocrity of proficiency, where he finds an exceilence of
capacity, or suffer the choice fruits of a transcendent wit to come short of
Maturity? What greater evidence then (beloved) can start up to our shame, than
the example of others, which flag in our means, yet outrun our industry? Or
what surer harbinger of condemnation, than among so many blessings diversely
bestowed on mankind, to acknowledge in others the practice and good use of
lesser, and find in our selves the neglect of greater? Sodom and Gomorrha,
those two first daughters of desolation are opposed in this comparative
judgment, to Capernaum, a prime darling of the Jewish Nation: What they wanted
is here rejected, and what was denied to those others Acceptance, is here
granted to their refusal. Willingly would they have thrown themselves into
those arms of mercy, which are daily open to these men's embracements, and have
prevented with repentance those judgments which these pursue with obstinacy.
Easier then shall it be for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment than
for them: and those works of theirs which no way deserve Gods approbation,
shall never the less be pressed home to these men's pedition. A multitude of
examples would here be mustred up to countenance this assertion: but I must
sail along with my Text; the happy wind which wafts us forward is the Divine
Spirit of God, which from those remote countries and far distant ages, is ready
to arrive at our times and Regions as the last haven; and through the Gentiles
urgent testimony, and the Jews arraignement speaks at length to our shameful
reproach, or sweet instruction.

12. The old Carle in the Poet stood laughing amain at the tale of Tantalus,
till he found himself taunted in the end with a -- mutato nomine de te Fabula
narratur.

Nothing seemed more ridiculous to the fond Athenians than the Carriers
contention with the Scholar, about the hire of an Asses shadow, till they
found themselves pointed at by Demosthenes in the serious Moral. Ready enough
was David to pass sentence on Nathans accusations till he found it to second
his own arraignement. And which of you that hear me this day would not
ratify my former doctrine with his best assent, and our Saviors judgment on
the Jews with approbation? But shift the scene, the selfsame Theater of
judgment which even now left you spectators, now finds you Actours; and which
of you all would not quickly shrink at his own censure; and with the caviling
Lawyer cry, Tho case is altered? Should we set in view of judicious insight, the
matchless industry of our bordering Neighbors, the supine negligence of our
own nation: the manifold obstacles barring their passage in the progress of
Religion; the store of opportunities, which stir and steare us to Salvation:
what starting hole can be left us to escape Gods sentence, or secure us from
perdition? What serious judgment would not admire in their penury what we
neglect in our plenty? and confess their industrious humility to ascend higher
than our insolent security? Compare and oppose on the one side that bounteous
hand of plenty, which fills up our channells with milk and honey; the wasting
Iaw of famine, which devours their Vineyards, and dries up their vintage; the
sweet calm of peace which daily smiles on our security; The boisterous storms
of war which depopulates their Cities, and lay waste their villages. The
clear Rivers of Science and Religion derived through each vein of our
vigorous government; the contagious vapor of Idolatry and superstition, as a
pestilence spreading their infection: The charming tongues of many sweet
singers which daily speak to our instruction: the enchanting tongues of many
false Prophets, which like Sirens, forerun their ruin, or like Zim and Ohim
breath nothing but desolation. Compare and oppose on the one side their devout
humility, ambitious with the diseased woman in the Gospel, to kiss the hemme
of our Saviors garment: our supercilious pride ready to crucify again Christ
in his members, and crown him with a bush of thorns; Their zealous fervency
panting and breathing with David for the sweet springs of comfort and
consolation; our contemptuous sensuality with the murmuring Israelites in the
desert loathing the wholesome Manna and food of our souls: Their religious
charity willing with the very dogs to lick the soars of pining Lazarus; our
uncharitable cruelty and reproach of Christ's Ministers, with delicious Dives
scarce affording them our Gates for succor. Here could I wish some modest
Aposiopesis would secretly suggest and whisper to each man's conscience that
judgment, which my discourse fears almost to pronounce, yet our sins
deserve. But in spite of my infirmities, or men's presumption, the consequence
will needs follow his undoubted premises; and where to my former proposition,
stamped by God himself, by truth and evidence, our own conscience adds an
assumption what cunning Sophister can shut out the conclusion? But casting mine
eyes on this fair assembly, me thinks I stand as the Prophet Balaam amidst
the Lords Army, enforced to turn my bitterness into blessing; at least as an
indulgent Physician to sweeten out this pill of judgment to your digestion.
Can any people plead more exemption than the sons of the Church? or any
prescription give more immunity than the Charter of the Christians? Was not
populous Jury spacious enough to shut out this Assizes, nor the Regions round
about large enough to bung up the mouth of Justice, or blunt the edge of
execution: but must London with her Sister Cities of great Britain stand the
push of this arraignement, and submit themselves to so strict an examination?
How ready here is flesh and blood with Jonas to fly from the judgment which is
in the midde way attending it; or with the subtle Sepes by stirring the
stream to avoid danger. Some righteous Lot is always expected to come betwixt
flaming Sodom and threatened Zoar, with this passionate petition; This City is
near to fly unto, and it is a little one, O let me escape thither, (is it not
a little one?) and my soul shall live.

But the verdict is given up, and the fact is evident; Law must proceed;
justice disdaines all encounters but a clear Conscience, and bootelesse it is
to hide those sins from our own censure, which lie open to Gods judgment.
What ingenuous stranger from the face of this populous and stately City, will
promise himself less proficiency in Religion, than he finds advantages of
means; or in other places expect greater, where he sees less encouragement?
The huge Bulk of your stately Churches, and number of your Preachers, the free
and frequent use and practice of Religious exercises, the strict form of your
discipline, the due administration of justice, the wholesomnesse of your laws,
are all able to burden each man's expectation, and make every man's hopes as
prodigal as his eyes; should I set in view of these gracious indowments the
dispeopled Cities of our neighbor countries, wasted with sword and famine;
their Pastors chased away, or slaughtered in the streets, the free use of the
Gospel prohibited, Idolatry and superstition under pain of death commanded.
Should I usher your remembrance through the large field of Germany and the
adjoining Territories, and show you as in a Map of desolation, their houses
razed, their vineyards spoiled, their Corn fields consumed, their bounds
altered, their right usurped, and their very ground it self (as it were) yet
panting under the hoofes of armed horses, and insulting enemies: who would not
admire in their penury, what we neglect in our plenty, and hold their very
imitation more praiseworthy than our example? I am no humorous travellour to
affect no flowers, but such as grow in a foreign garden yet from the
improvement of our Neighbors poor stock and good husbandry, might we extract
some good argument of persuasion to awaken our own industry. Can we with
patience behlod them gleaning a few ears of Corn from the short stubble, and
can we sleep amidst the full sheaves of a plentiful harvest? Can we behold
them plowing up the barren soil to extort from her needy entrails a small
crop of knowledge and Religion? and shall we suffer our fruitful vineyard so
often watered with the dew of heaven, and planted by so many skillfull
Gardners, to groan under ungrateful Briars, and starve for want of husbandry?
Their straw is taken from them by their cruel Taske-Masters, yet with the
poor Israelits in Egypt they are enforced to make Brick. All materials are
supplied us toward the erection of the Lords house, and shall our Iudustry be
only wanting to our selves? What more could the Lord do unto his Vineyard than
he has already performed? has he not hedged it, planted it, dressed it* and
built a Winepresse in it? and shall all our fruits prove wild grapes in the
gathering, or the Wine shrink in the vintage? If the example of our friends
cannot stir up Imitation, or checque our sluggish disposition; let our very
Enemies shame our backwardness, and instruct us in our duties. See we not our
factious Romanists to compass sea and Land to make Proselites, and shall we
sitting at home in our houses, shut our doors against the entrance of Christ's
Messenges? Shall the Jesuits like those mighty sons of Anak come against us
with their overstudied Impostures, and subtle stratagems, rather to tire our
Iudustry, than refute our grounds; and shall we sit in the Market place all the
day idle, choosing rather to buy their trifles, than make sale of our own
sufficiency? Shall all the Coffers and Cabbinets of that Babilonish Strumpet
be enhanced to furnish their expedition? Shall Rome disrobe her felfe of her
braveries, and the Indios expose their unknown treasures in the defense of
their Antichristian Hierarchy? and shall we suffer the Worthies of our Church
for want of encouragement or means, like Ostriches to bury their neglected
Eggs in the sand of obscurity, for the earth to ripen, or the Sun to
quicken? O beloved, these are matters that will no less rise up to our
condemnatign, than Tire and Sydon against Bethsaida and Chorazin: More
propitious shall Sodom and Gomorrah find the day of judgment than Capernaum
the pride of Palestine; as she which having received better means of
recovery, had marched further in the broad way of impiety. Their contempt of
Christ above ours of Christ's Ministers, can challenge no greater precedence or
disproportion. He that despises you (says our Savior, speaking of his
Messengers and Apostles) despises me: Which leads our discourse to the next
point propounded to our consideration, the things wherein Tire and Sydon were
compared to Bethsaida and Chorazin, to wit, the contempt of Christ's works, and
impenitence.

13. Contempt, and Impenitency, even in the smallest matters are accounted
sins of the greatest moment, as those which seem to stand in terms of
defiance with Law, and dare Justice to do her worst. This wicked disposition
found our Savior in the inhabitants of Bethsaida and Chorazin, which it seems
he saw wanting in Tire and Sydons inclination: He found the contempt of his
person, the contempt of his words and miracles; he found the contempt of his
Laws and Commandments, the contempt of his sacred courtesies. And least they
might seem to owe any favor to Repentance, or recant wickedness, they are
taught to persevere in sin, and shut up all the progress of their
Contemptuous behavior with hardness of heart and obstinate impenitence. Hence
our Savior first sendes after them as a swift pursevant the woe of Commination
to summon them to judgment; then delivers them over to ruin and destruction,
as the speedy executioners of his vengeance. As if he would thereby copy out
unto us this infallible observation: That impenitence and contempt of Christ's
word and works are seconded by his heavy indignation, and men's certain
punishment. Should I in the large Theater of worldly changes, show the hand of
Gods vengeance in the wounds of his rebellious Enemies: Should I draw the
Curtain, and open to your eyes at once all the sad spectacles of pride, and
Gods indignation: Should antiquity communicate her store to Memory, and History
expose all her treasure to observation? The whole world would seem the Scene,
and the beginning and end of time the bounds. Time which has seen the rise
and fall of many puissant and famous Empires, the erection and decay of many
stately Trophies, the greatness and confusion of many magnificent nations:
Time which in his vaste gulf has swallowed up all former ages, and for the
most part envied them story; has notwithstanding almost every where left some
register or other of Gods heavy wrath against man's impenitent rebellion. What
one chapter almost shall we find in the sacred volume of the Prophets, which
upbraides not Israel with Gods benefits, and man's ingratitude, and makes not
their own perverseness the immediate Vaunt-currior of his vengeance? Had Time
cancelled all her records, and bequeathed to posterity no monument, but her
own losses; it would seem a book wherein the Characters of Gods anger and
man's sin are every where legible. The scattered ruins of that sometime
chosen generation, groaning as yet under the worlds scorn and their own
calamity, carry (as it were) engraven in their foreheads the fatal marks of
Gods curse, and their own infidelity. And that promised land, wherewith as
with a second Eden, God sometimes enriched those sons of disobedience, shows
her face to this age no otherwise than as an unpeopled wilderness exposed to
fruitless sterility and pagan usurpation. Jerusalem that Sceptred City, whose
bosom had cherished so many kingly Prophets, what other Monument has she
consecrated to posterity, than the example of her own shame? yt she which
sometimes as the bright star of the East shone to the Nations terror and the
world admiration, stands now as a blazing Commet in the worlds eye, to threaten
our security. Should I lead your remembrance through the gates of that
beseiged City, and place your affections in the sad theater of desolation,
your passion might perhaps exceed my description, yet fall short of their
calamity. Those bewteous buildings wherein peace sometimes had placed her
Tabernacle, behold now circled with a band of Romans, and threatened with
invasion. Those seemly streets wherein Pride was wont to strut in ostentation,
now become a Shambles of civil Butchery. Those populous houses, wherein plenty
had set her store, made now a prey to the hungry Jaws of pining scarcity. That
pleasant air, wherein millions had been cherished, now overspread with the
poisonous vapors of pestilent contagion. That sacred Sanctuary, wherein the
King of Kings had set his rest; now a Brothell house prostitute to all impiety.
Behold and see with grief and wonder, here the sprawling Infants tossed on the
pikes of remorslesse soldiers: There age and sickness, gasping in the
streets in vain for pity. Here a miserable Myriam sacrificing her son to
famine, making the womb of her increase, the toombe of her posterity. There an
outrageous bloodhound, dragging some disconsolable widow by her dishevilled
hairs. Here blazing Comets, and signs from heaven, the apparent Marks of
anger; There prodigies and wonders of the earth, the forerunners of fear and
desolation. All these calamities notwithstanding, the highest pitch of misery,
which either history could ascend, or nature suffer, is by our Savior termed
but the beginning of sorrows. Hell and the grave are ready to receive them,
where worldly vexation leaves them. Sin and security which have thus far
dragged them to the Bar of Gods judgment, never shakes them off till
execution. That promised seed, which should have been the prime guest at the
Lords Table, are now the least in his affection, while the scattered and
despised Gentiles (as it were) from the hedges and high ways are invited home
to his sacred banquet. As if he would show us in a vision his Apostles shaking
off the dust of their feet as an Evidence of the Jews contempt, and turning
to the Gentiles. These are the poor witnesses of Christ, in whose opposed
wants and miseries, they might well read their own sin and condemnation.
Which leads our observation to the third and last point, which is the effect
and consequence which should have followed Christ's works, had they been
wrought among the Tyrians and Sydonians*

14. The repentance of the Tyrians and Sydonians offers it self unto us, under
a threefod consideration. First, our Saviors foresight supposed to be the
ground of his Prediction. Secondly, the cause, out of which Grace and
Repentance are usually engendered in the sons of the Church. Thirdly, the
manner of their repentance, to wit, in Sackcloth and Ashes. To begin with the
first, we must observe that out of this conditionate repentance of the Tyrians
and Sydonians, a ground is rather sought than found by our adversaries the
Jesuits, to establish a certain middle kind of knowledge in Almighty God, and
free will in man. God (say they) conditionally foresaw at the offer of such
means as the Jews contemptuously rejected, the Tyrians and Sydonians
conversion. The object (as the Schoolmen general consent) of Gods natural
and first knowledge, termed Scientia simplicis intelligentiae, comprehends the
latitude of things past, present and to come, as they present themselves only
in possibility. The second of free knowledge depending only on his decree,
termed by the Schoolmen Scientia visionis, is the prescience of things
absolutely and necessarily decreed to come to pass. Since then the conversion
of the Tyrians and Sidonians, which God foresaw should attend his works, had he
there acted the^, went beyond a mere possibility of being, yet came short of
an absolute existence: a prescience seems to be granted somewhat more than the
former, yet less than the latter; by which conditionate events are foreseen
of God. To this we may breefely answer with some of our side, that the Scientia
visionis comprehends not only such things as are absolutely to come to pass,
but also such things as might flow and proceed out of the Actual decree made
out of this, or that condition thereunto annexed. For although properly there
be no decree of God of conditional things in respect of the act it self; yet
may there be granted a Conditional decree in respect of the object: So that
the decree of God may be conceited two ways, either for a formal and
explicate ordination, or appointment; or else for an implicate or virtuall,
which is grounded on another decree. Now concerning future contingent things
which never come to pass, there is given not a formal but a virtuall decree
of such things, to wit, which should exist, if this or that condition were
adjoined. Such a decree it was to be conceaved, out out of which our Savior
hypothetically foresaw the conversion and repentance of these Cities, and not
out of the use of their free will, as they erroniously imagine. But truth never
wants an adversary to oppose, or error a subtility to contradict: If God (say
our Jesuits) foresaw their conversion, and thereon decreed to annex unto his
miracles a saving and prevenient Grace, what force shall we find in our
Saviors exprobration? Either God foresaw the repentance of the Tyrians and
Sydonians, and the perverseness of the Jews as emergent from the fruits of
their own free-wills; or else he foreknew in his conditional decree the
supply of grace in the one, and the want of it in the other. If ye grant the
former, what bar shall we set against free will and Scientia media which we
establish? If the latter, what advantage of means and opportunity could the
Jews challenge beyond the Tyrians and Sydonians, and what reason had our
Savior to upbraid the one with the others conditionate conversion? The ground
of our assertion is yet unshaken: Certain it is, that neither of both could of
themselves lift themselves into the bosom of Gods mercy without supernatural
and prevenient grace; yet might the contempt of those offered means, and abuse
of free will in moral actions, prove a greater bar to the one than the
other. No man can climb the stairs of faith and repentance without a divine
hand to support and guide him: Yet is his own natural concupiscence of force
sufficient to press him downward toward the gulf of Perditition. What should
hinder then our Savior Christ upbraidingly to oppose the Tyrians and Sydonians
conditionate repentance to the Jews stiff-necked and obdurate obstinacy, since
the former had less disabled themselves from the acceptance of Gods favors;
the others had maliciously cast a block in that way which should lead them to
Salvation. Should two young Students stand in competition for some preferment;
the one perchance negligent in his former exercise, and dissolute in his
behavior; the other diligent in his studies, and civil in his conversation:
What ingenuous Governor would not reject and discountenance the one, encourage
and advance the other? Not that either of himself was able to work out or
deserve his own Immunity; but that the one had improved his abilities to the
best advantage, the other by negligence had shut himself from his own
promotion. Thus far might we answer our sworn enemies the Jesuits at their
own weapons, and make the mint of School divinity to serve better for our
defense, than their assault. But why should we show our selves so curious with
the Israelites to run unto the Philistims to have our swords sharpened? The
propriety and phrase of speech, wherein the Spirit of God usually accommodates
himself to our understanding, might sufficiently clear this place from any
such perplexed subtility, and take away that ground whereon they strive to erect
their Babel of popish forgery. But had these Sophisters in using the authority
of holy writ, been as sincere as subtle, they would not (like Chymicks out of
their metalls) have labored to extract out of the Text what God and nature
never meant, nor understood these words otherwise than as a patheticke
exprobration; wherein by the Tyrians and Sidonians, a rude and neglected
people, he taxed the Jews neglect in hearing his sacred Sermons, and observing
his mighty miracles. which being the cheifest Causes and forerunners of grace
and repentance, offer themselves in the next place to our consideration.

15. The door of Repentance which opens unto us the sweet aspect of Gods mercy,
is fastened on two hinges, whereof the first is Gods prevenient grace, which
dictates unto our understanding the mysteries of the Divine Law, and works our
will unto obedience. The second are those outward means presented by opportune
occasions to our exterior senses, ready to second the first conversion. This
latter stands again indebted to two helps, to wit, the preaching of the Word
and Doctrine, as the true evidence of our faith, and the gift of Miracles as
the seal of confirmation. These sacred means of Grace and Repentance in a
plentiful manner, as it were prostituted to the Jews contempt, and that
contempt obvious to our Saviors observation, seconded by his heavy
commination, may easily express the horror and guilt of wilful impenitence,
and show how many judgments of God as so many swift Pursevants stand in
readiness to follow the neglect of his sacred means and ministry. And
howsoever the Jews amongst other Nations seem to stand highest in Gods
indignation, as no sooner confirmed by his first pattent, the first sons of
his adoption; but forfeiting their prerogative by unnatural contempt and base
ingratitude: yet cannot we, the heirs of his second choice, boast our selves
of a greater liberty, nor challenge an immunity from this strict obligation.
The clear Sunshine of the Gospel confined for a time to their hemyspheare,
has enlarged his influence from East to West; and the sound of Gods word, (the
partition wall broken down) is found to have dispersed it self to all
Nations. Whence we have seen them disinherited by their own wilful
disobedience; and can we repose a greater affiance in Gods favors, than our
own penitent inclination dares to justify? Think you those on whom the Tower
of Siloe fell, are greater sinners than all the rest? I tell you nay, but
unless ye repent, you shall all likewise perish. This may teach every true
Christian not to stand upon terms of capitulation with Gods justice, neither
to foreslow the time, or slack our duty; but by a seasonable repentance to
prevent our punishment, and by our prostrate humility abate the edge of Gods
indignation* Which calls to mind two other circumstances left as yet to our
examination in the Tyrians and Sydonians penitency. 1. The time that they would
have repented, long ago. 2. The manner, to wit, in sackcloth and ashes, of
which a few words; as time shall give permission.

16. The convenience of time, and decency of manner, are the cheifest
circumstances to season an approved action. For Piety the Mother of good works
no longer seems her self, than when she goes hand in hand with Discretion;
by whom she is still directed, as well how, as wherein to dispose and improve
her industry to the best approbation. If all civil actions else seem to
challenge interest in this grace of Times opportunacy, and decent manner of
presenting the object to acceptance; how much more stands the duty of
repentance engaged to such circumstances, wherein Misery as ashamed of her
self, is enforced to address it self to Gods mercy, and guilty sins stand
to be arraigned before Gods high Majesty? If Chorazin and Bethsaida in the
first infancy of Christianity had been found so fair ( outshined by Tire and
Sydon,) had Christ's works been there shown to their acceptance; how far
shall these Tyrians and Sydonians, set in the scale with us, out weigh our
endeavor, and overpoyze our husbandry? They had repented long ago, and
prevented Gods heavy judgment with a seasonable and sweet conversion. Long
have the arms of his mercy been open to embrace the first motions of our
untoward inclination. Long since have the knowledge of our Saviors miracles
and Sermons, the daily Ministry of his Preachers, given sufficient evidence of
his extraordinary love and abused patience. Long since have his corrections and
punishments, as the messengers of his wrathful displeasure, summoned our
slacknesse to his Court of Justice: famine and pestilence have long since
scaled your City walls; death and desolation have rid in triumph in your
streets: the hideous cry of the fatherless children, and childlesse fathers,
have peirced deep into your ears. The rumor of war and fear of invasion,
awak't your sleepy security, and armd'd you to prevention. And is this
(beloved) a time to procrastinate our repentance, and trespass further on his
patience? Stand we not already (beloved) at the bar of his justice,
expecting every hour, the giving up of the verdict, and the fatal sentence of
Condemnation? And can we be so senseless to play with death, and stake Heaven
against Hell, and buy a minutes space of pleasure with a perpetual and
datelesse durance of damnation? The least mites of our sins summoned up
together, will swell into an infinite: and more than the highest folly would it
seem in us, to run further on this score, when enough is cast up already to
condemn us. No minute of our lives but adds some scruple to the weight of our
transgressions; and what puff of breath passes from our mouths, which
steals not away some touch of our integrity: what can to morrow promise, more
than the present hour, or wherein finds Religion less improvement, than in
fruitless procrastination? Some boisterous hand of violent disaster may crack
or turn our houreglasse, ere the sands are half spent; or the time of our
Pilgrimage slip away ere we begin to calculate the motion. Sera est in fundo
par simonia: He that too soon beginns to spend, shall too late be taught to
spare: And he that sets his Salvation on one and the last cast, is sure to
hazardall; but uncertain to win any. To day if you will hear the Lords voice,
harden not your hearts, but bring forth fruit worthy Repentance. Herein the
inclination of the Tyrians and Sydonians foreseen of our Savior, might trace
you out the way, or with their supposed industry (upbraided to Bethsaida and
Chorazin) shame your contempt, or correct your negligence; They had repented
long ago. Neither was it altogether so notable in the Tyrians and Sydonians,
that they should with a ready hand catch at opportunity, and at first call of
Gods Grace and Spirit awake contrition, had they not seconded and seasoned
their contrite souls, groaning under the heavy weight of sin, with devout
humility: and that not only conceaved in the inward mind, but expressed in
the outward signs and emblems of Sackcloth and Ashes.

17. Humility is the first stone in the groundworke of Gods Temple; the first
step by which we ascend the throane of his sacred mercy; the first round of
Jacobs ladder, by which, like Angels, our souls climb up to God in Heaven,
and his holy Spirit descends to us on earth. The soil wherein this herb of
grace roots it self, is the heart of a true Christian, whence it derives and
spreads his branches outwardly in our exterior actions and behavior, and
expresses it self in such forms and weeds as are consonant to Gods prescript
and the sincerity of our affection. This inward sorrow and outward humiliation
have the ancient Fathers and Patriarchs expressed in Sackcloth and Ashes, as
Emblemes of contrition, so pleasing unto God that in Reprobates themselves,
though not effectual to Salvation, it has been found sometimes so far
accepted, as in it self it was sincere: As we read of Achab that God spared
him for his humiliation. In his Repentance he showed not himself an Hypocrite,
though he came not home to the Mark: He was true and sincere, though not
perfect and constant; and therefore lost he not his reward, though he obtained
not his end. The like may we read of Nineveh, whose contrition without doubt
total and perfect in a few, yet unfaigned (as it seems) in all, having passed
some steps of humiliation, though not ascended the highest pitch of true
Repentance; wrought notwithstanding so much good in Gods favor, (...) the
suspension of punishment, and their Cities preservation. Hence may every good
Christian enforce his conscience, with what good advice our Church has
ordained the use of kneeling, fasting, and outward penance for sin, as that
which in some measure has always been found acceptable in Gods sight, as the
complement of our devotion, and the most decent formality in our practice of
piety. The body can be no more wanting to the soul, than the handmaid to her
mistress in accomplishment of this holy service: Wherein howsoever either
party with all his faculties have designed and limited out their several and
distinct offices; yet as so many lines directed to one Center, they ought all
to meet in the happy period of Gods gracious favor, the only cause and
groundworke of our salvation. To which unspeakable bliss and Glory prepared
for the Elect in Christ, the Lord for his mercy direct our devotion, for the
merits of his dear Son; to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be
ascribed all honor, glory, might and majesty now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

