A DISCOVRSE, Concerning two divine Positions. The first ^^fectually
concluding, that the souls of the faithful fathers, deceased before Christ,
went immediately to heaven. The second sufficientlye setting forth unto us
Christians, what we are to conceive, touching the descension of our Savior
Christ into Hell:

Publicly disputed at a Commencement in Cambridge, Anno Domini 1552.

Purposely written at the first by way of a confutation, against a Book of
Richard Smith of Oxford, D. of Divinity, entitled a Refutation, imprinted
1562, and published against John Calvin, and C. Carlie: the title whereof
appears in ye 17. page.

And now first published by the said Christopher Carlisle, 1582.

Si quid hallucinor (hallucinamur enim omnes) Anglicae E^clesiae, cui me totum
dedo, esto iudicium. Imprinted at London by Roger Ward dwelling by Holborne
conduit, at the sign of the Talbot. ANNO 1582.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HENRY EARL OF Huntington, L. Hastinges, Hungerford,
Botreux, Molins, and Moyles, knight of the most noble order of the garter and
Lord president of her Majesty's Counsel established in the North parts
Christopher Carlil, wishes eternal felicity.
Idolatry and Exodus 22* 22.
Blasphemy are to be corrected Deuteronomy 13. 15.
by the civil Magistrate: and in like Leui^. 24. 16.
manner, the corruption Deuteronomy. 22. 22.
of manners: as Moses decreed, by the voice of Iehoua, and Exo. 22. 18.
sets down Godly Laws to that effect. Errors in doctrine are to be Errors
in doctrine.
reformed by examination: the authors thereof reduced by persuasion, convinced
by the word, and Tus. 1. 9.
reconciled by exhortation, and mutual conference. Wherein we ought to follow
the example of the high magistrate, Iehoua: who neither ene. 3. 9.
condemned, Adam, Caua, nor Cayne, before he called them, examined them, and
heard them. Magistrates therefore must examine by Laws* direct by judgment,
and conclude by conscience, guided by the word of God. Let us set before our
eyes Deuteronomy. 17. 19.
the most ancient and godly men, as Roma. 13. 2.
well in doctrine as in government. Adam and Seth by learning or rather
Joseph. 1.
by inspiratio^, which tends to Genesis 7.
the same end, made two Pillars, wherein they wrote a double subversion ^
Peter. 2. 12.
of the world: the one by Water, the other by fire. They instructed Peter 2. 5.
their posterity, and governed Nombers 11.
them with the law and comfortable Gospel. Enoch wrote books as we may read
in the epistle of Jude. Noac preached the Word, and (...)* 18. 5.
therefore called the eight preacher Sama. 2. 6. 17.
of righteousness, whose Sermons are plentifully described by Sybilla Erythraea.
Pr^a. 1^* 10
Abraham did the like. Moses, Iethro and such other Princes, executed both the
functions: instructed with the word, and reformed by* laws. So David, Solomon
and ^* King ^8. 14.
Josias blessed the people, and instruc 1 Kings 8. 14.
ted the people, and therefore are they called Cohenim, because they both
taught and governed: and by the same name were the sons of 1 Chronicles. 1^. 1^.
David termed in that respect* Iosaphat sent out his nobility to preach. 1
Reg. 10. 11.
These examples with many others of like dignity, honor and authority 2*
Chron. 17. 7.
have emboldened me also at this time to number your ^. as one among them and
with such modesty as becomes a loyal Christia^to crave your honorable
patrocinie, in subuerting the arrogant attempts and im pude^t assaults of the
Antichristians: whose wisdom in examining, whose judgment in discerning, whose
magnanimity in defending the truth, I have always had (as well is known) in
singular admiration. Iehoua the Eternal and original cause of all things,
indivisible in substance, and diuisible in properties, increase your ho nours
zeal in publishing the scriptures, to the subversion of Antichristianisme,
authority in defendinge the truth, alacrity in encoraging others to search
the fountains, and perseverance in amplifiyng the kingdom of Christ. At
London the 13. of May 1582.

Your Honors at commandment Christopher Carlil*


To the Reader.
WHAT Hell is: when it began: where it is: and whether Esaias 30. 31.
Christ descended, or ascended thither: and what he should do there: are
questions no less doubtful then necessary: doutfull, Queston doutfull.
for that the Doctors are variable: necessary to be known, for avoiding of
fables, and pernicious heresies.

These matters were disputed in Cambridge at the commencement, in the year of
Christ. 1552. Doctor Perne then Uicechauncelor, began thus against the
defendent. All the Scriptures, all the Doctors, and general Councels are
contrary to your assertion. Not so, says the defendent: for the Scriptures are
all with me^ as for your Doctors and Councels, when you allege them, they
shall be answered. Then the Doctor replied* saying: how answer you this
text* Thou shall not leave my soul Ps. 16 10.
in hell. Then said the defendent: it is not so in y^ Hebrew, but thus: Thou will not forsak^ ^r leave my body in the grave. Then stood up M. Ghest, late
Bishop of Sarisbury, and put forth this Enthimema: Christ ascended into ^eauen:
Ergo he descended into hell. It is, says the defendent, as absurd an Argument
as this: Christ ascended to Jerusalem: Ergo he des^ended to Jericho. Doctor
Young mine old ac^aintaunce in Philosophy, and a learned man* reasoned thus:
Thou shall not leave my soul in h^ll: for it is says he, in Greek, eis
hadou. The defendant answered, that he should have added according to the
property of the Greek phrase, eis oicon hadou, meaning thereby the Grave,
which is called in Job y^ house of death. Well says he, you lea^e too much to
the Rabbines, and with those words made an end. Sir John Cheek, a man most
expert in all kind of arts and tongues, and of most exquisite judgment,
prosecuted D. Young his Argument more at large, repeating the 24. verse of the
2. of the Acts, after the old Latin translation, on this sort: Whom God has
raised, loosing the sorrows of hell. The defendant denied y^ Translation, and
recited the Greek words, and translated them truly, according to the mind of
Peter, on this manner: Whom God has raised, loosing the sorrows of death To
that sir John Cheek answered thus: he did not loose the sorrows of Death,
but the sorrows of Hell. It was God that losed the sorrows of death and not
Christ*
Not so, says the defendaunt: for it is in Greek, Death, and not Hell. Then
called Sir John Cheek for a Greek Testament, and found it even so as the
defendaunt had aduouched. Then said sir John Cheek, the Disputation is at an
end, unless you will grant for disputation sake, y^ Infernus is taken in
this place for the Grave: otherwise I have no scope to reason: content says
the defendant: for Sheol signifies ye grave. Because says Sir John Cheek,
that you reason after the order of Socrates, I will reason with you
Socraticallye, and thus he began. Are there any sorrows in the grave? the
defendant answered, that there were sorrows in y^ Grave by Prosopopoia: and
so reasons Paul saying y^ every creature desires his renouatio^: thus he
writes. For the earnest expectation of the creature abides, looking when the
sons of Romans 8. 19. (...) 21. 22.
God shall appear: because the creature is subject to vanity, not willing, but
for him which has subdued the same in hope: for the creature it self shall be
made free from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the
sons of God. For we know y^ every creature groneth with us also* and
trauaileth in paiue with us, even unto this time. The time was spent by this
kind of reasoning, and such like, until that Doctor Perne gave sentence,
determining that Christ's body lay in the grave* but his soul went into
hell. This his conclusion (as his opinion was then) is utterly subverted by
this book.

The Papists and ioily Jesuits, ground all their Religion upon their high
Provost, and on his malignant church: they cry O the Church, the Church.
Iehoua commanded the Jews Jeremy. 7. 4.
not to trust in false lying words, where y^ like phrase is saying, Here is
the temple of the Lord, here is the Temple of the Lord, here is y^ Temple of y^
Lord: they triumph in ignorance which Ignorance the mother of de uotion.
to them is the mother of devotion. Devotion without knowledge is dotage:
knowledge without virtue is ostentation: praying to dead men, or for the dead,
or to Angels, is Superstition counterfayte holiness, is Hypocrisy. They teach
the doctrines of men, and their forefathers traditions reproved by the
Prophers, condemned by Christ, who with Peter terms them Patro Patroparado
ta.
Paradota. This matter of Christ's descending into hell is an Article of their
faith* and only Math. 15. 2.
proved by Revelations, dreams, and erroneous Mark. 7. 5.
Doctors: to be brief, there is nothing (...) 1. Peter. 1. 18.
absurd which they do not affirm. Paul the 4. Paul the 4.
in his Bull to the Duke of Florence, calls him self, King of Kings, Lord of
Lords, and Prince of the universal Earth. Pius Quintus writes thus: All
power in Heaven and earth is given Pius quintus Gregory the 9. lib. 4. decret.
to me. Gregory y^ 9. a Iusty lim of Satan, writes thus of himself: The Pope,
is of power to bind and lose, and is Christ's vicegereat, which is a Priest
for ever, according to the order of Melchisedech, appointed of God to be judge
of the quick and dead: of which Antichristian blasphemies, together with many
more of him, and other Popish decrees, I have more at large discoursed, in my
book of Peter's never being at Rome. To omit this fabulous and pernitio^s
doctrine of y^ Papists, with their traditions, ceremonies* and inuentio^s: let
us study yt scriptures, where in is contained eternal life, which are
neglige^tly ^ead of the professors thereof, de^ided by the Atheistes,
discredited and defaced by the Papists, and depraved by the Jesuits,
contemptuously and blasphemously deriuing their name from Jesus, ^ thing by
none ever heretofore (were they neu^ so pestilent heretics) attempted. May we
not (...) judge them impious I^pes, and desperate members of that malignant
Synagog^e, who thus dare to their own perdition, so shamelesly abuse so
reverend a name, whereunto each knee ^oth bow, both of things in heaven* of
things ^n earth, and of things under the earth: and besides Phil. 2. 10
whom there is none other name wherein mankind Act. 4. 12.
^an be saved? For this name, Jesus, is as proper ^o Christ only, as Iehoua,
is unto God. Iudeede, we that have given our names and professions unto* Christ
by the warrant of Gods word do term our selves Christians* for that we are
Act. 11. 26.
by his spirit anointed: But these sedstious Se^inaristes tearming themselves
Jesuits, arrogantly ascribe to themselves a share and portion (if ^ot an
entire interest) in ye salvation of mankind: and thereby rob Jesus of his
office. I know that some of them either of ignorance, or of obstinacy, will
object, that as well yt fonne of Nun, ^s also the son of Syrach, was named
Jesus: but they show themselves therein utterly ignorant of the Hebrew Tongue,
wherein their names be written not ( Jesus) but ( sosua). The same Jesus ^n his
good time, grant unto them that calling Acts 9. 5.
and conversion which he gave unto Paul, that they and we with one mind, may
jointly glorify the only Lord Iehoua.

Amen.
Illustriss. idemque eruditiss. 10. Chekus, Eques auratus and Consiliarius
Regius: finita hac in Comitiis Cantabrigiensibus disputatione, 1552. suum huic
argumento assensum senariis sequentibus testatum posteris voluit.
Partem in vtranque quaestiones public^
Cum disputaremus corona maxima,
Anno idque Soteris ses quimille^ima
Et quinquagesimo secundo: plurimos
Locos and argumenta protuli, quibus
Huius virs sententiam subuertere
Conabar: Atqu^ victus prole Temporis
Quae Veritas dicta est, caepi sententia^
Mutare, firmamenta illius p^nderans,
Uer^nique quod cod^x hic tradit dicere.
The same in English.
What time commencement holden amongst the learned men
In Cambridge, whereto great resort was from far and nere was then:
In the year of Christ a thousand full five hundredth fifty twain,
I brought forth scriptures, quoted texts, and sentences did strain
This man's opinion to confute with all my whole intent,
In open audience being then the only Respondent.
But fainting in my proofs at length and wresting textes amiss,
I straightwayes yielded unto Truth, of Time who daughter is.
For wayghing al his words of weight which did his cause pursue,
I Sir John Cheek do here aduouch his judgment to be true:
And firmelye with him do confess, and do believe it well,
That Christ in body nor in soul descended into hell.
Apotheosis Maiorum,
per C. Carlilum.
Quo nos, praesidio fidei penetramus, end^
In caelum priscos constat abisse patres.
Ignatius ad Trall. anno 107.
Corpora co^memorat Christu^ eduxisse sepulta,
(...), vita a^ restituisse nouae.
(...) appellant monume^ta, vbi corpora longo
Tempore sub gleba delituere putri.
Io. Scotus. Ann. 1300.
Christi iter ad manes and ad infima tartara scripti^
Sese diuinis posse probare negat.
Augustinus Steuchus Eugub. Anno. 1530. in Genesis 37.
Quae Lyra delirus de limbo so^niat, algent:
Ad lemures nullu^ Christus habebat iter.
Pecokus Episcopus Lincolnie^sis.
Omnino nullam Christu^ penetrasse Geennam,
Nec veterum manes eripuisse liquet.
Io. Caluinus c. 7. Sect. 25.
Dum cruce penderet, Christum lustrasse barathrum
Dicit, and immeritam sustinu^sse necem.
Theodorus Beza, in Act 2. 27. 1. Pet. 3. 18.
Beza per ignotas Erebi transisse lacuna^
Aut Limbos, Christum totus vbique negat.
Christoph. Carlilus.
Carlilu: Christi monumentum nominat (...),
In qua per triduum sede locatus erat.
Sapphica T. Newtoni.
Corpus in clauso iacuit sepulchro
Mortuum Christi, triduo sepultum,
Caelitum seeds animus capessens Gaudi^ sensit.
Mortuum corpus potuit nequaquam
Ire, scrutando barathri lacunas:
An putas manes miseri trahendos Ditis ab antro*
Absit, ve trudam dominum saelutis
In specum diris furiis dicatum,
Aut in humani generis profundam Hostis abyssum.
H. Hales in expositionem Symboli.
Quid^am concipitur? Corpus. Quid nascitur inde*
Corpus. Quid patitur? corpus. Quae mortua Christ^
Pars? Corpus* Perrae quid conditur antro?
Corpus. Tartareum quid^am descendit ad orcum?
Corpus. At in barathro nullum reperitur. Adiuit
Nusquam Erebu^ corpus Christi. Number sensibus orbu^
Corpus obire potest vastissima regna tyranni
Tartarei? quo nunc descendit corpus? in antrum
Horti cuiusdam. Tumulo surrexit ab imo
Quid? corpus. Corpus recta petiisse sepulchrum
Dicitur, hand animus: nihil immortale sepulchr^
Conditur. Inclusum fuit ergo sindone corpus
Per triduum: haud vltra tumulu^ pi^ symbola mittu^^
Christum: imo vero condemnant symbola monstra
Et portenta hominum, qui christu^ in tartara trudu^^*
(...) appellant monumentum symbola Christi,
Hunc sensum verba and vires sermonis hebr^i
Me doeuere: ^ec vsquam aliud me credere poss^
In mentem induxi: sic stat sententia: librum
Hunc fidei commendo tuae, commendo tutel^.
DOCTOR SMITH WRITING AGAINST John Calvin, and Christopher Carlil, entituleth
his Book: as follows,
Refutatio luculenta crassae, and exitiosae Doctor S.
heresis Iohannis Caluini, and Christophori Carlili Angli, qua astruunt
Christum non descendisse ad infero* alios, quam ad infernum infimum, qui locus
est damnatoru^ perpetuus, aut ad sepulchrum.

A manifest refutation, says Smith, we both deny that Christ went to any
hell: neither call we the grave hell, therefore your title is untrue.
of a gross and pestilent heresy of John Calvin and Christopher Carlil, an
English man: wherein they affirm that Christ descended into none other Hels,
than to the lowest hell, which is a perpetual place of the damned, or into his
grave.

Thus far the Title of Smith his Book.

CARLIL I Marvel, M. Smith, what cause you had to write against me, whom you
never saw, who ^euer offended you, who never reasoned with you, who neither had
put in print any book, either in English or Latin: neither you ever knew me.


Smith. I heard say, that you did defend in the year of Christ 1552. at the
Commencemente in Cambridge, that Christ never descended into Hell, and that Sir
John Cheek Sir John Cheek.
Knight, one of King Edwards Counsel did dispute with you, and certain others.


Carlil. It is so.


Smith. I have against you long custom: old Authoures: general councels:
and diverse Creedes.


Carlil. Custom without Scripture is cause of error: Authors Customs.
without the word are to be reie^ Authors.
(...) without Christ are Counsels
worthy of reproof. And where you allege diverse Credes, to them I will
answer, when you aduouche them, I require Scripture: for without it, I will
believe nothing to be necessary to salvation, though you bring Carteloades of
Doctors and devises.


Smith. Saint Gregory alleges Gregory in his 12. book upon Job. cap 7.
Genesis 3. 24. no man (says he) might enter into that place which was defended
by the Angels called Cherubins, The. 1. obiec tion*
and with flaming burning Sword: but Paradise was so defended: ergo no man
might enter Paradise defe^ ded with the Cherubins.
in, till Christ came, and removed them away by his ascension into heaven.


Carlil. If you understand by Paradise Paradise y^ heaven.
heaven and felicity, as Christ ^oth, Luke 23. 42. We must needs confess,
that the Cherubins were neither so unmerciful, neither the ^aked sword so
terrible to ye just, neither of such force, as to keep ^ut the faithful, unto
whose faith the Cherubins gave place, y^ sword removed, and the way was open,
and the faithful of all ages let into the celestial Paradise: for to the
faithful, Paradise, is never shut: to the unfaithful it is never open. Faith
is the keye, that opens the lock unto everlasting life. Faith is not only a
sure and infallible expectation Heb. 11. 1.
of heavenly joys, but also an apprehensio^ of the same. For where Faith
cease, there begins immortality: Where hope makes an end, there is the
full perfection, full Hope.
fruitien, full contemplation of the majesty of Iehoua. Let us expound the
text according to the letter. Adam saw this vision sensibly in the aer, as
David, an Angel with a naked Adam saw this vision in the aer.
sweard, 1. Chro. 21. 2. Sam. 24. 16. Joshua 5. 13. and Balam Number. 22. 31. to
declare that no man should eat of the tree of lives, that is, to have
felicity till he depart out of this life, and to show that no man by his
own merits should ascend into heaven, where the tree of lives is kept with the
sword, from all them which pass not through tribulations by faith, whereby
entry is made into heaven. Epiphanius judges this vision to have appeared
Epiphanius.
to Adam, that he might thereby admonish his children, that by his example
they might be reduced from sin. Augustine is of the former opinion, August.
lib. 2. contra Manicheos cap. 23. Tom. 3.
Lib. 2. contra Manichaeos. cap. 23. Tom. 3. And of the later de genesis ad lite.
lib. 11. cap. 40. This Uision August. de Genesis ad lit. 11. cap. 40.
which Adam saw was in the aer, heaven is above the aer many thousand miles:
This was before the gates or entry into the terrestrial paradise* you feign
it to be at the gates of heaven. This was for a terror to Adam, and to his
posterity for his transgression. This is removed by faith, this gives place
to the just. Christ entered not into the terrestrial Paradise, but into the
heavenly. Luke 23. 42* 43. 2. Cor. 12. 2. It was the terrestrial Pararadise
where this vision was seen. Paradise.



Smith. I perceive that you make two paradises, the one celestial, the other
terrestrial, which you will Read more of paradise in my note upon the 2. of.
Genesis
have to be the whole earth.


Carlil. That is my meaning, notwithstanding paradise by a Metaphor is taken
for prosperity and pleasant places. To the which Tirus, and Assiria, and the
land of Israel are compared Ezech 27. 28. 31. 36. Joel. 2. Genesis 13. By the
like metaphor in the new Testament it is taken for felicity, for paradise is
he auen.
the bosom of Abraham, and the kingdom of heaven. Luke 23. 2 Cor 12. Reuelat.
2 By this discourse their dreams are easily confuted who place paradise
without the S. Beda.
tropiks, or under y^ equator, or in a high montayn^, or in the circle of the moon, or in the middle region of y^ air or in Fortunatis insulis or Durandus
Cortesius 2. sent. did. 5. Ioach. Vad in Epitom. ^i. terr.
in campis Elisiis. Amongst the latins so many doctoures, so many opinions.
Could there grow any trees in ye air, or any beasts be fed about ye moan,
either floods run, and such other things which were all in Paradise? Wherefore
certain of the gre kes, as Chrysostom, Theodoret, and Epiphanius accuse such
dreamers, and specially they reprove Origene with certain Heriticks, who
either expounded paradise allegorically or anagogically. The Jews are more
monstrous and fantastical, who say that god prepared paradise before the
creation to receue the just as they departed: which is not so, but it may be a
figure of heavenly felicity, which was prepared to that effect before the
foundation of the world, Ephesi. 1. And therefore Genesis 2. 7
some translate Michedem from the beginning, and other some from the The second
objection.
East.


Smith. Jacob lamenting the death of his son Joseph, whom he thought Genesis 37
35
had been devoured of wild beasts, said: I will descend down unto my son
lamenting into hell. Now if Iaacob were in Hell and also his Jacob.
son Joseph, who were both full of faith and good works: then must needs the
Fathers before Christ descend into hell, and came not out till Christ fetched
them out.


Carlil. Why do you say that Jacob went to Hell, when as al our English
Bibles, say that he went into his grave? Is the grave hell? Rests not the
body there without Sheol, the grave.
life, without senses, without pain or torments? There is pain intolerable
in hell without release, torments without intermission, and damnation without
end. The text says not after your translation that the soul of Jacob
descended into Hell, but it says that Jacob went into Sheol, meaning his body
without life and senses.


Smith. I mean that Jacobs soul went to hell.


Carlil. But the text says, that it Genesis 4^. 28.
was Jacob, and the gray heads of Genesis 44. 31.
Jacob. Are there any graye heads in hell? Are you not ashamed so to Dream,
so to affirm, and so to write? When we say that Jacob, or any other man is
dead, we mean not that his soul is dead, which can not dye, for it is
immortal. A dead man is called a man, but a soul is never called a man after
that it is departed, but a soul. Wherefore by your own fantasy it was the
body of Jacob that went to hell. Jacob said that they would bring his gray
hears to the grave: he does not call his gray hears his soul, neither are
there any graye hears in heaven nor yet in hell: for they consume in the
grave. It is our English phrase that when we are offended with our
unthrifty children, we say that they will bring our graye hears to the grave
with sorrow.


Smith. I follow S. Hieromes translation, which has in Infernum, into hell. I
know that all your English Bibles put the grave for hell. Shall we give
more credit to your English translations, then to S. Hierome, then to all the
Greek and Latin Doctors, which have hell and not the grave, in their writings
and expositions?


Carlil. If the text be not faithfully Read August ad Hieron. and de trinitate*
translated, nor truly imprinted, y^ faithful interpretation is to be had from
the Hebrew, and in like manner The truth must be had out of the hebrew and
greek.
the truth of the new Testament out of the Greek text. Thus much the council
kept at Vienna in France a littel way from Lions in the year of Christ 1309.
Lib. 5. Clement. Tit. 3. S. Hierome did not translate the Bible out of the
Greek, but out of the Hebrew, and thereby did correct the Greek and Latin
translations, and the same council gives Augustine, who wills all men to
consider the propertye of every tongue, and especially the Hebrew, and Greek.
August. lib. 1. de sermon Domini in mont. in lib. retract. 1. cap. 7. ad
Volusian. epist. 1. contra Faust. Manich. lib. 11. de doctrina christiana. lib.
1. ca. 5. li. 2. cap. 15. Now seeing that the property of every thing, the
truth of the Text, the right sense of the Scripture is to be had out of the
Hebrew tongue and phrase, we must run to it, as to the fountain.


Smith. I understand not Hebrew, no more did S. Augustine, nor Chrysostom, but
in obscure places they asked the Jews what was the property of this word or
that, and of this phrase or that phrase.


Carlil. Sheol in this place is the Grave, as it is in the 44. Chap. verse. 31.
where the Sons of Jacob said, they should bring the gray head of their
father to the Grave. In all these places Sheol, is taken Sheol. Genesis 37. 35.
Genesis 44. 31. genesis 42. 38,
for the grave. This Sheol S. Hierome translateth Infernum, which is a place
below where the bodies are buried, meaning thereby a grave So write also
Photius, and Theodoret.

The same word Sheol is in the 1. of the kings the 2. chap. ver. 9. where in
the same phrase, David charge Solomon to cause y^ hoare head of Semei to go
down into the grave with blood. And Chrysostom interpreting the 9. ver. of the
4. chapter of Paul to the Ephesians, calls the inferior parts of the earth,
whether Christ descended, Death. Sheol is death
and alleges this place of Ge. 44. 31. to prove the same. Lyra though Lyra
upon the 1. of the kings 2. 6. rab. Solomon.
in other places he takes Sheol for hell, yet is he compelled here to take it
for the grave of Ioab, for says he, David did not mean that Ioab* should
go to hell, but that he should be punished temporally. And the Psalm. 143.
ver 8. I shall be Psalm. 143. 8. there is Bor put for Sheol. Psalm. 86 13.
like to them that go down to the pit, that is, says Chrysostom, I shall be
like to them that die. Thus to go down into the pit, and to go to Sheol, is al
one phrase, one sense, one meaning, which you translate hell.


Smith. Though I am but a small grecian, I know that the greeks called the 72
interpreters, 6 of every tribe appointed by Ptolome king 72 Interpretors.
of Egypt to translate the Bible, have: (...), eis hadou: to hell.


Car. You must consider Master Smith, that (...) does not signify hell where
in are Devils and damned Hell.
souls tormented for ever, unless Hades.
that torments be joined (...) quasi (...) ab a non, et (...), videre.
August. Tom. 3. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 12. cap. 34.
withal as in Luke 16. The Greeks say that hades has his name of not seeing,
as who say a place of darkness, and Pluto the king of the earth is so
called, and to this effect writes Ambrose and Augustine. The old Greeks, as
Homer and Euripides take hades for the grave, as (...), and Latin Poets also:
as Virg.

Iuuenes tot miserat Orco.

And Ovid:

Saturno tenebrosa in tartara misso.

Notwithstanding the first Grecians, as Sibylla Erythrea, deryue Ades of Adam,
who is the earth, and thereof has his name, Genesis 2. verse. 7. He made man of
the duste Homo likewise in latin has his name of ^umus, the earth.
of the earth, and therefore God says in Ge. 3. verse. 19. that, thou art dust
or earth, and to dust or earth thou shall return. Wherefore this earth this
place, that grave unto the which Adam for Adams grave.
Adam should return, is called of his name Adam, and the greeks altered it a
little and framed it to their tongue, and called it Aden, changing a. into e.
and m. into n. Thus writes Sibyll, Sybil. 1. (...)


Aden appellant, vbi primus conditur Adam
Morte^ obie^s, que^ terra abdit decoratque sepulchro.
Hinc fit vt humani generis linquentia vitam
Corpora, dicantur penetrare ^ubilia Ditis.
The Greeks do call Aden that place
Where Adam was laid in the ground:
And where al other rest and s^pe,
For so the Hebrew word does sound.

Smith. You reason much of the The third objection.
Grave and place where Adam was buried. I do not reason of the Body, but of
the soul of Adam, which I am sure descended into Hell, and lay there almost
four thousand Adam in hell 4000* year.
years, till Christ fetched him out.


Carlil. He was not in Hell, and therefore Christ could not fetch him out.


Smith. Where was he then?


Carlil. In heaven.


Smyth. How prove you that?


Carlil. He ascends immediately Adams soul in heaven.
unto heaven that asks pardon, that ^raueth mercy with a steadfast faith:
but this did Adam: ergo Adam ascended into heaven immediately after his death:
for the death of the faithful is the high way to felicitye, and faith is the
salvation of our souls 1. Pet. 1. 9. The assumptio^ is proved by Josephus,.1.
pet. 1. 9.
who faith, that Adam confessed his fault, and craved pardon for his offense*
Moreover Adam did not only Josephus 1. cap. 4
confess his fault, but also repented and believed in the seed promised. And
as he and Caua were the Caua is the mother of all mankind ge ne. 3. 20.
first that offended, so were they the first that received grace and ascended
into heaven, except Abell and Enoch. Which is proved by Solomon wysdom. 10..
4. Read the.. 3* cap. of wisdom.
or rather by Philo in these words: Wisdom, (says he) which is the son
of god, preserved the first father of all mankind from his offense. Is not be
saved that is delivered from his offense, from sin, from error? but in hell
there is no salvation, then was h^ in heaven by the same faith tha^ we have.
His faith made Christ's Faith.
death as present to him, as though it had been done in deed: for faith
apprehends things absent, and things, which are not subject to our senses,
consider Heb. 11. 1. And therefore Christ is killed to the faith of the elect
even from the beginning Revel. 13. 8.
of the world. And although Castalio and Beza resolves the latter part of
this 8. verse. on this sort: whose names are not written from the creation of
the world in the book of life of ye lamb which is killed. Nonwithstanding
they must needs conclude that the names of the faithful are and were written
in the book of life, in the The book of life is heaven.
^iuely book of the lamb, which is heaven: for so Christ define the it,
^aynge unto his disciples: Do not glory because that you have subdu^d spirits:
but because that your ^ames are written in heaven. Is it any absurdity to place
the souls, where their names are written? Are their names holier then their
souls? where good men's names are written, thither ascend their souls, but in
heaven are good men's names written: then there must needs be their souls. To
what use were it to have my name written in heaven, if my soul shall have no
fruition of heavenly joys, no contemplation, no solace, no felicity? The
disciples were predestined to this felicity, and therefore received presently,
when their tabernacle was dissolved, when their souls departed out of the
body. For they must needs reap one fruit, enjoy one felicity, whose faith is
all one, whose sacraments in effect are all one, for both have eaten one
spiritual bread and drunk 1. Cor 10. ver. 3. 4.
one spiritual drink: for they dronk of the spiritual rock which is
Theodoret. on. 1. Cor. 10.
Christ. The red sea expresses our baptism: The cloud the grace of An
argument infallible Romans 8. 28* 29. 30.
the holy ghost: Moses the high priest, Christ: the Israelites the Christians:
the rock Christ. Can he come in hell, who is forknowne of god, predestined
from everlasting, called of purpose, justified by faith, and consequently
glorified? Is the forknowledge of god doubtful? Is his predestination mutable?
Is his calling of purpose uncertain? Or our justification variable? Or our
glorificatio^ i^ doubt? Adam was gloryfied in y^ presence Adam glory fied.
of god always, always elected, always in sure hope, and in an infallible
expectation of heavenly felicity. To glorify, is as y^ papists term it, to
canonise, to make saints, To glorify
to give felicity, to introduce a man into ye inco^prehensible joys of heaven.
And to signify a certaintye and an infallible truth, in electi^ng calling,
justifying, and glorifyinge, he uses the preterperfect tense, as though it
were done already, and so it is in deed with god. shall we measure ye author of
time with time? or the geeuer of felicity by man's pha^tasie, or the certentie
of salvation, by the doubtful iustisiynge of the Papist? If Adam were
foreknowen, fore elected, fore appointed, and consequently called, and
glorified how could he come in hell? Is there any justification in Hell? any
faith any hope of better life. any salvation, any remission of sins, any
invocation of the name of God, any glorificacion, any felicity? Hell is
without Hope, Geenna without grace, Satan without Salvation, Tophet without
joy, the worm of conscience without solace, gnashing Hell.
of teeth without gladness. Let us speak of Habel. It is said Habel.
that Habel being dead, did speak. Genesis 4. 10.
So is it said of the Souls of the Revel. 6. 9. 10. 11.
faithefull in the Reuelacion: he is said to speak which lives, then Habel
and all the faithful do live the dead speak.
because they speak, and also because Heb. 11. 4.
that God is the God of the lyuinge Wisd. 10. 3.
and not of the dead. Moreover by ^ John. 3. 12.
this word speakinge, is painted forth his felicity which he has en ioyed
from his martyrdom hitherto, for Christ says that who so ever shall lose his
life in this world for Gods cause and religion as he did, shall find it again
in the next: but if he should go to Hell after his death, as our romish
Catholics do teach and affirm, it were an evil exchange, and the death
will: lingly received for his cause (or religion) very slenderly recompensed but
Habel was found just, and is so called both of Christ and of S. Paul. There
is none just, but he Math. 10. 28. 39.
that believes: for as S. Paul says whatsoever is not done of faith, is Math.
23. 35.
sin, the just man lives by faith, Heb 11. 4.
Habel was just, therefore he lived by his faith.

There is in this sentence of Habel three things to be noted: faith, The
just lives by faith.
justice, and immortal life. Justice is the free gift, mercy, and goodness of
god, given unto man by Justice.
faith, faith brings immortality Faith.
or ever lasting felicity, for the perfection of faith is felicity, and faith
ends where immortality begins: 1. Cor. 13. 13.
then has faith done his part, when yt has obtained ye which it trusted
upon: and then cease hope, when yt enjoys that which yt hoped for: then
remains charity, we S. Paul says is the gretest of Charity Hope.
the three, because it contineweth and florisheth for ever among ye sai^tes.
Herin does Ireneus err, affirmi^g Ireneus error lib. 5.
that faith and hope remain after this life. For he supposes that all men's
souls from the beginning of the world are kept in a secret place abiding or
waiting for ye last day, and therefore to believe and hope And Solomon was long
before Christ.
still. But Salomo^ or rather Philo says in the 4. chapter of the book of
wisdom: The just though they dye before their time, or being young, yet
they are in rest. Augustine calls Habel a virgin, Habell.
a priest, a just man, and a marti^ he has deserved (says he) the Acrowne.
crown of martyrdom, this crown is felicity, unto the which we are bound
to haste unto.

If there be a church in heaven, as we must needs confess there is, where
Christ is being the head then is it an iniquity to deny Habel, to be there
being the first martyr. Bernarde places him in heaven, Habell in he auen
because he received death patiently by his brother Cayne. who persecuted
him for his virtues 1. John. 3. ver 15. 12.
sake: for Abraham Esra an ancient Hebrew Doctor affirms that Cayne killed
Habell because hea said that vice should be punished, and Virtue rewarded in
an other life, which when Cayne heard, he slew him forthwyth. Ambrose also
does affirm that GOD hearethe the dead because they live with him, and do
rest in his Pallaice, he callethe Abell the Prince, Captain, and way leader
of Christian men.

And shall we say then that the August. de mirab. sacr. Cap. 3
captain is in worser state then ye soldiour, the prince in worser case then
the subject, so does Ambrose call him. And to ye same effect does it tend
which is written in the 6. chapter of the Reuelat. whereas the souls lying
under the altar apparayled in white garments say: Olorde holy and just, how
long will thon tarry to avenge our blood. Among whom was Habel desiring the
resurrection. And so was Enoch, as affirms Enoch.
Solomon in the book of wisdom, the 4. chapter saying these words: Heb^. 11.
Enoch because he pleased god Eccles. 44.
was carried into paradise an example Poi^e is he uen.
of good life unto the worlds to come. When he pleased god, he Faber upon Math
8.
was beloved, and for that he lived among the wicked, he was rapt up least he
should by their peruersity have been seduced. There are in ye same place many
goodly sentences which declare y^ faithful after their death forth with to
receive felicitye, and Heb. 11.
the wicked or unfaithful, misery. Paul also proves ye same, Enoch says
he, was translated or taken up from death to life, or dyed not at all: for
before his translation it is written of him that he pleased god, which for to
do without faith is impossible. Thus you must needs believe, you that will go
unto god, that thee is a god, that does reco^pense the faithful, and such as
love him. Wherefore it is evident that Enoch ascended into heaven. Josephus lib.
1. cap. 3.
Josephus affirms the same. Yet I know that there are some of the hebrew
Doctors as Esra, who takes his translation from death, Lacac.
for his death only, and not for So it is taken Psalm. 73 24. speakin^e of the
death of the just, whole souls god re ceiueth.
any assumption: howbeit the hebrew word signifiethe not only to take away by
death, but also to receive unto himself, as god did Enoch. Pselly a greek
author affirms that he did fly up into a heavenly place. So is there a great
number which affirm, that Enoch
he went into Abraham's bosom, and into the same place whether Christ his body
went. Isodorus says, that he was the 7. from Adam, because that all men in
the beginning of the 7. thowsande year should enjoy the same felicity which
he did then. And all the Latins in a manner say that he went into heaven,
least it should have been thought that the fathers souls should have been in
hell, or detayned in lasye limbus. Chrysostom, Ephrem, with other of the
greeks affirm, that he is in a fortunate place. Thus far of Enoch. And the
same I do judge of Enos, Seth, Lamech, Noac, Sem, and all the rest of the
faithful fathers, whose faith conuayed the^ up into immortallity. Now let us
hear and mark what god says Abraham, Genesis 15. 15. and 25. 8.
unto Abraham: Thou shall (says god) go unto thine elders and people quietly,
and be buried in a florishing^ age, which is as much to To go to our elders.
say: when thou art dead thy soul shall spedily ascend into heaven among
thine elders, where it shall live in the abundance of joys. Wherefore they who
contend and affirm that there is no place in ye books of Moses whereby the
immortalitye, of the soul can be proved, are greatly to be blamed. for it is
evident of this place that the soul went unto joy, for he said when thou shall
dye and go unto thin^ elders. First y^ souls go unto their elders, which are
all the faithful Fathers: and then is the body buried If you should
understand yt of his sepulcher, which is at Hebro^ where he was buried, in the
double cave y^ is false for there was none of his elders buried, nor none of his
familiars, his wife Sara only excepted, and the^ he should have said, y^ shall
go unto thy wife Sara and not to thy elders: if you understand it of his ^arnal
fathers Thara and Nachor they Ios. 24. 15.
most abominable Idolatoures, Faith.
wherefore he meant not unto them, then must he mean those faithful men before
recited, who exercised the same faith y^ he did, and believed in the same
Christ. For by faith he possessed Cananye, subdued tyrants, offered Isaac, and
obtained everlasting felicity: for faith brings salvation, as Prodromus
says in these verses which I translated out of the greek tongue:

O holy faith, sound, perfect, and pure: Which of salvation do man assure.

Or thus.

O constant faith. pure and not fained: Whereby everlasting life is ob tayned.

God made first a Covenant with Adam promisinge the Seed that should tread
down the Serpents head, unto Noat he promised quietness with the Rainbowe,
unto Abraham A Covenant.
he promised the Land of Abraham.
Canaan and immortalitye: none of these did doubt of any thing, but did believe
the promiser. Paul by their example perswded men to believe, and thereby to
obtain everlasting life. And if we that are their Children do hope by faith
to have the fruition of God his presence, how unkind are we to deprive our
fathers thereof, including them in the dark dungeon of Hell or Limbus,
spoylinge them of all Romans 4 II* Abraham went to heaven.
Joy and Glory? Abraham is called in the Scriptures the father of all the
faithful, and was he then in worse state then his children? When he had
lived. 175. years, he departed unto his Elders and people, that is (as
Caietanus affir^eth) into the sweet and pleasant Gathered to the fathers.
^asie of felicitye, which God has ^repared for his elect from the beginning,
Caietanus.
he is gathered unto his ^athers. This Metaphor is thus ^o be applied, that
as the husband: ^an does gather his corn into his Barn, so God gathreth his
faithful servants into his heavenly Math. 3. 12.
habitation, as Christ does witness saing, that the chafe, which is the
wickedshalbe, burned: but the corn, which are his faithful, he will lay Heb.
12 verse. 23. 23. 24.
or gether it into his barn which is heaven. He died, says the scripture,
Abraham.
in a pleasante age, such an age such a reward soloweth, such a death such a
life, such labor such joys. The interlyned gloss with the ordinary, Strabus
and also Angustine place Abraham sometime among the angels in ye mount Sion,
in the city of the living God, in the celestial* Jerusalem, among the
company of the innumerable augels, in the congregation To be gathered to the
fathers is only applied to the souls which live with god. David, Cim^i and
Rabbi, Abraham say ^o. Read Pagnin. in Cab. and Cadab.
of ye first born sons which are written in heaven, sometime (...) God the
Judge of all men, among the spirits of perfect men, and (...) Jesus Christ the
mediator of the new testament. Ambrose says (...) Caietanus that this phrase
of the gethering to his elderes can in n^ wise be referred unto the body but
unto the soul. The like is verified of Moses and Aron in Deuteronomy. 32. He that
believed as Abraham did, and like wise lived as he lived can inhabyte none other
place then very heaven: this city, this country, Two places.
this kingdom, and this inheritance, is promised, and is proper and common
unto all the faithful: even so is hell, the kingdom, country, and
inheritance of the wicked, or unfaithful, and other places of joy or pain,
of reward, recompense, or inheritance besides these twain, ye scripture
knows not, whatsoever ha ^h been, is, or shall be dreamed, de^ised or affyrmed
to ye contrary, as ^ost plainly appears by ye history Luke. 16. ver. 19.
Lazarus and Dives.
^f Lazarus and Dives, where is ^ewed the descending of ye wicked ^ch man into
hell, and how the poor Lazarus was carried up into the bo^me of Abraham, as for
any third ^ace as our purgatory Catholics ^o protest and defend, it is
utterly ^knowen not only unto that place of Scripture above expressed but
also unto all the rest of y^ whole holy Scriptures. And as Christ Two places.
speaks but of two places or rewards: so speaks he of two masters which
were God and Ma^mon, which two masters rewarded their servants in the two
forsaid places, whereby I gather that there were but two places, one of Joy,
the other of Pain. Two masters, the one good, the other evil, two kind of
people, the one faithful, the other unfaithful.

And, as for a third place, a third master, and a third people, the
Scripture proves none, neither do I believe that there is any. And I nothing
doubt but if our Romish Catholics should be enforced gratis, even as
charity does bind, to do their works of redemption, and to receive nothing
for their pains for releeuing the pore souls, they would right shortly be
persuaded and contented to let the place go after the profit and lucre, which
now enforces them so fervently to defend the same with sword and fire. But as
Christ mentions but two masters and two places after this life, one for the
elect and an other for the reprobate: so S. Augustine utterly denies Augustine.
the third place. For if there had been any such in those days, the rich
would have been redeemed for money: if there had been any popes in tohse days,
money and pardons had delivered him. The foresaid The bistcrye of Dives and La,
is not fei ned.
storye is affirmed to be true, and both thee men well known, and their
names, the one called Nineusis the rich, the other Lazarus the Nineusis.
poor, and to have dyed both when Christ preached before his passion. Munster
up on Math. 4.
Thus the Hebrews affirm and some of the greeks as Epiphanius, and Enthinius,
and Faber. Which history if it be true, as Ireneus, Orygen, Enthin, upon Luke
16.
Cyprian, Cyrill, Hierome, Hillary, Ambrose, Gregory, Gorrham, Chrysostom and
all the hebrews affirm: and if they dyed before Christ's passion as it is
evident by all these autors, and if Abraham his bosom, be heaven and
everlasting felicitte, which no good man can deny: Then was Adam, Habell,
Abraham, Lazarus and all the faithful fathers in heaven. Tertullian believes
ye story to be so true, ye he concludes that the rich man was Herod, and ye
poor man John Baptyste Thus far of this history A brahams bo some.
now let us note what is ye bosom^ of Abraham. it is ye place of joy and (...)
licitie, which all they had ye lived (...) believed as Abraham did and dyed i^
ye same faith. For as ye mothers be^ some is ye solace of ye child, ye haven
ye safegarde of ye ships, after storme^ and tempests: so is Abraham's bosom ye
r^st, quietness, solare and securyty (...) ye faithful. S August also affirme^
Abraham's bosom to be heaven (...) thesewordes, saing what soever i^ is in
Abraha^s bosom y^ same ha^ my familiar Nebrideus obtained if Lazarus who dyed
before Christ Nebridius.
was in Abraham's boosme, and Nebri deus who died after Christ had the same
bosom: then must needs al be one thing, and who dare, says S. Augustine, call
this bosom of. Abraham any part of hell? how be it he is in this matter, as
in diverse other inco^ sta^t and variable. Eustacius says y^ Ia Jacobs ladder
Jacob. genesis ^8 15.
cob saw Christ's corporal figure, when as he saw y^ ladder erected from ^arth
unto heaven and that it was a figure of christ's cross, by whose death al have
and shall asce^d into heaven* It is also ye figure of a christian ma^s faith, with
reaches up into heaven, and signifies the ladder: and y^ staves there of was
Jacobs journey from Canany to Mesopotamia. The angels co^ducted Cazo^.
him to Laba^, and home again. Ie houa upon the top of ye ladder guided his
journey by his angels. It is no more inco^uenient to call this a vision the^ to
term ye prephecies visio^s whi the were prophesied, and seen of the 16.
prophets, and so are they called in Hebrew: neither was the wrestling of Jacob
with the aungel really done but in a vision, as in like manner the prophet which
was not wounded. Ezechiel went bare footed: Esaias mouth touched with a burning
cole

Hose as married to an harlot, the Hose. 1, 1.
like you have as the sleep of Adam Genesis 2. 21. 22.
which was not really done but in a Uy^yon, for she was made, Genesis 1 26 27
when Adam was made and called by the same name h^ Adam, in this respect for
that she was made of the earth, and should return to y^ earth* This vysyo^ does
not declare a new creatyon of the woman but an union and asimylytude, to
figure ye indyuisyble vnyty between man and wife: between Christ and his
congregatyon for the woman is deryued of man as of Christ christian^ which are
the congregation, neither can it be understood of her creation for she and Ada^
were perfitly made i^ y^ sixth day, ye co^seque^ce therefore is she could not be
made of the rybbe for if she were made, of the rybbe of Adam, then had he a
spare ribbe, if he had no more ribs then were needeful, how could she be
made of that rybbe which was not to be had. If Caua were created of the ribbe,
then must it either be her body, or her soul, or both: if her body, then was
it as insensible as the rib which had no sense nor life: if her soul had been
made of the rib* Ge. 2. 26. 27.
then should it have putrifyed as ye Genesis 3.
ribbe did. Was the rib her father, Caua.
or Adam, or both? If both, then Genesis 3. 20.
had she two fathers: if neither, Mat. 16, 18.
then who was her father? the scripture does not say that god made ye woman of
thee ribbe, but that he ^uilded the woman of the Ribbe to declare that she
was as it were a building, and by her houses and families were planted, and
the* fore she is called the mother of all mankind: and Christ alluding to this
buildinge says: that he will build his congregation upon the rock, which is
himself. If Adam was created immortal, how could he sleep. Do imortal
creatures slepe^ that is contrary to immortallitye* that Adam was created
imortall, both ye book of wisdom and also these words do testifye.
Whenever thou shall eat of this fruit thou shall Wisd. 2. 26.
dye the death. Therefore he slep^ Genesis 2. 17.
not before he had offended. Where Genesis 2, 21 and 2 27.
Adam says y^ Caua is flesh of hi^ flesh and bone of his bones, signifying in
a mystery Christ and his congregation: for says Paul, we are ^bers of his
body, of his flesh, an^ Ephesians. 5. 31.
of his bones. For this cause shall ^ Cor. 6. 19.
man leave father and mother, an^ shall be joined unto his wife, an^ they two
shall be made one flesh this is a great secreate, but I speak^ of Christ and
his church.

For as Isha which is the woman is derived of Ish which is the man declaringe
a mutual societye, the is between man and wife, whi^ in a misterye figurethe
Christ and his congregation, of whom Christians are derived, as the woman from
man, even so, and in like manner, the church which are the Tob. 4. ver. 7. 10.
true Christians indeed are derived of Christ the head thereof. Tobias says:
we are the progeny of God, and look for the life which god gives to ye just
by liberalitye and alms, we shall see god face to face, for it delivers
from death, purges sin, and gives psalm. 31. 5.
life everlasting. Also David being in danger of his enemies, or in danger
of death by sickness, co^me^deth his spirit unto god y^ had redeemed him, when
as Christ had not the^ with his patible body redeemed hi^, and yet he said, he had
redeemed him, when as it was 500 year before his passion. Neither would he have
co^me^ded his soul unto god, if he had known y^ god would have sent yt Psalm.
73. ^4. Thou shalt receue me* meaning hi^ oule.
into Hell. CHRIST approved this Sentence being upon the cross, sainge:
father into thy hands I commit my spirit. But if some should here object as I
doubt not but they will, and say ye for all ye Christ's soul went not straighte
unto heaven before he had made his voyage unto hell, there to visit and fetch
out his old frindes all the space that the soul was absent from the body which
was three days: yet I dout not but they shall be compelled to confess and
think the contrary even Stephen, Acts 7. ver. 19
by the words of S Steven. who suffe red after Christ a year or there about,
and used ye very same words which David and Christ did, commendinge his
spirit unto God as they did. And if they grant that he ascended straight way,
than must they grant the same unto the other who used all one scripture, the
scrip ture is no Shipmans hose neither is it partial, but like effectual to
all beleuers. David committed his soul into the hands of god* gods Wisdom 3
The hands of God.
hands is everlasting joy and felicity, as it appears by Solomon, who
says: that the souls of the just are in the hands of god which is proved in
the book of wisdom. preach 1^. 7.
Also in the book called the preacher he constantly affirms the body to go
to the ground, and the spirit or soul to return unto god that gave it, who
soever shall read the second book of Machabeus, shall ap The 7. brethren.
Machab. 7.
parantly perceue by the words of the seventh and last brother, spoken unto
Antiochus, y^ their souls had rest and joy after their martyrdom saing: Do
not rejoice o most cursed Autiochus, nether imagine that thou can escape the
just judgment of God: I assure thee my brethrene here have suffered a little
pain, but now they are come into the heavenly Esdr. 2. ver. 38.
couenaunte of everlasting life. Esdras, seeing an innumerable multitude
praising God, asked the angel what they were. who answered, that they were
such as had put of their mortal coats and put on their immortal. and the
young man who did set crowns upon their heads and gave the^ palms in their
hands was ye son of god, christ the^ not being incarnate nor borne. god
Esa. 26. ver 19 20.
speaking in Esa. to the people miserably oppressed, says unto the^: enter into
my Houses and Chambers, and shut the doors to you for a while, until this
tirany be past: which cha^bers and houses the Latins do understand, Dau. 1^. 13.
to be pleasant and joyful places prepared for the elect. So do the greeks
also. The like is spoken unto Daniel in these words: go thou thy way and
depart unto the end of the world, rest thou in thy lot (that is among the
saints) until thou shall Zach. 3. 7. Joshua.
rise again at the last day. Also the Angel spoke unto Joshua. 400. years
before Christ's co^ing in ye flesh on this wise: If you shall ob serve my Laws
and Commandments, math. 17. 3
I shall place the among those Angels Moses.
who^ you see stand here, who as it is like were nether in hell nor in Elias.
Limbus. Moses and Helias were with Christ in y^ mount, it is not lick y^ Simeon.
they did asce^d from h^l or Limbus to Esa. 7. 14. 15 ^1. 12.
come and acco^pa^y Christ, but rather to desce^d from heaven. Simeo^ reding y^
Prophet Esaie y^ Christ should be borne of a virgin, and maruelinge how it
should come to pass, an angel said unto him you shall se thy sauiou^ ere you
do depart. And when Christ was presented in the temple, Simeon took him in
his arms and said, now suffer you thy servant to depart in Nice phorus 1
cap. 13
peace according to thy word etc. to depart in peace, is to enjoy everlasting
Luke 2. 26. 29 30.
life* S Paul so does erpou^d it, and calls joy and peace y^ effects of romans
8. 6. Ephe. 4. 3. Colos. 3. 19.
faith, and this must be in the conscience of man and h^w could they depart in
a quiet co^scie^c^ yt should go hence in 2 Cor. 3. 18
to hell or Limbus. He uses this order to prove ma^s salvation by who^ he
knows before, the^ he does predestinate Romans 14. 17 galath. 22. romans 8. 28 29
to be like unto his son who^ he pred estinareth the^ he calls who^ he
calls the^ he justifies: and who^ he justifies, he glorifieth, by ye which
it must n^des follow, y^ the fathers were predestined, called justified and
glorified by christ. Peter Acte^ 15. 11 the second part
says: we believe to to be sa^ed by ye grace of Jesus christ as well as y^
fathers. Hitherto the scriptures.

The Hebrew Doctors affirm The Hebrew doctors.
with one assente that there are but two places after this life: the one of joy
which they call Began Eden full of joy, quietness, and consolation, To Phet.
the other place Hell, where the wicked are continually tormented without
redemption. The Chalde Paraphraste placethe all the souls of the just in an
heavenly tabernacle, Chalde Paraphrast upon preca. 6.
where they enjoy pleasure perpetually: this felicity (says he) David
callethe y^ land of everlasting life. And of this opinion is Chimi, psalm. 27.
13. Chim and rab Abraham rea de page in *cha bad.
and Esra interpreting the 1. the 30. and 91 psalms. The greek doctors send
them to heaven* Origin writing upon the first of Job, to the Origin. not
withstanding it is their commune ^rrore to place none in heaven before y^ last
day.
tabernacies of the just, where are the joys of saints, the rest of the
faithful, the consolation of the godly, the inheritance of the humble, the
reioysinge of the innocents. I shall go into light and life, where is mirth
and joy, no sorrow, no lamitatio, no calamity, or sickness, but where I shall put
away all pains where virtues are rewarded, where is the bosom of Abraham, ye
state and patrimonye of Isaac Isreal's familiarity, where be all angels and
blessed souls, ye voices of archangels, y^ brightness of y^ holy ghost, Christ
his kingdom, and the glorious majesty of ye father. Gregory Nazianzen Nazian.
places the^ among y^ angels, Philo in a celestial place free from Philo.
all corruption. Eusebius called them Eusebius.
christians and therefore to receue ye reward of christianity. Josephus beeinge
Josephus lib. Iudai. 3. cap. 14.
one of them ye fled into ye cave at the siege at Iotopata, and when they
would have slain themselves rather the^ to have endured the famine and to
come out to the Romans, he exhorts them not to slay them selves until God
should call their Souls up unto himself.

Sybill Erythrea, whom some say Erythrea.
was Noac his Daughter in law, terms all the faithful to be christians in
these verses.

Of Christ's stock says she we came! (...). (...).

Therefore of Christ we have the name,
Receive with me the religion of y^ same.
And by cause certain of the latins, as Lactantius, Tertullian, Bernard, and
one John a by^shop of Rome who was after christ. 1315 years with certain of the
greeks as Ireneus, Chrysostom, ^uthinius, Justinius Mart^e, Oecumenius, and
Aretha do deny that any man is rewarded until the last day therefore can not
their autorities prevail in this case against the truth. S. Augustine was
like an Academicall waueringe Augustine.
to and froe, yet in this point in his 99 Epistle, has these words: I
affirm (says he) that Christ could bring no goodness to those that were in
Abraham's bosom, who had his diuinitye continually present with them. And of
(...) truth Lazarus was in Abraham^ bosom before Christ's death. H^ also
calls ye rich man's grave he^ and Abraham's bosom, the blessed man's rest: the
kingdom of heaven, and ye paradise of the these: and upon ye 11. of John he
is very plain in this matter. Hierome condemns Hierome.
Vigilantius, partelye because he would not place ye souls of yt faithful in
heaven with Christ, but in an honest prison, in Abraha^s bosom, a place solace,
under ye altar of god, in the fortunate yles, or in the fields of Cyprian.
pleasure. S. Cyprian says, who would not fear death if there should be no
pleasure after this life. He citethe many scriptures to prove the souls of ye
faithful to be in heaueu imediately after they depart out of Ambrose.
this life. S. Ambrose brings the Christians from Ha bell: and proves by
marvelous many scriptures in his book entitled De bono mortis y^ all y^
souls of the faithful ascended by and by after their death. Now shall I
allege the opinions of the philosophers, Philosopher^
whereby it shall appear unto the, good reader, y^ although y^ they knew not
God as they ought to have done, yet co^ceued they a better opinion of ye
immortallyty of the souls of the just then do our Romish catholics, and not
knowing God as they ought, had a better judgment of his equity, as Plato in
Phedon, Phedro, Gorgias, Timeus, Plato
with all his sect who apoynt a place in heaven for all the just: so does
Demosthenes. Calamus a phiolospher Calanus
of Judea says: oh what a worthy death is this, that when the body is buried
the soul shall go into light* also Cirus (as Zenophon and Cicero report)
calls it a blessed day, Cirus.
when he should go up into the company of the godly, And Tully says Cicero in
some Scip.
that who so have saved their country Seneca.
and increased the same, have a place Romulus soul ascended in to heaven.
Cice. in some Scip
appointed for the^ in heaven. Seneca also says do not envy thy brother, he
shall rest, he is safe and immortal, he enjoys the free and open heaven, he
has escaped out of this vile place in to an high and excellent place, which
receive the the souls into a blessed bosom, where he is now at liberty, and
has received all goodness with great pleasure, thy brother has not lost the
light, but has obtained a more perfect ^yght, why do we lament his destiny,
he has not forsaken us, but is gone before us: and in another place he says:
death which we so fear, changes life, but does not destroy it utterly, for
the day will come which shall restore yt again. Apollo answe red polites de
maundinge whether the Soul was immortal o^ no.


The soul does suffer sorrows great,
while it is in this earthly cage:
Sondered, ascends to Gods seat,
free from all anguish, pain and age.
The Chalde Oracle affirmethe the ^oules of the good to go unto god ^n these
verses, Lact. 7. cap. (...).


^t is for thy commoditye
^o have to god the perfect light,
Of whom thou have mind, soul and life,
Power, breath, defense, strength, aid, and might
Euripides has these verses also tendinge to the same effect,

The souls of such as leave this life,
not only straight immortal be: Eurip. in sup pl.

In perfect peace, void of all strife:
But also do their savior see: (...).

The body laid is under ground,
the soul in heaven grace has found,
The soul ascendethe unto God,
the body lies under a clodde:
Three virtues thou must exercise, Eurip. in An tiope.

Fear God thy parents do obey,
Thy country laws see thou practice, (...).

the crown of Glory have always.
Palladas. When that the soul departs henc^ (...)

It ascendethe to the presence
of God immortal, for defense.
Lucretius though an Epicure. That which from earth and ground did com
shall to the earth descend:
That which from heaven above did come
shall up again ascend.
Manilius. No man does doubt but that our souls
did from the heavens come,
And shall ascend thither again
to their old seat and room.
Antipater Sidonius in Laert. 7. in Zeno. Zeno the flower of his country
is dead and laid in grave:
His soul unto the stars is gone,
Which God does keep and save.
Laertius in Solon lib. 1. Salamis did contain the bones
of Solon as we read,
His soul into the heavenly throne
was carried with speed
Laertius Lib. 2. in Anaxagor. Anaxagoras lyethe here,
his soul with god does dwell.
Steucus lib. 8. Cap. 17. The souls about god stand^
on left hand and on right
Beholdynge his fair face,
desirous of that syghte

CHRIST DESCENDED NOT INTO HELL NETHER in body, nor in soul.
IF CHRIST The first argument.
descended into Hell, either he must descend in Body or in Soul, or in his
Godheade, Christ's body went not to hell.
or in all: but in Bo^ye he did not: for it lay in the grave three days, as
these places Math. 26* 61.
in the margent do testifye: More^uer a body that is dead, without John 2. 19.
^enses, without life, without soul, Jonas 2. 1.
^an neither descend, nor ascend, Mat. 12 4*
^oue, stir, or rise,: but all the Gloss. upon Act. 2.
^ime that it lay in the grave it was ^estitute and depryued of all these,
wherefore y^ body could not descend ^houghe some affirm the contrary: neither
could his soul descend. Could that descend, which did as^end? or that
descend into hell, that was in paradise, in felicity, in the The soul of
Christ descen ded not.
^ingdme of God? But Christ his ^oule was in heaven, even so soon as yt
departed out of the body.

As for his godhead, it can neither ascend, nor descend. Can that ascend, or
descend, y^ is every where, Luke. 23. 42. The godhead of Christ every where.
that fills all places, that is i^ heaven, earth, and hell, all at once* Ergo
his godhead was not in hell, Esaias. 66* 1.
more at one time then at another. Act. 7. 49.
They hold that it was his soul tha^ Christ's soul was not in hell The thief
not inhell.
went to hell: how could yt be i^ hell, when as yt was in paradise, with the
thief? Was the thief i^ Paradise.
hell? That denied Christ, who sa^ he should be with him that very^ day in
paradise. Was paradise he^* That denies the thief, who calls paradise ye
kingdom of Christ Luke. 23. 42.
And Paul in the 2. verse of the* epistle to the Corinth. the 12. cha^ callethe
paradise the third heaven of the which, I have discours^ there at large, and
upon the 1. an^ 2. chapt. of Genesis Now to conclu^ this first argument, yt is
euide^ of the premises, yt nether Christ^ body, nor soul descended into hel^
If Christ descended into hell, he either delivered the faithful, or the The 2.
Argument.
unfaithful, or both, or neither: but the faithful he could not* for they were
in heaven, by the same faith that we have, and with God, as is specifyed in
the 12. Chap. of the Preach* ^1. 9.
Preacher. and in the 16. of Luke. Luke. 16. 22. 25. 26.
The unfaithful he would not, for that they were already condemned. Neither is
there any redemption In hell no redemption. John. 3. 18.
in hell, no confession of the fault, no remission, no satisfaction, no
remedy, no consolation, no hope of grace, no expectation of any better life:
wherefore to conclude this argument, if he had descended, he had delivered
none, and therefore his journey had been in vain, his labor frustrate, and
they that defend y^ same either to be wilfully ignorant, or so blinded with
erroneus custom, that they will not see.

Neither Matthew, neither Mark, The 3. Argument
neither Luke, nether John, neither Peter, nor Paul, who wrote exactly of
Christ's death, resurrection, and ascension, made any mention of Christ's
descending into hell, and there fore we cannot believe that sentence without
error, neither affirm it we out a lie, nor approve it in our belief without
offense, and danger of drawing others to credit fables. The 4. obiec-Iob. 14.
13.


Smyth. I brought a place of Job, after the exposition of Gregory the Greg.
lib. 12 upon Job. 7.
first Pope of that name, whereby he proves, that Job desired of GOD that he
would not place him in the loweste hell, but in some superioure room, which I
interpret to be Limbus Limbus patrum.
patrum.


Carlisle. Job desirethe that God would hide him in his grave, or in Sheol the
grave, earth or death.
the earth, til his anger were past, and determine a time when he would
remember him. And Esra interpre teth this verse of his death and resurrection,
for Job knew that his body should sleep til the last day, Job in heaven
but he was assured that his soul should ascend into heaven immedyatlye He
that was blessed cannot A Sillogism:
come in hell: but Job was blessed: ergo, Job could not come in hell.


Smith. I deny the mayor.


Carlil. I prove it. He that is blessed, is glorified: he that is glorified is
in Heaven by Faith, and is carried from death, to life, ergo he that is
blessed cannot come in hell.


Smith. Were not all the fathers that Christ fetched out of Hell, blessed.


Carlil. He fetched none out for they were in Heaven by the same faith that we
have, for they believed that Christ should come, and we believe that he is come.
Differentia est in tempore, in re nulla. There is difference in time, in effect
none at all. Job. 1. 1.
Moreover Job was such a one who^ no man could reprove. Tam (...) he is called
Iashar, true, faithful, upright, and he is just, and one that feared God. And
all these effects follow of faith, and the end of Peter. 1. 9.
(...) burial, and resurrection, and this Esaias. 35. 3.
he proves by Esaye, and in the Psalms, which says thus: Thou art my son
this day have I begotten Psalm. 2. 3.
thee. This day he calls ye time and moment, when God the Haiom, to beget.
father did begett Christ: again, what is to beget in this place? It is to
raise Christ out of his grave, from the dead, not to return any more to the
grave: for so does Paul declare, Act. 13. 34.
and so do Chrysostom, Theodorus, Antiochus and Hilarious, interpret this
place. A begetting from the dead, is like to a man begotten and brought out
of his Mothers womb, as out of a grave, where he was as it were buried. And
therefore the Resurrection, is called of Christ, as it is here of David a
regeneration, Mat. 19. 28.
a bearinge of new, a new birth, a new coming into Romans 8. 23.
this world, a renouation, a rising from the dead, a restitution from above,
Theod^ret in ^pit.
quasi (...) (...), for the body is restored from above, by the power of GOD,
as Christ is here by the father.


Smyth. I know that this latter end of the Verse is understood of the
resurrection of Christ, but how say you to the former. Thou shall not leave my
soul in hell.



Carlil. I say that the latter is an explanation of the former, notwith
standi^g I will translate it so plainlye, that it shall need none
interpretacio^: thus I translate it. Thou shalt not leave my Body in the
Grave: And that Nephes, should be Nephes the body.
translated the body, I prove by a doossen places of scripture, and many more
if need require, where I Nephes and Sheol prope^ to the body.
declare the signification of Nephes. And that Sheol signifies ye Grave, and
proper always to the body, as Nephes is. I have proved a little after where I
have declared above 2. hundredth places of Nephes, and almost half as many of
Sheol. The words prove my purpose, the phrases declare my meaning, the
property of ye Hebrew tongue opens the truth, Christ himself speaks
psalm. 16. 9. Ac. 2. 27.
of his body which should not be left in the grave. Peter alleges Pet.
calls Nephes flesh Act. 2. 26. 30.
this half verse to prove the resurrection of Christ. David calls that his
Flesh in the verse before fayinge: that his flesh should rest i^ hope, which
he calls the body i^ this tenth verse: and that which David in the
presence of Christ (...). Act. 2. 30. 31. 32
calls the Holy one, Peter inter preteth his flesh, and the text say^ that
he came out of the Loins (...) Dauyd, and should sit in Dauid^ throne, this
same Jesus, says Ptter, God has raised up, and we a^ witnesses. Were they
witnesses (...) his soul with did not rise, or of his body which did rise?
Could his soul^ rise again, there is no resurrection of the soul, for it
dies not.

How could his soul be in the Loins of David? then should Dauid^ Christ was
in the loins of David.
soul have begotten Christ's: a si^ full soul, a soul without sin (...) is
contrary to nature? was ye sou^ flesh? so to say is an absurdity. But David
and Peter calls that The soul of Christ, was not in the loy nes of David
but in his body.
which you say went to Hell, flesh, could a dead carcas go? could his dead
flesh preach, could his soul without a body preach, which you say only
went to hell? you say y^ it spoke and reproved the Devils, you are not
ashamed to say that it burst asonder the brazen gates, the iron bars, and
entered violently in the despite of Satan, and saluted the Fathers, shaked Adam
by the hand, and brought them al out saui^g Cayne and Judas, who refused his
Be Z. in. 2. Act. ^ Aepinus in psalm. 16.
offer, Fabularum (M. Smyth) plena sunt omnia. Aepinus a new writer a Lutherane
will have his soul to have suffered in the hell of the damned souls. Lossius,
and Wellerus, Caieta ^us.
other two Lutheranes, that Christ went to Hell, both in Body and Soul. What
a detestable opinion has Caietanus, who defends that the soul of Christ
suffered a double punishment, one for y^ it was agreued to be out of the body,
the other for that it was sore tormented in hell* I pray you let Caietanus tell
me by scripture or by some reason, what that punishment was, or wherefore he
should be punished? For his own Offense he could not, for he had not
offended: for others he^ The death of Christ ransomed all.
did not: for that he dyed upon the cross, sayng: All things are dispatched,
John. 19. ^0
man is redeemed, man is saue^ Satan is subdued, hell is spoiled* the force of
the deuell is broken, his dominion deminished, and there are required no more
sacrifices, no m^ deaths, no more torments, no perigrination to hell, nor to
S. James* no more conflictes with Satan, no more tools to burst the gates of
hel^


Smith. Eusebius Emisenus de resurrectione what time Christ went to hell.
domini says, that Christ his soul descended into hell when he^ gave up the
ghost at 9. of the clock* with us it is then three of the clock* at afternoon,
to spoil hell.


Carlil. But that denied Christ who said, that the thief should be Luke. 23.
43.
with him that day in Paradise. Athanasius.



Smith. Athanasius de Virginitate, affirms that the Lord descended into
hell, at twelve of the clock at after noone, and rose again at midnight.


Carlil. Where was his Soul between three of the clock, and six at night*
Nicephorus says that he Nicephorus. August. tom. 4. quest. 65. and 26.
was not there above a moment. Augustinus writes y^ Christ was in Hell, st^e^
and thirty hours. Reinerus. says, that Christ was in Lim Reinerus in pan
theologia Lyra upon the 16. psalm.
bo one day and two nights. Lyra says that Christ was in Hell, which he
calls Limbus patrum nine and thirty hours. Dissentio^ in doctrine is a sign
of no Truth: note how some say that Christ descended into hell at three of
the clock, some say at six, some say he tarried there six and thirty
hours, other some nine and thirty hours other forty, other deny any local
descending, neither need theromish Catholics to be offended, seein^
Augustine steuchus. upon the. 16. psalm.
that Augustinus Steuchus one of Popes Library, and bishop of Kis^ translateth
this as I do, expounde^ it as I do, and proves his translation Nephes.
by many other places of the Remigius in the year of Christ. 856.
scripture, where the soul is taken for the body and life, and concludes
Math 10. 39.
fully with me. Remigius al^ John 15. 13.
Bishop of Antisiodor expoundet^ this place as I do, as ye may rea^ in my notes
upon the 16. psa. A^ likewise Martin Borrhai upon y^ 1. k^ 2. Feline and
Vatablus upon the 16. p^ Fagius upon Genesis 37. Bucer upon man Chrysostom
aduersus gent. ^om. 5. pa. 91. quod christus sit deus.
27. Munster upon math. 27. Pet^ in the 2. of the Acts, and Paul in 13. of the
Act. Beza upon Act. 2. Chrysostom is compelled to understand this place of the
16. psa. as I do.


Smith. Notwithstanding that Chrisostom interprets that place as yo^ The 6.
obiecti on. psalm. 24 9. expounded.
do, yet does he by other scripture prove that Christ went to hell as D^uid
says. Lift up your heads ye gate^ lift up ye everlasting gates, and the
king of glory shall come in*


Carlisle. David in this psalm declares that God is the ruler of all the whole
world, and that he especi^lly favored the Jews, whom he wished to live, an
incorrupte life, and they should dwell in Syon, ^hey should dwell at
Jerusalem, ^hey should dwell in the tabernacle ^f GOD which he had chosen for
^uer, as the Psalm. 132. declares psalm. 14. 15. 1. and ce.
^t large, to be a temple for GOD 1. Chro. 23. 6. 7. c 15. 29. c. 16. 1.
^ho sat on the top of the Arc, and there gave oracles, and therefor 2.
Sam. 6. 15. 16
David seeing in spirit that the Lyra interpre teth this place as I do.
^mple promised was performed (...) his faith, (for faith sees things Faith.
^bsent and long after to come) re^yceth with himself, and says: O ^e gates
of Jerusalem lift up your ^eades, O ye eternal gates be lyf^d up, that the
eternal God sit^ng between the Cherubins may ^me in, eternally there to dwell.

^e calls y^ gates eternal for that arcke had no certain place befo^ but
there* it should always be t^ tayne and eternal. I have no^ Allegories.
of this, much more in my Not Dionys. in Hie 10. 27.
of the 24* psalm, how that the a^gels rejoiced, and commanded Flam. in ps.
24
gates of heaven in Christ's asce^tion to open, and let in Christ, but (...)
literal sense is always the safe* For they that depart from the le^ter
propounde many absurditye^ forge many lies, mar many (...) intentions,
inuente a 1000 glo^ Chrysostom is not ashamed wi^ Chrysostom reproved.
out all reason and sense to call the gates, the gates of hell that shou^ let
Christ in. Hugo the Cardina^ calls these gates, vices, and the Hugo Cardin.
princes, which should be translated heads, hipocrites, and principal
heritiques, who should tal^ away their vices and errors, o^ of their minds.


Smith M. James of Theranio a doc^or of the decrees, in his book call^ Iacobus
de theranio.
Belial (for those are his own words ^n the year of Christ. 1382. the last A
merry fabl^
^ay of Oct. save one, dated at Auer^ besides Naples, the 5. year of Po^e
Vrbane the sixth of that name wri^eth, that God, the father of Christ ^earing
the lamentable crying of ^e souls in Limbus, bids his ^onne to girde his
sword to his Souls in Lim bus.
^igh, and like a mighty man of ^arre he went to hell, and commanded ^e princes
of hell to open their gats, (...) else he would burst them up. ^he princes of
hell were so amassed, ^at they consulted to bar the ^tes surely, to fortify
the walls, ^wers, castles and fortresses, and to ^atch and ward against his
asulte. Christ burst the brazen gates, ^ake the iron bars, gave a daun^erous
assault, entered with a white ^nner, displayed his red cross Christ entered
hell.
^on the walls, and towers, cast ^wne the hell howndes, hunted ^em from post
to pillar, bound ^tan or Pluto him self, with iron ^ters and chains, and
threw him into a deep dungeon, saluted t^ patriarckes, and prophets, shak^
them by their right hands: the was joy without heaviness, ligh^ without
darkness, there they weep for joy, daunced like damose there were sweet
odours, there w^ perfumes, music, simphony melodye, harpes, lutes, shalm^
drums, tabrets, fyfes, whistl^ bagpypes, psalters, songs, Kirie^ Osanna in
excelsis, or rather in ^fundis, there was De Profundis (...) maui, there was
Confitemini do^ quoniam bonus, dicant nunc rede^ there was captiuam duxit
eaptiuit^ there he tarried three days, ^ three nights, there the deuels ro^
bled, and roared like lions. Astaroth.


Then said Astaroth, we will m^ and ordeine for our chief aduo^ proctor, and
patron, our welb^ ued Belial, a most skillful, (...) expert lawyer, he may be
a Iu^ for his experience in wayghty (...), and an vmpier for his (...) dome, an
orator in pleadinge, and ^n arbiter in difficulte cases, he ^anne wreste the
text, he can ^nstrue and expound the canons, ^e can deprave the truth of
the Gospel, he can allege the Canon Law, he passethe all ^he Ciuilians,
and canonistes, he ^nne make* of white black, and (...) black white, he is
an odd ^ellowe indeed, and one that is Christ spoiled Hell. Solomon judge
^oste fit for our purpose. Then ^ame they into the consistorye, Sa^mon is
Judge, Beliall was present ^ythe his Notarye and wytnes a^ainste Christ, who
had done an ^aynous robbery in hell: Daniell Daniel.
^he notary and Secretary to king Solomon, makes for Belial a pub^que
instrumente: Solomon was judge between Beliall proctor of ^ell of the one
party, and Azaell AZael post. Jesus a^raigned.
swyft post or messinger of the other party: Jesus was brought in, he
^ppointed for his proctor and lawyer Moses
Moses. Moses petit* terminu^ ad responde^du^ There Belial alleged the cano^
la^ the decrees, decretals, extrauag^ Bartholus, Baldus, Accursius, Li^ Christ
is accu sed for spoy sing hell.
wood, Cantiuncule, gloses, an^ such like. Belial commencethe (...) libell
against Jesus, Moses excepte^ Belial.
against the libell dilatorye, Mose puts in 12 positions to prove tha^
Jesus did very well in spoiling hell^ Moses brings 9 witnesses, Ada^ Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, David, John Baptist, Aristotle, Virgil, and Y p^ nine witnesses
cras, so he terms Hippocrates. Belial replyethe salua reuerentia what
auaylethe the testimonye o^ Adam, who was a rebel, as is manifest to the
whole world, sayth^ Belial, or of Abraham, that kep^ openly co^cubines, or of
Isaac a lia^ and perjured man, of deceiptfu^ Jacob, a thief, and robber of his
brother, Vt ff. de Any. L. non potes. o^ David the murderer and adulterer 2.
Kin. cap. 11.
of Uirgill, that was deceived with women, and hanged in a basket over the
walls for a Spectacle* of Ipocras that killed his nephew: of Aristotle who
frandule^tly burst up the armary of Solomon, and deceiptfully appropriated to
him, his wisdom and philosophy. I have no exception against John Baptist who
was so holy: mary one wytnes is no wytnes, vt de test. li. 1. 13. I cease to
tell how many parliaments the deuels kept, and what prodigious pagents, as ye
may read an infinite number of such sigular good stuff in the scholasticall
writers of these last five hudrethe years.


Carlil. James de Theranio affirmethe that they of Limbus were in trouble, in
necessity, in darkness, in the shadow of death, and in chains and gives,
which Christ burst: you deny that they were in any trouble: but this fable
requires no answer.


Smith. Chrysostom says that The 7. Objection.
^e brake the brazen gates and bars of iron


Carlil. Esaye meaned that there Oeco la^padius*
should nothing withstand Cyrus, his power should be so great, his fortune so
good, his success so happy, and his journey so prosperous, no not though the
gates of the cities, which he should besiege, were of brass, and their
bars of iron. He invaded, he fetched out their treasure, he wan Babylon, he
took rich Cresus prisoner. Esaias did ueuer imagine such a fable.


Smith. I have a place in David where David says that GOD had delivered him
out of the nethermoste hell.


Carlil. Was David when he wrote this, dead, or alive? I^ Nethermoste hell is
largely^ expounded af terward in Sheol.
dead, he could not write, neither come there any writings out of hell, for
they lack ynke and paper: ynke for that there is no moisture, but burninge
bathes, and boylinge bryinstone, neither is there any paper, for yt would be
consumed Christ in the nethermoste hell.
with fire.

If he lived, as he did indeed, how could he be in hell? Is earth hell? Axe
there bodies in hell? Did he make this psalm in hell? Did he call out of
hell, or out of Palestina? Do not you make 4. hels? and now ye make but two?
Moreover you M. Smithe affirm, that Christ went to the vppermoste hell, and
yet here you say that he went to the nethermoste hell? What constancy Read
afterward in Sheol psalm. 86. 30.
is in your exposition, what coherence in your religion, what certainty in your
faction, and sect, what agremente in your doctrine? Reinerus in pantheologia
You say that he went to purgatory Reinerus denies that he went thither at
all. The 7. Obie*



Smith. We all agree that Christ went to hell, that he haried hell, that he
fetched out the fathers, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the patriarchs and prophets,
that he bound Satan, and terrified the rest, and put them to flighte.

Did not the holy fathers then cry

De profundis clamaui? who were De profundis. spal. 130. 11.
they that cried? was it not the chur che? not the lyuinge church upon
earth, but the Church that was in Limbus.


Carlil. You follow the poor Scholars of the Uniuersitye, who were wont in the
old time to beg with De profundis for all christian souls. Christ descen
ded to purgatory.



Smith. We understand this of Purgatory. Arnobius. lib. 2. contra gent
reproves the gentiles for a mitting any purgatory after this life.



Carlil. What was there any Purgatory in David's days? It was but found out
of late, and concluded upon in the council of Ferrara in the year of Christ
1439. or there about, notwithstanding so slenderlye, that the Greeks, when they
came Polidor. 6. c. 9
home, denied it. Volat. 12.


Polidore writethe that Odilo, the Aethna which is now called Ca^bo brenneth no
longer as Oliuerius writes upon Mela. ergo, purgatory is no longer for it is
brenr up.
Moncke found it out in the mount Aethna in Sicilia, in the year of Christ
1200. Ye have no Scr^re to prove it, neither is your place of the Machabes,
which you allege for that purpose in the Hebrew, but put in, by some
purgatory patron. Now if there be no purgatory, as we are able to prove, no
third place Match. 12. 4*
out of this life, no dungeon of expiation, neither after death any co^fessyon
Pomponius Mela.
of a man's offenses, any remission, neither hope, nor faith, for they end with
death, neither any repenting or expectation of felicity: the^ where is your
hellish Church, your Limbian Sinagogue, and your pur gatorie Prelates. Do they
say Masses satisfactory in Purgatory? have they any Trentalles, Obites,
Sacrifice, or any other satisfaction? De profundis, out of the diep^. psa.
130.
This psalm was made when David was in great danger of Saul and of his
ennemies, or rather, as The argument of the 130. psa
Lyra says in the person of the Israelytes, who were in their captiui tie at
Babilo^, drowned as it were in a diepe dungeon. Or when he was in an anguishe
of Conscience, after the death of Vrias, Psalm. 51. Augustine understands
this psalm of every man that is in this mortal life who is encombred we any
vice or misfortune, and therefore must ca^ and cry for help and mercy.


Smith. I could bring many mo places The 10. object
out of the Psalms.


Carlisle. Either the Argument and meaning of the Psalm shall confute you, or
else those places which I have alleged after for the true understanding of
Sheol and Nephes.


Smith. Wise men and the best learned The 11. object Hose. 6. 2.
allege the 6. of Hoseas for the going of Christ to hell: After tw^ days
says he, will he revive us, and the third day he will raise us up, and we
shall live in his sight. Thus far Hoseas words. Here you see that Christ^ was
two days in hell, doing his business there, preaching to them, comforting them,
spying out all the Corners in Hell, where they lay, pullinge them out, and
bringing the^ out of the captivity.


Carlisle.* Is it wisdom, for so you say, to understand this place of
Christ's being in hell, where the Prophet means the ten Tribes, which fell
away by the suggestion, and Idolatrye of Hieroboam? are they learned, for so
you say that they are, that take CHRIST for ten Tribes, or Hell for
Palestina? for in Palestina prophesied Hoseas, and not in hell. Moreover were
not they the Israelites that had of^ended? were they not the Is^aelites that
repented? Is there any repentance in Limbo? If the Inhabitauntes or
Soiourners, or Exiles of Hell should speak these Words, then did they
speak we their Tongues, but ye read not that there are any Tongues in hell
^nlesse by a Figure, therefore they ^ould not speak. Do not the sou^s in Hell
live? But he says that after two days they should revive, and after the third
day they should ^yse again and live.

There is nothing that reuiueth^ Souls die not
but that which once lived, and now dead: but these say that the shall be
revived, that they shall raised, and live again o^e. I can it not be
understood of (...) August. lib 4. ad cathe. ca. 6.
souls* which are immortal, a^ live always either in joy or pa^ Now by a
metaphor, they the They are dead that ^all from* God.
fall away from God, are account^ as dead and buried, and notwi^ stand thoe
rise up again by rep^ taun^, (...) ^essing of their faul^ as the^e (...). Let
us declare ye (...) truly according to ^he historye (...) repeat other
menn^es^ phantasi^ and gloses afterward.

These are the words of the I^ elites (...) After 2 days he shall q^ ken us
etc* He will punish us (...) Two days.
days with captiui^ye that is long time, but the third day, (...) is at the
length, he will deliver (...) Although Teglathphala^er in the year of Phaca
king of Israel (...) the creation 3129. after the Flo^ 1522. and before Christ
783. should destroy Iurye: And Salmanasar in the 9. year of Hoseas from the
creation, 3203. from the floude, 1546. yet God restored them.

But this place of Hose is to be understood of Synacherib, which continued
3. years from the time that he did threaten Ezechias to his clear
deliverance. Esaias. 37.


Esaias toulde Ezechias, that he 4. King. 19.
should live one year, in the time of Synacheribs invasion, of the abundaunce
which was upon the ground, the next year of fruits, and such as God sent
out of the earth, and in the third he should Joseph. lib. 10 cap. 1. 2. 2.
para. 32.
^e delivered, and Synacheribs army ^ppugned and destroyed. Which ^as from
the creation, 3221* before Christ. 741. This prophet by the ^rst 2. days
understands y^ first (...). years, in ye which they were re^iued by Esaias
prophecy, who pro^hecied y^ they should be delivered (...) ye 3. year, as
they were in deed.

And this is the very hystorye and Hoseas intent. I know that the Jews
apply the 2 last days, the one to Christ's regal kingdom and their
captiuitye, now under the Christians: ye other to ye last day of judgment, y^
first they can make nothing of. Our allegorical doctors refer the first
day to Christ's coming in the flesh, the second when he rose, the third
when he August. de ciuit. 8. cap. 28.
shall come to be Judge: or the first day ye time before Christ, the second
Lact. 4 cap. 19.
after, the third after the resurrection: Or the first of the^ is our
Baptism, the second our rest in heaven, and the third the last day. Of
these allegories, and anagogie^, The 12. object ion.
read further in the ordinary gloss.


Smith. What is meaned by this s^tence Hose. 13. 14.
of Hose, From the hands of hell* I will deliver them. Is not this a gold^
sentence? can there be any text more manifest^e? Or any scripture more
euidente, either to confute your opinion which is erroneous, or (...) confirm
mine?


Carlil. God spoke not here of hell, but this he says: If you Israelites
will amend your lives refourme your corrupt manners, return unto me, and
follow the truth, forsake your abominable Idolatrye, deteste, and abhor
your customs, and superstition, I will deliver you from the invasion of the
Assirians, from their cruel tirannye, from their violent invasions and
assaults, and from death, and the grave, which two do follow of invasion and
subversion of the common weal.

Why do you M. Smythe, say y^ yt is from the hand of hell, when y^ yt is in
your old translation, which you only allow, De manu mortis, from the
hands of death.

What was that which Hose thretned to ye disobedient Israelites? was it not
their subversion? was it not ye spoil of their country? was it not desolatio^,
captivity, death, and y^ grave? where were those y^ should be delivered? If
in hell, there are no armies of soldiers y^ do invade, no lands to be laid
waste, no towines or villages to be besieged, no prisoners to be led away
captive. If they were in Palestina, and alive, as they were in deed, how can
you prove Palestina to be hell, or the dead to live?


Smith. Paul semethe so to say. (...) ver. 55. 56.



Carlil. Paul speakethe there of the Resurrection.
resurrection. For after that he had proved by many arguments and
similitudes, that the dead shall rise again, he addethe the aucthority of
Hosee, traducinge by a Metaphor the death of the Assirians to death it self,
saying, that neither the death nor grave should be able to detayne the
bodies, but y^ they should be both vanquished and subdued, and restore the
corpse, and dead bodies, which they had captiued so long.

If Paul, and Hosee, speak of the bodies only, why do you apply it to the
souls? If these were in hell, surely it must needs be that they were their
souls: for the bodies go no further then the grave. But there is no
resurrection of the soul, therefore Paul and Hose speak of the bodies which
shall rise again, The souls neither sleep (...)
and not of the souls, which nether dye, neither sleep.

They can not dye that are immortal, neither sleep which wake always. Of
this I have noted upon the 13. chapter of Hose and upon the 1. Cor. 15. And
after in Sheol. Sheol.



Smith. The place of Zacharye can Zachar. 9. 11.
not be denied: Thou (says God The 13. objection.
the father to his son JESUS CHRIST) through the blood of thy covenant
shall let the prisoners out of the Pit, wherein is no water.

Where, or in what place were these Prisoners? Were they not in Limbo, for
there we hold that there is noe water? Limbus is the pitt^ Christ is he that
went down to yt, and loosed and let out all the prisoners.


Carlil. Do you call Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, with all the faith* full of the
old Testamente, prisoners? Were they bound in a^ cheynes? Who was their
Iayle^* Are you not ashamed to call fre^ men bond, patriarchs prisoners*
Saints slaves to Satan, Cytesins of heaven captives, and to (...) brief, to
be spoiled of the rewa^ of faith, to be destitute of hope and to be deprived
of their expecta^ tion, and defrauded of the conte^ plation of the trinitye?

If a man should go to Hell* what does Faith profit at all* or what
auaylethe Hope? where is the reward of Virtue? It i^ against reason to deprive
the fayth^ full of felicitye, against the word to thrust them into hell,
against conscience to punish virtue, hell i^ appointed for vice, and heaven
for virtue, hell for the desperate, and heaven for the faithful. where were
these prisoners, and who were they and what was this pit? The text says that
the prisoners were Judah, Ephraim, Jerusalem, and Sion, and all the Jews.

This pit was their vicious life, their Idolatry, their superstition, and
myserye out of the which he delivered them as out of a dangerous dongeon,
and pitiful pit of misery, wherein there was no water, no consolation, no
grace, noe remedy, no deliverance, no recreation but profounde miserye without
hope, extreme desperation without faith, and utter confusion and desolation.

Thou also through the blood of The covenant was Christ.
thy covenant: That is: Thou O faithful generation says God the father, and
virtuous family shall be saved by ye blood of Christ which is thy covenant,
he was promised to shed his blood for the Thus expoi^ death Vatablus, Munster,
and Pe^ licane. The 70. Interpretours, (...) Castalio, apply this Sentence
(...) Christ, And translate it thus, a^ though his father should say, (...)
will deliver thy prisoners out (...) the pit wherein is no water, b^ the
blood of thy covenant, which is the paschall Lamb, even Jesus Christ that
was promised. After Pagnine: Rejoice, says God, ^ Jerusalem, and you
Machabees, i^ the blood of Antiochus, which y^ shed for the defense of your*
co^ uenant, and the law. After y^* ordinar^ Gloss. O Christ (say the Iew^ thou
have delivered us* by the blou^ figured in the old sacirfices, out (...) y^
lake and dongeon of captivity, out^ of ye seruitu^e of Babylon.

Wherefore ye Israelites says Go^, return to the strong hold, to the Faith
of CHRIST* the sun Rock, forsake Idolatrye, observe religion, dispyse
superstition, em^ brace Christianity, leave your inuencions, clea^e, to Gods
word, and ye shall obtain a double reward, remission of your sins, which
remission brings felicity, and a delivery from the law, whereby the
consience was troubled, wherefore the opinions and conjectures of Sophisters
are to be condemned? which perverting this place, dream here upon the Fathers
whom they say should have been tormented in ye prison of Limbus or hell, unto
Christ's coming Hear you see that none aucthor unless it be the barbarous
schole men* and ignorant adversaries both in the tongues and in all other good
learning, did at any time fansye any other exposition Bid upon the 2. of the
acts
unless BEDAE, then the Text requirethe. Which is, that the Prophet
foreshewethe that when (...).
Christ should come, the Gentyles should be co^uerred to y^ faith, ye Jews
comforted y^ true Israelites delivered out of the pit of disperation: and out
of all misery, and so is ^ itt. Bor.
the pit used in the 40. psalm 2 verse. wherefore the church which Church
is meaned by Sion and Jerusalem, should rejoice at the coming of Christ, and
so is this place expounde^ Mathe. 21. 5. August. deciin. lib 18. c. 35.
in Matthew. And Augustine says y^ this pit is the bar, and diepe misery of
mankind, delivered by Christ out of captiuitye into liberty, out of sorrow
into joy, out of calamitye into felicity, out of disperation into security of
conscience, and out of (...) doubt of d^mnation in to the assured hope, and
comfortable exp^ctation of all heavenly joys.


Smith. Did not Christ louse the The. 14. obiec ^ion.
sorrows of hell? was not he in great gryefe when he was in hell, and Christ
loused the sorows of death.
saw the Fathers there detayned against their wills? What sorrows did he
there sustain? (...) there any greater sorrows the^ to be in hell. is not
sorrow some (...). 2. 24. sorrow dolor
extreme punishment, that vexethe either the soul or the body: if Christ had
not suffered in his soul, when he was in hell as great pains as his body did
upon the cross, he had not satisfied for the souls but only for the bodies,
Aepinus in psa* 16.
which he did upon the cross. For the souls, he suffered in hell, or else our
souls since Christ should have gone to hell, as well as they before Christ,
and have been The fathers were tormented in hell.
there afflicted. For there they suffered punishment, or else he did louse no
sorrows of Hell, but sorrows of hell he did louse says saint Peter, ergo the
fathers were in sorrows.


Carlil. A false principle brings A false principle.
forth many absurdityes: an untrue translation deceueth the reader: Not to
search the fountain and Greek text causes error. The blind eats many a
fly. Yt God the father loused the sorrows of death in raising his son from
death
is not in Greek, that Christ loused the sorrows of hell but that the father
even God himself loused the sorrows of death. (...) (...)

You allege Policarpus because that Polycarpus
he alleges the old Latin Text, which has, Solutis doloribus inferni,
when as he means the same that I do. I marueyll that* ye do no better
consider and expon^d^ the Text, for you say that Christ losed the sorrows of
hell (as Si^ John Cheke reasoned once with me in open disputation in Ca^bridge
till he called for a Greek Testamente. The text, the sorrows o^ death: you
say that it was Christ's soul that losed the sorwes of hell* Peter says ye it
was God ye raised him, and losed ye sorrows of death, because that it was not
possible ye he^ should be holden of it. Peter says ye God did raise Christ
out of his Acts. 2. 24.
Hebre. 2. 14.
grave, and as Paul says, death hal^ no more power over him. Who did louse ye
sorrows of death? do you no^ say that it was Christ? but Peter says ye it was
God his father.

What were these sorrows? if death be a separation of the soul from the
body, and a dissolucion of ye whole man: the^ are these sorrows such kind of
maladies and agonies, as are either annexed to death, or such griefs as follow
death, or rather both. Was not Christ extremely afflicted when for fear of
death he swett drops in quantity as big as drops of blood? what a pain was it
to have his side thruste through with a Spear, his head crowned with
Thorns, ^ys Arms and Legs, nailed to the Tree? his Body scourged? his
Thryste quenched with Uyneger? his Friends to forsake him: his Familiar to
betraye him? his Enemies to deryde him? What sorrow were his Disciples in, when
they saw him in such extreme Pains, which CHRIST took away, by his
reiurrection. If it be pleasure to man, to have soul and body togethere: what
a greyfe is it to have them dissolved? Did not Christ speak to this effect,
when he said that he was assured the psalm. 16.
God his father would not leave (...) Borhaus upon* 1. of the kings. 1.
body in the grave so long as vnt^ it should be corrupted, as oth^ Acts. 2.
27.
men's are? now has he conque^ death, now is he rysem again^ now has his
father loused the (...) rows of death, what is it to (...) the sorrows of
death it is to ou^ come death, to subdue yt, to ryse^ gain in the despite of
it, to abol^ all pain that was in death, to (...) when he raised christ from
death.
umphe over death, as one that (...) killed his enemy, of whom he w^ sore
wounded. Did not Christ (...) Romans 6. 9.
upon the cross Lord, Lord w^ have thou forsakene me: was r^ death a great
terror to him (...) To louse the sorrows of death.
not it grieve him to break f^ dominyon of death? and so (...) fieth Soluere
sometimes. such (...) rows of death are specified in (...) Soluere to break.
28. and 116. psalms. He the can dye no more has loused t^ sorrows of
death and abolishe^ her power by the power of (...) who raised him. But christ
(...) ^ye no more? Ergo his father has Death.
^oused the sorrows of death, cured her stinge, and subdued her power. Death in
this place is applied to the body, which suffered pain, and sorrows. How did
Christ louse the sorrows of death, when as death ^ether apperteyneth to the
quick, ^or dead? so long as the life is in man there is no Death: when the
^reathe is gone out of man, what sorrows does it bring? the body only has no
sense, or feelinge. What ^owe are these sorrows of death? The soul is in
heaven without sorrow: the body felethe none. though The sorrows of death.
the body feleth none, yet yt is said to sorrow, to lament, to groan, to
desire his resurrection* as all other things desire their renouation, as ^aul
discourses in the eight to the Romans. Moreover the soul desires to be
joined to the body as Romans 8. 19. 20 21. 22. 23.
the Souls under the Altar, in the 6. of the Reuelacion. The scripture
descending to one simple capacity, speaks diueres times by figures* as here,
where the Body is said t^ sorrow, loking and sighing for the resurrection. Was
not Abraham^ Lazarus in solace, and joy? How Euod. Epist. 99.
then says Augustine, could he lo^ their sorrows wherein they we^ not? nether
can the bosom of such felicity be any part or member (...) hell. Whereupon it
follows the the souls though they be in ioy^ have an earnest affection to be
wi^ the bodies, which though it feel (...) The souls de sire their bodies.
pain, yet it desires the resurrection. Wherefore Christ loused an^ abolished
those sorrows, and fulfilled that his affection and desire, which he had
toward his body, when he reuiue^, when he rose again, and had a body
impatible, When the sorrows of death are losed.
immortal, and glorified. Then ar^ the sorrows of death loused an^
dispatched, when this mortal body puttethe on immortalitye, then (...) death
subdued, and her dominion overthrown. And this is in the (...) surrection. Did
not Christ triumph over death victoriously, and subdued They that role with
Christ ascended with him. August. in sermon do Resurrect.
her valiauntlye, and abated her power everlastingly, and spoiled her
triumphantly, when he did not only raise himself, but also a great number of
such, as were tied in their graves we the bands and coardes Remigius upon Math.
of Death, which dyed no more? For Death is appointed for every Hierom.
man once, ergo not twyse. Neither Justinius quest. 85.
is it like ye the bodies once glorified Romans 6. 23.
can dye again. Nether can they sin, ergo not dye: for Death is appointed for
sin, y^ glorified bodies sin not, ergo they cannot dye. Moreover as they were
infallible arguments, and Origenes upon the 6. to the Romans
undoubted signs of his resurrection: ^o were they witnesses of his ascension.

If he had not ascended Bodily, sayethe Remigius, and Hiero, they had not been
sufficient wyt^esses of his Resurrection. And these sorrows of Death tou^hed
Christ's Disciples, as I said before, and Christ compareth^ John. 16. 20. ^1.
22.
them to the panges of a woman that labourethe with child, and when they are
ouercomed by the Resurrection, they are abolished, and put away, even as the
woman puttethe away all sorrow for the Joy of the Child that is borne These
are Christ's words: Y^ shall Weep and lamente, but the world shall rejoice:
you shall b^ When you shall see me ^yse again.
sorrowful, but your sorrow shall b^ turned into joy.

A woman, when her time or hou^ comes, has sorrow, but wh^ she has
brought forth her chil^ she remembers no longer her affli^tion, because that
she reioyce^ that the Child or man is borne in the world.

So shall you rejoice, says Christ to his Disciples, when you she see me rise
again into this wor^

And thus expound Chrisosto^ Theodorus, Antiochenus, (...) Hilarious upon the
2 psalm.

Augustine says that they were in Epist. ad Euod. epist. 99. Tom. ^.
in pains, and so he terms these Sorrows, out of the which he delivered
the old fathers.

You say that they were without Augustine and Smith d^sient and both in an
error.
sorrow. Augustine says that CHRIST loosed these sorrows in hell, for he
makes but one hell, and you say that he went but to the two highest hells.

Augustine denies that any goodman August. contrary to himself in epist. 99.
was in hell, you say that they were there: Augustine says that it is not
possible that the bosom of Abraham, which is an habitation Abraham^ bosom.
or a secret quietness, should be any part of hell: you say that Abraham was
in hell, and fetched out by CHRIST: Augustine says that Christ profited them
nothing that were in Abraham's bosom, when he descended into hell, and loused
the^ that were in torments. You say y^ Christ ransomed them. Augustine says
that Christ was with them in Abraham's bosom always with his divine nature, and
blessed presence: you plainly affirm that they wanted his presence, and were
deprived of his Blessed Contemplation.

Augustine makes the bosom of August. Tom. 3. de Genesis ad lit. 12. cap. 22.
page 702.
Abraham and Paradise to be both one, you deny it. Augustine says that he
cannot find that Inferos, Hell, should be that place where the Just men's
souls rested, you call it the highest Hell, and by another name unknown to S.
Augustine, or any ancient Father, Limbus patrum. Augustine doubts of all this
matter, and darethe conclude nothing: you are without doubt, and call them
Herytiques that will not believe your Fables, and unwritten verities

Whose sorrows did he louse? his own, for the Text says, that it was
impossible that he should b^ The sorrows of Death.
holden of them. So reads Augustine that place. But it is in Grek^ August.
Euod. 99. Epist.
that he could not be holden of it* meaning death. How can this place make
for the loosinge of the Fathers, which were in Hell, when as it is only
applied to the Sorrows of his own death? Moreover was Christ's death in hell?
was he buried there? wherefore you may see how they understand scripture, who
apply that to the souls of the Fathers, which they say, were in Hell, when as
the Text appliethe it to Christ only.

To be loosed from the Sorrows of To be loosed from the sorrows of death.
Death, is to be delivered from death, to rise again, not to corrupt in the
Grave, and like unto this Phrase according to the old translation. Now are
we loosed from Romans 7. 6.
the Law of Death, wherewith we were detayned, meaning that we are
delivered from Death. So GOD the Father loosed the sorrows of Death, meaning
his Resurrection, and deliuerye from Death. GOD the Father loosed the Sorrows
of the Death of his son in raysinge him out of hi^ grave, in making him to
triumph over ^cathe, as ye may read in Romans 6. ver. 4. 6. Act. 13. ver. 30.
32. 33. 34. 35.
these plain words.

And we declare unto you how that the promise which was made unto the fathers,
God has fulfilled to their children (even unto us) in that he raised up Jesus
again. Even as it is written in the 2 psalm. Thou ar^ my son: this day have
I begorten the.

As concerning that he raised him up from death, now no more to return to
death or grave, said on this wise: The holy promises made unto David will I
give faithfully to you* Wherefore he says also in another place. Thou shall
not suffer thy holy one to see corruption. The sorrows of death ar^ nothing
else but death it self*


The sorrows of death are like unto the dominion of death, and fear of
Death, from the which God delivered Christ in raisi^g him Heb. 2. v. 14. 15.
again. As death is here called the sorrows of death, so is it called the
stinge of death, and the stinge of the Sepulcher. 1. Cor. 15. ver. 55. 56. the
torment of death. Wisd. 3. ver. 2. the gates of death. wis. ^6. ver. 4. the
dust of death. Psalm. 22. ver. 15. the snares of death. Pro. ^3. ver. 14. the
shadow of death. Hier. 13. ver. 15. Psalm. 23. ver. 4. Luke ^. ver. 79. the
gates of death. Psalm. ^07. verse. 15. the same is called the the gates of the
grave. Math. 16. ver. 18. (...).

The same words are in the Ps. ^8. and verse 5. Chebele^ m^uetb. In The
terrour^ of death.
the 72. (...). Whereunto Peter respected and in the 6. verse. Chebeli she oll,
the sorrows of the grave.

Which place the old translatour of the new Testament seemed to Psalm. 55. 4.
have followed in the second of the Acts. verse. 24. (...). The iudgme^^ of
death.


And in the 18. psalm verse 7. the snares of death in the same sense with the
sorrows of death. Mocheshie ^ Romans 1. 9.
mai^ eh (...)

To raise Christ from death a^ to loose the sorrows of Death ar^ both one:
For the Greeks use t^ The Greeks pu^ a Verb and a Participle of on
signification
put a ^erbe and Participle, bo^ of one Signification, to express a^
Emphasis, to amplify the Oration and to make the sense more manifest* And so is
it here (...), and (...) What else is it to raise Chri^ from Death then to
loose the Sorrows of Death, or to loose the sorrows of Death, then to raise hy^
out of his Grave? One example Hades, which they translate Hell, put for
Death, and conseque^t ly for the Grave because that one follows of the other.
amongst a thousand I allege o^ of Nonnus, upon the Eleventh (...) John.
(...)

Whereas also (...), is put for the Grave or Death. That it was G^ the father
that raised Christ, and (...) loused the sorrows of Death, these places in the
margent among other do testify, and most manifest in y^ Galathians. Act. 4. 10.
Ro^ 4. 14. 1. Cor. 6. 14. 2. Cor. 4. 14. Col. 2. 12. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. Galat. 1.
1.
These places with many other declare his death and resurrection, but not one
word of his descending into hell.

I have been y^ longer in this point, because that I do see others both old
writers and new to apply these sorrows to Christ which he loused, and not to
God his father, who in deed loused these sorrows in raisinge of Christ from
death. Peruse ye Greek text, perpend y^ authorities alleged, keep in memory
ye analogy of scripture, consider the phrase and composition of the words. And
you shall find y^ adversaries in an intolerable error, and the truth ^iuersly
oppressed to prevail, like the date tree. Calvin says that it Calvin upon
psalm 22. ver. 2, Act ^8. 2. 24.
was not possible that Christ should be holden of the sorrows of death, where
Peter says that it was not ^ossible that Christ should be holden of death.

Marcion the heretic affirmed as you do, that all went to hell before All
went to hell before Christ*
Christ You do say that he deliue^ed, Abell, Enock, Abraham, and Marcion in the
year of Christ. 277.
^he other faithful: he says that them ^e delivered not, because that ^hey
would not come to him, for Ireneus. 5. c. 29
they feared that he would tempte them and punish them, as he did whiles they
lived: But that them Theodoret in (...) fab.
there he left, and delivered Caine, the Sodomite, Egyptians, and such other
gentiles. You say that Christ went to Hell and delivered the Fathers. But after
what sort ye do not declare. Clemens Alexandrinus in the.6. Stromate would
Clemens Alexandrinus error. strom. 5. 6.
prove by Hermes, that all the godly before Christ were in hell, and not saved
till the death of Christ, and then they were converted there by the preaching
of Christ, and of his Apostles. A fable.


And though that Ireneus says that Martion said that the faithful Marcion
before Christ went to hell, notwith Clemens in 2. strom.
standing, the said Clemens says that Martion said that the faithful before
Christ were saved, which you deny. Mark your inconstancy, and Consider that
one of your Paulus cortesius upon sen distio. 6.
own faction has noted the same partly before me, even Paulus Cortesius some
says he deny that the soul of Christ could go to hell, Variety of opinions.
and ransacke all the places of it, because that ^t has no body, and there
fore could not go, nor move locally: other say y^ the soul didnot go, nor
move as a body does, but as the angels Durandus
do. Durandus, and Picus deny Mirandul^*
that his soul went to hell, but that only the effect of his Passion, ^assed
over all. Thomas Aquine ^roueth that Christ effectuallye Thomas
Aquine.
^aked all the kenells, ransacked all ^he puddles, and dongeons of hell, ^ut
that his soul descended only to that part of hell, where the blessed souls
were. Wherefore, says ^e, his soul went only thither where the Faithful
souls were, But the effect thereof went through ^l y^ other there, you say y^
it went also to purgatory. Hugo Victor Purgatory.


Notwithstanding Hugo Victor ^enyethe that he went through Co^lius. in. 4.
s^nt did. 3.
Purgatory, for, says he, here is no place of purgation in hell, or out of
this life: but y^ euer^ sinful soul must be tormente^ ^zenburg prynted at
Colone in the year of Christ 1537. 14. ma ii. Ioha^nes detere cremata.
and punished there, where the o^ fence was committed.

Richard Villa stryuethe against^ Hugo, and would plant a purgatory in the
highest hell save one, and Lutzenburge in the highest place. Iacobus de Vo
^agine in his book printed at Venice in the year of Christ. 1478. in ^is
sermon d^ ^esur
Behold your discord. You deny^ that the Souls of Limbus we^ punished Johan.
de turre cremata, a Famous writer says that these souls were diverse times of
ye da^ terrified with the hell hownds molested with their terrible count^
tenaunce, feared with their frowning* and beaten with whippes* and with
intolerable torments* Reynerus in pantheologia. page 297.
And so gathers out of Thomas. The false Gospel ascribed to Nicodemus,
testyfieth as many a^surdityes Nichodemus Gospel.
as you do. How tha^ Jacob de voragine in his sermon of the resnrrection.
Orcus and Pluto reason, how the^ might keep CHRIST ou^ of their kingdom, they
be such^ Prodigious fables as are in the ^reames of Brigitta, and in many of y^
schole men. Which are tedious to repeat, folishe to be committed to writing,
ridiculous to the wise, impossible to be credited, hurtful ^o the simple,
mynystryng occasion of errors, and engendringe a thowsande-absurdityes. But to
our purpose.

To louse the sorrows of death To lose the sorrows of death.
says Theodoret, is to be the first borne from the dead, and by his
Resurrection to be an assured Theodore^ dial. 3. Impat.
hope to all men that they shall rise. If Death be a dissolution of the Body
and Soul, ERGO the joining of them is life, and so by CHRIST'S resurrection
the Sorrows of Death were dissolved.

Master Smith you and all such as you are, and as you allege are deceued,
because that you do not examine the text, expend every word, consider ye
phrase, and read the greek. All you say y^ Peter speaks here of Christ's
going to hell, where he^ Acts, 2. 24. 25 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31.
only proves that he is risen again. Peter proves that he is risen by the
words of David: you psalm. 16. 79. 10.
pervert David, and would falsely Peter's interpretation and allegation and
understand it of Christ's going to hell. Peter of his body, you of his soul.
Peter says y^ it was god y^ losed these sorrows of death, and God losed the
sorrows of death. act. 2. 24.
restored Christ to life: you say, not pondering the Greek, that it was
Christ that loused the sorrows of the faithful fathers that were in Limbus
and purgatory, following a great clark, John Herolt^ John herolt sermon. 146.
in the year of Christ. 1494. prynted at Norimberg says that their souls
ascended with Christ.
a Friar Dominique, who sayth^ that Christ delivered the Father^ out of Limbus,
and them out (...) purgatory, when they were sufficientlye purged*

But Peter says that it was God that losed these sorrows, that abolished
death, and restored Christ (...) life. For thus it is in Greek. (...) So says
Ignatius
(...). Whom god has raised, which God loused the sorrows of death* (...) is
referred to (...) and to none other thing by your own judgment. Now that I
have opened the text unto you: whether shall I accuse you of ignorance that
understands not the text: or of negligence that would not consider it? of
ignorance I will not, for that you know that (...) can August. expounds thi^
place untruly
have none other substantive but (...): it follows then that ye are negligent
in reading the text, and so you are in all your authors. For Augustine tom. de
gen^ ad lit lib. 12. c. 33. 34. pa. 702.
Augustine says that Christ could not go to hell, and louse sorrows, but that
he must needs louse the sorrows of them that were there, you say that they
were not in sorrow.

And where you say that this sorrow was not in Limbo, where the fathers
rested, but in purgatory, the said Augustine denyethe both: for he makethe
not four Helles as you do, but one as the Augustine de verbis
Scripture does. Two (says he) Apostolornm sir. 18
Habitacions are out of this life, the one in everlasting fire, the other i^
Tom. 10. 149.
A third place after this life is not found in scripture
an eternal kingdom.

Likewise, two places he assigns in his fyfthe Book Hypognostichon, the one
Heaven, the other August. Tom. 7. 1405
Hell. And he says in Enchiri^ion, cap. 67. that they are deceived that
assign a purging fire after this life. In the next World, says Saint
Augustine, Tom. 4. page* 784. in quest. ex vtroque mixto, the^ remains nothing
but either rem^neratio^, or comdemnation: if August One hell.
does appoint but one hell, then i^ your opinion odious, your assertion
uncertain, and your phantasy pha^tasticall, y^ fathereth purgatory upon saint
Augustine, so that you are burdened with negligence and ignora^^ y^ does not
discern chalk from chese.


Smith. I say that S. Aug. affirms Enchit. c. 111.
that the souls of the dead, are rele^ued Tom. 3. 190
by the devotion of the^ that live.


Carlil. The other places of Augustine deny it, and these in the August.
variable.
margent, and in the same Book Ad Macedon. epist. 54. ser. 66 lib. 2. quest.
cap. 38.
cap. 67. pa. 175. eodem Tomo. Ye must either make Augustine M. Smithe,
Inconstaunt, that affirms two contrary Sentences in one Book within four
leaves, or else that he had forgotten what he had written before. If you
consider the place, ye shall see that it was put in by some Purgatory patron
at what time the Romish Catholics did alter, change, pervert, Gloss,
detorte, Postill, comment, dispense, devise, deprave and corrupt all good
works.

Let us depart from Augustine, and come to the other, which you allege, and
you shall not find ^ne word in all their works that make for Purgatory, but
many that ^eny it.

Although Damascene out of a place Damascene in the year of Christ. 490.
of Esaye 61. with other Grecians do affirm that Christ went to. Hell,
notwithstandig he does not as y^ do, make four hells, neither do^ Damascene
understand Esaye trul^

Whether shall one give more cr^ dit to Damascene, or to Christ? Christ
interprets it of himself in the 4. of Luke verses. 17. 18. 1^ Confer the
place.

Esaye speaks of them that we^ in earth, Damascene of them in h^ Esaye to the
liuing^, and notwithstanding captiued in sin, Dam^ Esaias. 61. v. 1. 2.
cene to the dead: Esaias to them the might receive grace, Damascene the
graceles. Is there any grace (...) hell, any salvation, any peace, a^
remission, any pardon, any fayt^ hope, or repentance? Why do y^ falsefy
Damascene, saying that h^ meaned Purgatory, when as n^ Purgatory.
there he, neither any Grecians, (...) believe it fourtene hundredth thi^ and
nine years after Christ, (...) the Council holden at Ferrar* N^ withstanding
the Grecians y^ w^ at Ferrar in this general Counce^ revoked their opinion by
the per^wasion of Marcus Bishop of Ephe^us when they returned home. Damascene
condemned Bull. in conci. Transubstantiation invented by Damal. Damescene in the
year of Christ. 490. after Lebbeus 453. after Pataleon.


Do not M. Smithe defend Damascene: for he was condemned for an ^dolater in
the 7. Synod at Constantinople. Lib. de Orthodoxa fide. 4. cap 14. Moreover
he first made (...) the Transmutation, ^ransfaction, or transubstantiation of
the bread into Christ's natural ^ody, and the wine into his blood. Neither
says he may any question be asked how it comes to ^asse, but answer Hoc
est Corpus Trithemius in scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis.
^eum, This is my body.

This Damescene was a Jew, and converted, became a Monk.

The most of the Greeks never believed any Purgatory, for they ^enye it in all
their general Cou^^ells, The Greeks never believed any Purgatory*
till the council of Ferrar. Wherefore ye cannot allege the^ to prove that
CHRIST went to Purgatory, neither make they ^e^tio^ of Limbus in all their
works, neither of any such place. For the make all but one Hell.

Where is now your Purgatory or Limbus? I have proved sufficiently that ye
Greeks do not mean^ Limbus is in Vtopia mori
as you do, nor you as they.

If Ignatius had meaned the Ignatius ad Trallianos page 119. 200.
CHRIST had gone to Hell* surely he had not meaned that h^ had gone to Limbus
or Purgatory whither you mean he went: F^ he makes out of this life but t^
places, Heaven, and Hell.

Ignatius says, that thither di^ ce^ded CHRIST, from when That is to the
Grave.
a multitude rose with him. A^ this he proves by Mathewe when Math. 27. 53.
a great number of bodies of the^ that sleeped, did rise out of the^ Graves.

Are there any Graves in Hell* Were there any Bodies in Hell* for of Bodies
speak both S. Math* and also Ignatius: who says yt they ro^ with Christ, ergo
it was their bodies* for there is no resurrection of y^ soul*

Ignatius vnderstandethe the going down of Christ into his Grave, and says
that he rose again with a great number of bodies, and you understand his going
down to Hell, of his Soul.

Consider what you write, expende what you speak, be well advised how you
allege the old Aucthors, do not betraye them, do not falsefy them, do not
deceive the simple with your unwritten verities, who vnrerstand not, who can
not have those Books which you do allege.


Smith. Did not he lead Captiuitye The 15. object ion. Ephesians. 4. 8. Psalm. 68.
19.
captive, and gave gifts to men? Were not these Captives the fathers He led
captivity captive.
that were in Limbo? or such as were in Purgatory? They that rose with Christ
as cended with him.



Carlil. If this place be understood of CHRIST his ascension, then must we
needs interpret this Math. 27. 35.
captivity of such as rose with him, Chrisost. upon Ephesians. 4.
who also ascended with him.

Chrysostom expoundethe yt as Genesis 44.
I do: Haymo has diverse expositions tending to this purpose. Christ triumphed
over death, Satan Christ was not in Purgatory
and sin, and overcame the^ by his death, resurrection, and ascension, and
gave gifts to men, even the gifts of the Holy Ghost, which gifts he
received of them, for he crownethe his gifts in us, and his gifts are called
ours by participation, for he communicatethe his gifts with us, and our
gifts are his, for of him they Received gifts
come.

Christ, says Theoderet, delivered us captiued with sin, ty^d with the
chains of iniquitye, To lead cap^iuity captive.
he has set us at liberty, given us the grace of the Holy Ghost, has heaped
his mercy, and liberal kindness upon us. Of this place I have noted upon the
threscore and eighte psalm and Ephesians. 4. wherefore I shall not need to
repeat any more in this place. The 16. objection.



Smith. Did not he^ descend into lowest parts of the earth? What Ephesians. 4. 9*
other thing can you call the lowest parts of the earth then hell?


Carlil. I will not dispute with you where hell is at this time, neither
whether it be in the earth or not. Of the which I have discoursed a little
after. Notwithstanding Paul's meaning is that Christ. who ascended, is even he
that descended here into the earth. And although that his manhood came not
from Heaven, yet his Godhead did, The inferiou^ parts of the earth.
and entered into the Uirgin Mary and took flesh upon him, so that Flam. in
ps. 139 Fagius upon Gen, 37.
here he calls the Uirgins womb the lowest parts of the earth. So Psalm.
139. 15.
does David call his mothers womb Tactiioth Harets.
wherein he was fashioned and enclosed as in a place under the earth. Psalm.
63. 10*


Chrysostom says that Paul callethe the inferior parts of the earth, his
Death, which he suffered in earth, and after the which he did offend: for
says he after a manner of speaking, Jacob said, ye shall bring mine old age
to death, so he tearmethe Inferos* And Theodoret also callethe them his
death. Was his death in Hell? Did not he dye in Egypt? was Egypt The inferior
parts of the earth is the Grave. Ezech. 3^. 14. and 18. Ezech. 32. 24. The
17. object. 1. Pet. 3. 19 20. 21.
Hell? Photius and Aecumenius call these inferior parts CHRIST his grave.


Smith. Did not Christ preach in Hell to the disobedient spirits.


Carlil. Were these disobdient spirits in ye lowest hell, or in ye highest
called Purgatory we you, or in the highest but one called Limbus patru^ with you.
In ye lowest you say Christ preached not: for as you hold, he was not there:
in Limbo patrum he was not, for they were in Heaven by the same Faith that
we have: The godly fathers of the old Testament were not disobedient.
neither were they disobedient.

In Purgatory these disobedient were not, which would be brought to no
Repentance by any preachinge or exhortation, for in Purgatory you say that
they may, and do repent: but these did not repent, wherefore the Lord sent
such abundance These disobedient were the desperate Giant^s before the
floude.. 1. pe. 3. 17. 18.. 19. 20. 21.
of water that they were al drowned save Noac, Sem, Cham, Iaphet, and their
wives. Let us translate ye text according to ye greek. It is good surely.
Because it is the It is the hebrew phrase that Mem in comparisons is a mere
negative or exclu sieve
will of God, to suffer for well doing, and not for evil doing.

For Christ likewise has once suffered for sins: the just for the Iniust,
that he might bring us to God: he suffered death as concerning his psalm 52. 4.
5.
flesh: but was revived by the spirit. Psalm. 118. 8.
In the which also he went and prea Raised to life by the holy Ghost.
ched to those spirits that were in prison. (...) confer. 2. cor. 13. 3 4. 5.
(...). di^ look for their amendment. 120. years genesis 6. 3. through the help
of the A^ke. water


Which were Desperate at that time, at what time the long Sufferinge of GOD,
did tarry once in the days of NOAC, what time the, Arc was in preparinge, in
the which a few, that is to say, eighte persons were Saved by the water.
Unto the which, baptism, whereby we are saved, is compared: which is not the
putting away of the fylth of the (...).
flesh, but the testimony of a good conscience toward God by the resurrection
Baptism is like to that water the like figure or sign or Sacrament.
of Jesus Christ.

Thus far the text after my translation.

Peter exhorts all men to suffer for well doing by the example o^ Christ, who
suffered death a^ concerning his flesh, his body dyed and was buried,
notwithstanding^ The divine nature of Christ.
it rose again by the power of his own Spirit, which is the Holy Ghost. In
the which Spirit h^ went in the days of Noe, an^ being within Noe, forced
Noe t^ preach, and therefore he is sayd^ Noae is called and prached Peter. 5.
to preach to those evil Spirits* to the desperate Spirits and rebels,
which were in the pryson^ of their bodies, for the body wa^ as a prysone
wherein their Spirits and souls were contained. And these, says Peter,
were those Disobedient or desperate.
evil men, which were desperate and rebels to God even at that time, what
time the long suffer (...) of God, the clemency of the Lord, the Spirit of
Iehoua, Christ's divine nature did give them time genesis 6. 3*
^o repent. 120. Years, and looked for their amendment. And this, says
Peter, was in the days of Noe all the time that the arc was a preparinge, in
the which Noe with his three sons, Sem, Cham, and ^aphet, with their four
Wives were saved by the force of the wa^er that bare up the arc.

unto the which water, Baptism ^s compared, or a Figure, sign, or Baptism*
Sacrament correspondent to this ^ater, for as they were saved by their faith
and by the help of the ^ater from drownyng, so are we ^y Baptysme, and that
through ^is resurrection. For as Christ ^ose again being dead a glorious
^odye: so rise we being as it were ^uryed in Baptism to walk in a Read a
note upon. 1. cor. 15 29. romans 6. 4. 5. 6.
^ew life. Which Baptism is a Testimony of a good conscience toward God as I
have translated the place. And this is a perfect definition of Baptism. Read
more of this matter in my notes upon the. 1. of Peter. 3. Here you may s^ that
this place declares the death and resurrection of Christ, and the Divine
nature of Christ, which Prisone
is here called his Spirit: For h^ had power to give up his life, and t^ take
it a gain. Hethereto I ha^ repeated the text, and after it, the whole and true
sense paraphrastycally.

Now I will prove that this Spirit The Spirit Spi^ites
is the divine nature of Christ Secondlye that these Spirits t^ whom the
Spirit of Christ preached, were the evil men, that liu^ in the time of NOAC
unto whi^ John. 10. 17.
NOAC preached being endue^ and enflamed by this Spirit o^ Christ.

Thirdly that the prison was the Bodies of them, within the which were enclosed
these Bloody, cruel, and malicious spirits. If he ^ee a^ evil wicked man, we
use to call The spirit of Christ who^ peter in this. 3.
him a wicked Spirit.

This is the spirit of CHRIST, and his divine nature, and almighty Chapter
calls the spirit in his first cha. he. calls God.
Power. which I prove out of this place by this syllogism.

That thing, which raised Christ was GOD: this Spirit did raise 1 pet. 1. 21.
CHRIST: Ergo this Spirit 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
The spirit of Christ is God Read. ^om. 8.
was God, even the holy Ghost, the Third Person in Trinitye. That only God
raysethe the Dead, 11. Rom 4. 24.
which is the first proposition, it is 2. Cor. 6. 14..
evident, and proved also in many Gal. 1. 1
places. Romans 4. 17.
John. 5. 16. 17. 18 19. 20. 21. Acts. 26. 8.


The second Proposition called the assumption, or minor, is proved by this
place, and by Romans 1. This spirit Ambrose callethe the holy Ghost. de voc.
genesis 2. c* 3.
verse. 4. where it is written that the Spirit of Sanctification raised Christ.

For says Paul. As it were interpreting this place. CHRIST 2. cor. 13 4
Theodoret upon this place John 2. 19.
was Crucified through infirmytye of his Human Nature, notwithstanding, he
raygnethe and lives in his divine nature. For hi^ John. 2. 1^.
bad them dissolve the temple, meaning his body, and within thr^ days he
would raise it again* The properties of the trinity a^ given to them all in
places, as the Act 20. 28.
with Christ did, I mean to redeem John. 6. 21.
man is given to God, as though h^ should redeem man with his blood* so here
the spirit of Christ is said^ to raise him. Where ye have i^ Scripture the
flesh and spirit applied to the person of Christ, the flesh is his humanity,
and spirit^ his divinity. Of the which I ha^ noted upon this place of Peter.
And Christ's humanite and divinity.
upon Hebrews. 9. And that this i^ the spirit of Christ it is manyfe^ of the
whole hystory, which is set^ Augustine
for the at large in Moses. genesis 6. Di^ Enop.
not this same Christ in like man^ EPist. 99.
preach to Adam, and Gain, and reproved them? he came in spirit t^ The spirit
of Iehoua. genesis 6. 3*
them, as he did to these. This spirit in moses is called the spirit of
Iehoua, here it is called the Spirit o^ Christ: there it is said to have
^triuen An analogi^ between Moses and Peter.
with man, here it is said to have gone and preached to the despe rate
rebels in the days of Noe. There God says that he will not suffer it always
to contend with man: here Peter prescribes a certain time even all the time
y^ the arc was in preparing: There are given them to repent. 120. Years: here
the long suffering of God did look for their ame^dement. So long there were. 8.
persons saved, there was the arc in preparing. 120. Years: here in like
manner is the Bash^
same thing mentioned. There this spirit preached to fleshly men and carnal,
here to the desperate and disobedient: There God is said to hane warned them by
the spirit of holiness, here by the spirit of Christ. There they be called
giants which were so terible in countenance Hanepholi^*
that they y^ looked upon the^ fell down for Fear, here they are called so
obstinate that nether erhortation could prevail, neith^ threatening reduce
the^ from iniquity, to honesty. This spirit within Noac and others, did preach
to these impenitent Gyantes, exhorted the malicious, and would have corre^ted
them. Of this, read my note^ upon Genesis 6* and 1. Peter. 3. Nethe^ is this
spirit in Moses the soul (...) man, as Chimi dreameth, neither in Peter, as
Castalio translated, no^ the word as Athanasius reporte^ in his Epistle to
Epictitus, vnl^ that he take the word for the hol^ ghost, or for Christ's
divine nature* for the soul of man is a creature* This spirit is not the
soul of man
and this Spirit is the Spirit o^ Iehoua, and the spirit of Christ i^ Peter.
Moreover it was not mer^ man that preached to those obstina^ offenders: but it
was the spirit (...) Iehoua in Moses, and in Peter, the 2. pet. 2. 5. Beza.
spirit of Christ. This spirit wa^ in Noac who is called the eight^ preacher
of righteousness. For the other seven (I mean Noacs sons with their wives
preached as well ^s he. Noac was the eighte person ^at was in the Arc, a
preacher ^f Righteousness.

and Erithrea Sibilla, who writes er self to be one of Noacs daughters
Sibilla in her O. acles
in law, specifieth how that ^od commanded Noac to preach (...) the
Gyauntes.

God commanded Noac to preach,
That they should die both great and small:
^nlesse they would forsake their ways,
And turn to him the God of all.
^osephus writes the like lib. 1. c. 5. To what spirits preached this ^irite
of Christ, the Text aunsweeth, to them that were desperate ^ebells in the days
of Noac. Spirits were the desperate Giauntes of Noacs


The time declare the that this spirit of Christ being within Noac, ^reached
to them of Noacs days ^piritually, for some Books have (...).

They to whom this Spirit of Christ preached, were in earth Genesis 6.
and not in Hell. They were in time of Noac to whom Christ p^ched: These were
in Hell. T^ Spirit preached in the days Noac: the Papists say that he p^ched
in Hell, two thousand ye^ after this time and above. (...) did Christ, says
the Text, wh^ the desperate were, where the (...) antes were, where the
disobedi^ were: when the long suffering^ God looked for their amendem^ when
Noac lived: Noac then (...) not dead, therefore not in Hell, (...) the Arc was
in preparing, w^ there were 8. persons saved.

Was the Arc made in H^ who were the Artificers? w^ had they Timber? where had
(...) pytche? Were there any Bea^ in Hell? If the Deluge had b^ in Hell, then
should all the De^ have been drowned: for the T^ says, that there were but
ei^ saved.

Does Baptism answer to yt? Baptism.
Baptism is in earth, Ergo the ^eluge was in earth. And conse^ently these
spirits were in earth* Spirits are evil men.
the Scripture calls wicked me^ ^pirites, as Paul terms erro^ous 1. Tim.
4. 1. (...). (...) in Paul seducing: spirits.
men, the Spirits of error, ^en false ^rophets, as these are ^o were called
erroneous Spirits are they in Peter called disobedi^t Spirits in the like
Phrase.

Were not these desperate spirits (...) disobedient Rebels, infected ^ith
sensuality, seduced with plea^e, upon whom was powered (...) Spirit of
wyckednes, as of the ^inces Zoan, and Noph. Esaias. 19. 14.


^f this double Spirit, I mean Zach. 13. 2.
(...) Spirit of God, and the Spirit A duble spirit.
Hozee. 9. 11.
the world, as Paul writes, of 1. Cor. 2. 12.
^ith read my notes upon the 1. 1. John. 4. 1. 2.
^t. 3. And Cicero a profane wrivseth Cicero.
the same Phrase, calling so an impure Spirit.

Though Lyra was drowned in ^aming Limbus, notwithstandi^g he says that ye
Doctors, and Glo^ do not understand this of Christ To whom Christ preached a
true ex position.
descending into Hell: for these his and their words.

He (say they) that came in s^ in our time, and preached the (...) of life to
the world: the very s^ coming in spirit, preached bef^ the Deluge, to them
that were (...) perate, and lived carnally.

For he was by the holy Ghost Noac, and other good men, by w^ conversation he
preached to (...) evil men, that they might bee^ ned unto God.

Thus far the Ordinary (...) with much more matter to effect. This
preaching, says L^ of Noac before the Deluge, w^ Lyra.
figure of the preachiuge of Ch^ and of his Disciples, unto the of the world:
calling sinne^ Repentance, least y^ they she perish in the final judgment.

And here is an Argument (...) lesser, a Minore, ad Mains. I^ called them to
Repentance, much Prison is the custom of sinninge.
^ore will he call others. He prea^ed to them that were in prison, (...) mean,
to them that were tied ^ith the custom of synning, which ^as in the time of
Noac, when as ^ll flesh had corrupted his way. Genesis 6. he came in Spirit,
and ^reached by Noac, whom he had ^nspyred to make the Arc, and ^reach
Repentance: and although that y^ Humanity of CHRIST was not as yet,
notwithstanding ^is Substance, his Deity, and Godhead was ever: Jesus Christ
yesterday, to day, and he forever. Thus much Lyra, and more to y^ ^me purpose.

What prison was this that they were in? Were they enclosed in stone walls?
Were they in some ^ongeon? Lyra callethe this prison the custom of synninge:
for they, says he, were tied as it were with the gyues, or manicles, or
theynes of iniquity. Notwtstandi^g a Prison is taken in all Tongue by a
Metaphor for the Body, when in were enclosed these disobedie^ Spirits,
obstinate to be refo^med, desperate to be reduced, a^ so malicious, and
stubborn, the Noac could neither by his lenity reclayme them, neither by
seuerit correct them, nether did they estem^ what he preached, but (...) him,
and called him an old ^oting fool, sayng what had he to do with them, what
cared they for his pre^chinge. So is Babylon, meaning Revel. 18. 2.
Rome, called a Prison of impu^ Spirits.

This Prison may be taken (...) Sin, as the Shadow of Death is for dark
and wilful ignorance* So Esaye in the twenty four chapter and seventh verse,
prophecieth that CHRIST should delyu^* Prisoners out of Prison, where is also
the same word in Hebrew, Chele, and in the Greek (...), and in Peter also,
ye may call these ^ngracious giants such as were in ^e prison of sin, or in
the prison (...) their Bodies. And David does (...) use it in these words, as
the great ^ible translateth. Bring my soul ^ute of Prison. Psalm. 142. 7.


Augustine among other expositi^ns, August. upon Psalm. 142. 7. Mimmasgar.
says that David desired god (...) take his soul out of his Body. Prison
for the body. 72. Inter pretouts have, (...).
^otwithstanding Augustine being ^noraunt in the Hebrew Tongue, ^auerethe like
an Academicall, ^claring ye text uncertainly by con A true exposion of the 7.
v. of the 142. Ps. Munster and Flam. upon Ps. 142. 7. and the argument of the
Ps, in Hebrew before the psalm.
^ctures.

For David flyinge from Saul, ^d lyinge in the Cave Odolla, de^reth God to
deliver him saufe out (...) that Cave, wherein he was inclo^ed as in a Prison.

and there is Nephes which they ^anslate the Soul, taken for the Nephes.
Body, and the Cave for the Pry^on.

Bid therefore reads this Text Bid.
in this sort. That he preached to the spirits that were in their flesh, as
though it were written, (...) and not (...), of this diversity Hugo Cardinal,
Thomas Aquine, and Gagne, with Dionisius Carthusianus make mention, who
expound this place as I do^, though they were Schoolmen, and in the Barbarous
time. So does Augustine in his 99. Ep. to Euodius.

Accolampadius alleadgethe ^ place of Fsay, as though that Christ Esaias. 42. 7.
went to Hell, to deliver us from Hell.

Did not he all that upon the^ Cross? was not his passion sufficient? was his
death an imperfect death? (...) not he reconcile us to his father, (...)
assuaged his Wrath? ouerca^ Satan and Hell?

BEZA (who five years after Beza.
that I had expounded this place in a book entitled that CHRIST never came in
Hell, written* in L^ten upon the first of Peter 3. Chap. and 19. verse takethe
this Prison Prison.
for hell. As Satan is said to be put in prison, which sense does not impugn
mine assertion, notwestandig it is not so probable: For Peter speaks of them
that lived, Beza of them that were dead: Peter of them of NOACS days to whom
he preached, Beza of them that were in hell, to whom NOAC did not preach:
Peter and Moses mean of them, to who^ of his infinite mercy he gave 120.
Years to repent.

BEZA of them that were in hell? is there any repentance in hell, any
confession of a man's fault, but here were given an 120. years to repent.

If BEZA his opinyon please 1. Peter. 3.
any man better then mine, let him follow it, who Conspirethe with me
against them that allege this place for Christ's preachinge in hell.

You say that Christ fetched out only the obedyent, and faithful, Christ
fetched out of hell nether the obedient nor disobedient.
these were disobedyent, and unfaithful, ergo by your own judgment he went
not thither for their cause, if not for their cause, then may you August.
Euod.
be ashamed to aliedge this place for Epist. 99. these disobedient were be fore
the flood.
that purpose. How could he preach or fetch out Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
with the rest, when as they were long after the flood, and these before the
flood: They were Godly men, the other desperate: they were not in hell, the
othere were there without redemtion. Peter says that it was the spirit of
Christ ye preached to the obstinate, and that in the time of Noac, before he
took man's nature upon him.

The papists say that it was soul of CHRIST.

How could his Soul preache^ before it was? Before he was man? before he
was created, and joined to the body.

That which was not in the time of NOAC could not preach in the time of
NOAC. An fallible argument.
The Soul of CHRIST was not in the time of NOAC: wherefore it could not
preach in the This s^irite is not Chistes. sou^e.
time of Noac, you say that it was the Soul of Christ that preached in hell:
Peter does not mean of the Soul of CHRIST: but of his Spirit: of his divine
nature which is GOD, equal with the Father and the Son.

Is not their ignorance intolerable that do not see that Peter speakethe not
one word of ye soul of Christ: but of his God head. An other argu meant.


Is it credible that Christ did only preach in hell to them that were
desperate in the days of NOAC, and not to others as well? were there none
desperate but they of NOACS days? was not Cain before them desperate? and Esau
after the flood? Peter says that this Spirit of CHRIST preached, To whom pr^
ched Christ
to the disobedient of Noacs time, The papists say that he preached to all in
general: Peter to the disobedient and Desperate: they to the obediente and
faithful.

Peter to the Oyantes: they to the Patriarchs: Peter to them of NOACS days,
they to all the just before Christ.

Peter when the Arc was in Preparinge, they when Christ's body lay in the
grave: Peter where there were Eight persons saved, and the rest drowned, they
where there were an innumerable company and that in Hell: Peter where there
was amendment looked for, they where there was none amendment: for in Hell is
no redemption: Peter in earth, they in Hell, Purgatory, and Lymbus. A
syllogism.


Where the Arc was made ther^ preached this Spirit of Christ. Annius upon
Berosus. pa.


The Arc was not made in Hell: The arc was 7 or 8. forlonges in length.
but in Syrya about Libanus.

Wherefore this Spirit of Christ preached not in hell. You say that CHRIST
delivered Euodius. Epist. 99. August.
them that were in the state of Salvation, either such faithefull Fathers, as
were in Limbus Patrum: or such as were neither so good, as to be in Limbus,
nor so despreate as to be in hell, but to be as Newters, and in a mean, and
therefore in purgatory.

But Peter says that this Spirit of CHRIST perached to the Obstynate and
Desperate Gyantes, and that in the days of NOAC.

If he had preached in Hell, should not he as well have Preached to CAIN, and
such other as were before the floude, as to ESAV, and IVDAS, and such like,
which were after the floude.

If he Preached to the Faithful, as you say, why does he name the
unfaithful.

Wherefore PETER'S meaning is easelye to be perceived of the wise, well known
of the learned, and fully awnswered to them that will not call white black,
Euodius Epist. 99.
and black white. If we should say, says Augustine, that they that are in
hell can believe in Christ, what absurdities should follow contrary to our
faith? And how could they have been delivered out of hell, if they had not
believed in him? is there any delivery, any salvation, any redemtion without
him. This place of Peter, says Augustine, does not pertain to hell, but to
those days rather of Noac: the form whereof he applies to these days. Thus
much Augustine, with a manifest explanatio^ of this place, after the same order
and manners that I do.

The Spirit of Christ preached where there was amendment of Life, and there
where the flood ouerflowed, where the arc was made, were 120. Years of
repentance was given, where eight persons were saved, where Noe preached, but
none of these were in hell, ergo this place is not understand of Christ being
in hell.


Smith. I have a place out of Peter The. 18. objection.
that shall prove mine intent substan 1. Peter. 4
cially, fortify it strongly, conclude with me effectually, to the abolishment
of all your arguments and ex positions.

Does not Peter say that the Gospel was preached to the dead, and who are they
that were dead? were they not they that were in hell, or rathere in purgatory,
and in Limbus.


Carlil. If you say that the Gospel The Gospel preched to the dead.
was preached unto the dead: you either mean them that were a live then, when
Peter lived, and dead in sin, which are, all they that will not believe, as
Lira expounds this place, or else ye mean the^ that are dead and departed out
of this life.


Smyth. I mean that the Gospel was preached to the dead.


Carlil. The dead are not called the Souls that live, but the bodies* which
are dead. You hold that the Fathers that were in Hell did live.


Smyth. So I hold.


Carlil. Ergo they were not dead, but you say in this objection that the
Gospel was preached too the dead.

Are not the dead bodies, without Senses? can they see? can the^ hear, whose
ears are in the earth^ Dead
Te^tullian ad uersns ma^cio lib 5.
consumed by time, and eaten with worms.

Neither is this word dead taken at any time for them that live (...) the
other life: but is only appro^ Dead is only proper to the body.
pried to the body even by the exposition of Tertullian.

A dead body is without life, soul, and Senses, Ergo it was the bodie^ that
were dead, and ye gospel therefore was not preached to them. Wherefore we must
say that when Christ shall come to iudg^ the quick and the Dead, tha^ (...)
the quick, we mean them y^ ^all be alive when Christ shall ^me to
Judgment. 1. Cor* 15. by he dead, such Bodies as sleep The dead.
(...) their Graves till the last day, ^d their fowls either in pain or
^easure, in sorrow or ^olace, (...) felicity or misery, in Torments (...) in
Joy, in Hell or Heaven.

^hyche being joined to their bo^yes, shall Receive Sentence either to their
Salvation, or Con^mnation.

The Gospel was preached to Gospel preached to Adam
Adam, now dead, but then alive, ^hen Christ Iehoua preached to ^im the
Seed of the woman: to Noac now dead, but then alive, ^hen God told him that
his Spi^ite should no longe^ ^tryue with ^an.

To all other both that were either ^aithful, as the Prophets and Pa^riarches
were, and the other faithful: or to ye unfaithful, as to Caine ^owe dead, and
then alive: to the Gyauntes before the floude no^ dead, and then alive.
Wheref^ did he preach to them? that the should be judged like other men^
flesh: that is, that they might (...) to sin, and be mortifyed: a^ should
live to God ward in (...) Spirit.

Now the Gospel mortifieth s^ Of this read my note upon 1. P^r 4.
as believe, and raysethe them (...) that they might live godly a^
Spiritually. This is the truth.


The Gospel was preached to (...) dead, that is to men that are d^ in sin:
so is dead used.


Smith. How answer you Mi^ The 19 object Mich. 2. 13.
cheas, who sayethe that CHRIST ascended before them openinge t^ way.


Carlil. It wa^ not Christ but t^ Enemy, some understand it (...)
Nabucodonosor his Army, w^ assaulted and invaded Jerusalem

Now I will allege other mi^ minds, of the which not one (...) them does
allege yt as you (...) you falsify the Text, and sorge ^ther sense then ever
Micheas ^aned.

^is breaker was Sedechias, who (...) through the ruynous walls with any others,
for have to escape Af^ our English translation all this ^ap. is applied to y^
utter destruc^n of Jerusalem. After Pagnine ^s breaker of the wall was the
^ngell, which killed the Assiri^s, and the King that went before (...)
Ezechias. Others as Pellicane, ^unster, and Castalio, apply from ^is place: But
I will gather the in ^ede O Jacob, unto the end, all (...) Christ, who shall
gather a great ^ultitude at Jerusalem, like ^ckes of sheep, of such a number
^at they shall one opppesse another: ^e breaker of the gappe shall be ^essias,
who shall subdue your e^emyes, releue your miseryes, and ^ing you to felicity.
This King ^all go before you, and Iehoua shall ^e his name, he shall be your
head and guide. But according to the let^ by this breaker up, is meaned (...)
King of the Assirians, and Bab^nians, with their soldyours. The 20 obiec tion.



Smith. I go says Christ to prep^ John. 14. 3.
you a place, Ergo there were n^ in heaven, before that Christ a^ ded to
prepare a place.


Carlil. Is this a good Argument^ you, and I, and half a score (...) should
go to London, and (...) what neded Christ to go prepare aplace when as heaven
was empty, for as yet there were none in heaven, as the Papists hold.
should say I am afearde that (...) Innes should be taken up, t^ are so many
that go: I wyll^ and prepare a place for us.

Does yt now follow, that (...) went to London before us? (...) London emptye
before? Is the There is room enough where there are none inhabitants.
City where no Body dwellet^ Is that a Realm where there^ no Cytizens or
Subjects, or t^ Heaven, where there is no Saynct^ none inhabitauntes.

Let us expound the Text (...) dinge to the English Bible re^ in the Churches.

Christ seeing his Disciples much ^ered, and troubled with his sa^ges, John.
13. 21.
as, where he said that one John. 13. 23.
^ould betraye him: that whither Math. 26. 31.
^ee went, they could not come: that John. 13. 28.
^ey should be dispersed, that Peter ^oulde deny him, he comfortethe ^em thus
afflicted, willing them ^at their hearts should not be ^oubled: for if they
belueed in him (...) they did in his father, that then^hey should ascend
thither, whi^her he should Ascend, because that in his fathers house there
were ^any Mansions, Room enough, ^laces at large: for if it were not (...)
says he, I would have told ^ou.

This place appearethe to prove that Heaven was well inhabyted, ^r else, what
needed he to prepare (...) place

As my father had prepared these Math. 25. 34.
Mansions, meaning his Kingdom from the creation: even so now I go to
prepare a place for you.

For his act and myue is all (...) we prepared this place from the ginning.

If I go to prepare a place for (...) I will come again, and I will rec^ you
unto my self. This will (...) at the last Resurrection, that (...) I am, (I
mean in heaven) ye (...) be, and whither I go ye know your Faith, and you
know (...) way* which is already made my (...) and Resurrection. (...) I am
the way, truth* and life* This is the true sense. Read (...) (...), Enthy.
Bul^n Lyra, Non^ Beza, ^aber, Erasmus, Christ Hilarious, de trinit. 9. Cyrill,
Pell^ cane, B^er. Your allegations (...) both absurd, and mordinate: (...)
Thrist understands all this of (...) Apostles, you of the in Hell: Chr^ of
the living you of the dead: Chr^ of y^ house of his father, you of (...) ^hans
den: Christ of the large man ^ions of his fathers house and a amph^ room, you
of Limbus pa^ru^: Chri^ (...) the heavenly kingdom prepared ^f him and his
Father from the cre ^tion, you of the Popes kingdom ^urgatorie, prepared of
late and in^ented by the Abbot Odilo in Sci^cilye, and of Sayncte Patrycke in
Irelande, and forged by others so doubtfullye and variablye, that no man can
credit it.

Christ prepared them a way to Heaven, and went before them, you would
send him to Hell: Christ says that where he was they should be, meaning
Heaven, you say that he meaned Hell.

Went the Apostles to Hell? all this place prouethe Christ's Ascension, Ergo no
Descension: for, to Ascend and Descend are contrary. The ^1. obi^ tion.



Smyth. I have alleged those places of Scripture that seem to prove The common
Creed.
CHRIST his goinge to Hell, whereby the Fathers were persuaded, and shall not
that persuade you that persuaded them?


Carlil. They will have manne to ground or allege (...) manner of Doctrine
out of (...) Doctoure: But they all, are of^ Opinion and Consent, and (...)
whollye conclude and agree to^ there, that there is nothing ne^ sarye for the
Salvation of (...) Souls, which is not contay^ or mentioned in the Eannonni^
Scryptures, and therefore the will have Scripture, to be (...) only way and
Guide: Reas^ to Rule* Arguments to Proo^ Conferente of place with place (...)
conclude, the Tongues to D^ cerne, and the Litterall Tru^ and Sense to judge*


Smithe. If nothing ca^ The 22. obiec tion.
prevail with you, that I have se^ down or alleged, notwithstanding, it is
enough that it is in (...) Creed.


Carlil. I deny that it is in (...) Creed. If it be in our Cr^ then I pray
you* who did putte^ in? when, and where was it* thrust in. If when the Apostels
lived, where make they mention of it? Mathewe, Mark, Luke, John, Romans 4. 2^.
Paul, and Peter, diligently set out the healthful article of Christ's Death,
whereby we are saved, of his resurrection for our justification, and of his
ascension for ^ur glorification, and assured expectation of all Heavenly
Felicity.

Of this Fable they make no mention, it is excluded as, impertinent, omitted as
not expediente, neglegted as an inconvenience, and contempned as an absurdity.
August. de temp. sermon. Tom. 10.



Smyth. Does not Augustine say that Thomas the Apostle, added this Sentence
Descendit ad Inferna, he descended into Hell.


Carlil. That Sermon that is intruded into his works, is none of his Sermons,
for many years after, either by Bonauenture, or by some such Artificer, these
twelve were assigned seuerallye, every one to one patche. Saint Augustine Tom.
3.
This patche was not in S. August. days August. de Symb. ad Cathe. lib. 1. c.
3. 5. lib 3. c. 6. lib. 4. cap. 6.
ad petrum diaconum page 231. and de fide et simbola page 144. repeteth the
twelve articles of of our says, and expounds them, and this patche he
omitteth, which is an evident argument that it was not invented, nor believed in
his days a^ an ariicle. The same patch he leaves Tom. 9.
out in all places where he in treats of the Creed. de temp. ser^ 123. sermon.
125. Tom. 6. Chrysostom expounded. (...) Hades (...) Grave.


Chrysostom in his former exposition excludes this patch in h^ latter^ he
makes mention, of (...) Descendit ad inferna. He went into Hades, in to his
Grave, that h^ might there also do miracles, wh^ Many bodies (...) with Christ.
was to raise up many bodies. F^ many bodies of Saints rose wi^ ^im.

Thus much Chrysostom* where^ it is manifest, that Chrisostom^ means by
Hades y^ Grave* wh^ many have translated hell. Wh^ translation has feigned
many (...) surdities, how that Christ went to Tom. 4. in. ep* ad Cor. 15. ho*
40.
hell, and fetched out the faithful patriarchs. That Chrysostom means by
Discendit ad inferna, he Discendit ad inferna expou^ ded.
went to his grave, he was buried, nothing else but his burial, it is evident,
for thus he says. Discensus ad inferos, The discendinge of Christ into his
grave is a sign, to to be dipped into the water and to rise up again, and
this is Sepulchrum ^om ^. 3. 4.
the grave, that Paul calls Baptism.
baptism, ye are buried (says he) by Baptism unto death.

Thus much Chrysostom: I know that Chrysostom is variable in this matter for
he alleges ye place of the. 19. psalm for the resurrection of CHRIST, as
Peter, and all other do, and as I have proved before, notwithstanding he
de^orteth the place of the 24. psalm verse 7. and Esaias. 25. verse 23. that
Christ willed hell gates to Esays meaning is tha^ Cyru^, should break the
bars of Baby lon, and deliver the Israelites pa. 32* psalm. 32.
be cast open, and that he brake y^ brazen gates, and iron bars, he under,
stands of Christ's entering into hell, and bringing out of precious vessels,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. You Master Smith. say that christ* went into the
two uppermost hells, Purgatory, and Limbus patrum, Chrysostom knowethe neither
of them, you appoynte four Chrysostom hom 75. upon Math.
hells, Chrysostom but one.

As the physician, says he, can profit a dead man nothing at all, nor the
master of the shipp after the shipp is lost, so after this life After this
life no help
there is no thing that can profit.


Smith. Ruffinus Aquiliensis writes Ruffinns who made this creed and when.
that the twelve Apostles immediatlye after the receypte of the holy Ghost,
made this creed, before that they were dispersed, that one of them should not
discente one from an other in any principale point of religion.


Carlil. you say that Ruffine says that the Apostles made it for this
Ruffine creed is in Hierom*
cause, least that any of them should disscent one from an other: not with Tom.
2. and in the proemy apol. pamph. pro origene.
standinge Ruffine has not this patche.

Is it credible that they should dissent in any point of Religion, that were
inspired with the holy Ghost, that were only guided by the Spirit, which
led them into all truth: If it led them into all truth, what neded they
of any other rule? was not he suffitient? had they not received the Spirit
abundantly? could they err, It is an absurdyty to prescribe The Apostels were
authors and rule of all ^ounde doctrine.
an order to them, that were the authors of order, or to assign them a rule,
that ruled all: or that laid the foundation of Doctrine, to waver in Doctrine,
or that were the teachers of faith, to be ignorant of the will of God.

Could the Spirit of God err, which taught them all and led them into
all truth.

Wherefore you see what hold you have, and what your authority is.


Smith. John herolte a friar. Dominique John herolte when the creed was made.
valla can not tell who made it.
in the year of Christ. 1494. writes in his 146. sermon that the apostels
made this erede in the council at Jerusalem Act. 15.


Carlil. H^w do these two doctors agree the one old, the other new, the one
says, that it was made immediately after Christ's ascension, the other 17. or.
18. years after or above.

This is a good argument. How could the twelve Apostels make it so many years
after the assension of Christ, when as there were some of them that had
suffered death, for James brother to John the son of Zebede, was beheaded by
Herod Agrippa. And this was done 7. or 8. years or more before the council
holden in the Art. 15. Moreover the Act. 122.
other apostels were dispersed some into one place, some into others, as T^
apostels dispersed.
Phillipp in Scythia Bartholomewe in Lycaonia, India, and Armenia, Matthew in
Aethyopia, Thomas in Parthya, Media, Persia, Germanya, Hyrcania, and Bactria.

Now if there were none of the Apostels at the council holden at Jerusalem,
act. 15. save James, John, ^ Peter, then were not all the Apostels there to put
to every man his sentence, if it had been made there, then would either.
Peter, John, James, or Luke, who wrote the rest ^o exactly have made mention of
^t.


Smith. They made the twelve articles, Simbolum the* 12. article^*
as a Some of our faith, and cal^ed it Symbolum, for that every apostell added
one piece. Peter I believe ^n God the father almighty.


Carlil. John Herolte says that Peter The. 1. articl^ Augustine and Herolt
disagre Pseudo Augustine de temp. se^. 115*
^ade I believe in God the father al^ighty, the maker of heaven and ^arth.

Pseudo Augustine deniethe that, and says that Peter made but the ^ne half of
that sentence. For the ^tter part, says he, made John. Augustine make th two
articles of it, Herolte but one. Augustine says that Peter and John made
these two: Herolte that Peter made both* Herolte says that John made this*
How could this laines be at the* onncell at Jerusalem, Act 15 when as he
was killed by Herod Act. 12.
And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord. Pseudo Augustine sait^ that
James the greater made that. This Herolte deniethe, and sayth^ that John the
Euangeliste made it. Augustine makes this the third^ Article: Herolte the
second. Andrewe. Who was couceaued by he holy Ghost, borne of the Vi^gine
Mary.

Pseudo Augustine makethe thi^ the fourth article, Herolt the third* Pseudo
Augustine says, that Andrewe made it, Herolte that Iam^ the greater, brother
to John the Euangeliste Herolte makethe James that was dead to make an Ar ticle*
made it, who was the^ dead as it is manifest in the Act^ 12. John Herolte here
forgetteth^ himself, for he said in the begi^ning of his Sermon y^ this Cr^
was made in the council at Jerusalem. And this James was behea^ ded by Herod
long before, as is mauifest in Act. 12. Mendacem me^orem esse oportet.
Phillip: Suffered under Pontius Pilate, Crucified, dead, and Buried. Herolte
says, that Andrewe made this: Pseudo Augustine makes this the fist Article:
Herolte the fourth.

Thomas say^he: He descended into Hell, the third day he rose from ^he
dead. Herolte says that Phi^ip made this former part: Pseudo Pseud August.
Augustine says that Thomas made it all: Herolte makes, He descended into
Hell, a whole Article: Pseudo Augustine makethe it but ^alfe, and adds: The
third day ^e rose from the dead.

I marvel that they will father ^his upon Phillip, whose Creed, ^s it is
written in Pirianius leaves out this patche.

Herolte says that Thomas made The third day he rose again from the dead.
Pseudo Augustine joins this with Christ's going to Hell, and ascribethe it to
Thomas on^ Bartholmewe. He ascended into he^ uen, sittethe on the right hand
God the father Almightye: in (...) they both agree. Mathewe. Fr^ thence he
shall come to Judge (...) quick and the dead. James the le^ I believe in the
holy Ghost* the h^ Catholic Church. Pseudo A^ gustine makethe this one
Articl^ Herolte makes it twain. P^ Augustine makes it the 9. Arti^ Herolte
makethe y^ latter parte^ 10. Simon Zelotes: The Commun^ of Saints, Remission
of sins. (...) rolte makes the 10. Article o^ The holy Catholic Church*
(...) Augustine makethe this Articl^ part of the 9.: Herolte maketh^ the 10.
Indas Thaddeus. The Re^ rection of the flesh. Herolt and He^ Vrinaria, make the
11. Article, T^ Communion of Saints, and remis^ on of sins. Pseudo Augustine
(...) keth it the 10. Herolte the 11. P^ August. ascribes it to Simon (...)
(...), Herolte to Judas Thaddeus. Mathias added Everlasting life. Herolt says
that he made The Resurrection of the flesh, and everlasting life. Here you see
y^ disagreme^t between Discord:
(...), whom they say was S. August. Herolte. and Henry Vrinaria.

There is no less variety and inconstauncy, in the rest of the schoolmen
August. Tom. 3. de fide et Symbolo. which he adds in a book de Symb. ad Cath.


In S. Augustines time they were not digested in that order as they ^ee now.
For he leauethe out the goinge of Christ into Hell, and life everlasting.
Chrysostom leauethe Chrisost. Tom 5. de Symb. (...) ad in feros expounded.
^ut The Comunion of Saints: and in his former exposition, he omit^eth
Descendit ad Inferos: and in the ^atter he says, Descendit ad Inferos, was, y^
Christ was dead and buried, and with him raised a great number Read the 13.
objection.
of bodies: for he was y^ first fruits of them that sleeped, and the first
borne from y^ dead: whereby you may easily understand, that the Greek Doctors
understand by Hades the Hade*
grave, we has been translated he Hiero. August. and Ambr. say the Neither
have they all, nor orderly*
this Creed came from the Apostle which can not be persuaded to^ Valla a
Gentl. of Italye, and a singular Judgment. Many Credes. The first. where in
Christ's descendinge is left out


1. Marcellus in Epiph. says that (...) received this says of y^ Scriptu^ and
Elders: not wtstanding he leaue^ out this article of his going to h^ 2.
Ignatius has a perfect Creed Ignatius in epist. ad Mag.
many of the Articles of our co^ Creed, but never one word Christ's going
to Hell. 3. Neither in his epistle to y^ Ephe^ where he confesses his Beelye^
twyse. 4. Neither in his epistle to y^ Ro^ Theoderet.
Theoderet Dial. 1. immut. 5. Neither in his Epist. to y^ Tra^ lians. Theod.
Dial. 1. Immut. 6. Polycarpus in an epistle to the Poly^ardns in ^ Past. ad
Phil.
Phillipians, vtterethe the mystery of Christ's Nativity, Death, an^
Resurrection, but this addition h^ leaves out. 7. Justinius Martyr does most
manifestly, Justinius in Apo^oget. 2.
and exactly declare Christ's Passion, Death, and Resurrection: of this never
a word. 8. Ireneus has set out an absolute ^orme of our faith, in like
manner Ireneus li. 1. c* 2
as the other have done, and this either he forgotte for lack of memory, or
neclected it as an absur^ity, or dispy^ed it as a fable; or ab ^orred it as a
thing contrary to our Faith, which never placed any faithful man's Soul in
hell, Tertull. de pr^ scrip. page 92. 769.
9. Neither is this patch in Tertulian, where there is a perfect Rule of our
Faith published 10. Neither in another larg Creed in y^ said Tertul. against
Praxea 11. Neither in Origene, who has Origin* in proemi. lib. de princ^pus
Gregory Neo (...)
a long discourse of the belyef. 12. Neither in Greg^ Neocesarie^si, which
Ruffinus does interpret in ^ib. 7. cap. 25 13. Neither in Ciprian, though
there (...) a Creed ascribed to him, and in S. Hieromes works ye same assigned
to Rufine, which has this addition, notwithstanding he says y^ (...)
descended interpreted.
it signifiothe no more, but that he^ was dead, and buried. For it is a Phrase
among the Greeks, an^ sometimes among the Latins, (...) in Cic. off. 1.
Dilapsa arma cecideru^^ y^ a Participle is joined with aver^ Burved and des
cended both one.
of the same signification, as in thi^ place, (...): Buried, (...) descended.
which two words a^ all one, and signify only his B^ ryall.

And so is descended used in Ge^ 44. where Jacob is said to desce^ into Sheol,
meaning, that he w^ Genesis 37. 2.
laid in his Grave.

14. Neither in yt Council of Ni^ The Council of N^ce
Socrat. lib. 1. c. 8 15, Neither in Eusebius Cesarie^s^ Theodoret. 1. cap. 12.
16. Neither in the 3. Creed repented in y^ Council of Nice: for the 3. were
there recited. 17. Neither in y^ long Creed re^ted of Athanasius in an Epistle
Epictitus Bishop of Corinth. 18. Neither in the Creed y^ Atha^asius has in
his Epistle of the Si^odes holde^ at Arimini, and Selencia. 19. Neither in
Athanasius in lib. d^ ^aiore fide. 20. Neither in yt long Creed, set out by
the Bishops of the East. Socrat. 52. c. 19. Athanasius in epist. A^imini ad
Selencia. 21. Neither y^ Creed y^ was made The Council of (...).
against the Arrians in y^ Ctttye of Illiria, called Sardic^ Hillariu^ in his
Book of Sinodes 22. Neither in ye exposition of Hill. 23. Neither in any of
those Creedes which are in Socrat. 2. c. 30. and in Athanasius of the Sinodes
of Ari. and Seleuc. Hilarious against the Arrians. 24. Neither in a Creed of
them of Selenc. and Isauria. Socra. 2. cap. 40. Sezo. 4. cap. 22. Epiph. lib.
3. Tom. 1. Ser. 73 25. Neither in another Creed, in ye Syn. ^olden at Arimini.
26. Neither in the Synod of Illi^ about the year of Christ 370. The odor. 4.
cap. 8. 27. Neither in the excellent Cre^ of Damasus Bishop of Rome. The^ odor.
5. cap. 8. 28. Neither in the Creed set out (...) Eusebius. Socrat. 1. c. 8. 29.
Neither in the Creed of Hilla^ set out in his Book de Symb. 30. Neither in his
book De Fide. 31. Neither in that worthy Creed of Basil in Asteticis. 32.
Neither in y^ singular Creed of Greg. Nazianzene. 33. Neither in the exquisite
Creed of Marcus Victorinus in his 1. book against Arrius. 34. Neither in that
Substaneiall Creed of Epiph. in Anchorato. 35. Neither in Eustatius Bishop of
Antioche writing upon Ps. 16. 36. Nether in his book De Anima. 37. Neither in
Remigius Byshopp^ of Antissid or writing upon Ps. 16. 38. Nether in Hypolitus
ex lib. d^ ib^tione ^alentorum. (...). And ex epistol^ ad Regin. qu^nd. 40.
Nether in his oration in Mag^um canticum. Theodoret. 41. Nether upon the second
psalm. 42. Nether Ambrose in expos. ^idei ^heodoret d^al. 2. niconfusus. 43.
Nether in Theodoret in his di^og ^mpatibus. Where the Creed o^ Nice is
expounded. 44. Nether is it in ye counsel holden ^t Alexandria, Niceph. 14. c.
28. 45. Nether is it in the Creed of the ^st council holden at Toledo in ^he
year of Christ 420. 46. Nether in the Creed of the former council holden at
Ephesus in ^he year of Christ. 532. 47. Nether in the Creed of the cou^^ell of
(...). So^ra. 2. c. 34. 48. Nether is it in the council of Constantmople
against Eutiches about the year of Christ. 449. 49. Nether in the beleyfe of
Fla^imus set out in the said council. 50. Nether in the Creed of y^ Synod of
Chalcedon repeated in Zona^ Simbolum patrum*
51. Nether in the creed of the (...) there is in Ciril lib. 1. ad Regi. 52.
Nether in the Creed of Tho^ dorus in the. 5. Council, holden (...)
Constantinople. After Christ. (...) 53. Nether in the confession of the faith,
which was aduouched in (...) Council at Toledo the third, (...) the year of
Christ. 545. 54. Nether in that landable Cred^ published by Gregory, the first
(...) of that name. 55. Nether is it in that Epistle the Liberius Bishopp of
Rome wro^ to Athanasius, confessing his faith and beleyfe. 56. Nether in his
absolute confessi^ of his faith, which is published (...) Stirdion in (...)
^re of (...) 32.
the book of Counsels. 57. Nether is it in the Creed of Spi^ ridion Niceph. 8.
c. 15. 58. Nether in that famous confessi^ on of the faith, which the Bishopp
of the East gave up to (...) (...) Emperor. Niceph. 9. (...) ^ib. 9. c. (...)
5 6. Nether in the Creed of Acatius In the year of Christ. 35* (...)
ye time of Constantius seera. 2. c. 40 ^. 61. Nether in the duble confession
Marcus Arethusus before the ^mperoure Constantius at S^rmy. (...) the year of
Christ. 354. Socra. 2. c. ^0. 37. 62. 63. Nether in the two or three Credes in
the. 4. council holden at Tolledo. ^4. Nether in the Creed in the first
council at Toledo. 65. Nether in Carolus Magnus his Creed in his book de Imag.
c. 1. 66. Nether in the Creed of Ephesus in the year of Christ. 435. I could
repeat a great number of more Credes, and will hereafter if these be not
sufficient.



Smyth. I say as I said before it is enough that it is in the Creed made by
the Apostells.


Carlil. I have proved ye it was not made by ye Apostels: If it had been made
by them, it follows not that this addition was made by the^, for it was
certain hundredth year^ Decended into (...).
after added as I shall declar^ her^ after. The Creed says, that he de^ cended
into hell, who suffered vn^ der Pontius Pilate, who was cruci^ fied, dead and
buried: but that wa^ the body of Christ: ergo the (...) sends Christ's body
to hell. Bu^ the body descended no further the^ to the Grave, and rose again
the third day. That which went to hell, says the Creed rose again: but the
body rose again: Ergo the body went into hell. which is an absurdity to
affirm. That which was buried descended iuto hell, says the Creed, the soul
was not buried, therefore it descended not into hell. That that went to hell,
says the Creed, rose the third day from the dead* were there any dead in
hell* if they were dead, what did Christ among them? but you say that they were
a live, and the Creed says y^ the were dead to who he descended, and from
whence he rose. The Soul^ dye not, then it folowethe ye he rose from the
bodies that were dead, and not from them that lived. If his Soul went to hell,
whether went it before the body was buried or after. If before, why says the
Creed that it went after. But if it went at all, it must needs go immediately so
sone, as it departed out of the body which was upon the cross and at three of
the clock, at after noone, for the body was buried two or three hours after
about six of the clock or a litell before.

Where was the Soul all that while? if it had gone to hell* why did not the
Creed place it before his buryall? for every man's Soul is placed either in
heaven, or hell before the body be buried.

Wherefore says ERASMUS, Erasmns. (...)
he was no artificer, but some cobbler, or patcher, that placed it so
preposterously, that patched it so indecently, that set it so disorderly, and
iu such a place as it nether a gree^ with the sentence before nor aft^
Augnstinus Euod 99.
Augustinus affirms that Ch^ did them no pleasure that were Abraham's bosom.
Abraham's bosom, which had ^ ways the Divinity and the ho^ Ghost present
with them: and the Lazarus rested in that bosom (...) fore Christ's death:
which he (...) leth the rest of the poor man, (...) kingdom of God, and the
Part dise of ye thief, which he dares (...) call any part of hell: nether to
(...) taken in the good part, notwi^ standing he makes difference b^ twene
that eternal life, which (...) Upon the. 11. chap. of John.
Angels enjoy, and that rest, Wh^ the fathers before Christ had.

Aug. says that ye solues are in (...) No soul in heaven till the the
resurrection.
Sed non in ea action qua corpore (...) cepta vegetantur. Tom. 2. page 570
epist. lib. cap. 12. They are in pleas^ seats till the resurrection. Tom. 3*
Tom. 8. page ^81.
page 472. de Trinita. 15. cap. 25. (...) says upon the 36. psalm, that w^
shall not be there where the saints shall be, to who^ it shall be said. Come you
blessed, and possess the kinge^ome prepared from the beginning Augustine
placethe the souls in no better place after Christ then he does before. Read
epist. 99. to Euodius.
of the world: there thou shall not ^e, says he, who does not know? ^ut thou
maiste be there where the proud barren rich man in midst of torments did
see the poor man resting on high.

Thou being placed in that rest, thou do safely look for the day^ of
judgment, when thou shall receive thy body, when thou shall be changed on
such sort, that thou may be equal with Angels. In such like state as thou
departest out of this life, in such like thou shall be restored again to life.

The soul, says Augustine, all the Tom. 4. p. 66* ad Dulcy. 8. quest 2. In
Euch. c. 109. Tom. 3.
time between their departure and the resurrection are reserved in hid places,
according as they deserved whiles they lived, nether to rest or misery. Tom. 9.
in John 5 tract. 19. pa. 172.


The Souls of the just are in Abraham's bosom, the wicked are tormented in
hell.

The just are in rest, the wicked De eiuit lib. 13. c. 10. Tow. 5. pa. 715. A
^itel before (...) said that the sonles were in Abrahames bosom Discord.
torments.

All men's Souls, says Augusti^ Tom. 3. de Eclesi. Dog. c. 77. c. 7^ before
Christ were in hell, af^ they are with Christ.

How a greeth this with the wor^ before where, ^e says, that all (...) just
werein rest, in Abraham Tom. 4. pa. 353. quest.
bos^me, in solace and joy.

If the bosom of Abraham be a (...) Euod lib. 2. c. 3s.
crete place of the father, as August says, whither Christ ascended afte^ his
passion, why was it not (...) same before? was it removed, (...) such an
Immortal place (...) removed? can it be altered or em^ tied.


Smith. Christ, says Ignatius, in (...) The 32. obiec tion.
second Epistle, Descendit ad (...) Iguatius falsi fied.
number solus. He descended to hell alone: but he ascended with a multitude.


Carlil. In these few worde^ there are two manyfeste Erro^ first you say,
that these words ^re in his second epistle, when as ^hey are in his first
epistle to the Trallians. Trallis is a (...) ty of Asia (...)


Notwithstanding I think it is ^o great offense to allege one e^istle for
an other: but it is an in^ollerable error to falsefy an holy ^nans writing,
as you do: for Igna^ius meaned that Christ was buri^d, and with him many
bodies did ^yle: he says not that many souls ^id rise with him, neither is
there any resurrection of the soul. Ignatius words.


Ignatius words are these. Accor^ing to his own will he was truly
^rucified, and truly dead: heavenly ^hinges, earthy, and things under ^he
earth beholding it: the heauen^ye, as incorporall creatures: the ear^y as the
Jews, and Romans, and ^ther men who were then present ^he^ Christ was
crucified: he means the dead bo dies that rose with Christ to whom he gi
ueth l^fe.
they under the earth, being a great multi^ude did rise with the lord: for
many says Matthew, bodies of saint which were a sleep, rose with (...) out of
their graves, which were (...) open 27. chapt. He descended (...) Haden, into
his grave alone, but (...) Prosopopoia.
cended with a multitude, and (...) the wall, which was of old, and (...)
midde wall he dissolved, and (...) the third day, his father rai^ him: and
after certain days, wh^ Acts 2. 24. (...) 1. 1.
in he was conuersaunt with the Apostles, he was taken up to his father, and
sits at his right hand, there remaining, till his ennemie be put under
his feet as a foot stool.

Wherefore on Friday at with us 9. of the clock.
three of the clock he received sentence of Pilate, his father permitting it.

The 12 of the clock*
sixth hour he was crucified. The 3. of clock at afternoon.
ninth he expyred.

Before the sun was set, he was taken down from the cross, and was
buried in a new Sepulcher.

The The sabbath
Saturdaye he was in the ^aue under the earth, where Joseph (...) Arimathia
had laid him.

In the Sunday.
Lords day he rose from (...) dead, according to that which ^as prophesied of
him. As Jonas (...) in the* be llye of the whale three ^s, and three nights*
so shall the (...) of man be in the in the grave.
heart of the ^arthe (...) days, and three nights.

The Friday.
day of preparation contay^th his passion: the Saturday.
sabbath his bu^al, and rest: the Lords day his re^urrection. If he had gone
to hell, what rest should he have had.


Thus far faithfully translated out (...) Ignatius.

Now M. Smith, consider your ^ause, expende better your allegati^s, let not
your wilful negligence ^ue men occasion to speak evil of ^de authors:
ignorance is to be ^edressed with knowledge, and negligence by diligence.


Smith. Clemens Alexandrinus The 24* obiec
^mmediatelye after the Apostles, writes that Christ descended (...) hell.
Clemens Alex andrinus 215. Strom. 5. 6.



Carlil. Clemens Alexandri^ has this error among many others, that y^
fathers before (...) that lived virtuously, were (...) fied either by the law,
or by P^losophy: but to have been witho^ Fathers without faith.
faith in Christ, and therefore (...) Hell to have tarried, and looked (...)
the descending of Christ, and (...) Apostles: by whose preaching^ Christ and
the Apostles p^ea ched in ^ell.
there, they were converted, and (...) leued in Christ, and so saved. Stro^ 5.
6.

These errors are so prodigi^ Glements errors confuted.
that he is madd that would affi^ them. Law co^dem* neth.


How could they be iustifi^ by the law, which accuses, (...) Romans 3. ^0
and 4. 15. Gal. 2. 18. 21.
condemns? Does it not wor^ anger? Can it justify? Could philosophy
Philosophy does not justify.
justify? Is it not man's in^tion? Does it not deceive and suppli^ he says y^
they were without fai^ Coloss. 2. 8.
(...) he without faith, that is cal^ed Rom* 4. v. 9. 11. 12* 13. 14.
the father of the faithful? I mean Abraham father of the faithful.
Abraham.

(...) Abraham was justified by faith, ^aued, and thereby ascended into heaven,
Ergo all the other saithfull as well as he.

Could they look for the descen^ing of Christ into Hell that were ^ot there,
but in heaven by faith, which leads not to Hell? Could ^hey believe that
were in Hell? their ^ith was frustrate, their hope void, Faith. *
their expectation deceived. Did the Apostles preach in Hell, for so says
Clement? What did they preach? ^ot the Gospel which is preached to the
living? to whom? to Devils they would not, for they were condemned without
redemption: to the ^ste they could not, for they were in Heaven.

When did the Apostles preach in hell? before their death or after, ^r al, or
but some of them? If before their death, which way wen^ Dilemma.
they thither? How came they (...) again? Is Hell a visible place, (...) an
invisible? If visible, why man not other go thither with their (...) dies,
as well as the Apostles? (...) invisible, and without bodye^ then went they
thither with the souls? But their souls could not (...) thither by your own
doctrine: (...) ye say that no good men went^ (...) Hell after Christ's
resurrection: (...) Apostles were good men, and li^ after the resurrection:
Ergo they (...) not into hell, neither could prea^ there.

He has many such horrible (...) rours.

As Christ needed neither to ea^ nor drink: but used them, least (...) Strom.
3.
should be thought to have a pha^ tasticall body.

As, that Christ taught but one year. Strom. 1.


As, the serpente that (...) Caua to be pleasure.

As, Aungells to have layen with In protrept. Strom, 3. 5*
women.

As, he gives all, or the most part ^o free will.

Certain called Gnostiques to be ^o perfect, that they need not to ask any
forgiveness of sins.

^econd marriages not to be with ^ut sin.

Men to be turned into Angels, and then into Ar changels.

The souls to be in the matrice, and expectare (...).


Smith. Why shall not I alledg The 25. ob^ (...).
the authority of the church, which The dirige alleged.
gathered the Dirige out of lob, who was in Purgatory, when he desired his
friends to pray for him, who contended with GOD for his sore rod, and
grievous chasticement.


Carlil. Job was never in Hell, Job was neue^ in hell.
as I have proved before. His book says, that all those places that you, or
your Dirige, or your Romish church, do allege (...) spoken in the land of
Hus, in (...) mea, in the earth, and while Iob^ ued. Is it not a double and
dete^ ble error for you to allege the of the dead, which was spoken the
lininge, or to verifye that (...) Purgatory, that was done (...) the earth,
or to detorte the scriptures, to peruerte Jobs mind, (...) to make black
white, and whi^ black?


Smith. Are not indulgences an^ The (...). objection.
pardons the treasures of the church to what use were they, as Lutz. proves
Pardons.
Lutz. ^in tract. de purgator.
very clerkly, if that they should not help them that are in purgatory?


Carlil. I answer that they were invented only to adua^ the Pope, to
enriche the Pope, i^ glorifye him like a God, to give (...) him the honor and
power, onely^ proper to God.


Smith. Why? Is not he the judge of the quick and dead? Const^ ^ope the judge
of the quick and dead extra qui fil^i sunt leg. c. per veun.
(...) a deo ^udex viuorum and more ^orum, as Lutz. writes.


Carlil Is there any judge of the ^uicke and dead save Christ? who Decretalls
4. lib. cap. 13. Tit. 17.
shall come according to our creed ^o judge the quick and dead, your
^ssertion is either of ignorance, or ^f obstinacy. Ignorance without ^rtinacy
is pardonable: wilful ob ^inacye grounded of ignorance ^incurreth eternal
damnation, is it not blasphemy to ascribe that to the pope, which is proper to
God only? Apinus also upon the 16 Ps.


To return to our purpose, here I set your absurdityes naked before you, as
ye shall find them in Herolt in sermon 146. and in Cor tesius upon Peter
Lombart Did. 4.

They make Limbus patrum the highest, you purgatory, the higheste, and Limbus
patrum next under it.

Some place hell, and his cell In sermon de resurr.
and diverse s^ates under the no^ pole, some under the South po^ Pythagoras in
torida zona, Corte si^ the same place.

All your assertions of four hel^ are contrary to Nicodemus gospe^ to Iacobus
de voragine, who affi^ that Christ went to the lowest (...) and they make no
mo. The (...) Christ brake, put satan to flig^ took Adam by the hand and
brought him up into Paradise, the (...) followed, there was Enoch, Elias and the
thief with Christ's cro^ upon his back.


Smith. In the 479* sermon prin^ed The 27. objection. Christ descended into
hell to visit his friends.
at Venice in the year of Christ* 1473. it is written that* Christ descended
into hell for mere love, and for natural amity, to visit his friends in
adversity, to comfort the afflicted, and to deliver them out of captivity, as
Aristotle wr^teth ^ Ethicorum.


Carlil. If Christ were of like force always, if he were good always, if he
was merciful always, if his ^ffirs was to be killed to the faithful from the
creation of the world, ^hy did he suffer his friends to ^ye in misery? is it
the part of a ^rende, to suffer his friends to be ^ornieuted, if he can help
him. Is ^ot he, as Cicero writes, as much to ^ee blamed that does not help
his ^rende, and deliver him from in^ury, as he that does wrong? The 28.
objection.



Smith. Secondly Christ descended ^cording to a general justice, for it is
Christ descended for general justice.
requisite that when the price is paid, and the debt answered, that the party
should be delivered out of prison. The fathers were in prison pro pec^ ^to
humanae naturae, therefore it was requisite that he should bring them out of
darkness, out of the shadow of death, and burst their bands, where with they
were tied.


Carlil If the price was paid on the cross, was it not superfluous to be
paid again in hell? Could (...) pay it without sheading of h^ blood, which
you confess in y^ objection, and would you have h^ to shed it again in hell?
Heb. 7. ^7. ^eb 9. 28. 1. Pet. 3. 1^.


Is this your mercy to forme^ Christ twyse? did he^ suffer twice Paul and
Peter deny that.


Smith He descended for to ha^ a tryumphant victory, for he (...) The 28.
objection.
not only overcome him in fight^ He descended for to have Victory.
but also he took his kingdom^ from him, he bound him, he cari^ away a
great pray, he brake the brazen gates, and iron bars, an^ took out the
fathers from the way^ of their iniquity.


Carlil. If be bound ^he deuell* why is he now loose? or wh^ loused him? if
he took his kingdom^ from him, where did he bestow (...) has the deuell now
no kingdom* is it not iniquity to affirm that the holy fathers were in the
way^ of iniquity? The 30. objection*



Smith. He descended for example ^ike, that as he descended, so should Christ
descended for an example.
(...) likewise descend, and consider ^he pains eternal: for worldly men
^eing the punishment of others, will ^eware to offend.


Carlil. It had been a better example to have ascended, giving us an ^xample to
ascend into heaven, and not to descend into hell, neither is ^ee worthy of
thanks, that gives ^n example of descending into hell: it is not possible y^ I
can love him that would make me to fol^ ^im to extreme punishemente, or think
you that he or I would wil^ingly do it?


Smith. Christ descended to the lowest The 31 objection.
hell, to reprove them of their Damascene up on 3. Sent.
iniquity and infidility.


Carlil. This M. Smith do you deny. Christ descended to reprove the deuells. ^



Smith Christ delivered none out of Limbus patru^, because that children The
32. objection.
dying without Baptism are not the members of Christ. Inf^tes with out
Baptism dampened*



Car. If they be y^ ^de of Abraham they are blessed, if blessed, ergo not in
^el, for in his seed all nations shall be blessed* If the children, that dye
w^ out Baptism, be the seed of Abraham, Hell proved by poets.
then are they comprehended He might as well have proved ir by Hom^r. Sillius,
and Claudian if he had red so far.
within the promise.


Smith. This said sermon proves hell, and christ's descending by Seneca in
Hercule and Theseo, by Vir gill in the 6. of Aeneas, by ^uide in the 4. and 10.
of Metamorphosis, and by Luc^n.


Carlil. He alleges the scriptures falsely, he interprets the^
allegorically, he depraueth the meaning of the holy Ghost: he detorteth,
peruerteth, defaceth, and at last concludes with snakes, serpents, dragons,
torturs, furyes, fe^ndes, and such other inhabitants of his hell. etc.


Smith. Barnardinus de Bustis in hi^ ^sarius*
Rosary 17. sermon printed at Hagenaw in the year of Christ 1580. the 8. day
of december, says, that the soul of Christ so soon as he Christ descen in^o
hell.
died, descended into hell with a great company of angels, when the ^elhoundes
and deuells, hard of it ^y certain evil spirits that hanged in the aer and
saw it, they shut ^he gates of hell, the angels commanded them to open them.

Christ entered, the devil fell down^ ^o the ground, the gates were bro^en,
and this is figured by Sampson that carried the gates of Gaza upon ^is back.
Iud. 16. And by Valerius Maximus, who writes that there ^apened at Rome that
the earth did Samsons gate^ Valerius Maximus.
^ape and open, and that there asce^^ed a deadly stinche, and a pestilent
^mell, in as much as many died of ^t. The gulf that Curtius* leaped into.


Sibylla awnswered them by ora^le, that Curtius must leap into it ^n horse
back, and that plague Limbus patrum.
should cease. This terrible hole, and gaping gulf is morally Limbus pa^rum:
which devoured the holy fa^hers (for those are his words) Christ was Curtius
in armoure, the Curtius was Christ.
^orse was his cross, that he rode upon which skipped down in^ the puddle or
dongeon of Limbu^ Alex de Ale^. part. 3 sum. 9. 9 Art. 4. tom, in 3. did. 23.
A^. 1, 9, 1, 2,
and thus Christ shut up Limbus (...) trayled the holy fathers out of it, and
delivered them. In deed, says he Christ descended into hell, as these Bonau.
in 3. did. 22. Art* 1 9. 4.
in the margin testify.

The hole wherein the cross^ Blood dropped in at the, holle where the cross
stood*
stood went down into Limbus, where the holy fathers were, and the blood of
Christ descended thereby, which when they feled, they rejoiced, and with that
appeared to (...) the soul of Christ, and that Limbus and dark dongeon was
full (...) light.

Then said John Baptiste wh^ John *Baptiste ^alked in hell.
had been there but a short space, This is the light of the lamb of God, whom
I showed with my finger. Then stood up Esaias, this is that light, of the which
I prophesied, Esay^.
Then rose up Zachary, this is the Zachary.
blood of the testament, of the which I made me^tio^ in the 9. chap. of my
prophecy. And as they were thus comoning together, in came Jesus Boua^. 3.
did. 22. art. 1. 9. 3.
Chist himself, and ill^minated the whole place, he saluted them, he Thom. in
the same did. art. 1. 9. 6.
shaked them by the hand, he blessed them, he drew them out, and brought them
into the paridise terrestrial, out of an horrible prison, where they were nere
to horibled ^uils under the earth: the fathers began to singe lustely with a
loud voic^ and a sweet melody. Con^esseye unto (...) Lord for he is good. etc.

And the soul of the thief was there. For where the Pope is, there ^s Room.
In c. 1. Ego enim de Iure The Pope.
Iurand. et in c. quod^umque 24. 4. 1. Archi. in c. present. de pr^bend. and
dig. et in scire. 7. 9. 1.


Carlil. They salfelye ascribe to He^mes, who was a Disciple of He^mes Ro^. 16.
14.
Paul, that as ^missenus, and Gregory, and as his friu^us book of visions, and
similitudes testifye, y^ he should absurdly all^, these words of John, sent
by two of his Disciples to Christ. Art thou Math. 11. ^.
he that shall come.

Art thou he, says Hermes, the shall come, and go to Hell, and set^ out the
old fathers.

This counterfeyte and suborne^ Hermes, ^ither of negligence, or^ wilful
ignorance, depraueth thi^ place. Many places in hell, Sillius lib. 13.


If you had alleged 10. seuera^ places in Hell, out of, Sillius Italicu^
Bucchingerus.
the poet, and seven several (...) of Rabby Joseph in ^orto mi^is, (...)
nine out of the 6. of Aene as of (...), ye should have seemed to ha^ moved y^
readers as much as you^ now, to have faught as sound do^ trine, to have made
your cause a^ probable, your opinion no mo^ suspected, your fables no less
(...) di^ed, your disputations no mo^ de^ided, your inuectiues no less (...)
proved, your gross and insulse ^utations no more odious, nor yo^ ignorance
less reproved, nor yo^ judgment less friuelous, nor yo^ rashness in
inueighing against the^, whom you never saw, more detected and manifest.

As much diversity there is in placing Paradise.
of their Paradise* where they say, that Enoch, and Elias are reserved until
the coming of Antithrist whom saint John said, was come in his time: and into
the which Michael first brought out all y^ fathers. delivered to him by Christ,
when he was in hell, purgatory, and Lim bus.

If paradise be in hell, as they say Paradise papistical.
that make Abraham's bosom also to be paradise, and notwithstanding Olimpio in
3. c. Eccles.
a part of hell, how then did Michael bring them out of hell into paradise, as
Nicodemus Gospel fabuleth, when as paradise is in hell*

Then brought he them out of one place of hell into an other. Plato places it
above the clouds.

Damascene a fantastical doctor Viues upon Augustine de ciuita. 13. c. 21.
describes paradise like to ye field called Elysius campus, as though it
should flourish with fruits, flow^ and odours, and that always should
continewe in such abanda^^ and fertility.

Damascene makes paradise (...) Cortesius upon Lombardus lib. 2. did. 5.
petuall, and to continue but till (...) dam fell. Damascene can not t^ where
it is: God planted it in (...) Gen* 2. Joseph. 1. c. 3.
East.

Bid an english Doctor, and many other things tolerable: pl^ ceth Paradise
in the East, inu^ ned with the Ocean sea, and mountains on that side where men
(...) dwell, and that is so high, that touches the circle and globe of (...)
moon. This dream of Bid sait^ Cortesius, is approved of few.

How can any be there, when there is terrrble cold? for ye (...) is not
only cold: but also is (...) cause of cold. Lyra and others, (...) Lyra
upon Ge* 2. Scotus Bonet* Albertus Auicena, Poly bius. Eratost hen^s.
lowing Aristotle, place Para^ under the tropiques.

Burgensis between the tropiq^ under y^ Equinoctial. John Pec^ places it above
the sun, and al^dgeth frivolous reasons for that Lyra upon Genesis 2.
^rpose. Some place it in a high ^ountaine, where there is no cold, ^r any
other grief: other place it the middell aer: other in the for^nate Isles. The
Jews say, that was made before the world to re ^iue the just as they dyed.
Orige^s and certain heritiques, called ^ieracites make an allegorical
^aradise, whom Chrysostom and Epi Epiphaniu^. Paradise (...) restriall.
^anius confute.

Paradise was before the fall, the wholle earth, and sea, out of it issued
Geropius Bo canus will have it to be iu Jude who is to be read*
^ure rivers. Notwithstanding in Moses, it was in the East, and con^yned
Mesopotamea, Armenia, ^amascus, Assyria, Idumea, Madi^naea, Sabaea, Aethyopia,
sub Aegip ^o, Susiania, and this may appear ^y the discriptio^ of Hanila in
Genesis ^5. ver. 18. Ezech. 27. ver 23. where (...) have noted more.

Paradise for the fertilyty thereof, Paradise.
and for those insatiable pleasures which were there, is called eu^ plentiful
and pleasant place, as feilde of Sodom, likewise the (...) Genesis 13. 10.
charde of Salomons spouse is a pa^ Ca^t 4. 15.
dise odiriferous and pleasant.

Wisdom is compared to this p^ Eccles. 24. 34. etc. 10. verse ^7.
radise, and Iehoua compares t^ king of Tire to paradise. Now p^ Ezech, 28. 13.
radise is what soever is most fr^ Paradise.
^ull for sustenance, most decent behold, most odiriferous smell, most
pleasant to taste, (...) joyful to remember, most (...) for immortality, full
of nectar a^ Heb. 12. 22. 23. 14. Revel. 21. 22.
ambros^a, full of cinamum, full wisdom, and water of life, of ball^ mu^, of
precious stones, topaze, (...) Paradise.
ragdus, v^ions, adamants, turke^ Eccles* 44. 15.
Heb. 11. 5.
diamo^des, saphtres, carbu^cles, (...) 2. kings 2. 1.
and very jerusalem, and felicity, (...) Eccles. 28. 13.
bed in hebrews. Now what soen 1, Math. 2. 58.
is perfect and most absolute ye is par^dise, Par^dise is hea uen August. 1.
by a metaphor traduced from Tom 1. de
earthly paradise unto ye heavenly Gen* ad Lit. con^ra manich
whether Enoch was carried, (...) there as^e^ded Elias, ^ue^ into heave (...) so
it is called the kingdom of Lib. 2. c. 8. ^,
christ, and so termed by the good theif, Tom 3. de
which place Christ answering the Genesis ad lit. lib, 8. c. 1.
^eife, calls paradise. Paul called ^aradise the third heaven whether Luke
23. 42.
^e was raptc, and hard such things, The third heaven which place Origin
calls paradise Viues upon Augustine de ciuit. 13, c. 21.
^deuine, so many, such order, such ^ectacles, such personages, such in^tiable
joys, ye can be expressed, by ^o tongue or language. Of all this ^iscourse I
have noted largly upon 2. Cor. 11. 2.
second of Genesis It is mere vanity ^odescende thither: where there is neither
confession of a man's faults neither amendment of life, neither In hell no
redemption.
^emission of pain, neither forgiveness of sin, neither redemption: in ^ell
there is none of all these: Ergo ^t had been in vain for Christ to have
descended thither.


Smith. I may allege profane authors as Paul does. Tit. I. Did not Aeneas
make a voyage to hell to see his father, where he saw such like places, as
Virgile notes* as I describe? Virgil aenea. ^
for Aeneas descended into hell ^n at the puddle Auernus in (...) and came to
hell gates, where (...) three headed Cerbrus, the cruel man tiue keeping the
gates, and enti^ further to Tartarus, and Achero^ Cocytus, and Phlegeton, where
(...) ^on the fery man was carrying (...) dies over the loathsome lakes, at
stinking styx. Then came he to Smiths description of hell.
place where infantes were, behol^ Limb us infantium is in Virgil: (...) came
also where were magnanimi (...) Limbus infantium in Virgil.
es na^i melioribus annis, behold Li^ bus patrum. The^ came he to a plan of
purgatio^, sub gurgite vasto (...) Limbus pa ^rum.
eluitur, scelus aut exuritur igni. B^ hold purgatory. And from thenc^ faith
Virgile, they went to the ples^ Purgatory.
sant feildes called Campi Elisii. B^ hold paradise, whether Christ brought
Paradise.
them that were in Limbo pa^ trum and in purgatory.


Carlil. Virgiles doctrine founded (...) Plato in Phedon, and in the Odisse^
Homeri is of the same sense tha^ pours is. And some what more (...): for his is
of ^ long time before Christ, and before Rome was (...): yours long after
that the (...) began, about Aquinas days ^hen y^ schooleme^ obscured ye truth,
^eruerted the scripture, detorted ye ^octors, made the pope a God, and his
Chaue^r in the romans of the rose (...) mus de san^ to amo^e.
(...) to pass Christ's so far as ye ^ernel the shell: sun, the moon: ^
light, darkness. The like discourse (...) in Sillius Italicus, where he makes
Sillius lib. 13.
young Scipio to seek his father in hell. Virgil makes the pleasant Campi (...)
od^s 8. Strab. 1. lib. pa 3. and lib 3. pa. 105.
feildes which you interpret para^, to be in hell: you as yet can not tell
where it is. Read Vadianus in Epitome. Sillius calls y^ Fortunatas Fortunate
isles strab. 1* pa 2. o^ lib, 3. pa. 105.
i^sulas beyond the Ocean, as the Essees do. This hell, or at least the way to
hell, is in Italy, which if a man should affirm with you, perhaps we should make
the pope, Pluto, ye Cardinals The pope Pluto*
his Judges Rodomanthus The way to hell is in Italy as Smith me^ neth.
Aeacus, Minos, and Triptolomus, and his Curtesanes, Tisiphone, Me gera,
Ale^to, Erynies, and Furies, his fery man Charon, and his port^ Cerbrus. Why
forgot you Hercules* who brought Cerberus out of hel^ why did you not call
Hercules Christ* ^uid meta. 10.
and Cerbrus to figure the hellish (...)* there is? why forgot you Orpheus who
Orpheus made the deuells to dance.
descended to fetch his wife Euridi^ out of hell? he made all ye devils to
Tanarus.
dance, and stilled their roaring with Christ's blood distilled and dropped
into hell.
his music. Orpheus did not descen^ in Italy, for he was never there, but by
Tenarus a promo^tory of Laconia.


Smith I allege Peter before, who The 32. objection Act. 2. 27. Ps 16. 7.
is a manifest interpreter of David: for Peter translateth Sheol by Hades which
is hell.


Car. I have proved a little after y^ Sheol does never signify hell, and Hades
but seldom: and I proved yt David and Peter do both understand yt verse of the
resurrection of the body and never of the soul. Can the soul dye, or rise
again? was it buried? was it crucified? but Peter says y^ Act. 2. 23 24
he that was betrayed, he that was crucified, he whom the Jews killed (...) he
whom God raised again, and those deadly sorrows God abolish (...) in restoring
him to life, destroying utterly the dominion of death, and power of satan, was
it that David spoke, and prophesied of, but all these are meaned of the body as
Peter specifieth in y^ ver. following, prophe ^ing y^ Christ his flesh should
^est in hope, hoping to rise again y^ third day: he calls ye flesh in ye
26. ver. which he terms his body, and holy anointed son of God, in ye 27.
ver. Peter in every ver in manner makes mention of ye body raised from Act. 2.
26. 28*
death to life, from darkness to light: and how y^ God had showed to Christ y^
way of life, and should fill him with the beauty of his countenance, which must
needs be understood* of the body, for in so much as he was God his
countenance, and majesty was equal with his fathers. Peter does plai^ ly
enterprete Sheol ye grave or monument, or tomb of David, he says Act. 2. 29.
peter, y^ came of y^ loins of David was raised by God, but y^ was the body,
for the soul is not begotten i^ generation with y^ body, but is ge^ uen by
God, to who^e it return the ergo Peter speaks here of y^ body of Christ, and
not of his soul, and this Act. 2 30.
sense Peter proves and confirms by Preach. 12. 9.
David in y^ ver. following. paul lik^ Act. 2. 31*
wise says, y^ they put him in a gre^ or monument, who^ God raised from (...)
dead, you thrust him into hell: God raised him out of his grave, you out of
hell: God from them that were dead, and buried: you from the living, for you
say that they the wers in purgatory and Limbus do live. Paul expou^ death
David Act. 13. 29, 30.


Paul speaks of his body, you (...) his soul: paul understands the place
of y^ second psalm. of Christ's resurrection, and begetting from the dead, you
of his eternal gener^tion, you call that grave, hell into the which paul
denies that he shall return. Act. 13. 34* 35,


If descend, ^ee to come from (...) higher place to a lower. Why do Bull.
upon the ^16. of Luke.
(...) say and write, that Christ des^ded into hell ad inferos? Is to go To
descend signifies I^red ^ note psalm* 49* 18.
and ascend into Abraham's bosom (...) descend? and to carry the souls y^ Christ
found there up with him into Iorad sheol. to descend in to a pit o^ grave.
heauenas you say, to fetch out y^ others? wherein are diverse errors (...)*
that you can not make descend Job. 7. 9.
(...) be, to ascend, nor to go down, to (...) to go up. Secondly that hell is
never taken for Abraham's bosom ^or in hell is perpetual damnat ion, in heaven
eternal salvation: neither Luk* 16. ^6.
can they in hell ascend, nor they in Abraham's bosom decende, neither are they
both in one place, for the distance, as Christ says, was so great, the
places so far asunder, their rewards so contrary* Abraham's boso^e so high,
hell so low, the joys of the one so innumerable, the Torments of the other so
terrible, the felicitye of Lazarus so Infinite, and the miserye of the ^ther so
intol grable, that they must be so far distant as Heaven from Hell, so far
centrary as light from darkness.

Thirdly that Christ did not (...) them that were in Abraham's (...) some into
any higher place, or gr^ ^er joy, because that Abraham's (...) some is and was
the restinge (...) Abraham's bosom
and fruition of the just, the sola^ (...) the elect, the haven of them (...)
^thy upon the eight of math.
are departed, the Patrimonye (...) Isaac, the inheritance of Jacob, (...)
Paradise of the blessed Thief, (...) heavenly Jerusalem, the socie^ Hebru* 1^.
of the holy souls, and kingdom^ heaven. Notwithstanding Lutzenburge is not
as^amed with other^ to say that Abraham's bosom (...) Lutz. in purga ^ory
Limbus patrum.

In what place hell is no man (...) tell, notwithstanding as I have (...) ^ell*
before your eyes other men's opinions thereof: of the which the (...) part
same to place it in the earth even so may we by better coni^ res then an^e that
they allege place it in the Aer about the earth. where Hell* (...)* ^.


For first the Devils are called Ephesians ^* 12*
^he Rulers of the world: where they rule, there they must needs (...) well,
and have their place: but in (...) Worlde^ they rule: Ergo, the World is their
Place. So is the Deuell called the Prince of this John 12* (...).
world. John. 14. 30.
John* 16. 10*


And that the place of Satan is in the aer, and in the minds of wicked men,
Paul declares in the second chapter to the Ephesians, the second verse, where
he speaks of Satan and of the spirit of Satan, working in such as resist
the Gospel, and disobey the truth, follow sensuality, and are given to their
own ^stes. Satan in Job says that he ^ame thither to aflict Job, and had Job,
1, 5. 6*
gone round about the earth. but ye ^r compasses the earth about, wherefore
the aer appears to be Hell in the a^r*
his habitation.

These devils are y^ rulers of darkness, by darkness he means y^ dark (...)
circumfused about the earth, and (...) Steuchu^ Pet. philo^. ^ 27.
that large space, and compase, (...) twene the moon, and the earth^ which is
called Tartarus in Peter* Suid^ ^rab. 3
wheither the perverse angels were thrust bound with the cheynes (...) ^. pet.
2* 4. (...). 8. c.
darkness. Eusebius as Steuchus (...) porteth, affirms that therefore deuells
are called aeriall, beca^ that the aer is their place.

Lactantius an eloquent Chrysti^ writer witnessethe that the deuel ^ell in the
a^
himself, did confess that he him self with his angels were (...) ted in
the aer, Ergo then the (...) ^ay be their place. Thus says sa^

Deuells do fly by sea and land. Lactantius. 107.
with whippes tormented tied in (...)

Now if the aer be the place for (...) deuell and his angels prescribed (...)
scripture, then should the (...) Christ ascen^ into hell
have said: he ascended into hell, (...) not that he decended. For that (...)
aer is (...). ^ (...)* (...) about us, (...) compasses the earth rownde about
^ther is it any greater absurditye (...) say that the air has his
inha^itours, then to say that heaven which is above the planetts and ^ed
stars, has his. And y^ places ^re alleged out of the scripture Bucer upon
Math. 27.
^roue the same. That Christ says Martyne Bucer a man of a deep judgment
and profounde knowledge Dremes of Christ's decending into (...)
did carrye y^ saints that were in inferno, that is, they that sleped (...)
the dust of the earth, as all the ^lect did, from death to life, the scripture
prophesied nothing, never that the Lord should do any thing else, but to dy^
for them.

They are therefore dremes, whatsoever So writethe Steuchus upon geo. 37.
the deuines in time paste have disputed of Limbo patrum* and of that real
descendinge of Christ to the damned souls, and ^gatory. Nether is that
certain and sure, which some of late have imagined, forged, and invented that
Hell desperation.
Infernus Hell, is Desperation, and ^urgatory in a manner desperati^ The
Scripture after this life pro nounceth to the saints, quietne^ in the bosom
of Abraham, even t^ live with Christ, and to ^aigne (...) the father: to the
wicked he prom^ seth Geenna and everlasting fire prepared for y^ devil, but he
promiset^ not Infernum The aunciente Fathers report, that Christ descende^ into
infernu^, meaning thither whither every thing descends that is begotten. They
make no mention of Limbus, none of purgatory, no^ Oinne quod genitum est.
of Christ's spirit descending into certain dark dongcons. Let v^ let
these pass, as y^ inventions o^ men: and let us rather give thanks unto the
Lord, who thrust his ow^ son for us, and for all the elect, into Infernum:
that is ^o wit, that he willed him to dye truly, that by Infernus death and
the grave Sheol.
his death, we might be delivered and that by his resurrection from the dead,
we should not doubt, but tha^ we should rise again also unto blessed
immortality. Thus much ^ut of Bucer faithfully translated word for word.
Lactantius 4* ^ 19.


Lactantius terms Inferos, that place, out of the which Christ did rise:
his soul did not rise, for yt never fell, it never dyed, Ergo it was his body
which rose out of the grave, which he calls Inferos: and he alloadgeth the
16. psalm, for the same purpose, and the 13. of Hosee, in the which places is
Sheol, which Sheol*
he translateth Inferos, and understands all these places of y^ resurrection
of Christ, neither can Lactantius, neither does he in any place approve the
descendinge into hell. Can he say that Christ descended into hell y^ says y^
there are but Lactantius. ^, ^ ^. 4.
2. places out of this life: heaven and hell: which shall be filled with the
Lactantius, 7. ^ ^1.
just and unjust at the last day. in the mean time, no soul is judged, for
they are all both good and evil, Souls in one safe custod^*
kept in one safe custodye, till our ^iuiour CHRIST shall come and judge them.
If from the crea^ on they are all in one place, and no^ thence delivered till
the last da^. Then if Christ had gone thither, (...) could not have delivered
them, w^ by Lactantius, shall not come ou^ till the last day.

Neither did Lactantius dream ^ any time of the desce^ding of Christ into Hell.

Galatinus says that there is no man holy until he be dead. If he be hol^ and
a saint when he is dead, the^ were all the Faithful of the (...) Testament
saints, and saved by ^ same Faith that we have, for the^ ^. Cor. 10.
and we have all eaten one food, ^ ^ronken of one kind of drink, an^ ^epende
upon one Rock, even Christ. Galatinus seems to be repugnant Galatinus Lib.
^. c. 7.
to himself, for he says ^ al went to hell before Christ's death He alleges
out of a rotten Rabin^ called Iehosua, that hell has seven names, and truth
it i^ that nous of those Seven y^ the Hell where the damned souls are.

Neither according to their Phan^sticall dreams Limbus and Hell where infants
are damned, neither ^here y^ fathers of the old testament (...), nether
purgatory as Iproue in this discourse. The first is Sheol ^ that signifies
hell, he cites ^ 16. Sheol the same word i^ in Psalm. 55. 16. Psalm. 16. 10. pa.
Psalm, which I translate: Thou shall not forsake or leave my body in the
grave, which I have expounded before.

Abadon is the second name, and in Abadon.
no place signifies hell, or any part of Hell, but either the Grave ^or Center
or places in the earth, or any things that is lost, and joined Sheol.
with Death, for after death ^oloweth the grave, as in Job. 26. 6. Job. 28.
32. 31. 12. it is taken for ye grave and for that thing that corrupts in the
Earth, as in Psalm. 88. 12. the same thing, and Grave, and is so called
Psalm. 88. verse 4. and in the 5. verse, the Sepulcher, and Bor. Psalm. 4. 3.
the Grave: in the Sixte verse it is Cheber.
(...) in solace: the one in Abraham's besome full of Felicitye: the other in
Hell full of misery, and intolerable torments. Sheol the grave. gen ^7. ^5. g.
44. 29. 31. ^ of the kings ^. 9.


I have a little before declared that Sheoll signifies in the death of Jacob
and Semoi, only the grave, a^ the best Interpretors do translate* Pagnine,
Munster, Vatablus: an^ as Chrysostom, Photius, and Theodoret Ephesians. 4. 9.
expound it, writing upon Paul. (...).


Auenesra an Hebrew Doctor reproves Onchelus for translating Sheol Steuchus
Geenna. And Steuchus Library keeper to Paul the Third Pope of that name,
inueyghethe against Lyra, saying that all those things Lira upon the ^7. of
give.
are Dreams to deceive, and old Wives Fables to Blind the simple People,
which he wrytethe upon liying Limbu^, or in sending Jacob to Hell, whereas
the Hebrew word Sheol properly signifies the Grave.

Augustine says that these are the words of Jacob, to express his grief,
notwithstanding he is variable.

Let us repeat every place where Sheoll is found in the Hebrewe Text, and
prove by the Nature of the Word, propertye of the Phrase, course of the Text,
a^alogye of the Scripture, and Conference of the places, where the Hebrew word
is found, what it is, and how it ought to be translated. Dathan. Cor^ and
Abiro^


Where Dathan, Core, and Abiron with their Confederates, which were two
Hundrethe and Fiftye, murmured against Moses and Aaron, Nomb* ^33.
are said to descend into hell, Psalm. 106. 17*
as the Latin Tranlation has, it is not so to be translated.

It is an absurdity to call the earth Hell, or hell the earth. Sheol the
earth. Joseph. Lib 4. a^iqui ^at c 3. has not hell bu^ earth


Wherefore Sheol is here the earth which served the sedetious Rebels for their
grave. And so is this place plainlier uttered in Ps. 106. ^e. 17.

And after this sense Caietanus, Fo^^ Augustine is full with me.
seca. Steuchus, and Lyra, though^ (...) Catholique^, are compel^ Tom 4. quest
super Nume^os. c. 29. Page ^42.
led to expound this place as I do^*

Is it ^ble that their bodies, their Namelies, their goods, their substance,
tents, horses, sheep, ^ or^n, descended into hell.

Does not the text say, that they went all one way? has Satan Nombers. 16
^2.
any need of tents? can corporal D^ut. 11. 6. nomb. 26. 9. 10
things be in a spiritual place? are there any bodies in hell before the last
day^*

The hellhoundes need no sheep, n^ Psalm. 106. 18.
mutton to eat, nor horses to ryd^, no apparel to put on, for they are
spirits, and therefore need none. Wherefore Sheol is y^earth in this Sheoll.
place, which swalowed them up, ^ closed them within it.

Neither does Augustine say that they descended into hell: but that y^
August. Tom. ^ Epist 164.
earth opened and devoured them* August. Tom. ^. quest super (...). Lib. ^. c.
(...).


Here is ^o be noted, says the same Augustine, y^ hell is here taken for the
earth, whither they did s^nke.

For ^nfernus is used as the sense re^uirethe, and here it signifiethe the
inferior pattes of the earth, and pro^erlye spoken of the dead. se much
Augustine with more.

^here God is so sore offended with the Israelites for their Idolatry, he says
that his Anger is kindeled, that he will burn the bottom of hell, ^o does
the Bible at Geneua Deuteronomy. 32. 2^.
translate Sheol. The bottom of hell burned beware of such tran^lations.


If the bottom of Hell be burned, and consumed with fire, then there is no
hell. It is in Hebrew unto the earth beneath.

This Phrase signifies the inferior parts of the earth.

Moses adds y^ Epitheton, bottom, g^ad Sheoll (...). Into the earth be. ^oth.
or inferior, to declare y^ vehemence of the wrath of God in punishi^g the
offenders: as who say, that he would so plague them, that not bet^ (...)
(...). as ps. 63 10. Ps. 104 30. psalm. 146* 6 An hyp^*
^nclye the Superior pa^te of the Earth should be Burned, but also the
inferior and inward parts where the springs are which shou^ be dried up, the
veins of the (...) Caietan and F^n seca two To mishe Catholics do so ex
pound this place.
so consumed, that they should neither yield Silver. Gold, Tin^ Copper, Yr^n,
Lead, or any (...) there Mineralles,

It is not like that a material F^ which is here n^med, should (...)
Spiritual things. Neither can^ Hell be consumed, which place (...) Hell bath
non end.
appointed for ever to burn (...) tuallye the Devil, his Aungell^ Ministers.

This Fire continued for a season* the other for ever: This Fire (...) ned the
earth, the other the dan^ ned Soule^: This burned the (...) dations of the
Mountains, (...) there the Hellhoundes: This (...) Deuteronomy. 32, 24,
women, and children with hung^ the other Satan's children,

Can a visible thing burn an in^ uisible? a worldly Fire a Spirit all? a fire
sensible such as are (...) to no senses? wherefore this plac^ Deuteronomye is
vnderstanded^ ^ fire, of such affliction, of such torments, and plagues as the
Israe^tes did suffer. For God plagued them then living, and not the dead.

There did God plague, where the Israelites lived, but they were not ^n Hell,
Ergo, neither this fire nor ^lague, was in Hell: for it touched ^he living, and
not the dead. Anna 1* of t^ kings ^. 6.


Anna the mother of Samuel, in her song says, that it is the Lord, The
Bordkile leth and quickne^.
that kills and makes alive: that brings down to the grave, and Sheol the
grave orodeath The ^6. of wis. calls i^ the g^es o^death. or grave. ps. 9. 15.
^ayseth up* I marvel why they y^ translated the Bible at Geneua, do
translate Sheol the grave in this place, and a little before, Hell. It is God
that kills and reuiueth: that brings to death, ^r to the grave, Borrhai
upon. this place.
^r to deaths door, and restores health Sheol misery
again. If he should bring down into Hell, he could not raise them up
again, because y^ in Hell there is no redemption.

This place is understood of that place, or of that miserye, out of the which
GOD can ray^ manne up, but out of Hell he ray^ seth none: therefore we must
vn^ derstand it of the Grave, Death* and misery, out of the which he hath^ and
does deliver many.

The same sense is in other woord^ Deuteronomy* 32 39.
in Deuteronomy 32. cap. verse 39. Tob. 13 2. wis. 16. 13.
I kill, and give life. I wound, an^ make hole. And in Toby, and in ^ book of
Wisdom. For thou haste^ the power of life, and death: an^ leadest down into
the gates of hell* and bring up again

The old translation does translat^ Unto the gates of death, and (...) they
take Hades for death, and not for Hade^
hell, as ye english does. As the cloud^ says Job, vanishes away: so he tha^
Job 7* 9.
L^ra says ^o. Sheol. Job. 11. 7.
goes down to the grave comes up no more Thus much Job. whereby we
understand that a man being laid in the grave, shall not rise ti^ Job. 19. 26.
2^. if that be ^he sense.
y^ last day. Then shall he rise again* Job was in like perplexitye, and (...)
the like misery, in the 14. chapter* (...) therefore desires to be laid in Job
14. 13.
(...) grave, or in some place under (...) earth, that thereby he might es^e
Sheol.
all miseries.

^ope (says Job) for no ease, no re^se Job. 17. 13. 1^.
of my pain, no remedy, all ^y hope is gone, I hope for no^nge but the grave:
my breathe is ^rrupted, my bowels consumed, ^y bones ache, my days are spente,
^ely the grave tarieth for me.

^ere is in this first verse of the 17. ^apter Chebar put for Sheol: there
Cheber is a grave. Job. 17. 11. to 17.
(...) Sheol defined.

Job complains that the wicked Job. 21. 13.
^e without pain and grief, and go to ^eathe and grave, as it weere in a
Sheol death or grave.
^eete slomber.

Thus does Munster, Vatablus, ^o, Jude, Pellicane, and Oecolampadius,
translate this word Sheol, and the Greek Interpretors have ^he same sense, and
the 32. verse. ^athe Lecabaroth. (...). 72. Lec^boroth. Read the 72. upon Job..
2^
^nterpretors the graves, neither is ^here any rest in hell.

Job declaring the power of (...) Job 26. 6. Job 11. 8.
in creating the world, his pr^ ence in foreseing, his spirit in (...) shing,
his wisdom in ordering, ^ hid goodness in preserving, say^ neither the grave,
neither ye (...) ter of the ground is hid from eyes. And here have they
transl^ Sheol Hell, against reason, aga^ Sheol the earth. ps. 63. 10. ps. 86.
13. ps. 88. 7. called g^aphar maueth, for that man returns to the earth, from
whence he came, as I no ^ed ps. 22. 16. Abadon. Ps. 22. 16. Betactioth haarets.
ps. 63. 10. ps. 10^ 30. ps. 146. 6. Ps. 65 Sheol. The argument of the 6. psalm
the nature of the word, against property of the tongue, and aga^ the meaning
of the holy Ghost.

By the word Abadon, the (...) brues understand whatsoever contained in the
earth, which open to the eyes of the Lord.

I would rather understand of Gods power, whereby he is (...) to raise our
bodies putrified the Graves, and clean consu^ to dust.

David being either ^ore vexed conscience, because of his act and ^ fence in
causing Vrias to be sla^ and taking his wife Bersaba: or (...) ing sick in
body: or afflicted (...) enemies* desires God that he ^ight live, and
continewe a time health, that he might be wayle (...) act, repent with
tears, con^e his fault, entreat for mercy, ^e God with humility, obtain
^geuenes, because, (says he) I No salvation after this l^ Sheol death.
(...) persuaded that no man in the ^aue can praise thee, none after ^eathe
can ask forgiveness, paci^ Preacher. 11. 3*
thine indignation, nor to have ^y hope of salvation. Whersoeuer ^e tree
falls, there it lies. Esaias 38. 18.


The grave (says Ezechias king (...) Judah) cannot confess thee, The son of
Sirach. 17. 26.
^eath cannot praise thee, they that ^e down into the pit can not ^ope,
nor be able to show thy truth. Sheol (...) grave
^mbros. de bono mortis c. 2. Cyprianus ^tra Demetri. tractat. ^. Hysichius.
lib. ^. in Leu. cap. 19.

The same words in a manner, the same sense is in Psalm. 115. 17. ^reacher. 9
10. Steuchus and (...) Romish Catholics expound ^his place as I do in all
points.

David triumphing that he had (...) Psalm 9. 17.
led Golias, and giving god tha^ therefore, wishes or rather is (...)
persuaded that god would turne^ the wicked into their graves suc^ Sheol the
grave*
were gods enemies, and his, as ye P^ listin es, Ammonites, and Moabi^ David
did wish his enemies to^ Ps. 9 17. grave, death.
taken away, but not their soules^ hell, he wished death, but not (...) nation.

It had been against charity to h^ wished their souls in hell Neith^ Sheol
Proper to the body and ^euer applied to the soul.
is Sheol joined in any place w^ the immortal soul, which ne^ dies, but
always with the body which dies, and is buried in Sheo^ in the earth, and
grave.

Sheol is always spoken of the (...) die, as we see in the swalowing (...) of
Dathan, Core, and Abiron, (...) Nom. 16. 30.
went down quick into ye earth even into Sheol, which is though^ to be hell
of the ignorant, describ^ of the obstinate, beloved of ye simple and commonly
received of ye papists ^hy does the greatest Bible, and English Bible*
^he Bible printed at Geneua, translate Sheol the grave in the 6. Psalm. and
here hell? Why did they not ^nsider that the words were all ^ne, the sense
all one, the phrase all ^ne? Why do they in some place ^iue the right
signification, and in ^ther detort it from the right sense? Why do we love
darkness more Sheol should be translated in all places alike.
then light, falshoode moore then truth? Why do we prefer dreams, ^ables,
tales, and old custom, before the right understanding of the scripture?

If Sheol be only proper to ye body, which soroweth, dies, and is buried, and
applied to no other thing, why do they not translate it in all places alike.

David being delivered from the tyranny Psalm. 18. ^ 4. 2. Kings. 22. ^.
of Saul, and out of the hands of all his ennemies, read 2. of the Kings 22.
verse ^. first thankethe god, and secondly tells how* that he had escaped
them.

The sorrows of death compassed Lyra does so expound this Place as I do 2.
of the kings 22. 4.
me. He meaned Saul and his men, who compassed David and his men round about to
take them.

Must not he be sorrowful, that was in danger of his ennemies, that had much
to do to escape death, and the tyranny of Saul? And the floudes of wickedness
made me afraid. By floudes is meaned y^ Saul's army* nacaly. Saul belial. Lyra
upon the 2. of the kings 4. Cahld^m paraphrast. rab sa^o. ps. 18 5 Sheo
army of Saul, which Saul is called here Belial, a wicked and cursed man,
without the fear God, without mercy or grace, fierce, cruel, furious, the
very child of perdition, and therefore called Belial.

The next verse following is all one with this. The sorrows of the Sheol,
grave have compassed me about.

The sorrows of the grave, and the snares of death, as follows in y^ same 5.
verse are al one, and also y^ gates of death. Ps. 107. 18. which is no more but
death it self, the fear of death: who does not fear ye grave abhor death,
and deteste misery? The sense is this: David thought himself to be at
deaths door, to be nere his grave, when he saw Saul and his adherents so
narrowly persecute him. And therefore the Chaldee Chebel.
paraphrast translateth the Hebrew It as also called the hand of the grave. ps.
89. 49 The mouth of the grave.
word, The company of the wicked compassed me, and the armed men, and so does
the same paraphraste turn the same Hebrew word in Ps. 119. 63. Hierome
translateth it in ye Iad Sheol, p^* Sheol.
2. of the Kings 22. chapter verse 5. Psalm. 141. 7
the coardes. Is it credible that David Me Iad Sheol Ps. 49. 16.
would say, that the coardes of Hell should compass him? are there The way of
Sheol of death and grave, the house of the grave or death* the b^d of death*
prou. 7. 27 the sorowe^ of the grave and (...) of death ps. 18. 6.
coardes in Hell? Is Hell a material place, and corporal, or a place
spiritual? could the soul be bound with coardes? rather the body is so laid
in the grave, and bound coards? Was David in Hell when he thus ^omplayned?
Would David make mention of Hell, where he never intended to dwell? Could he
go to Hell, whom GOD had elected, and also predestined to heaven? Whom God
had chosen according to his hearts desire? Psalm. 31 5.
Was David so unfaithful that h^ Luke 3^. 49.
could dream of hell, when as he Act. 7. 59*
with an unfeigned faith committed The hand of God.
his Soul to the hands of God to Psalm, 30, 3.
be carried into felicity, to his custody, to be defended from satan and
Hell? As CHRIST did and after him saint Stephan. Nether is the hand of God
any thing else but a sure protection against the enemy, a defense from the
wicked, and in this place, that Felicitye, Min Sheol naphshi, here are they
both joined toge there Sheol is rather death in this place. called the dust of
death Psalm. 22 16* 30* and Thesma^eth the shadow of death Psalm. 23, 4.
which God prepared from everlasting for his elect.

David being Delivered from his enemies as it is in the first verse of the 30.
Psalm. giuethe GOD thanks, and also for his health which he had recovered.
And therefore says O Lord I thank thee that thou have delivered me from the
grave, and from them that desce^de into the pit^, meaning the grave, and this
place also have they hitherto corrupted, depraved the sense, obscured the
truth, deceived the ignorant, Job. 10. 21. 22. Job. 12. 22. Job. ^6. 16. Job.
38. ^7.
and supplanted the Simple, for it is Sheol, which they translate hell. The
geneua bible has this. Thou haste brought up my soul Math. 4 16.
out of the grave. And the greateste Luke 1. 79.
bible. Thou haste raised my soul up from the grave. What a translation An
absurdity The soul is not buried.
is this to say that the Soul is enclosed in the grave, and buried with the
body, which is an impietye to Imagine? For the soul dyethe not, it liu^the
always nether is it buried, for that is the body: nether rysethe it out of the
grave as they say, but out of the body it ascends into heaven, and at the
last They should have said thou have preserved me meaning his body from death
or from the grave* Nephe^
day shall return to the body.

Wherefore ^f necessity they should have translated Nephes the body, which
dies, and is buried, of the which word I will Discourse* after that I have
made an end of Sheol.

Which two words appertain only to the body, and therefore comonly^ joined
together, and to mortalitye, and Sheol and nephes proper to the body.
neither of them to immortallity in any Canonical book of the old T^stament,
as I suppose. Sheol may be Sheol.
taken for ye disease and sickness, out of the which he was delivered: because
oftentimes death and grave, follow after sickness.

David being molested with his Psalm. 31. 17.
enemies, as with Saul, with Saul's soldiers, with the Philistines, and others:
wishes that his enemies might be conquered, dispersed, and brought to
confusion, to death, to y^ Sheol Mu^sterus.
grave. Neither was David so unmerciful in his prayer, so cruel in his
petition, so uncharitable in his affection, and so envious in his anger, that
he would wish their damnation: but rather that they might repent, return to
mercy, and be saved.

Where David inueigheth against Psalm. 49 14 15. and in the 9. verse it is call
led Shacath the grave.
them that trust to their treasure, glory in their goods, triumph in their
territories, affecting honor and dignity, says, that they shall not continue,
but dye, and be put in a pit like sheep, and be laid in the Sheol.
ground, in a ditche, grave, or pit: So does Felix Pratensis tran^ late Sheol
whom Martyn Bucer did so much commend at Cambridge when he read the. 119. ps^n
the year of Christ, 1550.
and this is Sheol.

Are there any sheep buried in hell. Notwithstanding says y^ 14. verse that
both the godly and ungodly, shall dye as concerning their bodies, and be laid
in a pit, or hole, or grave: yet when the righteous shall rise to felicity, and
the unrighteous to misery. with their bodies they shall rise

Therefore, says David: I am persuaded that God will redeem me from the hand
of the grave: and will receive me to himself, though my body consume in the
grave, as the bodies of the wicked do, but by and by after death, he will
receive my soul, and at the resurrection both Read Pagnine in Sheol.
body and soul. And so does Lacac signify sometime, as I have noted before.

The godly in the last day shall triumph over the wicked, who per secuted
them in this life. And that is meaned by the Morning in the. 14 verse

Job declares these verses plainlye Psalm. 49. 14.
in these words, when the rich man Job, 27 19, 20, 21, 22.
slepeth, that is to say, dies, he shall not be gathered to his fathers, that
is to those his Fathers, who were Faithful, which were and are in heaven, but
shall be tossed, and afflicted miserably.

Of the gathering to the fathers I To gather to the fathers
have spoken before, and likewise noted largely upon genesis 49. In ye 49.
Psalm. verses. 14. 15. Sheol is thrice for y^ grave or pitas Felix also trans
Sheol.
lateth.

Nether is it probable that there are any sheep in hell, but the text says
that they are there where the sheep are, the sheep ^aye not in hell, but in
some pit or ditche as Felix translateth, or in the grave. as it is in ye bible
printed at Geneua.

The chalde paraphrast turns and beforteth all to another sense, saying that
the wicked killed and murdered the just like sheep. Omitting the morning:
whereby is vnderstandthe resurrection in the Fourtenthe verse.

David inueiheth against his familyar Achitophel. Psalm. 55. 15.
friend, who was a reuolte and a traitore whose name was Achitophel. 2. of the
kings 15. verse. 12. cap 19. verse. 21. and cap. 17. verse. ^ Lyra
understands it of the inha^ytors of Ceile. 1. of the kings. 23. David
wishes that Achitophel and his accomplices might go quick into Sheol. Job. 1^*
1. chibarim
their graves, be swallowed up, ^s Chore* ^athan, and Abiron were, ^ombers 19.
In Hell there are no bodies, wherefore Sheol. must needs be understood the
grave, Sheol.
and earth, as the 23. verse of the same Psalm declarethe manyfestl^e.

Sheol signifies the grave always and David spoke, as we do in english, when
we set our Children unapt, or unthrifts, or any oth^ What S^cos is properly
^ro 23. 30 where Be^r and S^ow ca a^e the grave*
ungracious person, we will wist* that he were in his grave, that h^ were dead,
that he were laid in the ground, that he were as far v^ the earth, as he is
above, (...) that the soul were saved.

And David was as charitable a^ we are.

When David was in extream^ Psalm. 86. 30* ^ of the kings 19. 2. 10. 11. 15*
The same in the ps. 88. 6* ^s called the lowest pit, meaning the grave* t^ough
there me^apho ryc^lly (...) ^gnifieth misery.
danger, in so much that Saul ha^ thought to have thrust him in with a spear,
he gives God thanks* who had delivered him from pres^ death, and from the
grave. So do^ Flamminius expound this Text, who dwelled at Rome when I di^
write this book, being of singula^ acquaintanc^ with Cardinal Poole* Lyra
says, that GOD deliuere^ David a fossa (...), from the pit, where he should
have been buri^d. The Geneua Bible translateth it thus: Thou haste delivered
(...).
my soul from the lowest grave: wherein they offend, that they translate Nephes
the soul, which Lyra in^erpreteth Nephes the life.
the life, which God deli^ered from the grave. Neither can ^he immortal soul
of man be enclosed in a grave, neither a spiritu^ll thing in a corporal place.

From the lowest grave. Lyra The lowest grave. Ps. 86. 1^. the same is Shacath.
p^. 103 5.
^yeth, from the pit where a man (...) buried, which is under the ^arth.

The same phrase word for word, is in Deuteronomy. 32. verse 22. which place I
have expounded before The greatest bible.


The greatest Bible translateth (...) thus: Thou have delivered my soul from
the lowest part of hell. Whereon they groun^e a detestable error, that they
should think that David a man of perfe^ faith, of singular virtues, and such
a one, as was written in the book of life* should imagine y^ either he should,
or could go to hell.

They put in this word ( part) which is not in the Hebruetexte, and why they
should do so, they ar^ able to give no reason. As though^ David should have
descended to the lowest part, where damned soul^ are.

Moreover their translation deuideth Hell divided.
hell into parts, as though so^ part were high, some low, so^ in a mean:
wherein they folo^ ye damnable error of the Papist^* the Superstitious
division of the Schoolmen, the ignorant pha^ tasye of the simple People, who
(...) a long time have been seduc^ by false Doctors, led into err^ by
lewd Friars, induced by bli^ Uisions and Revelations, bewitched by long
Custom, and (...) swaded to believe besides that, he^ Four H^lls
which the Scripture speaks of* and wherein are appointed for (...) wicked,
everlasting and int^llerable Torm entes, even Limbus Infantium, where Childr^
Limbus infantium.
dyinge without Baptism are pe^ petuallie condemned without (...) ^ission,
without consolation, wit^ (...) hope of delivery, without grace, without any
expectation of solace, Limbus patr^ after Herolte is above purgatory and the
highest hell* (...) Cortesius upon the 4* of the senten* did. 3*
without redemption.

The Second, where the Faith^ull Fathers, and they that dyed before CHRIST, did
lie in drou^y Dens, miserable mystes, pal^ble Darkness, and as some say
^courged certain times of the day with Whyppes, feared with the ^rowning and
foming Hellhounds, ^mased with the noyesome specta^es and tormented with
spiteful ^pirites: And these say they, Christ ^tched out.

The third they call purgatory, Purgatory.
^f the which I have spoken before (...) large.

Augustine writing upon this August. upon Psalm. 86. 13.
^lace, gesseth, as the Blind man ^asteth his Staff, disputes by
^oniectures, inuenteth many glo^s, and none of them true, and ^aueth the Te^te
in doubt, ney^er dare he conclude any thing, (...) complains of his own
ignorance. Thus it is to interpret^ Augustine co^plaineth of his own igno^nce.
the scriptures without foundation without the gift of the Tongues, without
the proper use, and grounded knowledge of the Hebrew^ Tongue. Psalm. 88. 3. Bor
^actia* to the grave beneth* as Sheol tac^ia. ps. 86. 13* as in Ezech. 31. 14.
el ereth tac tith into the earth below* the earth where a man is buried is*
Sheol.


David being miserably affli^ted, either with sickness, or els^ with his
enemies, and persecutor^, craves aid, desires to be comfor^ted, calls for
grace, and mercy, complaining that he is full of misery, and that his life
draws ner^ to the grave: which grave he tear^ meth a pit in the fourth
verse, ^ in the fifth verse a grave, in the 6* verse a low pitt^ or hole, and
(...) Cheber.
the same sixth verse, darkness, an^ the deapth, in the eleventh a grau^ Bor^
(...)
and the earth.

The Chaldee Paraphraste ha^ the house of perdition, or rathe^ consumption,
where men's bodie^ Abadon consumption.
consume to earth: in the. 1^. verse darkness, and the la^d of (...) or
forgetfulness.

What body lying in the grave does not forget all? How, or what ^anne it
remember that is without Sheol death* the earth
soul, life* and senses? Sheol is the earth where graves are made, and The
greatest bible
called the earth.

The greatest Bible translateth Sheol in this Psalm, the grave. P^ 63 10* Ps.
146. 4. Ezech. 31. 14* genesis 3. 19. Prea. 3 20 Prea. 12. 6.
Whereby it is manifest that they were not agreed how to translate it: for
oftentimes they translate it, Hell.

Hugo Cardinalis* against his will i^ compelled to call Infernum in this The
mouth o^ the grave. Psalm, 141, 8. Ps. 89. 48. Ps. 49, 16.* Hose. 13. 13. from
the hand of the grave. Mo yad ps. 89. 49. Duma hades* 72. so interpret. which*
signifies silence
place, Death.

What man is he, (says David) that shall not dye, or that can deliver himself
from the hand of the grave? So does the Geneua Bible translate this place, so
the Chaldee paraphrast, ^o Campensis.

The same is Duma in Psalm. 94. verse 17. For the grave is a place of silence.
So says Lyra.

Duma is so used Ps. 115. 19. Duma is a place of silence, as the Grave i^ where
every thing is quiet, (...) Duma hades. 72. ^o interpret which ^ihnifieth
si^ence.
at rest. Psalm. 94. 17. called a dit^ in the 13. verse. before. Psalm. 115. 17*
Esaias. 38. 10. 18. And Virgil. 6. (...) meth to describe the Grave after same
sort.

D^i, quibus imperiu^ animoru^, vmbraeque silent^ Et Chaos, and phlegeton, loca
nocte silentia late.

The pit beneath Ps. 88. 3. the gra^ beneth. Ps. 86. 13. Deuteronomy. 32. 22. a^ y^
earth beneath. Ezech. 31. 14. are al^ one.

And as it is in Ezechiel, so (...) it in Psalm. 63. 10. the grave is calle^
Erets the earth: and in Solomon. Eccl* 17. the nethermoste parts of the earth.

And Job says that he came nake^ out of his mothers womb, and thither he
should return naked: meaning y^ he should go to the earth o^ grave. The 72.
Interpretours als^ Psalm. 115. 17. Duma.
have Hades for Duma: whereby w^ may learn yt they in all places b^ Hades
^eaned ye grave. And y^ sam^ ^orde is in Psalm. 116. 3. David shew^th the power
of God to be so pre^ent in every place, that he says: If Psalm. 139. 8.
I shall ascend into heaven, there he ^is: or if I shall make my bed in the
Sheol Ca^ pensi^.
grave, in Sheol, there he is.

I suppose there is no man so insensible, that will think that there is ^nye
Bed in Hell. As for the Grave, it serves the Dead for ^ Bed.

If I shall go, says Hugo Cardinalis, into the bottomless pit of sin, thou
seeste me. But here is no place for allegories.

David being reuyled of Doeg, and Ps. 1^1. 7. doeg
of other of Saul's flatterers, and called rebel, and traitor, complains that
his bones were so scattered, as a man that diggeth gravel, and sprea^eth it
abroad, or as one that heweth wood, and therefore says, that his bones are
spread as it were at the mouth of the grave. So translate Sheol
Munster, Felix, Campensis, and the Chaldee paraphrast.

Our bones lie scattered upon It is called also Duma* because that in the grave
they are silent and dom. ps. 94. 16. ps. 115. 1^. and Shacath. ps. 94. 13
the graves mouth. The great Bible translateth it so. And t^ Geneua bible: At
the graves mouth

If we should translate Sheol Hell: as the old translation hath^ what shall
we do with David bones? Were they scattered at the mouth of Hell? He was not
as ye^ dead, therefore could not his bones be either in Hell, or at Hells
mouth. Prou, 1. 11,


Solomon writes that the wicked say: Let us swallow up the innocent Sheol.
like a grave, eue^ whole, as those that go down into the pit. David and
Solomon interpret them selves.


The latter part of this verse declares what the first is. And it is the
manner of David and Solomon, to amplifye every verse in manner on such sort,
that either the former Prou. 5. 5* Munst^ 1^
part declares the latter, or the latter the former. This considered, ye shall
easily understand one by the Prou 7. 27. Sheol.
other. An harlottes feet lead to death, and her steps to the grave. A
whoores house (says Solomon) is the way to the grave, which goes down to
the chambers of de^the.

That which he calls the chambers of death in the latter part, in the former
he calls the grave.

Now by Solomon the grave is the A grave the chambers of death. Prou. 2. 18.
Prou. 15. 11. prou. 27. ^9. A^ whore.
chambers of death. The same is in other words in the second chapter. Her
house (says Solomon) tends to death, and her paths unto the dead. A whore
consumes nature, wastes the body, dries the bones, drives to consumption,
quenches natural heat, infecteth man with pockes, leprosye, and other
diseases, and by that means brings him to deaths door, to the earth, and
to his grave.

Sheol and Abadon, are taken for the grave. Prou. 27. verse 21. so they are
Psalm. 88. verse. 11. as I have noted before. Ye shall find Sheol in Prou. 9.
18. Prou (...). 11. and Pro. Sheol r^ad my notes upon the 15. chapt.
23. verse 14. Smite the child^, says Solomon, and thou shall deliver him
from Sheol from destruction^ Sheol. Prove, 9. 18.
from hanging, and as the 72. Interpretors say, from death, so they translate
Sheol. (...) a morte, from death, miserye, and misfortune. Sheol Prou. 30 16.


The grave, says Solomon, is never satisfied, and therefore the grave Sheol
has his name of Shaal to desire, Shaal.
because that the grave says nener ho: make a grave and it refuses not, it
consumes the body.

And here the greatest Bible is constrained to translate Sheol the grave. Rabby
Immanuel, Pagnine, Sheol is some sudden death which leads to the grave.
Preacher. 9. 10 Sheol.


The Precher says that there is nether wisdom, work, invention, or knowledge
in the grave.

And before in the third verse, where he says, that they go to the dead, y^
Sheol proper to the body.
old translation has ad inferos, and the 72. (...) whereof it is evident that
Sheol is always applied to ye body which is here here in misery, or after
this life laid Hamethim* Grave.
in the grave, and apertayneth only to the body. Balad. 8. 5. Death and grave.


It is in Solomon that love is as strong as death, and gelousie as cruel as
the grave. The Geneua Bible translateth it so. Likewise Esaye 5 14.
Munster and diverse others. Here is death put in the former part of the
verse, and the grave in the latter, signifiyng all one thing in effect* Here
are joined nephes and Sheol* and signyfy the bodies only.
Esaye prophecieth that there shall so many people dye of hunger, and by other
kinds of death, as sweat and plague, that the grave must make her wider to
receive them: nether does it appear by the text that these which went to
Sheol into their grave, were dampened: Ergo they went not to hell, neither
speaks he here of their souls, but of their bodies, so that Sheol is not
hell, but the grave. Pagnine in Racab.

Esaye inueighing against Nabucodonoser Esaie 14. 9.
king of Babylon makes by a figure called prosopopaeia, and by an hyperbole,
the dead to speak, Nabucodono ^er. The dead ^pake. Sheol the grave. Esaias. 14.
9. 10. Munster. Sheol ver* 11.
the dead to bid him welcome, the dead to triumph over him, and to rejoice at
his death and coming. For (says the text) the grave yeldeth up her dead,
even kings, and princes to salute him, and to save that he was come down
unto the ground and grave, as they were, and that the worms are with him, and
about him.

This verse does plainly declare, as Munster translateth, and Geneua Bible:
though the said Geneua Bible translateth Sheol Hell, in the 9. verse, without
cause.

That Nabucodonoser was not in Nabucodono ^er.
hell, nor they that saluted him: but in the grave, which the prophet makes
to speak with her dead.

Where there were worms, there were these, and there was Nabucodonoser, but in
Hell there are no material worms, but in the grave, Ergo neither they nor
Nabucodonoser were in Hell. 15 verse. 15. verse* Sheol the grave.


And they say in the 15. verse, that he shall, or rather is brought down to
the grave, to the sides of the pit: which words declare, that Sheol the
grave. 19 which is the house of death. Job. 17. 12. ps. 49. 15. Job. 30. 23.
Sheol is the grave, and nothing else but a pit or ditche.

The translators of y^ greatest Bible, though wresting Sheol before, and in
other places are compelled, and as it appears, persuaded, to translate it the
grave in the 19. ver. or else they must say that his dead ^arkasse was cast
out of Hell, whereas I think, there are no bodies nor shall be till the last day.
Besides all this, was it like y^ Nabucodonoser Nabucodono ser was not in hell.
Daniel. 4, 31. 32. 33. 34.
was in hell, who was elected, who gave thanks to god with pure affection,
praised him with earnest mind, magnified him with voice, honored him y^ lives
for ever, whose power is incomprehensible, whose kingdom eternal, whose
works are all truth, whose ways are judgment, and who pulls down the
pomp and pride of the presumptu^ ous? I have noted more upon Esaias 14. In the
same sense Sheol is pu^ Sheol the grave. Abacuk 2. 5. Esaias 38. 10 17 18. A
grave. Sheol joined with nephes, which is there the body* Sheol Esaias. 28. 15.
18. Esaias 57. 9, Job ^4 19.
in Abacuk 2. verse 5. Joined with death, as it is diverse times, where I have
noted more.

Rabby David and Pagnine in Rachab, and Munster calls it death^ and
sepulcher. Ezechias said that he should go to the gates of the gra^ which he
called in the 17. and 18. verses the pit of corruption: for says he, in the
grave and death ne man can praise the Lord.

The grave and death are ioyne^ likewise in 28. of Esaias verse 15. and Munster
expounds them so upon Esaias 38. Porta inferorum inquit Zuinglius, est
periphrasis morie^di. The gates of death are alone with the gates of hell. Read
my nots upon Math. 16 P^. 107. 16. Wis. 16. 13. Ezech, 31. 15. 17.


The gates of the grave, which they translate the gates of hell, is a
circumlocution of dying, and death. And in like manner Oecolampadius handles
this place of the 38. of Esaye verse 10.

By an allegory of beautiful trees. Ezechiel prophesied against Pharao ^inge
of Egypt, saying that if the ^inge of Assiria, was not able to ^esiste the
Babylonians, how much ^sse he.

The like sentence is in Esaye 14. Esaias* 14. 6, 10, 11, 15. 19. The grave Sheol
is defined in Ezech. 31. 15, 16, 17, what the grave is. Sheol Psalm. 141 8*
where Nabucodonoser was brought ^o his grave, as here Pharao, and y^ ^inge of
Assure, and the grave is defined in Ezechiel. 31. 14. 15. 16, and 18. to be a
pit and place in the earth, where the bodies do sleep.

And in Ezechiel. 32. 18. 19. 21. and in y^ said 21. verse and in the 27.
verse is Sheol, and in the 22. verse 23. 24. 25. Sheol the grave These places
of Ezechiel prove plainly Sheol to be the grave. Hierem 41. 7. 8. Psalm 28, bo^
for Sheol the grave The land of the living*
and 26. is Chebarim graves, and in the 29. and 30. verses is Bor a pit, so
that Sheol Cheber and Bor are all one.

And in the 2^. and 26. verses of the said 32. chapter of Ezechiel, he calls
the land of the living, this life: and the grave the Land, and the earth
whether they went with their weapons, where the dead sleep, where the bodies
rest without senses. And therefore the church^ yard is called (...) Caemete^
rium a (...) to sleep, because, ^ there do our bodies sleep: if the^ sleep,
Ergo they must rise.

Galienus the Emperor, permitted Eusebius. 7. c. 13. Niceph. 6, c. 12
christians to have churcheyardes or burying places, in y^ yea^ of Christ, 260.

The grave is called guphar maueth. psalm. 22. 16. 30. because that all y^ come
of the earth, shall to the earth return. Gen, 27. Genesis 3. 17. Preache^ 3. 20.
a place under the earth. Aba^ don, darkness, and land of oblivion. Psa. 88. 12.
13. Job. 10. 21. confer a not^ Pro. 9. 18.

I will repeat the words outto Hose. 131 4.
Hosee as the Geneua Bible has translated them, and Pagnine, and Sebastian
Munster, a man wh^ has translated the Bible o^ of the Hebrew into Laten,
mos^ Sheol. the, grave. The greatest Bible in this one verse trans lateth
Sheol. first the grau^ and then hell. read a note ps. 49. 41.
truly, most plainly, and most effectually, as Martine Bucer did report. I
will redeem them from the power of the grave: I will deliver them from death: O
death, I will be thy death: O grave, I will be thy destruction. Here are joined
death and the grave, which Christ did overcome, and destroyed by his
resurrection, first in himself, and secondly in all mankind, whose bodies he
shall raise in the last day out of their graves. I would (says God Hosee 13.
14.
in Hosee) have delivered you from the violence of the Assirians, from death,
from the grave, if ye had repented. Paul applies it to the resurrection, when
this corruptibility shall put on incorruptibility, this mortalitye
immortalitye. then shall the Lord Jesus call up y^ dead, empty the graves,
scour y^ churchyards, conquer death, raise up our bodies and awake the
corpses that do sleep, and raise them to immortality. Paul's ^. Cor. 15. 55.
words are these: O death, where is ^hy sting? o grave, where is thy victory?
The old translation has for the grave, death: and him follow y^ ordinary Read
Pagni^ in Cata^.
Lyra, Haymo, Augustinus, Justinius. Augustinus Tom. 7. lib. 3. de pecca me^. c.
11. ^odem Tom. de perfect. Justinius. ^lpon. 14. Sheol death. Ps. 141. 8. 1.
cor. 15. Hell.
And Ambrose upon this place, and the. 72. Interpretors have for Sheol (...) as
Paul has.

Neither can this place be understood of hell: for there are souls, and no
bodies: there are torments intolerable, in the graves the bodies sleep without
pain: neither is there any resurrection of the soul, it never dies, it never
sleeps, it is not consumed to dust, it waxes not old, it lives either in
pain with Satan, or in joy with God. There is in this 13. of Hose, verse 13.
M^ Iad sheol.
From the hand of the grave I would redeem them.

And in Amos God threateneth to punish Idolaters, that if they Amos. 9. 2. The
grave Sheol
hide themselves in dens, dongeons, caves, and the grave, he will find them
out, or up a lofte in heaven, or as one that climmeth into ye high Towers. In
y^ text of Geneua it is, If they shall dig into the Hell the grave or earth.
hell. Can a man dig in hell? Are there any mattockes there, any ^pades,
any shouelles, any tools? Sheol.
^s it not a spiritual place prepared ^or Souls, and for no diggers? Wherefore
here ye may see what Sheol is. Read Pagnine in Catar, Jonas. 2. 2. Sheol a
belly by a meta phor. the same is shacath. Jonas 2.
and my note upon the 9. of Amos. Jonas being in the belly of the fish,
prays: he calls this belly agraue a deep dark dongeon, an obscure den,
and full of desolation, neither was it hell: for Hell is not in the fishes
belly, but it is a place invisible Hell is not the fishes belly.
to us, but to the dampened sensible, terrible, and full of pain; the pain
whereof no tongue can express, of the which I have written largely upon Esaias
30. Math. 12. 40. Luke 11 24. Hades.


Christ interprets this Sheol to be the heart of ye earth, to be Christ's
grave, and therefore not Hell, neither was Christ buried in hell?

Thus much of Sheol out of the Canonical books of the old testament.

Now let us see what the Apocripha say of Hades, of whose nature Hades.
and propertye I have noted somewhat before. Toby 13. 2. Hades Sheol.


In the 13. of Toby it is put for Sheol the grave, which phrase is declared
before in the place of Deu^* 32. 39. 1. of the Kings 2. verse. 6. in Wisdom
16. v. 11. This word Hades is put for Sheol the grant* and can be taken for
no other thin^ in the book of Wisdom, where the Wisd 2. 1.
wicked say that none returns fr^ the grave.

And that it must needs be so understood, their imaginations declare, where
they hold that there is no life to come, no heaven, no he^, no reward for the
just, nor punishment for the unjust: where the old^ translation has in the 10.
of Wisd* Wisd. 10. 19. Exodus 15. 1^
How that God drowned the Egyptians, and brought the Israelites (...)
altitudine inferorum, from the deapth and bottom of hell, where they never
were: y^ greek is (...), from the bottom of the deep, tha^ is: out of
miserye, out of Egypt, and the red Sea: and so expounds Pellicane.

The son of Siracke gives Eccles. 14. v. 12. 16. c. 2^ v, 21 c* 51. 5. 6.
counsel, exhorts all men, provoke the niggard, and also persuades we the
liver all to do good while he lives, for after death, after a man be buried,
brought to his long home and to his grave, there is no hope of amendment, no
rewards can No salvation out of this life
profit, no Popes pardons, no Peter hence, no indulgeces a paena and culpa No
trentalles.
no masses, no diriges, no obites* no Lady psalters, no prayers for them ye are
dead. They that are in ye grave, they that are buried can not praise God, says
Baruck, and that it is Baruck. 2. 17.
meaned of the grave, these words declare, which follow in the same
seauententh verse: Whose souls are out of their bodies. Of this I have noted
more upon the text of ye ^ Psalm. Baruc. 3. 11. 19*


The grave in Baruck is Sheol, as appears there.

Thus have I noted all the pla^ of the books called Apocripha, ^ came to my
memory, and in (...) place Hades, no more then Sheol in Hades.
the Canonical books, does signify Hell, where are the dampn^ souls.

In the first chapter of Wisdom, where it is said that God created Wis. 1. 14.
all things without fault, neither was there any poison, nor hell upon the
earth: he means if Adam had not fallen, there should have been no death, nor
grave, which he means by Hades. It is for the Hades.
grave. Wisdom 2. verse 7. when Hades is taken for Hell in the new Hades hell
joined with extreme punishment Luke 16. 23.
Testament, it is always ioyne^ with extreme punishment: without pain it is
ye grave, with pain^ or torments it is hell.

As for Sheol, wherein consists half of our controuersye, and the ignorance
whereof has forged mo Hells then ever God created, does never signify ye place
of ever lasting punishment, of the which I will speak anon, least that the
poysonfull tongue should falsely accuse me. Let us come to the new testament:
Math. 11. 23. Capernaum. Hades read my note a little before upon the place of
the 9. of Amos.
And thou Capernaum, which art lifted up unto heaven, shall be brought down
to Hades, to the ground. If ye understand by Capernaum the city with houses,
temples, and walls which should be overthrown and cast down for the sins
of ye people, as Sodom and Gomorrha were, then could it not sink into Esaias
14 14. 15. Luk 10. 15. Capernaum.
Hell, for there are neither towns, cities, nor villages: if ye understand
by Capernaum, the people, neither did they all, as I supose, go to hell:
neither had they all vowed to Baal, neither did their bodies go to hell.
Wherefore the phrase means, and enforces an utter destruction Euthy. upon
this place* Bulling. upon this text.
and desolation of Capernaum. To be lifted up or exalted up to heaven,
signifies to be glorious and puffed up with pride and presumption, and to be
brought down to be brought down to Hades is (...) be inglorious.

In the 16. of Matthew Christ says that the gates of Hades shall not overcome
Math 16. 18. Hades. The gates of hell they are called y^ gates of death in
Wisd. 16 13. and in P^. 107. 16. Ps. 9. 14. Esaias 38. 10.
the Church, shall not utterly destroy the faithful, nor af^ length prevail:
for though they ki^ the bodies, they can not touch the souls.

They do press, but shall not oppress: invade, but not prevail: assault, but
not enter: consume ye flesh and bones, but not the souls.

By gates is meaned the tyrauntes, Gates. Metonymia.
and cruel magistrates that sit in judgment, and condemn the Christians and
innocents, who will not deny Christ.

Such like 2. false Judges were those two elders, who accused, and condemned
Susanna. Susanna. Hades. The gates of Hades are wicked ludges


The gates of Hades are the gates of death, the false judgments of wicked
Judges, their malicious charges, their threatening enforcementes, and most
false sentences, for they condeme the innocent, and Ps. 9. 14. ps. 69., 13.
prou. 22. 22.
iustifye the malefactors, through ^ribes they shed the innocent blood through
rewards, their eyes are blinded, their minds corrupted, and true judgment
perverted: they pronounce death for life, the ^ope for right, the halter for
help, the galous for delivery, and the grave for grace.

So are they become the authors of death, murder and of all iniquitye

Such false Judges, and terrible tyrants were they that sat in the Ps. 69. 1^.
gates, which rayled upon David. Such they were that condemned y^ martyrs in
queen Mary's days. The Jews did give judgment Genesis 34. 20. ps. 9. 3. ps.
69. 3^. Hose, 13. 14.
and sat in the gates of the cities And David calls y^ gates of death
present death, And Ezechias in Esaye 38. verse. 10. calls these gates Esaias.
38 10. Sheol Hades.
the gates of the grave. Thus ye see that the gates of death, and the gates of
the grave are all one.

I know that Origene, and A^ brose, with others, call these ga^ These gates
are vices.
of death, and of ye grave, vices. (...) Christ speaks here of the
persec^tion.

Of these gates read my discour^ at large upon Math. 16. In the R^uelatio^,
after John had seen a stra^ Reuelat. 1. 18.
vision, he fell down at his feet, this personage was Christ, wh^ willed him
to be of good ch^are, an^ not to fear: For (says he) I am the first and the
last, and therefore God Hades Hades the grave.
And I have the keys of Hades, and of death, and raised my self, and (...) my
self out of my grave, wherfor^ I was God in so doing, and man, in that I was
raised from the dead, and out of my grave.

And in like manner in the 6. of the Revelation, death goes before, Reuelat.
6. 8.
and Hades the grave follows afte^ Hades.
immediately.

The place of the Revelation 20. Reuelat, 20, 13 14.
makes death, and the grave Hades to deliver their dead bodies: Wherefore Hades
necessarily is here taken (...) Sheol the grave. Hell.


Hitherto I have declared out of the new Testament, where Hades ^s put for
death and the grave. Now ^ will describe unto you how that Hades in the 16. of
Luke, is placed ^or Hell, and what Hell is.

Hades is in no place for hell, but Hell defined* by the ^or (...) tures. Luk,
16.
(...) the 16. of Luke, and there it is ioy^ed with flames and torments, and
^herfore Geenna, a place prepared ^or the damned: joined with torments, it is
Hell: without them, y^ ^aue. Bucer upon Luke. 16. Hell is place full of
torments, full of fire, and extreme punishment without ^lace: neither can
they that be there ascend, or come out. That hell ^s full of torments, Christ
declares ^n Luke 16. ver. 23. full of fire, ver. 24. (...) of extreme
punishment without ^lace, verse 25. y^ they can not come out, it is evident of
the 26. verse.

Hell is called Geenna, of Gy, a Geenna. Hinnom.
^lley, and Hinnom a valley of the children of Hinnom. This Hinn^ possessed
this valley which (...) before the gate of Jerusalem (...) Tophet,
led Carfit and it was called also (...) phet of blowing of trumpetts, a^
striking of drums, lest the F^ there is should have had compassi^ of their
sons, hearing them (...) so pitifully, lament so horribl^ c^ing so terribly,
and die so miserabl^ Priests of Baal.
For the priests of Baal like blac^ monks did this sacrifice, drawi^ the
children to and fro through t^ ^er, and thinking to do high (...) uice,
Moloch. Munster and Lyra upon 18. Leuit. To this Idol did king Ach^r and
Manasse^ offer their children. 2. Chro^, 28. 3. c. 33, 6,
and an acceptable sacrifice (...) Moloch which was an Idol of the Ammonites.

This Idol had in him seven ch^ bers, or places. In one to recei^ meal, an
other turtels, the third (...) sheep, the four the a Ram, the (...) a cal^e,
the sixth an ox, the seaue^ the a child.

Of this Idol read. Leuit. 18. verse* 21. c. 20. 2. Deu. 12. 31. Deu. 18. 10.
3. of Kings. 11. verse* 5. 7.

^hey builded high places to Mo Josias.
^och in Tophet. Hier. 7. verse. 31 Hier. 32. verse. 35. Act. 7. verse. 43.
^sias destroyed Moloch, and made ^he place Tophet a dunge hill, and (...) cast
car^on there, and therefore Tophet.
Tophet for the filthynes thereof is taken for hell, where there is extreme
punishment appointed for the desperate. It is called Geenna Geenna. hell.
^gnis the hell of fire, or fiery hell, Math. 5. verse. 22. it is called in
Math 18. verse. 8. 9 an everlasting fire, in Math. 23. verse. 33, the judgment
of hell.

Hell is a place of extreme darkness, Hell.
where there is be waylyng, and ^ashing of teeth, and everlasting ^er, which
is prepared for the devil, and his angels. Math. 25. verse Hell,
30. 41.

Hell is an unquenchable fi^r, Mar. 9. 43. 44. 45. 46. Esaias* 66 ^4, L^, 12. 5.
Hell. Esaias, 30, 33.
where the worm of Conscience does not only accuse, but also bi^th, and where
ye fire shall never cease

Hell or Tophet is a place prepared from the beginning for the King Synacherib,
and such other wicked persons, and desperate abiectes, (...), and large, the
burning thereof is ^yre and much wood: the breathe of Iehoua, like a Kyuer
(...) brimstone does kindle it.

This definition does declare tha^ it was created from the beginning and for
the wicked, and the matte^ where with they are tormented i^ fire, and wood, the
place deep^ and large, of capacity to receive a^ infinite number, and that it
shall continue for ever, the breath of Ie houa declares, which has non^ end.

Of this place I have discours^ at large upon the 30. of Esaias, when Hell.
this matter is fully declared of hell which is y^ second death, a lake the
burns with fire, and boyleth with brimstone. Read Revel. 21. 8.

Thus much out of the scripture directly, with much more, but I s^ die to be
brief, and to see what the ^ors say. Augustine. Tom 3, de spiritu and anim^ c.
56,


The torments of hell are perpe^all terrible terrors, fear without ^yth,
pain without remission, the ^angman strangling, the helhounds ^ourging, the
worm gnawing, the ^onscience accusing, and the fire ^onsuming, or rather
continewing without mercy, end, relaxation, (...) ease.

Hell (says Augustiuus) is called August. Tom. 3. de genesis ad lit lib. 12. c.
24. (...) Retract. 2. c* 24.
^the Latin tongue Inferi beneth: and ^ery inferior thing and low thing
^heauie, and therefore grievous, and ^ainefull, and therefore the Greek ^orde
signifies unpleasant I seem ^ith he, rather to teach that hell is under the
earth, then to show any ^ason, why it should be believed, ^saide to be under
the earth.

^ertullian says that hell is in the Tertul. lib. de a^ Hierom in com* in
Iona^.
^arth.

^ierome says that hell is in the ^iddest of the earth.

^rnobius says that the Gentiles Arnob. contra gen^es. lib. 7.
(...) believe that Pluto his kingdom Arnob. lib. 2. Plato in Phedon ad ax^
(...). Ambrose de bono mo^ it is c. 8. Lactan tius 7. c. 7.
was under the earth: and the s^ Ar^bius (...) that Plato (...) keth mention of
Acheron, Styx, (...) ^ytus, and Periphlegeton, which (...) flo^ds i^ hell, where
the Souls (...) plunged, and buried, and vexed. (...) Laetantius says that
Zeno the (...) Two Places.
que appoynteth two places, the (...) joyful, where the godly are, the^ Ephrem
lib.
there miserable, where the wick^ are, the one quiet, the other (...) de extremo
Iudi^o c. 4.
quiet, the one pleasant, the oth^ grievous: the one light, the oth^ darkness:
in hell there is no (...) fession of the fault to be receiue^ No redempti on
in h^ll.
the judges be inexorable, no (...) ^able complaint, or feigned exc^ will
serve: there is no repentan^ no return, no salvation, no con^ lation, no
redemption, neither an^ hope of better state, or any re m^ sion of sin or
pain. Gregory di^ log. 4. c. 24. Chrysostom 16. ad Romans de prae^s san^ ^orum.


Gregory says that some say the Hell is in some part of the ear^
Chrysostom says that other ho^ that it is in the valley of Iosap^ those
error he reproves.

Paulus Cortesius affirms, that Cortesius 4. ^ent. did. 11.
^ome Divines place Hell in centro (...), in the midst of the earth, or (...)
to it Pythagoras in y^ fiery zone. What manner of fire that is wher^ith the
damned souls are torme^^, whether it be material or spi^ituall, or kindled of
it self, and so (...) from the creation, or con^inued and forced by some super
na^rall power, as by some Angel, (...) after what sort, and whether it (...)
always or not, or shall end as Origin said, Cortesi^s discourses ^t of the
dunses and Schoolmen, ^ubtfully, darkly, and curiously, out of Lombarde,
Durand, Auicenna, Thomas, Richard Middleton, Peter ^alud, and such others. But
we are as^red Math. 3. 12. Esaias 30 33, Math. 22. 13. and 8. 12. and 13. 43. and
25. 30. Math. 5. 22. and 18. 9. and 23. 15. Mark. 9. 42. 44. Luke 12. 5* James
3. 6.
yt it is inextinguible, and ^dled ^y y^ blast of Iehoua: there as is darkness
without light, gnashing of teeth ^thout release, weping without comfort, a burning
furnace without cea^ng, ye flame of Geenna inque^chable. Of this Hell I have
discoursed upon Esaias 30. verse 33. and in my definitions of scripture.

Hitherto I have manifestl yproued by repeating every place, unless my memory
fail me, where Sheol Sheol how often in the scrip ^ure.
is found in scripture, and I find that it never signifies hell, but always
the grave, or death, or the earth which are all one in effect, neythe^ does
it signify death in any other respect, but, that the grave commonly The grave
follows death.
follows.

And that it is that place only where the bodies rest, and sleep til^ the last
day, and only proper to y^ bodies, and never to the soul, I have proved by
those places of scrip Sheol applied ^o the body.
ture where it is read, by old Interpretours and new, by the nature and
propertye of the word, by the order of the text, by the accustome^ phrase of
speaking, and by the natural and germane sense. Sheol in the bible above
(...), times.


And I find it in the Canonical scripturs, about or above 84. times and in
the books called Apocrypha Sheol is no^ the state of the dead be they good or
evil
14. times.

Neither does Sheol signify yt state ^f them that dye, whether they ^ee
^ithfull, and go to Heaven: or unfaithful, and go to Hell, as Bucer ^riteth
upon the 16. of Luke, Fla^inius upon the 6. Psalm, Zuing^s upon the 5. of
Esaias, and Calius upon the Creed: unless they mean of the state of yt body.
For i^ Sheol signify only the grave, as I have ^roued, then can it not
signifye the ^ate of the blessed, who are in heaven: (...)
for Sheol is never taken for ^eauen: neither for the state of the ^icked, for
they are in hell, neither ^re any buried in hell.

I would rather that they should ^ue called Sheol the state both of Sheol
applied to the body Preacher. 9. Ps, 82, 7 c 3^*
^e just, and unjust, as conterning their burial: and to have meaned that
they both dye as concerning y^ ^ody, both buried, both should rise ^aine though
turned to dust, and ^t signifies Sheol.

Castalio in his defense of his translation Castalio.
of his new Testamente against Beza, either of ignorance, (...).
wherewith I am leth to burden such a learned man, or rather of wilfulnes, and
perti^acye, which should not be in so modest, corrigible, and reformable a
writer, a denies that Sheol is in any place taken for the grave, which Beza
says, is taken as truly for the grave, as Iehoua for God* which is as much to
say* as that Sheol does always signify the grave: for Iehoua is only proper
to the Trinity, and to no other Iehoua.
thing.

And as Beza affirms tha^ Sheol is as properly the grave, a^ Iehoua is God:
so say I, that Nephes is as proper to the body, and thos^ Nephes.
parts of man that are mortal, a^ Nishama or Ruac is for the immortal
Nishama. Ruac. Esaias. 14. 19. Sheol.
Soul, as I prove a little hereafter.

If that Sheol in this 14. of Esay^ be taken as well for y^ state of them, as
Castalio notes, that are unburied, as for them that are buried,
notwithstanding he must needs con^es that Sheol is the state of the body,
which is dead, whether it be buried, or unburied: but the body descends not
into Hell, Ergo by Castalio his own Argument, Sheol is not taken for hell.

Neither does the King of Babylon Beza in his an swear to Castalio.
in the 14. chapter of Esaye and the 19. verse lack all manner of burial, or
to be cast out without any grave, as Castalio means, but y^ he was not buried
with the Kings: for the text ^aith in ye 13. verse, that he was thrown into
his grave, into Nabucodono sers burial.
Sheol and in the 17. verse, that he was cast out of his grave. Whereby it may
be understood of Nabucodonoser.

For as Oecolampadius no^eth, all the time, which some ^ye was seven years,
his son Euilmerodach was King, and Read my note upon D^n 4
led.

When Nabucodonoser was t^ stored, he laid his son in prison and when the
father was dead, (...) son durst not for fear take vp^ him to be King, till
that he might^ be assured that his father was dead, and for that cause made his
father body to be dug up.

And that I suppose is the meaning of the Prophet: unless that ye will
understand it of Balthazar, o^ whom I have noted somewhat upon Daniel 5.

If Sheol were taken for Hell, then was his body in hell, which is an absurdity
to say, for there are (...) bodies, and the text says, that he was dug
out of Sheol. But who can dig into hell? if you will Then was it (...) grave.
wilfully affirm that Christ did descend into hell, and father that fable upon
the Creed, though it was not intruded at the first, neither is it expedient:
for there are twelve Articles besides, and it is against y^ 12* article^
^alogy of our faith, it ingendreth many inconveniences, many absurd opinions,
frivolous fables, and fantastical visions, notwithstanding, the phrase of the
Hebrew and Greek, and also of the Latyne shall easelye refell your erroneous
opinions, and long custom, the author of error. Hades how this erro rose.


The septuaginta interpretors did for the most part translate Sheol, by Hades,
which they were assured ^id signify the grave, and the circumstances thereof.

Afterward certain doctors ignorant in the Hebrew tongue, and pha^^sying the
fables of Plato and of Latyne poets turned Hades, infernum or inferos or orcum,
and the English, hell.

Whereof arose this pernicious ^eresy of Christ's descending into hell.

Notwithstanding I am able to prove out of Homer, Sophocles, (...) ripid. Virg.
Ovid, and others, y^ Had^ signifies in them, as well the gra^ as it does hell.
And the same is commonly Sheol.
used of Ecclesiastical writers for the grave, and death. For where Helias
prayed to God, that ^ widows son of Sarophtha might be restored to life, it
is in Prodromus Cyrus Theorus Prodro mus wrote in greek verses the sum of
every chapter which I tran slated into La tin. Act. 9. 40.
(...): there he calls Hades death: which others would translate hell,
against the mind (...) Prodromus, against the prayer o^ Helias, and against
the words of the scripture.

The same Prodromus utters in plainer words, calling it the gates of death,
(...) for Tabitha was dead, which Christ Math. 16. 18.
calls (...).

And the same Prodromus so terms the death of Christ, from whence he
rose, writing upon the 1. of the kings 17. 21
last of Mathewe, and a little before he calls it (...) a tomb which he
terms here the gates of Hadou, (...) gates of death. Nonnus in his ^raphrase
upon John: where Christ Nonnus, John 2 19. Dissolve the temple
(...) y^ he would dissolve the temple, meaning his body, and raise it up the
third day: he uses Borethron and Hades, where Christ spoke only of Hades.
Sybil callethit (...). As Lossius does upon Act. 2.
his resurrection. For he says y^ he would raise his own body out of Hades,
out of his grave, which place manifestly declares y^ he raised his body out of
the grave, and not out of ^ell. For no man y^ is well in his wites, will say
that his body was in hell. Wherefore Hades signifies the grave; and not hell,
as it may do in the Creed, where as it is in the (...). of John, that Lazarus
was like to Iaho. 11* 4. Lazarus
^ye, or at the point to dye, Nonnus has (...) where Hades is taken for death,
or for his grave. and by Hides
an other name ye same Nonnus calls it Lazarus tomb (...) but there are no
tombs in hell. He calls i^ Borethron and (...) all which Nonnus flatly call
* calls death, and the grave fr^ the which Christ delivered (...) raised.
Lazarus. read Nonnus diligently.

Where Sybil writes that Adam^ Sybyl. Lib. 1. (...). Hades the earth so is She
ol. Esaias 57. 9. Pluto his house. Act. 2. Sybil. (...).
his children dyed, she says y^ the^ descended into Hades, calling it the
earth where they were buried. (...) that place where Christ was buried, she
calls the house of Pluto. (...) And therefore i^ the 2. of the Acts, Christ
is said t^ have been (...) where is understand (...), y^ he was in ye house
(...) Pluto, meaning his grave.

If ye would follow your own phantasy, ye can not fay that Christ was in hell,
but in y^ house of Unto whom was given the dominion of the earth as the Poets
fable, Sybil. lib. 2.
Pluto, for (...) is always with an accusative case either expressed or
understood.

Neither signifies Hades among^ the Greeks any thing else properly then Pluto
for when y^ division was made among ye three children of Saturn, Jupiter was
king in the East, Neptune over the Isles, and Pluto in the west. The poets and
Grecians who filled the world full of fables, ( O Graecia mendax) assigned
heaven to Jupiter, the sea to Neptune, the earth to Pluto, where^ore he is said
to be the king of the ^arth Homer Iliades, read Cic. 2. de natura deor. Lact.
1. c, 11. pluto has his name of riches for that out of the earth proceeds
gold, silver, corn and all other riches.

and as all things come out of the ^arth, so all things fall to the earth
Pluto. Plato in craty^o cic. 2. de not. Phurnutus. Hades the earth. so is
Sheol. Esaias. 57. 9. Homer. Ilia, Hades is Pluto.
men our bodies also, as I have no ^ed before.

Now it is evident that Hades is ^he house of Pluto, which is y^ earth ^d
graves. The which Pluto is ^yde to have dominion over the ^ad.

(...) Hades which (...) translate hell has dominion (...) the dead. where are
the dead even by Hom^ are they not in their graves? Erg^ Hades the
the graves have dominion over t^ bodies till the last day. At the la^ Sybil.
lib. ^. Auernus Strab. 5.
day the fire is said to burn Hades.

Shall hell be burned, or not rath^ the earth? which the same Sybil sa^ shall
yealde the dead bodies, an^ calls the earth Hades.

Auernus is a lake in Campania, (...) high trees growinge about it (...)
thick, that as the inhabitants r^ port the filthy savor killed the birds
flynig over: and therefore (...) is taken for hell among the poet^ Cim^merii
in Italy Strab. 5* Ho^er. odi^
and dedicated to Pluto.

There are Cimerii, that dwell i^ such dark dongeons, that they ca^ neither
see the sun rise nor set, (...) by them the Poets imagine tha^ Stix.
there is away to hell. Styx is a pestilent puddle in Arcadia, and poysoneth
all living creatures that (...) of it, and therefore t^en among the poets for a
lake of hell. Phlegeton is also a burning lake, Strab. 5. Phle geton.
^id taken for a lake in hell. All ^hese as Strabo says, are fables. and
Acheron.
Acheron and Aechrusia* are rivers ^n Campania, and taken for hell. Tartarus
Strab. 3.


Tartarus is the lowest part of the ^arth, and of the fabulus poets taken for
hell, a tarassein, (...) a turbando, (...) frigore (...): read Beza upon 2.
Petr. Sheol defined
^. verse 4.

Let us omit profane writers, and Sheol the grave Job. 30. 23.
return to the scripture what Sheol ^s. It is evident in the 30. of Job, where
the grave is defined and des^ribed Sheol defined Lecolcai, To every mortal
creature. Munster upon Job. 30. 33.
in other words. I know, says Job, that thou will turn me to death, an house
of witness to every living creature. Job, calls death an house of witness, so
says Ovid.

Tendimus huc omnes, haec est domus vl^ima cunctis,
Se rius aut citius sedem proper^mus ad v^am*
To the earth we come both great and small, an house for every wight,
Betimes or late thither we have, For m^gned is a place appointed where all the
dead are gathe red even the grave and earth. Job. 30. 23. the earth. the grave
Job. 33. 18.
a place for us by right.
And the Chalde paraphraste calle^ it the house of the grave, because the grave
is as ^n house to every mortal man: and therefore the. 7^ Interpretors cal^
the earth an house to every mortal thing. (...) In the ^8. verse (...) the
33. chapter of Job, Elihu says, (...) God uses many means to with draw men
from sin and from death, and the grave. where Nephes Nephes.
is joined with Shacath, as the same Nephes is with Sheol in the. 16, Ps. and
in the latter end of the vers^ where Sheol is in ye fore end is shacath
Shacath pro per to the body Shacath.
put, which is the grave, because that the bodies do corrupt in the grave, so
is Nephes joined with Shacath in Ps. 107. verse 20. to declare that they are
both proper Sheol and Ne phes proper to the body.
to the body, and neither to the soul I mean neither Nephes* neither Sheol,
neither shacath, which is the same that Sheol is. And to this ef^ct, that
shacath is the grave, the ^2. Interpretours have (...) ^eath. And a little
after in the 20. Job. 33. 22.
^rse, where Elihu says, that man ^aweth nere to the grave, and his The
english bibles.
(...) to the dead. The English By^les have, The soul draws to ^e grave, and
life to the buriers. that a translation is this to say, ^at a man's soul
draws to the ^aue? do our Souls go to the ^aue? can a Soul corrupt? do not
(...) that go to the grave putrify? why ^ould they translate the text thus: The
man draws to the grave ^ard? so we say in English, so does ^e Hebrew word
Nephes signify, (...) as the 72. interpretors have to ^ath (...). neither do I
as^nt to the Englysh translations ^ho translate me m^t him to be bu^ers, To the
dead mortuis. read a note Job. 33* 22*
nor to Munster, who has to ^yers, or murderers interfectori^us, but to the
dead, for the which ^ebrue word the Greek translation has, but his life
(...): whereby ye may understand that the Greeks meaned the grave by Hades.
Hades. In the 28, and 30, verses of Job. 33. 28. 30. Shacath.
the same 33. chapter of Job, Shacath Ezech. 31. 32 33. Ezech. 31. verse 14.
15, 16, 17, 18. Ezech. 32. verse 18. 21, 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28, 29.
is read which y^ Greeks translate both corruption, (...) (...) also death^
(...). I decla^ a little after exactly, how that Sheol is called by other names
death, and the nether parts of the earth; and (...) pit.

Now I will prove by the same Nephes is ne ^er the im mortal soul
order out of the scriptures, that the other word called Nephes is never
applied to the immortal soul in the Hebrew Bible. Which if I can prove, it
must needs follow y^ the Soul of Christ did never go^ to hell* for y^ part of
Christ which they say descended into hell, is Nephes Christ descen ded not into
hell.
in the 16* psalm. of David, which is the body of Christ, as I shall prove
piainlye in their objection. And it is a mere absurditye to affirm that the
dead body did de^ scend into hell, or any where else, saving only into the
grave.

Nephes which the Greeks have Nephes. E^ymology.
translated (...), and the La^ nestes animam, and the English, the soul: has
his name in Hebrew, Chal^ee Greek, and Latin, of breathing, because that it
cools, and refreshes with respiring, and breathing Nephes signifies as much
as ^nima, and tam late patet.

Nephes is that breathing substance, The definiti^ of Nephes.
sensitive, and lively power, and natural motion, whereby every living
^reature is norished, and moved* And this is of three sorts.

The first is vegetative, and common 1. Vegetative*
to herbs; and and the earth is the cause of the^. Esa. 10. 18.
trees: notwithstanding other l^uing creatures do grow, and are nourished.

The second is sensitive, which 2. Sensitive.
is common with beasts, and men: 3. Concupis^ble.
^or they feel, see, hear, smell, touch, taste: and also they both have
affections motions, and other per^rbatio^s: (...) they (...); and phantasy^* as
men do, they dream, they sleep, they wake, they sorrow, joy, for see,
Aristotle's in (...) (...) ^e animo.
provide, desire, will, receive profitable things, and refuse the contrary* they
love, hate, remember, they want only the immortal soul. Where Aristotle
seems to say, that Psyche. Corruptible.
Psyche, and the parts thereof, are corruptible and mortal, and dy^ with the
body, it is so: but ye soul he affirms Aristot.
to come from God, and to be immortal.

Aristotle will not have the immortal soul to be any of ye three before.
Nephes may some to some to be taken for the immortal soul in the 17. of Leui.
in the 10. verse. against him that eats blood, says God, I will turn my
face. Nephes I translate Him, or that man, as Imanuel does. Leu. 17. 11. the
life of y^ flesh is in ye blood. Life in hebrew is Nephes, for the life is
sustained by blood, ^ not the immortal soul.

I have appointed the blood to be an expiation and purgation, for (...), even
for your sins: for it is ^his blood that purges you. Nephes I translate you,
for so it signi^eth here. Darash nephes to care for (...) man's life. Ps. 142.
as in many other places. The whole 16. chap. of ^eu. declares this sacrifise
of ex^iation, and purgation by blood: ^ut it could not take away sin, ^ut
in them only, who by faith con^eiued, and represented thereby the ^loud of
Christ: their sacrifice, cere^onies, figures and shadows, figured Christ,
confer Heb. 8. 9. 10. neither ^ould the blood of bulls or gotes, ^ke away
sin, Heb 10. 4. 11.

This Nephes consists in senses, Genesis 1. ver. 20. 21. 24. 30. Nephes a
living creature*
^ouing, and in affections, and pro^er to the body, and dies with the ^odye.
Wherefore in the first of Ge^esis, it is taken four times for a nature that
has life, and has ^aia joined with it, which signifith the same. Wherefore
oftentimes Ne Phes joined with (...) is any living creature.
(...) alone, it is a coarse, a dead body, and the dead, joined with Caiia, it
is a living creature.

Nephes is proper to the body, and to th^se parts of man, which rise with the
body, and dye with the body: notwithstanding I think, that Nephes no part of
the im mortal soul.
it is no part of the immortal soul: neither can it be mortal, that is
immortal, as I shall prove in Neshama, after that I have done with Nephes.

Nephes consists in blood, breath, Nephes caiia. Wherein Ne phes consists.
life, vital spirit, senses, and in the whole mortal substance of any
liuelye and corruptible creatures.

And therefore such living creatures have their names of Nephes, and therefore
are called in latin anu mantes, or animalia, (...), of this natural life given
to them in their first The life. Nephes is the blood.
creation and generation. Nephes is the blood, and is so defined Leuit. 17. 11.
4. The life of every living creature is the blood. Wherefore this Nephes is
mortal.

Man likewise is written to have this life Nephes. Genes. 2. verse 7. Gen 2. 7.


And it is the life of other living creatures. Genesis 2. verse 19. it is taken
for the life, which consists in the blood. Genesis 9. verse 4. Leu. 17. verse
14. My life, says Abraham, may be preserved by thee O Sara, where Nephes is.
Genes. 12. verse 13.

The King of Sodom, desired of Abraham to have ye persons which he had
rescued. Genesis 14. verse 21. the men which were taken prisoners. Nephes a man
Gnacus be A dam Nephes he that shed death a man's blood. Pro. 28. 17.


And so does the 72. Interpretors translate Naphshim (...)* Leu. 2. v. 1. and
4. v. 2. and 20. v. 5. 2. Sam. 14. Leu. 23. v. 30. and 26. verse 15. Nom. 9. v.
13. and 19. v. 20. Ezec. 18. v. 20. Pro. 10. v. 3. c. 11. v. 25. c. 12. v. 19.
c. 14. v. 25. Nephes for a slothful man. pro. 16. v. 26. c. 25. v. 25. c. 27.
v. 7. Nom. 31. v. 28. Ezech 18. v. 5. 20. 27. Nephes a bo die with sens^* Psalm*
35 4. 7* ^ 17.
Nephes a body, with senses, blood, and other his properties. Leu. 16. verse
29. 31. to humble a man's body ^ay. 53. 10.
with fasting. Leuiticus 23. verse 27. 29. 30. 32. Esaias. 58. verse 5. 10. Eze.
chiel 18. verse 4. Psalm. 30. verse 3. Psalm. 35. verse 13. and 49. verse 16.
and 69. verse 13. and 86. verse. 12. and 66. verse 9.

Thou have delivered my body from Nephes a man 1. Sam. 22. 23. La^ary nephes
beauy or ^ad. Prou. 31. 6.
the grave. Nephes from Sheol. Psalm. 30. verse 3. Psalm 88. verse 3. and 94
verse 17. and 105. verse 19. where Joseph's body was pinched with the stocks,
and fetters, psalm. 106. ver. 16* Psalm. 107. verse 9. Esaias 58. 5* and 58. verse
10. Hie^. 4. verse 10. 31. and Esaias 53. verse 9. 10. Ezechiel. 16. verse 5.
Preach. 2. verse 24. Nephes Nephes a man self Job. 10. 1. Prou. 29. 24. Prou.
25 25. Pro 27 7.
is in all these places, for a man that lives, as ye may read in these places
alleged, if you confer them with judgment, and in Psalm. 116. verse 7. where
David wills himself to return to rest, after that he Gnatsath nephes a man's
own counsel Piou 27. ^. prou. 29. 10.
had received benefits of Iehoua, who had delivered him from the tyranny of
Absolon, or of Saul.

Neither is Nephes here the immortal soul, which can not dye, Hanephes
servants cat tell and persons.
but the body, which is subject to death.

Abraham went out of his country, with all his servants and cattle, and
such as he had persuaded to his Religion, which he calls Hanephes, Leuit. 27.
verse 2. Nephes a ser u. (...).
Nomb. 15. verse 28. 30 Leu. 20. ^e. 6. and 22. verse 6. 10. for a servant
Prou. 28. verse 17. Bagnal Nephes Nephes a man ^lfe Pro. ^9. ^ Job. 7. 15
(...). 16. 4. Pro. (...). 4. Pro* 19. 2. 8. 1^. 16. pro. (...) 10. 23. pro. 22.
23 2^. Nephes (...) (...).
a cormorant, a greedy gl^tton* Pro. 23. verse 2. Nephes a man's* self Abacuc.
2. verse 4. give me the me^ says the King of Sodom in greek (...).

Here you may well perceive y^ Nephes is a word so large* that it signifies
servants and (...), as well* as free men, ^attell, and of her living
creatures* For it is nothing else b^t the life, ^ses, moving, appetite, and
(...).

They are dead ^th GOD to Exo^* 4 20. (...) ^* (...)*
Moses that sought thy life, y^ went about to kill thee. Naphsheca. and the
said phrase is uttered plainly in (...)
other words, meaning the same thing, in the 24. verse of the same chapter,
where God would have killed Moses.

Neplies the life of a beast, Prou. 12. ver. 10. Chaneth^ bat san^ napshi:
(...)
I aflicted my body with abstinence. Psalm. 35. verse 13. here is Nephes the
body. Nephes is the whole man (...)
with senses, will, affections, industry, endeavor, reason, memory,
intelligence, heart, mind, breast, breath, blood, vital spirit, and other
faculties. Psalm. 71. ver. 23. Gomel naph^ sho: he does good to himself. Pro.
11. verse. 17. His breath kindles the Nephes for a br^ath.
coals, and causes them to burn. He means it of the breath of Leuiathan.
Job. 41. 12.

Nephes baraca a liberal person. Pro. 11. 25. A good man regards the life of
his beast, Iadag nephes (...) (...). pr. 12. 10. Shamar nephes is to lay in
wait for a man's life to kill Shamar Nephes ashith gna^soth benaphshi. I devise
with my self, I take counsel of my self, I. celebrate an^ consult.
him. Psalm. 71. verse 10. shamar nephes to regard a man's life. Pro. 22.
verse. 5. Job 30. 16. shaphac ne phes is to ^oure out a man's affection to utter
his grieffe. Psalm. 24. verse. 4 1. Sam. verse. 15. Lament. 2. verse 11. nasha
nephes is to swear psalm. 24. verse. 4. nasha nephes is also Psalm. 13. 2^
to lift up a man's affection, hart^, and Nephes an affection love good will,
heart.
mind, Psalm. 25. ver. 1. Psalm. 86. verse 4. Tsaphan nephes to lay in wait
for a man's life. Pro. 1. 18. Sichem loved Dina. va Tibbachi Naphsho. Nephes
Psalm 63. 8^
mine heart, mine affection, my love was fixed upon her. So did David ^leue
unto God by a fervent lou^, a constant affection, and with all his heart, 1. of
the Kings. 18. verse 1. Esaias 58. verse. 10. Job. 25. verse 12. Job. 16. verse.
18. Nephes Calilim. The life, the blood of them y^ are killed, cry for a
vengeance as Abels blood did. Genesis 4. 10. Esaye 26. 21. Habacuc. 2. 11. 12.

But I would rather call Nephes the body and the whole man. For they being
wounded, and at the point of death by tyrants, cry out for vengeance, and of
their injury.

Cim nephes to take away a m^ life. ps, 56. ver. 7. Bacash nephes is the same.
Ex. 4. ver. 19. Mat. 2. verse. 20. ps. 70. ver. 3. Hashein nephes bacaia is, to
preserve a man a live. psalm. 66. verse. 9. for life. psalm. 66. ve. 15. shamar
nephes is, to watch and lay wayt for a man's life. psalm. 71. ve. 10. Nephes the
life Gen 35. 18. Gen 44. 30. twice.


Nephes for the life Genesis 35. verse 18. The life of Jacob depends of the
childs life. Gene. 44. verse. 30. Exo. 4. ver. 19. Iosu. 2 ver. 13. Job. 2^
verse. 8. Judge. 12. verse. 3. Esa. 53. verse. 10. 11. 12. hier. 19. ver. 9. cap.
21. verse. Nephes the mind har^ and inward parts pro. 16. 24. Pro. 19. 18.
pro. 23. 6. pro. 25. 12*
9. 7. cap. 22. ver. 25. psa. 35. verse. 3. 12. Proverbs. 13. verse. 8. 1.
Sam. 25 verse 26. 29, chap. 26. verse 21. 2. Samuel. 1. verse. 9. 2. Samuel. 14.
verse. 7. for life. 2. Samuel. 19. ver. 5. three times. 1. of the kings. 17.
verse. 22. 23. Chap. 19. verse. 2. 3. 4. 2. of the kings. 1. verse. 13.
Leuiticus 2. Eze* 16 verse. 5. Ezech. 18. ver. 5. 27. Ester. 7. ver. 3. Job. 2.
ver. 4. 6. Job. 6. verse. II. Job. 12. ver. 10. cap. 13. ver. 13. cap. 27. ver.
2. 8. Job. 33. ver. 18. 20. 28. 30. psalm. 7. ver. 2. 5. psalm. 22. verse. 21. 33.
psalm. 31. verse. 8. psa. 40. verse. 20. psalm. 59. ver. 3. psalm. 69. verse 1.
psalm. 70. verse. 2. psalm. 94. verse 21. psalm 97. verse 11. psalm. 116. verse
5. 8. psalm 131. verse 4. psalm 139. verse. 13. psalm. 142. verse 10. psalm.
143. verse 3. 6. 10. 13. pro. 1 ver. 13 cap. 6. ve. 26. cap. 8. ver. 36. cap.
10. verse. 2. 3. Cap. 15. verse. 40. cap. 18. verse 7. Cap. 19. verse 2. 16. Cap.
2^ verse. 2. Cap. 22. verse 5. 23. 25. cap. 24. verse 12. cap. 29. verse 10.
Esaias 43. verse 4. Leuiticus 26. ve. 3. 11. Nephes for God pro. 6. 16*
God abhors the Israelites for they I idolitry. Esaias 1. ve. 14. I hate and
abhor your sacrifices. psalm 24. ve. 4. he that has not taken the name of God
in vain, he that takes not in vain, says the lord, my name. Iere. 51.
verse 14. Amo^ 6. verse. 8. Naphshi, and therefore in the margyne Munster
puts Nephes a name. Nephes braca a liberal person. Prou. 11. 25. Nephes an
affection or delight.
Naphshi, and in the text Naphshi his name. read pagnine in Nephes, Flamminius
and other conjecture unfeignedly. Hierem. 1. verse. 14. It is Christ, says God,
in whom I take pleasure, in whom is my delight. Esaye 24. verse. 1. Math. 12.
verse. 18. There is Naphshi, in Nephes an appetite or lust. Job 38. 59. Ps. 41.
3. Job 33. 20 Ps. 49. 19.
whom I have pleasure, here is Nephes put for God the father.

Our lust or appetite is not to this Manna, we abhor it, we have nothing else.
Number. 11. verse. 6. The same is in Nombers. 21. verse. 5. Ezech. 16. verse.
27. psalm. 10. ver. 3. Psalm. 27. verse 12. Psalm. 49. verse. 19. Psalm.
107. verse 9. 18. Prou. 13. 4. twyse for lust
prou. 6. verse 30. cap. 13, ver. 4. twice verse. 25. cap. 23. verse. 2.
chapter. Nephes for tyrany Ps. 41. 3
27. verse. 12. 7. preacher 6* verse. 3. 7. 9. Deuteronomium. 23. verse. 24.
Hier. 31. verse 12. Esa. 29. ver. 8. 16. Esa. 58. verse 11. Hieremias 2. verse
24. Micheas 7. verse 1. And in Exodus Nephes bo ged^m false dealers. Prou. 13.
2.
15. verse. 9. I will, says pharao, fulfill my lust, my desire, and mine
affection, in spoiling these runnegats the Hebrews. Job. 39. verse 1. Habacuc.
2. verse. 5. Job. 33. verse 22.

Vaticrab Iashacath naphsho, his soul says the Geneua bible, draws to
Nephes shamar, to put to a man's will endeavor. di ligence affec tion. Ps. 34. 3.
the grave. The soul can not be buried. Therefore thus translate it, The man
draws toward corruption. Nephes shamar, is to take heed, to beware, to be
diligent, Dare operam, to put to a man's good will, Deuteronomy. 4. verse. 9. 92. cap.
6. verse. 5. Math. 22. verse. 37. Mark 12. verse 27. Luke. 10. verse 27. psalm.
19. verse 9.

Nephes and Sheol are so proper to the body, that lives and dies, that they
are very often joined together, to declare the mortality of mankind. God, says
David, psalm 49. verse 15. shall deliver my life, or me Ps. 49. 15* Nephes and
Sheol joined together.
my self, from the power of the grave: which other translate my soul from the
power of hell or of ye grave. The same phrase and words are in psa. 86. ver.
13. psa. 16. verse 10. pro. 23. verse. 14. Nephes which they translate ye soul
is joined with silence, which signifies the grave. Nephes. a ma^s self Job. 32.
2* Job. 33. 18. Job. 33. 22, 28. Ps* 3. 2 Genesis 19. 20*
psa. 94. verse. 17. and the life joined with sheol. psalm 88. verse. 3. Casau
nephes, to lack a man's pleasure preacher 4. ver. 8.

Nephes a man's self, a man himself. Deu. 4. verse 15. Nom. 30. ver. 5. 6. 7.
8. 9. 10. 11. 14. Job. 6. verse. 7 Job. 7. verse 15. cap. 9. ver. 21. psalm. 3.
ver. 2. psa. 6. ver. 3. 4. psa. 11. verse. 1. psa. 18. ver. 12. 14. psa. 33. ve.
18. 19. psa. 34.* ver. 22. psa. 35. ver. 3. 10 14. 16. 20. 28. psa. 38. verse.
12. psalm. 42. ver. 1. 2. 4. 6. 8. 16. psa. 43. verse 5. psa. 57. ver. 1. 5. 8.
psa. 62. verse. 1. psa. 63, ver. 2. psa. 66. ver. 7. psa. 69. ver. 22. psa. 71.
ver. 11. 25. psalm. 77. verse. 3. psa. 88. ver. 15. psa. 94. verse. 19. psa. 103.
ver. 1. 2. 5. psa. 104. ve. 1. psa. 119. verse. 20. 26. 29. 82. 110. 178. psa.
120. verse. 2. 5. psalm 123. ver. 5. psalm 124. verse. 4. 7. psalm. 131. verse.
3. Esaias 15. ver. 4. Esa. 49. ^erse 7. Esaias 55. verse. 2. 3. Hie. 37. verse. 9.
Lament. 1. verse 11. 16. cap. 3. verse 20. 24. 25. 58. Ezechiel 3. verse 21.
Ezechiel 4. verse 14. ^osee. 4. verse. 8. proverb. 3. verse ^2. cap. 6. verse.
32. cap. 11. verse. 17. ^rouerb. 18. verse 7. cap. 17. cap. 19 verse 18.
preacher 7. verse 30. Bal. ^. verse 6. chapter. 3. verse 1. 2. 3. 4 Nephes his
self Esaias 5. 14
^hapter 6. verse 11. Joshua 23. verse ^1. There died so many of surfets
drunkenness, that the grave sheol ^as said to make her self wider. ^ephes.
Esaias 5. verse 14. Habacuc Nephes the mind, heart, or affection Ps. 25. 1. Ps.
86. 4.
^ve. 5. Pagnine in Nephes, She^, and Racab. Chimus in psalm. 4. ^onas 4. verse
8. Eze. 13. verse. 18. 9. 20. Nephes for the vexation of ^ind. Deutrono. 28.
verse 65. The ^4. verse, and 66 expounds it of ^e greise and pains which
they all. sustain 2, of the Kings 4. All inward powers Job* 21, 23*
^rse 27. Job. 7. verse 11. chap. 10 ^rse 1. psalm 13. verse 2* psalm 24.
verse 4. psalm. 25. verse 1. psal^ All inward poures. Job. 21. 23.
107. verse 26. psalm. 146. verse 1^ prou. 14. verse 10. cap. 16. verse 24*
chapter 21. verse 10. chapter 24. ver* 14. chapter 25. verse 10* chapter. 2^
verse 9. chapter 28. verse 25. Esaye 26. verse 8. 9. Lo Nephes ^adag (...) to
be gilty. Job. 9. verse 21. Racab* Nephes of a broad or shout stoma^ and
courage, or arrogant and proud, prou. 23. verse. 26. Nephes a tablet* Nephes a
ta blet Esaias 3. 20
Esaias. 3. verse. 20. because that* a tablet is much desired and so is Nephes
put for a desire, Chimus says so, or rather as Rabby Abraham notes, because
there, I mean in the heart is the life, and therefore they used to hang their
tablets there.

Nephes is a body without life, ^ coars, a dead body without senses, Nephes Ps.
16. 10. a coarse or dead body.
and feeling. psalm 16. verse 10. Leu. 19 verse. 28. Leu. 21. verse. 1. 11.
Leu. 22. verse 4. Nomb. 5. verse. ^ Nomb. 9. verse. 10. Nomb. 19. ver. i^ 13.
Act. 2. ver. 31. Act. 13. ver. 35. Ezech* 16. ver. 5* where Esaias prophecteth ^
(...). 53 12
the death of Christ, he saitha, that he gave his body to death, Naphshi,
which they translate the Soul. But his Soul could not dye.

And Virgil in the burial of Polidorus Aeniead ^. Psalm. 97* 10* (...) 72. 13.
Hier. ^. 19. and 28. 6. Ios. 2, 24. Ps. 33. 19. Pro. 22. 23. Nephes for (...)
berality.
uses anima for the dead body in these words: animamque sepulchro condimus:
and Lactantius in Phaenix used anima for the body.

Nephes for liberality. If thous show thy self liberal to the nedy. Esa. 58.
verse 10.

The Bible printed at Geneua tra^slateth it thus: If thou pourest out thy soul
to the hungry, and refreshe the troubled soul, the shall the light spring out
in darkness.

The Bible read in the church has thus: If thou have compassion upon the
hungry, etc. Here is Nephes taken for liberality, for a liberal mind, and a
willing affection* and compassion toward y^ poor. They should have
translated it thus: If thou pourest out thy liberality* upon the poor, and
refreshest the Nephes for a person. Esaias 58, 10.
troubled person, then shall thy ligh^ spring out in darkness.

Thus far have I declared out of the canonical books of the old T^ stament,
what Nephes is, and (...) What nephes is properly.
of those places, where it is found^ and I do not find it for the immo^ tall
soul in any place, but alwaye^ applied to the body, which dies (...) man, who
is consumed by age, sickness, or other means: or toy^ breat^ which does
exspire, or blood, tha^ is shed, or y^ senses that shall pe^. ^he* or to
certain motions of the mind or affections, which dye with the body, or
servants, persons, or (...) a coarse, and dead body, so beasts, which are al
mortal, or to God him* self, who has no soul, and therefore does signify God,
for that he is the Nephes appli ed to God.
giver of life, breath, and being, t^ all creatures: neither has God a^
immortal soul, for that is a part The immor tall soul,
of man, inspired by God, about the 6. month after the conception, a^ I have
declared in my Latin book ^e animo.

Neither is Psyche taken for the immortal soul, in the books cal^d
Apocrypha, saving, as I reme^^er, in the 3. of Wisdom, verse 1.
Notwithstanding the Greeks take ^ diverse times for the immortal ^ul: as Plato
in Phedone and Axia^. Aristotle de ortu animaliu^ and de animo* 3 c. 5*
But Aristotle takes it for that ^rt of man that dies, and the immor tall
soul he calls (...)* animae, which ^ey translate souls, are the bodies the
41. verse of Esdras 4.

^n the new testament it is for the Psyche the life Math* 6. 1^ twyse Job, 36,
14.
^e: as Math. 2. verse* 20. Exodus 4. 20. They are dead that sought (...) life
of the child. Math. 6. ver. 15. ^ke 12. ver. 22. Mat. 10. verse 39. find a man's
life, is to save it. read ^ath. 16. verse 25. of that phrase. ^rse 26. Mark. 8.
ver. 35. 36. 37. (...). 9. verse 24. 25. cap. 17. verse 33. ^n 12. verse 25. in
which places ^ phrase above mentioned is truly ^pounded. Math. 20. ver. 28.
Mark. 10. verse 45. Luke 7. verse 20. 22. 23. cap. 14. verse 16. cap 21. verse
19. John 10. verse 11. cap 12. ver. 25. cap 13. verse 38. cap. 15. ver^ 13. 2.
Cor. 1. verse 23. 1 Thessalonians. 5. (...) 23. Acts 20. ve. 10. c. 20. ver. 24* cap.
27. ve. 10. Romans 11. verse 3^ and 16. verse 4. philip. 2. verse 30* 1 Thessalonians.
2. verse 8. Heb. 4. ve. 1^ 1. John 3. 16. Reuelat. 12. ver. 11* psyche for God
himself. Math. 12* 18. Esaias 42. 1. Heb. 10. 38. An^ so does God the father
expound the place of Esaias 42. in the 17. verse (...) the 3. of Matthew. In whom
is m^ delight. (...), ex animo willing^ ly. Ephesians. 6. 6. Coloss. 3. 23* Do
(...) things willingly like good childr^ and not unwillingly as seruaunt^ do,
compelled by their masters. Psyche a man's self. Luke. 12. 1^ Psyche a man's
self,
John 12. (...). Acts 25, 24. 2. Co^ 12. 15. Hebrews 13. 17. 2. Peter^ verse
8. psalm. 120. ver. 6. Psych^ a dead body. Act. 2. v. 27. 31. Psych^ ^ consent,
as they were all of one Psyche a con sent.
mind, and consent. Acts 4. verse 31. phil. 1. 27. Nephespsyche en ^euour*
stu die, diligenc^. mind a^fectio^. Thomas A qui^e i^ E^. P^. 34. 3 Genesis 27. 31.
ps. 71. 23


Thou must love thy God, with all thy psyche, with all thy study, and
endeavor, toto tuo sensitiuo appe^itu, as Lyra interprets: with all thine
intelligence, wisdom, cogitation, as Chrysostom: with all thy life, with all
thy mind, as Augustine: with all thy will and mind, as Glossa Ordinaria: we al
thy life, which thou ought to yield up for him, as Origin: Math. 22. 37.
Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Luke 10. 27. Mark 10. 45. Revel. 18. 14.

To save a man. (...) Mar. Psyche a man.
3. 4. Luke 6. verse 9. Acts 2, 41. Acts 14. verse 2. Romans 2. 9. 2. pet. 2.
verse 14. 3. John verse 2. Acts 7. verse 14. and 27, verse 37. Romans 13. verse
1. 1. Cor. 15. ver. 45. 1. pet. 3. 20. and 1. 22. August. Tom. 5. de ciuitat*
dei. lib. 18. c. 22. calls psychas men, which were in the Arc of Psyche man's
fearful nature.
Noac. My nature, all ye parts of my body, wherein is any life, do fe^re
death: my will is unwilling, my mind vexed, mine affections moved, mine heart
is wounded, my members shake, my breast pants, Math. 26. 38. Mark 14. 34.
Heb. 12. 3. John 12. 27. Ps. 6. 4. The immortal soul.
my legs faint, mine hands trimble, and all my senses are amassed: his flesh
was so troubled, that h^ desired, that if it were possible that he might escape
death.

(...) is for the immortal soul Math. 10. verse 27. 28. James 1. ver 1 Peter
2. 11. 25 1. Peter 4. 19. Revel. 18. 13.
21. 1. Peter 1. 9. where Peter interprets the reward, or rather the end of
faith, to be the salvation of our souls.

(...) in the new Testament signifies for the most part the same that Nephes
does in the old Testament: notwithstanding it signifies in two, or three
places, in the new Testament, the immortal Soul, as I have noted a little
before.

Now least that any man ^houlde conceive any sinistrall meaning, for that I
do not translate Nephes in any place the immortal soul, neither Psyche, but
in few places, I will declare what the Soul is by definition, and with what
words it is truly, and pro^erly expressed.

In this discourse yeshal have brefly repeated, the errors of them, ye have
wrongfully written of ye soul, Sinistrall opini ons of the immortal soul.
their opinions opened, their phan^asies detected, their heresies confu^ed,
their judgments confounded, their authorities removed, and their ^ssertions
condemned.

And although I do not do this at ^arge in words, notwithstanding ^here shall
be matter inoughe to re^ell them all in the scriptures, which I will allege,
for the mainte^aunce of the immortalitye of the ^oule, and for the insatiable
pleasures which it has so sone as it departs ^ut of this body

I utterly detest the Sadduces, and Epicures, who deny y^ immortali^ of the
soul.

Neither do I think with the Essees, that the souls come ex aethe^ Essees
Joseph. ^. c* 7* de bello
re sub^ilissimo into these bodies, a^ when they depart to go over the Ocean
Sea, into a pleasant place* Souls in fortu ^ate yles. Pharisees. Souls going
from bodies. Joseph. 2 c. 7, de (...), Irenaeus lib. 2. c. 59. Seleucians*
Angelscreated souls. Gnostiques in the year of Christ 108* Souls of the
^ubstance of God. Anno 135. Clemens 215. in Eglog. in Hip Souls in the ^trice.
in fortunas insulas, or in C^mpos El^sios.

Neither with the Pharisees, who say y^ they go from bodies to bodies, and into
beasts, and from one to another, as Pythagoras prateth, and the Carpocratians.

Neither we the Seleucians, and Herm^ans, who said that the Angels did create
the souls.

Neither with the Gnostiques, that the souls are of the substance of God, or
shall rise again, and not the bodies: of this error was also Valentinus and
Marcus.

Neither with Clemens Alexand^nus, that the soul remains in y^ matrice* and
there ^oth for the seed (...) man, where the bo^y is made.

Neither with Origene, Proclus, and Origene. 2^5. (...). Tom. 1. L^b. 2. Souls
sinned before the bodies. Maniches 2^5. Souls in the sun and moon.
Purgatot^. Epiphanius in Maniche. Hi^ro. Tom. 9. Theodor^ olimpiod. Souls of
the substance of God. Tertullian Lib. 4. contra Marcionem. Bosom ^of Abraham.
Aglaophon, who affirm that the soul is in paradise, and there synneth, and
therefore to ^e thrust and enclosed in ye body as in a prison, for his
punishment and purgation.

Neither with the Maniches, who hold that the Souls go into the globe of the
moon, and from thence into the globe of the sun, where when they are
sufficiently purged, like as our purgatory proctors defend, they are
translated in to the region of saints.

And they say that y^ souls which are in beasts, and men are all one, and to
be of the substance of God, with Cerdon and Marcion.

Neither with Tertullian who calls y^ bosom of Abraham no heavenly place,
but a region higher then hell, where the souls are refreshed unto the
resurrection: and Lib. de anima, Souls in hell until the last day.
that this bosom of Abraham is a temporal place for the Souls, are that they
are seq^stred in hell until the day of the Lord. If they Souls in hell
until the last day
be yet in hell, what needed Christ to descend into hell, or what did he there?

Nor with Origin, who appoynteth Origene. Souls in an earthly place*
the souls to be in an earthy Paradise, as in a school where they are taught
of all things, which they had seen in the world. Notwithstanding in the 3.
Hom. upon Inconstancy.
Luke, he says, That the soul departed, deserves to see the Angels, the holy
ghost, the Lord our savior, and God the father. Behold his inconstancy.
Arabian. 330. Eu^eb. 6. c 37. Souls dye with the bodies. pristicilianistes
anno. 380 Souls of the substance of God. Epiphanius in Anchorato. Souls in a
certain custo die.


Neither with certain Arabians, who affirmed that the souls died with the
bodies, and should rise with the bodies.

Neither with the Priscilianistes, that the souls are of the same nature and
substance that God is of, and willing to descend out of heaven, to be
exercised in these bodies.

Neither with Epiphanius, that the souls are in a certain custody, there
reserved until the last day. Lactantius Lib* 7. c. 21. and 6. c. 4. Lib. 6. c.
3.


Nor with Lactantius, who appoints one safe custodye for all the souls unto
the day of judgment. H^erom 488, Abraham inhel. Soul bege^ teth the soul.
Te^tul. Apoli ^arius. August Lib 83 quaest. 80. Herom ad M^lli and A^psy.
Pelagians. Au gust lib. 4. co^ traduas ep^t. pelagi^norum Souls of in fantes
not sinful, August, ad quod vult d^ um.


Neither with Hierom ad Paulinam, who say, that Abraham, although that he be in
a place of refreshing* notwithstanding it is written that ^e is in hell with
Lazarus.

Nor with Tertullian, and others of our days, and the (...), who say, that one
soul (...) an other, os one body an other: which error I have confuted at
large in my book de animo, and upon the second of Genesis.

Neither with the Pelagians, who ^tend that the souls of infantes have no more
sin then Christ's had.

Neither with them that affirm, that the souls of the wicked be turned Souls
of the wicked turned into deuels. Chrysostom hom. 18. in 8 Actor^m hom 4. in
Marki in Luke 16.
into deuilles when they are ^ead.

Neither with Chrysostom, who will have all good men's souls to be in hell, til
Christ descended, and delivered them. And likewise none to Hom. de dini te and
lazaro. Souls vnrewar ^ed. Christ. upon the Hebrews 11. Hom. 28. Behold his in
constancy.
receive any reward till the resurrection, but Abraham and paul to look to
be rewarded, and Abel to sit uncrowned, and Noac likewise though they have
prevented us in labor, and pains, and conflictes, they shall not prevent us in
crowns, if they be yet unrewarded, how the^, did Christ deliver them? where
did he bestow them? Eu^hy. upon 2^. Luke. No righteous man has re ceiued the
promise.


Neither with Eut^ymius, who says, that no just man's soul as yet has
received the promise. The like does Theophilact upon Luke 23. and Theodoret
upon the 11. to the Hebrews. Aretha upon the 6. of Barnard in 2. hom. om* sanct
Souls in the entry. John 23. pope 13 15. Masseus. No soul shall see God be
fore the last day.
the Reuelat. with Justinius Martyr.

Neither with Barnard, who appoynteth the souls to stand in the entry, but not
yet entered.

Neither with John the 23. pope of that name, who defended and caused it to be
preached in Paris, that no Soul should see God before the last day.

Neither with the^ y^ send all the fathers before Christ to hell, as
Damascene, who says that Christ's soul deified, was made very God and
descended into hell, for if his human Soul had descended it could have done
nothing, for that it was and is a part of man.

Neither with the papists, that say that infantes dying without Baptism are
damned in Limbo Puerorum.

Neither with the papists, who make three hells besides the lowest, which we
only acknowledge, the other the scripture denies. Is Infantes saved Limbus
infan tium.
it reason to send infantes, that dye without Baptism to hell? to Limbus
infantium? are they not foreknowne of God? did he not love them? are they not
in the covenant of the blessed seade of Abraham? are they not written in the
book of life? are they not created of god? are they not y^ children of God? are
they not predestined of God?

Neither with the whole rabble of the barbarouse schoolmen, and Doctor Smith
now of late, who within this two or three hundredth years, have invented a
place called Limbus patrum.
Limbus patrum, the third hell, or fourth after some, where the fathers lay till
Christ came to fetch them out.

And because that the old doctors ^duced by the translation of the 72.
interpretors, being Jews, that translated the Bible, or rather thorough their
ignorance in the hebrew tongue, did send Christ to the nether most hell, for
the old authors knew of no more, but of two places out of this world, Heaven,
and Hell. Two places.
The schoolmen, as Thomas, and Bonauentura with the rest, do not agree
Cortesius in 4 sent. d^st 3.
of the p^ating of these helles. For some place Purgatory highest, some Limbus
patrum. The old aucthors that knew no mo helles but one, send Christ
thither. The barborous The dunses invented Lim bus.
Dunses supposing that to be an absurdity, that Christ should go to that hell,
where there is no redemption: forged an other place, and called it a part of
hell, or the skirtes of hell, out of the which Limbus pa trum. Purgatory a
monge the Greeks was not determi ned neither credited of the Greeks until the
council of Fe^r in the year of Christ 1438. which deter mination when they to
turned was re fused and repea led. Math. wys Mary's Lut^* Bona.
Christ fetched the fathers, and termed it Limbus patrum, a place as unknown
to the scriptures and old writers, as the word is in that signification in all
tongues.

Neither with the Papists, who affirm, that many souls go to purgatory,
which some say is on the right hand, as you go to hell, some on the left,
some in mount Aetna in Sicily, some in Torrida Zona, some in the Moon, some in
Irelande, as ye may read in these verses.

When purgatory did begin,
they did dissent, and strive therein:
Some say when God did creat all
Other when that Angels did fall,
Some say that none therein did dwell
till Christ was come and harried hell.
Some say that then it took effect,
and there men's faults and deeds correct
they do not know the end of it,
that does require (say they) some wit.
Some say the end must needs be tha^,
when Christ shall com to judge each man.
Alexander sixth of that name Alixander the 6. pope

denies that, and them does blame
that so do teach, or yet defend,
and all such men to hell does send.
I can (says he) of pardon give
ten hundredth thousand year and more Rosar.

to them that me fear and believe.
This can I do after the last
day of judgment, this I hold fast,
what dar Christ say if thou do bring
my bull, and pardon with my ring.
Thus shall thou scap the day of do^e
such pardons I do give at Rome.
As they dissent how it began
so do the school men every man.
They discord in their gloses vain
in their argues they do remain,
seking out their formalities,
using their ancient quidities.
Most say that it is one great part
of hell, where souls do feel the smart,
the highest of the fourfold hels,
not the lowest where devils dwelles,
Neither Limbus infantium,
nor yet Limbus of old patrum:
but one as fierce in punishment
as any of the^, where souls are shent.
Some say this place is as you go
in a dark dongeon full of woe:
unto hell gates on the right hand,
this is the popish gainful land.
Other all this stoutly deny,
and on the left hand they can it spy:
The monk Odilo does souls roste,
in the mount Aetna, and there the^ tossed Voluter. poly. dor. 6. c. 9.

for there he places Purgatory:
Pollidor tells this lying story.
Some say Saint Patrique placed it
in Ireland, these men lack wit.
Some in the fire above the air,
where yse and cold are, with great care.
Some under Zona torrida,
where are incendia feruida:
the souls are burnt and roasted there,
where fiery flames do fume and fere. Maniches.

Some send them up into the moon
where when they are purged somewhat.
from thence into the region
of saints names does the^ translate.
Neither with Empedocles, who Emped oc. Tusc. 1. The soul blood.
terms y^ soul to be ^bloud about the heart, nor with others, to be a part
of the brain, * for they must needs dye with the rest of the body, whereof
they are a part.

If the life which is in y^ senses, or The soul is the life. Zeno. The soul
is harmony. Aristoxenus. Democritu. The soul of Atoms. Dinarchus.
y^ fire, as Zeno phantasieth, it must be quenched.

If the harmony of Aristoxenus, or Atoms of Democritus, it must be dissolved.

If an harmony of the four Elements, as Dinarchus doteth, it must perish with
the Elements, when we shall have a new heaven, and a new earth. Seuerus. A
woman the work of the devil. Epi. Ph. Tom. 3. lib. 1. H^. 45.


Neither with Seuerus, wh^ defended that a woman is the wor^ of the Devil, and
man from the navel upward, is the work of God* and from the navel downward y^
work of Satan, and matrimony likewise.

Neither with Hierarhcas, that denied that children perteyned to the Children
no^ saved. Hilar. 6. de Trinit.
kingdom of heaven, because y^ they had no merits.

Now let us, as we promised define the immortal soul, and prove y^ same
definition by y^ scripture. The soul defined.


The soul is an invisible substance without a body, created immortal, which
God gave with breathing upon Adam, what time as his body was made perfect, and
is now infused by GOD into the child about the sixte month after the
conception.

His outward breath signifies that he gave an inward substance, as when he
breathed upon the Apostles, The breath of God was an outward sign
his breath was an outward sign, but with that he gave the holy Ghost, so
with his breath ^ee gave the immortal soul. And thus I translate the 7. verse
of the second chapter of Genesis

And Iehoua Elohim has shaped this man of the mold of the earth: and breathed
into his nosethrils the spirit The immor tall soul.
of lives: and this man was made a living creature.

In this verse is contained y^ perfect creation of man, the body of the earth,
the soul from God. Preacher. 12.


This place describes unto us y^ soul of man from whence it comes, and who
gives it, and the immortallity thereof: from heaven it comes: for Neshama
has his Neshama* Shamaim.
name of shamaim heaven, for that the immortal soul comes from heaven, as I
discourse a little after. And God gives it, in so much as he breathed it into
man.

And that it is immortal y^ word Caiim.
Caiim lives, which is the Duall number, declares: for to other living
creatures God only gives life, Nephes caiia: y^ which he gives Nephes caia*
the spirit of lives.
life, Nephes caiia: y^ which he gives also to man, which signifies all our
senses, moving blood, vital spirit, body, affections, and other faculties
which rise with the body, and dye with it.

But this spirit of lines declares an immortallity, that we live in this life
by faith and hope, and shall live in the next everlastingly.

And where ye have this Hebrew word Caiim in the duall number, Caii^.
it signifies immortalitye, as the tree of lives, of the which if Adam had
tasted, it would have brought immortallity.

It is no good ^ense to say that man was made a living soul. For man was not
made, nor is not a living soul, but a living creature: for the A living soul
is the body.
soul is but a part of man, and therefore a man cannot be a living soul.

Neither is the Hebrew word which is here translated in ye greatest Nephes*
Bible the soul, applied to the immortal soul, but to those powers The
sensiti^ life.
only an qualities, which rise with the body, and dye with the body. (...)
^e^. Neither does it die with the body, as the Sadduces seduced men: Neither
are the souls of the same eternity with God: neither are they of the
substance of God: neither do they go from men in to beasts: Maniches.
Theodoretus.
neither from beasts into me^: neither have men and beasts all one soul, as
the Maniches do dream, and as the translation to this seventh ver. seems to
affirm, in saying that Man was made a living soul, which should be translated
a living creature.

The Maniches deny the resurrection of the bodies, and affirm that the souls
shall rise only, for say they, it is in Paul, The body must be given to
Satan, that the spirit may be saved: whereon they falselie gather, that the
bodies should not rise, but only the souls. Nephes.


Again 1. Cor. 15. man is called Nephes a living creature, because y^ he has
life, blood, senses, moving, and affections, as other living creatures have.
Man is here called the earth, because that he should understand Homo ad hu mo.
a man. Anoch.
that he is earth and returns to earth* And ther^re called in laten Homo an
(...) c^ature: Anosh in h^brue, for that he is mortal, and full of corruption,
as in greek brotos.

Neshama, as Esra upon the 7. of Genesis and Rabby Solomon upon the 150. Psalm.
say, is always applied to the immortal soul of man: or else to God: whis^h
both I will prove in this discourse. It is in Genesis Genesis 2. 7.
2. 7. Iehoua Elohim fourmed this same man dust of this earth, and breathed
into his nosthrelles the breath of lives* and this man was made a living
creature. Thus far the text.

In the creation of all other creatures, Moses uses only Elohim, and likewise
in the creation of man and woman, Genesis 1, 26. 27. 28. to declare that all
things are the woorkeman ship of the whole Trinity. But here, where h^ more
exquisitely describes the nature and dignitye of man, he adds also Iehoua:
which is the Essential name of God: formed) God facioned the body of the
earth, that man may know that he is but dust. Genesis 3. 16. Genesis 18. 27. Psalm.
103. 14. Psalm. 104. 29. and this body he calls ^ living creature: because
that man has the vegetative and sensitive life, common with other living
creatures: and besides, Nephes Caia^ Nephes caia.
which signify all our senses, blood* ^omplections, phleme, cholor, me^
lancholy, and all affections. He breaths into man Neshmath caim* Neshmath
caim.
the spirit or breath of lives: which is the immortal Soul inspired (...)
God-For with breathing, which was an outward sign, he gave an inward thing,
and that was the immortal soul: for as Christ breathing upon the Apostles,
gave them the gifts of the holy Ghost: so with breathing upon Adam, he
gave him the immortal Soul. Into The immortal soul.
his nostrils. why did he breath in to his nostriles? to signifye unto us ^ude
mortal men, that he inspired in inward immortal Soul.

Neshama.) The immortal Soul Preacr^. ^. read a note Job. 12. 10. Genesis 7. 22.
Ge^ 2.
is inspired by God, and called Nesh ama, for that it comes from Heaven, and
from God, and thither shall return: and proper to man and to none other
creature. Wherefore, after that Moses had declared that all kind of beasts had
died: he adds also man, in whose nose^rels was the breath of the Spirit
Neshamath ruac ca^m. Genesis 7. 21 2^* 23.
of lives.

Neshama is for ye immortal soul in this phrase: Deu. 20. 16. suffer none Deu.
20 16.
^o live, in whom is the immortal Soul Neshama.

He willed them to kill all the men of those seaue^ nations: and no beasts:
Joshua 6. 21. Col hanephes* is spoken of man and beast.
if he had meaned both men and beasts, he would have said Col hanephes: as
is specified in Joshua. 10. 28. 39. 32. 33. 35. 37. 39. 40.

Where as Joshua destroyed man Joshua. 10. 28. Joshua. 11. 11. Joshua. 11. 14.
and beast, it is added: both Col Hanephes, and Neshama. Joshua left nothing
undestroyed in Hasor: But in the other cities he killed only the men where Col
Neshama is applied only to mankind.

This kind of spech is oftentimes in scripture, to say that the soul and life
is gone out of the body, when as it is but sickened, grieved and vexed, as Psa.
107. ver. 5. They were so hongry and thirsty, that their life and soul failed
them, notwithstanding they were not dead. So Knataph is used psalm. 61. verse 3.

A certain magistrate came to Christ, and said that his daughter was dead: But
Christ said that she was not dead but slept. Mat. 9. 9. 18. 24. 25. 24.

There was one that brought his Son, who had a dumb spirit to Christ, which
when Christ had expulsed, the child was as good as dead. In so much, that many
said that he was dead. Mar. 9. 17. 26.

There is a manifest place, Act. 20. ver. 7. 10 where a yongman one Eutichus
fell out of a window, and they took him up dead. Notwithstanding Paul says
that the life was in him.

When as Abigael, had told her husband Nabal the heavy message, and violente
intent of David, his heart was dead within him, and yet he lived ten days
after. 1. Kings. 25. 37. 38.

When Jacob knew that his son Joseph was a live, his spirit reuyued, his
spirit was not out of him. Genesis 45. 27.

Raab says* when we heard of you O Israelites, our hearts were amassed, neither
remained there any breath or life in us. Iosu^. 2. verse 11.

There was an Egiptian, who ha^ neither eaten bread, nor droncke any water by
the space of three days, unto whom David's soldiers gave meat and drink, and
his spirit returned into him again. No^ withstanding he was not dead ^ kings
30, 31. 1. Sam 30. 12.

The Queen of Saba was so (...) nied and in such admiration wi^ Solomon and
his pomp, tha^ there was no breath nor life in he^ 3. kings. 10. 5. 2. Croni,
9. 1.

The wydowes son of Sarphat was very sick but not dead these are the words,
his sickness was (...) 3. Kings. 17. 17.
vehement, that no breath appeared or sturred in him.

Thus far the text, other transla^ it all rwonge, who say y^ there (...) mained
no breath in him. For the Hebrew word Natar is not to (...) maine, but to
stur, to leap, to mo^ as in the 37. of Job. Mineharte sai^ Job is moved out of
his place.

Liby veieter mimmocomo: neith^ was his heart put out of his body, Job. 37. 1.
Ps. 146. Ps. 105.
or out of his place, but amassed, and troubled. Ps. 146. 7. Iehoua makes
prisoners to sckip Ps. 105. king Pha ^ao made Joseph to sckipp for joy when
he went out of prison. Besides this, if his Soul had been out of his body, it
had been in heaven: from whence Elyas could not have fecthed it for it was
glorified, and should not have returned to the corruptyble body, nether says
the text, that the Neshama, Da^, 10, 17.
child was dead, but very sick: one may be very sick and not dead, as this
child was, so when one is astonished he is as one dead, as Daniel, in whom
remained no breath, yet was not he dead. How could he be dead, when he mesured
him self. 3. times upon the child, and by the heat of Elias, the child not
clean dead remained and recovered and 3. Kings. 17. 2^ 22. Nephes.
this is proved by the 21. and 22. ver. where Elias desires God that the life
of the child might be refreshed, restored, renewed, recovered, let his lively
spirit come to him, his sense^ renewed, his moving restord.

Let his life return, that is, let the child be comforted, and his life be
restored, so is Shub used, joined with Nephes* Sam* 1. 16. (...) ps. 116 8.
psa. 19. 8. It is manifest of the ^kinges 17. 18
mothers complaint, that the child was not dead, when she said, Came thou
to me, to make my son dye? Ergo as yet he was not dead. And it appears in
the prayer of Elias in these words, that the child was not dead, but lay in a
trance, O Iehoua my God, willest thou so afflict the widow, and kill her son?
Ergo he was not killed as yet. Then says Elias, O Lord let the childs life
come again, let him live again, let him live and not die, let him recover
this sickness, let him come to himself. Shub nephes is eloquentlye expressed
in Laten, Colligere se, a man to refresh, to comfort, to recreat and to come to
himself. God heard the prayer of Elias, verse. (...).
and the child revived. Behold (says Genesis 45. 27.
Elias: thy son lives: yea he is revived: so is Caia used Genesis 45. 27. For
when Jacob saw the chariots ye Joseph had sent to fetch him into Egypt, his
spirit revived, and yet was he no more dead the^ this child. So is Caia used
Genesis 19. 19. to comfort, to revive, to make alive, and yet Genesis 19. 19.
Loath was not dead. Lehacheioth Naphshi, If I shall walk (says Da^id) in
extreme danger, thou reuiuest me, thou comfortest me, and preseruest me.

I would allege an hundredth places to this effect, if the matter were not
evident.

As concerning the child, this says Pagnine.

He was thought to be as one whose pulses and motion ceased, and breathing
appeared not. But as neither David nor Loath were dead, though they were
revived: no more was Neshama.
this child, though lying in a trance. Neshama is applied to the son of
Zarephtha i^ a town between Tire and Sidon. Joseph. 8. c. 7. Neshama. Pro 20.
27.
the wydowe of Zarephtha: and to Daniel. 10. 17. and to Christ, Esaye 2. 22.
and to man, Job. 26. 4. Job. 27. 3. Job. 34. 14. Ps. 105. where I have noted
more.

Neshama, says Solomon, Pro. 20. 27 is the lantern of Iehoua given to Neshama
Ruac. Esaias. 42 5. Esaias. 57. 16. Job. 12. 10.
man as a most precious and immortal jewel, and to lighten man. I. Cor. 2.
16. In Esaias, Neshama and Ruac are joined together, and given Neshama ap pli^d
to God.
by Elohim Iehoua.

Neshama applied to man, it is his immortal soul: to God, it is his
Melancthon. The sorma^ on of man in the mothers ^ombe. Lact. de opi fic. c. 29
G^m. Psalm* 139. 16. 72. interpre tors. Read my book de any ^o.
spirit* power, grace, and might. Job. 4. 9. Job. 26. 4. Job. 32. 8. Job. 33.
4. Job. 37. 10. Psalm. 18. 16. Esaias. 30. 33.

Let us declare y^ whole formation of man. The first six days after
generation and conception, yt thing there begun is a rude piece without form,
or facio^, an imperfect mass which David calls Gole^. And this imperfecte
creature is declared lik^ wise by Racam, and Iatser, which signify Now it is
called (...) * and faetus, in hebrew go lem.
to make a thing imperfect, which he made by days.

And after 12. ^aies the liver, heart and brain are made. This verse would be
otherwise translated then it is in the Geneua bible. In the conception of
Christ, who was conceived of the seed of Mary, by an other word the angel
calls it Luke 1. 35. Math. 1. 20
(...), and in Mathewe it is (...). And in deed Christ was ^ourmed first
vnperfectlye of y^ seed^ of Mary in the matrice, as David was, least that we
should imagine Dimerit.
with the Dimerites that the body of Christ was Coessentiall with the
Monothelites Eutychians.
divinity and Godhead. In the same error were the Monothelites and Eutychians:
The child vulcurio.


After the conception, that thing that is conceived has none other life,
until the. 70. day, or at most Vegetative life.
until the 100. day, then the vegetative life, which is common with ^ll other
living creatures as well herbs, plants, trees, beasts, ^nsitiue life.
fishes, fowls, as men: and consists in growing, norishing, and increasing:
and from the 70. or 100. day after the conception, until the 6. month comes
into it the sensitive Hierom. August. de. Ecclesiast. dogma. c. 18.
life: and this is only in beasts, in animantibus, and in men, and not in
herbs and trees: and this consists in feeling, descerning, desiring,
moving, willing, seeing, The immor^all soul.
hearing, breathing, fearing, and sorrowing.

About the sixth month the immortal soul is infused. And Paul 1. The^* 5. 13.
makes this division, where he says: The God of peace keep you sound and
whole, that your spirit, life, and body, may be kept safe, and without
blame, until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. The spirit he calls the
immortal Preach. 12. 7. Job. 26. 4. etc. 27. 3.
soul, as Solomon does: the life the senses, and vital spirit, with
affections: the body the receptacle of both: and increases, and grows as
things vegetative do.

Gregory Nissene is of mine opinion, as concerning the exposition of this
place. Neither Lyra, nor the Ordinary gloss differ greatly from me. I expound
it of the soul, as does Didimus who is reproved of Augustine, August. Tom: 3.
de Eccles. dogm. c. 19.
Chrysostom, and Theodoret who reprove Apollinarius for expou^ ding it as I
do. Ambrose, Theodoret, Theodoret, dial 2. The spirit.
and Augustine, call this spirit the grace of the holy ghost: I call it the
soul.

The Greeks and Latins, following August. Tom. 4 quaest. ex vet. test. c. 23.
Theodoret in Haret Fab.
the 72. Interpretours, as Augustine, and Theodoret, prove by the 21. of Exodus
that the soul must needs come into the body, when ye body is perfect with all
his parts, ^ineamentes, and proportion: where Moses gives this law, That if a
man beat a woman, and if the child Exodus 21. 22.
shall not be borne with his full shape, the^ he that caused her to deliver her
^hild, shall yield life for life: but if ^t be without shape, he shall by ar^
bitrament pay according to the Job. 10. ver. 8. ^. 10. 11.
request of her husband. Which place, says Augustine, Job in like manner
discribeth. First, the whole frame and proportion of the body, and then the
immortal soul, in the Which is go ^em. in Psalm. ^39. 29. Mola embryo
10. ver. he says that God poured him out like milk, and like cruddes of
cheese has put him together. And in the 11. verse he adds the The immor ^all
soul Caiim. Ruac Ruac. Luke 23. 46. Psa. 31. 6. Act. 7. 59. Caiim is the
immortal ^oule.
frame of the whole body, as skyn, flesh, bones, and sinews, and in the 12.
verse. The immortal soul, which God gave him of his abundant mercy, and the
same soul he calls his spirit, as Christ does.

Job puts the Hebrew word Caiim in the duall number, to declare that God
gave him two lives, one here in this world, and an other in the next,
immortality.

Let us now join unto these the creation of Adam the first man, that we may
consider how all these do agree.

Who gave this soul? God did inspire it. What did he inspire? the i^ Genesis 2.
7. (...) (...) C^m. Nesham^ Caiim.
mortal soul. What calls he that? Nishmath caiim. What is Neshma? and what
is Caiim? Neshama is the immortal soul which God does give, and Caiim is
joined with it in the duall number, to declare the immortality of it, both in
this life and in the next.

In the 57. of Esaias God is said to Esaias. 57. 16.
make the souls Nishmath. Of the which there I have noted, and very largely
upon Job. 26.

Esra writing upon the 7. of Genesis says that Neshama is proper to man only,
and Rabby Abraham y^ it is not found without man. Read my note upon the 150.
Ps.

Josephus to answer both to Nishmath Josephus lib. (...)
Caiim, and to Nephes caia, translateth them (...), meaning as Moses does by
Neshama and Caiim the immortal soul (...) caii^ the life
(...) by Nephes caia the life which is ^egetatiue and sensitive.

This place is expounded by the W^dom. 15. (...) 11.
15. chapter of Wisdom, where it says, that God gives to man a working life.
(...), expressing ye sensitive life, uttered by Moses in N^hes Caia, and
Neshmath Caiim, it calls the vital spirit, Ruac. immortal soul. Prea. 12.
7.
(...), the immortal soul. Read my note upon Wisdom 15. The immortal soul is
called Ruac, which returns to God that gave it. If it return to God, Ergo
from God it comes, and from heaven. For they say, y^ Neshama has his Neshama.
name of Shamaiim, heaven, because that from thence the soul comes, and
thither returns.

Thither returned the soul of Ada^ immediately after his departure out Adam.
of ye body: thither Enoch his body and soul^ as some say: thither Abraham's
soul, thither all the faithful fathers souls, thither Elias with his body in
the sight of Elisaeus, thither the poor Lazarus soul in Luke, thither Christ
himself in the presence of his Apostles, thither the soul of Stepha^, Luke 16.
Act. 2. Act. 7.
thither Elias and Christ ascended, even unto the seat and majesty of
Iehoua: as in a figure at the next impression (Godwilling) shall be manifestly,
and more at large expressed, together with other matter, and figures to this
book appertaining.


FINIS.


THE BELIEF OF A CHRISTIAN CALLED THE COMMON CRED^ as it is repeated in
Augustine ad Pe trum Diaconu^, tom. 3. page 231. likewise in his book de fide
and sym^ bolo, pa. 144. also de sy^bolo ad Cathe. lib. 1. cap. 3. and 5. lib.
3* c. 6. and lib. 4. c. 6. Tom. 9. Chrysostom tom. 5. August* de temp. s^r.
123. 125.
In God the father I believe
the Lord omnipotent,
Who by his word did creat all,
earth, sea and firmament.
I bo believe in Jesus Christ
with all mine heart and mind,
Who is only the son of God,
and savior of mankind.
Who was conceived by the spirit,
the holy Ghost I mean,
Borne of Mary without all sin
a virgin chaste and clean.
Him Pontius Pilate judged to death,
and cruel sentence gave,
When he was dead they took him down,
and laid him in his grave.
From thence the third day he did rise,
for our sakes and comfort,
And So writes Ignatius Act. 107.
many one with him that hour,
as Mathewe does report.
Through aer and clouds he did asce^d
unto the seat of grace,
And there reigns triumphantly,
and has done all this space.
From thence he shall come down again
to judge the quick and dead,
So do the scriptures teach us plain
as we in them do read.
In the holy ghost I do believe,
who does our hearts inflame.
And causes us to worship God
and call on Christ's name.
I do believe there is a church,
a spouse most chaste and pure,
A faithful and elected flock
which ever shall endure.
I do believe God will forgive
my sins and life misspent,
And of as many as their faults
unfeignedly repent.
I do believe God will restore
and raise out of the ground,
All me^ that are consumde with death
with a loud voice and sound.
I do believe after this life
to fi^e an other out,
Better then this ten thousand fold,
of this I have no doubt.

