Remember Lots wife.

Two godly and fruitful Sermons very convenient for this our time: lately
preached on a Sunday in the Cathedral Church of S. Peter's in Excester: the one,
in the forenoone: the other, in the afternoon the same day.

By John C.

Math. 24. He that endures to the end, the same shall be saved.

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Orwin, and are to be sold by Edward White at the
little North-doore of S. Paul's, at the sign of the Gunne. 1588.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and virtuous Matrone, Mistress Mary Woolton, wife to
the Right Reverend Father in Christ, John, Lord Bishop of Excester, Grace,
faith and felicity in the Lord.
I Am not ignorant (Right worshipful) that worldly wits do desire to hear
rather Eliphas, Job. 2.
Bildad and Zophar, the Themanite, the Suhite and the Naamathite, to paynt
forth a bad matter eloquently: than patient Job, to handle a very good cause
with playnnesse and simplicity. To whose curious heads and itching ears, mine
harrish harmony deuoyd of learned method, utterance and grace, may seem
altogether unpleasant. Howbeit, I am not, for all that, all unwilling (upon
just occasions) now to publish that, which before I never meant to make
public, otherwise then by word only. For I persuade my self of the
goodness of my cause, and adventure to promise it, both profitable and godly.
Besides that, the candle once lightened is not for the Bushel, but for the
Table: the talent taken in hand, is not to be hidden, but to be employed. And
the light that a Christian man has in him, must so shine on every part, as
thereby the name of God may be glorified, and the godly edified. Neither ought
a Christian to be ashamed of Christ and of his word, seem it unto worldlings
never so contemptible. Finally, to commit that thing to perpetuity, which is
for the benefit of the brethren any way, is as commendable as it is
profitable, and oftentimes commanded to be done in the word of God, as an
especial help for man's mind, which (being as water that suddenly loses any
impression) without such memorandums, does very quickly forget things memorable
and most necessary. Therefore the Lord does not only write his commandments in
two tables of stone: but also commands Moses, and after him the Prophets,
and lastly his servant John, to write the things which they had seen, and
heard, being (as David says) profitable for the posterity, and (as Paul
confirms) for our learning, that we which be the Lords, may thereby be the
sooner furnished and prepared to every virtue. These things considered, might
sufficiently have persuaded the penning of these two Sermons, touching that
notable memorandum, which our Savior gave to the Jews, Remember Lots wife:
yet calling to mind with what a diligent ear and attentiuenes your self
listened to the matter uttered (by your own confession) with the good liking
and semblable commendations, wherewith ye beautified the same at that time,
(besides some desires of others, thereunto, esteeming the argument and matter
right requisite for this time) it prouok^d me to resume my pen with the more
dexterity and readiness, to gather up (as it were,) into a store basket the
fragme^ts of that spiritual banquet, which were scattered abroad, as justly as
I could, to be and remain to and for the use of them that had before tasted
of the same: hoping that they which liked it before, will not loath it now: and
nothing doubting by the grace of God, but that it will be to his glory and the
benefit of his Church, the only mark which I have aimed unto. In respect
whereof we may not stick (if we be the Lords) to hazard all the credit that
we have, yea and rather wish with Moses and Paul, to be as Anathema among
them of this world, then that we should hold back, or thrust to obliuio^ any
thing that may be to the advancement of the one, or profit of the other.
Having therefore preserved by pen, and noted these words in a Book, I both
commit and commend them to the Church of Christ, and among the true members of
the same, especially to your Worship, by whose often courtesies to me, I am
moved to thankfulness, and by whose happy choice of good Mary her lot, I am
stirred up to gladness: the token and signification whereof my good will
utters unto you in this my present, which (though so simple in show) is for
the matter as precious as pure gold tried in the fire. Therefore I pray you to
accept it gladly, to read it at your convenient leisure, and repose the
profit thereof in your breast, that thereby ye may both be comforted your self
with Mary: and also may the rather (as otherwise ye are well able) (God be
thanked) persuade others, not only women, but also men, to follow Christ in
faithful zeal, godliness and virtue, without wearines or fainting. The Lord
God grant, that the hearers and readers of this Book, may not only thereby
the sooner tend to the right use of memory therein taught them: but also
learn to go forth from Sodom, to proceed, and to hold on with just Lot,
toward the goal of everlasting life: and on the other side, with wisdom to
eschew the horrible sins and faults of Lots wife, by the consideration of the
fearful judgments of God on that unhappy woman. And even thus, I commend
both my good Lord and your self to the Almighty Lord, who bless, preserve
and keep you under the wings of his mighty protection.

From London the 28. day of June. 1588. Your Worships to my power in Christ.
John Carpenter.

O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. Open
the cares of thy people, that they may hear: and incline all our hearts to
believe and follow those things that be taught us in thy holy Word, through
Jesus Christ thy dear Son our Lord, Amen. Luke. 17. Verse. 32.
Remember Lots Wife.
ALthough the Lord God be so holy, and glorious, Ezech. 1.
that no man can behold him, and the very Angels be unable to sustain the
brightness of his face: And on the other side, man is so unclean, and
ignominious, Ier. 17.19. Genes. 6.
so stiff-necked, and stubborn hearted, so wicked, and abominable, that he
is forced with the Publican to hang down his head in great confusion: with
Daniel, Dani. 9.4. Psalm. 8.4. Hebr. 2.6.
to grant the due desert of open shame: with David, to admire that ever God
would vouchsafe either to regard or remember man: and that all men from the
highest of them to the lowest, can not but confess with blushing faces, that
all men be not only conceived and borne in sin, but also bred and brought up
in the same, being mere liars, and lighter than vanity. Psalm. 116. verse. 11.
Dan 9.11 Ezech. 18. verse. 21. Psalm. 51.9.
Yet because that to the Lord belongs mercy and forgiveness, he turns away
his face from man's sins, being ever mindful of mercies. He foretells men
of his judgments provoked, and gives them timely warning to eschew the
plagues deserved, with a sweet provocation of sins to fruitful repentance,
either by comfortable arguments of his bounties to his obedient children, Sap.
10.
or by strange and fearful examples of his judgments executed on the
rebellious and ungodly sinners. In like manner, our Lord Jesus Christ, that
true (...), and friend to mankind, imitating in this (as in all other things)
his heavenly Father, who of his love to man, according to the purport and
effect of the ancient promise made to Adam, and confirmed to Abraham, David,
and other godly Fathers in his mercy, sent him into the world to bring all true
believers unto life everlasting, does not only by perfitting the work of man's
salvation, which none could do but himself, show great mercies unto his
beloved: but also foresheweth both to them, and all others, a most miserable
destruction imminent and ready to fall, first on the Jews, and then, on all
others, who after their stubbornes, faithless ingratitude, and Apostasy, do
despise the goodness of God: and he leaves not vnwarned in the same all men, to
take heed of those future miseries that horrible sinners do purchase to
themselves, by producing this notable memorandum of the terrible judgments of
God even on the wife of that righteous man Lot, she going about to save her
life, lost it, and looking back in her heart to sinful Sodom, from whence,
the Lord in mercy had drawn her with charge to proceed without retire, God
foresheweth his judgments.
she perished from the right way between Sodom and Zoar, in that great wrath
kindled against her.

We read in Genesis, that when all flesh had corrupted his way on the earth,
Genesis 6.23
and the Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great on the earth, and all
the imaginations and thoughts of his heart were only evil, in so much that he
repented him of man's creation, and was grieved in his mind: he would yet in
mercy, though in the midst of wrath, both foreshew the destruction
following, unto his righteous servant Noah whom he favored, and gave him also
commission to diuulgate and publish the same to the world, whom,
notwithstanding this unreasonable sorrow conceived, he would in mercy spare
for the space of an hundred and twenty years. And moreover, for a perpetual
instruction to the posterities, the Lord (after that Noah had obtained rest)
made his Bow in the Clouds to be a token of the covenant thereon compacted,
which also bears manifest Arguments both of mercy and judgment: to the
comfort of the godly, for whose benefit the promise was given: to the confusion
of the wicked, for whom destruction waits. And there is the blew color of
water, to note for ever, wherewith the world was destroyed: and the red color
of fire, to show wherewith it shall perish, 2. Peter. 3.
according to the Prophecy of S. Peter.

Genes. 18.
Afterward, when the sins and abominations of the filthy Sodomites had
ascended up, and the loathsome cries of these execrable Sinners had pierced the
Lords ears, he determined thereon a mighty Plague, which yet he threw not
upon them, till time he had both warned them thereof, and delivered from the
same his Servants Abraham and Lot.

In the Book of the Judges it is mentioned, that the Israelites oftentimes
sinned against the Lord, and incurred the plague of their transgressions:
whereof likewise they were forewarned and admonished to beware by Moses,
Iosuah, Deuteronomy 28. verse. 31. Josh. 24.
and other the Servants of God. And besides that, such destructions and
miseries as ensued intolerable ingratitude to their posterities, were told of
by the holy Prophets, and the persons on whom the inconveniences fell had yet
certain signs and tokens left to be as continual remembrances unto them.

The Prophet Samuel said to King Saul, whiles he was yet King over Israel, 1.
Sam. 11 verse. 23.
and without fear of disgrace: The Lord has cast thee off from being King
over Israel. And this thing (said he) was also signified by the renting of his
garment.

And so the Prophet Ahia the Silonite, told Jeroboam, 1. Kin. 11. verse. 31.
that the Lord had rent the Kingdom of Israel into 12. parts, and this did he
prognosticate, by renting a new Mantell into twelve pieces.

The Prophet Jeremy foreshewing a destruction to come, proclaims thus in the
Lords name: Iere. 35.5.
Behold, I have set pots of Wine before the household of the Rekabites, but
they would not drink, obeying therein their fathers commandment, but as for
you, ye have not hearkened unto me, as they hearkened unto their father:
therefore I will bring upon Judah, and upon every inhabiter of Jerusalem, all
the trouble that I have devised against them. And this was certainly performed
in his due time, when as the Israelites for their sins were carried away
captive into Babylon, their City being destroyed, their Temple polluted, and
all their glory shadowed. 1. Cor. 10.
S. Paul having declared both the mercy and wrath of God: mercy, in bringing
the ancient Israelites out of Egypt: wrath, in overthrowing the rebellious
people in the wilderness, and turning (per apostrophen) to the Corinthians, to
whom he commits this example, warns them thus: Wherefore, let him that
thinks he stands, take heed that he fall not. And thus did S. Peter, Jude,
James and John, admonish them to whom they wrote. Above all, our Savior
Christ, willing to stir up not only the Jews, but all men which rest in
careless security, Christ foreshewed the destruction of the Jews.
and begin to bend backward, foreseeing their ruin and miserable thraldom,
does not only languish and power forth tears for the same, thereby moving us
(if possible,) to weep for our selves: but also prophesies destructions, and
many heavy lots to fall on men in the world. And to the end they may the
better be admonished (seeing the consideration of other men's hurts may move
them to take heed) he brings forth the examples of the Ninevites, of Tire
and Sidon, of those on whom the Tower in Silo fell, and of them whom Pilate
slew in the time of their Sacrifices, of them that were drowned in the
general Flood, and of the Sodomites. And thereunto he adds semblable
Parables: as of the Rich man, and poor Lazarus: of the unjust Steward, and the
wicked Mammon: of the five foolish Virgins: of the disobedient child: the
wicked husbandmen: the ungrateful guests, and such like. Here he sets
forth unto them the fearful judgments of God on Lots Wife, willing them by
her example to take heed of destruction, not to look back from the plough,
but to hold on for fear of a grievous and horrible destruction. Therefore
says he: Remember Lots Wife. A sentence very brief, yet a lesson not for idle
Scholars: few words, yet not for dull hearers: but as enough for a Sermon, so
a meet memorandum for a man, during his life. The Oracles and grave sayings of
the wise men of yore, were very pithie, though brief, as was that, (...): Know
thy self: and that, Memento mori: Remember death. Many like sentences we have
in the divine Scriptures. John the Baptist preached, Repent, Repent. So
counseled Peter: Acts. 2.
Repent, and be baptized. Salomons conclusion is, Eccles. 12.
Fear God, and keep his commandments. So our Savior Christ in his preachings
has these sentences, Watch and pray: Ask, seek, give, forgive, judge not,
condemn not, have faith in God: Remember Lots Wife, He that goes to the
plough, and looks backward, is not meet for the kingdom of God. O ye Jews,
remember this, least unawares ye have your lot with Lots Wife: Oh remember
this, ye that forget God, least he take you away, and there be none to rescue.
An excellent persuasion, to have moved the Jews to beware of their future
miseries, and a semblable instigation of all men to the due consideration of
the time of visitation, and the things that belong to their peace. A lesson
both particular for every Christian, and also general for all persons, people,
kindreds and toongs whatsoever, to learn them faithful perseverance: and the
sentence may well be divided into two parts, namely: 1. The Action commanded,
which is, Two parts.
Remember. 2. The matter or subject, which is, Lots Wife.


By the former part, we be drawn to the right use of memory. By the latter
part, we be put in mind of two notable examples, the one, of Lot himself, the
other, of his Wife, in which two, there is found an excellent Antithesis, both
in life and lot. Here is one example most comfortable, another example most
fearful, the one of mercy, the other of wrath: one profitable against
despair, another necessary against presumption: the consideration of both
which must join in a true Christian, to withstand those two fiery darts of
Satan. The Lord God grant, that we, beholding Gods mercies toward his chosen,
may with faith and thankful hearts, timely and fruitfully embrace the same:
and seeing his terrible judgments on the wicked world, now also threatened and
ready to fall down upon the people of this age for the like, may hastily fly
and eschew them, by serving the Lord in trembling and fear, for he is a
consuming fire.

The first part. Remember.
THe Lord God, which is the true (...), searcher and knower of man's heart,
perceiving the mind of man (as now polluted with many sins) to be either as
hard to conceive that which is good, as the Adamant stone is (...) be pierced:
or as unable to retain in memory that which ought to be ever remembre^^ as
the soft wax is to hold fast the image therein ensealed against the heat of
the fire, and therein also not unlike to the air that claspeth again after
disclosing; does oftentimes cry out unto man by his Prophets, by his precepts,
by his works, by his blessings and wonderful judgments, Remember, Remember,
and uses all the ways and means convenient to persuade and draw man to the
right use of his memory, and that so much the more, by how much nature fails
in accomplishing this thing, and a divine action supernatural, (as it were,
extreme to man's corrupt nature,) is required: for as the Stone by nature is
deorsum tendens, descending to the center, and the water which is not bound in,
fleeteth abroad: so is mortal man's mind, prone always to that which evil
is, and never apt to goodness, but by constraint; it soon forgets that which
ought to be remembered, and busieth it self semblably in that, which should be
forgotten: and it is true indeed, that the heart of man is a vile thing and
unsearchable. Neither may we think, but that as in other things, so also in
this, there is found a great abuse, which we must endeuou^ to take away, before
the use can be effectual, that is, The abuse of our memory.
by forgetting and putting out of mind the things that we learned amiss, and
which ought not to be retained in mind. This forgetfulness is a preparatiue to a
good remembrance: A necessary forgetfulness.
for as clear liquor may not be kept in a vessel, before that the corrupt be
powered out, and there must be a cleansing of the field, before it be sown; so
before man's mind can be made apt to that which is good, it must be cleansed
from that which is evil. Therefore being persuaded to Remember, let us make
way thereunto by a good forgetfulness. Seeing wisdom cannot enter into a
wicked heart, Sap. 1.3.4. Eccles. 11. verse. 10.
and wicked thoughts separate from God, let us take away grief out of our
hearts, and cause evil to depart from our flesh, and remember our Creator in
ye days of youth. This is the wisemans rule: first, to forget, then, to
remember: to remove away evil, then to plant and maintain the good.

The Lord himself is oftentimes forgetful (as the Scriptures testify) of the
sins and offenses of penitent sinners, and he puts all their wickedness out
of his holy remembrance, that so he may remember them in goodness, as Nehemiah
prayed him to do for himself. Nehe. 13. verse. 31.
And herein would our Savior Christ have us to be like unto our heavenly
Father, not to keep the remembrance of injuries done against us by our
brethren, but willingly to forget and forgive them, as never minding to revenge
them: herein, Math. 5. A wicked memory. Themistocles of Athens.
shall we declare our selves to be the children of our heavenly Father, as most
excellently he preaches on the Mount. From this point do worldly men far
differ, when as they can with Themistocles not only retain in mind an
injury, but seek (for their profit) an dishonest revenge. But this man was
censured to be too sharp of memory, which also himself confessed, whose
words Cicero reports: Memini quae nolo, obliuisci non possum, quae volo: That
which I would not, do I remember, neither can I put out of my mind, that which
I would forget. Of such an ungracious memory was Juno noted in Vergil, who
reteining the displeasure conceived against the Trojan Knight, did never give
over vexing and troubling him both by Sea and by land, till time she was
revenged, which was noted a matter worthy great reproach in such a personage,
and therefore he expostulateth:

Tantae ne animis coelestibus irae? that is,

Should heavenly hearts harbor such hatreds? And another points at the
folly of such, Qui vir siem, etc. He shall surely know my might, what I am,
and what I can do, when I have drawn out of his blood. This kind of memory is
too much used among men, which they have brought into an Art, unskillful in
the mean time of the right Art of Memory in deed. Now love and charity is
cold: faith is scarce found upon the earth, the malice of man is great, and
mischief being once conceived, he trauaileth to bring her forth, neither is
he pleased, until he be eased: whose wood affection and fleshly bent, Ovid.
eleg. 1. li. Ah tu ne dubita. etc. Genesis 4.
another decyphereth thus:

Ah nothing but revenge must ease my deadly woe!

In this sort curssed Caine remembered his brother Abel, envying the acceptance
of his Sacrifice before his own, and thereupon took occasion to kill him.
Thus the Sons of Jacob challenged a cause of hatred against their brother
Joseph, and sold him away. Thus Haman in the Book of Hester Hest.
calling to mind, what the Prophet Samuel 1. Sam.
had once done to Agag, and the Amalekites (from whom he descended) conspired
against the whole stock of the Jews. Genesis 27.
Thus Esau remembered that his brother Jacob had both supplanted him in his
birthright, and prevented him in the blessing, and thereupon resolves: My
father will dye shortly, and then I will kill Jacob my brother. Thus the Lords
of Babylon, and the wise men there, envying the excellency of Daniell Dan. 6.
in the spirit of Prophecy, and his royal favor with the King, accused him,
and caused him to be thrown into the Lions den. Thus Absalon remembered
Ammon, and flew him under color of freendship. So the Scribes, the Pharisees,
and the high Priests, remembering how the Lord had often spoken against their
pride, hypocrisy, and manifold abominations, conspired together against him,
and never left off, until they had nailed him to the tree. Finally, Genesis 3.
the ancient enemy of Mankind, bearing in mind that malediction, which the
Lord cast on him for his pernicious practice against man, leaves not to
persecute the Woman and her Child, as S. John witnesses in his Apocalypse.
Revel. 12.
It seems a marvelous wisdom to the men of this world, to imitate him
therein: but they shall find (as S. James teaches) that this wisdom is not
of God: Iam. 3.15.16.17.
for the wisdom of God is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated,
full of mercy and good fruits, without judging, without simulation. As for
this wisdom of theirs, the same Apostle calls it earthly, sensual, and
devilish: for where envying and strife is, there is sedition, and all evil
works. The craft and drift of the Devil is, to set men by the ears, that they
may worship him in such deeds of darkness, Romans 13.
whiles he laugheth at their madness and folly. Sic malus exultat demon, etc.
And seeing again, that by the blood of the Lamb he is overcome, and his head
crusshed, he reteineth a Dragons hatred, he trippeth on his heel, he casts
forth water after the woman and her child, he draws down the third part of
the Stars with his tail, he rages horribly, and stormeth sturdely, because
his time expireth shortly: As Leuiathan in the Sea without a hook in his
nostrels: as Behemoth in wilderness, having no bridle in his Jaws, 1. Peter. 5.
Job. 1.
and as a Lion rampingly he walks and stalketh, hippeth and skippeth from one
coast to another, seeking to deuoul. And for the readier accomplishing of his
devises according to his desire, do these his instruments work also: whereby,
as the head is full of poison, the heart is replenished with malice, which
boiling and raging cannot but break out with such eagrenes, that sooner may
the Tiger be tamed, then this mischievous (...) and (...) consumer, and
destroyer of men, be stopped from prosecuting his wood fury. Howbeit, Psalm.
2. The great cruelty of men.
the dweller above laugheth these mad men to shorn. The Scythians are said to
be so cruel and barbarous, that they eat and devour their parents and
kinsfolks when they be dead, in stead of burying the^, among whom, the
Essedonians and Massagetes, are chief: yet are they not indeed so barbarous
and cruel as these, who eat up and devour their brethren, even whiles they
be living. Against such Cormorants cries the Lord Woe, Woe. These bury not the
dead, Isa. 5.
but the living: these devour and eat the body of Jesus in his members, and
it is to be feared, that many which come to the Table of the Lord, with
pretense to eat the body of Christ, do only in this sort feed on him, by
envying their brethren, and persecuting his members. But what gain they by
this? even that which Judas gained, who, when he had devoured his master, and
they that sat with him, fell headlong into an endless destruction. They may
not only say, Oleum and laborem perdidimus, we have labored in vain, but
also may justly account with Judas and the ungodly in hell, whose passions and
groans the wise man thus describes: Sap. 5.7.
We have weried our selves in the way of wickedness and destruction: what did
Pride profit us? what gain has the pomp of riches brought us? It may be
answered, so much profit as the fire in Mount Aetna, for it dries up the
marrow within the bones, it macerateth the face, banisheth all good digestion,
hurts the mind, and tormenteth the soul: for the holy spirit of discipline
flies from deceit, Sap. 1.5.10.11.
and withdraws himself from thoughts that are without understanding. The
ear of iealosie hears all things, and the noise of the grudgings shall not
be hid, etc. Therefore says the wise man: Eccl. 10.6.
Be not angry for any wrong with thy neigbour, and do nothing by injurious
practices: Or thus (as another Translation yields.) Remember not every injury
of thy neighbor. Leuit. 19.17.18.
And this is taken from Moses law to the old Israelites, saying: Thou shall
not hate thy brother in thine heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke him, and
suffer him not to sin. Thou shall not revenge nor wait to do displeasure, or
be mindful of wrong against the children of thy people: but thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self: I am the Lord. This Law the Lord wrote in the
hearts of his children from the beginning, and of which he expected observance,
when he said to Cayne: Cayne, where is Abel thy brother? Genes. 50. verse. 19.
And this rule observed Joseph, who after many heavy injuries received of his
breethren, did nevertheless forget all, and spoke kindly unto them, saying,
Fear not now, for I will nourish you and your children. And King David
answered to this law, 1. Sam. 25. verse. 3.
who notwithstanding that Nabal did answer him churlishly, and Doeg currishly
reviled him, 2. Sam. 19.
did yet at yt request of Abigael put away his displeasure conceived against
Nabal, and pardoned Shimei at his own desire. Stephan the Protomartyr prayed
for his persecutors, desiring God not to charge them with that sin. And our
Lord the true pattern of patience and piety, prays thus for the envious
Jews that crucify him, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.
Neither has this virtue shined only in those whom the law of God directed,
but also in the very Gentiles in some sort, among which Aristides,
notwithstanding he was exiled by the Athenians, both forgave them, and prayed
for their good success.

Hereby the godly persuaded themselves, The man that forgets the injury of
his brother, may the better come to God.
that laying aside all displeasures, and forgetting manifold injuries, though
it were to seventy times seven, as Christ teaches, they might with more safe
hearts, and quiet consciences, approach unto the throane of grace, with these
and such like petitions: Remember not the sins of our youthful days (O
Lord: Psalm. 25.
) Forget our iniquities, and blot our transgressions out of thy mind. Forgive
us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. The Lord Jesus
grant us the spirit of piety and patience, to forgive and forget the offenses
of our breethren against us.

Moreover, David in his 45. Psalm teaches the Church, Psalm. 45.
and therein every member of the same, what should be forgotten, that her
heavenly wooer Christ Jesus might be pleased in her: Another forgetfulness
commanded in Scripture more general. John. 3.
Forget (says he) thine own people, and thy fathers house. Thereunto
counsels S. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans cap. 12. verse. 1.2. and in his
13. Chapter of the same, verses 12.13.14. This is that new birth, which
Nichodemus with all his wisdom is not able to conceive: and so difficult and
hard for the fleshly man, which conceiueth not the things that be of God, as
nothing is harder. And therefore as the valiant Captain Ulysses being in
Africa, and perceiving that his fellows did continually languish with the
remembrance of their Country, Wife and Children, which they could not forget,
caused them to taste of the Tree Lotos, (whereof, if a stranger eat, it is
said he forgets his own Country:) so our most excellent Captain Christ
produces unto us his holy Word, the tree of life to be tasted, eaten, and
disgested, with this commandment: Hearken o Daughter, hearken o Israel: he
that has ears to hear, let him hear: and happy is he that hears the Word
of God and keeps it: for by eating thereof, man lives, he forgets old
Adam, To forget old Adam
and the fleshly affections of man, he casts off the shoe from his feet
with Moses, and draws near to the Lord, he meditateth on the Law of God day
and night, and is satisfied with goodness. By this was Paul put apart from the
world. This quenches out the lust of the flesh, the pride of life, and love of
the world. This brings faith to justify man before God, and virtues to
approve him before men. This harbors men in the bosom of faithful Abraham,
whom the ruinous habitation of Adam could not preserve. This draws men from
earthly Hierico, to heavenly Jerusalem, and persuadeth Iaphet to dwell in the
tabernacles of Shem. Peter tasting of this, Genes. 9.
goes forth at the door, and weepeth for his sin: Ruth Ruth. 2.
the Moabitisse is hereby taken from her own country and brought into Israel:
and this pearl being so precious, causes a man to forsake all that he has,
to sell all his wealth, to buy, purchase and obtain it. The Lord grant us
grace to be in this point so forgetful, that we neither remember to commit,
nor dare be so bold as to attempt sin: that we neither dwell in the
loathsome tents of Kedar, nor so much as savor of the fleshly affections of
impious and ungodly men.

Thus have we seen, what things we are chiefly to forget and shut out of
memory. Now let us behold the true substance of memory, What to remember
and so in the end descend unto this particular example of Lots wife.

If we would, that GOD in goodness should remember us, and that our prayers
may enter in before him, Nehe. 13. verse. 31. Ionae. 2.7.
as Nehemiah and Jonas said: then must we not be forgetful of that which he
commands to be kept in mind. And except the Lord in his mercy be mindful
of us, Genesis 8.1. Genes. 19. verse. 29. Psalm. 115. verse. 12.
as he has been of old time of his servants Noah, Lot, Abraham, David, Jonas,
Manasses, and others, to whom in extremity he sent comfort and help, we may
be compared to Sodoma and like unto Gomorrha, we cannot stand in the
congregation, but be confounded in judgment, we shall want that which may
help us, and find whatsoever anoyeth us: and being banished from the
benediction of Gods children, shall incur the heavy curse of his enemies.
And a most fearful thing is it to be forgotten of the Lord. For there is
nothing remaining, but cursings in the town and in the field, going out and
coming in, in the basket and in the store, in the body and in the land, and
in whatsoever is taken in hand: a sick body and a faint heart, maimed members
and a doubtful mind: in the morning wishing for the evening: Deuteronomy. 28.
in the evening desiring the morning: vengeance from heaven: an hell upon
earth. Of this portion drinks the ungodly, to whom there is no peace, says
the Lord, seeing they be adversaries to the Almighty and banished from his
presence, Isai. 40.
as clean out of his merciful remembrance.

The faithful children remembering these things with considerate minds, have
resorted unto the Lord, praying him in goodness to remember them. Thus prayed
Solomon: O Lord God, 2. Chro. 6. verse. 42.
refuse not the face of thine anointed. Remember the mercies promised to David
thy servant. And so prayed that noble Captain Nehemiah: Nehe. 1.5.8. cap.
5.19. ca. 13.31.
O Lord God of heaven, the great and terrible GOD, that keeps covenant and
mercy for them that love him and observe his commandments, etc. I beseech
thee remember the word that thou command thy servant Moses. Again,
Remember me (says he) in goodness. That patient man Job in his great
afflictions cried out unto the Lord: Remember that my life is but a wind. And
King Hezekiah turning his face to the wall, 2. Kin. 20.3.
prayed in this manner: I beseech thee, O Lord, remember now, how I have walked
before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight. Baruch, in the behalf of the captive Israelites: Remember
not (says he) the wickedness of our fathers, but think upon thy power, and
thy name at this time. The Prophet David, being moved with an excellent spirit,
Psa. 74.20 and 137. Psalm. 119. verse. 49.
sings unto the Lord: Remember thy covenant and promise: Remember Sion: be
mindful of thy mercies, etc. Finally, the condemned thief on the Cross with
our Savior, says unto him: Lord remember me, when thou come into thy
kingdom. These godly desires uttered with a faithful heart have not been put
back, nor was the Lord unmindful of his love: but as he remembered Noah and
every beast and all the cattle that was with him in the Arc: and as Christ
remembered Peter, Mary, Paul, and the thief on the Cross: Psalm. 115. verse.
12.
So (says David in the behalf of all the faithful) The Lord has bin
mindful of us, and he shall bless us, and he will bless the house of Israel,
he will bless the house of Aaron, he will bless them that fear the Lord,
both small and great. Psalm. 105. verse. 8.42.
He has been always mindful of his covenant and promise that he made to a
thousand generations. Therefore let not the ungodly any longer say unto the
Lord: Depart from us, Job. 21.14 Sap. 2.
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Who is the Almighty that we should
serve him? And what profit should we have, if we should pray unto him? For the
candle of the ungodly shall be put out, their destruction hasteneth on them,
their hope is as a dry thistle flower blown of the wind: they lead their
lives wantonly, and suddenly they go down into hell. And as for us, let us put
our trust in the Lord, and consider deeply and duly to what end the Almighty
has bestowed on us that excellent treasure of Memory: Let us endeavor
rightly to use the same by printing therein enough these five worthy things
following. viz.

1 The Lord God, and his actions both of mercy and judgment. 2 Our brethren,
and that duty we owe them. 3 Our own selves, what we are, and whereunto
subjected. 4 The final and general Judgment, for which we must wayt and
prepare our selves. 5 Lastly, this memorable example of Lots wife: and this
last do I refer to the second part of my general dunsion, as the only
matter or subject for the action commanded in my present text.
A good memory is here required.
Now, if a man could remember with Cyrus King of Persia, who was able (as
Solinus reported) to call every one of his Soldiers by his proper name, when
as his host was exceeding great: Or if a man had the mindfulnesse of that
maid which can hardly forget her attire, as Jeremy said: yet could we not
reach herein to a sufficient perfection. But as for our selves, I fear me, we
be so far of, that we may rather be justly compared to one Messala Coruinus,
who albeit he was sometime a grave Senator in Rome, and much commended by
eloquent Cicero for many virtues, did yet, a two years before his death become
so forgetful, that he remembered not his own name. Which kind of
forgetfulness has come unto diverse other also, either by infirmity of
nature, or by extreme sickness, or by dotage, or by excessive cares. And
would to God, that our natural infirmities, our sinful agonies, our damnable
dotings in blind affections, and our worldly carefulnes had not maimed us with
this malady: then might we have escaped that reproach of the Israelites: The
Ox knows his owner, Isay. 1. verse. 3.
and the Ass the cribbe of his master: but my people have not known me: they
have forgotten me. Although we cannot deny, but that we have our earthen
vessels with Agathocles, thereby to remember our original: and with Peter have
heard the Cock crowing thrice in our ears, to put us in mind of things
memorable: yet it is true, that we have forgotten oftentimes that we should
mind, having our cogitations blinded with Satan's enchantments, that sometimes
we will not hear to obey the Word of God, be it preached never so wisely.
This point of folly notes S. James in the man, Iam. 1.23.
that beholding his bodily face in a glass, but going his way, forgets
immediately what manner of one he was. Heeere is great forgetfulness, from the
which the Lord keep us. Let us use the talent lent us, knowing that as well
for that one, as for the ten, an account is required, and a reckoning must be
made: and that good servant shall be commended with a double reward, when the
unprofitable wretch shall have his talent taken from him, and himself double
punished. Remember God and his Works. Eccles. 12. verse. 1.
Let us remember the Lord and his marvelous works.

The wise Solomon commands us to remember God, and therewith to observe the
time convenient, saying, Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, whiles
the evil days come not, nor the years approach, wherein thou shall say, I
have no pleasure in them. To this duty did Moses often incite and stir up the
forgetful Israelites, who nevertheless, after innumerable benefits received
of the Lord, remembered him not, Judge. 8.34
but forgot ye Almighty that begat them, and God that formed them, Deuteronomy. 32.
verse. 18.19.20, etc.
which caused him in anger to correct them, to whet up his glittering sword for
them, and his hand to take hold of Justice against them, to execute vengeance
on them, and to reward them that hate him. This David having considered,
exhorts thus: Seek the Lord and his strength: Psalm. 105.^
Seek his face continually. Remember the marvelous works he has done, his
wonders, and the judgments of his mouth. And thus let us remember the goodness
of the Lord first generally on all me^: next on his Church and holy
congregation, and then on every particular member thereof: and considering the
same, let us ascribe all praise, honor, thanks and majesty to him for ever.

He has not only created man, The mercy of God
but in mercy preserved him, and provided lovingly for him. He makes the
Sun to shine as well on the unjust, as on the just, and gives rain to them
both, moving all men to remember them, and without this duty, they be touched
with intolerable ingratitude. But as for his Spouse the Church, David sings
of his loving mercies and goodness unto the^ in this manner. Psalm. 115.
He blesses them abundantly that fear the Lord both small and great: he
increases his graces toward them, even toward them and their children: for
they be the chosen generation, the royal Priesthood, the holy Jerusalem, and
blessed of the Lord, that made heaven and earth. And therefore this especial
little flock has the Lord wonderfully defended and kept unto himself holy,
safe, and undefiled before him. Although the holy Church is as a bush in fire
burning, yet is it not consumed: though as a Ship tossed, yet not ouerturned:
though as a woman travailing, yet never dead; and though as a Vine pruned, yet
never sterued. And as for this particular branch of the Church wherein we live,
the very land savoring of the sweetness of Gods mercy, we are forced to
confess, that the Lord has not dealt with every Nation as he has dealt with
us, and do find by full experience, that the Nation is blessed which has the
Lord for their God. Lastly, if every particular man shall duly consider with
himself, and remember how many excellent blessings he has received of the
Lord to the beawtifying of his body and soul, oh God, how shall he be forced
to praise and bless him in the same with endless comfort? Above all, when
there was neither sufficiency of wood for burnt offerings in Libanus, The
goodness of God in Christ.
nor Cattle enough upon the Mountains of Israel for Sacrifices: when there
was none able to tread the Wynepresse, nor any able man to bind the strong
man: when there was none able to break down the wall of separation between
God and man: nor to rent asunder the veil of the Temple: when there was not so
much as one sufficient for zeal, to stand up in the gappe that was open,
Ezech. 33.
to turn away the Lords displeasure from man: then caused he his own arm to
help his Church, and every member of the same: he sent his own Son Jesus
into the world, who to the comfort of his children, says, Lo, Psalm. 16.
here am I, to do thy will, o Father, as in the beginning of the book it is
written of me. And this is the same which even unto me (may every Christian man
say) is become Righteousness against Sin, wisdom against folly, holiness
against corruption, and freedom against bondage: my righteousness by his
resurrection; my wisdom by his word; my holiness by his spirit; my redemption
by his death. Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and
remember the wonderful works wrought by him for the children of men! Oh that
they would take up the cup of Salvation with David, and call upon the name of
the Lord, for all his benefits toward them. Psalm. 116. Isai. 46. Exodus 20.
Oh that they would remember to sanctify his Saboth. Remember the law of
Moses his servant, and their sins in breaking that Law, and thereof be
ashamed: and remember, that Jesus Christ of the seed of David is raised again
from the death. 2. Tim. 2. verse. 8.
Such and so great and maruailous is the Lord in his mercies unto his children,
after the purport of his promises made to Abraham and David his servants.
Remember Gods judgments on his enemies.
But as for his enemies, which anger him with stubborn rebellion, which fight
under the banner of Satan against him and his children, they be subdued to his
judgments which on them he has declared, by rayning down storms and
tempests, plagues and destructions, according to the effect of that
communication and threatening, which Moses in Deutr. 28. does denounce against
them full of bitterness and woe, which also with the causes thereof, the Lord
reiterateth in the 31. of the same, saying: Deuteronomy. 31.16.17.
This people will rise up and go a whoring after strange Gods of the land
whether they go, and will forsake me, and break the appointment which I made
with them: and then my wrath shall wax hoate against them in that day, and I
will forsake them, and will hide my face from them, and they shall be consumed,
and much adversity and tribulation shall come upon them: so that they will
say, Are not these troubles come upon me, because God is not with me? How these
Judgments have been executed on the Israelites, it is mentioned in the books
of the Judges, Kings, and Chronicles of Israel, as in many other books of the
holy Scripture: and how the remainder of these things meets with the future
Apostates, S. John descrieth in the overthrow of Babylon, with the great
Whoare. Revel. 18.
Oh therefore that men (considering this) would stand in awe and sin not:
Kiss the Son before he be angry, and learn of David truly to protest in
this sort: Psalm. 116. Psalm. 77. verse. 8. etc. and 119.52 55.
I have set the Lord ever before my face: I remembered the years of the right
hand of the Lord: I remembered the works of the Lord certainly. I remembered (O
Lord) thy wonders of old, and I did meditate in all thy works, and did devise
of thine Acts. I remembered thy judgments of old, even the examples whereby
thou declarest thy self to be Judge of the world, and I have bin comforted.
And I have remembered thy Name o Lord in the night, (in the night when other
sleep) and have kept thy law. David did observe this, David teaches the same
to us, and this must we also do. Remember God and his works.

Five things which move us to remember God.
There be (among other) five things which may move us, or persuade us the rather
to this duty. The first whereof is, the due consideration of the frame of the
World, which a certain Philosopher said was his Romans 1.
The very Gentiles were occasioned hereby both to know and remember God,
though they worshipped him not as they should, Psalm. 19.
as Paul reasons, Romans 1. And as the Heavens declare the glory of God, and
the Firmament his handie work, so the excellent harmony of all the creatures
consenting thereunto, moves the mind of man wherein is the view (as it were)
of all these things. The ancient Philosopher Trismegistus draws men to the
knowledge and mindfulnes of God, In lib. de poten. and Sap. dei Dialog. 5.
by the consideration of man's body. Age fili, says he, circumspice humani
corporis opificium, cuius admonitione perdisce, quis tam pulchrae imaginis
conditor, etc. Go to (my Son) look about the workmanship of man's body, by
the admonition whereof learn perfitly, who is he which has made so beawtifull
an image. And perusing every part and member of the body, he concludes thus:
Behold how many works of divine Art are in this one matter demonstrated, every
of which is most sightly and handsomely proportioned, and so, that every of them
yet differs from other in his proper office. But who has framed these
things? what father? what mother? Is it not that only invisible God, which of
his own will has done them all? And another Philosopher says, that a man
having in his body so many joints and members, as there be days in the whole
year, is thereby put in mind of Gods goodness, and moved to remember him
continually. Heerewith, if we consider the hidden treasures of the Soul, and
so include the whole man, we shall be even devoured with zeal, and forced to
sing joyfully with David: O Lord, Psalm. 134.14.
I will fear thee: for I am fearfully and wonderfully made, marvelous are
thy works, and that my soul knows right well.

The word of God.
teaches us plainly, not only what God is, what his will is: what he has
done, but also in what sort he is to be served, and how to be remembered.
Without this Remembrancer, he saw all our memory to be forgetfulness, all our
knowledge, ignorance: all our wisdom foolishnes: all our policies peeuishnes,
all our sight blindness: had not the Lord given us his word written not only in
the heart, but even in Tables of stone, brass, iron, etc. to remain a
Schoolemaister unto us for ever: how had the creation of the world, the making
of man, the building of the woman, the placing of them in pleasure, and cause
of their pain bin remembered? How could the promise of the Lords mercy in
Christ, the drowning of the world, the burning of Sodom, the preserving of Lot,
and the punishment of Lots wife, bin brought to our knowledge? Yea Moses
himself would soon have forgotten what was written in the tables of stone
which he brake, had not the Lord written it again with his own finger.
Neither had the precepts and laws of the Lord bin remembered in the posterity,
Deuteronomy. 11.
had not the Lord commanded the children of Israel to write them in the posts
of their doors, Deuteronomy. 17.
etc. and the Kings to copy them out for their instruction. And this charge
was given to Isaias the Prophet. Isai. 30.
Now go and write it before them in a Table, and note it in a Book, that it
may be for the last day, for ever and ever. And of this benefit David
speaking, says: This shall be written for the posterity. And had not the Lord
given unto them his Word to be a light to their feet and paths, a staff to
stay them, a rule to direct them, they could not but run a whoring in
ignorance with the heathens, worshipping not only birds, fourefooted beasts,
and corporal images, the Gods of Ekron, Baalpeor, Dagon, Asteroth, Moloch, and
such, but even the Devil himself, contrary to that commandment of God to
them: Deuteronomy. 6.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Again,
had not the Lord commanded in his Word, the Paschall Lamb to be eaten every
year, had not the Serpent bin lifted up in the wilderness, had not Manna bin
reserved, had not circumcision bin given to Abraham, Psalm. 78.
the law and statutes to Israel, they would soon have forgotten altogether,
and turned the service of God into Idolatry. Finally, we at this time would
soon forget that excellent benefit offered us in Christ Jesus, had he not
willed his Gospel to be preached, and instituted his Sacraments with this
commandment: Do this in remembrance of me. I know your memories be weak as
the water, and ye by nature forgetful, therefore yet do this one thing for my
sake, thereby to remember me, and declare my death till I come. Let us
therefore consider this, and thereby remember God and his works.

Affliction brings men to God.
to remember him in their beds, and to run unto him in their afflictions, to
call upon him in trouble, and glorify him in his mercies. He well knew, that
as the frozen with cold best thinks of fire, the hungry of meat, the naked
of clothes, the prisoner of liberty, the condemned of pardon: so men be
earnest to seek after God, Hos. 5.
and to remember him, esteeming more of his mercy in time of wrath, then of
his judgments in time of grace. As for examples, King Manasses in the prison
reme^breth God, whom in his prosperity he had forgotten. Jonas in the Whales
belly remembers that obedience to the Lord, which before was shut out of
memory. Psalm. 51. Exodus 2. Ier. 31.
David in his misery cries peccani: Israel in Egypt cry unto the Lord, and
Ephraim in captivity complayneth heartily.

Thus the Lord purges the gold from the dross in the fire: thus winnoweth he
the corn from the chafe in the wind: thus scoureth he the rust from the iron
on the fretting stone: thus drives he the rebellious through fire and water,
until they acknowledge with Nabuchadnezar, Dan. 4.25 37.
that the most high has power over the kingdoms of me^. The polluted vessel
is with water washed, the raw flesh is seasoned with salt, the dropping vine
must be pruned with a knife: the weak stomachs must have bitter wormwood:
the slow Ass a whip, the heavy Ox the goade, the idle scholar correction,
and the fleshly Christian sower affliction. This drives home the lost son to
his father, and the wanton daughter to her mother. And herein will the Lord
begin at his own house, and execute this judgment on the trees that be
green, whatsoever become of the dry trees. And therefore, when we feel the
touch of Gods judgments either in mind, body or wealth, let us know ye
cause, and consider to what end the same is inflicted, and seek remedy
thereof at the hand of God with Ephraim, David, Peter and Magdalen. And so
remember God, etc.

Fifthly and lastly, when the Children of Wonderful deliverance.
trial and sufficient experience of the Lords Justice and mercy, he
wonderfully delivered to their great comfort, they have a great occasion given
them to remember God and to glorify him. Judge.
As in the time of Gedeon, when all hope was past, they had a marvelous
deliverance from Madian. As in the time of Sampson, Judge.
when all hope was quailed, they had a great victory and deliverance from the
Philistines. As in the days of Saul, when Israel was oppressed by the
Philistines again. 1. Sam. 17.
Goliath was overthrown, and Israel delivered. As also in the time of the Kings
of Israel and Judah, God gave great victories to small hoasts against mighty
Nations. A great instigation of them to think on the Lord and his wonderful
works. And because we have received great things, and obtained wonderful
deliverances of of the mercy of our God, let us not forget the same, but sing
unto him heartelie with songs of deliverance.

The second thing that we are willed to Remember our brethren.
First those among them, that have the oversight of us, and which speak unto
us the word of God, as the Apostle charge, Heb. 13.7
whose end of conversation considering, we must follow their faith. And these
be they which ruling well, are ^^compted worthy of double honor. Neither must
we neglect to bestow on the^ our temporal things, which deliver unto us the
Spiritual treasure. And this is a part of that honor which we be commanded to
yield to our parents. Exodus 20. But how hardly the judgment of man censureth
these laboring persons, with what grudgings they yield to them of their
wealth, and with what gainesaying the Ministry is furthered and relieved, all
men may see. This is not to remember, I^. 5.
but forget the^. Woe unto him that defraudeth the labourer of his just hire
whereof he is most worthy. The remembrance of these is often mentioned in the
Law: Le^^^.
and so is that mindfulnes of our poor brother, Deuteronomy. 16.
to whose need we must not be grieved to confer. Pro. 31. Tob.
This Bersabe also remembered in her wise lesson to her young Lemuel, Romans 12.
Prou. 31. And Tobiah to his son. S. Paul charge the Romans and others,
to give cheerfully to the poor: 2 Cor. 9.7.
to do good, and forget not to distribute: to remember the prisoners and the
poor Saints, Heb. 13. Gal. 2.9. 1. Cor. 16.1. To. 15.26. Act. 10.
and for such he himself caused diverse collections to be made, and thereto
labored with his hands. He commended them much of Macedonia and Achaia for the
same thing. The noble Nehemiah, mindful of his poor breethren, did neither
crave that wages he should have exacted, nor suffered any man else to oppress
them. But alas, there is a common cry of the poor in every place, whose faces
be grinded with the extortions of the wealthy, and this pity have they found:
Am I (says Cayne) the keeper of my brother? is his oversight or protection
committed to me? am I bound to relieve him? These persons be not of the mind of
Christ, which says: Weep not Widow, but of the mind that Dives that rich man
was, who could rather permit poor Lazarus to cry and dye at his gate without
compassion. But hear that terrible sentence against such vnpitifull people.
Math. 25. When I was hungry ye fed me not, when I was thirsty ye gave me no
drink: therefore depart from me ye cursed.

Unto this duty belongs that, not to forget to deliver the oppressed from
the hand of his oppressor. And that also, to be grateful and thankful to our
breethren that have both labored for us, and comforted us with their
charities, whether they be poor or rich.

This thing not only the very Heathens have taught, by painting forth their
three (...) or Graces: but also the very brute beasts and birds, as ye
Elephant, the Storke, yea the earth insensible, which yields to her tiller a
double reward. But alas, among us that be Christians, we oftentimes find this
verified, No man remembers the poor man, Eccles. 5.14.15.
that by his wis^dome delivers the City from the great King: Pharaohs Butler
has quite forgotten Joseph, though he earnestly requested him to remember him
to the King: Genesis 40. verse. 14.
yea the unthankful Sichemites have not only quite forgotten the goodness of
Gedeon toward them, Judge. 9.18
but are likewise consent together with Abimelech, to rise up against him and
his house. Thus Ioas remembered the goodness of Iehoida the Priest, which had bin
his only stay and preservation, in rising up against Zacharias his son and
killing him. 2. Chr. 24.20.21.22.
It is great unkindness not to requite a benefit received: so it is to forget,
or not to acknowledge it: but oh most horrible is that unkindness, which
recounteth good things with evil things: from this kind of oblivion the Lord
deliver us: and a true mindfulnes of our breethren we beseech him to give us:
and hereunto may we be the better induced by the remembrance of our own
selves. Remember our selves.
To know our selves, is a profitable persuasion to the knowledge of God, and
imitating of Christ in our duties.

Here might we be put in mind of our estate and condition in this land, which
to remember, is most profitable, that being admonished by others examples, we
may (after Paul's caveat) take heed we fall not, although we think we stand. 1.
Cor. 10.
And let it be remembered, that as the five talents gained five other, so is it
expected, that our great abundance of Gods blessings, should yield semblable
thankefulnes, the want whereof brings dread and fearefulnes: by the
consideration of the unprofitable servant, the disobedient son, the barraine
fig tree, and unfruitful Vine: and I pray God, that in this our time of
peace, we do remember not only of whom we receive it, but also what belongs
to the same: I aim only to that, which I should with many more words express
But more particularly let every man look into his own estate and condition,
as derived from the common condition of all men, as fold and subdued to sin,
and thereby to infirmities, miseries, and death. To this point the Apostle
brings all me^, when he says, All men have sinned, and hereof took that
general calamity his original, Thou art dust (says God to Adam after his
transgression) and into dust thou shall return again. This is particular to
every man, and this is general to all men. Hereof is man called mortal,
flesh, grass, vani^^e, a vapor, a liar, a corrupt feed, the child of
inconstancy, and dust. Let men remember this, what man is, that they may not
wax proud, A man does seldom remember himself.
being but dust and ashes. But alas, this is so hard a thing for them, as
nothing is harder, to persuade them selves what they be, what their life is.
And therefore, whiles they note the condition of their tenures, whether they
hold their land in fee simple, fee tail, term of life or years, and account
when their leases may expire, they never remember the condition of their own
lives, how good or evil they be, they note not how they draw to end, and
think not of death, which lingreth not.

This was that notable and wise saying, which Symonides, Simonides
who (as Cicero reports first found out the art of Memory) uttered before
Pausanias the Lacedemonian King at his banquet, being willed by the King to
speak something excellent and of importance: Remember, thou art a man, says
he. The King hearing it, took it scornefully at the first: But afterward being
shut up in prison and in misery, where also he dyed with famine, he called to
mind that word of Symonides with great sorrow, saying: The words were in
deed of great importance, but I through mad pride esteemed them nothing. The
like in a manner read we of rich Croesus, who in prosperity forgot himself,
and what Solon had taught him, till time that Cyrus brought him to recognize
his estate and misery with imminent execution of death. But Philippe of
Macedonia did more wisely provide for his memory, when a boy cried to him
every day: Philippe, Remember thou art but a man. And this is common to every
one: he is a man: then mortal: then subject to miseries: then of short life
and continuance. This is the effect of Jobs description of man: He has but a
short time to live, Job Man is a Pilgrim.
yet replete with many miseries: he comes up as a flower from the earth: he
florisheth a little while upon the earth: he is cut down and withers in the
earth. Which also Isaiah in his 40. Chapter: Isa. 40.^. Ia. 1.11. 1. P. 1.1^.
S. James in his first Chapter, and Saint Peter in the first Chapter of his
former Epistle do effectually apply. Man comes from a sinful womb, lives
in a wretched place, and goes to a ghastfull gulf. Remember this. Old father
Jacob was most mindful of this, which he also taught to King Pharao, before
whom Joseph his son presented him. How old art thou? (said Pharao to him) he
answered: the whole time of my pilgrimage is an hundred and thirty years,
few and evil have the days of my life been. He is a pilgrim. A similitude
near one in effect with that of Job likening man to a flower, and with that of
the Lord calling man dust. For as the flower is oppressed with many annoyes in
heat and cold and of short time: and as the dust is now moist on the ground,
then dry, flying in the wind, without certeyntie or constanines: So is the
pilgrim, a stranger from home, looking to his place of rest, and ever
trauayleth till he come thither, oppressed each while with many great dangers
and miseries. Hebr. 11.10.13.
The fathers (says the Apostle) all dyed and confessed themselves to be
strangers and pilgrims on the earth; and that they sought for a City having a
foundation, whose builder and maker is God. Some say, that this pilgrimage of
man, is set forth by the example of Hagar, the handmayd of Sara: Genesis 16.4
who flying from Abraham's house wandered in the wilderness, and was councelled
by the Angel to return again to her Mistress. But David truly confesses: 1.
Pet. 2.11.
I am a stranger and pilgrim with thee, as all my fathers were. And so may we
say every one of us. Therefore let us abstain from fleshly lusts: therefore
let us walk and not tarry. Let us not choose the lusts of sin that hinder
us: proceed we toward Jerusalem that holy City, and ever recognize our
condition and duty of life. Here again we be warned to look back to our
former time, what we have been: that we have been vile sinners, offenders
against God, transgressors of his law, strangers from the commonweal of
Israel, and slaves in Aegipt under the tyranny of our spiritual Pharao. We
are also admonished to look before us, both on things present, and also to
come. If we be the children of God brought into his merne^ous light by Jesus
Christ, from bondage into freedom, from sin into righteousness, from the
power of the devil to the grace of God: let us be glad and rejoice in the
Lord with continual thankfulness. If yet any be in ignorance, in blindness,
in sin, in stubbornnes of heart, and thereby contemn the Gospel: let him
fear, tremble, quake, stand in awe of Gods judgments: but yet not forget a
timely and fruitful Repentance. Never to be merry nor sing, nor leave of to
pray, ask and crave pardon, until a merciful deliverance: as that bird,
which being ensnared never leaves crying until he dye or be delivered. And
having future things before our eyes, as marks whereto men shoot: forget not,
but remember daily and hourelie (O thou mortal man) that Mors non tardabit,
Death comes on without tariyng.
Death hasteneth on thee, respecting not any ornament or treasure either of
body or mind. For be thou never so fair and well favored, yet with fair
Absolon must thou dye (though happily not in that sort) and in the kingdom of
death there is no difference between Nireus and Thersites, Nireus. Thersites.
of whom the Poets feign, the one to be the fairest, the other to be the most
deformed of all them that came to Priamus, palace, or Troy: and that they
striving in hell after death, who should be preferred, verdit was given (
Menippus being the Judge) that there was no difference between them. Hereunto
also comes, as well Dives, as poor Lazarus: as well wise Solomon, as foolish
Nabal. But thou braggest of thy parents Nobility, and then art of gentle
blood, etc. What of that? Can these things deliver thee? No truly. But hearken
what I hear one say: Te, quide nobili generositate tuorum parentum tumescis
superbia, interrogo, etc. I demand of thee (says he) which art puffed up in
pride by means of thy noble Parentage, whether those thy parents be either
dead or living? If they be living, know this, it will not be long ere they
will dye: for death comes on them with speed. If they be dead, then hearken
what S. Augustine says: Aug. de. ver. Inocen. ca. vlt.
Respice eorum sepulchra, and aliorum pauperum, and vide quis dominus, quis
pauper, discern si poteris vinctum a Rege, fortem a debili, pulchrum a
deformi, etc. Behold their Sepulchers, and the graves also of poor men, and
see, who is the Lord, who is the poor man: discern if thou be able, between
the King and the prisoner, the strong man and the feeble, the beautiful and
the ugly. Look upon their sepulchers, and I suppose, thou may not find
any great difference there, between the rich man and the beggar, except
peradventure in this, that in the rich man's grave thou may find a greater
savor of corruption, than in the poor man's pit, for that he was fed more
delicately in his life, than the poor man. De. van. seculi.
The same Augustine says again in a certain Sermon: Considera etc. Mark
well the groans of them that have lately been your companions, what they have
been, what they now be, and how vainlie their wealth served to their profit.
Lo, there is nothing of them remaining to be seen: but ashes, which if they
could now speak unto you, would utter these words: O ye vain men! to what
end do ye so ouerlade your lives with vices and sins? Look upon our bones,
and thereby be ashamed of your insatiable covetousness. Quod vos estis, nos
fuimus, and quodnas fumus, vos eritis: What you be now, have we been, and what
now we be, shall you be hereafter. O ye fools, remember, that in one night,
Luke 12.
that great fool mentioned in the Gospel had his soul rapt from him,
uncertain of his heir. O man, remember, what betided that glorious Rich man
which was clothed in purple: Luke. 16.
death takes hold upon, and is thrown down into torments, notwithstanding
the solemnity of his funeralles. Hug (...) de ^^ma.
Dic mihi (says another) vbi sunt amatores seculi, qui tam magni fuerunt? Dic,
quid eis profuit inanis gloria, breuis latitia, mundi potentia? Tell me, where
be now the friends of this world become, which have been of such estimation?
Show me, what their vain glory, their short gladness, their worldly pomp,
their fleshly pleasures, their false riches profited them? What is become of
their laughter? of their sport? of their boasting? Here see we the corpse given
to the worms, and peradventure their souls appointed to perpetual torments
in another place.

Baruch also, to draw men to the consideration of the power of God upon the
proud Potentates of the earth, and to the mindfulnes of man's condition, says:
Baruch. 3.16.17.19.
Where are the Princes of the heathen and such as ruled the beasts upon earth?
They that had their pastime with the fowls of the heaven, that hoorded up
silver and gold, wherein men did trust, and made no end of their gathering?
They be come to naught, and gone down to hell, and other men be come up in
their steades.

And to show, that not only man, which is compared to the grass, but also
that all his wisdom and glory (which is compared to the flower of the grass
by Saint James) shall decay: 1. Cor. 1.20.
hearken what S. Paul expostulateth thereon. Where is the wise? where is the
Scribe? where is the disputer of this world? has not God made the wisdom of
this world foolishnes? Hereunto hasteneth man, and hereunto comes his glory
in the end: which to remember is very profitable for all men, as Syracides
says, and as Moses wished to his people. Deuteronomy. 32.
For men having once numbered their days, they be moved to set their mind on
wisdom, as David says: and having considered the manifold days of darkness,
they will remember God the sooner in their youth, Eccles. 11.2.
as Solomon counsels: they will cast away the deeds of darkness, and put on
the armor of light, as Paul exhorts, that whiles the Sun is not dark, nor
the light, nor the Moon, nor the Stars, nor the Clouds return again after
the rain: Eccles. 12.2.5.6.
before man go to the house of his age, and the mourners go about the street,
and the dust return to the earth as it was. Thus must we remember our selves.
God grant we forget not our selves. When man forgets himself and his
condition, there is none evil which he will fear to commit. God make us
mindful of this.

Remember the latter Judgment
Fourthly, because the hour of death is uncertain, and yet death which is most
certain brings man to the judgment, and this, as was the other, is a
forceable Argument to stir us up, to examine our selves, to clear our
selves, to prepare our selves with Lamps burning in our hands, and loins
girded with staves to the journey, with watchful hearts ever listening when
the Tromp shall sound to the battle: let us in any wise imprint this
memorandum in the tables of our minds: Our God shall come, and will not be
silent. Psalm. 50. Mat. 25.
Christ will come in the glory of his Father, and all the holy Angels with
him, sitting upon the throane of his glory. Before him shall be ^rought all
Nations to be judged, and be shall divide them one from another, as the
Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats. And we shall all stand before
the tribunal seat of Christ, and give accounts of all that we have done.

Thus Enoch, Iud. verse. 14.15.
the feauenth from Adam (as Jude says) prophesied. Behold, the Lord comes
with thousands of his Saints, to give judgment against all men, and to rebuke
all the ungodly among them of all their wicked deeds, which they have ungodly
committed, and of all their cruel speakings which wicked sinners have spoken
against him. This thing did that holy man think upon with due expectation,
which said, that whatsoever he did, he heard this dreadful doom ringing in
his ears, Surgite mortui, venire ad iudicium, Arise ye dead, come to judgment.
Oh remember this ye that forget God, least he take you away, and there be none
to deliver you. For in deed, when all stand before the tribunal seat of
Christ, there shall be no excuse allowed of the wicked, to pacify the terrible
displeasure of the Judge, when the accusations shall be produced against them.
Then neither Goliath with his strength, nor Croesus with his riches, nor Haman
with the Kings favor, nor Absalon with his beawtie, nor Achitophel with his
craftines, nor any worldly man with his vanities, shall be able to prevail.

5. Lots wife.
The last thing which I said we should remember at this time, is Lots Wife,
which I refer to the latter part of my general division, whereof I mind to
speak (and God will) in the after noone. The Lord God of his mercy grant us
grace to consider of his goodness and mercies toward the children of men: to
put displeasure out of our hearts, to forget our own people, and our fathers
house, and to worship the Lord by a thankful and reverent remembrance of him,
of our breethren, of our selves, and the judgment prepared, that so with the
true use of memory, we may the better walk in our duties, and tend to the end
of our delivery, which is to serve God in holiness and righteousness all the
days of our life, before him, as Zachary sings, Luc. 2. Luke 2.
and that which upon our preservation is required, as David concludes, saying:
He brought them forth from Egypt, with joy and gladness, that they might keep
his statutes, and observe his laws, Psalm. 105.45. Which, God grant we may
also keep and observe, to his glory, and our comfort in Jesus Christ our
Lord, to whom with the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, world without
end. Amen.

The end of the first Sermon.
The second Sermon. Lots Wife.
IN the former part, we have bin incited to the true use of memory, by the
consideration of the Action commanded, Remember. Now are we likewise furthered
in the same, by the consideration of the subject or matter here mentioned,
namely, Lots Wife. Neither can it be impertinent to our purpose, if also we
call to mind, as well Lot, as his Wife, in whom, an excellent example of Gods
mercy appears, as of his fearful judgments on her: for as when light and
darkness, sweet and sour, fire and water, and things contrary are compared
together, either of them is the better discerned from other. So by the
consideration of Lot, and then, by conferring him with his wife, and by noting
the contrary dispositions and lots of them both, we shall in much better sort
from either of them learn that, which the holy Spirit, by reserving their
examples for our memories, will suggerate unto us.

From Lot, Lot.
is there learned the lot of a godly man in this life, with a comfort unto the
godly through the mercy of God on him.

From Lots Wife, Lots wife.
is learned the lot of the wicked in this world, with a terror unto all
backsliders and wicked Apostates, by the terrible judgments of God on the
wicked Sodomites, and Lots Wife. Therefore first beholding Lot. himself,
therein consider these circumstances.

1 Who this Lot was. 2 By what means he came to Sodom. 3 How he behaved
himself in Sodom among the ungodly. 4 What entertainment he found among them.
5 How that God loved him, and delivered him not only from the sins, but also
from the punishment of the Sodomites.
We find in Genesis 11.27. that Lot was the Son of Haran, What Lot was.
which was brother unto Abraham, who was contented (as one believing ye Lord)
to accompany his Uncle Abraham, when he forsook his own Country, and his
fathers house, out from Vr of the Caldees, and went soiourning as a Stranger
into the land of Canaan, at the commandment of the Lord God. And hereby is he
noted to be of the faithful: as also more effectually by that, when being
among the wicked, he nevertheless feared the Lord in all things. The Wiseman,
Sapi. 10.6. Sap. 10.6. 2. Pet. 2.
calls Lot, The Righteous man. And S. Peter in his 2. Chapter of his second
Epistle calls him Just Lot. Righteous in deed and just both before God and
man: Before God, by the forgiveness of sin, through mercy and apprehension of
righteousness by faith. Before men, as well by his godly conversation and
virtues, as also in respect of the wicked Sodomits, before whom, he was far
preferred. Thus was he a righteous man. And hereof it was, that he lived so
unspotted among the wicked, vexing his righteous soul, that he saw the two
Angels coming into Sodom, and rose up to meet them, Genesis 18.
that he bowed himself with his face to the ground, and invited them gladly to
his house, that he entertained them reverently, and defended them against the
rage of the Sodomits: that he believed the words of the Angels, and most
obediently followed them, departing from Sodom without desire to retire: that
he contemned the sins and society of the Sodomits, and forsaking all the
trust of the world, depended only on the mercy of God, whom he knew to be
able and willing to provide a better habitation for him. But it is a thing
worth the noting, how Lot came into Sodom, 2. How he came to Sodom.
which was upon two occasions, the one, by his unhappy departure from his
Uncle Abraham: the other, by the foolish lust of his eye in his unhappy
choice. For as we read in Gen: 13.6. Genesis 13.6.
when these two godly persons Abraham and Lot were greatly increased, and their
flocks could not pasture together in one country, without conte^tion between
their servants: it was the counsel of Abraham, that to eschew that
inconvenience between them, being as brethren, they should sunder themselves
and their flocks one from another, and therein he did not stick to give the
choice unto Lot, saying unto him: Is not the whole land before thee? Depart I
pray thee from me: If thou will take the left hand, then will I go to the
right: Or if thou go to the right hand, then I will take the left. So when Lot
beheld the Country, he perceived that all the plain of Iordane was watered
every where: for it was (before the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrhe) as the
Garden of Eden. And so Lot chose unto him all the plain of Jordan, yea, he
pitched his Tent even to Sodom. But hinc ille lachrymae, woe unto thee seely
Lot, Lots unhappy choice.
for whiles thou go about to please thine eye, thou woundest thine heart,
thou lustest for the plain, but the bushes enclose thee: thou delightest in
the waters of Jordan, but thou art in danger of the fire of Sodom: thou
thoughtest thou had gotten thee into heaven, Aug. de ci. Dei. 21.
but thou art come to the gate of hell. Sodom is fair and fruitful, but thou
must not taste of their fruits, Egesippus.
for their Apples fall to dust and scinders if thou touch them, their herbs be
hurtful, and death is in their pot. To be plain, there is bona terra, mala
gens, a good Country, but a wicked people: for it is truly said, Genesis 13.13.
that the men of Sodom were wicked, Cause of separation.
and exceeding sinners against the Lord. This separation between Abraham and
Lot, came of contention and strife, a cause of division even among breethren:
this contention and strife grew, of the abundance of worldly wealth, a cause
of much discord even between the children of one parentage, whereof there be
too many examples, besides common experience. This choice of Sodom, came of the
lust of the eye, which ensnareth many men by the hook of voluptuousnes, and
draws them to horrible inconveniences, as innumerable testimonies, with
semblable examples, and our daily experience do also witness at the full. Beware
of contention about these vain earthly things, beware of a desire to be made
rich, beware of lust of the eye, and pleasure of the flesh, which is in the
world (as John says) and is an enemy to the Lord. And if this good man could
not rule himself therein, neither eschew some pain thereof ensewing: Let us
not presume to promise our selves safety and ease in these pricking thorns.

Now may we see in what sort Lot 3 How Lot lived there
lived in Sodom among the ungodly. It is a very difficult thing for a man to
escape the infection of the plague, whereas the very air is corrupted. It is
not easy to touch pitch, and not be therewith defiled, and to stand in the
furnace of fire with the three children, and not have as much as a hear burned,
is altogether of Gods power, and not of man's wit. Lot is in Sodom, as in a
place of infection, as in the pit of pitch and furnace of uncleanness, and yet
is he there righteous among them. Yet as a Lilly among the thorns, as a
child among the Scorpions, and as a woman groaning in travail, he endures it.
As a preacher of righteousness, he ceasseth not; as a Pelican in the
wilderness he rejoices not: but preaches, prays, A cause of Lots sorrow.
lamenteth, and vexes his righteous soul: as moved thereunto by their great
sins, to behold, how wickedness was extolled, and virtues trodden down:
how right was exiled, and wrong dealing in price: how sins did abound; and
righteousness, faith and truth was scarce found: and he saw the Angel
(whereof John speaks) Revel. 10. to put his right foot on the Sea, Aret. in
Apo. 10. verse. 1.2.
but his left on the earth, when the wicked seemed more to flourish in worldly
sway and estimation than the godly, which had none honor at all. The Prophet
Jeremy Jeremy. 9. Lam. 1.
living among the like kind of people, was forced to vex his mind with their
ungodliness, and the consideration of their pain ensuing: (as it can not be
but a grief unto a godly man to see the people so obstinate, indurate and
wicked to their own destruction:) and thus he breaks out: Oh that my head
were full of water and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day
and night for the slain of the daughter of my people! Again: Oh that I had in
the wilderness a wayfaring man's cottage, that I might leave my people, and go
from them: for they be all adulterers and an assembly of rebels. Hereof was our
Savior Christ moved to weep over Jerusalem. I would to God the godly men now
had not the like occasion given them to vex their godly minds: but it is
truly said, and too truly verified: Love waxes cold, and the Son of man
ready to come upon us: faith starteth aside and is scarcely found but as a
pilgrim on the earth. Tongues are bent as bows to shoot forth lies, but for
the truth they have broken strings: they proceed from evil to that which is
worse, and care not for the knowledge of God: neither brother, nor friend, nor
neighbor may be trusted. This is a cause of confusion and plague, the Lord of
his mercy deliver us. 4 His enterteynment in Sodom
See now (I pray you) what good Lot gained by his being in Sodom: his desire of
pleasures procured him pain: his hope of friendship, nothing but afflictions.
First, being among the Sodomites, Lot had many afflictions and dangers among
the Sodomites.
he was taken prisoner with his wife and all his substance, together with the
Kings of Sodom and Gomorrha, by Amraphel King of Shinar, Arioch King of
Eleasar, Chedarlaomer King of Elam, and Tidal King of the Nations, in great
danger of his life. Well, the ungodly may be sometimes favored by the means
of the godly men among them: but this is sure, that the godly can have no good
by joining hands with the ungodly, or being among them. The tares may be
suffered for a time, because of the corn: but in the mean while, the corn is
annoyed by the growing up of the tares with it. Therefore Pharaos Court is no
place for Moses to wayt in, nor Putiphars house for Joseph to serve in, nor
Baltazars feast for Daniel to banquet in, nor Nabucadnezars glory for Sidrach
to worship in, nor the open land for Dina to gad in, nor the high Priests
palace for Peter to come in, nor Sodom a City for just Lot to inhabit in. It
is commanded: Come out from Babylon my people, least ye be polluted with their
sins, and so take part of their plagues.

And although we learn (as afterward it shall be declared) that the banishing
hence of the righteous, hasteneth destruction on the rest; The ungodly can not
abide the righteous among them.
yet cannot the ungodly have quiet minds until they have extirpated and
rooted out all the godly from among them. The same we see in this example of
Lot, who could not enjoy the benefit of any Supersedeas among the Citizens of
Sodom. He did not only vex his righteous soul there with beholding their
sins, but also he was violently oppressed with their cruelty. They rushed in
upon him saying: Thou art come hither, Genesis 19.
but as a stranger among us, and will thou be our Judge? Thou art no town
borne child, nor citizen of ours, nor of this country, thou art not of our
society and company, nor of our conditions: we did never bear thee such good
will to make thee a Judge over us, or to be tried by thy determination: no,
but we will deal worse with thee, then with these men, whom thou harborest.

Oh good Lot! could thou so long time abide there, where thou could never
be welcome? What gaynest thou among such ungodly persons? Thou may say: Only
this, a trial of my patience and piety: An experience of the great might and
mercy of the Lord. Such is Lots enterteynment in Sodom. God grant that his
children may be betimes warned to take heed of such enterteyners: and that we
our selves be not contented to yield hatred unto them, that deserve to be
welcome among us.

Another affliction had this good man, Lots own wife was an affliction to him.
which peradventure did touch him nearer, namely by this, that his own wife
which lay in his bosom, and should of all other be a comfort unto him, became
a grief and corasiue to his heart.

It was no small grief to David, that his own son, sought after his life:
And our Savior protests with no little sorrow of soul, that the same which
eat bread with him, lifted up his heel against him. And it may be, this
godly man would not have stayed so long in Sodom, had not his wife been a
vehement cause thereof.

Unequal yokes.
Here then let us learn to take heed under what yokes ye submit your selves,
and with what wives ye join. Ios. 24.
It was said of the women of the Nations: they will be unto you, snares,
pricks in your eyes, and whippes on your sides: they will allure you, seduce
you, draw you to Idolatry. Did not Solomon the King of Israel sin in these
things? Nehe. 13.24.
Did not the daughters of men defile the children of God? Genesis 6.
Was not Iezabell a pricker forward of Ahab to every mischief? Did not Saul
provide Michol to be a snare unto David? and did she not mock at him openly?
Did not Jobs wife grieve him in the bitterness of his heart? Was not Esau
blamed for taking wives of the Hittites, a grief of mind to old Isaak and
Rebeccha? Therefore Jacob was straightly charged by his parents to eschew such
women. Abraham swear his servant, that he should not take a wife for Isaak of
these nations: and a law was ratified by Moses to that end. 1. Cor. 7.
This is Paul's charge: Bear not the yoke with Infidels. Let us take heed
then of unequal matches. The man which is unwilling to be drowned, does not
cast himself desperately into the Sea: and it is against nature for a person to
seek comfort of that which by nature yields corrasiues and griefs. Lots
wife being by nature evil, could not do any good to her husband in all her
life. A great affliction.

This thing also is general, that the godly, wheresoever they come, shall be as
welcome unto the worldlings, as water to the fire, as Lot was to Sodom. Christ
tells this playnlie: Ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. And John
his holy Apostle says: Marvel not my brethren, though the world hate you.
Does not Cain envy Abel? Is not the old world against Noah? Ismael against
Isaak? Esau against Jacob? Does not Saul envy David for his victory? Do not
the Lords of Babylon hate Daniel for his piety? Do not all the Nations
conspire together against Israel? Yea more yet: though Ephraim deuoureth
Manasses, and Manasses devour Ephraim, yet do not they both join hand in hand
to devour Judah the Lords inheritance? As Pilate against Herod, and Herod
against Pilate, but both of them against Christ? what concord between fire and
water? what peace between Christ and Belial, may be found? But yet, why does
the world thus hate the children of God, whom they have rather cause to love?
The children of God be brethren at amity in themselves, whose society Satan
seeks to divide, that his own arm may be the stronger, and that one house
may fall upon another. They be the redeemed from the earth, and from the power
of darkness, whom he seeks again to draw unto him: they follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes, to the great grief of Satan: they be not of the world,
but chosen out of the world, therefore they be hated, but have the worldlings
any just cause of hatred given them? no truly, for as Christ was hated without
a cause of them that should have rather loved him, so are his children. Yet
they allege causes also for themselves, whose imaginations, the Wise man
descrieth in his 2. Chapt. of the book of Wisdom: Sap. 2.
where he tells, that the ungodly being not fully persuaded of a better life
after this, and therefore minding to take their fill of pleasure here in
despite of Gods threatenings, and in contempt of his promises, without any
co^troulment or contradiction of the righteous, which can not but speak
against them, they thus resolve and conclude against the righteous, Let us
oppress the poor man that is so righteous. Will ye oppress, nay rather,
deal justly. Will ye hurt the poor? nay rather help him. Will ye do violence
to the righteous man? nay rather do him good. But ye will not be restrained: ye
will oppress him, and why? he is not for our profit: he is contrary to our
doings: he checketh us for offending: he accounts us transgressors of
discipline: he bosteth himself of the knowledge of God: he says he is Gods
son: he is made to reprove our thoughts: it greeueth us to see him: his life
is not like other men's: his ways are of another sort: he accounts us as
bastards: he abhors our ways: he commends only the latter end of the
righteous, therefore we will examine him with rebukes and torments, we will
condemn him to a shameful death. Alas ye miserable caitiffes, be these your
profound arguments? Indeed these beseem him that says in the pride of his
heart, Sic volo, siu iubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas: I will have it so, so I
command it to be done, my will is an argument forcible enough. This is the
manner of dealing of the worldlings against the righteous: So is Lot
entertained. Now seeing the case thus stands, The godly are to join together
in love.
oh how ready should the godly be to join together, and live in concord
together? a thing both godly and profitable, as David sings, Ecce quam bonum,
etc. for the house is not desolate, nor the kingdom confounded, where love and
concord dwells and reigns. It is good for birds of one flight to fly
together, chickens of one hen to couch together, sheep of one fold to flock
together, strings of one instrument to sound in harmony together, members of
one body to join together, and Christians of one calling to love together, as
sons of one father, brethren of one Christ, and Saints of one God. This is
expressly commanded by Christ: this is the badge or recognizance whereby we
be known, and hereby we be assured of our translation from death to life, as
S. John says. And the Apostles speaking hereof, lay oftentimes our Savior
for a pattern before us, who commanded his Disciples to love together, as he
had loved them: that was (as one notes) Veraciter sine simulatione: prudenter
sine corruptione: temperanter sub Dei dilectione: generaliter sine exceptione.
That is, without simulation truly: without corruption wisely: under the love of
God temperately: without exception generally. Here is not taught the love of
Cayne to Abel, of Saul to David, of Judas to Christ: but here is the love of
David to Ionathas, of Ruth to Naomi, of Paul to Barnabas, of Christ to John.
Again, here is taught to love not the errors, but the virtues of our
brethren, to hate the sin with love of the person: to love not for wealth,
nor favor, nor strength: but for that he is thy brother a Christian. Yet so as
this love must not exceed the love of our God, whom above all things we must
love: that in regard of that, we must even forsake all other things which may
hinder us from the same. For whosoever loves either father or mother, wife or
children, yea, or his own life, more then me (says Christ) is not worthy of
me: herein then is temperance learned. Let us love heartily, but yet in the
fear of God: and under his love, yet so reverently, as we may honor God in our
love. Lastly, we are taught by this rule, to love generally, I say not all men
alike: for although God in mercy makes his sun to shine as well on the
evil, as on the good: and so they feel as it were the beams of Gods love,
whereof they be most unworthy: yet has he ever had an especial love to his
own children. The household of faith must be preferred before the worldlings, as
Jacob before Esau, Isaac before Ismael, Abel before Cayne, David before Saul,
Solomon besore Absolon, John before Judas, but I speak here only of the
brethren. This rule is enioined to the flock under one shepherd, to love and
embrace, of what nation, kindred, tongue or sex soever they be. Thus let us love
without exception, so shall we yield and obey as good children to our heavenly
father: so shall we show our selves his scholars: so shall we assure election
to our selves: so shall we be strong in our selves: so shall we withstand our
enemies on every side, and shine as lights in the midst of a crooked
generation, and thus have we seen the entertainment of Lot in Sodom.

Now are we to consider, how that this good man, 5 The delivery of Lot.
notwithstanding the hatred of his Citizens, obtained the love and mercy of the
Lord, through whom, not only himself was wonderfully delivered from
destruction, bu also his adversaries for a time fared the better for his
presence. P. Mart. in Genesis 19.
It may be that now the prayer of Abraham had his effect in this, that God
destroys not Lot with Sodom. For it is said, that God remembering Abraham (and
therein his prayer) took Lot out of the midst of the overthrow. Hereof it
was, that God was merciful unto him, and therefore sent his Angel to deliver
him: yea and when he delayed, the Angel did even perforce constrain him to
fly. But so much the rather, in that Lot was also a righteous man: whereof
David argues (no doubt) among the semblable examples, I never saw the
righteous forsaken. And why Genesis 18. Genesis 18.
should not the Judge of all the world do according unto right? and who is
righteous? even Lot, in that by his faith he obtained mercy: and therefore he
is saved (though by nature sinful) yet by the mercy of the Lord made
righteous. But from what other example might David gather this assurance? was
not Noah saved from perishing by water, with his family, when all the world was
overwhelmed? was not Abraham and Sara preserved in a strange land and was not
Isaac wonderfully preserved by the Angel, when his father held up the knife to
have killed him and was not Jacob (...) Lords providence, here is his fault
and fall: such is man's wisdom, and thereunto it tends: a note of disgrace
in so godly a man. But God is yet merciful unto Lot, yea and spares for a
time Sodom through him. And here observe, that whereas the Lord stayed the
wrath of his rod from his enemies, till time that Lot was gone out of Sodom,
least happily the righteous had perished among the wicked, which God forbid, as
Abraham prayed. So do we see that commandment of the tares here verified, Let
them yet alone, least whiles ye weed out them, ye pluck up also the corn. The
Angels said plainly to Lot, when they willed him to hasten unto Zoar, We can
do nothing until thou be come thither. And this is a general thing, that when
God determines to extirpate and root out Nations, When good men be taken
hence, plagues may be feared to follow.
Kingdoms, and people, he first takes away the godly from among them, and
leaving only a confused heap of ungodly persons, a free passage is given to
the execution of his judgments. When we see therefore that good men do slide
from us, let us fear of a judgment ensuing, and with repentant hearts turn
unto the Lord, and crave mercy in time convenient. The Prophet Ezechiel
tells, that when the Lord could find no zealous man among them Ezech. 22.31.
he powered out his wrath, and consumed them. Isaiah Isa 57.1.
says, that the righteous men do dye, and be taken away from the evil that
comes after them. And David witnesses, Psalm. 12.
that the godly men be gone, and the wrath of God recompenceth the remaynder.
Examples hereof we have many. Among which we remember, that when Noah Noah.
was gone from the world, and was enclosed in the Arc, the water forthwith
fell down upon the world, and drowned it. When King Hezekiah Hezekiah.
was laid to his Fathers in peace, the plague fell down upon Judah, which the
Lord had by promise restrained all the time of his life. The like in effect is
mentioned of Josias, Josias.
Christ and his Apostles being departed from Jerusalem, and not one left there,
but counterfeit Jews, Christ and the Apostles.
and notorious evil sinners, all the plagues that tended to the utter
destruction of that City, immediately followed, Matthew. 22.
Thy house is left desolate, for ye shall not see me henceforth, etc. So
here, Lot Lot.
the righteous man, being gone out of Sodom, the Lord rained upon them fire and
brimstone from heaven, Aug. de ciu. dei. 21 Solinus. Egesippus.
and consumed them all, and their Country, as many ancient Testimonies,
especially the holy Scripture report.

The consideration hereof might move even the ungodly, to wish for and desire
the peace of Jerusalem, and gladly to enterteyne and reteyne the society of
righteous Lots among them. And when they perceive them departing, to dread
great judgments imminent, 1. Sam. 3.
as the daughter of old Eli did, who hearing that the Ark of God was taken
away from Israel, cried out in great fear: Now is the glory gone from Israel,
for the Ark of God is taken away! And thus much for the person of Lot.

Now are we come to the view of Lots Lots wife.
Wherein we are to consider: First,

This woman by all likelihood was of the Cananites, but far unlike the woman
of Canaan that cried after Christ for her daughter. And it may easily be
gathered that Lot married this woman either in or about Sodom, whereas he
pitched his tent: partly for that we do not find in the history that she
came thither with him, as Sarai did with Abraham: partly for that she had such
an earnest desire to stay, and dwell there among them. And it is true,
Canaanites be mixed with the Israelites.
that notwithstanding the commandment of God to the contrary, some
Canaanites are not only dwelling, but also joining unto them of Israel: which
cannot do them any good, but evil as long as they live. As long as the godly
man sows corn in this world, will the envious man cast in his tares among.
While the net is in the Sea, the bad fishes will be taken together with the
good: whiles the Mustard seed grows up to a tree, the birds of all sorts
will rowst under the same. The beasts of al kind will be found in the Arc,
and Cham will couch between Shem and Iaphet, Genesis 10.
and grow to a mighty nation to divide their Tabernacles asunder: that now
the Lords flock, in respect of all the rest, is called little. As if the Lord
had chosen of all birds one Dove, of all beasts one Sheep, of all trees one
Cedar in Libanus: of all pittes, one River Jordan: of all hills, one Sion: of
all people, one Israel: of al Cities, one Jerusalem: and out of all Sodom, Lot:
but not Lots wife. As all the world to Noah: all Baals Priests to Elias, all
the rebellious Israelites to Joshua. Ios. 24
All Jerusalem to Christ and his Apostles. So is Sodom to Lot, yea and with
them his own wife. This is not Sarah to Abraham, nor Rebeccah to Isaak, nor
Hester to Ashuerus, nor Susanna to Ioachim, nor Elizabeth to Zacharias, nor
Mary to Joseph: but here is so heavy a yoke, as good Lot could not well bear,
and such a burden as he was not able to bring forth from Sodom to Zoar. Here is
a cursed Xantippe to a learned and patient Socrates: here is a murmuring Annah
to an holy Tobiah, yea more yet than that: here is a disdaynfull and mocking
Micholl to a zealous David, and a cursed woman to a blessed Job. But we may
note in her some particular sins, and eschew them the better by the
consideration of her evil success for the same.

First we note in her infidelity. 1 Infidelity
For she believed not the words of the Angels which said: We be come hither to
destroy this place. And herein she joined hands with all her kin in that
city, who esteemed the report of Lot, touching the words of the Angels, as
fables vainly invented: or she thought yt God would have spared so beautiful
a thing, notwithstanding the Angels words. So Thomas was incredulous, and would
not believe the words of them which said, they had seen Christ after his
death, But yet blessed are they, which have not seen, and yet have believed.
Sarah, Heb. 11.
that woman is commended for her faith by the Apostle. The wife of Manoah also
is commended in that she believed the Angels words to her. Judge. 13.
Anna also the mother of Samuel, Rahab, Ruth, Mary, Martha, Elizabeth, Damaris,
and other like women are for their faith praised: but Lots wife is diffamed by
her unbelief.

This is the subtlety of Satan: Satan's craft to take away a man's faith.
first to pull out faith from man's heart, which being once gone, he knows
that man is neither able to resist him, nor to quench his fiery darts. He
does therein as the Raven, which first picketh out the sheep eye, and
afterward deuoureth his body: And faith is in a man, the eye of the soul.
Satan knows, that faith is the pillar whereon our building stands.
Therefore he shakes it to cast down our building. He knows that faith is as
a Tower which gives us two advantages against him: namely, to defend our
selves thereby from him, and to cast out from thence the strokes of thundering
Ordinances to annoy him. Therefore he first aymeth to our faith.

Heb. 11. Ephe. 6. 1. Pet. 1. Romans 9. 1. Cor. 10. Romans 11.
The Apostle showing the commodities of faith by the examples of Abraham, Isaak,
Jacob, Sarah, and other Saints, does thereto oppose the infidelity of such as
have thereby purchased just pains for recompense. Adam by his unbelief, with
Eua, were cast out of Paradise: the Jews wanting faith could not come into the
land of promise, but perished in the wilderness: he that believed not the
Prophet, was trodden on in the gate of the City: Zachary was dumb because he
did not believe the word of the Angel: the Apostles were checked for their
unbelief, and Lots wife is plagued. The world is reproved for sin by the
holy Ghost, Io. 16.
because they believe not: as if under this one sin al other sins were
comprehended, and well worthy: for without faith it is impossible to please
God, seeing whatsoever is done, is sin. The Jews, by their unbelief, were
not only unworthy that Christ should work any miracle among them in his own
country ^ but also they alienated the favor of God from them and their
children. This is if grievous sin.

Let us take heed of unbelief and eschew the pain thereof, by a perfect faith
in Christ. Let us believe the voice of the Angel: let us hearken unto our
great Archangell Christ and his word preached by his Ministers, that we may
believe: for faith comes by hearing, and faith has more commodities, than I
am able to express at this time. When Satan desired to sift us as wheat,
Christ prayed that our faith might not fail. The Lord therefore help our
unbelief, and increase our faith in us evermore, that thereby we may hasten
from Sodom with righteous Lot, and not stay, or turn thither again, to perish
with his unrighteous wife.

Secondly, in her is noted the sin of disobedience. 2 Disobedience.
Lot obeyed the voice of the Angels, and departed from Sodom, without retire or
looking back: but she disobeyed that voice in looking back. And no marvel,
for she believed not. For obedience is not expected from infidelity, no more
than the standing of an house without a foundation, or sweet fruit to grow
on the tree that has a bitter root. She would not come forth to Zoar to save
her felfe there. She looked back to Sodom. Though obedience be better than
Sacrifice, as Samuel said to Saul, and to hearken is better than the blood of
Goats, and disobedience is as the sin of witchcraft: yet she obeys not,
she hearkeneth not, but rebelleth. Although it was commanded by the Lord,
enjoined by the Angel: Genesis 19. Deuteronomy. 28.
and obedience has a promise of the best thing in the land, and disobedience
a commination of plagues which surely be performed, and that not the hearers
of the law be justified but the doers: yet is she disobedient. Would to God,
the most part in these days did not follow her therein. Take heed of the
judgments thereunto belonging. Saul for disobedience is rejected, and his
kingdom taken from him. The man of God was slain of a Lion, 1. Sam. 15 1.
Kin. 13.
because he did eat bread in the old Prophets house, contrary to Gods express
commandment. The good King Josiah, in that he obeyed not the Lord, speaking
out of the mouth of Neco King of Egypt, yet a wicked King, was stricken that he
dyed. The fathers in the wilderness perished through disobedience, yea and
many that did things with a good intent, yet disobediently, were surely
reproved and punished. Vssah touched the Arc as it was falling, with intent to
stay it up: it apperteyned not to him, therefore is he stricken. Nadab and Abihu
the sons of Aaron took strange fire in their Censors, thinking they did
well, but being contrary to the commandment, they have therefore a grievous
punishment. In these, yea even in these persons was this sin punished. But
what of that? Shall we then think to escape unpunished for the like, yea and
greater breaches of Gods holy commandment? Heb. 10.20 29. Deuteronomy. 19.15.
If he that despises Moses law dies without mercy under two or three
witnesses; of how much greater punishment suppose ye shall he be worthy of,
which has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of
the Covenant, wherein he was sanctified, an unholy thing: and has done
despite unto the Spirit of grace? 1. Pet. 4.17.
The time is come that judgment begins at the household of God: and if it
begin there, what shall be the end of them that believe not the Gospel? I
begin (says the Lord) to plague the City whereon my name is called, Ier.
25.29.
and think you, I will suffer you to escape? No, ye shall not go quite. Take
heed then of this sin of Lots wife. We do read of other women, which have
gotten both favor and commendation by obedience to GOD and their own
husbands; but Lots wife loses all good report, yea her life and health too,
through disobedience.

The third fault we note in her, is Pride: 3 Pride.
this thing did the devil join to infidelity and disobedience of Euah; who
would willingly be as God. So this woman aspiring above degree, thereby
contemns the simple estate of her own husband, and the word of the Lord. Oh
how much better had Christian humility beseemed her! It is the best ornament
of a faithful person. Abraham was beautified therewith, when coming before
the Lord, he accounted himself vile dust and ashes, unworthy to speak unto
his Majesty. This David also had, when he daunced bare before the Arc, though
Micholl his own wife disdained him thereat. This virtue did Christ himself
embrace, who oftentimes fell on his face to the earth, when he prayed, yea and
yielded himself to the great contempt of the Cross. Humility lifts that up
into heaven, which pride assayeth to cast down in hell. The humble and low
degree of Mary the Lords handmayd is esteemed, and she accounted blessed: the
poor Publican is (...), David obteyneth mercy: but the proud Phariste
Antiochus, Senacherib, Herod, and other proud persons have been cast down.
Lots wife in her pride disdayned the vocation of her husband, she contemned the
Country whereinto he was going from Sodom, she thought scorn to make such a
change, and to endure in steed of pleasure affliction: for delicate fare,
hunger and cold: for ease, travail: for fine apparel, Camels hair: for
seeled houses, Caves of earth: for Iuorie beds, the hard stones, or grass
in the fields: in steed of company, solitariness: for mirth, mourning: and
sorrows for solace. She disliked now after so many wealthy pleasures in
Sodom, to become as a Pelican in Wilderness, as a dove alone mourning, as the
sparrowe on the house top sorrowing. She could not abide that, for there is
nothing more contrary to the cross of Christ, than Pride. Except ye humble
your selves and become as children, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven, says Christ.

Pride brings men with speed to Babel, yields confusion, shame and fall. I
would to God there were not found too many possessed with this devil among us,
who, albeit they be called Christians, whose meekness they should follow,
do yet in the pride of their hearts disdain simple Jesus and his word, and
that were it not for the love of worldly estimation and wealth, would even
openly contemn the profession of humble Jesus. The Lord stop the great
inconvenience of this sin, to the casting down of proud Lucifer and his
members, that the glory of Jesus Christ might be the better embraced even in
humility.

Another fault we note in this ungracious woman: that is, wanton and worldly
pleasure, 4 Worldly pleasure.
which was of force to withstand her proceeding. Sodom was a pleasant Country,
as the garden of Eden, so well watered, and the Apples and fruits therein most
beautiful to the eye. Video meliora proboque, etc
And hereon Appetite took occasion to contend with reason, and in her
prevailed, that with Medaea she could now dispute, and thus resolve: yet will I
follow my pleasures, be they never so noisome, and eat these apples be they
never so venomous, though I see that which is wholsomer and cannot but commend
it. These snares does Satan cast before the hungry fowls to take them, and
merrily sings when he deceives. The Syrenes sing sweetly, the Lamaei shine
beautifully, the Serpent suggesteth subtlety, and the devil promises all the
glory of the world to them that worship him.

But they reason for themselves and will coin excuses, although he that had
married a wife had none excuse at all: Shall I abandon worldly pleasures? I am
yet but a young man. Shall I not have a wanton eye? I am but a girl. Shall I
loose the assurance of my delights here, and trust to an vncerteyntie? Take
heed, O young man: Eccle. 11.
and know that an account shall be called of thy youthful years: and a
pain will ensue these pleasures. The Apples of Sodom be fair to behold; but
touch them, and they fall to sinders: and the stinging Hydra lies under the
golden swarth. Remember, that Heuah lost the true pleasures of Paradise, by
following her pleasant appetite. Esau for a mess of pottage, and his worldly
pleasure, did lose both the birthright and blessing: the man that had wedded
himself to his delights, could not enjoy the benefit of the marriage feast:
and Lots wife for the wanton pleasures of Sodom, lost the saftie of Zoar, and
turning from heaven, was devoured of hell. Remember what our Lord said:
Whosoever loves either father or mother, wife or children, or any thing in the
world more than me, is not worthy of me. And remember what father Abraham said
to the proud rich man in hell: Son, (says he) remember that thou in thy
life time had thy pleasure, but contrariwise Lazarus received pains: but
now he is comforted and thou art punished. Arguing a matter of Justice to give
torments and pains after death to them that have given themselves to pastime
and pleasure in this life: which also S. James Iam. 5.
in a manner confirms in his 5. Chapter. Remember that Moses having hereof
right consideration, did not only put off his shoes from his feet, the
clogges that might have hindered him from coming to the Lord and from doing his
duty: Exodus 3.
but also he chose affliction with the people of God in the wilderness, Heb.
11.
before the pleasures of sin in Egypt for a season. The Lord in his mercy
persuade us with Iaphet to depart from the society and pleasures of Cham, and
(...) dwell in the tabernacles of blessed Shem, that we may not serve the
devil among the many of this world in these vain and fleshly pleasures,
which confounded Sodom, and with them Lots wife.

Further, we note in this woman a distrust of Gods providence mixed with
worldly carfulness; 5 Distrust of Gods providence and worldly carefulnes.
inconveniences which always follow infidelity. O woman, thou distrusting one
thing, take care for many things. Do thou think, that the great
omnipotent God is not thereby rich and liberal, mighty and most willing to
provide for his children? Could not he have given thee enough without Sodom?
And will thou distrust him and care for thy self without him? Will thou look
back to the things left behind thee in Sodom? The Hebrew text has it thus,
(...) that is, his wife looked back behind her. Which the Greek translation
yields, (...). that is: She looked back, or had respect to the things behind
her, or on that which she had left in Sodom. She thought that God would not
have so well provided for her, elsewhere, as she was provided for in Sodom:
therefore she had a careful desire of the things left behind her, and a mind
to provide for her self. Thus the Israelites in the Wilderness, distrusting
God, wished for the flesh and fare of Egypt again. Oh that she had remembered
the goodness of God to Abraham and her own husband Lot. She never saw the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed to beg. Behold, he feeds the young Ravens
that cry unto him: and will he not feed his own children? Do bodily fathers
offer unto their children not stones but bread, and not Scorpions but fishes:
and shall not our heavenly father give good things to such as ask the^ of him?
Shall the birds feed their Chickens, and the beasts their young, and will
not he feed his children? O woman, what meanest thou? Would to God this
malady had not also infected us; then would we not by such indirect means as
we use, endeavor to provide for our back and our belly: then would we not
so murmur against God, as we do with minds never content. But some do decipher
themselves hereby to be not true sons, but bastards. For if we assure our
selves to be his children, and be our father, then also do we assure our
selves of his provision for us, that he ^eepeth us, as the apple of his eye,
and not suffer one hair of our head to perish, much less our life. He fed
Eliah by the ministry of Ravens: he sent meat to Daniel in the Lions den:
he fed an hundred Prophets by the hand of Obadiah in Caves: he gave water to
Sampson from the Iaw bone of an Ass, and honey from the dead carcass of a
Lion: the widows had their oil and flower increased in the famine. He gave
Manna from heaven, water from the Rock, and Quayles from the air unto the
Israelites. In Samaria there is plenty of flower on a sudden: and our Savior
Christ feeds sometime 4000. sometime 500. persons with fine loaves and two
fishes, and yet more is taken up in fragments, then was laid down in the
whole. Why then should we murmur? Why should we excessiuely care for the
morrow and vex our minds? Let us rather apply our vocations according to
the rule of his word with the ordinary and lawful means, and affixe our
minds on him and trust in his mercy, knowing that man lives not by bread
only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. The Israelites
cried for flesh, they have it and dye thereof for their murmuring distrust. And
so Lots wife distrusting God, she murmureth in mind, she bends back, as
though her own care had been better than Gods grace for her saftie: but she
has a reward. Remember her distrust and worldly carefulnes.

6 Foolish pity.
Another fault we find in this faithles woman (as cords of vanity do ever linck
together to pull men from God,) and that is foolish pity, which is also too
common among us. She was moved for her friends and old acquaintance, whose
company and conditions she loved, which she should rather have hated: and she
thought it a pitiful thing, that sinners should be punished. Psa. 101.3
I hate the^ (says David to the Lord) that hate thee; and am grieved with them
that rise up against thee: Psalm. 15.4.
being persuaded that he only should dwell in the Lords tabernacle, and rest
upon his holy hill, in whose eyes a vile person is contemned. Therefore he
says again: Psalm. 26.5.
I have hated the company of the evil, a froward heart shall depart from me,
Psa. 101.7
I will know none evil person: for thus says the Lord, There shall no
deceitful person dwell in my house. Let Magistrates take heed of foolish
pity. Remember how King Saul for pitying Agag the Amalakite, was reproved and
plagued: that Achab, for letting go of Benhadad King of Siria, was reprehended
and endangered. On the other side: Remember what Iehu did to Iezabel and the
wicked house of Achab, without compassion, and that he was promised by the Lord
for doing this thing, his sons should surely sit on the throane after him to
the third and fourth generation. Remember also, what a good report zealous
Phinehas obtained, when with his sword he flewe Zimri and Cozbi, and ceased
the plague, which was accounted unto him for righteousness throughout all
generations. And it is for every man to be zealous in the Lords cause with
Christ (who was devoured with the zeal of his fathers house) not to give aim
to sin, nor suffer the honor of the Lord God of Israel to be profaned: but
to desire with heart the conversion of sinners, to withstand their open
abominations, to reprove sin, and by lawful means to seek the execution
of justice against sin: every master in his house, every father in his
family, and every true Christian in his place, is to take heed that he
withstand sin in his servants, in his children, in his brethren, though with
reprehension, with due correction, and the lawful execution of the end of
justice, as the case or cause shall require without foolish pity. But how
negligently this is observed, the very streets of the City do testify, when
as servants, children, and those that should know how to measure their words
with discretion, be nothing fearful to sweat and blaspheme the holy name of
God in their common conferences: neither do they shame to commit sin openly
as Sodom did, and there is found no just Lot to reprove them: but there be
found too many masters, fathers, and others, that with Lots wife will rather
give aim unto their ungodliness, and be unwilling in heart that any correction,
reprehension or punishment at all should be given them, Remember Lots wife.

Another fault is found in this unhappy woman, sloth and negligence 7 Sloth,
and negligence.
in her journey forth. There is none excuse can be admitted against the Lords
commandment, neither the stammering tongue of Moses that could not speak, nor
ye tenderness of Jeremy being but a child, nor the simplicity of David the
least among his brethren, nor the poverty of Gedeon so mean, nor the
bashfulnes of Jonas so fearful, nor the former life of Saul a persecutor, may
justly offer excuses of delays in their lawful vocation. But seem the thing
never so hard, strange, obscure, uneasy or impossible, Note this.
if the Lord once bid us to proceed, we may not be slack nor negligent, nor
refuse to obey. And this is taught us by many examples: Peter in prison is
commanded to rise up quickly, and so he did. Acts. 12.
Zacheus being called from the fig tree by our Savior, he comes down
quickly. The children of Israel did eat the Passover hastily as they were
commanded, and Paul does the work of the Lord without negligence, as the
Spirit moves him. We must strike whiles the iron is hoate, and seek the Lord
whiles he may be found, for the tide carries for no man. We must knock in time,
Isa. 55. Eccles. 3.1.
and enter in before the gate be shut: for there is a time of mercy, and a
time of wrath: of mercy, whiles Abraham prays, and Lot is yet in Sodom: of
wrath, when Abraham ceasseth to pray, and Lot is departed. Do not then say,
when ye are called by the word of the Lord to come to him: I am but young, and
too young to serve God yet: I will serve him when I am old: say not, I will
first go and bury my father, I will go and bid the^ farewell at home: neither
make delays or excuses by buying Oxen, fyning farms, marying wives: but to
day, if ye will hear the Lords voice, harden not your hearts: The Lord
promises not to stay for you till to morrow, though he promise that at what
time soever ye repent, he will forgive you. Therefore delay not, he only
wins the goal that runs swiftly, he obtains the victory that strives
valiantly, he enters into the gate, that waits carefully, and he is heard
worthily, that craves timely. Run then, make haste, the day is at hand, the
time is uncertain, the enemy is strong, Sodom is sinful, the Angels be come
to destroy the ungodly, the cale is taken, the Lord is not entreated, the
number of the godly is small, there is none to stop the Lords wrath, not one to
stand up in the gap for the City that can be heard, and the fire will not be
^uenched, therefore it is more then time to fly hence. Heereat Lot with his
two daughters do run hence with his speed, but his wife has many heavy
clogs, she is slothful, negligent, full of delays, and is overtaken with
destruction.

Lastly, this ungodly Woman being by the devil, the world, and the flesh, 8
Apostacy.
so mightily hindered from the good course, now thereby in the end makes
shipwreck of all together: for she does apostate and turn back from the Lord
to Sodom. There be two kinds of returns, 2. kinds of return.
the one good and commendable, the other wicked and abominable. It is a good
thing to turn unto the Lord, and to change our selves, (...), by true
Repentance, to amend and become new creatures in Christ. This is that new birth
which Christ shows to Nicodemus, John. 3. and this brings mercy and
forgiveness in Christ, righteousness, holiness, and eternal glory. But it is a
dangerous thing to turn back again, being co^parable to the dog that resumeth
his vomit again, and to the sow being washed, to her wallowing again in the
mire. She went from Sodom, and seemed to proceed well for a time with her
husband: but she should also have quite forgotten her own people, and her
fathers house: she being in the feeld, should not have turned back to that she
left in the City. Here be two in one bed, the one received, the other
forsaken. An hypocrite An hipocrite.
gives a show of that which is not: so did Lots wife: but now it is apparent
what she is, when with Demas she leaves Paul, and turns back to Sodom ward.
Nothing feigned is of continuance, nor an hypocrite can long conceal the
malice of his mind, Quis enim relaverit ignem? Cayne gave a fair show for a
time, he sacrificed as Abell did, though not with Abels heart. King Saul showed
many resemblances of virtue, but whereunto that grew, it appeared plainly in
his disobedience. 2. King.
King Ioas in the lifetime of Iehoida the Priest, by whom he was instructed,
proceeded with commendation: but Iehoida being taken away, he plainly
deciphereth himself, by murdering the Prophet, and committing wickedness
against God. Absalom stale away the hearts of the people: Oh that I were King
(says he) then would I do justice? but his hypocrisy in the end appeered most
publikly. Iezabel had her Prophets, and when Naboth should be put to death, she
pretended holiness by proclaiming a fast* etc. but her wickedness is bewraied and
punished. So Herod pretended a desire to go and worship Christ, when he
determined to murder him: and Judas was for the poor in open show, because
he bare the bag, and would deceive the poor. Thus the very Devil himself
being most execrable wicked, will yet transform himself into an Angel of
light, till he has brought forth the lump of his lewdnes, to the dishonor of
God, and hurt of men: Et gandet se nesciri, and sua facta lateri:
Et nocuisse tamen, sed non nocuisse videri.
And so secretly does he wrap up his devises, that when he hurts most, he
will pretend greatest honesty. And thus Lots wife bewrays her secret folly
in the end, by her bending back. She now fully declares what she is, by
forsaking her vocation and backsliding.

Learn here by the way, that the work of the Lord must not only be taken in
hand, but also continued: The work of the Lord must be continued
in token thereof, Joseph has his long coat, and the very tails of the
beasts were sacrificed with their bodies, and he that is unworthy, and
continues not in his calling accordingly, has this censure laid on him by the
holy Ghost, Episcopatum cius accipiat alter, Acts. 2. Psalm. 109.
Let him be taken away, and another put in his place.

It had bin good for thee, thou Wife of Lot, to have called to mind thine Aunt
Sarah, Abraham's Wife, who being faithful, denied not, but most willingly
consented to follow her husband at the commandment of God, from Vr of the
Caldees, with a long journey and great danger, into an unknown and strange
land, to her great commendation, and how that God had every way provided
mercifully for her, but she forgot all, being blinded with impiety: I pray God
we be not forgetful with Lots wife.

There have bin many good women.
We have heard of many good women sithence then, that do teach us continuance,
and an obedient willingness in our duties. What is said of Rebekah? she left her
fathers house, and accompanied Abraham's servant unto Izhak her husband with
great chastity: also Leah and Rahel the wives of Iaakob came with him from
their fathers house willingly: Naomi goes with her husband Elimelech into
Moab, when food wanted in Israel. Moreover, Rahab of Ierico, Zipporah the wife
of Moses, Anna the wife of Tobias, and Sarra his sons wife, Mary the mother
of Christ, and many other good women, have most worthily declared their faith
by christian constancy: thus ought we to do: and so should Lots wife have
done: for these women before mentioned, were righteous in their lives, and be
in memory with the Saints: but this unhappy woman by bending back from her
husband, and so from God, is noted to be unrighteous and infamous among the
reprobate for ever.

Oh that we were free from such women! and all men from their infections: but
it is to be feared, that too many in these our days, even now whiles the
Gospel is yet preached, and the Son of righteousness gives us light, do
refuse to follow their husbands, and them that are willing to further them, I
will not say into the mountains, but even into the Church where the word of
God is preached. If Lots wife was punished then for that, alas what judgments
remain for these? This I say, ta^^^ heed of backsliding. Remember the
judgments of God on such hypocrites and Apostates. Remember Lots wife.

3. The punishment of Lots wife.
This wretched body escapes not without her reward and punishment, and so
much the sorer is she plagued, for that once she began to follow, but
afterward looked back and forsook him. It had been much better for her never
to have come forth from Sodom, then being come forth again to return. Of
this turning about speaks the Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap. 6.4. and Chap.
10.26. saying: It is impossible for such to be renewed by repentance: for
there remains no more Sacrifice for sins, but a fearful expectation of
the Judgment* and violent fire which shall devour the adversaries: This is a
terror to them that consider both the sin and the judgment: but a bitter
hell and torment to them that feel the same. Let the Magistrate, the Minister,
the people, the city, the country, and our whole land by the due
consideration hereof be humbled in fear, and pray heartely to the Lord to
deliver them from this outrageous evil.

Lots wife is plagued: but does not her husband herein help her? The husband
helps not the wife in this plague.
Note here. The pre-eminence of the good man cannot serve the evil woman
herein. Then take heed, wax not bold on other men's virtues: trust not to
others oil. Absalom was David's son, and Esau first borne unto Izhak: but
what of that? They be both rejected: have faith in God: have faith in your
selves: the just man lives by his own faith, and not by another faith.
Though Daniel, Noah, and Job had been there, yet could not this ungodly woman
escape, no, albeit Abraham prayed for the Sodomites, and among them for her:
yet she perishes, because she remained evil.

Lot perishes not among the wicked: but Lots wife being wicked. And although
his two daughters for his comfort in his great sorrow are with him brought
forth from Sodom, yet may not they boast of their merits: but rather stand in
awe an^ sin no more. Neither can it profit any man, that his father, mother,
wife, brother or sister are godly and accepted with the Lord, Ezekiel. 18.
except that himself do immitate and resemble them truly in godliness.
Therefore Lots wife being wicked, escapes not with the just man, but perishes.

But what plague ouertooke this ungodly woman? The manner of her plague.
A plague of body, and torment of soul. But leaving her soul to the secret
judgments of God among the sinful Sodomites, with whom she perished: we find
it mentioned in the Scripture, Genesis 8. That she was turned into a pillar of
Salt, standing as a monument to the posterities. Inasmuch as she was a
chaungeling, she was changed: she turned about and she is turned. A sudden
change and strange Metamorphosis, not feigned by the Poets, but wrought in
deed by the power of God, testified by his holy Spirit, wrote in a book by
Moses his servant, and remembered by our Lord Christ for our instruction.

The Poets faigne transformations of shapes, some into birds: some into
beasts, some into trees, some into stones: but a more true Metamorphosis we
have testified in the Prophecy of Daniel, of Nabucadnezzar, the Monarke of the
earth, who became as a beast of a brutish and savage mind. Yet here a more
maruailous transformation: A righteous man's wife is turned into a pillar of
Salt. Her mind was not only monstrous in her life: but her body also, a note
of inconstancy and iniquity in her death.

I know that some of the Hebrews have given this Interpretation: Pet. Mar. in
Genesis
Et fuit cumulus, vel statua salis. And there was an heap or pillar of Salt:
not of Lots wife, but of the earth, which she saw behind h^^ when she looked
back to Sodom. She did see, say they, the earth or the land, and it was an
heap of Salt, by reason of the burning: but this Interpretation is overthrown
by these reasons. First, the daughters of Lot would not have urged seed of
their father, Sap. 10.7.
had their mother been then living. Secondly, the Wise man says of her: for
the remembrance of the unfaithful Soul, there stands a pillar of Salt.
Thirdly, Josephus witnesses, that he saw such a pillar of Salt. Fourthly, S.
Augustine is of the opinion, that such a thing was done in deed: that is, in
Salem versam esse vxorem Loth^. Lots wife was changed into a pillar of Salt.
Lastly, Christ himself notes in her a strange punishment, when talking of
the Jews Apostasy and latter destruction, he says: Remember Lots wife. So we
gather, that this is to be understood of the woman her self: and therefore as
we receive it, does Munster translate, Et facta est statua Salis: She was made
a Salt stone, or pillar.

She is turned into a pillar or stone: A stone.
to note, the hardness of her heart, which the true prophecy of the Angels
and the words of her husband could not mollify. A stone, to note her coldness
in the true Religion, wherein zeal is required, and heat of Gods grace. A
stone, to note the nature of such, as like stones, will rather resist the drops
of rain, than receive moisture, as the obstinate and stubborn hearts
accustom to do. A stone, to note her barrayne breast and unfruitful faith. A
stone, not of the corner, but cast aside and set alone, though not in Ierico,
yet not in Jerusalem, but between them both: not in Egypt, nor yet in Canaan,
but in the wilderness, where many have perished for want of faithful
continuance. She halteth between both: And therefore is she loathed of the
Lord and abandoned of good men. She stands as a pillar, not for any goodness
in her self, but to note her ungodliness, foolishness, and plague. She is
famed, but yet with diffame, as Horostratus, who to get him a name set the
temple of Diana on fire. She was respited a while for her husbands sake: but
now is she plagued for her own sins. Sodom nothing helps her, for it
cannot help it self. Her glory is turned into shame by her return, which she
gained before, by her coming forth. She desperately falls headlong into
misfortunes, and might (if God would) have incurred the plagues of Kain for his
murder: of Saul, for his disobedience: of Nabal, for his foolishness: of
Iezebel, for her sorceries: of Athaliah, for her treacheries: of Antiochus, for
his blasphemies: but yet she has another kind of plague: for she is turned
into a pillar of Salt.

Salt signifies, sometimes discretion, Why she is turned into Salt. Col. 4.
the word of God, Doctrine. And Salt is good if it want not savor. And the
Apostle would that our Doctrine be so seasoned. Pliny Plin. lib. 31. cap. 2.
uses a Metaphor taken from the use of Salt. In all meats it is used in
steed of a Sauce to eschew greediness and surfeyte. Neither can a man well
live without Salt. So necessary an element is it. Such are the ornaments of
man's life. And it is commanded in the law, that every Sacrifice shall be
seasoned with Salt: to note, that no Sacrifice can please God, Leuit. 2.
but that which is done with discretion. And therefore it is charged, Ne
auferes Sal faederis dei tui de Sacrificio tuo: Thou shall always use Salt in
every gift, which thou shall offer unto me, by reason of the Covenant which I
have made with thee. And for the doctrine of truth, the Apostles be called Sal
terrae, The Salt of the earth: for as Salt is bitter to the taste, and fretteth
away the corruptions of the flesh, so is the truth unto sinful man. Howbeit,
this miserable woman is by that nothing the better, inasmuch as that which is
now in her, serves wholly to the use of other, and not of her self. She is
like in this to the heart of a poisoned man, which as some say, will not burn,
but wax hard in the fire, as a stone, and will become a sovereign medicin for
others against poison. She stands therefore a pillar of Salt for a document
unto others, which by her example flying the like punishment, are the happier.

Besides that, she is salt in another sense, for salt does not only note
discretion, wisdom, doctrine, and such, but also it signifies barraines: for
every place of the earth where salt is found (says Pliny Plin. li. 31. cap. 7.
) is barraine, and apt to no fruit. Therefore Abimelech (as we read in the
ninth Chapter of the book of the Judges Judge. 9.
) sowed salt in Sichem. And so speaks Zephenaiah: Zeph. (...)
As I live, says the Lord of hoastes, the God of Israel, surely Moab shall be
as Sodom, and the children of Ammon, as Gomorah, even the breeding of Nettles
and Salt pits, and a perpetual desolation. And such a place does Isaiah Isai.
34.13
describe in his 34. Chapter, speaking of the destruction of the Sinagogue (a
worthy figure whereof appears in this woman) he that reads it, let him
understand it. And thus have we seen the punishment and plague of Lots
unfaithful, and so unequal yokefellow: Oh remember this ye that forget God: O
kiss the Son, Psalm. 50. Psalm. 2.
least he be angry, and so ye perish from the right way, if his wrath be
kindled against you even but a little: Oh put away displeasure out of your
hearts, Eccl. 12.1.
and remove evil from your bodies in season, for childhood and youth, is but
vanity. Let us consider to what end we have our minds and memories given us:
let us with thankefulnes remember God and his mercies toward us: let us think
of our sins, and amend our lives with faithfulness: let us know the time of
our visitation with watchfulnes: let us beware of those horrible sins noted
in Lots wife, and eschew the danger of her punishment with godly carefulnes.
Let the Magistrate continue his calling without wearines: the Minister go too
and hold on the Plough without loathsomnes, the people proceed in their
calling without sluggishnes, the City to fight in faith without faintnes, the
Country to be religious without malitiousnes, and the whole land to serve the
Lord without fearefulnes. Let this persuade Iapheth, to dwell in ye Tabernacles
of Shem: let this move Joseph to eschew the polluted bed of Potiphar: every
chaste Susanna to deny the desire of the ungodly Elders: every Shiphrah, and
Puah (as they did in Egypt) to fear the Lord, and not men. Let this stir up
Mordecai, to provide for the safety of his people: Queen Hesther, to pray for
her self and her people, and every faithful Abraham, to forsake old Adam, and
the affections of man. Let us all with that kingly Prophet David, desire to be
rather doorekeepers in Gods house, then to dwell in the Tabernacles of the
ungodly. Let us with Moses rather choose affliction with the people of God in
the Wilderness, than the pleasures of Sin in Egypt. Let us desire rather
Jerusalem, than Ierico, and Canaan, before Babylon. Let us fly from Sodom and
Gomorah with just Lot, and not return again with Lots wife. Psalm. 1.
Let us proceed from virtue to virtue, and be fruitful in the same: Let us
set God ever before our faces, as our Savior Christ teaches us: and let us
with S. Paul fight a good fight: keep on the good course: continue to the end
constantly without fainting: expecting faithfully that eternal Crown of
glory, which all such as by the blood of Christ the immaculate Lamb have bin
Victors, shall be crowned with in his everlasting Kingdom. This grace and
blessedness the Almighty grant unto us, for Jesus Christ his sake: to whom,
with the holy Ghost, three persons, and one most mighty and eternal God, be
ascribed all honor, might, majesty, and dominion, now, and for evermore.

Amen. (...).

