THE PREACHERS TRAVELS. Wherein is set down a true Iournall to the confines of
the East INDIES, through the great Countries of Syria, Mesopotamia, Armenia,
Media, Hircania and Parthia. With the Authors return by the way of Persia,
Susiana, Assiria, Chaldaea, and ARABIA. Containing a full suruew of the Knigdom
of Persia: and in what terms the Persian stands with the Great Turk at this
day: Also a true relation of Sir ANTHONY SHERLEYS entertainment there: and the
estate that his Brother, M. ROBERT SHERLEY lived in after his departure for
Christendom. With the description of a Port in the Persian gulf, commodious
for our East Indian Merchants; and a brief rehearsal of some gross
absudities in the Turkish ALCORAN.

Penned by I. C. sometimes student in Magdalen College in OXFORD.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Thorppe, and are to be sold by Walter Burre. 1611.

TO THE VIRTUOUS AND Worthy Knight, Sir THOMAS HVNT, one of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace and Quorum in the County of Surrey, I. C. wishes all
terrestrial and celestial happiness.
SIR, when I consider that it is the common manner of all, that write any
Books in this age, to Dedicate the same to one or other of great place, I
bethought me to whom I might offer these my travels: and at last resolved with
my self, none to be more fit, then your Worship; both in regard of your zeal
to Religion, because you do give to diverse Congregations in this land, Milk
without silver, and bread without money, which not many other Patrones do; as
also for your love unto Scholars, who though in this unthankful age of ours,
men wonder at us, V^ pueri Iunonis auem; and we wonder again at them, because
they do so little for us, yet my self, and many others now of some place in
the Church never departed discontented from you. Many other respects as well
public as private, do naturally bear this small discourse to the very point
and center of your Worships only Patronage.

Concerning the matter of this discourse, you shall find in the Preface: and
concerning the manner, there is no great matter of learning or ingenious
invention, only a simple relation of a simple truth; yet somewhat there is,
which may happily concern the learned, and give some satisfaction to an
indifferent Reader, when he understands, how two of the most mighty and most
warlike Princes among the Barbarians, the great Turk and the Persian, are now
in arms one against the other; stirred up thereunto by two of our Countrymen,
Sir Anthony Sherley, and Master Robert Sherley his brother.

A war not only like to be long and bloody, but also very commodious and of
great opportunity to the Christian Commonweal: for that it does g^aunt and
give leisure to diverse parts of Christendom to refresh themselves, and to
increase their forces, much weakened, both by the Great Turks wars; and most
of all by their civil dissentions at home. For Cortug-ogli the Turkish Pirate,
in his perswasiue Oration to his great Mast. Solomon, The Magnificent, to
besiege Rhodes, could say unto him, And now dread Sovereign, if it please you
to vouchsafe but to look into the matter, you shall see that there is a divine
occasion by the procurement of our great Prophet Mahomet, presented unto your
most sacred Majesty, for that the Christians of the West are at discord and
mortal war among themselves. And to say the truth, the discords and
dissentions of Christian Princes have laid more Countries to the enrichment
of the Great Turk, then ever his bow or Shield could have purchased. In the
days of Mahomet the second, these polluted Sarazens had gleaned out of
Christendom like scattered ears of corn neglected by the owners, Two hundred
Cities, twelve Kingdoms, and two Empires, and still as a canker running on,
before the Persian took the field against them, they every year did fret and
eat into Christendom.

Finally, I might have added many worthy collections, as well out of sacred as
profane writers, that have written of the most stately and magnificent Empire
of the Medes and Persians in times past, and so have compared it, with the
modern and present estate thereof; which has scarce a shadow of the antique
Government, wherewith it was then ruled and governed. But the matter would have
proved too long, and made this volume too great: and therefore for those
aduertisements, I purpose to put them forth, when God shall make me strong and
able. In the mean time, whatsoever is here penned, I leave it with your
Worship, beseeching you to give it entertainment. And so I do most humbly take
my leave, commending both your self, your virtuous Lady, and your whole family
to the best mercies of the Lord Jesus.

From mine House in Southwarke, this 18. of October. Anno Dom. 1611. Your
Worships to command in the Lord, JOHN CARTWRIGHT.

Gentle Reader,
IT was my purpose to have added to this Iournall, some observations touching
our Northwest Passage; with many reasons to have proved the great probability
thereof. But I am persuaded by some friends to make stay thereof, until the
truth of the news: That it is already discovered, be thoroughly examined. In
the mean time moderate thy opinion of our former proceedings. And though some
maleuolent tongues have especially shot out their venomous poison against me,
upon what ground they cannot justly say, when they have been pressed thereto,
yet God is my witness that my Conscience is clear, either from wronging the
Company that then was; or any ways from hindering the full proceeding of that
Voyage, which I purpose shortly to make good unto the world. And for this small
discourse, if it pass current in thy judgment, I shall think my self to
have gained enough, in lieu of all the Travels, of all the dangers, and perils,
that I have sustained in those places.

THE PREACHERS TRAVELS. Wherein is set down a general description of the most
principal Kingdoms, that have been, and are at this day in ASIA the great,
viz. Syria, Mesopotamia, Armenia the great, Media, Hircania, Parthia, Persia,
Susiana, Chaldaea, Assiria, and Arabia. TOGETHER WITH THE MOST memorable
occurrences and expeditions, which the Princes of those parts have had each
against the other.
THE PREFACE.
POMPEY the Great being put to flight in the battle at Pharsalia, by Julius
Caesar, was desirou^ to know of Cratippus the Philosopher, what should be the
event of the wars between Caesar and himself, demanding of him, an sit
Prouidentia? whether the purpose and decree of God were unchangeable without
alteration? To whom Cratippus answered, not as a Philosopher, but as a true
Divine, saying, Fatales esse Imperiorum periodos, the providence of God is most
sure and certain; which Pompey found most true, in a small time after, when
Caesar was created the first Emperor of the Roman Monarchy; and which also
shall be verified (God willing) in the discourse of this Iournall: wherein is
principally showed, how all humane affairs, and the greatest Cities of renown
have had their Periods in their greatest perfections; to which though they have
ascended gradatim, yet they have forthwith fallen into a retrograde of
declination, till they have been brought to the lowest degree which misery can
allot: So true is that of Seneca. Nulla sors longa, dolor and voluptas
Inuicem cedunt: breuior voluptas,
Ima permut at breuis hora summis:
Nemo confidat nimium secundis.
Nemo desperet meliora lapsis.
No chance is long, for grief and eke delight,
By course give place, pleasure has shorter flight,
An hour but shor^, that presently does end,
Does make the lowest things aloft asc^nd:
Let none too much trust in a prosperous state.
Let none despair, but hope for better f^te.
For in this small discourse we shall see how unavoidable destruction does
always attend on the succession of greatness, and advancement on the
posterity of misery: as also the sacking of many Cities, the depopulating of
the greatest Countries, the deposing of Princes, and high descended families of
their lives, together with their Crowns and Kingdoms, and that in so short a
time, as never the like was executed in the antique world. Two reasons have
moved me to set down this Iournall: ^he causes (...) moved (...) Author (...)
write this ^^urnall.
The one for that I have not yet seen any that has made a full description of
these parts, as they are at this day, which I hope shall be performed by my
self, who spent much time in those Countries, being familiarly conversant (to
help my knowledge herein) with many Sultanes, and principal Commanders in the
Kingdom of Persia, as also diverse Ianizaries, who served in the wars
between the great Turk and the Persian. The other is for that I do verily
persuade my self, that this discourse will breed much delight unto any
indifferent Reader, when he shall understand how mighty the forces are of the
Persian King, a capital enemy of the name of Christ, as also in what terms he
stands at this day with the great Turk, what Kingdoms he possesses, what
Provinces are subject unto him, his worship, his religion, his kind of
government, their weapons, their manner of fight, their form of battle, the
reuennues and expenses of that Crown, and in a word whatsoever else is
necessary to be known.

Finally, you have here described the several Nations, Situations, Cities,
Rivers, Mountains, and Provinces, which I have seen and passed by. It is not
my purpose to write any thing of the Islands in the Mediterranean-Sea, which we
sailed by, and are so much renowned in old writers, viz. Maiorica, and
Minorica, Corsica, Sicilia, Malta, Cephalonia, Zant, Candia, Rhodes, and
Cyprus, howsoever many excellent things might be spoken of them; yet seeing
they are so well known to most of our nation, I omit to write, binding my
self to a true relation of what mine eyes have seen in more remote parts of
the world, not respecting the judgment of the vulgars, but contenting my self
with the conscience of truth, beside which (I protest) I purpose to write
nothing.

The beginning of the travel.
ANd first I will begin at Alexandretta: Alexandretta now called Scanderone,
is a road in the bottom of the Mediterranean-Sea, on the coast of Cilicia,
where our Merchants land their goods to be sent to Aleppo: within eight miles
of this road is Tharsus, the chief City of Cilicia, and the Country of St.
Paul: the place also where King Solomon sent for great store of gold, and other
provision for the building of the Temple: whither the Prophet Jonas also
sledde, when he should have gone to Nineuie. A little from this Town did
Alexander the Great give the overthrow in person to Darius, in joining of their
first battle together.

Lying at an Anchor in the aforesaid road the space of two hours, our
Ianizaries with a sufficient guard and horses for our selves, were ready to
conduct us up to Aleppo, and safeguard us as well a^ they might, from the
dangers and evils, which many times in the way does befall passengers. In our
passage up, no matter of importance happened: many false rumors of Thieves
were diuulged by the Country people, to affright us; but we by the assistance
of God arrived in safety at Aleppo, being some six miles before our approach to
the City, encountered by many of our English Merchants, to give us the welcome
on the Turkish shore. After mutual courtesies ended, they accompanied us into
the City unto the Consul Palace; where having dismounted our selves, we were
well entertained by Mr. Richard Colethrust worthy Consul then to our worthy
English nation. At whose charge and expenses, I abode two months and better:
all which time I fell into consideration, not so much of the City, as of the
Province, in which it stands, offering hereby unto my self two things worthy
observation.

The description of SYRIA.
FIrst the greatness of the Kingdom of Syria, which confronteth Eastward on
Mesopotamia; Southward on Arabia; Northward on Cylicia, and Asia the less;
and Westward on Tire and Sydon, and the bottom of the Mediterranean-Sea. The
other the division of the said Kingdom, which deuideth it self into five
notable Provinces: viz. Palestina, Foenitia, Celestria, Syria, and Camogena.
The last of which five is that part which runs up to the River Euphrates,
and to the confines of Armenia, in which stands the great and wealthy City of
Aleppo. This Kingdom of Syria has diverse Cities of importance, but my purpose
is to speak but of those, which my Iournall leads me unto, and which my eyes
have seen: viz. Tripolis, Hamath, Antioch, and Aleppo.

The description of Tripolis.
TRipolis is a Town which stands under a part of Mount Lybanus, two English
miles distant from a certain Port, which trendeth in the form of an half
Moon, having on the one side thereof five block-houses, or small Forts,
wherein is very good Artillery, and ^ept by an hundred Ianizaries. This City is
as great as Bristow, and walled about, the walls being of no great force. The
chiefest strength is a Citadell, which stands on the South side within the
walls, and ouer-lookes the whole Town, and is strongly kept with two hundred
Ianizaries, and good Artillery. Through the midst of this City passes a River,
wherewith they water their Gardens and Mulbery trees, in such sort that there
grow on them abundance of silk worms, where with the Inhabitants makes great
store of very white silk, which is the chiefest natural commodity in and
about this place. Finally, this road of Tarapolos or Trapolos, commonly called
Tripolis, was more frequented (before Scanderone was found out) with all sorts
of Christian Merchants, as Venetians, Genouis, Florentines, Marsilians,
Sicilians, Raguses, and English men, then any other Port of the great Turks
Dominions. Some say that the Scale is again translated from Scanderone
thither, but how true it is, I leave to the Merchants to report. One
inconvenience this Town is subject unto: for right before it toward the Sea is
a bank of moving sand, which gathers and increases with the Western winds
in such sort, that according to an old prophecy amongst them, this bank is
like to swallow up and ouerwhelme the Town: for every year it increases more
and more, and eats up many Gardens and Orchards, albeit they use all policy
to diminish the same, and to make it firm ground.

The description of Hamath.
THree days journey from this Town in the midway to Aleppo stands Hamath,
a City of great Antiquity, and very famous in the Scripture: for it was
delivered up into the hands of David by Toi, Numb. 13.22. 1. Chro. 1.16. 2.
Sam. 8.9.
who was King of the same. It stands on a very goodly plain, replenished
abundantly with cornemand cotton-wooll; but is much ruinated, and falls more
and more to decay, and at this day there is scarce one half of the wall
standing, which has been very fair and strong: but because it cost many men's
lives to win it; the great Turk will not have it repaired, commanding these
words to be set over the Castle gate, which stands in the midst of the
Town, in the Arabian tongue: Cursed be the Father and the Son, that shall
lay their hands to the repairing of this place.

The description of Antioch.
NOt far from this Town is the famous City Antioch, which in ancient time
was called Epidaphane, or Epiphane, and of the Hebrews Reblatha, sometime the
Seat of the Syrian Kings, and afterward the Metropoliticall City of Syria,
having under it an hundred and fifty Bishops: famous for many things, but
amongst the rest, because it was the seat of the blessed Apostle St. Peter,
and because it was the first place, where the professors of Christian religion
took the name of Christians. This City lies upon the River Orontes, in
Scripture called Farfar, about twelve miles from the Sea, and was once strongly
fortified both by nature on the one side by high broken Mountains, and on the
other side by Art, being compassed about with a double wall, the uttermost
whereof is of hard stone, of an huge bigness, and the other of brick with
four hundred and sixty towers on the same, and an impregnable Castle at the
East End thereof, whereunto was joining a deep lake, coming out of the great
River, which wa^ereth the South Side of the City.

But in the year of Grace 1187. Saladin Sultan of Egypt, dealt so cunningly
with the Patriarch, that by his means the Castle (otherwise almost
impregnable) was for gold betrayed unto him. By means whereof Saladin in a
short time, became Lord and Master of that famous City (which was hardly gained
by the whole power of the Christians, after eleven months siege) and with it
five and twenty Cities more, that depended of the fortune thereof, with all the
Provinces belonging thereunto; and so now at this day the splendour and beauty
thereof is altogether Eclipsed by the Turks, there resting and remaining in
the midst of the ruinous walls a small village to be seen.

Close by the walls of this ruinous Town runs the River Orontes, The River
Orontes.
which courseth through the large and spacious plain of Antioch, being numbered
amongst the famous rivers of Syria, whose banks I have viewed, even from his
springing head to his maine channel, which is near to Selencia Pieria, now
called Soldin. This river amongst the Turks and Arabians has quite lost his
ancient name: but because it runs very swiftly in his course, and has many
turnings and windings, (so that those that swim in it are oftentimes drowned)
as though the poor river had in that respect the nature of a murderer;
therefore the Turks and the Moors do now give it a name, that expressly
signifies a murderer or traitor.

The description of Aleppo.
FRom this miserable town we spent a days journey and half to the rich and
wealthy City of Aleppo, which in ancient time was called Heliopolis, and was
that ancient Haram mentioned so often in Scripture. The Moors do call it
Halip, which in our tongue signifies milk, for the same Arabians do say,
that it was so called for the abundance of milk, which in the time of the
Patriarchs was y^elded by the herds and flocks of cattle, which fed in those
champaines. This City stands in the Province of Camogena, which runs up
to Euphrates, and to the confines of Armenia, and is now become the third
capital city of the Turkish Empire. And well it may be so accounted, since it
is the greatest place of traffic for a dry town in all those parts: for
hither resort Jews, Tartarians, Persians, Armenians, Egyptians, Indians, and
many sorts of Christians, all enjoying freedom of conscience, and bringing
thither all kinds of rich merchandise: the trade and traffic of which place,
because it is so well known to most of our nation, I omit to write of.

The air of this City is much pleasing and delightful to a sound and
healthful body, but very piercing and dangerous for such as have received any
contagion at Scanderon; and therefore it is not good for any passenger to lie
long at that road, but to hasten at his first arrival so soon as he can up
farther into the Country. This City lies upon the River Singa, The River Synga.
which as some report a Soldier of Grand Caire drew from Euphrates, and has a
channel under ground, which produces many fountains both public and
private, yielding no small pleasure and contentment to the inhabitants. It
contains in circuit four hills, upon one of which is raised a goodly Castle,
having a deep ditch entrenched round about, and a bridge ascending step by
step, with four gates, before you can pass into the Castle it self, being
guarded with a strong and sure garrison of four or five hundred Ianizaries,
both to curb the rebellion of the City, and to keep it from foreign
invasion. The walls of this City are about three English miles in compass,
and the suburbs almost as much more: and round about for four miles space are
goodly Gardens, Orchards, and Vineyards, which bear abundance of delicate
fruits, and of the best Wines, which are notwithstanding very dear, by reason
of the quantity thereof, that there is sold and eaten. The number of people
which resort to this City may easily be comprehended, since between the City
and the suburbs in the year of Grace 1555. there dyed of the plague more then
an hundred and twenty thousand persons in three Months. No building of
importance is here to be seen, Cain^s are storehouses for foreign Merchants.
save the Temples or Moschees, and Caines, all fabricated of hard quarry stone,
arched and vaulted with Cesternes full of water in the midst of the Courts.
In a word this City is one of the most famous Marts of the East: the customs
that are paid by our English nation, the French, the Venetians, the huge
Carauans, which come from Balsara, Persia, Mecha, are exceeding great, and
therefore may well obtain the third place of the Turkish Empire.

Nevertheless it has endured diverse changes and sundry alterations, being in
the year 1177. betrayed and taken from the Christians by Saladin Sultan of
Damascus; but afterward in the year 1260. it was again recovered by Haalon
the Tartar, who having received the Christian faith was sent of purpose by
Mango the great Cham of Tartary a Christian also, with a puissant army and a
world of people to relieve the distressed Christians in Syria; and so Haalon
with Hayton king of Armenia, scouring through the Countries of Persia, Asiria,
and Mesopotamia, in the end entered into Syria, and in a few days took Aleppo,
sacking and razing it down to the ground. But it continued not so long; for
afterward being repaired by the Christians, it was again taken by the Sultans
of Egypt, who possessed it many years, but in the year 1516. when Campson
Ganrus reigned in Egypt, it was peaceably delivered up by Cayerbeius the
Traitor, into the hands of Selymus the first, who favorably took the Citizens
into his protection; and the more to win their hearts, granted unto them
greater privileges then they had in former time inioyed. And so ever since
has continued under the Turkish Government, having under the regiment thereof,
five and twenty thousand Timarriots, that is to say, Pensioners, which are all
horsemen, so called of Timaro, that is a stipend, which they have of the Grand
Signeor, viz. the possession of certain Villages and Towns, which they hold
during their life, and for which they stand bound. For every threescore
Duckates of yearlie reuennew, to maintain one horseman either with bow and
arrows, or else with Target and Lance, and that as well in time of peace, as
in time of war.

Having rested in Aleppo two Months and better, Mr. John Mildenab and my self
took our leave of the Consul and Merchants, with a full intent and purpose to
travel unto the great City Lahor, in the great Mogors Country in the East
Indies: lodging all that night on a thin Turkish Carpet in woods-caine, where
the A Carauan is a great many of Camels lade^, not much unlike our carriers
here in England.
Carauan was assembled, to the end that we might be with the foremost: for
delay in such travel does produce great and inevitable danger. From Aleppo we
spent three days journey unto the banks of Euphrates, passing by many
villages not worth the naming, and fertile plains, abounding with all sort of
provision necessary for man's life. One of those Villages is a Village of note
unto this day, called by the Country people Tedith, Tedith a Village of note,
for the Great Synod holden there by the chiefest Jews, for the reformation of
the old Testament.
where the Jews keep a monument in remembrance of the great Synagogue holden
there in the year from the Creation 3498. For after the twelve Tribes were by
Salmanazar King of the Assirians led captive into a Country never inhabited by
any before, a year and half journey; so as men in this age trouble their wits
to know where they remain, in the East or West Indies, in Tartaria or
Moscouia, and new inhabitants in their place; I say, it so fell out that after
the captivity of Babylon, an hundred and twenty men of the chiefest of the
Jews held a Synod at the aforesaid Village, of which Esdras was the Scribe,
at which Synod (as the Rabbis affirm) were present, Nehemias, Mardocheus,
Zorababel, Joshua the high Priest, Daniel, Ananias, Azarias, Misael, Haggeus,
Zacharias, and Malachiah, and placed the books of the old Testament in the
same order as now they are, and changed the hebrew characters (the figure T
excepted) into the Assirian characters, which is the square form used at this
day: and changed the Hebrew tongue into the Armenian tongue, but that was
altered afterward, and the right Hebrew tongue restored.

Near unto this Town is the Valley of Salt, The Valley of Salt. 2. Sam. 8.13.
memorable for that great overthrow which David gave the Aramits, when he slew
of them in one battle eighteen thousand men. Here also Campson Gaurus the
great Sultan of Egypt fought that deadly and mortal battle with Selymus the
first, the great Turk; where he lost his life being trodden, without regard,
to death, both by his own Soldiers and pursuing enemies, after he had with
great Majesty governed the Kingdom of Egypt, Judea, and Syria many years;
and together with the loss of his life and overthrow of his army, he lost the
great and populous Kingdom of Egypt, which he and his predecessors had
gotten and kept by martial prowess above the space of three hundred years.

Being arrived on the banks of Euphrates, we found it as broad as the Thames
at Lambith; but in some places it is narrower, in some broader, running with a
very swift stream and current, almost as fast as the River of Trent. At this
place does this River begin to take his name, being here all gathered into
one channel, whereas before it comes down from the lake Chieldor-Giol in
Armenia, in manifold arms and branches, and therefore is called by the
Country people, by a name which signifies a thousand heads. Here it is that
Merchants use to pass down by Bark unto Babylon, thereby to avoid and
shun the great charge and wearisomnesse of travel through the desert of
Arabia. Which passage they make sometimes in fifteen days, sometimes in
twenty days, and sometimes in thirty days, answerable to the rising and
falling of the River: and the best time to pass thither is either in April or
October, when the River does swell with abundance of r^ine. The Boats are flat
bottomed, because the River is shallow in many places; so that when they
travel in the Months of July, August, and September, they find the River at
so low an ebb, that they are feign to carry with them a spare Boat or two, to
lighten their own, if they should chance to fall on the shoales. Every night
after Sunne-set, they fasten these Boats to a stake, the Merchants lying
aboard, and the Mariners upon the shore, as near as they can unto the same.
In this passage down the River, you shall meet with diverse troops of
Arabians, who will barter their provision of diet (for they care not for money)
as Hens, Kids, Lamb, Butter, and sour milk, for Glasses, Combs, Coral,
Amber, Knives, Bread and Pomegranates, Pills, wherewith they use to tanne
their Goats skins, in which they Churne withal. All of them, as well Women,
Children, and Men are very good swimmers, who oftentimes will swim to the
Bark side with vessels full of milk upon their heads. These people are very
theeuish, and therefore in your passage down good watch must be kept.

But to return where we left, we were constrained by the deepnesse of the
river to ferry over our whole Carauan, which consisted of a thousand persons,
besides Camels, Horses, Mules, and Asses, by reason of which multitude we spent
a whole day in transporting over the said Carauan. The gains of which
transportation yielded the ferriman a Shaughoe, which is five pence English
upon a beast. It was the manner of the Egyptian Sultanes, not to account
themselves worthy of the name of Sultanes, or great General, before they had
encamped their army upon this side of the River and in this place, and there
with solemn pomp had in the sight of the army, forced their horses into the
River to drink; giving to understand by that ceremony, the greatness of their
Empire, and that they were ready by force of arms to prove, that all those
Countries were theirs, which lay along the River from the Mountain Taurus,
unto the desert of Arabia.

The description of MESOPOTAMIA.
BEing over the aforesaid River, we arrived at Bir and entered into the famous
Province of Mesopotamia; which North-wards bounds on a part of Armenia the
Great, where the Altar of Hercules stood: Southward on the desert of Arabia;
Eastward on Assiria; and Westward on Armenia the less. The Hebrews were wont
to call this Kingdom Aram Nearot, Syria amongst the Rivers, as the Jews do
at this day. The Greeks call it Mesopotamia, because it lies between two
great Rivers, which watered Paradise, Euphrates and Tygris. The Turks do call
it Diarbech. This Province of it self is most fruitful, but by the Turkish
wars much ruinated and wasted: nevertheless there are some Cities of great
importance.

The description of Bir.
BIr called by Ptolomey, Barsina, is an ancient City, but very ruinous. It is
very famous for the situation, being built on the side of an high craggy
mountain, having the River Euphrates running close under the walls thereof,
and a most delightful valley, yielding abundance of grain and other necessary
provision. But because this town is not much esteemed by the Turks, but left
open to the fury of every enemy, I will be sparing to speak thereof, and so
pass to the rest.

The description of Orpha.
ABout two days journey from this unrespected town, we came to Orpha, a City
of great account and estimation, which many suppose to have been the famous
City Edessa, which Seleucus (the next King after Alexander the Great) built.
For having conquered Asia and Syria, Functius reports that he began to
build towns and Cities, as Antioch, Laodicea, Seleucia, Apamia, B^rouea,
Pellum, and Edessa; and they are not deceived, because that as yet there
remains certain monuments of Baldewine in Latin letters, who after his
brother Godfrey was possessed of Jerusalem, is reported to have taken Edessa,
and there reigned. The air of this City is very healthful, the Country
fruitful, only wood excepted, and therefore in steed thereof, they burn the
dung of Camels and other beasts, dried in the Sun. This City is built
foure-square; the West part standing on the side of a rocky mountain, and the
East part trendeth into a spacious valley, replenished with vineyards,
orchards, and gardens: the walls are very strong, furnished with great store
of artillery, and contain in circuit three English miles: and for the
gallantnes of the site, it was once reckoned the Metropoliticall seat of
Mesopotamia, howsoever it is now translated to Caramida or Caraemit. There is
in this City a fountain full of fishes, so used to hand, that they will
receive any sustenance that shall be offered unto them: both Jews, Armenians,
and Turks reported unto us, that this fountain was Iacobs-well, Genesis 29.13.27.
and that here he served his Uncle Laban twice seven years, for fair and
beautiful Rachel.

The gates of this City were much battered, The Scriuano at the walls of
Orpha. 1603.
a little before our coming by Eliazgee the Scriuano, and the rebels his
followers; The success whereof, so much tormented the haughty mind of Mahomet
the Turkish Emperor, Mahomet much troubled with the Scriuano.
as that it would scarce suffer him to think of any thing else. For the rebel
growing stronger and stronger (by reason of the great numbers which he allured
with the sw^ete name of liberty, hope of prey, or the good entertainment by
him given, daily more and more resorted unto his camp) had overrun a great
part of the Turks Dominion in Asia the less, and in these parts, putting all
to fire and sword, that stood in his way, ransacking also diverse walled and
fenced Cities by the way as he went: this City bearing a share in that misery:
for being entered into the City, he drew the citizens to a composition of fifty
thousand Chekens, and so departed. A rebellion not only dangerous to the great
Turk, but also very commodious and of great opportunity to the Christian
commonweal, and to the Persian himself, if at that time they had taken up
arms together.

Memorable also is this City, then called Carras, for the great battle which
was fought before it between the Romans and the Parthians, when Marcus Crassus
was General on the one side, Crassus and Surena joined battle together before
the walls of Orpha.
and Surena on the other side, who joining both their armies together, there
was fought a most mortal and deadly battle. For there might a man have seen
a miserable and lamentable sight of the overthrown Romans, which were so
tortured and tormented with the Parthians arrow^s, that some showed unto their
Captains their hands fast nailed to their Targets, some their feet shot
through and nailed to the ground, some their bodies stuc^e full of forked
arrows, and some wounded with spears and pikes, in such cruel manner, that
the m^st part of t^^ G^ntlemen of Rome slew t^^mselues: for Publius Crassus
himself commanded one of his Gentlemen to kill him, whose h^ad after was cut
off by the enemy, and s^nt to his Father for a present, the Fathers fortune
being no better then his Sons, for his head was cut off as his Sons was, and
twenty thousand Romans of great account slain; besides a great number carried
captives into Parthia. Plutarch affirms, that the Parthians so triumphed of
this victory in their feasts and plays; that they made rimes and jests of both
Crassus heads.

At this City having paid our custom, which is a Dollor on a sum of goods,
our Carauan was licenced to depart: and at our ordinary hour which was three
of the clock in the afternoon, we set forward toward the ancient City
Amida, now called Caramida, or Caraemit, five days journey from Orpha,
travailing sometimes over rough and craggy mountains, and sometimes through
most delightful plains and vallyes: amongst which there is one of note,
environed about with a pale of mountains, in such wise that there is but one
entry and passage.

The policy of Aladeules to ^inne unto himself despe^ate Villains to execute
his mischievous practices.
In the midst whereof we beheld the ruins of a great Fortress, built (as the
Country people report) by Aladeules a mountain King, who much annoyed Selymus
the first and his army, in his expedition against Ismael the Persian King. This
plain is very pleasant to the eye, by reason of the fair meadows and
brooks, wherewith the same does plentifully abound. In this place did
Aladeules build diverse houses of pleasures, causing the same to be inhabited
with the fairest young men and women that could be found; so that, when he had
surprised any young man, he brought him to this Fortress, and gave unto him a
drink, which should cause him to sleep so soundly, that he should so remain
a long space, as though he had been dead. Then would he cause him to be
carried into this valley amongst his beautiful women, and to be clothed in
rich apparel, so that awaking out of his trance he should find himself
another man, and as though he came into a new world. Forthwith he was
entertained with all kinds of pleasures, which youth and lust could desire, and
this continued so long as one whole day lasted. But at night after a certain
banquet, the drink as before again was given him to make him sleep, his
sumptuous attire pulled off, and his former garments put on, and so carried
again into the Fortress from whence he came, a place far unlike to that
which he had been in the day before.

Hereupon the mountain King would infer, that the place where he had been
in, was Paradise, and that it lay in his power to send him thither when he
would; if therefore he had a desire to continue in such happiness for ever, it
was granted unto him upon this condition, that he should take courage to
adventure his life in such service, as he should command him. To which those
desperate villains most willingly consented, as not esteeming any adventure
dangerous, yea though it were with the loss of their own lives, so they might
attain that vain Paradise, which Aladeules had promised unto them. Selim the
great Turk had like to have lost his life, together with other Princes, too
long to recite, by these desperate ruffians: But Selim in his return from
Persia, both destroyed their King, and ruinated their Fortress, with all the
houses of pleasure built in the aforesaid valley.

The description of Cara-emit.
AT the end of five days travel from Orpha, we arrived at an ancient City,
termed by Iouius and others Amida, but now Caraemit, which is to say, the
black City, either for the stone wherewith it is built, being like unto jet in
color, or for the fertility of the soil round about it, which is of a dusky
color. This City is seated upon a maruailous high Rock, and contains in
circuit very near six miles; and though it be sufficiently fortified by
nature, yet is it environed with a double wall: the outmost is somewhat
decayed, but the inmost is well repaired, being fenced with great store of
artillery. It is governed by a Bassa, who commands over twelve Sanzacks, and
thirty thousand Tymariots: and is now become the Metropoliticall City of
Mesopotamia. There were mustered from this City, when Amurat the third invaded
Persia, in the year 1578. twelve thousand Soldiers, the Captain being well
checked by General Mustapha for bringing so few. The Soldiers of this City
for the most part are archers, not of any courage, but very effeminate, and
accustomed to the use of the Scimatarre.

During our abode at this place (which was fourteen days) we lodged in a
very fair Caine built of free stone; for which lodging we paid to the Master
of the Caine five Shaughes a piece: all which time nothing fell out worthy
observation, A most cruel execution.
but the cruel execution of a petty malefactor, who having but pilfered away
certain small wares, was mounted on a Camel, with his arms spread abroad,
having two sockets-holes bored in his shoulder blades, into which were set two
flaring torches, dropping continually on his skin to his greater torment, and
in the end having carried him in this pitiful manner through the principal
streets of the City, they brought him to the place of execution, and there
ganched him on a great iron hook, suffering him so to hang till he dyed.

Passing through the South-gate of this City, we paid to the Porter of the gate
a Shaughee upon a beast, descending from the City into a most fertile and
fruitful plain, where are many Gardens and Orchards, and places of great
refreshment.

Through this plain runs the great River Euphrates, Euphrates.
with a very swift current; and is as broad here sometimes of the year as the
Thames at London Bridge, but now was much dried up, by reason of the heat in
Summer, making thereby many Islands and demi-Ilands, where the Citizens of
Caraemit during the Summer season do use to pitch their Tents, to enjoy the
freshment of the air and river: but in the Winter it swells so abundantly
over the said Islands and banks, that neither man nor beast is able to pass
over: to avoid which inconvenience, there is a mile distant from the city a
stone bridge of twenty arches, made over the said River. This evening we
pitched two miles from the City, and stayed all that night of purpose for some
Merchants that were behind. Here we exchanged our Camels, and in stead of
them took Mules, a creature far more fit to travail over craggy Rocks and
Mountains then Camels: for now we were within a few days journey, to pass
over the high Mountains of Armenia, called in Scripture the Mountains of
Arraret: which travel with Camels is not only laborious, but very dangerous,
if the ground should prove moist or slabby; for then being laden with great
burdens, they cannot go onwards, neither are they able to pass with their
huge burdens, through the straight passages which are in those Mountains.

Two days journey from Caraemit, One of the heads out of which Tygris flows.
we rested at the foot of a great rocky Mountain, being one of the heads out
of which Tygris flows, and runs down with a swift current to Balsara, and
so discharges it self in the Persian gulf. Strangely does it issue out of
three rocks admirably hanging, that a man as he passes under them, would
imagine them to be ready to fall on his head. And for the strangen^sse of the
site, the Turks have builded three Bridges in the midst of those rocks, to
pass from one unto another, thereby to b^hold natures wisdom in fram^ng them
so wonderful. We went to view the same, but through the huge over falls, which
came far off within those Mountains, and the steepness of the same,
together with the hideous noise, and whistling murmuring, we found not so great
contentment above, as we did beneath.

The next day we spent over many high Mountains, on the top whereof grew
great quantity of Gall-trees, Gall trees.
which are somewhat like our Oaks, but lesser and more crooked: on the best
tree in this place a man shall not gather a pound of g^ll^s: at eu^ning we
pitched again on the banks of Euphrates; Euphrates.
and in the morning passed the said River, but not by barge as before, which
was likely to have bred no small annoyance to our whole Carauan; for through
the swiftness of the stream and deepnesse of the channel, many beasts with
their ladings had been carried away and drowned, if there had not been in ti^e
a shallow Foorde discovered, which had in such sort raised the depth of the
channel, making as it were a shelfe for our commodious pas^^ge: by help
whereof there was not so much as one man or beast that perished.

The description of the Curd^^s a most theeuish people.
WE were no sooner over, but forthwith we were incountred with a c^rtaine
troop of people called the Cur^ies, which some think to be a remnant of the
ancient Parthians, who so much annoied the Romans with their bows and arrows,
as before is declared. This rude people are of a goodly stature, and well
proportioned, and do never go abroad without their arms, as bows and
arrows, Scimatarre and buckler, yea and at such time, when a man for age is
ready to go down to his grave. They do adore and worship the Devil, The
Curdies worshippers of the Devil.
to the end he may not hurt them or their cattle, and very cruel are they to
all sorts of Christians; in which regard, the Country which they inhabit, is
at this day termed Terra Diaboli, the land of the Devil. They participate much
of the nature of the Arabians, and are as infamous in their Ladrocinies and
robberies as the Arabians themselves. They live under the commandment of the
great Turk, but with much freedom and liberty; For Selymus the second having
a great multitude of them in his army against the Persians, they did him little
service, performing no more then what well pleased themselves. This theeuish
company did sundry times arrest our Carauan, affirming that their Prince had
sent for a Dollor on a sum of goods, without the payment whereof (being five
several times demanded) we should not pass through their Country.

One Village of note is there in this Country, Manuscu^e.
wholly inhabited by the Curdies, being five days journey from Caraemit, and
three days journey from Bitclish, called by the Country people Manuscute.
This Town is seated in a most fertile and fruitful valley between two
mountains, abounding with pasture and cattle: and about a mile from it, is an
Hospital dedicated to St. John the Baptist, which is much visited as well by
Turks as Christians, who superstitiously affirm, that whosoever will bestow
either a Sheep, Kidde, or some piece of money to relieve the poor of that
place, shall not only prosper in his journey, but obtain forgiuen^sse of all
his sins. To the Governor of this Village we paid for our custom a
Shaughee on a sum of goods, and so were dismissed. The next day following we
passed over many craggy and steep mountains, and at the last rested our
selves and wearied beasts on the bank of Euphrates, Eup^rate^^.
being the outmost bounds on this side of Mesopotamia, and so entered the day
following on the borders of Armenia the Great, which is by some distinctly
divided into three parts; the North part whereof being but little, is called
Georgia: the middle part Turcomania: and the third part by the proper name of
Armenia.

The description of ARMENIA.
The original of the Armenians.
ARmenia was founded by Armenius (one of the companions of Jason, who won the
golden Fleece at Colchos:) for after Jason was dead, Armenius having gathered
together a great multitude of people, and wandering up and down the Country,
in the end he founded the Town of Armenia, near unto the mountains out of
which the River Tygris springs; constituting many good and wholesome laws,
whereby from time to time, the Country of Armenia was governed by Kings of
their own Nation, until such time as the house of the Ottamans subdued the
same.

The Turks first came out of Scythia, and feated themselves in Armenia.
It is now called Turcomania, and was the first seat of the Turks, after their
first coming out of Scythia, who left their natural seats in that cold and
bare Country, to seek themselves others in more pleasant and temperate
Countries more Southerly, stirred up no doubt by the hand^ of the Almighty, who
being the Author of all Kingdoms upon earth, as well of those which he has
appointed as scourges wherewith to punish the world, as others more blessed.
This people thus stirred up, and by the Caspian ports passing through the
Georgian Country, then called Iberia, near unto the Caspian Sea; first ceased
upon this part of Armenia, and that with so strong an hand, that it is by their
posterity yet holden at this day, and of them called Turcomania; of all other,
the most true progeny of the Turks. These Turcomanes of a long time under
their diverse leaders, in the manner of their living, most resembling their
ancestors, did roame up and down with their families and heads of cattle,
after the manner of the Scythian Nomades, their Country men, without certain
places of aboade; yet at great unity amongst themselves, as not having much to
loose, or wherefore to strive. This people did not only notably defend this
Country thus by them at the first possessed, but still incroched farther and
farther, and gayning by other men's harms, became at length dreadful unto
their neighbors, and of some fame also farther off. Whereunto the effeminate
cowardice of those delicate people of Asia, with whom they had to do, gave no
less furtherance then their own valor; being nevertheless an hardy rough
people, though not much skillful, or trained up in the feats of war. But to
leave these Turcomanes for a while, we will return where we left.

This Country of Armenia has for it utmost bounds northward, Colchos, Iberia,
and Albania; all which are now called by the Tartars Comania. Colchos was that
famous Province, so much spoken of by the Poets, for the fable of Medea and
Jason, and the golden Fleece: the inhabitants now are called Mengrellians, a
Nation most barbarous and savage, selling their Sons and Daughters to the
Turks for little or nothing. Iberia is now called Georgia, and Albania, Zuiria:
Westward it confronts upon Euphrates and Armenia the less: Southward on
Mesopotamia, with that which the Curdies inhabit: and Eastward on the River
Araxis, which waters the South part of Armenia, and almost divides from
Georgia.

A d^scription of the people of Armenia, as they are at this day.
AT our first entrance into this Country, we traveled through a goodly,
large, and spacious plain, compassed about with a row of high mountains,
where were many Villages, wholly inhabited by Armenians; a people very
industrious in all kind of labor: their women very skillful and active in
shooting, and managing any sort of weapon, like the fierce Amazones in antique
time; and the women at this day, which inhabit the mountain Xatach in Persia.
Their families are very great; for, both Sons, Nephews, and Nieces do dwell
under one roof, having all their substance in common: and when the father
dies, the eldest Son does govern the rest, all submitting themselves under
his regiment. But when the eldest Son dies, the government does not pass to
his sons, but to the eldest brother. And if it chance to fall out, that all
the brethren do die, then the government does belong to the eldest Son of
the eldest brother, and so from one to another. In their diet and clothing,
they are all fed and cladde alike, living in all peace and tranquillity,
grounded on true love and honest simplicity.

The Armenians are a populous nation.
To discourse how populous this nation is at this day, is needless, since they
inhabit both in Armenia the greater, and Armenia the less; as also in Cilicia,
Bithinia, Syria, Mesopotamia and Persia. Besides the principal Cities of the
Turkish Empire be much appopulated with them, as Brusia, Angori, Trabisonda,
Alexandria, Grand-Caire, Constantinople, Cassa, Aleppo, Orpha, Cara-^mit, Van,
and Iulpha. Some of this nation affirmed unto us, that the chiefest cause of
their great liberty in the Ottoman Kingdom is, for that certain of their
Kings bare great affection and love unto Mahomet their lewd Prophet, in regard
whereof Mahomet did recommend them as his kind friends to his successors, who
ever since have permitted the poor Armenians to live amongst them. But the
true reason is, for that they are very laborious in transporting merchandise
from one City to another, by which means through the customs which are paid
in every City, the coffers of the Grand Signior are wonderfully enriched. Unto
which does well agree that scoffing taunt which Abbas now King of Persia did
throw upon an Armenian, who being desirous to forsake his Christian faith, and
to embrace the wicked and filthy superstition of the Persians, upon hope of
reward and preferment, the King did not only rebuke his tepedity and coldness
in his religion, but sent him away with this skornefull reproof: That an
Armenian now was good for naught, save as a Camel to transport merchandise from
one city to another: implying that hows^euer in antique times they had been
warlike and courageous, yet now they were become Buffelloes and Pultrones,
altogether unfit for martial affairs.

This people have two Patriarchs, The Armeni^^s governed by two Patriarks.
to whom they give the name of Universal: the one keeps his seat in the
City of Sis in Caramania, not far from Tharsus: the other in the Monastery of
Ecmeazin, near unto the City Eruan in this Country. Under these two
Patriarchs are eighteen Monasteries full freight with Friars of their
religion; and four and twenty B^shopricks. The maintenance allowed in times
past unto each of these two Patriarks was a Maidin on an house; each Patriarch
having under him twenty thousand households: but now that large benevolence the
great Turk has ceased into his own hands, as if the tithe of the Church were
fitter for his insatiable desire; then for those poor, miserable, and despised
Churchmen: and therefore now they are constrained to live on the alms of the
people, going continually in visitation from one City to another, carrying
their wives and whole family with them.

The people of this nation have retained amongst them the Christian The
religion of ^he Armenians is spotted with many absurdities.
faith, as it is thought from the time of ^he Apostles: but at this day it is
spotted with many absurdities. They hold with the Church of Rome in the use of
the Cross, affirming it to be meritorious if they make the same with two
fingers, as the Papists use; but idle and vain if with one finger as the
Iacobites. They adorn their Churches in every place with the sign of the
Cross, but for other Images they have none, being professed enemies against
the use of them. In keeping ancient relics they are very superstitious, and
much devoted to the ^lessed Virgin Mary, to whom they direct their prayers.
They imitate the Dioscorians in eating whit-meats on Saturday, which to do on
Wednesday and Friday were a deadly sin: nevertheless they will not refrain
from the eating of flesh on every Friday, between the feast of the Passover
and the Ascension. They abstain five Sabboths in the year from eating flesh,
in remembrance of that time, in which the Gentiles did sacrifice their children
unto Idols. They celebrate the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary on the sixth of
April, the Nativity of our blessed Savior on the sixth of January, the
Purification the fourth of February, and the Transfiguration the fourteenth of
August. The ministration of their Liturgy or service, is performed in their
native language, that all may understand: but in their service of the Mass for
the dead, they are most idolatrous, using at the solemnizing thereof, to
sacrifice a Lamb, which they first lead round about the Church, and after they
have killed it and roasted it, they spread it on a fair white linen cloth,
the Priest giving to each of the Congregation a part and portion thereof. For
which cause they are called by some Sabbatists, and Iulianists, as too much
addicted to the ceremonies of the Jews, and devoted to the errors of Julian.
I have heard some Papists boast and brag much, that both Armenians,
Iacobites, and Greoians, are united to the Church of Rome, but I could never
hear either Armenian or Grecian ^uouch any such matter. They are (unless some
few families) so far from yielding obedience unto the Sea of Rome, that they
assume all antiquity unto themselves, as having retained the Christian faith
from the time of the Apostles. Many Jesuits and Priests have been sent from
Rome to bring this oppressed nation under her government, but they have little
prevailed; for neither will they yield obedience, nor be brought by any
persuasion to forsake their ancient and inueterate errors, to become more
erroneous with her.

Having well refreshed our s^lues amongst these villages, we proceeded in our
ordinary travel, but ere we had passed two miles, certain troops of Curdies
incountred our Carauan, with a purpose and intent to have robbed the same, but
finding themselves too weak to contend with so great company, they departed
until the next day following, when again they met with us in a very narrow
passage between two mountains, where they made a stay of our whole Carauan,
exacting a Shaughee on every person, which to purchase our peace we willingly
paid; and so arrived that evening at Bithlis an ancient City, but a City of
much cruelty and oppression, where little justice and right is to be found to
relieve distressed passengers.

The description of Bithlis.
THis City stands in a pleasant valley, by which runs a little River,
falling out of the mountains Anti-Taurus, it was once a Town in the confines
of the Persian Kingdom, bordering upon Mesopotamia, and had a Castle kept with
a garrison of Persian Soldiers, before such time as Solomon the Magnificent
did conquer these Countries, The great battle fought between two great
Bassaes and Delymenthes a valiant Nobleman of Persi^^
which was in the year 1535. In which year there was a memorable battle
fought between the two great Bassaes of Caire and Syria, conducted by Vlemas
the Persian Traitor; and Delymenthes a right Nobleman of Persia. The two
Bassaes and Vlemas were commanded by Solomon (in his return from the spoil of
Tauris) to follow him with eighteen thousand good Soldiers in the rereward of
his army, to receive and repress the sudd^n assaul^s of the Persians, if need
should require. But Delymenthes with five thousand Persian Soldiers pursued
the Turks, and ouertooke them in the aforesaid valley; and being furthered in
this venterous designement, both by the darkness of the night, and the
abundance of rain which fell at the same instant, as if it had been wished
for, on a sudden go^ within the Turks camp: where the Persian Soldiers, as
Wolves amongst Sheep, did such speedy execution amongst the sleepy Turks,
that the two great Bassaes and Vlemas had much ado to get to horse, and save
themselves by flight. And such was the fury of the Persians, and the greatness
of the sudden fear increased by the darkness of the night, that the Turks
not knowing which way to turn themselves, or what to do, were slain by
thousands, some sleeping, some half waking, some making themselves ready to
fight, and to fly, few of all that great army escaped the sword of the
Persians. There was three great Sanzaecks slain, one taken, and the other
sled, eight hundred Iamzaries seeing themselves for^aken of their Captaine^,
laid down their Harquebusiers, and other weapons, and yielded themselves upon
Delymenthes his word. It might then well have been said of the Turks, which
the Poet spea^eth of the night, wherein Troy was ^ack^: Quis cladem illius
noctis qui funere fando
Explicet? --
The slaughter of that night was such, as that it is of the Turks until this
day accounted amongst their greatest losses; and the victory so welcome to the
Persians, that in memorial thereof they still keep that day (which was the
thirteenth of October) as one of their solemn holidayes.

In Bithlis we stayed two days; and at our departure paid unto the Governor
of the said City a Doll^r on a sum of goods, and so set forwards toward the
great City Van, three days journey farther. In which travel we had a very
wearisome and painful journey, over high mountains and craggy rocks, the way
being exceeding narrow, that a beast could hardly pass with his burden,
without much heauing and tumultuous shouldering. The which narrow passages the
Turks told us, was by the commandment of Amurat the third, the great Turk,
cut through by the maine industry of laborers, for his army to pass, like that
incredible work, which Hanibal with vinegar wrought upon the Alps. In this
place our travel was very dangerous, by reason of a brackish lake or little
Sea, called the lake Arctamar, which was under the Rock, over which we
passed, and we enforced to ride shoaling on the side of the said Rock, that
had not our Mules been sure of footing, both the^ and we had perished with an
insupportable downfall i^ that Sea. Two miles from this shore in the aforesaid
lake are two Islands called the Ecmenicke Islands, The Ecmenick Islands.
inhabited only by Armenians, and some Georgians, which two Islands do bring
forth and yield such store of cattle and plenty of rice, wheat, and batly,
that as the Island of Scycilia was called in time^ past Horreum. P. Romani, so
these Islands are at this day the gatners and store houses for all the Country
round about.

Being arrived at Van, our Carauan rested in the sub^^bs of the said City, not
daring to presume to enter the City, by reason that the Bassae was gone to
fetch in a rebel, that was risen up in those parts; in whose absence the City,
under the sub-Bassae, was no better governed then it should be. On the West
side of this City lies a pleasant and delightful plain, wherein the
Ianizaries twice a week do exercise themselves after their manner in the
seats of war. On the North side runs the lake Arctamar, The ^ake Actamar
call^^ in ancient ti^^ Martiana.
called in antique time the Moore or Marish, Martiana, or Margiana, or
Mantiana. Strabo affirms that it is matchable in greatness with the lake
M^otidis, in the Kingdom of Sermatia, so much spoken of by the Poets. Out of
this lake is caught yearly an innumerable quantity of fish like our Herring,
which being dried in the Sun, they disperse and sell them over all the
Country thereabout.

The description of Van.
THis City is double walled with hard quarry stone, and is the strongest Town
in all these parts, being fortified with great store of brass Ordonance, and a
strong Castle mounted on an high Rock, to command and defend the City. Solomon
after ten days siege took the City Van.
It was once under the government of the Persian, but Solomon the Magnificent
in the year 1549. with a puissant army did besiege the same, which after ten
days siege was yielded unto him by the Persian Governor, upon condition,
that the Persian Soldiers there in garrison, might with life and liberty
depart with their weapons, as Soldiers: which was by Solomon granted, and so
the City was surrendered up into his hands from the Persian King, who
neuersince could get the same into his possessions. It is governed now by a
Bassae, who has under him twelve thousand Timariots.

At this City we stayed five days, paying a Dollor on a sum of goods, and
passed from thence to a Turkish Village called Gnusher, the houses standing in
two several places, the one row fit for the Winter, and the other for the
Summer season: Here we began the ascent of the high mountains of Arraret,
and about noone-tide we beheld Bruz; the very crest of the Periardi mountains,
now called Cheilder Monte, the hills of Periardo. These mountains so called, are
very famous by the rising of many notable great rivers, which do so
fructiferate the country therabouts, that the barbarous people call it Leprus,
which is to say fruitful, viz. First, the River Araxis, which running out of a
certain Marish, with many arms does wonderfully enrich that champaine and
dry Country.

This River springs out of the hill Taurus in this part, The River Araxis
springs out of the hill Taurus.
where Periardo is situate, on the side of the hill Abo, and so runs by East
even to the confines of Seruan, and windeth it self toward the West, and by
North, where it is joined with the River Cirus, and then passes to Artaxata
now called Nassiuan, a City of the Armenians, right against Reiuan another
City, and so waters Armenia, and coursing along the plain of Araxis,
discharges it self into the Caspian Sea, on the one side by South leaving
Armenia, and on the other side by North leaving the Country Seruania; whose
chief City is Eris. This River is deep and large; but yet at this present, it
contains not those maruels, that Herodotus reports of it; as also it is
very hard to understand, that which Q. Curtius writes touching the course
thereof; and that which Natales Comes has left written of it in his History.

The River Cirus likewise springs out of Taurus, The River Cirus.
and so descending into the champaines and plains of Georgia, charging it
self, and being greatly increased with other Rivers, it is joined with Araxis,
and so makes his issue also into the Caspian Sea. This River the inhabitants
of the Country at this day call by the name of Ser, in their own language,
but the Turks call it Chiur.

Out of these mountains also springs the River Canac, The River Canac.
which makes (as it were almost) an Island, a little on this side the City
Eres, and afterward unite it self in the Channel with Araxis, and so runs
into the Caspian Sea.

Two other mountains are of great note in this place; The mounta^^ Anti-Taurus.
the one is Anti-Taurus, now called Mons Niger, the black mountain, which
runs up into Media; and the other Gordaeus, the tops of which mountai^es are
covered continually with white and hoary snowes. The mountai^ Gordaeus.
The mountain Gordaeus is environed with many other petty mountains called
the Gordaean mountains; on the tops whereof (as we passed) we found many
ruins and huge foundations, of which no^re son can be rendered, Joseph.
Ant^quitat. lib. 1. cap. 5.
but that which Josephus gives, saying: that they which escaped the flood were
so astonished and amazed, that they durst not descend into the plains and low
countries, but kept on the tops of those mountains and there builded. And some
observe that this Country was first peopled after the flood, for being high
land it first appeared. Fruitful propagation after the flood.
The Tradition of the Hebrews is, now in this place after the flood, the men
accompanying with their wives, every woman brought forth at once a male and a
female, and so did their children; for God and Nature never failed to the
necessity, which belonged to the wealth and increase of the universal world,
no more then in this old age of the world, in the time of the infinite
multitude, and increase of people, wherein God does miraculously keep them (as
the Sea from ouerflowing the land) that they do not so abound as that one
cannot live by another.

The Turks call the mountain Gordaeus Augri-daugh, the Armenians Messis-Saur:
it is so high, that it ouer-tops all the mountains thereabout. There issues
out of the foot of this hill a thousand little springs, whereof some do feed
the River Tygris, and some other Rivers, and it has about it three hundred
villages inhabited by Armenians and Georgians; as also an ancient Monastery
dedicated to St. Gregory, very large and spacious, able to receive Shaugh Tamas
the great King of Persia, and most of his army, who for the austere and strict
life that he saw in those religious men, made him to spare it, and to change
his determination, having a full purpose before to have destroyed it. About
this Monastery grows great plenty of grain, the grain being twice as big
as ours, as also Roses and Rheubarb, Rheubarb.
which because they have not the skill to dry it, that simple is of no esteem
or value.

The Arc of Noah rested on the top of the Gordaean Mountains.
ON the top of this Mountain did the Arc of Noah rest, as both Jews, Turks,
and Armenians affirmed. Berosus who registered the affairs and acts of the
Chaldaeans, Berosu^.
sets down diverse things both concerning Noah and the resting of the Arc
in this place. Concerning Noah he writes, that (the flood ceasing) Noah with
his family descending out of the Arc from Mount Gordaeus* (called by Manasseus
Damascenus, Manasseus Damasce^.
Baris, and by other Araxis) into the plain adjoining full of dead karcasses,
which they call M^ry Adam, that is, of dead men, wrote in a stone (for a
monument) what was done. The inhabitants to this day, especially the Armenians,
do call this place where Noah descended, Aprobaterion, that is, descent, or
Egressorium Noe, The going out of Noah. He further sets down how that the
eldest of all, father Noah did in the same place first teach his children
Theology and holy Writs, Noah wrote books.
and afterward humane wisdom, committing to writing many secrets of natural
things, which the Armenians and Scythians, did commit only to the Priests, to
whom only it was lawful, both to read, to teach, and to look into those
writings, rites, and ceremonies left by Noah.

And as for the resting of the Arc, he sets down diverse occurrences of the
flood on this manner. Some (says he) affirm that a certain part of the Arc
is yet in Armenia, near to the mountain of the Gordaeans, and that some men
have brought from thence, some part of the pitch wherewith it was calked, which
the people of that place were wont to use as a sovereign preservative against
enchantments. So Hierome the Egyptian (who wrote the Antiquities of the
Phoenitians) do make mention of the same matter; Hierome the Egyptian.
and also Nanesius with diverse others. Nicholas Damascene.
Nicholas Damascene speaks thus: above the region of the Minaeans, there is a
great mountain in Armenia called Baris, in which mountain it is reported that
diverse people retired themselves for safety during the time of the deluge, and
there escaped; and that a certain man (meaning Noah) arrived in an Arc on the
highest top of the said mountain, and that certain plankes and timbers of
the bottom of that Vessel was kept there a long while after. To verify
which, some Friars of St. Gregory's Monastery told us, that even at this day
some part of the Arc is yet to be seen on the top of this mountain, if
any could ascend thither; but the way (as they say) is kept by Angels, so that
whosoever shall presume to go up (as once a Brother of that Monastery did)
shall be brought down in the night season, from the place which he had gained
by his travail in the day time before. But to leave this fable to the first
inuentor, it suffices us that here amongst these mountains the Arc rested,
since the Scriptures tell us, that none were saved, but Noah and his Wife, with
his three Sons, and their three Wives, even eight persons in the whole, in
the Arc; and that the said Arc after the waters had prevailed upon the earth
an hundred and fifty days rested in the seventh Month, in the seventeenth
day of the Month upon the Mountains of Arraret, which is expounded by all
Writers to be in Armenia.

From the foot of this mountain, w^e spent a days journey farther toward
Chiulfall, which day we traveled through very many narrow lanes in those
mountains, and very deep valleys, The River Araxis.
wherein the River Araxis with most outrageous turnings and windings, and his
many rushing downefals amongst the Rocks, does even bedease a man's ears, and
with his most violent roaming in and out, does drown and ouerwhelme, whosoever
by miserable chance falls down headlong from the top of those narrow
passages, which are upon the mountains. And upon the crests of the said
mountains, on the side of the said narrow passages, there grow most hideous
Woods and antique Forests, full of Beeches: Trees like Poplers carrying mast
fit for Hogs, and Pine-trees; where the horror of darkness, and silence
which is oftentimes interrupted, only by the whistling winds, or by the cry of
some wild beasts, do make the poor passengers most terribly afraid.

The description of Chiulfal.
AT length our Carauan ferried over the foresaid River, and so we arrived at
Chiulfal, a town situate in the frontiers between the Armenians and the
Atropatians, and yet within Armenia, inhabited by Christians, partly Armenians,
partly Georgians: a people rather given to the traffic of Silks, and other
sorts of wares, whereby it waxes rich and full of money, then instructed in
weapons and matters of war. This town consists of two thousand houses and
ten thousand souls, being built at the foot of a great rocky mountain in so
barren a soil, that they are constrained to fetch most of their provision,
only wine excepted, from the City Nassiuan, half a days journey off, which
some think to be Artaxata, in the confines of Media and Armenia. The
Chiulfallines great drinkers of wine, but no quarrellers in drink.
The buildings of Chiulfal are very fair, all of hard quarry stone: and the
inhabitants very courteous and affable, great drinkers of wine, but no braulers
in that drunken humor, and when they are most in drink, they power out their
prayers, especially to the Virgin Mary, as the absolute commander of her Son
JESUS CHRIST, and to other Saints as Intercessors. It is subject and tributary
to the Scepter of Persia, and contrariwise both by nature and affection great
enemies to the Turk. Chiulfal much endangered in the last war between the
Turk and the Persian.
This Town was much endangered in the wars betwixt Amurat the great Turk,
and Mahomet Codibanda the Persian King, ready to be swallowed up of both. One
while the Bassae of Reiuan, on the great Turks behalf, made an inrode upon
them with a thousand and five hundred Harquebusiers, whom they were feign to
pacify with a very bountiful present, excusing themselves, that if they had
been backward in bringing unto him their voluntary tributes, it was done for
fear, least they should have fallen into the displeasure of Mahomet Codibanda
their King: who no doubt if he^ should have understood any such matter, would
have been ready to destroy their Country, and deprive them of their liberty
and lives. The Bassae was no sooner departed with this answer and their
present; but forth with Aliculi-cham was sent by the Persian King with three
thousand Soldiers, and with this direction, that if the country were subdued
by the Turks, he should fight against it: and if it had voluntarily yielded it
self unto them, he should not only recover it, but also burn it, and bring
away all the chief men of the Country for prisoners and slaves. To avoid
which danger, these poor Chiulfalini were glad to present the Persian Prince
with greater and more liberal gifts, then they did their enemy Bassae. Thus
these miserable people in the midst of arms and squadrons of the enemy, were
constrained, what with presents, and what with lies, notably to preserve their
liberties, and their lives in safety.

The mortal battle sought between Selymus the first, Emperor of the Turks,
and ^ismael the Sofie of Persia.
Within a days journey and half of this Town is the Chalderan plains;
memorable for the battle fought there, on the seventh day of August in the
year 1514. between the two great Emperors Ismael King of Persia, and Selymus
the first. Emperor of the Turks. In which battle Selymus lost above thirty
thousand men, amongst whom was Cassan-Bassae his great Lieutenant in Europe,
seven Sanzacks, with the two Malcozzian brethren, who laboring the one to
rescue the other, were both together stain. Besides his common footmen, of
whom he made least reckoning, he lost most part of his Illirian, Macedonian,
Seruian, E^irot, Thessalonian, and Thracian horsemen, the undoubted flower and
strength of his army, which were in that mortal battle almost all slain and
grievously wounded. And certainly had it not been for the Turks great
Artillery, Ismael with his thirty thousand horsemen, had overthrown Selymus
with his three hundred thousand Turks. But Selymus reserving all his great
Ordonance, at his last refuge, caused it to be discharged: by violence whereof
such slaughter was made, as well of his own men, as of his enemies, mingled
together, what for dust, what for smoke, and thundering of the Artillery,
having on both sides almost lost the use of sight and hearing; and ^^eir horses
being so terrified with the thundering report of the great Ordonance, that they
were not now to be managed, the battle was broken off, and the victory yet
doubtful. In the end Hismael had the worst, and was put to flight by reason
that the Persian horses had never been used to the noise and thundering of the
artillery, which they could not abide to hear. The Turkish stories to express
the terror of this day, number it amongst their dismal days, terming it the
only day of doom. The manner of this battle is painted in the Counsel chamber
at Venice, and is reported that Selymus the great Turk caused it so to be
done, and sent it to the Senate there. At Chiulfal we stayed eight days, and
passed again the River Araxis, leaving the noble Kingdom of Armenia, ^alled
now Turcomania, because of the Turcomanes a people that came out of Scythia (as
before we noted) who live as sheepheards in their tents, but the native people
give themselves to husbandry, and other manual sciences, as working of Carpets
and fine Chamlets. We were no sooner over but we entered into Media; which by
some is divided into Media Atropatia, and Media the Great.

The description of MEDIA ATROPATIA.
The Kingdom of Siruan.
MEdiae Atropatia is called by the Hebrews Madian, but now it is termed S^ruan
or Seruania: The bounds of this Kingdom Northwards are the Albanians, and a
little beyond them some wandering and vagabond Tartars called Pericorschi,
between Caucasus and the River Volga, whereupon it may be, that the Tartarians
are comprehended under the name of Volcenses: Eastward the lake (as Polycletes
term it) or rather (as other call it) the Sea of Corazan, viz. the Caspian
Sea: Southward on Armenia, and more toward the South, Atropatia exceeding
fruitful.
and South-cast Media the great: The whole country is very fruitful, and
watered with the River Araxi^ and Cirus, and other Rivers that are famous even
in antique Writers.

Diverse Cities are there in this Kingdom, but my purpose is to speak only of
those, which we saw in these parts. viz. Sumachia, Derbent, Sechi, Eres, and
Aras.

Sumachia.
Sumachia is the Metropoliticall City of Sir^an; and lies between Derbent and
Eres; where the Kings of Siruan used to keep their great and sumptuous Courts,
chiefly inhabited by Armenians and Georgians. In this City our English
Merchants did traffic much, and had an house given them by Obdowlocan in the
year 1566. (as reverend Mr. Hackluit does relate) who then reigned there under
the Persian King. In this City we saw the ruins of a most cruel and
barbarous spectacle, A most barbarous spectacle in Sumachia.
that is to say, a turret erected with free stone and flints, in the midst of
which flints were placed the heads of all the Nobility and Gentry of that
Country: which fell out on this occasion. This Country of Siruan in time past
was of great renown, having many Cities, Towns, and Castles in it; the Kings
thereof being of great power, able to wage war with the Kings of Persia, but
through their diversity in religion, the Persian made a conquest of them,
razing down to the ground their Cities, Towns, and Castles, that they should
not rebel, and also putting to death their Nobility and Gentry, and for the
greater terror of the people placed their heads in the foresaid Turrer.

About a mile distant from this Town is the ruins of an old Castle, once
esteemed to be one of the strongest Castles in the world, and was besieged by
Alexander the Great a long time before he could win it. And a little further
off, was a Nunnery most sumptuously builded, wherein was buried (as they told
us) the body of Ameleke Canna the Kings Daughter, who slew her self with a
knife, for that her Father would have forced her (she professing chastity) to
have married with a Prince of Tartary: upon which occasion the Virgins of this
Country do resort thither once a year to lament her death. This City is
distant from the Caspian Sea with Camels seven days journey; and from Derbent
six days journey; It was in the year 1578. yielded up unto Mustaffa the
General of the Turkish army, without resistance, who presently did surprise
the City, entreating all the inhabitants in friendly manner, without doing or
suffering any outrage to be done upon them; but for this their infidelity in
voluntary yielding themselves to follow the religion of the Turks, when as
they were not induced thereunto by any necessity; Emirhamze eldest Son to
Mahomet Codibanda King of Persia, The Persian Prince punis^eth the inhabitants
of Sumachia with diverse kinds o^ tortures and death^.
coming with his army into Seruan, did with great cruelty punish the miserable
and unfortunate commons of this City, making their houses even with the ground,
destroying both the old and new walls thereof, and bringing the whole land to
naught, that sometimes was so desired a ^eceit of the Turks*

Derbent builded by Alexander the Great.
Six days journey from this City, lies Derbent; This city has sundry names
given unto it by writers: Sometimes it is called Derbent, because it is in
figure narrow and long: and sometimes Demir-Capi, because there were the
yrongates, that were sometimes the entrance into Scythia: and sometimes
Alessandria; because it was first erected by Alexander the Great, when he
warred against the Medes and Persians; The great wall which Alexander built
between Derbent and Testis.
at which time also he made a wall of a wonderful height and thickness, which
extended it self from this City, to a City in Armenia, called Testis,
belonging to the Georgians. And though it be now razed and decayed, yet the
foundation remains: and it was made to this purpose, that the inhabitants of
that Country, newly conquered by Alexander, should not lightly fly, nor their
enemies easily invade them. This City is seated upon an high hill, and builded
all of free stone much after our buildings, being very high and thick:
nevertheless it never grew great nor famous, and even in these days, there is
no reckoning made of it: and the reason is because of the situation, serving
for passage only out of Tartaria into Persia, and out of Persia into Tartaria,
receiving those that travel too and fro, not as Merchants and men of Commerce,
but as passengers and travelers; and to speak in a word, it is seated in a
very necessary place as the case stands, by reason that it is in the ports of
the Caspian Sea, but not profitable unto it self: much like as it is in the
passages of the Alps, where though the Frenchmen, Switzers, Dutchmen, and
Italians, continually do pass by them; yet was there never found a mean
City; much less any City of state and importance.

Sechi.
About four days journey from Sumachia, is Sechi, which also at the same time
as Sumachia offered themselves to Mustapha, as vassals and subjects to the
Turks, who all were gladly entertained of him, and some of the chief of them
apparelled in silk and gold, and honored with great magnificence, and in the
end had all protection promised unto them. Here also stands the City Eres,
Eres made Mamodaean silks.
most fruitfully watered with the river Araxis and Cyrus, and has yielded in
times past great store of those fine white silks, commmonly termed by the
merchants Mamodaean silks, whereof at this day, there is not to be found, no
not a very small quantity, by reason of the monstrous ruins and overthrows,
that has happened in these countries, partly by the Armies of the great Turk,
and partly by the Army of the Persians, which still has succeeded one
another, in their cruel incursions, and bloody inu^sions. For after the
people of Sechi and Eres had yielded themselves voluntarily without any
resistance unto Mustaffa great Amurats General; Emirhamze the Persian Prince
came upon them with his army, as upon rebels to inflict deserved punishment.
In effecting of which his purpose he spared neither sex, nor age, nor any
condition, but though the persons were unequal, yet was the punishment equal
to all, carrying away with him the two hundred pieces of artilerie, that were
left in the sort by Mustapha, and presently sent them to Casbin to his father.

There is also in this Kingdom another City that bordereth upon the Georgians
called Arasse, Arasse the most chief and opulent City in the trade of
Merchandise that is in all Seruauia.
being the most chief and opulent City in the trade of Merchandise, partly by
the abundant grouth of silk, there nourished, partly by other good and
necessary commodities, there growing and there brought, as rough and smooth
galls, Cotton wool, Allome; besides all kinds of spices and drugs, and
Diamonds, and Rubies, and other stones brought out of the East Indies. But the
principal commodity is raw silk of all sorts; so that from hence has been
and is carried yearly five hundred, and sometimes a thousand mules laden of
silk to Aleppo in Syria. From this town we spent six days travel to
Tauris, passing over the river Araxis, leaving Media Atropatia, and entering
into Media the great.

The description of MEDIA the Great.
THis country has for it bounds, westward Armenia the great and Assiria:
Southward Persia: Eastward Hircania and Parthia: and Northwards the Caspian
Sea. The land is high and spacious, most part mountainous, full of hills, woods,
rocks, and ruins, specially toward the North parts, but Southwards it
abounds with silks, fruits, wild beasts and falcons. It received the name
from Medus, The original of the Medes.
Iasons son, who being an earnest follower of his fathers virtues, in honor
of his mother Medea, after the death of his father Jason, builded the City
Medea, and established the kingdom of the Medes, calling it after his own
name, which in continuance of time, grew to that estate, that all the East was
in subjection to the Empire thereof.

I omit to write any thing of Astyages, who reigned in this country; or of his
dream, how he saw springing out of his daughters belly a vine, whose branches
should ouershadow all Asia, meaning Cyrus that was borne of her; or how Cyrus
was brought up of an heard-man, and miraculously preserved from death; and
lastly how Cyrus was banished into Persia, and after being come to man's estate,
overcame Astyages his Grandfather, removing the Empire from the Medes to the
Persians, being all matters of antiquity, and not so pertinent to our iournall.

S^^chatana.
The chief City of this country is Tauris, which in times past was called
Ecbatana, as Ortelius and Minado do witness, howsoever P. Ionius very unjustly
would have it Terua, and Nigro the Italian Tigranoama. ^uffinus de Medioru^
ori^ne.
It was first founded by Deiocis the first king of Media, who no sooner gave
out his edict for the building thereof, but forthw^th the inhabitants with one
consent did make it the chief City above the rest; and so ever since it has
remained one of the chiefest seats both of the Median and Persian kings.

Memorable also is this City for the resiance once of the Prophet Daniel, The
Castle which Daniel the Prophet builded.
who near unto the same builded a most magnificent and sumptuous Castle,
which many years remained a maruailous monument; the beauty whereof was so
lively and perfect, that continuance of time did little deface it, being very
fresh and flourishing in the time of Josephus. In this Castle were all the
kings of Media, Josephus Anti. lib. 10.11.
Persia, and Parthia for many years together intombed. But now time has worn
it out, it faring with buildings as with men's bodies, they wax old, and are
infeebled by years, and loose their beauty: nevertheless Ecbatana now called
Tauris remains in great glory unto this day.

The description of Tauris.
IT is seated at the foot of the hill Orontes eight days journey or there
abouts from the Caspian Sea, and is subject to winds and full of snow; yet of a
very wholesome ayte, abounding with all things necessary for the sustentation
of man: wonderful r^ch, as well by the perpetual concourse of merchandises,
that are brought thither from the countries of the East, to be conueighed into
Syria, and into the countries of Europe; as also of those that come thither out
of the Western parts, to be distributed over all the East. It is very
populous, so that it feeds almost two hundred thousand persons: but now open
to the fury of every army without strength of walls, and without bulwarks,
saving a Castle built of late by the Turks. The buildings are of burnt clay,
and rather low then high. On the South side of this City, is a most beautiful
and flourishing garden, large and spacious, replenished with sundry kinds of
trees, and sweet smelling plants, and a thousand fountains and brooks,
derived from a pretty river, which with his pleasant stream denides the garden
from the City: and is of so great beauty, that for the delicacie thereof, it
is by the country inhabitants called Sechis-Genet, that is to say, the eight
Paradises: and was in times past the standing house of the Persian Kings,
whilst they kept their residence in this City, and after they withdrew their
seat from thence, by reason of the Turkish wars, to Casbin, became the
habitation and place of abode for the Persian governors.

Tauris yields to Selymus the first. 1514.
Sundry mutations even of late years has this City endured both by the great
Turk and the Persian. For in the year 1514. it was yielded to Selymus the
Turkish Tyrant, who contrary to his promise exacted a great mass of money from
the Citizens, and carried away with him three thousand families, the best
artificers in that City, especially such as were skillful in making of armor
and weapons, only to enrich and appopulate the great City Cons^antinople.

Sacked by So^yman. 1535.
Afterward in the year 1535. it was again spoiled by Solomon the Turkish
Emperor, who gave the whole City for a prey unto his soldiers, who left
neither house nor corner thereof vnransacked, abusing the miserable Citizens
with all manner of insolency: every common soldier without controlement,
fitting himself with whatsoever best pleased his greedy desire or filthy
lust: beside the most stately and royal Palace of King Tamas, together with
the most sumptuous and rich houses of the Nobility were by the great Turks
commandment all rased down to the ground, and the greatest part of the best
Citizens, and beautiful personages of all sort and condition were carried away
captives.

^iserably ^o^led by Os^an Vizier. 1583.
And in the year 1585. it was miserably spoiled by Osmun vizier unto Amurat the
third, who commanded his soldiers to do the worst that possibly they could or
might do to it. Here a man had need of a very learned and eloquent pen, to set
forth the fierce and cruel execution of the Turkish soldiers. For in truth
who is able either by writing, or by speech, sufficiently and lively to lay
open the treachery, the covetousness, the wrath, the cruelty, the impiety,
the wickedness of these triumphing Turks? The misery of the Taurisians.
And on the other side, who can express the crying of infants, the gronings of
the wounded, the tears of parents, the prayers of old men, the ^eares, the
griefs, and to be short, the misery of the Taurisians. There was nothing but
slaughter, pillings, rauishing, spoiling and murdering: virgins defloured, men
children defiled with unspeakable and horrible Sodomitry, younglings snatched
out of their mothers arms, houses laid even with the ground and burnt: riches
and money carried away, and to be brief all things wasted and ruinated.
Neither were those outrages committed once only, but the second followed worse
then the first, and the third upon that worse then the second: so that it was a
misery almost inexplicable to behold that City, which was once so populous
and so rich, sometimes the Court and Palace of the Crown, and the honor of
the Persian Empire, now subject to the fury and cruelty of the Turk plunged
in calamity, and utterly destroyed. This is the uncertain state of the world,
sometimes up, and sometimes down, sometimes conquerers, and within a while
after conquered.

For this City groaned not full four and twenty years under the Turkish
slavery, Tauris won by the Persian King in the year. 1603.
but Abas now King of Persia reposing no less confidence in his own good
fortune, then the valor of his soldiers marched in the year 1603 with his
army directly to the City of Tauris, and that with such expedition, that he
was come before it, before any such thing was feared, much less provided for:
stirred up hereunto, partly by the great Turk troubles at home, and his wars
with the Christians in Hungary, as also with the disposition of the
Taurisians, whose minds were then so alienated from the Turkish governor; that
upon the approach of Abas, they were all ready to forsake him. Nevertheless
the King was constrained to besiege the City, being then kept with a strong
garrison of Turkish soldiers. In which siege he for battery used the help of
the Canon, an engine of long time by the Persian skorned, as not beseeming
valiant men, until that by their own harms taught; they are content to use
it, being with the same, as also with skillful Canoniers furnished by the
Portugals from Ormuz. So that after six weeks siege this City was surrendered
up into the Persians hands to the great rejoicing of all Persia, together with
the whole country of Seruan, except a fort or two which still stands out.

At this City we paid a dolor on a sum of goods, and five Shaughes to the
keeper of the Caine wherein we lodged, and set forward to the wealthy City of
Casbin distant from Tauris ten days journey; passing the three first days
over many rough and craggie mountains, full of a thousand difficulties, which
were the more increased by wonderful great snowes that were fallen, by means
whereof many passengers, horses, and mules (if our guide had not been good)
had perished in one common destruction. Every night we had great fl^kes of
lightening, and huge thunderclaps with great store of rain and snowes which
did much annoy our whole Carauan. We had no sooner left those hard passages,
but we were forthwith encountered by a gallant troop of Persian horsemen, who
lay up and down the borders by the kings commandment, to murder all Turkish
merchants that should pass that way: upon revenge of the death of a Persian
merchant, who being richly arrived at Van, (a little before our coming) was
injuriously deprived both of his goods and life. Hereupon the governor of this
troop, demanded of our Carauan-Bassa (who was a Chiulphalin) to deliver up
into his hands, all the Turkey merchants, that were in our company; to which
request he durst not condescend, affirming that there was none but Jews and
Christians under his conduct; and withal bestowed on him a bountiful present
of two hundred and fifty dollors, which was levied amongst us.

By this time we came to the full borders, Our first entry into the Persian
kingdom.
and outmost bounds then of the great Turks dominion, so far as the Othoman
Empire on this side does extend; and so entered into the territories of the
Persian King: both which are divided by the high mountain Duz^m, and by a
pretty river that runs at the foot th^reof. This night we rested at a
Persian village called Darnah, much ruinated, but seated in a very delightful
place, both for springs of water, and plenty of all things. For here we
bought four hens for five pence, a kid for ten pence, and thirty eggs for two
pence.

From Darnah we spent three days further to Soltania, a very ancient City,
traveling by many Persian villages, and finding every man at his labor, and
neighbor with neighbor going from one town to another, Great quiet in Persia.
which bred much contentment, and made us wonder at the great peace and
tranquillity, which the commons of Persia live in above the commons of Turkey.
The ruins of many fair Christian Churches we beheld, but not without pity,
built all with great arches and high towers, lauorated with gold and other rich
paintings to the beautifying of the same. And verily I take them to be those
Churches, which Cosro^ King of Persia destroyed, who being in a battle
discomfited, fought between him and Heraclius the ^mperour, reaked his teene
and malice on the Christian Churches throughout his dominions.

The description of Soltania.
AT Soltania we safely arrived. This City is called by Ptolome, Heraclea; but
by others Tigranocerta, because of the wonderful ruin of the huge buildings;
and was in times past one of the royal seats of the Persian Kings, but it was
much ruinated by the Scythian Tamerlane, when with a world of people he ouerran
these countries: it retains now no show of the ancient majesty, but only in
the Churches by him spared. This desolate town is on every side environed with
huge mountains, whose tops are to be seen a far off, always covered with
deep snowes, called in ancient time Nyphates, Caspius, Coathras and Zagras,
taking their beginning no doubt of Cancasus the father of mountains; which
joining one to another, some one way, some another, do divide most large and
wide countries.

Before this town lies a very great and spacious plain, memorable for that
dreadful and horrible tempest which fell on Solomon the Turkish Emperor and
his whole army in the year 1534. A most horrible and terrible tempest.
For whilst he lay encamped in these plain fields with his Army, there fell
down such an horrible and cruel tempest from the mountains, as the like
whereof the Persians had never seen before at that time of the year, being in
the beginning of September; and that with abundance of rain, which froze so
eagerly as it fell, that it seemed the depth of Winter had even then of a
sudden been come in: for such was the rage of the blustering winds, ^triuing
with themselves, as if it had been for victory, that they swept the snow from
the top of those high mountains, and cast it down into the plains in such
abundance, that the Turks lay as men buried alive in the deep snow, most
part of their tents being overthrown and beaten down to the ground, with the
violence of the tempest and weight of the snow, wherein a wonderful number of
sick soldiers and others of the baser sort which followed the camp perished,
and many other were so benumbed, some their hands, some their feet, that they
lost the use of them for ever: most part of their beasts which they used for
carriage, but specially their camels were frozen to death. Neither was there
any remedy to be found for so great mischiefs, by reason of the hellish
darkness of that tempestuous night, most of their fires being put out, by the
extremity of the storm: which did not a little terrify the superstitious
Turks, as a thing accounted of them ominous. Many of the Turks vainly
thought, that this horrible tempest was brought upon them by the charms and
enchantments of the Persian Magitians; whereas it was undoubtedly by the hand
of God, which brings the proud devises of Princes to naught.

The description of Casbin.
FRom Soltania we spent four days travel to Casbin, passing by many
villages, where we paid a Shaughee a piece to the Beg or governor of the
village, not as a custom, but as a free grat^ity, and so entered into the
territories of Casbin, a City very wealthy, by reason of the Kings Palace,
and the great concourse of merchants which resort thither. It was in ancient
time called Arsacia as in Strabo; but now termed Casbin, which in the Persian
language signifies chastisement, or a place of punishment, because the kings
were wont to banish or confine such persons, as for their offenses and
misdemeanors had deserved such chastisement. This City is seated in a goodly
fertile plain of three or four days journey in length, furnished with two
thousand villages, to serve the necessary uses thereof: but evil builded, and
for the most part all of bricks not hardened with fire, but only dried in the
Sun; as are most parts of the buildings of all Persia.

It is now one of the seats of the Persian Kings Empire, which was translated
by King Tamas, (this kings Grandfather) from Tauris, who built one goodly
Seraglio for himself, and another for his women, and has been ever since
continued by his successors, though the king that now reigns, make most of
his abode in Hispaan fourteen days journey farther toward the East.

There are three places in the City most of note: viz. the Kings Palace, the
Bassars, and the At-Maidan. The gate of the kings Palace is built with stone
of diverse colors, and very curiously ennameled with gold: on the seeling
within, is carved the wars of the Persian Kings, and the sundry battles
sought by them against the Turks and Tartars; the pauements of the rooms
beneath, and chambers above are spread with most fine carpets, wouen and
tessuted with silk and gold, all ensigns and monuments of the Persian
greatness.

Bassars are certain streets of traffic.
There is likewise in this City sundry Bassars, where, in some you may buy
Shasses and Tulipants, and Indian cloth of wonderful finenesse: in others
silks of all sorts, as Ve^uets, Damasks, cloth of Gold and Silver: in others
infinite furs, as Sables and Martine out of Muscouia, and Agiam furs
brought from Corassan. In a word every speech has a several science or trade,
wherein is sold whatsoever is fit and necessary for the use of man.

The At-Maidan, is the high speech or chief market place in this City; and is
foure-square, containing in a circuit very near a mile; and serves as a
Bursse for all sorts of Merchants to meet on, and also for all others to sell
whatsoever commodities they possess, so that in one place is selling of
horses, mules and cammels; in another place carpets, garments, and felts of all
sorts, and in another all kind of fruits, as Muske-mellons, Anguries,
Pomegranates, Pistaches, Adams apples, Dates, Grapes, and Raisons dried in the
Sun. In this place do sit daily twelve Sheraffes, that is, men to buy and sell
Pearl, Diamonds, and other precious stones, and to exchange gold and silver,
to turn Spanish dollers to great advantage into Persian coin; and to change
the great pieces of the Persian coin, as Abbasses, Larines, and such like into
certain brass moneys for the poor. They will also lend upon any pawn, and
that with as great interest as our devilish Brokers and Scriueners take in
London.

Finally the strength of this City consists not in walls and bulwarks, but
in the soldiers that are continually maintained in and about this City; for
out of Casbin, and the villages belonging unto the same, are maintained twenty
thousand soldiers on horseback, howsoever in this kings fathers time were
levied but twelve thousand. Ardouil the first place that received the Persian
superstition.


Two places near to this City are very remarkable; the one is the City
Ardouil; the other Giland. Ardouil is a City four days journey from Casbin,
and two from Soltania. A City of great importance, where Alexander the great
did keep his Court, when he invaded Persia. It is a town much esteemed and
regarded, by reason of the sepulchers of the kings of Persia, which for the
most part lie there intombed: and so is grown a place of their superstitious
devotion; as also because it was the first place which received the Persian
sect, wherein Gi^^^ the first Author thereof did reside and reign; A sect or
superstition very commodious to the Christian Commonwealth, because it has
bred great contentions and war among the Mahumetane nations, which before
were so united together by Mahomets device, that they seemed to be more then
friends and in league one with another.

The Author of this nouelty was as we said before, The Author (...) the Persian
s^perstition.
one Giuni, a man well descended among the Persians, who contemning al worldly
honor, r^ches, and pleasure, as mere vanities and trifles, led such an
austere kind of life with such co^tinency and contempt of the world, as that
the vulgar people began to have the man in singular admiration for the opinion
they had conceiu^d of his upright life and rare virtues. The fame of thi^ new
Prophet (as so he was accounted) was grown so great in the Persian kingdom,
that the people without number resorted out of all parts of Persia unto the
City Ardouil to see the man. And he the more to seduce the people, The Turks
and Persians differ not about the interpretation of their law, but about the
true successor of their great Prophet Mahomet.
being by nature inconstant and superstitious, began to persuade them, that the
three first successors of Mahomet, were unjust and unlawful usurpers of that
dignity, and that just Aly, Mahomets son in law, only ought to be named the
lawful successor: that he alone ought to be called upon in their prayers for
help, and that all honors should be given to him, and taken from Abubacher,
Omar, and Ottaman, as from persons that were undoubtedly damned. Finally he
taught them only to receive the writings of Aly as of others most
authentical, to reject Abuchacher, Omar, and Ottaman, with their writings as
most wicked and accu^sed; who^ the Turks had ever, and yet do honor and
worship as the true successors of their Prophet Mahomet, and his sincere
interpreters, together with the aforesaid Aly, ^he new prai^r of the Per^ians.
whom the Persians do only acknowledge: and therefore in their prayers do
commonly say, Cursed be Abubachar, Omar, and Ottaman, and God be favorable to
Aly, and well pleased with him. Which their difference about the true successor
of their Prophet, in whom was no truth, has been, and yet is, one of the
greatest causes of the mortal wars between the Turks and the Persians: and
not the diverse interpretation of their law (as many have written) which among
the Tu^ks and Persians is all one.

This superstition was first broached (as we said) by Giuni, afterward
maintained by Sederdin, after him by Giuni the second, then by Haider Erdebil;
afterward by Hysmael the great Sophy it increased wonderfully, that Persia
seemed to envy the glory of Cyrus and Darius. After the death of Hysmael it
was maintained by King Tamas his son, who reigned with less felicity, being
much damnified by Solomon the Turkish Emperor: After Tamas succeeded Aidere
the second, who reigned but certain days and hours; and then followed
Hismael the brother of Aidere, who troubled all the Cities of his kingdom with
manifold hurly-burlies: after him Mahomet surnamed Codibanda this kings father,
more unfortunate then all the rest: and lastly the king that now is, who by his
valor has so largely dilated the confines of his kingdom, that it seems he
has (as it were) founded it anew.

The description of HIRCANIA.
THe other place near to Casbin remarkable is the country of Gilan, in the
Province of Hircania very famous in antique time. Sundry names are given unto
it by the Barbarians; some call it Girgia or Corca, from a certain City which
stood in the same: others Straua from a part of this kingdom: others
Messandra, as Minado^: Mercator calls it Diargument: and in ancient time
Hircania, so much spoken of by the Poets for the huge woods, and fierce Tigers
that abound there. Westward this kingdom bounds upon Media: Eastward on
Margiana: Southward on Parthia, and the Coronian mountains: and Northward on
the Caspian Sea. The North part of this kingdom is full of thick woods and
shadowi^ g^ones wherein grow diverse sorts of trees, but specially C^da^s,
Beeches, and Oaks, a fit harbor and shelter for Tigers* Panthe^s, and
Pardies, which wild beasts make the passage in those places very dangerous:
but near to the Sea side it is full of pasture, and very delightful by reason
of the manifold sweet springs which issue out of the mountain near
adjoining. Many principal Cities are there in this country, as Bestan,
Massandran, Pangiazer, Bachu and Gheilan Cities of such state and condition, as
deserve to have a Governor of the same dignity, that the Bassa is with the
Turks.

Bachu.
Concerning Bachu, it is a very ancient hauen-towne, very commodious for ships
to harbor in, as also profitable to vent commodities, by reason that Ardouil,
Tauris, Eres, Sumachia, Oil springs out of the ground.
and Derbent ly not many days from thence. Near unto this town is a very
strange and wonderful fountain under ground, out of which there springs and
issues a marvelous quantity of black Oil, which serves all the parts of
Persia to burn in their houses; and they usually carry it all over the
country, upon Kine and Asses, whereof you shall oftentimes meet three or
four hundred in company.

Gheilan.
Gheilan and the rest stand likewise altogether in traffic: Gheilan being but
four easy days travel from Casbin; and very near unto the Caspian Sea. The
Caspian Sea.
A Sea that is very commodious and profitable; being in length two hundred
leagues, and in breadth an hundred and fifty, without any issue to other Sea:
to the East part of this Sea joins the great desert country of the Tartars:
to the West part, the country of the Circassians, the mountain Caucasus: to
the North the river V^lga, which has seventy mouths or falls into the same:
and to the South part joins the countries of Media and Parthia. This Sea is
fresh water in many places, and in other places, as salt as the maine Ocean. It
has many goodly rivers falling into it, as the great river Volga, called by
the Tartars Edell, which runs at the least two thousand miles in length: as
also out of Syberia, Yaic and Yem, and out of the Periardian mountains Araxi^,
Cirus, Canac, and diverse others too long to write of. And though so many goodly
rivers do discharge themselves into it, yet it emptieth not it self, except it
be under ground into the black Sea by Constantinople.

A trade might be planted by ^he Muscouian ^erchants.
Now by the commodious site of the Sea, a very profitable trade might be
planted, being but seven days sailing from Astracan to Gheilan: the gains of
which passage is as I have credibly heard say both of Persians and Armenians
fifty in the hundred, even in mere Buttanosses. To further which commerce and
trade Abas the Persian king has diverse times of late sent sundry Ambassadors
to the grand Duke of Moscouia; among other things, requesting of him, The
barks which must pass the Caspian sea must not draw five foot water, because
in diverse places it is very shoald.
that merchants might have a safe conuoy, to transport their goods down the
river Volga into the Caspian Sea, and so to Gheilan; which he promised most
faithfully to perform, so fa^re as his power would extend. I know the voyage
will be chargeable, yet the benefit will quite the charge, were the passage
safe and secure down the river, and had we barks of our building but of fifty
or three score tuns, which might by reason of the great store of timber in
those parts be easily builded.

The commodities to be found at Gheilan and Casbin are silks of all sorts of
colors, The commodities of Persia
both raw and wrought, and that in such quantity, that a merchant may b^stow
thirty or forty thousand pounds yearly, as also all manner spices and drugs,
pearls diamonds, and rubies, likewise carpets of diverse sorts, with diverse
other rich merchandises, the prices of which I think not meet to set down,
because of their ^ising and falling as the market goes. The commodities to be
carried from England into Persia.
In exchange of which commodities, we are to carry thither tin and copper and
brassel; as also ca^sies for the common people, broad cloth for the
merchants, and better sort of people, black clothes for women's garments; good
chamlets and v^luets died in grain, with purple colors and fine reds; cloth
of gold and tissue, veluets, imbroidered with gold; fine holland cloth for the
king and Sultanes, dags and pistols, complete harnesses, targets of steel,
shirts of male, stonebowes, brushes and such like.

The only colors of cloth which are to be sent, The colors of cloth to be
sent into Persia.
are skarlets, violets in grain; fine reds, blacks, brown blewes, London
russets, taunies, Lion colors, fair lively greens, and the like. I am
persuaded that any honest factor residing in Casbin may vent a thousand
clothes yearly, whereof the Venetians have good experience. But to leave this
noble country of Hircania, we will again come to Casbin a principal City in
Media, where we stayed fifteen days.

From Casbin we set forwards to the great and populous City of Hispaan,
lodging every night either in a Persian village, or in a fair Caine built of
stone, where we found all kind of provision necessary for our selves and
beasts travailing six or seven in a company: company sufficient, by reason
of the great peace and tranquillity, which the Persians live in above the
Turks; and so having spent six days, we arrived at Com a very ancient
City.

The City Com once twice as big as Constantinople.
This City is called by Ptolomie, Guriana, and was so great in times past, that
the inhabitants affirmed unto us, that when it was in it first flourishing
estate, it was twice as big as Constantinople; but it was much ruinated by
Tamerlane, and ever since has lien in the dust without repair, Cassan
carrying away the trade of merchandise from her, which was once the Mistress
and Lady thereof. It is well seated for water and all other necessaries,
having a spacious river running by it, with a stone bridge over the same: the
which we no sooner passed, but we entered into the bounds of Parthia; a
kingdom once famous, but now so mingled with Persia, that the very name of
Parthia is quite extinguished among them.

The description of PARTHIA.
THis Province in antique writers is much renowned: Nigro does call it
Corassan, and would have the metropoliticall City to be Charras, under which
he would comprehend the Zagathean Tartars, but herein he is much deceived, for
Corassan and the Zagathean Tartars is very nigh two months travel from
Hispaan, which is the chief and principal City of Parthia as shall be showed
in due time and place. Mercator and Minadoi do call it Arach: and Alphonsus
Hadrianus, Iex. The bounds of this Province Eastward is on Aria: Southward on
the great desert of Caramania: Westward on Media: and Northward on Hircania.
The North part is very woody, and compassed about with huge mountains; ^uery
plain is enclosed with a several pale of high hills belonging to ^^e same:
though the climate here be subject to much heat, yet does the country
produce all sorts of delicate fruits (only Olives excepted) being watered with
many pretty rivers which flow from the mountains.

The native people were at the first a most base, The Parthians were at the
first a most servile and base people.
vile, and obscure people, d^iuen out of the cold countries of Scythia at that
time, when the Assirians and Medes flour^shed, and they continued so a long
time after, when the Persians gained the monarchy from the Medes, yea and after
Alexander had conquered Persia, they were so rude and barbarous, that no
Macedonian Prince would take upon him to be king of Parthia. But in process of
time they became very valiant, and great soldiers: for after they served in
the wars one while under Eumenes, another while under Antigonus, and after
under Sel^ucius Nicanor, and then under Antiochus, commanders of great
account, they grew so famous by their service, that finding themselves strong
enough, they made head against Antiochus, and revolted from him, making choice
of a king among themselves, who in short time brought such renown to the
Parthians, as that they enla^ged their confines, and augmented their
territories in such m^nner, that Parthia (once despised and contemned of the
M^cedonians) within the reign of eight kings became sole Lady and
com^aundresse over all the countries from the mountain Caucasus to the river
Emphrates: subdoing Persia, Media, and Assiria, sacking and d^spoyling the
great and wea^thie City of Babylon, in so much that their fame spread unto
Rome, a City that could never abide any kingdom or country to flourish but
it self. These were they that gave the great overthrow to rich Crassus of
Rome, who minding more his gold, then the guiding of his army, was slain
himself and many thousand Romans, the Parthians with exprobration of his
thirst after money powered moulten gold into his mouth after he was dead.
Against these great Lucullus fought many battles, and the Romans were never
able to bring them quite into subjection, until Augustus Caesar reigned.

I omit for brevity sake to write anything of Arsaces, the first king of
Parthia, whom the Persians loved so alive, that they honored him being dead,
surnaming always after him the kings of Parthia, Arsaces, with no less honor
and glory, then the Caesar's of Rome, the Pharhoes and Ptolomees of Egypt: or of
Herodes the ninth king of Parthia, who so much prevailed against the Romans or
of Phraherts their tenth and last king, who unnaturally killed his aged father,
and put thirty of his brethren to death, and that the Parthians might have no
man left to to be nominated king after him, commanded his own son to be put
to death likewise: or lastly how Augustus Caesar by his clemency, and justice
drew this bloody tyrant to submit himself and his kingdom unto the Roman
Monarchy, ending that without war, which others could not do with wars,
commanding more with a word, then Antonius who sought it with blows, or
Crassus that sought it with his death. But leaving these matters of antiquity,
we return where we left.

The description of Cassan.
AFter two days travel from Com, we arrived at Cassan a principal City in
Parthia; very famous and rich howsoever Ortelius, and others make no mention of
it. This City is seated in a goodly plain, and because it has no mountains
near it, but within a days journey the heat is very fastidious, as great
almost as it is in Ormuz: the spring and harvest is sooner in this climate,
then in any other p^^ts of the Persi^n dominions. It wants neither
fountains, springs, nor gardens, but abounds with all necessaries
what^oeuer: consisting altogether in merchandise, and the best trade of all the
land is there, being greatly frequented with all sorts of merchants, especially
out of India. The people are very industrious and curious in all sciences, but
specially in weauing girdles, and ^hashes, in making Veluets, Sattans, Damasks,
very good Ozmuzenes, and Persian carpets of a wonderful finenesse; in a word
it is the very Magazeen and warehouse of all the Persian Cities for these
stuffes,

Here may you buy all manner of drugs and spices, and Turkasses with store of
Pearl, D^amonds, and Rubies; as also all so^ts of silks as well wrought as
raw. I am persuaded that in one year there is more silk brought into Cassan,
then is of broad cloth brought into the City of London. Civil and good
government.
This City is much to be commended for the civil and good government, which
is there used. An idle person is not permitted to live among them: the child
that is but six year old is set to l^bour: no ill ^ule, disorder, or riot is
there suffered. F^r they have a law among them, (resembling the Egyptian law
which Diodorus mentions) whereby every person is compelled to give his name to
the Magistrates, therewith declaring what kind of life he likes, how he
lives, and what art he exercises. And if any do tell untruly is either well
beaten on the feet, or employed in public slau^ry. The Persian law against
idleness.
The greatest annoyance that this City is infes^ed withal, is the abundance
and multitude of black Scorpions, of an exceeding greatness, which many times
do much harm, if a special care be not had of them. At this City Master
John Mildenall and my self parted company; he traveling to Labor in the E^st
Indies; and my self setting forwards to the great City of Hispaan, three
days travel distant from Cassan.

The description of Hispaan.
THis City as some affirm was built by Arsaces the first King of Parthia,
being then called Dara. But whether so or no, is not much m^teriall. Sure it
is, that in times past it was called Ecatompolis, the City of a hundred gates:
and well it may keep that name still since the huge walls of the same
contain in circuit an easy days journey on horse back, and is become the
greatest City in all the Persian dominions: which is so much the more
magnified and made populous; by reason of the kings re^iance therein. For there
is the supreme place of justice; all matters of importance have recourse to
this place; all Ambassadors of Princes, and Agents of Cities, make their
repair thither; and such as aspire and thirst after offices and preferments
run thither amain with emulation and disdain at others: and in a word
thither are brought the revenues that appertain to the crown, and there are
they disposed out again. By all which means this City has wonderfully
increased and appopulated it self within these five and twenty years.

Very strong is this City by situation, compassed about with a very great
wall, and watered with deep channels of running springs, conueighed into it,
from a part of the Coronian mountains, which are as a wall inaccessible about
it. (...) sort of (...).
On the North side is erected a strong Fort or Castle, being compassed about
with a wall of a thousand and seven hundred yards, and in the midst thereof is
built a tower or rather a strong keep, sundry chambers and lodgings therein,
but stored with little Ordonance. On the West side of this City stands two
Seraglios, (...) kings (...).
the one for the King, the other for his women; Palaces of great state and
magnificence, far exceeding all other proud buildings of this City: the
walls glister with red marble and pargeting of diverse colous, yea all the
Palace is paued with checher and tesseled work, and on the same is spread
carpets wrought with silk and Gold: the windows ^f Alablaster, white marble,
and much other spotted marble; the posts and wickets of massy Iuory checkred
with glistering black ^bony, so curiously wrought in winding knots, as may
easier stay, t^en satisfy the eyes of the wondering beholder.

Near unto this Palace, The kings garden.
is a garden very spacious and large, all flourishi^g and b^a^ti^ull,
replenished with a thousand sundry kinds of grafts, ^rees, and sweet smelling
plants, among which the ^illy, the Hyacinth, the Gillyflower, the Rose, the
Violet, the flower-gentle, and a thousand other odoriferous flowers do ye^ld a
most pleasant and delightful sig^t to all beholders. There are a thousand
fountains, and a thousand brooks; among them all, as the father of them all,
a pretty river, which with his mild course and delight^ome noise does divide
the garden from the Kings Palace; neither is this garden so straightly looked
unto, but that both the kings soldiers and Citizens, may and do at their
pleasures oftentimes on horse back repair thither to recreate themselves in
the shadows and walks of those greenes.

And as a guard for the gate of this sumptuous Palace, The guard of the kings
Palace.
the king keeps certain orders of soldiers: whereof the most noble and the
greatest in number are called Churchi, which are as it were the kings
Pensioners, being eight thousand in number, all of them divided under several
Captains: which Captains do yield obedience to the general Captain called
Churchi-Bassa, a man always of great autho^ity. Next unto this order is
another called Esahul, to the number of a thousand, distinguished also under
particular Captains, and the chief Captain is called Esahul-Bassa. All these
are maintained by certain towns and villages, which are feudataries to the
crown of Persia; and they receive at certain times of the kings armor,
horses, apparel, and tents, every one as he is in place and degree: with this
strong garrison is the King daily attended upon, and maintains the Majesty
of his Court, especially when he rides in prograce.

The order of the Persian dignities in Hispaan.
And for the government of this City, there is besides the King and the Prince
twelve Sultanes, but three especially are appointed by the King, for the
general government of the whole Empire, having their several distinct
charges. The Sultanes.
One has the care of all martial affairs throughout the kingdom: and the
other two receive all the revenues, keeping a just account thereof, which two
we may call Treasurers. The Treasurers. The great Chancellours.
Next unto these are the Mordari two great Chancellors, whose office is to
write all orders, commandments, and letters concerning the government of the
kingdom: one of them keeps the Seal, and the other the Pen. Besides these
there are two Caddi, The Caddi or Judges.
that is two Judges, who make answer and give sentence only in matters of
controversy and civil quarrels; but as touching criminal causes, they have
no further authority, then to frame examinations of witnesses, and to make
declaration thereof, which they call the Sygil, and this Sygil they deliver up
into the hands of the Sul^an, that is either governor of the City, or else of
the Empire, and he causes execution to be done according to custom. And look
as Hispaan is governed, so other Cities have the self same Magistrates, all
being at the kings disposition and appointment.

The (...)
Concerning the Church government, there is in this City, first the chief of
the law whom they call the Mustaeddini, a wicked and profane Priest: and in
the other subject Cities are certain peculiar heads, obedient to this chief
Priest, who are not chosen and displaced at his pleasure, as the popish Bishops
are by the Pope, but by the king himself, who is not only a King, but a
Priest, as Mahomet and Aly were. But to avoid trouble, the King grants that
favor, and puts over that burden from himself unto others, to whose
judgment, he also refers himself, whenever any consultation is touching
their law or profane superstition. The Calif^s.
Under this great Priest are Califes, and these do daily execute service in
the Moschees or Temples. The chief of these Califes is he that puts the
horn upon the Kings head, when he is first inthronized. A ceremony once
performed in Cafe near Babylon, but since Solomon the Turkish Emperor won
Assiria from the Persian, it has been sometimes performed in Casbin, and
sometimes in Hispaan. The nature of the Persians.


Finally the inhabitants of this City do much resemble the ancient Parthians in
diverse things, but specially in their continual riding. They ride on horseback
for the most part, on horsback they fight with the enemy they execute all
affairs as w^l public as private on horseback, they go from place to place on
horseback, they buy and sell, and on horseback they confer and talk with
one another; and the difference between the G^ntleman and the slave is, that
the slave never rides, nor the Gentleman never goes on foot.

Besides the nature of this people is arrogant, seditious, deceitful, and very
unquiet, but that the fierceness of their nature is much restrained by the
kings severe government.

To sensuality they are much inclined, The Persians giu^n to sensuality.
having three sorts of women, as they term them, viz. honest women, half
honest women and courtezans; and yet they chastise no offense with like
extremity as adultery, and that as well in the half honest woman, as in the
honest.

Last of all they are full of crafty stratagems, and are breakers of their
promise (a vice that is very inbred in all Barbarians. The Persians very
inconstant.
) Not content with any man's government long: and lovers of novelties. For
testimony whereof we may avouch those ancient poysonings and wicked
treacheries which were plotted not only by subjects against their
sovereigns, The impiety of the sons of Artaxerxes the Persian king.
but also by children against their natural parents, for the name of father
were in so small estimation with those fifty sons of Artaxerxes, that with one
consent, they all conspired to murder him. The which monstrous impiety ever
since has been practiced in this nation, sometimes the father with the
children sometimes the children with the father, and sometimes the children
with one another. For instance whereof we may take Abas that now reigns, who
being governor of Heri whilst his father reigned, did not only conspire to
have his eldest brother Emirhamze, the hopefullest Prince that ever was in
Persia, to be betrayed into the hands of the Turkish general in the year
1586, but also by force of money and gifts, persuaded one of his own Eunuchs
to kill him; The Persian Prince slain by one of his own Eunuchs.
who was no sooner corrupted, put his treason in practice, and upon a sudden
in the night time, as he slept on his pallet, stroke him through his body with
a lance: and so the most resplendent and bright shining Lamp that ever was in
Persia, was utterly extinguished. And not content with this impiety toward
his brother, did shortly after condescend, (as the full report goes) to have
his aged father Mahomet surnamed Codibanda poisoned without either regard of
his fatherly majesty, The impiety of Abas King of Persia.
or reverence to age, or natural piety, that so he might ascend into the
kingdom. Infinite also are the calamities, which he has brought (since he
came to the crown) on the houses of the ancient Persian Nobility.

Notwithstanding howsoever by the shedding of much blood he was saluted King,
upon the death of his father, yet has he so carried the matter, that now he is
exceedingly beloved and honored of his subjects, in so much that when they
will confirm any thing by solemn oaths they will swear by the head of Abas
the king, and when they wish well to any man, they usually say, King Abas grant
thee they desire.

The descrip^ion of the Persian king.
This Prince is very absolute both in perfection of his body, and his mind,
(but that he is in religion a professed Mahumatine) excellently composed in the
one, and honorably disposed in the other. Of an indifferent stature, neither
to high, nor to low. His countenance very stern, his eyes fierce and
piercing, his color swa^ffy, his mustachees on his upper lip long, with his
beard cut close to his chinne, expressing his martial disposition, and
exorable nature, that at the first a man would think to have nothing in him,
but mischief and cruelty. And yet he is of nature courteous, and affable,
easy to be seen and spoken withal: his manner is to dine openly in the
company of his greatest courtiers, delighting much in hawking and hunting
accompanied with his nobility, and the Ambassadors of foreign Princes. He
will oftentimes run, leap, and prove masteries with his chief courtiers,
being himself a most excellent horseman and cunning archer.

V^ually every morning he visits his stables of great horses, The Persian
horses very good.
and according to an old custom of the Persian kings, the soldiers of his
court (before mentioned) do receive horses at his hands, as he is in place and
degree. And these their horses are of singular virtue, equal with those of the
old time, which (as Strabo writes) were accustomed to be fed and brought up in
Armeniae for the kings use. They are wonderful swift in course, fierce in
battle, long breathed and very docible: when they are vnsadled, thy are gentle
and mild, but when they are armed, they are warlike, hardy, and manageable,
even at the pleasure of the rider. And I have seen of them sold for a
thousand, and sometimes a thousand and six hundred duckates a piece.

After he has viewed his horses, The weapons of the Persian soldiers.
he passes into his Armory, certain buildings near unto his Palace, where
are made very strong Curiasses, or Corselets, headpeeces and targets, most of
them able to keep out the shot of an arquebusier, and much more to daunt the
force of a dart. Here also the king furnishes his soldiers, not only with
Curiasses, headpeeces, and targets; but with bows and arrows, pouldrones, and
gantlets, and with lances made of good ash, armed at both ends; with Scimatars
and shirts of maile, most finely and soundly tempered, wherewith both
themselves and their horses are defended in time of war.

The kings exercises in the A^-maidan.
By this time having spent most of the forenoone, he returns again into his
palace, and there remains till three of the clock in the afternoon, at which
time he makes his entry into the A^-Maidan, which is the great market place or
high street of Hispaan: round about this place are erected certain high
scaffolds, where the multitude do sit to behold the warlike exercises performed
by the King and his courtiers, as their running and leaping, their shooting
with bows and arrows, at a mark both above and beneath, their playing at
tennis, all which they perform on horseback with diverse mo^ too long to write
of. In this place also is to be seen several times in the year, the pleasant
sight of fireworks, of banquets, of musickes, of wrastlings, and of whatsoever
triumphs else is there to be showed, for the declaration of the joy of this
people.

Besides, the King very often in this place, in the presence of the Princes and
Peers of the Realm, will give judgment in diverse causes: much like unto the
ancient kings of France, who used ordinarily to hear the complaints of their
subjects; but of late years the more the pity, they have committed this
business unto the consciences of subordinate officers, hearing by other men's
ears, and seeing by other men's eyes, well nigh concerning all their affairs:
which course the Persian King holds neither good nor comfortable for the
people, nor yet by any means to further Justice. And certainly, where such
carelesnes does enter into the majesty of kings, the estate of the Realm
cannot choose but be weakened, and the majesty royal imbased, so that in the end
(it might be showed) the people have not refused to rise against the person of
the king, and sometimes to murder him.

To be brief in the execution of justice he is very severe, a^ well to the
greatest as to the meanest, not sparing (as might be showed) to hang up his
chief Cuddi or Judges, when he shall perceive how that upon bribes and favor
they delay the suits of his subjects, The Persian kings correction of Judges.
Herodotus.
against the cle^re and manifest truth: imitating herein Cambises who commanded
Sisamnes ^kin for giving an unjust sentence, to be flead off, and covered the
judgment seat th^rewith, appointing also his son to judge in his place, to the
end that by sight thereof, all other judges might be warned, to be just and
upright. And I have seen him many times alight from his horse, only to do
justice to a poor body. Besides he punishes theft and manslaughter so
severely, that in an age a man shall not hear either of the one or of the
other; which kind of severity were very needful for some parts of
Christendom, I will not say for England though we have faulted therein) but
for France especially; See Les ombres des defuncts sieurs de Villemer and de
Fontaines. page 46.
where within ten years six thousand gentlemen have been slain, as it appears
by the kings pardons. So that since king Abas came unto the crown, full twenty
years and upwards, the Persian Empire has flourished in sacred and redoubted
laws, the people demeaning themselves after the best manner they can,
abundance of collections coming plentifully in, the rents of his chamber were
increased more then ever they were in his Grandfather Tamas his time, arms,
arts, and sciences do wonderfully prosper, and are very highly esteemed.

To this great Monarch, Sir Anthony Sherleys arriua^ in Persia.
came Sir Anthony Sherley Knight, with six and twenty followers, all
gallantly mounted and richly furnished; whose entert^inment was so great, that
the Persians did admire, that the king should vouchsafe such high favor to a
mere stranger without desert or trial of his worth. Of whose bounty, the
world may judge, since within three days after his first arrival, the king
sent him forty horses, furnished with saddles, and very rich trappings; four
of them fit for the proper use of any Prince, twelve Cammels for carriage,
together with six Mules, four and twenty carpets, most of them rich and
fair, three tents or pauilions, with all other necessaries of house, and
lastly six men laden with silver.

Sundry times Sir Anthony had audience of the king, wherein he declared first
with what perfidious dealing, Sir Anthony Sherleys speech unto the King.
and with what greediness and pride the Turkish Emperors have always set
upon the Christians, and that being discharged of the war with them, he would
of all likelihood set upon the Persians, having the self same quarrel unto
the Persians, that he has unto the Christians: viz. an ardent and insatiable
desire of sovereignty: a sufficient motive for the greedy Turk to repute
every king, the richer that he is, the more his enemy. After that he set forth
to the full the prowess of the Christians, the wonderful preparation, that
they could make both at Sea and land, persuading the king with all his power to
invade the Turk, then altogether busied in the wars of Hungary, and to
recover again such parts of his kingdom as his predecessors had lost. Wars
he said were more happily managed abroad then at home: that since his majesty
alone is able to withstand the Turks whole force and power, he needed not now
to doubt of the most prosperous success, the Christian Princes (by his means)
joining with him.

He told the King further, that he was much unmindful of his former losses and
wrongs, if he thought he joined an assured peace, which he should find to be
nothing else but a deferring of one war unto more cruel times: and that the
Turk if he should ouerrunne Hungary, would forthwith turn his victorious
arms upon him and his kingdom: the end of one war (as he said) was but the
beginning of another; and that the Turkish Empire could never stay in one
state; and it were good that his highness should observe not the Turks words
but his deeds; and how the Othoman Emperors according to the opportunity of
the time, have used by turns, sometimes force, sometimes fraud, as best
served their purposes.

He wished also the king, that at length this his deceit might manifest it
self unto the world; and though in former times, there were sometimes wanting
will, and sometimes occasion to unite their forces, yet now he hoped that by an
employment from his Majesty to the Christian Princes, that they would combine
themselves for their common good against the common enemy; and that it
concerned no less his Highness, then the Christians to have the power of the
great Turk abated: and this taking up of arms should be for the good of his
Majesty, howsoever the war should fall out, if well, he should then recover
what his predecessors before had lost, with much more that was the Turks: If
otherwise yet by voluntary entering into arms to countenance himself, and to
give the Great Turk occasion to think that he feared him not, which was (as
he said) the only way to preserve the common safety.

Many such speeches passed from Sir Anthony, but most of the chief
counselors were obstinately bent against it at the first; Sir Anthony
Sherley sent b^ the Persian King to eight several Princes.
howbeit the King being stil^ animated by his forcible persuasions, and his
General, Oliuer-chan a Georgian Christian furthering the business in the end
with the rest of his Council consented thereto; and so Sir Anthony within
three months after his first arrival, was dispatched to these several
Princes: viz. to Queen Elizabeth of famous memory; to King James our dread
Sovereign; to the French King, to the Emperor, the Pope, the King of Spain,
the Senate of Venice, and the Duke of Florence, with Letters of credence, and
very rich and bountiful presents; to conclude a general peace among
themselves, and between the Persian and our Christian world.

The chief things that the Persian requested of the Christians was; The deman^
of the Persia^ King.
that they would send him by the way of Syria, men skillful in the casting of
great Ordinance, an Engine once hated of the Persians, who held it a sin and
shame to exercise so cruel a weapon against mankind: yet now knowing by
woeful experience, of what moment it is in a set battle, the King did
specially require such men as were skillful therein, having matter enough
within his Dominions whereof to cast them: that they with an army by land,
(...) Turk promising in the mean time himself to fill Asia the less with
his army, and that if they would be in the field three months, he would be
six months: and if the Christian Princes would bring an hundred thousand
fighting men into the field, he would bring two hundred thausand, and so they
should give unto themselves a fair occasion to recover both by land and sea,
all such places as they had before lost, either in Hungaria, or upon coast of
Peloponesus and Grecia.

Master Robert ^herley left as ^ pledge for Sir Anthonies ^eturne out of
Christiandom.
But how well Sir Anthony behaved himself in so weighty a negotiatio^, I leave
to the world to judge of: sure I am that for his fidelity therein, he left
his brother Master ^obert Sherley a worthy gentleman as a pledge for his
return out of Christendom, accompanied with five English men, viz. honest
Captain Powell, John Ward, John Parrot who afterward died in Lahor, being in
Master Mildenals company; one Brooks who is gone for the East Indies; and an
English gunner, whose name I do not well remember, who was slain by an
Italian in the way to Corassan. All these at the first were very kindly
entreated by the King, and received large allowance; but after two years were
fully expired, and no news of that great and important Ambassie; and the King
perceived that Mahomet the great Turk began now to have him in jealousy,
and that the whole war was like to lie upon his own neck, without any
help from the Christians, he began to frown on the English, notwithstanding
Master Sherley through his good desert, soon gained the Kings gracious favor
again. And as evident signs thereof obtained of the King freedom of
conscience for all Christians throughout his Dominions: allowing also his
house, to be the only harbor and receite for all poor Christians that
travail into those parts. And farther, the King to manifest his love, gave him
out of his Seraglion in Marriage, a Cirassian Lady of great esteem and regard.
But that he should have a child in Persia, and that the King (a professed
enemy to the Name of our blessed Savior) should be the Godfather; this
certainly is more fit for a Stage, for the common people to wonder at, then
for any man's private studies.

Notwithstanding, if we do rightly consider on the one side, the great power
and preparation, that the Persian is able to make against the great Turk: and
on the other side the miserable captivity of many thousands of poor Christians
that are subject unto the Turkish tyranny, we cannot deny but that both the
Embasseies of Sir Anthony Sherley, and also of M. Robert his brother are of
great importance, and that a combinatio^ of so great forces together would
soon have delivered many poor Christians of their miseries, the world of it
ignominy, and mankind of that monster of Turkish tyranny, that has too long
reigned and laid the earth desolate.

As for the first, The great power that the Persian king is able to make
against the Turk.
the strength of the Persian consists now in three kinds of soldiers: the
first are the soldiers of his court, to the number of nine thousand, as we said
before. The second kind are such, who by custom and duty are bound to serve
him in his wars, and these be his ancient gentlemen of h^s country, who hold
land^ and possessions descended unto them from their ancestors, or holden by
the gift of the king; these are sent for in time of wars, and are of duty bound
to perform such like service, as the gentry of Italy, France, and Spain do
unto their Soueraigns: these do amount (since Abas came to the crown) very
nigh to forty thousand, most of them come well armed, the rest content
themselves with headpeeces and Iacks, and use for their weapons either horsemen
staves or bows, which they can most cunningly handle, discharging their
arrows also, very near unto that they aim at, either forward or backward.
The third sort are such as are sent unto him from the Princes and neighbors
his confederates: and these are commonly sent from the Princes of Iberia,
Albania, and the countries bordering upon Media and Armenia: who being half
Christians, bear a mortal hatred against the Turk.

Besides the King has under his dominions, The co^ntrie^ subject to Persia.
these great and famous countries, Seruania, otherwise called Atropatia, and
some part of Georgia, these countries since the yielding up of Tauris, have
voluntarily yielded up themselves under his protection; Besides Media the
great, Gheilan or Gely, Massandran or Hircania: Parthia, Aria, Cand^har, Heri,
Corass^n, Farsi, or Persia with the Caramanian desert, as also the Kingdom of
Lar, which frontiers on Ormuz: Provinces so great and large, that in ancient
times were able with their multitudes to cover the face of the earth, and to
drink the ^i^^ers dry. And to make himself more strong, within the bowels of
his kingdom, he has subdued the Turcoman nation, that were rebellious in his
fathers time; as also he has ruinated the houses of most of his ancient
nobility; as of late Amet-chan Lord of Gheilan, Rust^n M^r^ze the King of
Candahar, Emir-Miran the lord of Jest, and Ebrain-chan the governor of Lar,
who would never in his fathers time Mahomet-Codibanda send in their aid
against the cruel en^mies ^f their common liberty, but impeach and molest
their sovereign, as much as they could, leaving many times the poor King to
escape with his life. But now the King has drawn all the aforementioned
provinces into his own possession; and is able to carry all his force cl^ere
without interruption, which at the least may be two hundred thousand strong and
better.

The Pers^^^s bette^ soldiers then the Turks.
And for his soldiers they are for the most part very valorous and noble, which
b^ing compared with the Tur^ish people (who for the most part are very ^^scall,
of vile race) are by good right very highly to be esteemed. For the naked
Turkish horseman is not to be compared with the Persian m^n at a^mes; who
comes into the field armed with a strong Cuiras, a sure head piece, and a good
target: whereas the Turkish Europeian ho^s^men, altogether naked, use only a
square or crooked buckler, wherewith they do scarcely cover themselves: and
the Asian horsemen, bucklers ma^e of soft reeds, wound round, and covered with
some kind of silk. Again, the Persian horseman, wears his poudrons and
gantlets, and bears a staff of good Ash, armed at both ends, fighting with
them as occasion serves at the staff, after the manner of the Numid^ans, and
with doubling and redoubling their often thrust from on high, do easily wound
or kill the unarmed Turks with their horses: whereas the Turk^sh horseman,
after the manner of the Grecians do couch their staves in their rest, and so
that the first course most commonly break the same, being made of light and
brittle fire, and so presently come to their scima^ars or horseman mace, being
in all other things far inferior to the Persian man at arms. And for the
Turkish archers on horseback, they are in no resp^ct to be compared with the
Persians, who are well mounted and surely a^med, using both greater and
stronger bows, and shoot more deadly arrows, making small account of the
Turks. So that all things well consi^ered, the Persian is now able to deal in
field with the great Turk, having both numbers of soldiers, good store of
shot, and other warlike furniture, as also (which is the chiefest stay of a
state) obedience of his subjects. And verily when Persia was at the weakest,
had not the Turkish Emperors Selymus, Solomon, and Amurat, been allured
either by treason, rebellion, or intestine discordes, they would never have
taken that war in hand. And so much of the Persians forces.

And as for the miserable thraldom that the poor Christians do endure under
the Turkish tyranny, The miserable thraldom of the Christians under the
Turkish tyranny.
we (thanks be given unto God) in these Northern parts of the world may behold
with safety, but not without pity, when we rightly consider, how that the
people among whom our Savior himself conuersed, at what time his beautiful
steps honored this world, with those Churches in Grecia, which his Apostles so
industriously planted* so carefully visited, so tenderly cherished, instructed,
and confirmed by so many peculiar Epistles, and for whom they sent up so many
seruent prayers, are now become a cage of unclean birds: filthy spirits do
possess them. The Turk with his Curaam, and Mahomet with his Alcoran, are
Lords of these places. So that now the Grecians have lost their liberty, (which
their ancestors had many times before, to their immortal praise, worthily
defended against the greatest Monarchs of the world) and are now so
degenerate, by the means of the Turkish oppression, that in all Grecia is
hardly to be found any small remembrance of the ancient glory thereof: Insomuch
that whereas they were wont to account all other Nations barbarous in
comparison of themselves, they are now become no less barbarous then those
rude nations whom they before skorned.

Infinite are the miseries, which they from time to time have endured under the
Turkish tyrants; and so great has been the fury of that barbarous Nation,
that no tongue is able to express, or pen desc^ibe. For what tongue is able to
express the miseries that the poor Greeks endured, when the imperial City
of Constantinople was taken and spoiled by Mahomet the great in the year 1453.
when the cruel tyrant could not content himself with the spoil and riches of
that fair City; The Gecian Nobility put to death in the presence of the great
Turk, whilst he sat feasting with his Bassaes.
but caused also, as he sat feasting with his Bassaes and great commanders
most of the chief Christian Captains, both men and women (of whom many were
of the Emperors line and race) to be in his presence put to death: deming his
feast much more stately and magnificent, by such effusion of Christian blood.

The miseries of the Constantinopolitanes.
There might a man have seen the poor Christian captives driven up and down,
by the merciless soldiers, as if they had been droues of cattle or flocks of
sheep. It would have pitied any strong heart, to have seen the noble
Gentlewomen and great Ladies, with their beautiful children, who flowed in all
worldly wealth and pleasure, to become the poor and miserable bondslaues of
most base and contemptible rascals, who were so far (...) showing them any
pity, as that they delig^ted in nothing more then to heap more and more misery
upon them, making no more reckoning of them then of dogs. There might the
Parents see the woeful misery of their beloved children, and the children of
the parents, the husband might see the shameful abuse of his wife, and the wife
of her husband, and generally one friend of another: yea such was their malice
to the Christian faith, that they converted the temple of Sophia, built for God
to be honored in, into a stable for their horses, making it a place for the
execution of their abominable and unspeakable filthiness: yea the image of
the crucifixe they also took down, and put a Turks cap upon the head thereof,
and so set it up and shot at it with their arrows, and afterward in great
derision carried it about in their camp, as it had been in procession, with
drums playing before it, railing and spitting at it, and calling it the God of
the Christians, which I note not so much done in contempt of the images, as in
despite of Christ and the Christian religion. Neither have they committed
these outrages and monstrous cruelties in Grecia alone, but in other parts of
Christendom also: as Italy has sundry times tasted of their cruel incursions
and bloody invasions. The countries which (besides Grecia) that groan under
the Turkish slavery.
Besides Seruia Bulgaria, Transiluania, Moldauia, and Valachia do groan under
the yoke of Trukish tyranny: what should I write of Hungaria that royal
kingdom, since in the reign of one Turkish Emperor (I mean Solomon the
magnificent) the number of those which were slain, and carried unto miserable
captivity were welnigh two hundred thousand Hungaria^s. So spoiled and harried
in this kingdom by the Turks that it may welbreed an astonishme^t not only to
the neighbor countries adjoining, but to others further remote. So that to wind
up all in a word, there i^ now to be seen in these Christian countries, which
the great Turk possesses, nothing but triumphs over Christ, and skorners of
his religion: insolences and violences against the professors: extortions and
oppressions upon their goods: rapines and murderings upon the very souls of
their children, a case to be wailed with tears of blood by all Christian hearts
that know it: hearing the only anchor and stay of their souls (our blessed
Savior) daily derided and blasphemed by the pride of the Turks. Indeed it were
a small thing, if the Turks extorsio^s were only on their goods and labors, or
if the bodies and lives of those poor Christians, were only wasted and worn
out in his works and slaueries, it might be suffered, for goods are
transitory, and death the end of all wordly miseries.

A tribute of souls paid yearly by the Christians to Mahomet that lying
Prophet
But to be forced (as those poor countries are) to pay a tribute also of souls
to wicked Mahomet, to have their dearest children both sons and daughters
snatched out of their parents bosoms* to be brought up in his impious
abominations, and to be employed (after they are so brought up) in murdering
their fathers and mothers that begat them; and in rooting out that faith
wherein they were borne and baptized, and which only were able to bring their
souls into happiness. This surely is a calamity insupportable, and which
cries out unto God in the heavens for relief.

I will say no more touching this matter, but even wish with the humble
petition of a mind pierced with grief, to the just Judge of the world,
Redeemer of mankind, and Savior of his people, to cast down his pitiful eyes
upon those nations; to behold on the one side his triumphing fierce enemies
persecuting without measure; on the other his poor servants trodden down, and
persecuted without help, hope, or comfort; to dissolve the pride and power of
the one, to comfort the astonished and wasting weakness of the other, with
some hope of succor and final delivery: To inspire the hearts of Christian
Princes (their neighbors) compounding or laying side their endless and
fruitless contentions, to revenge their quarrel against their unjust
oppressors. For certainly if mean Princes have incombred the course of the
great Turks conquest; what would not the united Christian forces do? if we
might but once see the glorious beams of that bright shining day appear?

Which union the The king o^ ^ersia or late ^eare has ^^nt five ^eve^^ll
Embasla^^urs into ^hristendome
Persian king has often and instantly sought of the Christian Princes, and
that within these few years. For first (as we said before) he sent Sir Anthony
Sherley a man very wise and valiant, if he had not been too prodigal. After
him in the year of grace 1605. he sent three other several Ambassadors one
after another: viz. Zincl Chan Beg, Methi Cult Beg, and Ius Bassi Hassan Beg.
The two first came directly to the Emperor at Prage, and the other was sent
unto the French King, whose Embassy was for the common good also, though it
wanted the wished success. And to show the great desire that the Persian still
has, to have the pride of the great Turk abated, he has since employed
Master Robert Sherley as his Ambassador to the same purpose.

Never did Christendom miss times of more advantage, to have prevailed much
against the Turk, not only to have holden their own (which they do not in
Hungary) but to have recovered some good part of their losses before received
also. And indeed true it is that the time then well served for both, by reason
that the great Turk was and is still troubled with wars both against his
own rebels, and the Persian King in Asia; most part of his forces being turned
that way. The Persians promise unto the Emperor.
But what avails opportunity without unity* For howsoever the Persian king
did instantly request of the Emperor to join with him in all fr^endship and
brotherly love, and to continue his wars against the great T^rke their common
enemy: and also promised that for his part he would never lay down arms until
that enemy were brought to naught and destroyed, so that the Christian Princes
would on the other side likewise impugn him: The Emperors promise t^ the
Persian king.
and though the Emperor for his part did promise to continue his wars, and
to raise greater forces, and also by letters to exhort and incite the greatest
Christian Princes and Potentates to extend also their power against the common
enemy; yet could he not effect it, neither perform any part of his promise to
the Persian King.

For the next year following (seeing the Hungarians revolted from him, and
taking part with the Turks and the Turks with them, and finding himself not
able with his own power to hold the field against them, The reasons why the
Emperor leaves the P^rsian king in field to himself, and concludes a pe^ce
wit the great Turk.
much less to maintain a defensive war, and his friends and allies, his
wonted and greatest stays, then at his greatest need to fail him) was glad to
leave the Persian in the field to his own strength, and to conclude a
reasonable peace with Achmet the great Turk that now reigns; being no way
able without the great aid of other Christian Princes, to withstand the huge
and dreadful power of the Othoman Emperor Which (be it spoken without ominous
presage) is to be feared, will too truly appear and manifest it self,
whenever the wars of the great Turk, and his troubles in the East with the
Persian be ended, he shall the^ again turn his victorious and insulting
forces, this way toward the West.

I conclude then, that those distressed parts of Christendom which are subject
to the Turkish fury, Some parts of Ch^istendome greatly in indebted to the
Sherlies.
cannot but be much beholding, both to Sir Anthony Shirley, as also his brother
M. Robert Shirley for this twenty years peace which is concluded between the
Emperor and the great Turk. They being (I dare be bold to say under God) the
only means that stirred up the Persian king to take up arms against the
great Turk, and to draw by degrees the whole war upon his own neck, thereby
to free and give a time of breathing to the champions of Jesus Christ to
refresh themselves, and increase their forces. A peace not only well pleasing
to the Emperor, but to the Turk also, who no sooner heard from the the Bassa
of Buda, that it was concluded, but forth with conceived so great^oy, that with
a number of Ianiz^ries and others, he went from his Palace in Constantinople
in great magnificence to the Church, to give thanks therefore unto his Prophet
Mahomet, spending the next day in great sport and pleasure, purposing from
thenceforth to turn all his force and power for the subduing of the Persian
king. But to leave these two great Monarchs, the only enemies to the name of
Christ in field each against the other, I come now to my return from those
parts.

The return of the Author by the way of Persia, Susiana, Chaldaea, Assiria,
and Arabia.
Having took my leave of Master Robert Sherley, and the rest of my
countrymen, I left them to the mercy of the king (whose bounty and goodness
by their return has plentifully showed it self) and betook my self to the
protection of the Almighty, to bring me in saftie again into my own
country: being in my return, accompanied with one Signior Belchior Dios d'
Croce, an Armenian, Portugal or Portugal Armenian; and one Christophero a
Greek, who were sent with letters from the governor of Goa, to the king of
Spain, but lost afterward their lives and letters by shipwreck in the
Venetian Golfe.

From Hispaan we spent ten days travel to Siras by persuasion of some Persian
merchants that were bound for Aleppo with us, traveling through the very heart
of Persia it self, paying now and then a Sha^ghee a piece to certain villages
in the way, no matter of importance worth the relating till we come to the
City it self.

The description of Persia.
THis country (in which Siras stands) is now called the Kingdom of Farsi,
but in ancient time the Kingdom of Persia; a kingdom of it self very large
and pacious; confining Northwards on Media and Parthia, Eastward on the great
desert of Caramania, Westward on Susiana, which Strabo makes a part of Persia,
and lies between Babylon and Persia, as shall be declared hereafter, and
Southward on Ormuz and the Persian golfe, containing also the great kingdom of
Lar, whence the best Bezar stones are brought.

Very famous is this country: for that it was the first place, where Elam the
eldest son of Sem dw^lt, whereby the people of this nation were a long time
called Elamits, as appears by the prophecy of Daniel, No more but five kings
in Persia.
who names it Elam: as also because it was the seat of those five great
Persian kings mentioned in the Scriptures, viz. Darius Medus, Cyrus,
Ah^shuerosh, Darius Longimanus alias Artaxerxes, and Artaxerxes the third,
which was that Darius whom Alexander the great overcame. Darius Medus.
For Darius Medus his acts and deeds were of so small esteem and regard, that
they are not worth the writing. But concerning Cyrus his son in law, Cyrus.
many excellent things are spoken of him: for no king conquered so many
kingdoms as he did. Besides he was in grace and favor with God: for by
Daniels instructions he was brought to confess and acknowledge the God of
Israel. Of him did Esaias prophecy an hundred years before his birth: Esaias.
44.28.
and his diligence was so great in ayding the Jews after their captivity unto
Jerusalem, 2. Chro. 36.22. 1. Esdras. 1.2. Esdras. 2. Joseph. Anti. 11. ca. 1.
that he suffered them quietly to return with wealth and treasure, and
commanded all his Princes of Syria, and subjects to favor and to help them,
publishing a decree for the building up of their temple unto God.
Notwithstanding this happy and fortunate Prince was slain by Tomyris Queen of
the Massogets in Scythia, who not contenting her self with the death of her
enemy, commanded also his head to be smitten often, and thrown into a bole of
man's blood, with this exprobration of his cruelty in killing her son: Tu
quidem meum vluentis and in pugna victricis filium perdidisti dolo captum,
Herodo^us.
at ego te cruore satura^n: Go now, and glut thy self with the blood of men,
which in thy life time would never be satisfied with blood.

Next unto him reigned Ahashuerosh, Ahashuerosh.
whom our writers call Xerxes, the Chaldeans Artaxerxes the first (husband to
Queen Hester) whose dominion did extend it self from India unto Ethiopia,
over an hundred and seven and twenty Provinces. The goodness of this king was
fully proved, at what time the Church was miserably afflicted by proud Haman,
and hindered by cruel Cambyses against the decree of Cyrus: for he gave full
liberty and license unto the Jews to build the Temple at Jerusalem.
Nevertheless toward his latter days, he was very unfortunate in his wars,
being twice overcome both at sea and land; by which unfortunate success, he
that erst while was termed the Terror of all Nations, became in so general
contempt of all his subjects, Justin. lib. 3.
that both himself and his sons were slain by Artabanus the traitor.

Next unto him succeeded Darius Longimanus. Darius Longimanus.
This Prince was no way behind his predecessors in piety and devotion toward
God: for he would not by any means change their institutions concerning
religious worship, but with great beneficence favored the Jews. For in the
second year of his reign the Temple at Jerusalem was finished: and in the
seventh year Esdra^ with a number in his company returned.

The last King was Artaxerxes the third, Darius.
whom they called by the name of Darius a Prince of great industry, and
nobleness of spirit: yet at last was vanquished by Alexander the great, and
slain by one of his own kinsmen, ending his life together with the Persian
Empire.

So that now by the computation of the reign of these kings which was one
hundred forty and seven years, The Iewe^ confuted. Daniel. 9.25.
we may easily confute that malicious tergiuersation and erroneous exposition
of the Jews, of the prophecy of Daniel, touching the threescore and nine
weeks to the coming of the Messiah. The Jews affirm that the same prophecy
does not belong to our Savior Christ, but that it ended the day wherein the
Temple was overthrown by Titus: and do interpret Christ (whom Daniel
prophesied should be slain after threescore and nine weeks) to be Agrippa the
last of the Herodians (surmising peeuishly that the Messiah lives in the world
inuisibly) coloring their gross errors therein by the false and lying
Histories of some Greeks and ^atines, The Jews surmise that the Messiah lives
in the world inuisibly.
who attribute two hundred years and above to the Empire of the Persian kings:
whereby some have been driven to reckon the beginning of those weeks after
the time of Cyrus, that they may end at the death of our Savior Christ.

Which false Histories to make up those years, name more Persian kings then
ever were; Herodo. lib. 7.
as Cambyses to succeed his father Cyrus; whereas he was but left by his father
King in Persia, in his expedition into Scythia, according to the Persian
custom mentioned by Herodotus, which was that if the king went out of the
country with an army, he must appoint another king to abide in the country
during his absence. And so were Cambises and Darius Histaspis kings of Persia.
And whereas some Persian kings had two or three names, as Darius, Xerxes, and
Artaxerxes, they make so many kings; whereas the Scriptures set down but the
five before named, As the captivity grew at three times. So the return was at
three times.
who reigned (as we said) but one hundred forty and seven years. Whereupon
it falls out, that whether you begin to account the threescore and nine
weeks from the first year of Cyrus, who then determined the Jews reduction;
and as the captivity grew at three times, so the return from the captivity
was at three times.

For first in the second year of Cyrus, Zorababell with welnigh fifty
thousand Jews returned, and then laid the foundation of the Temple; which was
finished the second year of Darius Longimanus: And many Jews remaining in
Babylon, who for the love of their possessions and children, having purchased
of the kings of Persia a form of a commonwealth, elected to themselves a
Prince of the line of David, (whom Origin calls a Patriarch) calling him
Aechmalatarcham, which signifies the head of the outlawes. And in the seventh
year of Darius Longimanns, Esdras with a number in his company returned. And
lastly in the twentieth year of the same Darius, Nehemiah with his company
departed.

So that it falls out, that whether you begin to account the threescore and
nine weeks from the first year of Cyrus, who then determined the Jews
reduction; or from the second year of Darius (as others will) for that he
confirmed, and put the same in execution: or from the twentieth year of his
reign, for that he then made a new edict in favor of Nehemiah, and sent him
into Iewrie. (And not only the tribes of Judah, Leui, and Benjamin, to the
number of thirty thousand, but some of the other tribes to the number of ten
thousand returned also into Iewrie by the Edict of those kings.) Every way
those threescore and nine weeks did end either in the reign of Augustus or
Herod, under whom Christ was borne, or in the year of Tiberius under whom
he suffered.

He that would read more of the ancient estate of Persia, either concerning
the Royal Majesty thereof, or the Religion, Laws, Manners, and Customs of
the same, or the Military Discipline whilst she held the world in awe, let
him read Barnabas Brissonius, who has written three books, De Regio Persarum
Principatu. In the mean time, we come to describe that which we have seen;
returning where we left to Siras ancient Persepolis.

The description of Sieras ancient Persepolis.
The river Bindamir.
THis City is situated on the banks of Bindamir, a great and famous river,
which courseth through Persia, and the kingdom of Lar, and so emptieth it
self into the Persian Golfe, and was once the Metropoliticall seat of all the
kingdom, until of late years, Hispaan has gained that privilege from her.
Notwithstanding it is large and spacious containing very near ten miles in
circuit, and lies just in the road way which leads from Hispaan to Ormuz.
Pliny did call it caput Persiciregui, for so it was during the Monarchy, the
head City of the Persian kingdom, which continued famous many years
together, being stuffed with the spoils of the whole world: for Alexander when
he took it, found in the treasury forty thousand talents of gold, every
talent being six hundred crowns by Budaeus his computation. Alexander at the
request of a strumpet fi^eth Pe^sepolis.
And the same t^me at the request of a drunken strumpet he set this gallant
City on fire, himself being the first president in that woeful misery, which
in short time was quite burnt down to the ground as Diodorus Siculus relates.
Which unhappy mischance Quintus Curtius on this manner bewaileth: Huno exitum
habuit Regiatotius Orientis, vnde tot gentes ante i^ra petebant patria tot
regum, vnicus quond^m G^aecia terror. etc. Such a miserable end befell to the
re^all City of all the Ea^^, whence so many Nations did derive their laws and
customs; which was the seat of so many kings, and in times past the only
terour of Greece.

So that in and about this town are to be seen the ruins of many ancient
monuments: as two great gates, tha^ are distan^ one from the other the space of
twelve miles, which shows the circuit of this City, as it was in the time of
the Monarchy, to be both large and spacious. On the South side we viewed the
ruins of a goodly Palace, ^^ilded as they say by King Cyrus, a Palla^^ (...)
^agnified by Aelianus in his first book de animalibus. cap. 59. And on the
North side the ruins of an old Castle, which seems was gyrt about with a
threefold wall: ^he first wall being four and twenty foot high, adorned and
bea^^i^ied with many Tu^rets and spires: the second was like unto the first,
but twice as high; and the third was four square, being four score and ten
foot high. All fabricated of free stone. On each side were twelve gates of
Brass, with brazen pales set before them very curiously wrought, all which did
show the magnificence of the founder. On the East side of this ruinous Castle,
some four ac^es of ground distant, is a mountain, on which was erected a
goodly Chapel, in which most of the Persian kings in anticke time were
intombed. And though this City has endured sundry mutations and changes, yet
is it not to be esteemed one of the least Cities in Persia: for out of it in
short time is levied twenty thousand horsemen well armed. Besides it is one of
the greatest and most famous Cities of the East, Excellent armor made in Syras.
both for traffike of merchandise; as also for most excellent armor and
furniture, which the armorers with wonderful cunning do make of iron and
steel, and the (...) of certain herbs, of much more notable temp^r and
beauty, then are those which are made with us in Europe; not only Headp^ec^s,
Curiaffes, and complete armours, but whole caparisons for horses, curiously
made of thin plates of iron and steel.

Now by the s^tuation of this town on the ri^er Bindamir, Batan a commodious
por^ town in the Persian Golfe for the East Indian company.
a very profitable trade for the East Indian company might be at Batan, an
haven town in the Persian Gol^e, which trende^h in the form of an half
Moon, having a little pretty Island, as a most commodious shelter, in the mouth
of the same, whereby a sh^p of five hundred ^unnes and better may ride at
pleasure. Very desirous is the Persian King that our shipping should come
thither, or to any other port in his dominions; prom^sing oftentimes times (as
may be justified very probably) that it should be lawful for us to build and
fortify, The river Iesdri ninneth close by Batan.
and to enjoy all privileges in as ample manner as his own subjects; and
that if the Portugals in Ormuz should offer violence to our shipping, that then
he would become their professed enemy: whose league of friendship (I am
assured) they dare not in that Island break, standing so many ways beholding
to the Persian King as they do. Besides where we planted in Batan, the King
would quickly cut off the greatest trade of Merchandise either of raw silk or
Indico from Tauris to Constantinople, and turn it unto that harbor. There we
should have a speedy vent for our broad cloth, Carsies, Tin, and Lead, and
have in barter for the same whatsoever either the kingdom of Persia or India
does affoorde. So that in mine opinion to have Batan for a resting and
refreshing harbor after our tedious sailing through the great Ocean, were
far better then Bantam in Iaua, or Aden, or any other port in Arabia Felix;
places altogether of wrong and oppression, where little justice is to be found
being so far from Constantinople: Whereas Batan stands in such a Country
as is full of peace and tranquillity, having a most just and upright Prince
(the only true stay of traffike) Lord of the same, whose only care and
endeavor is to maintain and uphold the trade of Merchandise. But to leave
these things to the Merchants, we come now to the Kingdom of Assiria.

The description of ASSIRIA.
FRom Siras, having spent eight days travel and better, we entered into the
Province of Susiana, now called Cu^estan, but in old time Assiria. The bounds
of this Country, Northwards is on the South part of Armenia, Eastward on a
part of Persia: Westward on Mesopotamia: and Southward on a part of the Persian
Golfe, which part is (...) of fennes and marish bogges, without either port or
haven. The climate in that part is exceeding hot, and very much infested with
bituminous matter, which both spoils the growth of trees, and corrupt the
waters, whereby it comes to pass, that the people are not long liu'de. And
howsoever this country was that land, wherein the first Monarchy was settled,
so that many excellent things might be spoken of it; yet since, it has endured
so many mutations and changes by the outrage of armies, that it has lost her
ancient name, I will be sparing to write thereof, least I should write many
things rather fabulous then true, and therefore, laying aside the danger of
lying, I will pass unto those towns and ruins which I have seen.

The description of Susa.
Traveling two days farther from the entrance into this Kingdom, Herodot.
lib. 5.
we rested at Valdac, once the the great City Susa, but now very ruinous. It
was first built by Tythonus and his son Memnon, but enlarged by Darius the
son of Histaspis.

In the building whereof Memnon was so exceeding prodigal, that as Cassiodorus
writes, he joined the stones together with gold. It was once one of the regal
Cities of the Kings of Persia; Cassiod. lib. 7. ^ariar. ^pist. 15.
and was so rich that Aristag^ras did in this manner cheer up the hearts of his
soldiers, when they came to besiege it. Hanc vos vrbem, si animose ceperitis,
iam cum Jove de diuitijs, licet certetis, If you can win this City
courageous soldiers, you may strive with Jupiter himself for riches: which
Alexander had good experience of, when he found fifty thousand talents in
wedges of gold, besides silver, and great store of coin. Behold (says Q.
Curtius) that in an hour, which many kings had heaped together for posterity,
falls now into the hands of a stranger. In a word such was the beauty and
delectablenesse thereof for situation, that they called it Susa, which then in
the Persian tongue signifies a Lilly, but now it is called Valdac, The river
Ch^aspes.
of the poverty of the place.

Close by this ruinous town swimmeth the famous River Choaspes, which after
many turnings and windings through the country of Susiana discharges it self
in the Persian Golfe. The water of this river is very delicate to the taste; so
that it is no marvel, though the Persian and Parthia^ kings in times past
would by their good wills drink of no other water. For which purpose they had
vessels of gold and silver, to carry the same after them, whenever they
either did ride in prograce, or go to the wars. Xerxes (as Varr^ relates)
being on a time exceeding thirsty, caused proclamation to be made throughou^
his camp, that if any soldier had any water of Choaspes left he should be well
rewarded. And it so fell out, that a small quantity was found, which though it
was exceeding muddie by reason of carriage, yet that mighty Prince drank
freely of it. Of such account was ^his river in ancient time.

Having passed over this river, The description of Nineuie.
we set forward toward Mosul, a very ancient town in this country, six
days journey from Valdas; and so pitched on the banks of the river Tigris.
The magnificent building of Nineuie by Ninus.
Here in these plains of Assiria, and on the banks of Tigris, and in the
region of Eden, was Nineuie built by Nimrod, but finished by Ninus. It is
agreed by all profane writers, and confirmed by the Scriptures, that this
city exceeded all other cities in circuit, and answerable magnificence. For
it seems by the ruinous foundation (which I thoroughly viewed) that it was
built with four sides, but not equal or square; for the two longer sides had
each of them (as we geffe) an hundredth and fifty furlongs; the two shorter
sides, ninty furlongs, which amounts to four hundred and eighty furlongs of
ground, which makes threescore miles, accounting eight furlongs to an Italian
mile. The walls whereof were an hundredth foot upright, and had such a
breadth, as three Chariots might pass on the rampire in front: these walls
were garnished with a thousand and five hundr^th towers, which gave exceeding
beauty to the rest, and a strength no less admirable for the nature of those
times. Ninus reigned in Nineu^e.
Here it was that Ninus reigned, who after he had maistred Bactria, and
subjected unto his Empire al those regions between it and the Mediterranean
sea, and Hellespont (Asia the less excepted) and finished the work of
Nin^uie, he left the world i^ the year thereof 2019. after he had reigned two
and fifty years. After him succeeded Semiramis his wife, The rich and
sumptuous tomb of Ninus.
a Lady of great prowess and virtue, who in this city buried him so
honorably and in such a sumptuous tomb, that it was the only pattern which
Artemesia the Queen of Caria made for her husband Mausolus, and accounted for
the rareness thereof, one of the seven wonders of the world. Upon the Pillars
whereof was set this Epitaph. His Epitaph.
Mihi pat^r Belus Jupiter, Auus Saturnus Babilonicus, proauus Chus Saturnus
Aethiops, Abauus Saturnus Aegiptus, Atauus Coelus Phoenix Ogyges, repeating the
pedigree of Ninus to be the son of Belus, the son of Nimrod, the son of
Chus, the son of Cham, and the son of Noah.

Sardanapolus the last king of the Assyrians.
Now as the Monarchy of the Assyrians began by Ninus, which lasted for the
space of a thousand and two hundred years, and some add forty years more:
so it ended in Sardanapalus, that beastly Epicure, who finding his forces too
weak to fight against the power of Arbaces and Belochus his two Lieutenant^,
the one in Media, and the other in Babylon, retired out of the field to his
palace in Niniuie, and there caused an huge fire to be made, Sardanapalus
destroys himself.
into which he cast himself and all his riches; herein only playing the man.
Such was the effeminate wantonness of this King, that he consumed whole days in
the nurcerie among his concubines, sparing no time from incontinent exercises.
As appears by the Epitaph, which living, he commanded to be written on his
tomb: His Epi^^ph.
Ede, Bibe, Lude.
Eat, Drink, Play.
Which Epitaph, Aristotle chancing to find, stayed, and read the first part
thereof, and smiling, said: A man would think, this writing fitter to be fixed
to the grave of an ox, then written upon the tomb of a Prince And having
perused the three verses, concluded, That Sardanapalus enjoyed that being dead,
which living he never had, but so long as he was in feeding his panch.
Intimating, that all pleasures which are not reduced to necessity and honesty,
are very reproachful

San^he^ib slain by h^s 2. sons. 2. Reg. 19 37. Herodotus lib. 2.
Here also reigned and dyed Saneherib, who at his return from the beseeging of
Jerusalem was slain by his two sons, Adramelech and Sharezar, as he was in the
temple worshipping Nisro^h his god. Herodotus relates, that after his death, an
image was set up unto him with this inscription; Learn by me to fear God; for
a memorial of Gods judgment against him.

Finally, that this city was far greater then Babylon, being the Lady of the
East, the Queen of Nations, and the riches of the world, having more people
within her walls, then are now in some one kingdom: but now it is destroyed (as
God foretold it should be by the Chaldaeans) being nothing else, then a
sepulture of herself, a little town of small trade, where the Patriarch of the
Nestorians keeps his seat, at the devotion of the Turks. Sundry times had we
conference with this Patriarch: and among many other speeches which past from
him, he wished us that before we departed, to see the Island of Eden, but twelve
miles up the river, which he affirmed was undoubtedly a part of Paradise.

The description of the Island of Eden.
THis Island lies in the heart of the river Tigris, and is (as we could guess)
in circuit ten English miles, and was sometimes walled round about with a wall
of strong defense, as appears by the ruinous foundation of brick which there
remains. And howsoever the beautiful land of Eden is now forgotten in these
part^, with those flourishing countries of Mesopotamia, Assyria, Babylonia, and
Chald^a, being all swallowed up into mere Barbarism, yet this Island still
retains the name of the I Will of Eden

Now whither this Island were the very Eden of Paradise, is not probable: but
certain it is, that, that garden of Pleasure, which God chose out to set Adam
into, was seated in the lower part of the Region of Eden, The Description of
the Region of Eden.
afterward called Aram fluuiorum, or Mesopotamia: a country which Southwards
stretches it self over the great river Euphrates, toward Shinar nie Babylon:
and Northwards contains that continent of Mesopotamia, Assyria, and Armenia,
which is watered with Tigris, between mount Taurus and Seleucia.

That there was such a Paradise as the garden of Eden, That Paradise was upon
the earth, is without all disput^.
upon earth, is without all dispute, because the Scriptures tell us of it: And
the Lord God planted a Garden, Eastward in Eden, and there he put the man whom
he had made. genesis 2.8. And it is said of Caine, that he dwelt in the land of
Noa toward the East side of Eden. genesis 4.16. The Prophets likewise do often
make mention of the land of Eden and the inhabitants thereof, As in Esaias 37.12.
where after Gozan, and Haran, and Reseph, the Prophet speaks also of the
children of Eden which were at Telasser. And the Prophet Ezechiel in the. 27.
chap. and 23. verse. bewailing the desolation of Tyrus, shows what Merchants
resorted thither, and among many other nations, he reconeth the merchants of
Eden. Now as they make mention of the land of Eden, so also of the garden it
self. How is this land wast, which was like the garden of Eden. Ezech. 36.35.
And in the Prophet Joel. 2.3. the land is as the garden of Eden before him. By
which places of scripture it is evident that the garden of Eden, was a certain
place upon the earth, which God chose out (above all other places of the world)
to set Adam into after he had created him.

Paradise planted in the country of Eden near Babilonia
And that the very Eden of Paradise was in this country is plain by the
relation of Moses, who says that it was eastward in Eden, that is, it lying
eastward (as this country does) from Indaea. For so it is said, that the Lord
God planted a garden Eastward in Eden, which quarter of the world is to be
understood, eastward, in respect of Iud^a. Besides this country stands in
the most excellent temper of all other, to wit five and thirty degrees from the
Equinoctial line, and five and fifty from the North Pole: in which climate the
best wines, the most delicate fruits, the sweetest oil, and the purest grain
of all sorts, are this day found in great abundance.

The rivers which watered Paradic^.
Again the very rivers, which course through this country, do make good, that
the very Eden of Paradise, was here planted: For Moses describes, that a river
went out of Eden to water this garden, and from thence divided it self into
four^ branches: and we find by experience, that Tigris and Euphrates, running
through this country of Eden do join in one, and afterward taking several
ways a part, do water both the land of Chus, and Hauilah, as Moses relates:
the true seats of Chus and his sons, being then in the valley of Shinar, in
which Nimrod built Babell, and not in Ethyopia as some would have it. And as
for the land of Hauilah, that country joined to Persia eastward, where Hismael
and his Sons dwelt: for they dwelt from Hauilah unto Shur, that is toward
Aegipt, as thou go to Assiria. Genesis 25.18. And therefore they that make the
river Pison to be Ganges, The e^our of those disproued, which make P^son to be
Nilus.
do contrary both Scripture, experience, and reason. For how can the river
Ganges, which runs through the great Mogors country in the East Indies, be a
branch of those rivers which watered Eden, since the river Tigres (though it
rise in the same quarter of the world) is distant from Ganges, above four
thousand miles? And as for them that would have, the river Gihon to be Nilus,
do dream of an impossibility; because the river Nilus is farther distant from
Tigris and Euphrates, then Ganges is: being begotten in the mountains of the
Moon in Ethyopia, almost as farr^e off as the cape of good hope (which our
East-Indian ships do double) and falls into the Mediterranean-Sea; whereas
Euphrates springs (as we have said) out of the Mountains of Armenia, and
falls into the golfe of Persia: the one rising South which is Nilus, and
running North; the other rising North, which is Euphrates, and coursing South,
threescore and three degrees one from the other. Strange fertility and
happiness in the region of Eden.
Finally this country abounds with all kind of fertility and happiness
though not in that exquisit manner, as before the fall of Adam, because it was
accursed in special, like as all the earth in general, yet thus much I find
written of it; Strabo makes mention of the South-part of Armenia, which is the
North border of Eden, or a part thereof; to be a region which abounds with
most pleasant fruits and delightful trees, always green and flourishing,
witnessing thereby a perpetual spring, not found elsewhere, but the Indies only.
And Q. Curtius writes on this manner: As you travel on the left hand of Arabia
(famous for plenty of sweet odours) there lies a champain country placed
between the two rivers Tigris and Euphrates, and is so fruitful and fat a
soil, that they are said to drive there cattaile from the pasture, least they
should perish by Satietie. And true it is that the vngy, or hay, which grows
in these parts, is of so strong an operative power to fatten, that they are
constrained (before they give it their cattaile) to flake and cool the heats
thereof with water.

Herodotus speaks as an eyewitness, that the place where Euphrates runs
out into Tigris, not far from the place where Ninus is seated, is a Region,
of al other^ most excellent, which bringe^h forth corn so abundantly, that
the ord nary fields in his time did return the seed sown in them two hundredth
fold: the better places three hundredth, that is thr^e hundredth bushels for one,
Palme-trees in great abundance.
or at the least three hundredth grains for one corn. And there is nothing
that better proves the excellency of this soil, then the abou^dant growing of
Palm Trees, in these places, without the care and labor of man. The most of
which trees do bear fruit, out of which the inhabitants make both meat, and
wine, and honey, and whatsoever else the life of man begets at nature. Pliny
affirms, that such is the fertility of the ground, that they are constrained
twice, to mow down their corne-fields, Pliny. not. ^i. stor. lib. 18. c. 17.
and a thi^d time to eat them up with sheep: adding this singularity to the
soil, that the second year, the very stubble (or rather falling down of the
seed again) yields them a harvest of corn without any farther labor.

So that by these few collections we may gather, that they are far besides
the truth, which have sought Paradise, either beyond our known world, or in
the middle region of the air; or nere the Moon; or as far as the South-line;
or the North Pole, being mere vanities imagined in men's fancies. Cardinal
Bellarmin^ in his co^trouersi^s is likewise much troubled, to find out the
place where Paradise should be, Bella^m. lib. de Great. primi hominis.
whether it be in the earth or in the air; yea some are so mad, that they do
peremptorily set down, that the earthly Paradise, after Adam was banished
thence for his sin, was by God lifted up into the air: but this (as His
Majesty learnedly shows in his Praemonition to al Christi^n Monarchs, free
Princes and states) is like one of the dreams of the Turkish Alcoran, s^eing
no such miracle is mentioned in the scriptures, h^uing no ground but from the
curious fancies of some boiling brains, who cannot be content sapere ad
sobrietatem. We conclude then, that the garden of Eden was created by God, in
this habitable world, and that in the lower part of the region of Eden, called
by the Jews Aram Fluuioru^, Aram amongst the ^iuers: and by the Greeks
M^s^potamia, containing a part of Shinar and Armenia, and reteining the name of
Eden, in some part unto this day, as before is declared.

From the Island of Eden we returned to Mosu^, and stayed there eight days
and so went down the river Tigris to Bagd^t or New Babylon, being carried not
on boat, as down the river Euphrates, but upon certain Zatarres or rafts,
borne upon goats skins blown full of wind like bladders. Which rafts they
sell at Bagdat for fire, The strange coursing o^ the river Tigris.
and carry their skins again home upon Asses by land, to make other voiages
down the said river. This river is very famous because it watered Paradise,
whose coursing is very strange: for some part of it, issuing out of the
Mountains Nifates, passes through the lake Topiti in Armenia, (a lake which
has Nitrum in it, the property whereof is to rent and tear a man's apparel)
with such swiftness, that it mingles not it self with the water of the said
lake, and thereupon it is called Tigris, which in ye languag of the Medes
signifies an arrow. Nere to the uttermost corner of this lake, it falls into
a great deep and runs for a great space under ground, and then rises
again near to Colonitis, and from thence courseth toward Opis and the ruins
of Nineuy, and so to (...) Persian gulf.

The description of New Babylon, now called Bagdat.
BY this river the city Bagdat is very abundantly furnished with all kind
of provision both of corn, flesh, foul, fish, and venison of all sorts;
besides great store of fruit, but especially of dates, and that very cheap.
This city by some is called new Babylon, and may well be, because it did rise
out of the ruins of old Babylon, not far distant, being nothing so great,
nor so fair: for it conteines in circuit but three English miles; and is built
but of brick dried in the sun: their houses also being flat roofed and low.
They have no rain for eight months together, nor almost any clowd in the sky
night nor day. Their winter is in November, December, January and February,
which moueths are nevertheless as warm as our summer in England. In a word,
this town was once a place of great trade and profit, by reason of the huge
Carauans, which were wont to come from Persia and Balsara: but since the
Portugalls, Englishmen, and Hollanders, have by their traffic into the
East Indies, cut off almost all the trade of Merchandise into the gulfs of
Arabia and Persia, both Grand Cairo in Egypt, and Bagdat in Assyria, are not
now of that benefit, as they have been, either to the merchant, or great
Turk; his tributes both in Egypt, and his customs in this place being much
hindered thereby.

Bagdat the seat of the Caliph for six hundredth yeere^.
Memorable not withstanding is this town; for that it was the only place,
where for the space of six hundredth years, the Mahumetane Caliphes were
resident and kept their sumptuous court; until the Tartare Prince and the King
of Armenia (as before is declared) did besiege it, Bagdat won by the Tartar
Prince and King of Armenia.
and in the end took it, with the Caliph also, together with an inestimable
mass of treasure. Which treasure when the two Princes saw, they demanded of
the Caliph, why he would not with the same leauy and wage soldiers for his
own defense. Whereunto he answered, that unto that time, he thought, his own
subjects had been sufficient enough to have resisted any foreign enemy:
which they understanding, immediately caused all that treasure to be carried
into the castle, and the couetou^ wretch set in the midst of the same,
forbidding that any man should give him either meat or drink, where he
miserably dyed through famine, Bagdat yielded unto the Turks.
in the midst of his riches.

After it continued under the Tartar and Persian government, until it was taken
by Solomon the Turkish Emperor, from Tamas the Persian king, who (after it was
yielded unto him) according to an old superstitious manner, received at the
hands of a poor Caliph, A Caliph is a man reverenced of all Mahometa^ Princes,
and has an old privilege in the choice and confirmation of the Assyrian kings
and Su^ans of Egyp^
the ensigns and ornaments of the kings of Assyria* so this city, with the
great countries of Assyria and Mesopotamia, sometimes famous kingdoms of
themselves, and lately part of the Persian kingdom, fell into the hands of the
great Turk, in the year 1534, and so have continued ever since Provinces of
the Turkish Empire. It was reported unto Rodulphus the Emperor for a certain
truth, that the king of Persia had won this city and these countries again
from the Turk, in the year 1604 but that news was not true; for in April
last 1611, it was then under the Turkish government.

Within two days travel of Bagdat, At Case the body of Aly intombed.
lies Cafe a little village, where the bodies of Aly, whom the Persians
honor, and his two sons Hassan and Ossain lie entombed: by whose sepulchers, it
is in great credit, and is every vere visited by the Persians in all respects,
after the same sort, that the Turks do visit the sepulchers of the three first
successors Abuchacher, Ottaman, and Omar: yea the very Kings of Persia used to
be crowned and gi^t with the sword in this place, where the Caliph was wont to
keep his residence as being the man that represented Aly, and occupied the
chief room of their filthy and abominable priesthood.

Having stayed 20. days at Bagdat, we put our selves into the company of a
Chiaus, who was bound from the Bassa of Bagdat for Constantinople, being in
number sixeteen persons and no more, to travel through a great part of
Chaldaea, and the defart of Arabia. So soon as we were out of this city, we
passed over the swift river Tigris, on a great bridge made with boats, chained
together with two mighty chains of Iron: and so entered into a part of Bagdat,
on this side of the river, like London and Southwarke, where we stayed four
days.

The description of Chaldaea.
THis part of new Babylon stands in Chaldaea, which has on the East,
Assyria: on the West, Syria and Palestina: on the North, Armenia: and on the
South the desert of Arabia. It is called by some, by the name of Mesopotamia,
because it lies in the middle of the two great rivers Euphrates and Tigris.
This country is famous for many things: and among the rest, for that it was the
country wherein Abraham was borne. The country wherein Abra^am was born
For Eupolemon in his book of the Jews, relates, that about the tenth
generation from the ^loud, Abraham was borne in Camerine, a town of Babylonia,
otherwise called Vr, or Chaldeopole: where he invented Astronomy, and was in
such favor with God, that by his commandment, he removed into Phoenicia, and
there taught the course of the Moon, of the Sun, and of the Planets, to the
great liking of the king of that country: all which (says the same Author) he
had received by tradition from Enoch, whom the Greeks call Atlas, unto whom the
Angel had taught many things. Besides, here were the great Southsayers,
Enchanters, and Wisemen, as they call them: the first Astrologians, which are
so described and derided in the Scripture: and indeed from this country and
Egypt is supposed to have sprung ^e first knowledge of Astronomy.

Two places of great antiquity did we thoroughly view in the country: The tower
of Babel.
the one was the ruins of the old tower of Babel, (as the inhabitants hold
unto this day) bu^lt by Nymrod, the nephew of Cham, Noah's son: a man very
valiant and courageous, yet very profane and irreligious; insom^ch, that he
persuaded the nations about him, that all their prosperity and happy fortune
came not from God, The persuasion of Nimrod.
but from their own prowess and industry: giving them farther to understand,
that if God should send any more floods, he would on their behalf and his
predecessors take revenge on him, by building a tower so high, that the waters
should not dare to touch the top thereof. Hereupon they began to build, and
continued building (as ^lycas says) forty years together, raising the work
to such an height, that it was beyond all expectation. But God seeing their
madness, did not punish them with a general extermination, (because as yet they
had made no use of those fearful examples which perished in the Flood) but
made them mutinous one against another, by changing their language, whereby
they could not understand one another. Of which overthrow Sybilla thus
prophesied: At such time as men used one kind of language, they builded a most
high tower, as if they would have mounted up into heaven: but the Gods sent
down winds and overthrew the tower, giving every one his distinct and several
language,

So that the Division of Languages was not a devise of man, The division of
languages no humane d^uice, but a punishment of God vp^ on mankind.
(as some wicked spirits that call that story into question, would have it)
but a punishment cast by God upon mankind. For it was a common opinion (by the
verdict of Abidenus) that men being bredde of the earth, and trusting in their
own strength, would needs, in despite of the Gods, go rear a to^er up to
the Sun, in the same place, where Babylon now is: and farther adds, That at
that time began the diversity of Languages, wh^rupon the Hebrews called
that place Babell* And now at this day that which remains, is called, the
remnant of the tower of Babel: there standing as much, as is a quarter of a
mile in compass, and as high as the stone-worke of Paul's steeple in London.
It was built of burnt brick cimented and joined with bituminous mortar, to the
end, that it should not receive any cleft in the same. The brickes are three
quarters of a yard in length, and a quarter in thickness, and between every
course of brickes, there lies a course of mat^ made of Canes and Palm Tree
leaves, so fresh, as if they had been laid within one year.

The description of old Ba^ylon.
The other place remarkable is, the ruins of old Babylon, because it was the
first city, which was built after the Flood. For after Nimrod had drawn the
people together, he did not only make laws, but began to build the great
city Babylon, his son Belus amplifying it, and at last Semiramis, the wife of
Ninus, finished it in great glory and show, as Herodotus and Solinus relate.
^erod. lib. 1.
This city was built upon the river Euphrates, as we found by experience,
spending two days journey and better, o^ the ruins thereof. It was so great
that it contained in compass four hundred and fourscore furlongs, the walls
were fifty cubits in breadth, ^rist. Pol. li. 3.
and two hundred cubits high. Aristotle reports, that it was so huge and great,
that when part thereof was taken by the enemy, the other part heard not of it
in three days together: and the Inhabitants were so many in number, that they
durst give battle unto Cyrus, the greatest Monarch for power that ever was in
Persia.

Amongst other stately buildings was the temple of Bell, erected by Semiramis in
the middle of this city, (...) of Belus (...) by Semi^ais.
environed with a double wall, carried foure-square of great height and
beauty, having on each square certain brazen gates curiously engraven. In the
vault of the square, she raised a tower of a furlong high, which is half a
quarter of a mile: and upon it again (taking a Basis of a less circuit) she
set a second tower; and so eight in all, one above another: Upon the top
whereof the Chaldaeans Priests made their observation of the stars, because the
tower ouer-topped the ordinary clouds. Some do think, that the ruins of
Nimrods tower, is but the foundation of this temple of Bell, and that therefore
many travelers have bin deceived, who suppose that they have seen a part of
that tower which Nimrod builded. But who can tell whether it be the one or the
other? It may be that confused Chaos which we saw, was the ruins of both, the
Temple of Bell being founded on that of Nimrod. In a word their were burnt in
t^is Temple an hundredth thousand talents of Frankincence in a year as
Herodotus relates. This Temple did Nabuchadnezar adorn and beautify with the
spoils of Jerusalem, and of the Temple of Solomon: all which vessels and
ornaments Cyrus re-deliuered. And Xerxes after him euened this Temple with the
soil; which Alexander is said to have repaired, by the persuasion of the
Chaldeans. I deny not that it might have been in his mind so to do, but he
enjoyed but a few years after the taking of Babylon, and therefore could not
perform any such work.

But to return where we left. The captiuit^ confirmed b^ the Heathen
To this city were the Jews carried captives, and so thereof it was called the
captivity of Babylon. A captivity so well known to heathen writers, that they
make mention of it. For they expressly affirm, that in the time of Ioachim King
of Judah, Jeremy the Prophet was sent unto them from God, to foretell them of
extreme calamity, because they worshipped an Idol called Baal; whereupon (as
they relate) Ioachim commanded Jeremy to be burnt a live. But Jeremy tells them,
that the King of Assiria should put them to sore labor, and make them to dig
a channel, to sail, out of the river Euphrates, into the river Tigris:
whereupon Nabuchadnezar did set forward with a mighty army spoiling Samaria,
winning Jerusalem, and leading away King Ioachim prisoner. Yea they do set
down the very time of the captivity: viz. that it should last three score
years and ten: and that Nabuchadnezar at his return to Babylon, was stricken
with madness, and did cry out for a certain time, night and day to his
subjects the Babilonians, that so great a mischief would shortly fall upon
them, that all the power of the Gods should not stay it. For (quoth he) an
half ass of Persia shall come and make you thrals: foreshewing that Cyrus
should be the man, which should both build again the Temple of Jerusalem, and
subdue Babylon. So that now we may justly ask; what is become of this proud
city, which once held the world in awe? Where are her conduits, the rareness
of her bathes, the hugeness of her towers, the greatness of her Temples, the
beauty of her princely palaces, and a number of other monuments of her kings
vanities? Alas! time has worn them out: and we may say.

Miramur perijsse homines? monumenta fatiscunt:
interitus Saxis nominibusque venit.
Why wonder we that men do die?
Since monuments decay,
And towers fall, and founders names,
Do perish clean away.
For first she was subdued by the Medes, then by the Persians; after by the
Grecians, then by the Saracens; then by the Tartars, after that by the Persians
again: and now by the Turks. So God does appoint, and God does disapoint
states and commonwealthes, according to the decree of his Eternal will, sin
being the only cause of his anger, his anger the cause of all calamities and
subversion of Kingdoms, according to that of Syrach; Regnum a gente in gentem
transferetur propter i^iustitiam. Because of unrighteous dealing and wrongs,
and riches gotten by deceit, (...), 10.
the Kingdom is translated from one people to another.

The description of Arabia.
FRom the ruins of old Babylon we set forwards to Alepo; traueling, for the
most part, through the Desert Arabia. This country of Arabia has on the North
Palestina, and Mesopotamia: on the East the golfe of Persia: on the South the
maine Ocean of India; on the West Egypt and the red sea. It is divided into
three parts: the North-part whereof, is the desert Arabia: the South-part is
called Arabia Foelix: and the middle between both, is Arabia Petrosa. It is
not my purpose to write any thing either of Arabia Foelix, or Arab^a Petrosa,
because they lie not in the compass of my travel: only it shall not be
amiss to insert a word or two, of Mahomet and his superstition, who was borne
in this country, and has seduced the greatest part of the world with his
abominable religion.

Concerning Mahomet, The opinion of them of Mecha touching Mahome^ their Prophet
the people of Mecha (where he lies intombed) do altogether condemn him both
for his robberies and murders. And himself in his Alcoran confesses himself
to be a sinner, an idolator, an adulterer, and inclined to women above measure,
and that in such uncivil terms, a I am ashamed to repeat.

And concerning his Alcoran, wherein he has inserted the precepts of his
invention, The Turkish religion a mere s^igne invention.
there is no truth in it. For first upon pain of death, it may not be
disputed upon, whereas the truth loves trial, so that though the Arabians,
Turks, and Persians will not spare to say, and that vauntingly, that the
doctrine of Mahomet, is divine and conformable both to the old and new
Testament, yet as good as they make it, you may not examine it or call it into
question; as if a man should say, behold you are paid in good money; but you
must not weigh it, neither look upon it by daylight. 2 Besides his Alcoran is
pestred with a number of fables and falsities, as nine hundredth untruths; It
is full of li^^ and fables.
whereof two are most gross, that Abraham was the son of Lazarus: and Mary
the sister of Aaron. 3. Again it points out at things sensible and
corporal, and not to things internal and spiritual: for Mahomet most
blasphemously reports in his prograce up to the throne of God, that he felt
the hand of God threescore and ten times colder, then any ye: that he saw an
Angel that had a thousand heads, a diamond table of a thousand miles in length,
and a Cock of a wonderful bigness, which is kept until the day of doom,
that then by the shrilnesse of his crowing the dead may be raised: and further
he sets it down that the devil is circumcised, with this leasing also,
that the stars, are very candles hung out every night from the firmament. The
promises are mere carnal pleasures.
4. And for his promises to all such as call upon him faithfully, are mere
carnal and earthly, such as I am ashamd to name, being fit for none but
Heliogabalus, and Sardanapalus. 5. His precepts are indulgent to perjury,
giving leave to have as many wives as a man will, to couple themselves not only
with one of the same sex, but with bruit beasts also: to spoil one another
goods, and none to be accused under four witnesses. Mahomet wrought no
mir^cles, but propagated his doctrine with fire and sword.
6. For his miracles he wrought none at al, but he confesses that God sent
Moses with miracles, and Christ his forerunner with miracles, but for himself
he was to come with fire and sword to force men, to obey his law, whereas the
truth does draw men of their own accords: rediculous also is that which he
writes of himself, how when he was a child, an Angel was sent from God to
open his heart, and to take out that lump of blood, which is the cause of
sin, The effects of ^he Turkish religion.
as though the cause thereof were not spiritual. 7. The effect of his doctrine
is perjury, as that they need not to keep any oath made with a Christian, who
is an Infidel: and also murder, as the eldest brother, so soon as he comes
to wear the crown, to strangle all the rest. For instance whereof, Mahome^
the third (this Kings father that now swaieth the Scepter at Constantinople)
did not only murder his brethren, but to rid himself of the fear of all
competitours (the greatest torment of the mighty) at the very same time caused
ten of his fathers wives and concubines, such as by whom any issue were to be
feared, to be all drowned in the sea.

And is it not now a wonder, that the people of the Turks and Persians, being
both warlike and politic, magnificent and stately, and to say in a word, the
very hammer of the world, as it was said of Babylon, should be thus led away
with these vild enchantments of their wicked Prophet Mahomet. I will say no
more, but since the darkness of Turkey and Persia is so great, that it may be
felt, and that it is a wonder in our eyes, to see such mists in those places,
then let us in this land rejoice, that are not only endued with nature as they
are, but with a special inspiration from above besides: having the celestial
doctrine of the everlasting Son of God, to guide us unto true happiness. For
certainly the time will come, when both the great Turk and his Bassaes, and
the Persian with his Chans, shall bitterly rue the time, and wish, with the
loss of both their eyes, that they had but heard and seen, as much as we have
done.

Let this then persuade my loving Countri-men, that either shall hereafter
serve in the wars of Hongary against the Turk* or trade in those places,
utterly to detest the Turk^sh Religion, as the only way that treads to death
and destruction. Lud. Viues (...) 1. de ve^itate Fidei.
We may conclude with Ludouicus Viues, who compares Heathenisme and
Mahometisme, to glass: Touch not glass, for though it be bright, yet is it
brittle, it cannot endure the hammer: and Christianisme to gold, do you melt
it, or do you rub it, or do you beat it, it shines still more orient.

But to return where we left, having spent three days and better, from the
ruins of old Babylon, we came unto a town called Ait, inhabited only with
Arabians, but very ruinous. The mouth c. Hell.
Near unto which town is a valley of pitch very merueilous to behold, and a
thing almost incredible, wherein are many springs throwing out abundantly a
kind of black substance, like unto tar and pitch, which serves all the
countries thereabouts to make staunch their barks and boats; every one of
which springs makes a noise like a Smiths forge, in puffing and blowing out
the matter, which never cease night nor day, and the noise is heard a mile
off, swallowing up all weighty things that come upon it. The Moors call it,
the mouth of hell.

Here we entered on the Desert of Arabia, wherein it pleased God, after the
delivery of his people out of Egipts furnace, to exercise them, for their
rebellion, under the conduct of Moses for forty years together; feeding them
from heaven with Manna; and giving them drink miraculously out of the dry
rocks. Three days spent we on this Desert, Anna a town in Arabia.
and so arrived at Anna, a town of three miles in length, but very narrow,
inhabited altogether with Curdies, a most theeuish people. Here we stayed two
days, and could not be suffered to pass without a present to the governor of
this town, which came to a duckat a piece. Close by this town runs the
river Euphrates, with a very swift current, which does merueilously
fructiferate the country round about, whereby we provided our selves of all
necessaries fit for travail through the rest of the Desert.

From this town we proceeded, and every second night, through the good
descretion of our guide, we pitched on the bancke of the river Euphrates, which
much refreshed our selves and wearied beasts, beholding every day, great droues
of wild beasts, as wild Asses all white, Gasells, Wolves, Leopards, Foxes, and
Hares. And now to wind up all, in passing from Babylon to Alepo, they
ordinarily with Camels spend forty days, traveling through this sorry and
barren Desert* lying unmanured because of the scarcity of moisture.
Nevertheless great is the mutual commerce and trade, through these sandy and
barren places, and that by the labor of Camels, which carry wondrous burdens,
as a thousand weight a piece, The Cam^ll a commodious beast.
and that for forty days and upwards. They drink in these sterill and sandy
places, but once every fifth day, and if extremity enforce, they will endure
the want of water ten or twelve days. When their burdens are off, a few
thistles, thorns, or leaves of trees, and a little round ball of paste made of
barley meal will suffice them. There is no living creature less chargeable,
and more laborious then the Camel, how beit we used not their service, by
reason of the speed which the Chiaus made for Constantinople, so that the
travel with the Carauan is forty days about; we passed in eighteen days in
much security, and so in great safety by the mercy of God I arrived again in
Alepo.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 6. l. 26. read corn and. p. 10. l. 32. read Mildenal. p. 25. l. 26. r.
Maidin on an house. p. 25. l. 31. r. then for. pa. 28. l. 26. r. funera. p. 30.
l. 26. r. Ararat. p. 37. l. 5. r. as. p. 38. li. 21. r. was. p. 50. l. 22. r.
street. l. 25. r. street. p. 63. l. 35. r. was. p. 65. l. 5. r. inexorable. p.
68. l. 25. d. one. p. 73. l. 8. r. fur p. 75. li. 24. r. is this. p. 84. l.
1. r. Siras. l. 2. d city. p. 85. l. 14. r. antique.


