THE SONG OF THE BELOVED, Concerning his Vineyard.

Modulated, and applied, to move men to know and embrace that, which belongs
to their peace, in this their time.

By John Carpenter of Norleigh in Deuon.

Iere. 2. 21. I planted thee a noble Vine, and wholly a right seed: How art
thou turned then into a bitter, unfruitful, and strange Grape?

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1599.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir John Stawell Knight, in the County of Sommersed,
the grace and blessing of God, with all prosperity, in Jesus Christ our Lord.
THe Jews being captiued in Babilo^ (Right worshipful Sir) were not a little
sorrowful, not only for their miserable thraldom of body: but also for this,
that they could not then, and there exercise themselves in the right service of
the true God, as they might sometimes freely have done in the City of
Jerusalem and land of Judah: therefore, when the Babilonians (in their merry
mood) required them to sing one of the Songs of Zion: they in their heaviness
answered them: How shall we sing the Lords Song in a strange land? howsoever it
was delightsome to the Babilonians, now triumphing over those Jews, to hear
them to sing one of the Songs of Zion: it was (doubtless) no Iesse woeful to
the Jews, to sing the Lords Song, then and there among such as scorned and
contemned both them and their holy religion: then it was sometimes loathsome
unto those Jews, to hear the holy Prophets to sing and modulate such divine
Canticles and Songs at home in their own land. But thus did the Lord deal
with the^ in his upright judgments, that for as much as they neither loved,
nor delighted in, but altogether loathed and disdained, both the Lords
messengers and their holy Songs and divine Sermons, even then, when they had a
time of grace and peace, with fit opportunity to hear and sing the same to
their own solace and the glory of their God: and therein resembled them that
would not dance unto them that piped, and proved like the barren and
ungrateful vineyard: therefore a time and place ouertooke the^, where in (they
being miserably captiued) were thralls unto such, as did (in the like sort)
both disdain them, and deride those holy Songs and solaces in the which their
souls should take the greatest delight and commodity: neither had they the like
peace and opportunity to use and exercise that which they had both neglected
and grossly abused in the due time: wherein as their unthankfulness was
deciphered toward the Lord God after his manifold benefits on them bestowed:
so his judgments laid on them for the same, were likewise expressed and made
known. The Lords Prophets foreseeing such things to ensue on that unthankful
people, did not omit, nor forbear, to foreshew them thereof, and the same by
many Arguments to approve, wishing and admonishing them to accept gratefully,
and to use reverently the graces of Gods spirit offered them, the which would
be for their good; and that the neglect thereof, would surely bring upon them
intolerable troubles and woes both of body and mind: the which gentle
admonition, when the Prophets perceived, how lightly the Jews did regard and
loosely observe, it grieved them not a little, howsoever those hard hearted
Jews could not be moved to lament for themselves, until their days of
sorrows came. Hereat Jeremy wept bitterly for them, whereof also he made a
Book of mournful Songs, entitled, ^s Lamentations. And this Isayah the
Pro^het perceiving (being now moved by ^e spirit of God in the anguish of his
^fflicted mind) did not only reprove ^ threaten the^ in his ordinary
Sermons, ^ght woeful that they so little regarded their own health* but also
composed a ^ertaine mournful Song, which he en^tuled, The Song of his Beloved,
touching is Vineyard. In the which he depainted and set forth before them,
their horrible ^ngratitude toward their God, whom ^hey had moved to sigh and
complain ^hereof, and prognosticated their future ^iseries. And surely, as
these So^gs were ^omposed and sung unto them for testi^onies against them, and
to admonish them: so also were they both written and ^reserued in the holy
Register for ex^mples unto us, on whom the ends of ^he world are come; to
teach, instruct, and warn us, not only to accept, em^race, and highly regard
the Songs of ^he Lord and his divine religion in this our own land and time:
but also, to yield unto him the sweet and timely fruits of the same: lest
(peradventure) being justly deprived both of this benefit, and of al meet
opportunities toward the recovery of this lost treasure, we shall not only
desire to see one day of the Son of man, and shall not see it; thirst after
that which we neglected and not have it; and long for that which we loathed and
not obtain it: but also full longsomly lament the loss of our happiness, and
the sense of our miserable condition with those wretched Jews.

All these things (Right worshipful Sir) when I had deeply waighed, and well
compared both this our time, and the people and condition of the same, with
that state and condition of the Jews (being yet at home in their ownland, then
when the Prophet Isayah was moved to sing this heavy Song) I was also moved in
that my meditation, ^o renew and modulate the same, though thus simply, yet (as
I presume) in right concord and harmony, for the solace, instruction, and
ad^onitio^ of my brethren and countryme^, ^d to publish it under this Title,
The ^ong of the Beloved, etc. And this being ^us composed and modulated, I have
^ought it good to dedicate and commend ^hiefly to your Worship, thereby to
ex^resse my willingness, not only to bene^t others (though not with silver and
^old, yet with such as I have) but also ^y desire to utter some sparkle of my
^hankful mind toward your W. whose ^ncie^t good will, bonnty and right friend^y
courtesies extended toward me and ^ine, as I gladly acknowledge and keep ^n
grateful memory* so would I with all ^y heart endeavor to requite to my power*
Let it please your W. therefore to take ^his poor present, and to esteem y^
same according to my good meaning: but ^hiefly after the goodness of the thing
it ^elf, being (indeed) the Lords Song, and ^herfore worthy to be so entitled:
and the which being weyed in equal balla^ce, is ^ightly preferred above silver
and gold: and is no less comfortable to them that are sorry for the affliction
of Joseph, an^ love the Lord Jesus: and therefore ^ nothing doubt, but that as
your Worship has uttered your loving affection to the Lord and his truth, by
hearing of his word preached, by reading of the Scriptures, by perusing the
godly labors of the best learned, and by the friendly entertaining and defense
of hi^ Ministers, with other Christian virtues: so ye will gladly accept,
embrace^ and defend the truth of this excellen^ Solace of the glory of God, the
comfor^ of the Saints, and the right good seruic^ of her royal Majesty, in
that high function wherein ye are now placed. An^ thus I commend your Worship,
wit^ my good Lady, to the Lord God, who ever bless you and your family, an^
give you all prosperity in Christ Jesus

Your Worships ready to be used in the Lord. John Carpenter.

The Preface to the Reader.
THE Lord God, seeing that the house of Israel, and the men of Judah, (the
which he had chosen, blessed, and beawtified before all the nations of the
earth) notwithstanding all his benefits powered forth on them, would neither
fear and serve him according to his word, nor yield unto his goodness the
pleasant fruits of Godliness: but rather, as Children most ungrateful
toward their most loving and dear father, rebelled against the Lord their
God, and angered him with their monstrous and manifold abominations: neither by
the exhortations, reprehensions, admonitions, threatenings, and often preachings
of the Prophets in the Name of the Lord, they could be moved to repent and
turn to the Lord: but rather continued wallowing in their sins without
repentance, to the high displeasure of God, and their own horrible
destruction: he now at the length puts a Parable in the mouth of his Prophet
Isayah, which concerns the whole matter, and sends him therewith to those
unthankful children. Again, the Prophet moved by the Spirit of God,
considering how little he had prevailed after all his long preachings,
prophesies and labors employed and bestowed on them: and how little they
esteemed his plain words and ordinary dealing among them, he endeavors
another way then before he accustomed, and uses another kind of style and
vein of speaking. And therefore he says, that he will now, not prophecy, or
preach, or speak, as he was wont to do unto them: but sing a Song: namely, the
Song of his Beloved concerning his Vineyard. The which being done, he
expounds and applies to the state and condition of the people of Israel and
Judah, to whom he had proposed the Parable, and of whom he had sung the Song.
And by this, he would (if it were possible) move and stir up them, who, as
yet, would not be moved by any other ways or means. Now, having taken in hand
to modulate this sweet Solace of the Prophet, I mean, the Song of the Beloved
concerning his Vineyard, I have thought good, not only to expound, but also to
apply the same, observing therein (as near as I could) the method and order
of the The division of the matter into three parts,
singer thereof: and therefore I have made thereof three general parts, viz.

1. A Proeme, or a preparation to a Song or Parable. ^. The Song or Parable it
self, with the exposition thereof. 3. The Application of the same for
instruction and admonition, to this people and time.
The first part is made of these words The first part has five circumstances,
or branches.
of the Prophet, Isay. 5. verse. 1. Now will I sing unto my Beloved, a Song of
my Beloved, concerning his Vineyard. And this part yields to our
consideration these five things: viz.

1. The person of the Prophet, being the Actor, whereof there is made one
Chapter. Chap. 1. 2. The manner of his dealing with the people, which is in a
Song, as Chap. 2. 3. The kind and nature of his Song, which is a Canticle and
Parable: as, Chap. 3. 4. The person, to whom he consecrateth the Song: which
is, to his Beloved, as, Chap. 4. 5. The Title of the Song, which is, Of his
Beloved concerning his Vineyard, as, Chap. 5.
The second part is made of the words immediately following: viz. My Beloved had
a Vineyard in a very fruitful hill, The second part has 6. branches.
etc. unto the end of the sixth verse, and ^eeldeth these six things to be
considered: viz.

1. The great love and mercy of God toward the people of Israel and Judah,
and thereof are made eight Chapters, as 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. ^. The Lords
expectation of their fruitfulness in good works, and thereof are made two
Chapters, as in Chap. 9. and 10. ^. The horrible ingratitude of the people of
Israel and Judah, yielding the unpleasant fruits of wickedness and sin, as
in Chap. 11. and 12. ^. The Lords appellation to their own guilty
consciences: and his request of judgment of themselves in the case, as in
Chap. 13. ^. The Lords complaint against them, with his repoofe of them for
their unkindness, as in Chap. 14. The Lords just sentence of condemnation and
terrible commination of the execution of the same against them: and hereof are
made four Chapters, as in Chap. 15. 16. 17. 18.
The third part has two Chapters, The third part is an application of the
matter, as ver. 7.
and is made not only of the example of this Prophet, who has applied this
Parable to the people of his time, as verse. 7. but also of the example of
Christ Jesus in the Gospel, whom also his Apostles, Peter, Paul, Jude, James,
and other his Ministers, have immitated, using to make such like Parables and
Similitudes, perpetual instructions, and admonitions, by a sound application
of them to the posterities, especially to the people in their times. So in
those two last Chapters, have I (in the fear of God) applied the present Song
or Parable (for an instruction and admonition) to this our tim^ and Nation, and
that the sooner, leas^ whiles we be busied in gazing on the state and condition
of others, we either forget or neglect our own. Neithe^ may we think, but
that both this and other such Songs and Parables in the law, in the Prophets,
in the Psalms, and in the Gospel, may be worthily made applicatorie, not only
to them to whom they were then proposed: but also to all others in the
posterity, who are drenched in the same or like sins; the which in those
Songs and Parables were reproved, and that both the one and the other, are kept
in the holy Register, and laid down (as Paul says) for examples unto us, who
thereby be warned also to take heed, that we neither contemn nor abuse the
love and mercies of God, nor prove unkind toward his goodness, after all his
large bounties powered forth on us: but that (as we are most bounden) we yield
him the pleasant fruits of gratitude, and holy works, the which he requires
and expects: lest we be both worthelie reproved, and rightly recompensed
with such grievous plagues, as our sins do justly deserve, and the which the
Lord has yet in his mercy withholden from us, most willing by his so
long-suffring, we should be drawn to repentance. The Lord God grant, that
we may yet now at length be persuaded (by the motion of his holy Spirit in our
hearts, and the sound of his word in our ears) to believe, that this is
written and reserved for our learning also, and not for the Jews only: and
that we may thereby the sooner consider of our present state and condition, and
learn to be wise by the consideration of the hard haps of others, rather then
to be schooled by Experience, the mistress of fools: which has caused many a
wretched wight to sing the Song of had I wist: when else they might have
modulated the Lords holy Song in their own land in peace, to their exceeding
joy, and best solace. Moreover, albeit that the wise man needs not to have
line upon line, and lesson upon lesson, here a little, and there a little, (as
those foolish Jews needed to have, whom therefore the Prophet ^sayah
reproves, and unto them, all was little enough): yet because the Readers for
the most part, unwilling to be wearied with large discourses, like better of
brief lines, then of long lessons, I have for their sakes disposed the parts
into certain particular Chapters, according to the matters and circumstances
of the same, as ye may perceive, being (indeed) most willing (after the example
of this Evangelical Prophet) to use that way and mean, which might best
procure Readers, and allure hearers, of that which shall bring rest to their
Souls, and do them most good.

More thine, then his own, in the Lord Jesus, Ioh. Carpenter.

Isai. 5. ^ow will I sing to my Beloved, a Song A proeme, or preparation to a
Song.
of my Beloved, concerning his Vineyard.


^ers. 1. MY Beloved had a Vineyard in a very fruitful ^ill.

Verse. 2. And he hedged it, and ^athered out the stones of it: and ^e planted
it with the best vine: and ^e built a Tower in the midst ^hereof: and made a
Wine Press ^herin: and he looked, that it should ^ring forth grapes: but it
brought ^orth wild grapes.

Verse. 3. Now therefore (O inha^itant The Song.
of Jerusalem, and man of Iu^ah) judge (I pray you) between ^e and my
Vineyard.

Verse. 4. What could I have done more to my Vineyard, that I have ^ot done to
it? Why have I looked that it should bring forth grapes and it brings forth
wild grapes

Verse. 5. And now, I will tell* yo^ what I will do to my Vineyard: will take
away the hedge thereof and it shall be eaten up: I will break^ the wall thereof,
and it shall b^ trodden down.

Verse. 6. And I will lay it waste* it shall not be cut, nor dug: bu^ briars
and thorns shall grow up* I will also command the Clouds that they rain no
rain upon it.

Verse. 7. As for the Vineyard of the The Application of the Song.
Lord of hoasts, it is the house of Israel* and the man of Judah, the plant of
his pleasure: of these he looked for Judgment, and lo; Oppression: for
Justice, and lo, a Crying.

The Song of the Beloved, Concerning his Vineyard.
The first part.
Isa. 5. ver. 1. Now will I sing to my Beloved, the Song of my Beloved,
concerning his Vineyard.
The first Chapter.
Of the Prophet, being the Actor, or Singer of the Song.

THis part contains a Proeme, wherein the Prophet Isayah makes preparation
to sing the Song of his Beloved. But before that we speak thereof, or of the
Song, it is meet that we consider of the Prophet himself, and so commence
and begin our Oration with him, who here sets forth himself as the Actor or
singer of the Song: for speaking of himself, he says, I will sing.

This is that very Prophet, after The kindred and name of the Prophet.
whom the whole book of this prophecy is entitled, namely, Isayah the son
of Amos, Isay. 1. 1. howbeit, not of that Amos which is named and numbered among
the twelve lesser Prophets: but of him who was the brother of Amasiah or
Azariah the King of Judah: for in this, as the best learned in the Church do
consent, so is there no small difference in the name: for the Prophets name
begins with the hebrew Y, as Yamos: but the father Y Amos.
of Isayah his name begins with A, and ends with z, as Amotz. By this it
appears, Amotz.
that Isayah was of the Royal blood of Judah, the which by this his function,
he rather beawtified, then distained With this well agrees the name of thi^
Prophet, for Isayah is a most sweet and delectable voice, and notes health
good news and gladness, and it is as much to say, as Iaschay-iah, that is, the
health, or salvation Isayah.
of the Lord. And seeing the holy Ghost has exhibited unto us this Prophecy
under that delectable title, let us (as soon as we either hear or read the
same) promise to our selves some joyful, wholesome, and happy thing therein to
come from the Lord. Neither shall we ^e therein deceived, if we deceive not
our selves through our own infidelity and fleshly lusts, as those commonly do
which receive the graces of Gods spirit ^n vain.

2. What the calling and office of The calling and function of Isayah
Isayah was, it plainly appears in the ^xt Chapter of his Prophecy (the
which Chapter after the judgment of the best, should be in order the first)
for there^ is contained his calling, and the be^nning of his Prophesies, where
he ^yeth, verse 1. I saw the Lord sitting upon an high Throane. And there
he ^yeth, that he heard the Lord to say, whom shall I send? and who shall go
for us? Isayah answered (after that his lips were ^uched, his iniquity taken
away, and his sins purged) Here am I, send me: and he said, Go, and say unto
this people, ye shall hear, etc. Lo, here is the office of the Prophet, his
calling, and authority. He is called by the Lord, and made his Ambassador unto
his people, to declare unto them his word and judgments. Thus are they called,
and are (indeed) the Prophets of the most high God, which are not instructed,
taught and authorized by any humane art, study, industry, o^ power of man:
but furnished and enabled by the light and power of Gods spirit and sent forth
to preach the holy mysteries of God, to reprove sins in the people, to
threaten them with the judgment of God, that be rebellious and obstinate and
to preach remission of sins to the repentant. And this is a thing common to
all the Prophets.

3. Further, because it pleased the high God, to show himself unto thi^ Isay
calls his prophesies visions.
Prophet (according as his capacity wa^ made able to comprehend) and from
thence gave him in charge what to do (in like sort as Kings and Princes before
they send forth their Ambassadors i^ matters of importance, do call them into
their presence, and show plainly, and de^iuer unto them their will and
commis^ion) therefore Isayah calls his prophesies Visions. By this also he
would persuade, that he has brought nothing to ^he people, but that which he
had perfectly seen revealed unto him: yea, things certain and heavenly, and
such as concerned the Majesty of God and his people, which intimated these
three things:

4. This Prophet beyond all others, Isay was an Euangelical Prophet.
has preached and testified most plainly and significantly of the Conception,
the ^irth, the life, the death, the resurrection, ^he Assension, the rule,
Dominion, Glo^ie, and perpetuity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of that glad
tidings of the remission of sins, and eternal peace in the Son of God, and
therefore he has bin^ worthily called, not only a Prophet, but also an
Evangelist, and an Euangelical Prophet.

5. The labors of the Prophet in The great and long labors of the Prophet
and about these things appear to be great, and also of long time he taught
and instructed the people with all wisdom, constancy, humanity, vehemency,
as the cause required: he feared not to reprove the corrupt manners, not only
of the common people, but also of the Priests and Princes: to this end, that
they might amend their lives, and not to perish in their ungodliness without
warning. And he amplifieth his Sermons with many exquisite and pithie words,
according to that which Solomon notes in the wise Preacher, and that they
might Eccles. 12.
not forget at any time the great mercies of God on them declared in his
manifold benefits, he often uses these and such other like words in the Lords
behalf: I have nourished and brought v^ children: I have adopted them: I have
brought them out of Egypt: I have born^ them in my bosom: I have given them ^
good land: I have made them victors over their enemies: I have prescribed unto
them the right Gods service. I have formed them for my self. I have created
them for my Glory, etc.

6. And thus continued he busied in The time that Isayah prophesied.
this his charge, above threescore and four years, within the which time,
succeeded five Kings in Judah: as namely, Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, and
Manasses. In the history of the which 5. kings, we may easily understand the
state and condition of the time and people: and therein how comparable to this
time and people we may likewise consider. But howsoever the people declared
the^selue^ worthy such a benefit, it is certain that the Lord expressed his
love toward them in this, that he vouchsafed the^ the presence and painful
ministry of so holy a Prophet. How the people esteemed of the Prophet and his
words.


7. But all this they nothing considered, and therefore, as they contemned the
mercies of God; so contemned they his Prophets: and notwithstanding all the
travels of this Evangelical Prophet, and his goodness toward the^, they never
gave him his ^ight honor among them, but despised him, took him as a fool,
and made him their jesting stock, whereof he was moved to say, chap. 57. 4. On
whom have ye iested? upon whom have ye gaped, and thrust out your tongues? His
words also they compted as fables, and of no credit: whereof he complained,
Isa. 53. 1. Who will believe our report? And (indeed) unto this impiety were
the people come in this time, notwithstanding those excellent means they had
to be well taught and instructed by the Prophets. Thereof it is said, 2. Chro.
30. 10. that when King Hezekiah in this time sent forth his posts to call the
people to the Lord, they would not believe, but laughed the messengers to
scorn, and mocked them. And indeed this is that the Prophets find, and this
is the common reward that the Ministers of the Gospel receive after their
labors.

8. Moreover, this Prophet finds The reward of the Prophet after his long
labors.
(besides that) a more heavy reward of those unthankful people: for after
that he had sharply reproved them for their pride, their covetousness, their
oppression, their cruelty, their drunkenness, their whoredom, their
idolatry and unthankfulness; he was at the length accused and called by them,
before King Manasses, for an heretic and a seducer of the people: whereupon
(notwithstanding he was of the Royal blood, and near unto the King) he could
neither be liked of the people for the hatred they bear his ministry; nor be
tolerated of the King, for that he had reproved him for his idolatry: and
therefore Manasses commanded him to be cut asunder with a saw, that he dyed.

9. Lo, this is the wages which this The ingratitude of the people to them that
do them good.
painful labourer received after his long days work of this unkind people.
Such a thing is therefore worthily taught and reproved in the fable of the old
dog, the which said to him that beat him sorely, Quam cito meritorum meorum
oblitus, ita in me saeuus es? How cruel art thou toward me, whose good
deserts thou have forgotten? And well thereof said the Greek Poet:

O'uk'esti charis metopisthen' euergeon,
That is,

Thankfulness for good deserts is rarely found.
10. Howbeit, all this should not discourage The Ministers of God ought not to
be discouraged by the hard lots o^ their fellow Ministers.
them that be thus called and authorized, neither should they think all their
travails in this bestowed in vain, no more then the like discouraged Jeremy,
Daniel, Amos, Zachary, Hoseah, and many others: but rather with them, and with
the Apost^es of Christ, they should be glad^ (as their master has warned
them) that they are thought worthy this ministry, and to suffer those
rebukes and persecutions for his sake. Neither shall they be extinguished, which
are thus abandoned and thrust out from among men: but they shall Isa. 57. 1. 2.
be sure to rest in peace, when others broyle in torments: and shall with
Daniel, Jeremy, and this holy and Evangelical Prophet, Dan. 12.
shine as the brightness of the firmament, and as the stars for ever and
ever: when their persecutors shall perish, and weep, and wayle, and gnash with
their teeth, in utter darkness, without comfort. For God is not unrighteous,
that he should Heb. 6. 10.
forget our works and labors of love, which we have showed toward his name,
in that we have ministered unto the Saints, and yet do minister: Therefore,
persuading 1. Cor. 15. 58
that God is righteous, and will remember us in goodness, and that those ^ur
labors in him are not in vain, let every one of us (as the Apostle
requesteth) show the same diligence to the full assu^ance of hope unto the end,
that we be not slothful, but followers of them, which through faith and
patience inherit the promises, committing the success of our labors and our
selves, wholly to the Lord.

CHAP. II.
2. The manner of the dealing of the Prophet with the people: viz.

Now will I sing, verse. 1.

Having spoken before of the person, office, labors, and reward of the
Prophet, it is meet, that now we consider the manner of his dealing with The
Prophet considered the nature of the people and of the time.
the people in this place, and in this time. Surely, the Prophet (as it well
beseemed him) had ever a due consideration both of the nature of the people to
whom he spoke, and of the time wherein he spoke, and (according to the same)
he behaved, used, and ordered himself in his ministry. This, as we find, was
likewise observed of Christ Jesus himself, of David, of the Apostles of our
Lord, and the holy Martyrs, and fathers of the Church.

2. In the dealing of this Prophet w^ are to observe these three things, viz.

1. the affection and mind of the Prophet

2. his vein, and style in speaking.

3. the nature and kind of his Oration or Sermon. The first whereof is noted in
1 The motion of his mind. Quaeso. Nunc.
this particle, Na, or Ana, which signifies the motion of the mind: by the
which a man shows the desire of his heart toward his superior, to persuade
or entreat, or incline him, to yield or harken to his words: and is
interpreted, Now forsooth, or now I pray you, or earnestly beseech you. By this
therefore, the Prophet expresses his able mind, and the submissiuenesse of his
heart, with the earnest desire His humble submission and courtesy.
he had by all ways and means to allure and persuade the people. He now
behaueth himself, not as a man of the Royal blood, not as a Prince, neither
as Pope, or as an high Prelate: but, as a ^ruant to his Master, as a subject
to his ^rince, as an inferior man to his Supe^or, saying in all humility and
reue^e^ce, beseech you, I pray you, I earnestly entreat ^u: Thus he assayed by
gentleness, ^ourtesie, and humble desires, to get au^ience, and to allure the
people to accept and embrace his words.

3. Neither thought he, it was meet or him to deal otherwise with them in His
discree^ dealing.
^his time, when men being fat and full ^ith prosperity, were become more like
Tygars, Lions, Bulls, Bears and Wolves, ^hen like Sheep or Lambs: and
therefor, as men that use such colored garments, words and gentle means, as
rather allure them, then constrain them to ^ecome gentle: so was it the best
way for ^he Prophet to do and behave himself ^owards this people, that thereby
(if it could be) he might allure and persuade them with gentleness, which
would in no wise abide to digest sharp and rough dealing. Now therefore I
beseech you with all courtesy, and gently pray you (my masters, my Lords, my
friends) that y^ will vouchsafe to hearken unto me for your own good. The
righteous man Noa^ after the flood wished with all his heart that the Lord
would in this sort allure Iaphet Gen 9. 27.
to enter into the tabernacle of Shem And thus Paul dealing with some of that
posterity, I mean the Gentiles, says unto them: Now I beseech you brethren
Romans 12. 1.
by the mercies of God, that ye give up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable to God.

4. In this sort the Prophet teaches humility and gentleness to the Ministers
A lesson for the Ministers of the word.
of the word, who should be indeed (as Christ has taught them) rather
Servants to all, then Lords of all. Neither can the Roman Bishop and other
proud Prelates, but blush and be ashamed (if they were not too impudent) in
that they so much extol themselves above their brethren in proud titles and
worldly promotions: yea, and deal with them more like Tyrants of the Heathen,
then the Ministers of the Gospel. Surely such persons do no^ nor shall allure
the people to godliness: but rather terrify and discourage them, 1. Sam. 2. 1^
as the sons of Eli ^d the people of God. They be such, neither enter into
the kingdom of Luke 11. 52.
^auen themselves, nor suffer others at willingly would, to enter therein. ^ut
the Prophet, to the end he might ra^er draw them to goodness then discou^ge
them, does gently pray and beseech ^em, to give him audience.

5. Next, the Prophets style and vein 2 His vein of speaking, he sings.
noted in this, where he says, I will ^g. As if he said: Behold, I have thus
^ng time prophesied, preached, and ^ad unto you, and therein have I de^ared the
goodness of God toward you, that he looks for at your hands: a^ine, your
unkindness toward him, ^d what will be the end thereof: I have proved you,
and threatened you, and cal^d and warned you: howbeit, ye be ne^r the nearer to
the amendment of your ^es. Therefore, now I mind not to call ^u to an ordinary
Sermon or Lecture, or ^ my accustomed manner of prophesying, ^t to a Song: for I
will now rather modu^e and sing (as a Poet) then speak (as Prophet:) yea, I
will be unto you, as a woer now, who by some loving dittie and sweet Song,
will assay to allu^ and get the heart and affection of m^ best beloved.

6. The cause that moved the Prophet The cause that moved the Prophet to sing:
First, to get hearers.
to use this vein, was partly to ge^ him hearers: partly, to make them mo^
attentive to his words: partly, that the things which he delivered therein,
should be the better remembered. For first, b^ this extending and lifting up of
the voi^ (beyond his accustomed manner) he dre^ the people to flock about him,
as they d^ about them that sing in the streets. Suc^ a mean used he to get
audience: for the longer he preached among them, the more loathsome he was unto
them: an^ might preach and teach long enough (^ some of our Ministers do now in
the^ Churches) without hearers. But he hat^ happily by this singing some
audienc^ before whom, he might deliver his e^rand, who should be made
witnesses bot^ for him touching the discharge of his d^tie, and for themselves
and against themselves, touching their monstrous vnkin^nesse to the Lord their
God, howsoeue^ they iested at him, as whom they made their jesting song, and
accounted his words but as the pleasant sound of him that was a cunning Singer:
as they also esteemed of the Prophet Ezechiel and Jeremy, and Ezech. 33. 32.
their words.

7. Howbeit, the Prophet was persuaded (for his part) that by this kind of
dealing 2. To make them attentive.
they would be the more attentive to his words, as to matters of great weight:
for howsoever men use songs and ditties ^ow, and abuse this divine exercise by
their sensual lusts, and howsoever they e^teemed them then, yet in the old
time ^hey committed nothing to song, but the matters most noble, most weighty,
and of ^he highest importance. As Moses com^osed Exodus 15.
in a song the remembrance of the ^onderful delivery of the people of Israel
^ut of Egypt, when the Lord had brought ^em safe through the red Sea: the which
^ng, Moses, Aron, Miriam, and others did ^ng, to the praise of God, and comfort
of ^emselues. Afterward Moses composed Deuteronomy. 38. ^.
^other Song of the great blessings of ^od on the people: and of their great
vn^ndnes toward him, for the which he threatens them with Gods future
judgments. These be matters of no small account. Such the Prophet handles in
this place, and many such have we registered in the new Testament, as the Luke
1. 44. 68 and 2. 14. 29. Apo. 5.
Song of the Angels, the Song of Zachary, the Song of Mary, the Song of
Symeon, the Song of the four Beasts, of the 24. Elders, and the Creatures. In
the hearing whereof, we should prepare our minds to the consideration of
high, strange, and great matters.

8. Thirdly, the Prophet composeth 3. That the matter might be the better
learned and remembered.
this matter in a Song, to this end, that it might be the sooner learned of
every one, be ruminated in every man's mouth, and so be had and kept in mind:
for there is not any thing sooner learned, nor more spoken of, nor better
remembered, then that whereof men make their Songs, and use daily to modulate
for their solace and recreation of mind. And therefore they of yore used to
compose in such song^ the worthy acts, exploytes, and virtues of noble and
famous Princes and personages, that thereby their worthy deed^ and excellent
virtues might be known, spoken of, and remembered through many generations. And
what things ought more to be learned, spoken of, and remembered, then the most
noble acts and works of the Lord of Hoasts? Of this sings Hezekiah: O Lord,
to all those that Isa. 38. 16. 18. 19. 20.
shall live hereafter, to all men shall it be known. The father tells his
children of thy faithfulness. And we will sing my Songs ^n the house of the
Lord, all the days of ^ur life. And thus sings the Psalmist, I will make thy
Name to be remembered Psalm. 45. 17.
through all generations: therefore shall the people give thanks unto thee
world without and.

Moreover, as the mercies of God, and his noble works, are by such means ^et
forth, known, and remembered: ^ also, the unkindness of men toward ^is
goodness, shall not be couched, con^ealed and buried, but be called into
^emembrance against them that will not ^pent. As that whereof Moses made a ^ng.
Frowardly have they done against him Deuteronomy. 32. ^^
^ their vices, not being his own children; ^t a wicked and froward
generation. And this the Lord commanded Isayah to Isa. 30. ^.
note with an iron pen, to be remembered for ever.

9. Finally, as the Prophet changes hi^ accustomed vein, so also alters he
hi^ ordinary dealing with them, as touching^ 4. The nature of the Oration* a
Parable.
the nature and kind of his Oration. For whereas he was wont to speak unto the
people in simple words and plain terme^ now he is forced to take up a Parable
for the Song is a Parable. But of this, a^ also of the causes that moved him
there unto, it shall be spoken (and God will in the next Chapter.

10 But by the premised, we may wel^ gather in what sort the Prophet applied
himself to the people, and the time^ neither omitted Jeremy, Ezechiel, and
other Prophets the same. Paul also (among the Apostles) made himself ^ a Jew
to the Jews, and as a Gentile t^ the Gentiles, to win both. All the
notwithstanding, the people behave themselves both to the one and to the other,
much like them, unto whom it w^ sa^d by Christ in the behalf of all pain^ full
Apostles and Ministers: We* ha^ piped to you, and ye have not daunced: we have
mourned to you, and ye have not wept. And some such there be in this time,
which pipe, which sing, which lament and weep, to allure the people to
repentance: but all cannot prevail to move the affection of the stiff-necked
and hard-hearted people, who, whether we will or no, will wallow in their
^bhominations, and dye in their sins.

CHAP. III.
Of the kind of the Song: and what the Song is. He says, I will sing a Song.
verse I.

AS we have considered the manner of the Prophets dealing with the people: so
now we will observe the ^ind of the Song which the Prophet sin^eth, and what
the Song is.

The Hebrews have diverse kinds of The Hebrews had diverse kinds of ongs. Halal.
Songs, whereof some they call Tehilloth: that is, Praises and lauds. And this
kind ^s made of that word, which signifies the exaltation of the voice, in
extolling, in lawding, in glorifying either the worthy person, or his noble
action. Some they call Mismorim, that is, Mismor.
Psalms, verses, and artificial Metres, which hold in number and feet. Some
Quasi ex ^ather and quibusdam longis vocibus. Schir.
they call Scherim, that is, Canticles or Balades, in the which are respected
rather the voice and words of the singer and matter, then any artificial
composition of syllables, and is made of a word, which signifies Schor.
to intend or extend the voice, and by translation, to sing or descant.

2. Of this sort, Rahi Joseph numbreth Munster. in Cant. 1.
up ten Songs, wherewith (as he says) God is glorified in this world, and
shall be glorified in the world to come. Adam sang on the Sabbath day, when his
debt was remitted, and it is the 92. Psalm. Moses did sing with the children
of Israel, at what time they had passed on dry foot through the red Sea, Exodus
15. 1. Israelites, when the water was given unto them. Moses, when he said,
Hear ye heavens, etc. Iosuah sang, when in his war the Sun stood still
against Gabaon. Barak and Deborah, when Sissera was delivered into the hand of
Israel. Hanna the mother of Samuel did sing. David of all those great signs
and wonders which the Lord wrought with him. Solomon the King did sing:
Isayah, not for us Christians, but for his country men the Jews.

Howbeit, among all these he makes no mention of this memorable Song The kind
of the Song. Schir-hascirim.
of Isayah the Prophet against the Jews, the which nevertheless is reserved
in the holy Register for us Christians, and is of that kind which Solomon
composed, entitled, The Song of Songs, as may Cant. 1.
be gathered, not only by the title thereof, but also by that word which the
Prophet uses, when he says, I will sing.

3. And (indeed) as this Song sounds much like a Love Song, and seems to
allude to the fashion of Lovers, who are wont to allure one another with
pleasant and sweet Songs and Ditties, so seems it to be of the like note and
music which Solomon modulated in the like kind of Song, wherein he sets
forth the spiritual love The Song has both pleasure and sorrow.
and sweet communication between Christ and his Church. But yet, when we
consider the end of this Song, we can scarcely discern between it, and our
mournful Song, for the beginning thereof is not so Comicall, but the end is
also as Tragical, for though he began to sing of love and benefits, yet he
ends his Song with anger and displeasure. He began thus: My beloved had a
Vineyard in a plentiful hill, the which he hedged, planted, and beawtified,
and this is gladsome: but he ends thus: The Vineyard is ungrateful,
therefore my beloved is angry with it, he is not minded to do (...) any more
good, but rather he will spoil and waste it: and this is woeful. Such a and of
Song sings the Prophet.

4. Moreover, as we have observed the The Song is a Parable
and of the So^g, so let us note what is me^t ^y the Song. The Prophets by a
Song, ^o sometimes understand a Parable: as ^is Prophet says. In that day this
Song ^all be sung in the land of Judah: Isa. 26 1. ^^at is, they shall use or
apply this Para^e. Again: Sing of the Vineyard of New^ine: Isay. 27. 2. that
is, propose a Para^le of the Vineyard. So (indeed) the Song which the Prophet
sings here, of the What the Jews understand by a Parable.
^ngratefull Vineyard, is a Parable, and ^f that kind which Christ often used
in ^^e Gospel. But the Jews under this lord, used to comprehend all kind of
^imboles, Riddles, Proverbs, Adages, ^pothegmes, Allegories, Mysteries, and
^ll obscure and dark sentences whatsoe^er, the which had in them something
^ore hidden and conceited, then could ^lainly be understood of every one that
^ther heard or read the same: And so ^eaneth the Evangelist, when he says,
Luke 8. 10.
that Christ spoke to the people in Parables: that is, he spoke in an hard,
dark, and mystical saying, far beyond their understanding. And it is certain,
that the Prophet i^ this place makes such an obscure an^ dark oration unto
them, as that they t^ whom he proposed it, could not by an^ by understand the
pith and substance o^ the matter therein contained, no mo^ then the Jews
understood the meanin^ of Christ, when he spoke in parables vnt^ them. This is
a Similitude taken from the What a parable is.
Truth, of the which there be right man^ in the divine Scriptures, and the
which nevertheless without an expositour t^ give the sense of them, are as
words spok^ in a strange tongue, and sealed up from them to whom they be spoken.

5. If ye demand, what moved the Lord to speak by the Prophet Isayah in thi^
sort, unto the people of Israel? I answere^ even that which moved Christ in the
Why the Prophet speaks in a parable.
Gospel to speak in parables to the Iewe^ And we find not, that Christ spoke
to the in parables, but in simple and plain word^ until they began to
sclander, deride, an^ contemn both him, and his doctrine an^ works: but after
that time, he spoke as in ^ strange language unto them, and that for ^ese three
causes: first, because they loa^ed The first cause that moved Christ to speak
in parables. Mat. 13. 10.
and contemned the plain teaching, ^leased the Lord to shut them up in
vn^liefe, and deprive them of the benefit ^ereof. For when this question was
pro^sed to Christ by his disciples: Why spea^t thou to them in Parables? he
answered ^d said unto the^, Because it is given to you ^nly) to know the
secrets of the kingdom of ^auen: but unto them it is not given: tea^ing us,
that the knowledge of the divine ^ysteries apperteineth not to all men, but ^ly
to such, as it shall please God to give that is, to the disciples of Christ:
and that ^th in Christ is the only key of all pa^bles and dark sentences of
the holy ^criptures: to him that wants faith, ^hatsoeuer is spoken is as a
riddle or pa^ble: and so spoke Christ to the wicked ^d reprobate Jews in
Parables.

6. S. Paul after a sort expounds ^is sentence of Christ, showing that a
strange tongue or Parable is an evident ^gne of Gods vengeance and curse
to^ards 1. Cor. 14. 21. 22.
the wicked, which have contemned ^e plain doctrine and truth of his word.
Tongues, says he, are for a sign not t^ Strange Tongues are as Parables to
the^ that believe not.
them that do believe, but to them that believe not. And so must we understand
^h^ words of Christ to his Disciples, To you^ says he, (which are believers,
and are le^ by the spirit of God) it is given to kno^ the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of heaven* but unto them which are without (that is* which have no
faith whereby to attain^ to the pith and substance, but do stay ^ the bare
bark, and letter of the word) speak I in Parables?

Again, it is said, that without Parable^ he spoke nothing unto the Jews.
Mark. 4* 34. but unto his Disciples (which believed in him) he expounded all
things.

7. The Lord proceeds both in confirming and amplifying of the cause* They
that cont^mne plain words shall be fed with dark Riddles.
Mat 13. 13. Therefore I speak unto them in Parables, because they seeing, do
not see: and hearing, they hear not, neither understand. And why? For this
peoples heart is waxen fat, and their ears are dull of hearing, and with their
syes they have wincked, least they should see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and should return that I should heal them. As if he said: They
have even thrust away from themselves ^y graces, and have made themselves
vn^orthie the knowledge of my ways and ^erlasting life. When they might have
^eard, they would not hear: when they ^ight have seen, they would not see:
^hen they might have understood, they ^ould not understand: when I called, ^ey
refused: when I stretched forth my ^and, they did not regard, but contemned ^y
counsels, and set my corrections at ^aught: therefore, when they will, they
shall not: yea, because they would not use their hearing, their seeing, their
understanding to their own good, when they ^ad it, even that shall be taken
from them ^gaine. For unto him that has, it shall be given, and he shall have
abundance: but from them, that shall be taken away, which they ^aue. Therefore,
I speak unto them in dark and mystical sayings. To this purpose serves also
that Prophecy of Isaiah. In hearing, ye shall hear, and shall not understand:
Isay. 6. 9. 10.
and seeing, ye shall see, and not perceive, etc.

8. And to note, that this kind of dealing When the plain preaching of
with those rebellious and stubborn children, was not only a preamble t^ of
the word, is turned into obscure sayings, it is a preamble to plagues ensuing.
their destruction, but also a warning t^ all others in the posterity, to take
heed* how they negiected and contemned the graces of God, and shut up their
hearts i^ the deadly dungeon of unbelief. The Prophet says, that when he
asked the Lord, how long this deafness, blindness, an^ hardness of heart
should continue, he answered him, until the Cities be wasted Isa. 6. 11.
without inhabitants, and the houses without man, and there be a great
desolation in the midst of the land. This is that which ensues, the
deafness, the blindness, and the obstinacy of this people.

9. The second cause that moved the The second cause was to persuade them to
give ear.
Lord to propose this Parable to the people by the ministry of the Prophet,
was that the Prophet might thereby persuade the people to hearken and hear him
to the end of his oration, who (as I said before) being as fierce Tygars and
wild beasts, would otherwise have interrupted his words, and fallen upon him,
as the Jews did on S. Stephen. Act. 7. Thus Nathan, when he should speak to
David Nathan. ^. Sam. 12* 1.
in the case of Vriah, took up a Parable. Thus Ioatham proposed a Riddle to
the Ioatham* Judge. 9. 8. Christ. Math. 21.
^chemites. Thus Christ himself did of^n use Parables: when he would re^ooue
the pride, the covetousness, the ^gligence, the wickedness of the Priests ^d
rulers of the Jews, who yet were ^ntented to listen to such things, when ^ey
would abide the simple preaching, one otherwise, then Herod suffered John ^e
Baptist and his words, when he re^oued him in plain terms.

10. Hereof was it, that men in old time The use of Comedies, Tragedies, etc.
^uented those Comedies, Tragedies, ^bles, prosopopoiaes, and fictions of
per^ns and things, which deciphered and re^oued the pride, insolency,
ambition, in^atitude and abominations of certain ^ird persons, and of the^
absent, to teach, ^dmonish, and put in mind second persons, and them present,
before whom, and to whom they spoke. And to these things ^oth the Princes and
the people rather ^ue audience, then to that simple oration ^f truth, which
does reprove them to ^eir faces, neither do they think it ^wfull for the
Minister of the word, to ^ll them wherein they be faulty, and how needful it
is they did amend, albei^ they themselves, know themselves guilti^ and cannot
but acknowledge the equit^ of his dealing with them therein.

11. But in this, they be likened no^ Men rather hear and look on the faul^s
of others, then either amend or think, or suffer to be told of their own.
only to the eye, which both sees an^ corrects all other things save it
self but also to that covetous wretch, wh^ notwithstanding he would not use
his riches, but brooded on them, and was a^ poor in the midst of plenty,
does ye^ admire and laugh when he hears the Poet tell of Tantalus, who was
thirsty i^ the midst of the stream, and died wit^ drouth. Thus (I say) the
very guilty conscience can harken and behold, so long a^ he persuades that
yet the Prophet o^ Minister poynteth not to him, but t^ some other person. For
such therefore, ^ Parable is more meet, then a plain Oration.

12. The third and last reason is, tha^ The third cause that moves the Prophet
to sing a Parable. David condemns himself.
by this kind of dealing, the guilty an^ faulty person might be drawn in, to
giu^ sentence against himself, even then, when he thinks to condemn an other
man King David hearing the Parable which Nathan proposed, imagining the case ^o
^ouch any other man besides himself, ^aue this judgment against himself, As
^e Lord lives, the man that has done this, 2. Sam. 12. 5.
^all surely dye. And the chief Priests, Math. 21. 41
^ulers and Scribes, hearing the Parable which Christ proposed, of the
perfidious ^usbandmen, and being asked what the lord of the Vineyard would do
to those hus^andmen? They answered him (giving ^ntence against themselue^) He
will cru^ly A Parable has not the like effect in all men.
destroy those wicked men, and well let out ^s Vineyard unto other husbandmen,
which ^all deliver him the fruits in their seasons. ^hese both Parables were:
expounded ^d applied, the one by Nathan to Da^d, the other by Christ to the
Scribes, ^riests, and Rulers of the Jews, the which ^t had not the like effect
in either: for ^auid acknowledged his fault, repented, ^d was forgiven; but the
other waxed ^grie, continued obstinate, and dyed in ^eir sins.

13. And (indeed) as David gave ^dgement against himself upon the ^aring of
his Parable: and as the Priests, ^cribes and Rulers also censured themselves
worthy destruction. So these v^ They give the sentence against themselves.
thankful people were induced by the parable of the Prophet Isayah, to
condemn themselves, whose very senten^ of condemnation, that same is, which
the Lord thereupon confirms by the Pr^phet against them thus: It is meet
therefore, that this good and painful husbandm^ do take away the hedge from
that ingratef^ Vineyard, that it may be eaten up, and ^ break the wall
thereof, that it may be trod^ down, and that he lay it waste, etc. To su^
speaks Paul, Romans 2. 1. Therefore the art inexcusable (o man) whosoever thou
^ that iudgest: for in that that thou iudgest another, thou condemnest thy
self: for the that iudgest do the same things. For the causes was it, that
the Prophet Isayah ^ not only sing a song, but such a song ^ has in it a
Parable, that is, a mystery a^ obscure and dark saying. But of the m^ter, and
circumstances of this Parab^ I mind to speak in the second part, ^ the grace
of God.

CHAP. IIII.
^ whom the Prophet consecrateth his Song, viz.

To his Beloved, verse 1.

AFter the order of the words, we are next to note to whom the Prophet
sings. He says, I will sing unto ^ Beloved. Here the Prophet shows, ^
whose praise he consecrateth his ^g. When S. Luke had written two Luke 1. 1.
^ned Volumes, the one, entitled, ^ Gospel after Luke: the other, The Act. 1.
1.
^es of the Apostles, he dedicated them ^h to his dear Theophilos: and so o^rs
Theophilo^
also have had a desire to commend ^ir best labors to such personages as ^y
most reverenced and best affected. ^us the Prophet Isayah having com^ed a Song,
says, he will sing the same ^is beloved friend.

^. And (as it seems) he alludeth in The Prophet alludeth to the manner of
writers
^, to the manner not only of them that ^e and dedicate books, but of Woers
and Lovers (as I said before.) As if ^ of Books and Woers.
said: seeing men* use to sing Songs ^ commend and please them whom the most
love and affect, I will also af^ their manner Sing a Song to my Belo^ For I
have also a Beloved: howbeit, ^ Beloved* is not as theirs: but my Belo^ is mine
and I am his: Cant. 5. 10. my Belo^ is fair and ruddy* Cant. 5. 10.

3. B^t (this notwithstanding) we ^ not imagine* that therefore the P^phet Who
is the Beloved.
was pissionated with any fleshly ^ worldly conceit* or affection, as the
fleshly woe^ b^^d lovers be: but rat^ that he wa^ enflamed with a most h^ and
godly zeal, and an ardent ^ffect^ of love, and desire to promote* the gl^ of
God* whom before all other things loved, and to the which he would ^ those and
all his labor should be c^ secrated. Therefore we may justly c^ sent with the
best Expositours of^ place, that by this his Beloved he ment^ Lord his God, and
the same, whose sp^tuall love and communication with ^ Church* Solomon
describes after ^ Cant. 1. P^al. 45.
manner of the man and the woman t^ ardently desires the favor and society
^e one of the other in chaste love. Of this ^loued he rejoiced, and might say
with ^e holy Spowsesse, Lo, this is my Beloved, ^d this is my Lover, o ye
daughters of Ieru^em: My Beloved is not a fleshly but ^pirituall lover, and he
will be pleased ^t with fleshly, but with spiritual love: ^, the true
worshippers worship him in ^rit and truth, and love him so.

^. By this, we learn to ascribe the ^ry of all our actions to God, to write
We ought to consecrate our labors to God.
^okes, and dedicate them to his honor^ ^compose Songs, and sing them both ^h
the spirit* and with the vnderstan^g, to his eternal praise, as to the wor^est
and best beloved. Thus also Mo^ Deborah, Hanna, David, Solomon, ^a^y, Zachary,
Hezekiah and others, ^wred forth their Songs to the Lord, ^ gave him the glory.
Thus also sang ^ Angels, Glory be to God on high. They Luke 1.
^t attribute the power and glory of ^t virtues and commendable labors ^o any
other, do derogate from his ^aiestie, and blaspheme his honor* ^erefore, let
us sing unto the Lord, and extol the glory of his Name, as the Psa^ mist has
also taught us saying: Not v^ to us, o Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Na^ give
the Glory, for thy loving mercy, and f^ thy truths sake, Psalm. 115. 1.

5. At the least, the Prophet b^ Thus should we commend the success of our
labors to God.
singing to his Beloved, does commen^ the success of his labors, and the
iudg^ment of all things to the Lord God^ As if he should say (to our
understanding) Seeing I have a long time pipe^ and none would dance: seeing I
ha^ preached and prophesied unto this people, and never a one of them beleeue^
my report and words: I will now bri^ the matter before the high Judge, a^ to
him will I commend both it, and t^ success of my travails. I will sing v^ to
him, yea, I will complain v^ him, and call him forth as a witne^ for me
against them. Thus, this P^phet in the first Chapter calls to ^ Isay. 1. 2.
Heavens and the earth, as if he eith^ spoke to them, or called them to be
w^nesses against the people. Thus, M^ Deuteronomy. 32. 1.
also deals with those ungrateful Isr^lites. So says Micah, I will look ^
^^^h. y. 7.
unto the Lord. And Zachary being ^rought to the place of execution, (at ^e
commandment of that unkind Ioash) ^ommitted the cause to God, saying: ^he Lord
look upon it, and require it. So 2. Chro. 24. 22.
^eere this Prophet commits all unto ^od, as we also ought to do; for unto
the lord it only apperteineth either to make ^ mar all.

6. It is objected, that the Prophet The Prophet by this word Beloved, means
not the people, but God.
^ this place rather commends his Song ^ the people of Israel, to whom he
^ake, because he says, I will sing to my ^eloued, and then proposes the
matter ^ the people, the which also he might ^ll his Beloved, in respect of his
love to ^em, and his great desire to reform and ^end them: But that which
follows ^thstandeth all this, and ratifieth that which is said before:
namely, that the Pro^et by his Beloved, means the Lord. ^r he says, he will
sing a Song of his Belo^d to his Vineyard. And it is certain, that ^ Song or
Parable, which he proposed, is ^e word of God, and the Vineyard where^ he
spoke, was the people of Israel and ^dah, unto whom the Lord himself in mercy
behaved himself as an husbandman to his Vineyard: for so the Prophet
expounds it, My beloved had a Vineyard that is to say, the Lord of hoasts had
^ chosen and peculiar people: namely, the house of Israel, and the man of
Judah.

7. There be here two other question^ to be answered, whereof the first is, why
he calls God a Beloved: the second i^ why he calls him, his Beloved.
Touching 1. Why he calls God Beloved.
the first, we have the reason of this title in the 2. Chap. of the 2. Book o^
Samuel, verse. 24. where David named hi^ son Iedid-iah, the Beloved of the
Lord for that (as it is there said) the Lord love him. So the Psalmist
(speaking of Christ in the person of Solomon) says: Thou ar^ Psalm. 45.
fayrer then the children of men, full of grace are thy lips: the reason is
added, because God has loved thee for ever. And the Prophet calls the Lord
Iedid, Beloue^ for that he is the same chief Good; the God is the chief good
which (before all things) is to be loue^ and to be desired, according to that
commandment, Thou shall love he Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy
mind, wi^ all thy power: And, first seek: the kingdom^ of God, and the
righteousness thereof.

8. Next, the Prophet calls him My 2. He calls God his Beloved: as speaking
in the behalf of the Church.
Beloved, partly as speaking in the person of the whole Church: partly, for
himself. He speaks in the behal^e of the Church as Solomon did who brought
in the same, speaking of Christ, as a faithful wife of her husband, saying: My
Beloved is mine, Cant. 2. 16. Again, I have sought for him whom my soul
loves: and in that respect, the Lord names himself an husband, and his
people his wife: Hos. 1. and 2. So is the Lord my Beloved (says the holy
Spowsesse) because he loves me, as the good husband loves his wife: he is my
best Beloved, because I affect and desire him, as the good wife affects and
desires her husband in holy love. And such (indeed) he would our love should
be toward him, as his love is toward us. The Church said, I am sick with
love: so let us love him, and let us be sick with his love.

9. Next, the Prophet speaking in his 3. As speaking in his own behalf.
own behalf, calls the Lord his Beloved, because the Lord had especially
chosen, called, and loved him: and also, for that he affected and desired his
love, mercy, and holy graces before all worldly treasures. For this cause was
the Lord called the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Iaacob, the
God of Daniel, as the same, who had been especially good unto them, and whom
they loved and served before all other Gods. And in this sense Paul says, I
thank my God: God, that loves and 1. Cor. 1. 4.
preserves me; God, whom I love and serve with my whole heart.

10. Finally, by this word, the Prophet expresses his thankful heart unto A
note of the Prophets tha^kfulnesse to God.
God, whose love and goodness he does not only acknowledge, but reverently
remember, and endeavor to requite to his power (through his Grace) to stir
up, and to provoke the people to do the like. Neither could they deny, how
bountiful the Lord had bin in blessings toward them, therein declaring his
great love to them, as Ezechiel also says in the 16. Chapter: or that thereby,
he might make them blush at their monstrous unkindness, who would neither
confess his love to them, nor show any token of good will toward him:
whereat the Lord was moved to say, I will call her Beloved, which was not
beloved, and her whom I loved, will I reject and cast off. Therefore says the
Prophet, I will sing to my Beloved: that is, to God, whose love toward me I
acknowledge, and whom I only love and ende^our (by all means possible) to
express and utter this my love toward him, as he has expressed his love
toward me. This is my Beloved, and I am his. A most worthy lesson for all men
to learn and follow, according to S. John's rule: Let us 1. John. 4 9. 10.
love God, for he loved us first, and let us express this love, by keeping of
his commandments, as our Lord has in his Gospel commanded us.

CHAP. V.
The Title of the Song. viz.

A Song of my Beloved concerning his Vineyard, verse. 1.

THere be in the holy Scriptures diverse Psalms and Songs diversely entitled,
either according to the names of the Authors of them, or the persons to and for
whom they were dedicated or composed, or according to the matter in them
contained. As, the Psalm Diverse titles of Psalms.
of David the servant of the Lord: the Prayer of Moses the man of God: the Song
of Solomon: the Song of Mary: the Song of Zachary: the Song of Degrees: the
prayer of the afflicted: the Song for the Sabbath day: the Song to give
instruction: a Song committed to Asaph: a Song committed to the sons of
Korah, etc. But this Song before all others, as he sings it to his Beloved,
so also he entituleth it of his Beloved touching his Vineyard. And in this, he
gives two things to be considered, viz. first, whose Two things in this title.
the Song is that he sings, and secondly, what matter the Song concerns.

First he says, that the Song is of his Beloved: next, that the Song
concerns the Vineyard of his Beloved.

2. I said in the Chapter before, that the Prophet calls God his Beloved, and
now, in that he calls the Song, the Song of his Beloved, it is as much, as if
he had called it, the Lords Song, for that is his The Lords Song, and why it is
so called.
meaning, namely, that he would sing a Song of the Lord. And worthily does he
so entitle it, first, because the Song was not the Prophets, but the Lords: for
(indeed) the Lord put this Parable and Song in the mouth of the Prophet, as he
also put a Parable in the mouth of the Prophet Nathan, whom he sent to David.
By his commandment was it, that one of the Seraphims flew unto the Prophet
with an hot coal in his hand, which he had taken from the al^ar with his
tongs and touched his mouth, as himself said, Isay. 6. 6.

3. By this, he would declare the credit of the matter, testifying, that he
brought unto the people nothing of his The credit and authority of the Song.
own, but that which was the Lords, who spoke by his mouth. Thus said Christ
to his Apostles whom he sent forth to preach, partly to embolden them, and
partly to give authority to the word they preached, It is not you that speak,
but the Spirit of my Father which speaks within you. Again, The words that I
speak, are not mine, but his that sent me. So, he says, I will sing a Song,
not mine own, but my Beloueds, that is, the Lords. Neither can it be but a
comfort to the Minister, when he is assured of his calling, and the cause, to
be the Lords: and a notable credit for the matter, when the people can
persuade, that it is the Lords.

4. Next, the Prophet entituleth the Song, the Lords Song, because it concerned
the Glory of God, and the case of his people. As the Jews in Babylon called
that Song the Lords Song, which concerned the praise of God, the service of
God, the Psalm. 137. 4.
Religion of God. In that sense, the Evangelist says, that Christ spoke unto
his Apostles of those things which apperteined to Act. 1. 3.
the kingdom of God. And we call that a godly Sermon, a godly Song, a godly
Psalm, in the which, the Glory of God, and the consolation and instruction of
his people is set forth and furthered. And here we are taught, what should be
the chief matter of our Sermons, our Songs and parables: and wherein we should
(indeed) meditate, as our chief exercise and delight with that Blessed man,
Psalm. 1. 2.

5. Again, considering the excellency How to use the word of God.
of the matter, as bewtified and authorized by the author thereof, that is, by
the Lord of hoasts, we should both reverently use ^t, and advisedly dispose it.
God will not be ^leased, that we handle his holy mysteries with unwashed hands;
nor that we mix ^is pure divinity with man's inventions; ^or that we apply
them to profane uses ^o please man's fleshly lusts: but that we ^se the^
holily, modestly, zealously, wisely, ^^ the fear of God, to his glory, to the
^omfort of his Church, to the discharge ^f our duties. And also the Lords will
is, that we should sing the songs of mercy to them that repent, and the songs
of judgment to the^ that be obstinate, as the Pro^het has taught us; least
(peradventure) ^e should seem to sing the Lords Song in a ^range land; to give
things holy to dogs; and to cast precious pearls before swine*

6. Finally, the Prophet (to make difference This Song concerns the Lords
Vineyard.
between this Song, and other the Lords Songs) tells what thing th^^ Song
chiefly concerns, namely, the Vineyard of the Lord. But thereof, with the
matter of the Song, and what the purpose of the Lord is in the same, it shall
be (by the help of God) declared in the second part.

The end of the first Part.
The Second part, containing The matter and substance of the Song of the
Beloved, etc.
^erse 1. My Beloved had a Vineyard in a very fruitful hill. And he hedged it
about, etc. unto the end of the 6. verse.
CHAP. I.
The brief Sum and disposition of this second part.

AS the Song of the Beloved concerning his Vineyard, has in it a Parable (as
it is declared in the former part: so, in the Parable, the Prophet covertly
describes A description of the state of Israel and Judah.
the state and condition of the people of Israel and Judah: to the en^ that
seeing their own sins and i^ gratitude, and for the same, their futu^
misery (as in a Glass) they might be ^ shamed, and be driven to repentanc^
thereby to eschew that heavy iudgeme^ hanging over their heads. And in the
part, the Prophet sets forth these six^ memorable points to be considered,
v^^ 1. The great love and mercy of God towar^ Six points to be considered in
this part.
the people of Israel and Judah: 2. his expectation of their good works and
thankfulness. 3. their horrible unkindness t^wards him. 4. his appellation
and requ^ of judgment in the case. 5. his complai^ 6. his sentence and
commination again^ them.

2. And these points are gathered o^ of the Song: My Beloved had a Vineyard in
a ve^ Verse 1.
fruitful hill: and he hedged it, and gath^red out the stones of it, and he
planted Verse 2.
with the best plants: and he built a Tow^ in the mids thereof, and made a
Win^ press therein. Then he looked that it should bring forth ^apes. And
brought forth wild Grapes. Now therefore o inhabi^ts Verse 3.
of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, ^ge I pray you between me and my Vine^d. What
^ld I have done any more to my Vine^d, Verse 4.
that I have not done unto it? Why ^e I looked that it should bring forth
^apes, and it brings forth wild Grapes? And Verse 5.
^ I will tell you what I will do to my Vine^d: I will take away the hedge
there^ and it shall be eaten up: I will break ^ wall thereof, and it shall be
trodden ^ne: And I will lay it waste: It shall Verse 6.
^ be cut, nor dug: but briars and ^nes shall grow up: and I will also
com^nd the clouds that they rain no rain ^n it.

3. And these points our Lord Jesus ^ the Gospel worthily observes in ^
Parable (which he proposed to the ^es) of the perfidious husbandmen, ^ch
(indeed) touched not only the ^^ Priests, Scribes and Rulers of the people,
to whom the Lord had committed the charge of his Vineyard, tha^ is, of the
people of Israel and Judah, bu^ also, the whole state of the Jews. An^ therein
it cannot be denied, but that the Lord alludeth to this Parable which the
Prophet has proposed, and the sam^ both expounds and applies to them Christ
observed those six points in his Parable proposed to the Jews. Math 21. 33.
as of the conclusion may be gathered for first, the love and mercy of God is
s^ forth, in that Christ says, There was ^ certain householder which planted a
Vineyard, and hedged it round about, and made Wine Press therein, and built a
Tower, a^ let it out to husbandmen. 2. His expect^tion is expressed in this:
And when the Verse 34.
time of the fruit drew near, he sent his se^uants to the husbandmen, to
receive t^ fruits thereof. 3. Their ingratitude appears in this, that the
husbandmen to^ Verse 35. 36 37. 38. 39.
his servants and beat one, and killed another and stoned another, etc. 4. His
appellatio^ and request of judgment, is declared ^ these words, When therefore
the Lord ^ Verse 40.
the Vineyard shall come, what shall he do ^ those husbandmen? 5. The complaint
^ considered of these words: Read ye neu^ Verse 42.
in the Scriptures, the stone which the builders refused, the same is made the
head of the corner. Complaining as it were, that those high Priests, Scribes
and Elders of the Jews, who were accounted the builders of the Church and
common wealth of Israel, had rejected Christ, and so denied the mercies of God,
who had ^eene most bountiful toward them. 6. The sentence and commination is
contained in these words: Therefore I Verse. 43.
say unto you, that the kingdom of God shall ^e taken from you, and shall be
given to a Nation which shall bring forth the fruits ^hereof. And this is the
sum of the whole.

4. Surely, as the Lord God has de^lared his love, and sweet mercies on all
The mercies of God.
^he Nations of the earth (howsoever they ^aue acknowledged the same, and
beha^ed themselves): so has not any one Na^ion under the heavens more felt and
in^oyed the sweetness and happy fruits ^hereof, then the children of Israel,
and ^hiefely them of Judah, to whom he had ^ndeede) dealt in his love more
bounti^ull then to others. And this is witnessed first by Moses, who tells
with what Deuteronomy. 32.
wonders and tokens the Lord had freed this people from the Egyptians, and
preserved and maintained them in the Wilderness; and how the Lord had been
unto them, as a Father to his Son, as an Eagle to her young, and as a most
gracious King to his true and obedient people. Of this the Psalmist also
modulateth in many places, and after report of many the Lords wonderful works
of mercy toward them, he concludes, saying: He has not done so with euer^
nation, neither have they known his judgments, Psalm. 147. 20.

5. After this, Isayah was bold an^ urged this argument before the face o^
Kings and Princes. Jeremy also was plentiful in these things: and (to let
pass^ the rest) how copious and eloquent i^ Ezechiel in his 16. Chapter? he
commenceth there with the original of this people, and declares most amply,
ho^ wonderful the Lord has been in hi^ mercy toward them from time to time^
Therefore of this people, far beyon^ all the nations under the heavens, di^
he most expect to be served in Spirit What God expected of them.
and truth, who indeed (beyond all others) should in this declare themselves
grateful to him for such his great blessings. But (alas) as there is no Nation
which has not angered God by great abominations and sins, so was there But
no Nation angered him more then the Jews.
never any that more deceived the Lords expectation, then this people of
Israel: ^ea, they did not only decipher their ^orrible ingratitude toward
him, but also far passed all the Nations of the earth in wicked abominations
and sins ^ginst God, to his great displeasure and their own woe.

Therefore the horrible ingratitude of They be made a Glass to all posterities.
^his people, and their final destruction ^or the same, is made a glass and
example ^o all posterities, not to be commended and followed; but to be loathed
and abandoned of them that mind to retain the grace of God, and to enjoy the
sweet fruits and comfortable effects of his love, for ^he eternal consolation
of their souls.

6 But now, seeing it pleased the Lord to ^et forth all these things by his
Prophet under the Parable of the Vinitor and his Vineyard, let us examine the
particular circumstances; and first, those which do express the great love and
mercies of the Lord, toward the house of Israel and Judah.

CHAP. II.
First, the love and mercy of God is expressed in these words: viz.

My Beloved had a Vineyard, verse 1.

IN this Song or Parable, we hear the Prophet to tell of a certain Vinitor or
husbandman, and of his Vineyard: of the place of the Vineyard, of the hedging,
cleansing, and planting thereof with the best plants, and of a Tower and a
Winepresse builded and made therein: of all the which, I mind and God will to
speak in order. For albeit that (after the judgment of some men) it is not
necessary that we should exquisitely sift every word, or that the Allegories of
the same should be expounded: thinking it enough that only by the words we
should generally ^nderstand the Lords love and mercy to ^is people, and their
unkindness toward* ^im: yet have I thought it meet and ^^nuement to examine
every word par^icularly, and thereof in the fear of God) ^o yield the sense,
as of an Allegory or Parable which cannot well be understood without an
exposition: and that the soo^er, because it may appear even to the ^gnorant
and unlearned, with how many ^ich and particular bounties the Lord had ^lessed
and beawtified the people of Israel, and how careful, provident and watchful
he was over them at all times: ^a vehement Argument to have stirred them to
thankfulness. Neither should we be ungrateful to the Lord, when (the rather
by the consideration of these things) we meditate of the Lords love and mercies
toward our selves, the which in very deed have been, and be right plentiful
and most apparent in this our time.

1. First therefore, in that the Lord God The Vinitor and his Vineyard.
likeneth himself to a man, and speaks after the manner of a man, thereby
applying himself and his words to our infirm and gross capacities, it
argues his love and favor to man, who, as a Father loving and liking his
little Son, will etiam in baculo equitare (as they say) show himself as a
child to teach his child. And thereof sings the Psalmist: Who is like unto
the Lord our God, that has his dwelling on high? who yet abaseth himself to
behold things in heaven and in earth? And who can but wonder with the same,
that considers how the Lord so high Isa. 9.
and wonderful vouchsafes to incline himself to our condition, to humble
himself to teach and instruct us: to be mindful of us: to regard us? But yet,
more apparent is his love and mercy to his people, in that he likeneth
himself not only to a man, but also to an husbandman: yea, to a wise,
careful, and painful Vinitor, and his people to God is as a Vinitor.
his Vineyard, which is also oftentimes spoken and repeated in the holy
Scriptures.

2. There is not (in all the Scriptures) a meeter Comparison to set forth the
love and mercies of God to mankind: for, as there is not any possession of the
husbandman more precious and dear A notable comparison to express the love of
God to man.
unto him, then is his Vineyard: so neither any, that requires the like
providence, care, labor, and daily regard. By this the Lord would teach, that
the people of Israel and Judah were not only unto himself a precious
inheritance: but also, that himself has a special love, liking, and regard
of the same, to consolate and embolden them in all afflictions that put their
trust in him, and to stir them up to express their thankfulness, by
bringing forth and yielding unto him the fruits of righteousness.

And such a thing intended our Savior when he said to his disciples: I am the
John. 15. 1. 5. 8.
Vine, and my father is the Husbandman. Again: I am the Vine, and ye are the
Branches. Again, Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit,
and become my disciples. This similitude does aptly set forth the love and
mercy of God to his people: but to amplify and enlarge the same, the Prophet
brings in certain particulars, numbering up certain special benefits that
the Lord of his goodness had bestowed on his Vineyard: that is, on the people of
Israel and Iuda^

3. Psalm. 24. 1.
tongues? says not the Psalmist: The Earth is the Lords, the plenty of the
round world, and they that dwell therein? How God is said to have one Vineyard:
and how? Answer.
then is it said, that God has this one Vineyard? as if therefore in respect
of this one, all other Nations did nothing belong unto him? I answer: As those
things which men affect, and use either little or nothing, are said to be not
their own, in respect of those things which they most love and use daily; so,
albeit the Lord knows who be his, and has also other sheep which are not of
this fold, yet because it pleased the Lord to elect and choose those sheep of
the house of Israel from and before all others, and to favor and feed them
with right good pasture, and to be present and daily helping them, and to
account and reckon them for his peculiar people: therefore they are called his
Vineyard: his sheep, and his peculiar people, and he is called their God.

4. And indeed, the Lord God has not one only Vineyard, but many Vineyards,
God has many Vineyards: but yet one above all:
even of and among the Gentiles also: And the time is come, that those sheep
which are without, are also both called and brought into the right sheepfold
under the chief Shepherd, according to that desire of Noah when he prayed
thus, O that God would persuade Iaphet to dwell in the Tabernacles of Shem! But
until that came to pass, the Gentiles were excluded (as it were) from the
people of God, and the Israelites were chiefly accounted and called the
Vineyard of the Lord, as the same of whom he had most regard, and to whom he
expressed his love by large benefits before all other Nations, as Esdras also
said to the most high. O Lord, Lord of every forest of the 2. Esd. 5. 23.
earth, and of all the trees thereof, thou have chosen thee one only Vineyard:
And of all lands of the world, thou have chosen thee one pit: and of all the
flowers of the ground, thou have chosen thee one Lilly: and of all the depthes
of the Sea, thou have filled thee one River: and of all builded Cities, thou
have sanctified Sion to thy self. And among all the fowls that are created,
thou have named thee one Dove: and of all the cattle that are made, thou have
appointed thee one Sheep: and among all the multitude of people, thou have
gotten thee one people: and unto this people (whom thou love) thou gave a
law, which is approved of all. And this is approved by many testimonies and
examples in the Law, in the Prophets, in the Psalms, and in the Gospel.

5. In this respect Christ said to the Syrophenissan, It is not meet to give
the bread which belongs to the children unto dogs. Mat. 10. 5. 6.
Again, I am not come, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And
sending forth his Disciples, he charged them saying, Go not into the way of the
Gentiles, and into the Cities of the Samaritanes enter ye not: But go rather to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel. This was (I say) until the time of the
Gentiles, who then also came by faith, and made a challenge of the merits of
Christ, according as the Prophets, and Solomon in his Songs had prophesied. Of
this also, Peter, by the vision he saw was fully certified, and Paul to the
Romans, Chap. 11. at large disputes.

But the purpose of the Prophet was The purpose of the Prophet.
^o set forth the love and mercy of God, ^hiefely toward the house of Israel
and ^he Jews, whom he had wonderfully ^lessed and enriched with benefits, and
unto whom the Prophet preached and ^xpounded, and applied the Parable
^ccordingly.

CHAP. III.
The love and mercy of God, expressed also in these words, viz.

In a very fruitful hill, verse 1.

WHen men intend to plant Gardens, Orchards, and Vineyards, they first make
choice of the ^lace, and soil, such as they think to be The place of the
Vineyard.
^oth fertile, pleasant, and most meet for ^he purpose: neither without this
prouide^t ^oresight, may they expect any fruit of their labors. Solomon
displayed his own ^are in this case, when he said: I have made ^y great
works, I have built me houses, I have planted me Vineyards, I have mad^ me
Gardens and Paradises, and planted i^ them trees of all fruit: Eccles. 2. 4.
5. Unto this point of husbandry alludeth the Prophet Isayah, when he says, My
Beloue^ had a Vineyard; Bekeren Ben-schamen, tha^ is, In an horn of the son
of Oil.

By an horn, the Hebrews vnderstan^ An horn. Son of oil.
pleasure, strength, height: by Oil, they note fatness, plenty, fertility:
and by the son of Oil, they note that which i^ of Oil, or comes of oil,
or fatness a phrase usual with them, as the Son o^ Nobles: the son of
days: the son o^ death: the son of plenty, etc. So, by the horn of the
son of Oil, the Prophet means a very pleasant and plentiou^ ^ill or high
country: declaring thereby, that God had planted his people in ^ land both
pleasant and plentiful of all Pleasant and fertile.
fruits.

2. Some moralizing on this place, understand by this hill, the field of this
world: but they exceed the meaning of the Prophet, who doubtless speaks of
the land of Chanaan, and alludeth to the words of the promise made to them that
hearkened to the Lords voice, and walked in his Deuteronomy. 28. 1. 11. 13.
^ayes, Deuteronomy. 28. The Lord will set thee on ^gh above all the Nations of the
earth. A^ine: He shall make thee plenteous in good^sse in the fruit of thy
body, in the fruit of ^y cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground, in ^e land
which the Lord swear unto thy fa^ers to give thee. Again, The Lord shall ^ake
thee the head and not the tail: and ^ou shall be above only, and not beneath.
and speaking again of this special land ^ the Lords Vineyard, he says unto
the ^ildren of Israel, The land whither ye The plenty and pleasures of the
land of promise. Deuteronomy. 11. 11. 12.
^ to possess, it is a land of mountains and ^lleys, and drinks water of
the rain of ^auen (which was in this preferred to the and of Egypt, which for
want of rain ^rely needed to be watered with streams ^awen out of the river
Nylus.) This land ^eth the Lord thy God care for: the ^es of the Lord thy God
are always ^on it, from the beginning of the year, ^to the end of the year.
And this no^d his continual providence over this and beyond all others. This
is the same ^ the which the Lord spoke when he said, ^at he would deliver his
people out of the hand of the Egyptians, and bring them out of that land, into
a good land and ^ large, into a land that flows with milk^ and honey. And
indeed, Moses both believing and foreseeing this in the Spirit prophesied
thereof in his Song, saying He carried him up to the high places of the Deuteronomy.
32. 13. 14.
earth (for the land of Canaan was indeed^ high in respect of Egypt) that he
might eat the fruits of the fields: and he ca^sed him to suck honey out of
the stone, an^ oil out of the hard Rock: Butter of Ki^ and Milk of Sheep,
with fat of the Lamb^ and Rams fed in Bashan, and Goate^ with the fat of the
graynes of wheat, an^ the red liquour of the Grape have the drunk.

3. Some would refer this only t^ the City of Jerusalem, which was high^
then all other Cities, and the Countr^ thereabouts, no less fruitful,
especiall^ in Vines, the which do grow and pr^sper Bacchus amat colles,
Aquilonem, and frigora Syluae.
naturally, rather in the high hille^ then in the low countries, chiefly ther^
where they have the heat of the Sun a pure air and sweet humor. And there
of is it, that all Vines are not of like goo^nesse and pleasant taste, because
all pla^ are not alike in goodness and name for it. And it is certain, that
as the ^ophet commends the field whereon ^ Vineyard was made by the situation
^reof on an hill, and by the goodness ^he soil: so he would thereby display ^
plentifulnesse and pleasures of the ^d of Canaan, into the which the Lord ^d by
his grace brought his people of ^ael, and planted them: as also the happy ^e
and condition of that people, as long ^hey enjoyed the presence and favor God
in that pleasant land, in regard ^ereof, all nations called them blessed, ^he
Prophet Malachie said. Mala. 3. 10.


4. And this shall we the better The situation of the land of Chanaan. Mare
mortuum.
^we, if we note, how this land was bordered and compassed about. It ^ on the
East side thereof, the Dead ^, whereas in the old time were ^ed the Cities of
Sodom and Go^rha, the which Country as we ^de in the book of Genesis, Chap.
13. ^. was both pleasant and plentiful in ^ites, and therefore Loath in his
de^ting from Abraham, made choice thereof to dwell there. Beyond the whi^
Althamer. in Syl. Bibl.
Sea, was the Country of Moab and A^mon, and the great River Euphrates, b^yond
Luther. in Isay.
the which is Babylon, and the regi^ of the Chaldaeans, and beyond that Per^
Then on the North side lies Galilaea, the back whereof is the Mountain
^banus, beyond the which is Damascus, ^ the famous River Euphrates: then Sy^
and Assyria, which bend toward the E^ then beyond that, is Zidon and Tire, ^
tending something toward the W^ Then on the West part, are the Philist^ or the
land of Palestina, with the coasts the great Sea, called Mediterraneum, the Sea
of Palestina. And then, lastly the South side, Egypt, Ethiopia, the red S^ Edom
and Midiam. But Egypt, thoug^ be set on the South side of Iudaea, de^neth very
much to the West. And the are the limits or bounds of the land Chanaan,
otherwise called the land promise: the which is more at large ^scribed in those
places of the Scriptu^ as Genesis 10. 19. Exodus 23. 31. Nomb. 34. to verse 13.
Deuteronomy. 11. 11. 24. Josh. 1. and Ezech. 47. 15. unto the 21. verse. 5. Now, by
this we may gather, that ^e Lords Vineyard was sited indeed ^ the hill of the
son of Oil (as the Pro^het says) that is, in a most pleasant and ^uitfull
land. Such a blessing did the Lord ^ue to the children of Israel, and such The
good things belong to the good.
^ood things bestows he on his people, things ordained (indeed) not for the
^icked Chanaanites, but for the godly ^raelites: not for the atheistical
world^gs, but for the true worshippers of ^od, howsoever the wicked have and do
^yly vsurp on them and abuse them: ^ stir up the children of God to the ^ght
consideration of his fatherly love ^d mercies toward them, and to be right
^ankfull unto him, by whom and from whom, they enjoy these so rare blessings.

6. Where the Prophet says, My Be^ed had a Vineyard in such a place, he ^ould
teach us whose those good things ^e, and who gives and bestows them ^ the
children of men. The Devil says, ^ll these things be mine, and to whom soever
^ill I give them, Luke. 4. 6. But he lies ^ost falsely: for he has nothing,
but Whose the things of
^ permission from the Lord. For the earth is the Lords, the world is the
Lords, the world are? Gods.
and all whatsoever is therein is the Lords, who gives the same to whom
soever he will. Thus also the worldly man says* These Lands, these Parks,
these Forests, these Granges, these Manours, these Farms, and all these things
be mine: I have gotten them, I have travailed for them, I have adventured my
life, and perished my conscience, and now they b^ mine, nor belong they to any
other. This was Nabals resolution. But the Prophet says: The Vineyard is the
Lords: The vineyard of the Lord of host is the house o^ Israel: and the man of
Judah his choy^ plant, and whatsoever we have for the use of our life, is the
Lords: for he gives water and bread, milk and honey, and whatsoever else. And
this the servant o^ Abraham confessed, when coming to Genesis 24. 35.
Bethuels house, to get a wife for Isaak h^ masters son, he said: The Lord
has blessed my master wonderfully, that he is becom^ great: for he has given
him sheep an^ beeues, and silver and gold, and men-seruants, and
maid-seruants, and camels, an^ asses: So he acknowledged that his master was
enriched of the blessing of God, from whom he knew that every good thing came,
and not of any labor or wisdom of his, albeit he was a man both wise and
virtuous.

7. Oh that men would in like sort acknowledge whose all these things be, and
^ow they be enriched with them in the We should consider of whom we have our
wealth, etc. and use i^ well.
world, and that they would accept and use them as his gifts, and not to abuse
them after their lusts. Let us know, that the Lord has a Vineyard and talents,
and ^e sets forth his Vineyard to some: ^e lends ^his talents to other.
Let not now the Husbandmen say, this Vineyard is our own, and we will not ^aue
this Lord to rule over us: Neither let them which have the talents ^o be
employed, neglect them to their pleasures, and reckon not of any ac^ompt: But
let the Husbandmen know, that they are but tenants, and that the Vineyard
appe^^eineth to their Lord, who looks for the fruits thereof: and let the
other know, that the talents belong to their master, to whom they ought to
^eeld increase thereof, else shall they be thrust out, and destroyed for ever:
for the Vineyard is the Lords: the Talents are his: and he will not that we
derogate from him, and arrogate to our selves that which belongs to his honor.

CHAP. IIII.
The love and mercy of God toward the Jews expressed in this, that he hedged
his Vineyard about, verse 2.

IT seems to some, that the Prophet observes not the right order of
husbandmen, The hedging of the Vineyard.
who begin first to plant before they hedge their Vineyards. And to that order
it seems that our Savior in Math. 21. 33. alludeth when he says, that the
householder planted a Vineyard, and hedged it round about. Howbeit, we should
rather respect the matter and drift of the Prophet, then his method, being
certain, that the Lord (who is only wise) did not plant only his Vineyard in
such a place, but also added all things necessary both for the defense,
saferie and prosperity of the same. And yet we shall not need to subvert the
Prophets order in The Prophets order may be observed.
this, seeing that according to the same, it may be true enough, that the Lord
first ^edged his Vineyard, and made all things safe and sure about the very
place thereof, before that he planted therein the choice Vine, as those
husbandmen accustom to do, which before they till and sow their land, do first
hedge and fence it strongly round about.

2. And this shall appear plain enough, ^f by this hedge we understand either
the Law of Moses (as some expound it) or the Divine Protection, whereby the
Lord governed, defended, and preserved the children of Israel, and of the
which, they ^nioyed the benefit and commodity long ^ere they came into the
land of Chanaan: Read Psalm. 105 8. 13. 14.
but then and there they felt the sweet savor of the same most abundantly,
as that Vineyard which is environed and well fenced round about with a most
mighty and substantial hedge. And in this respect the Prophet observes such
an order, as well became the Lords wise proceeding by his providence in this
matter, whereof Christ spoke summarily.

3. This Hedge is expounded sometimes By the hedge, is noted sometime the Law:
Munster. in Isa. 5.
to signify the Law given by Moses, by the which the people of Israel was kept
in order within, and well defended from the foes without; and without the right
use whereof, they retained neither good order nor safety, but confusion and
ruin: howbeit, the Hedge here chiefly notes the Divine Protection, by the
which (as by an hedge) the The Divine Protection.
Lord both defended and preserved the children of Israel. Of this hedge
speaks the Psalmist, saying: Who so dwells Psalm. 91.
under the defense of the most highest, shall abide under the shadow of the
Almighty. Again, There shall none evil happen The commodity of this hedge.
unto them, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling: for he shall give
his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. This hedge did the
Lord promise to make about Jerusalem, when he said by the Prophet Zachary, I
my self Zach. 2. 5.
will be a wall, or hedge of fire round about her. And in this time, he
reproved the Deuourer for their sakes, neither Mala. 3 11.
did he suffer him to destroy the fruit of the ground, nor was their Vine
barraine in the field, as said the Prophet Malachie.

4. This is that hedge, with the which the Lord did compass Elisha round
about, when to defend him from the rage of the Syrian soldiers, he sent horses
2. King. 6.
and chariots of fire, which environed the City of Dathan where Elisha was.
And this hedge did the Lord God make round about Job, and all that he had, so
Job. 1. 9.
strong, that the Devil himself could not so much as touch him. Therefore he
said, Does Job fear God for naught? have thou not made an hedge about him, and
about his house: and about all that he has on every side? thou have blessed
the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land. That is,
has not Job good cause to serve God, seeing God protecteth him and his house
and substance, and blesses and prospers him? but if the Lord would remove
from him this hedge, he should soon be as bare as ever Adam was, when he
sought with fig leaves Genesis 3. 7.
to cover his nakedness.

5. Indeed, whenever this hedge is gapped The want of the hedge. Psalm. 80.
(in the Lords displeasure) there is then neither safety nor prosperity at
all: for (as the Psalmist says) the wild Boar out of the wood, and the wild
Beasts of the field do devour them within: that is, the cruel Tyrants, and
such as hate both the people of God, and the holy religion, are pressed and ready
to invade and devour them. The Assyrians wanted this hedge, when 2. King 17.
25.
being in the cities of Samaria, they were destroyed of Lions, which the Lord
sent among them, for that they feared not the Lord. And this hedge was gapped,
before this, to the Israelites, when the Philistines entered into the Vineyard,
and smote 30. 1. Sam. 4. 10. 11.
thousand footmen of Israel, and took away the Ark of God, with the which
(as the wife of Phinez complained) the Glory of Israel was departed.

6. When the Psalmist on a time perceived this hedge to be gapped, through the
which the wild Boar of the wood, and the wild Beasts of the field had entered
the Vineyard, he lamented, and complained unto the Lord in the behalf of the
distressed people, and prayed also to him in these words: Return we beseech
thee, o God of hoasts: look down from heaven, Psalm. 80, 14.
and behold and visit this Vine, and the Vineyard that thy right hand has
planted, and the young Vine, that thou made so strong for thy self. He
desired, that the Lord would yet in mercy repair again this hedge unto them,
and defend them: and Deuteronomy. 11 11. 12.
that (as Moses said) he would watch over them, to preserve and protect them
from the beginning of the year, unto the end thereof, as he had in times past.

7. This is that hedge, which Moses calls the refuge and defense of Israel,
the shield of their help, and the sword of their glory. This did the Lord
cause to go before all, to proceed with all, and to compass, keep and defend
all. This began in our election, was stretched forth in our calling, flourished
in our redemption, shined in our sanctification, and shall be perfected in our
glorification, through the merit of the Son of God. This was Psalm. 105. 14.
Exodus 14. Josh. 3. 16. and 4. and 5.
as a wall unto the Israelites both on the right hand and on the left hand,
when they came through the red Sea, when they passed over Jordan, when they
marched toward the land of Chanaan, whiles they prospered in the holy land,
and glorified the Lord their God in their hearts.

8. And this is the Hedge, by the which the Lord (through his Son) blesses,
prospers, and preserves both us and our houses, and all that we have, whiles
we truly serve him, maugre the surie of our foes. Therefore, let us be
thankful unto God, and retain his Grace, to serve him with reverence and
fear, so shall this hedge be maintained for our continual safety, peace, and
comfort.

CHAP. V.
The love and mercy of God, expressed also in this: that he gathered out the
stones of the vineyard, verse 2.

NExt to the enclosing, the Prophet tells of a clensing, saying, that The
clensing of the Vineyard.
his Beloved gathered out the stones. There be some which would confound this
circumstance with that which goes before, expounding this place to be a
^alling, or placing of stones in order, as ^n a wall, for that the word Sakar,
signi^ieth In secunda coniugatione.
to gather stones, to place stones, to ^edge with stones, or to make a wall
with ^tones: and so much the sooner, because that Christ in the Gospel
speaks of the ^edging and planting, but not of the clensing of the Vineyard.
Howbeit, it ^s true, that neither Christ nor the Pro^het meant that the Vine
could well Math. 21. 33
^rosper and grow there where the stones ^ere not gathered out, and the ground
^leansed of briars, thorns, and other ^oysome things. S. Luke making report ^f
the same thing, as respecting rather Luke 20. 9.
^he drift and purpose of the Lord, then ^he exact repetition of circumstances,
^elleth neither of the place, nor of the ^edge, nor of the clensing, nor of ye
tower, ^or of the wine press: but only says, A ^ertaine man planted a
Vineyard, and let it ^rth to husbandmen. And yet is it certain, that the
Vineyard was not only planted, ^ut had al things provided both necessary and
convenient in and about the same. Be^des that, the word as it may be and is
best ^xpounded, signifies to cleanse from stones.

2. Therefore the best expositours have and do consent in this, that the
Prophet here means a picking out of the stones from the Vineyard, and a
cleansing of the soil to make it capable of the plants; and profitable for the
fruit. And in this; The manner of husbandmen.
he alludeth to the manner of husbandmen, who before they cast in their seed or
plant in their fields, do first cleanse and purge the same of brambles, bushes;
thorns, stones, and whatsoever else which may hurt or hinder the growing of the
seed, plants, and fruits thereof.

3. He gathered out the stones: A ston^ What is meant by a stone.
in the Scripture is diversely taken, but i^ this place in the worst part, as
we may gather by this, that the stones be gathere^ out of the Vineyard, as
things unprofitable and noisome to the Vines. By The Gentiles.
stones, are meant sometimes the Gentil^ and heathen people, and those (some
say) John the Baptist meant, when he said, G^ is able even of these stones to
raise up children to Abraham, Math. 23. And here by the stones, are understood
those hardhearted Chanaanites, whom the Lord ca^ The Cananites.
out before the children of Israel, an^ thereof the Psalmist sings to the
Lord, ^hou have driven out the heathen with thine and, and thou have destroyed
them, Psalm. 44. ^ Again: Thou have cast out the heathen, ^d planted it. Psalm.
80. 8. That is, thou have ^pelled the cursed Chanaanites, and ^anted thy people
(even the Israelites) their Land.

4. And these the Prophet calls Why they be called stones.
^nes for the hardness of their hearts, ^e which would not be mollified with
^e word of God, to serve to any good ^e. And in this sense Christ calls them
^nes, which having stony hearts, when ^e seed of the word is cast among them,
They that have hard hearts, be as stones.
^fer not the same to take root. So the ^rd by Ezechiel, calls such kind of
^sons, stony hearts. Chapt. 11. 19. and 36. ^ That is, hearts which are
obstinate, ^ will not be moved to repentance. ^ch stones the Lord gathered
out of his ^neyard, that he might give rest and ^speritie to the same. Such
stones would ^e been as pricks in the eyes, and whips the sides, and an
intolerable burden ^he Lords people, had he not expelled ^m, and caused the
land to spew them out, as things most unworthy so good la^d. Thus did he unto
them of his iustic^ for their stony hearts, and filthy abh^minations: and thus
did he for his Vin^yard, of his free love and mercy towar^ the same, without
any desert.

5. Let us learn to make use of thi^ and such other examples, as Paul w^ wont
to do to the Romans and Cori^thians, 1. Cor. 10. Romans 11.
applying them unto these daye^ to admonish us, on whom the ends of the The use
of this example.
world are come, how that God, wh^ the same now, that he was then, will al^
reject us, as he rejected them, if we b^ stones, that is, hard-harted,
stiff-necke^ stubborn, and polluted with the lik^ abominations and sins.
And let ^ pray to the Lord in the name of ^ dear Son, to put that new Spir^
within us, to t^ke away that stony hea^ out of our bodies, and to give us ^
heart of flesh, that is, soft and tractable that we may be moved by the
allurin^ pipe of his word, to walk in his way^ to keep his judgments, and be
indeed his people, and that he will be and continu^ our good God, with whom we
may liu^ honor among those living stones of his ^ple, and not be gathered out
and re^ed from his Vineyard, with those dead ^ senseless stones which are good
for thing.

Further, by these stones, may be vnstood Stones also signify all sins and
abominations.
all kind of errors, sins, and ^ominations, the which are no less ^some to
the good vine, then those vnsitable stones which the husbandman ^h to gather up
and cast out from his ^l are hurtful to his seed. And these also Lord God
gathered out from his Vine^: he banished away errors, he par^ed their sins,
he abandoned all kind ^hominations, and consecrated this ^le to himself,
through the most ^llent Graces of his Spirit, where^hey might be and continue
wise, ^e, pure, and an holy people, as to ^m he might say (as to his innocent
^wsesse) Behold, thou art fair (my ^e, my Sister, my Spowsesse) and with^pot.

Finally, by these stones are meant more ^erally all things whatsoever were
of^iue, noisome, or unprofitable to the Lords people, to the end he might (the
things being removed) furnish them w^ things good and profitable. Such a
mat^mindeth this Prophet, Chap 57. 14. wh^ prophesying of the return of the
peop^ from their captivity into their own la^ that none impediment might
hinder the happy return and way homeward, h^ says: Cast up, cast up, prepare
the way, t^ up the stumbling blocks out of the way of ^ people. Again, he
says: Cast up, cast ^ the way, and gather out the stones: that ^ prepare your
selves, and remove away t^ lets that may hinder you.

8. So the Lord gathered out the sto^ from his Vineyard: that is, he rejected ^
Heathen in respect of his people, the c^dren of Israel: he expelled and cast^
the stony Canaanites: he cleansed the The Lord removed all naughty and
unprofitable things from his Vineyard.
from all abominations, and suffered^ those gross sins of the Heathen ^
reign among them: and he remo^ from them all noisome impedime^ that the Vine
being planted, might spr^ up and prosper. And in this, is set for the great
regard and care that the Lo^ (in mercy) had of this people of Isra^ And by
this the godly (which are the ^ds true inheritance) do not only ac^wledge the
Lords great love and mer^owards them: but also his desire to ^nse them from all
errors, impediments ^hinderances, to their daily growing, ^spering, and bea^ing
the fruits of ^ctification; and they gladly add to ^ example, that
commandment which ^ist gave them for their good. If thy ^t hand hinder thee,
cut it off and cast it ^ thee: which also alludeth to that ^d of God spoken to
Moses, saying: Put ^hy shoes from thy feet, for the place wher^hou stand,
is holy ground. Exodus 3. 4. ^d the which John the Baptist in his prea^g, did
warily observe, Prepare, says ^he way of the Lord, etc. For, neither ^OD and
Mammon, nor Christ ^ Belial can agree: nor can such burrish ^es, agree with the
pure Vines in the ^eyard of the Lord: therefore they be ^hered up with those
noisome toys, ^d cast out.

CHAP. VI.
The love and mercy of God to the ^e^ declared in this, that he plan^ his
Vineyard with the choice V^ verse 2.

AFter that the Prophet had spok^ of the place of the Vineyard, ^ the hedging
about, and cle(...) thereof, he also speaks of the plan^ The planting of the
Vineyard.
as also of the kind of vine where wit^ was planted: and as without this, all ^
rest is nothing worth, so neither can ^ labor and cost be quited, except ^
plants be of a good kind. Therefore ^ Prophet says, He planted it with the ^
plant: The Hebrew word is Sorek. Vitis electa. Genesis 49. 11.
Sorek* t^ is, the choice Grape. Of this kind ^ Vine spoke Jacob, when he
blessed ^ son Judah, saying: He shall bind ^ ass foale unto the Vine, and
his asses colt ^ to the best Vine: He shall wash his garm^ in Wine, and his
cloak in the blood ^ Grapes. And this kind was wont to gro^ ^ the valley of
Palestina, where Samson ^ued Dalila, which valley was also na^ed Judge. 1^.
after the Vine, by the which the ^ountry was most commended.

2. Now, as the best things are set ^orth^ by the things of best price and
^stimation: so here, as by the Vineyard, ^e Prophet meant the people of Israel,
which the Lord chose and took from ^ong all other people: so also by the ^oise
Vine, or the best Plant, he vn^erstandeth What is meant by the choice Vine.
the best and choice persons ^ and among that people of Israel, es^ecially of
them of the house of Judah, ^ David (of whom is mention made in ^salm. 78. 71.
and Solomon, and some ^ch others, whom the Lord God had ^osen, illuminated, and
inspired with ^ principal spirit, and made zealous and ^le, some to rule and
govern: some ^ teach and instruct the people: some ^ minister in the house of
the Lord: and every one of them to serve God, and ^enefit the Common wealth in
his* seue^all calling, according to the law and word ^f God. And that this
choice vine notes ^specially them of Judah, the Prophet himself in his
exposition of the Parab^ witnesses it, saying: The man of Iudah^ his pleasant
Plant. Ver. 7.

3. Of this Plant sings the Psalmi^ and tells us from whence it was taken
and how it was planted after that t^ place was cleansed and prepared, sayi^ to
the Lord: Thou have brought a Vine ^ From whence this Vine came.
of Egypt, thou have cast out the Heathen a^ planted it. That is, thou have
brought the chosen people out of Egypt, and have ^^ out the stony hearted
Chanaanites, an^ planted that people in the land, where they dwelled: Psalm. 80.
8. And of this h^ speaks yet plainer. Thou have driven ^ the Heathen with
thine hand, and plan^ them, thou have destroyed the people of t^ land, and
caused them to grow: that is, tho^ have gathered out the stones, even the
s^o^nie Chanaanites, with thy mighty pow^ and destroyed them, as things noyso^
and unprofitable: and thou have plant^ thy choice Vine, even thine elected
people, and caused them to prosper in tha^ good land.

4. Some would, that by this Vine w^ This Vine sometimes notes Christ.
should understand our Lord Jesus Christ* whom the father promised to Abraham,
and ratified to his seed, being borne in ^he Tribe of Judah: and the rather
would ^hey it should signify Christ, for that the Prophet speaks in the
singular number ^oth in the Parable and in the exposition of the Parable. He
says not Vines or Plants: but a Vine, or a Plant Sorec. And ^ee says, not the
men of Judah are his Plants: but, his pleasant Plant, is Is^h^ehudah: the man
of Judah. And to this, may also that of the Psalmist be applied, which in the
Gospel is performed by Christ, who was called out of Egypt after Mat. 2. 15.
^he death of Herod, alluding to an other Prophecy which said, Out of Egypt
have Hos. 11 1.
^ called my Son. And indeed, albeit this singular kind of speech may well be
refer^ed to that singular kind of Vine, or cho^en Grape, and signify that
peculiar people, whom the Lord God chose from and ^boue all other Nations of
the earth: yet will I not deny, but that the Prophet in ^his, may point unto
him, who said unto ^is Disciples, I am the Vine: ye are the Branches: that is,
unto Jesus Christ the Ioh 15. 4.
^rue head of the holy Church, in whom (doubtless) that was truly verified an^
accomplished, which was prefigured by the deliverance of the Israelites out o^
Egypt, and by planting of the choice an^ holy people of God in the pleasant
lan^ of Chanaan. And in this, the love and mercy Christ was borne in the Tribe
of Judah.
of God appeared most bountifully unto this people: that he vouchsafed the^ his
own son, according to the Prophecy, which says: When Israel was ^ child,
then I loved him, and called my so^^ out of Egypt. And this Plant is to all
othe^^ preferred, without comparison, as the^ only true Vine in whom the Lord
is w^ pleased, and the same in whom the true believers do prosper and bear
fruit^ Ioh. 15. 4.

5. Others also by this choice Vine, have The church. The holy religion.
understood the Church and holy religion, the which the Lord placed and planted
in and among that people, where also he was of long time best ^erued and
honored. Howbeit, the best learned of our age^ have expounded it simply of the
holy and zealous men of Judah, (as I said before) and so they have translated
the place as we have accepted it: He planted it with ^he best Plants: The men
of Judah are his ^leasant Plants. And indeed, these being by his goo^ Grace
framed and made like* unto the Image of Christ the true Vine, whom they
immitate as the right branches of the same, in ten things: as first in the
Root. 2. in the Stem. 3. in the Bark. 4. in the Branches. 5. in the Leaves.
6. in the Flowers. 7. in the Sap. 8. in the Fruit. 9. in the congruitie of the
Grapes. 10. in the use of the Wine, that is to say:

6. First, as the Root of the Vine 1 The Root.
then best prospers and bears when ^t is planted in that convenient hill or
^oyle which is set against the hear of the Sun, has a pure air and sweet
humor: so does the soul and mind of the godly man the best prosper, when it
rests in the love of God, in the justice of Christ, and in the sweet
operation of the holy Ghost. 2. As the Ste^ of the Vine among all other trees,
2 The Stem.
exceeds in growing from degree to degree: so the godly man increases daily
in godliness far beyond al others, proceeding from one virtue to another, as of
the which spoke Solomon: Many daughters there be which gather riches together:
but thou go beyond them all. Pro. 31. 29.

3. As the Bark or rind of the Vine appears 3. The Bark or Rind.
withered and dry, notwithstanding it has plenty of sap within it, chiefly
in the winter: eue^ so, howsoever the godly man appear under the cross of
affliction, yet is he replenished with the sweet liquor of life: for the Kings
daughter is Psalm 45. Canti. ^.
glorious within, though she seem black and deformed without.

4 Fourthly, as the branches of the Vine be naturally flexible and hang
downward, 4. The Branches.
especially in the time of bearing of fruit, as offering both her self and
her fruits to them that will vouchsafe to take thereof: so the godly man is
both humble and liberal, willing to submit himself to others, and to give to
others, of that which he has. 5. As the leaves of the Vine do both cleanse and
heal the wounds 5. The Leaves.
and soars of them that take and apply them: so the words of a godly man
being (as it were) wholesome and seasoned with the salt of the heavenly wisdom,
do both purge and heal all the wounds and enormities of sinful consciences,
as it is said; he sent his word and healed them. 6. As the flowers 6. Psalm. The
flowers.
of the Vine do by their wholesome smell and sent expel every venomous thing,
from the which therefore the Serpents and venomous worms do fly in the time
^f their blowing: even so the good life and manners of the godly man, expels
wicked imaginations from the hearts, and ^ndgodlinesse from the hands of many
of them that behold them.

7. As the liquor or sap of the Vine being cut in the spring time, droppeth
forth 7. The liquo^ or sap.
much like those tears that drop from the ^yes of him mourns: so the godly
man ^ho is afflicted, is often provoked to ^weepe, sometimes for himself,
sometimes ^or others, sometimes for that the glory of God is profaned among
men. 8. As the 8. The fruit.
^ruite of the Vine is sweet in it self, plea^ant to him that uses it, and
profitable to ^he Vinitor: so the virtues of the godly ^an are in himself
comfortable, to his ^orethren delightsome, and profitable to ^he glory of God.
9. As the Grapes 9. The Grapes mixed together.
do well concord one with an other, and make as of many but one Wine: so not
only the godly do concord in the Vine Christ, but also all their good works
do in a most sweet harmony and communion consent one with another, to the
praise of God, and comfort of men.

10. Lastly* as the wine both comfort 10 The wine comforting and enflaming.
and enflameth them that use it: so the spiritual virtues of the godly, do
both comfort them that thereof take use, and inflame them with a feruencie of
holy: zeal; especially then, when it pleases God to make the examples of
those holy men, applicable to them that either behold or hear thereof, through
the virtue of his spirit. And herein also appe^reth that godly envy, where
many men beholding the forwardness of others, do st^iue to excel them, and to
run before them toward the goal of eternal life.

11. As all those Christian and godly virtues are found and be indeed actually
and really resting and reigning in the body of Christ without measure: so also
are they by participation and application; found in the godly in a measure,
whom the Lord has and does conform to the image of his Son, and who indeed
(as the members of Christ) do endeavor to follow the Lamb their head, whithei
soever he goes. Such a Vine did the Lord God plant in his Vineyard: and such
seeds ^weth he in the Church, that so good an ^iginall and begt^ning might
happily ^ue the semblable proceeding and suc^sse. Neither that any fault might
be found ^ him touching his discretion and choice the Plants, howsoever the
Vineyard ^ould prove in the end, he made a chief ^d special choice of the
best Vine.

12. Thus the Lord in the Gospel tel^h, From whence the evil fruit comes.
how that the good man sowed good seed ^is field: and therefore when the tares
ap^red to spring up with the seed, and the ^estion was asked from whence those
tares ^e? he, to clear himself of all fault, ^d: I did (for my part) sow
good seed: ^ those tares are cast in by the envious man, ^les men slept, to
hurt and hinder the ^peritie of my seed. And indeed, in ^ there be so many
ungodly Miscre^ in the Church, and so many horrible ^ominations and grievous
sins in ^ world, it is not long of GOD good householder: for he has not
^nted any such Plants in the Church, ^ sown such tares in the world: but the
Envious man, that is, the Diue^ who has in himself nothing but wi^kednesse,
it is he, that has done this; h^ has conceived mischief, and brough^ forth
ungodliness: he has planted the wild grape, he has cast in the tares among
the wheat in the field: he troubles the Church with wicked and ungodly
persons; he pestreth the world wi^ noisome and filthy abominations, errors
and sins.

13. But the Lord God, who is ^ good and gracious to his Vineyard, ha^ therein
planted the choice Vine, and sowe^ the good seed: that is, godly and zealo^
persons, the true and right Religion, ^ godly and heavenly Graces, and spiritu^
good virtues, the which kind of plan^ and like seed, cannot but fructify a^
bring forth unto him the like fruits and if the fruits which appear be no^
this kind, esteem them not to be the right fruits of this plant, or of this
seed for men do not of thistles gather figs, n^ of thorns grapes. Thus as the
tree^ well known by the fruits, so are me by their deeds; for the good man
from the good treasure of his heart, brings ^orth that which is good: and the
evil ^an from the evil treasure of his heart, ^r^ngeth forth that which is
evil.

CHAP. VII.
The love and mercy of God, expressed in this, that he built a Tower, or great
thing in the mids of the Vineyard, verse 2.

AS the Lord was most diligent and careful to enclose, cleanse, and plant his
Vineyard, so also he spared no ^st to beawtifie, to fortify, to guard and
^rnish the same. For now the Prophet The building of the Tower.
^yth, that he builded Migdal bethocho.
Migdal bethocho, ^at is, a great or high thing in the mids ^ereof. This word
is translated into ^reeke Pyrgos, which we call a Tower. and affection to the
place.

2. For men do commonly build ho^ses Where me^ build, they delight in the place.
in those places whereof they have ^ pleasure and delight. And this had ^^ Lord
to this place, where he had set ^^ name, as the Psalmist says, and where^
Psalm. 78. 69.
he would that his own son should^ horn. Of this Vineyard, he said by ^^
Prophet Hoseah: When Israel was a chil^ Hos. 11. 1.
then I loved him. And of the same he say^ by Jeremy: I have loved thee with an
eu^ Iere 31. 3 4.
lasting love, therefore with mercy I ha^ drawn thee. And thu^ sings the
P^^mist thereof, The Lord has chosen ^^ Psalm 132. 14. 15.
to be an habitation for himself: he h^^ longed for her, who says: This shall
(...) rest for ever, here will I dwell: for I hau^ delight therein. Therefore
to make (...) he says: I will build thee, and thou shall ^ builded, o virgin
Israel. Again, I with ^ Jeremy. 44.
you, and not destroy you.

3. And as in building there is bestow^ 3 The building of a A Tower requires
both cost and labor.
cost and labor: so the building of a Tow^ requires an unmeasurable charge
and la^our: but the Lord builds a Tower: allu^ng to the manner of those
builders, which being very rich and wealthy, spare ^ither cost nor labor to
build and set ^ that which shall be most pleasing unto ^eir hearts in the places
wherein they have delight to dwell. Thus, when David ^ouided for the building of
the Temple, ^ heaped up a wonderful treasure and ^re of all things belonging
to the same. and thus, to take away all occasions of ^estioning, how this great
matter should ^ accomplished; the Prophet does not ^ly tell us, that all the
Earth is the Lords ^h the plenty thereof: but also says, ^t the zeal of the
Lord shall bring to ^e that which he has devised, neither ^ll the greatness
of the cost, nor the measurablenesse of the labor, hinder ^ p^^pose therein.

He builds not this Tower in a ^ner or by-place of the vineyard, but in 4 The
place of the Tower.
^ mids thereof: alluding to them ^t build their houses in the mids, or ^he
most convenient places of their in^itances. Thus the Lord as most wise and
provident, has disposed all his wor^ How God has disposed his works. Genesis 1.
31.
in the best order (as we see in the mighti^ works of the Creation he has
done) an^ has ordered all things to be most fit an^ convenient for the
prosperity and goo^ of his Saints. And thus has he done for us: therefore let
us also yield our selue^ What we must do.
fit for the Lords building, and edify on^ another: let us be thankful unto
h^ Grace, for such his great cost and care be ^ stowed in and for us; neither
let us m^^mure to bestow of that the Lord hat^ given us, toward the
advancement of hi^ glory, and the comfort of our brethren ^ moreover, let us
(after his holy example ^ use and employ the wisdom, reason a^ judgment which
he has adorned ^^ selves with, to the right ordring of all o^ actions and
affairs.

5. It has pleased some to conclud^ this great edifice or building in
^^nter^plation: but it likes me better, that by the same we understand either
the great m^tropolitan city of the Jews, namely Ier^salem, or rather the
Temple which Sal^mon builded therein, not only by the commandment of David his
father, but al^^ by the will, power, and authority of ^e Lord: and therefore
was chiefly at^buted to the Lord himself, as the ^salmist says, He chose the
tribe of Iu^h, even the hill of Zion which he loved, ^d there he builded his
Temple on high, and ^id the foundation of it like the ground which ^ has made
continual. Psalm. 78. 70. And of ^rusalem he says again: Jerusalem is ^ilded
as a City that is well compact together ^ it self, whereunto the tribes, even
the tribes ^ the Lord, go up to testify to Israel, to praise ^e name of the
Lord, Psalm. 122. 1.

6. Neither may the place be amiss The good policy or government of the
Israelites.
^ansferred to the good government and ^ell ordered commonwealth of Israel, to
^^d for the which the Lord raised up, in, ^^d among them, sometimes most wise
and ^liant Captains, as Moses and Iosuah; ^metime prudent and upright Judges,
as ^arach, Gedeon, Samuel: sometimes most ^oble and famous Kings (especially in
Iu^ah) as David, Solomon, Iehosophat, H^ze^ah, Josiah, and such others, which
are also ^gnified by this Edifice or Tower. And ^f these speaks David, when
he sings ^^us: Peace be within thy walls or Towers, and prosperity within
thy palaces.

7. By this Tower may likewise be understood The great works of God.
the great and wonderful worke^ of God, wrought and declared openly, and in
the mids of this people, of the which the books of Moses, of Iosuah, of the
Judges, of Samuel, of the Kings, of the Read Psalm. 105 27. and P^al 40. verse
^.
Chronicles, and of the Prophets, do a^ large testify, whereof also the sweet^
Psalmist of Israel has in many places spoken at large. Neither was there eue^
any nation under the heavens, to whom God came so near, as he came unto the
Deuteronomy. 4. 7. 8. 33 3^. and 10. 21.
Israelites in all that they called unto hi^ for: nor was there any nation so
great that had ordinances and laws so righteous: nor was there ever any people
that heard the voice of God speaking out of the mids of a fire: nor has the
Lord assayed to go and take him a nation from among nations, by so many
tentations, and signs, and wonders, and warre^ and a mighty hand, and a
stretched o^ arm, and by great fear, as Moses plainly told them.

8. Finally, this great work or Tower, does not unaptly signify that mystery
of Godliness, whereof S. Paul The mystery of godliness.
^ake, saying: Gneat is the mystery of ^odlinesse: for God was made manifest
in 1. Tim. 3. 16.
^e flesh, was justified in the Spirit, was ^ene among the Angels, was preached
^ the Gentiles, was believed on in the ^orld, and was received up into Glory.
This ^ that new and strange thing, whereof ^oth Jeremy, and Isayah, yea and
Daniel, Isa 7. 14. and 19. 5. Iere. 31. 2^.
^d other Prophets, have so plainly ^oken and prophesied. A work sur^assing
all other in greatness: a won^er, far beyond all other wonders to ^e
maruailed at. The building of this ^difice is of more value, cost, and care,
^en the building of Heuah of the rib Genesis 2. 22.
^f Adam.

9. And this is applied according The uses of a Tower.
^ the sundry uses of a Tower, which ^e among some others, these four: ^at is
to say: and destruction to them that be without it. And so (indeed) every of
these great edifices before mentioned (as they are, and may be wisely
considered) did bewtisie and adorn this people with high glory: did yield
them a right watchful regard and prospect unto every part and member of their
Commonwealth: did strongly arm, defend and preserve them that dwelled under
the shadow thereof, and astonished and vanquished their foes on every side.

10. Thus has the Prophet declared, The happy state of the^ which have the
presence of God.
not only what cost and charge the Lord bestowed on the people of Israel, to
express his love and affection toward them but also how prosperous and
happy wa^ the state and condition of that people, so long as the Lord was
present among the^ with his love, grace, mercy and blessings. And (indeed)
this was their glory, in the midst of them (as the Lord said by the Prophet
Zachary:) this was their wisdom, Zach. 2. 5.
this was their defense, and this was their victory and triumph over their
enemies.

CHAP. VIII.
^he love and mercy of God to his people signified by this, that he made a
VVine-presse in the Vineyard. verse. 2.

We have heard of the hedging, cleansing, and planting of the Vineyard, as
also of a Tower ^uilded in the midst of the same. Unto this (the Lord
continuing his care, ^ost and regard, willing to omit nothing) The Winepresse.
^ added a Wine Press. The Pro^het says, he dug therein a Lake, or a
^essell, or a Tun: The Greeks call it Lenor: that is, a Vessel, in the which
the liquor ^f Grapes, or the new Wine, is wont to ^e pressed out. But because
the word is ^iuersly taken, it has pleased the Latin ^nterpretors, to
translate it Torcular, the which we call in English, a Wine Press, a thing
incident to the Vineyard. For by ^his, the Grapes are pressed, and the Wine
taken out to the right use. And this was a token of the conceived hope of the
fertility of this Vineyard, in and about the which, there was bestowed and
employed such care, diligence and unmeasurable expenses*

2. But for as much as the Prophet speaks in a parable or dark saying, which
needs an explication, we may not omit to search out the true meaning of the
Prophet, and sense of his words, least that whiles we speak with the tongue, we
observe not Paul's rule, to speak to edification. By a Wine Press in the
Scriptures, is signified The preaching of the law, and doctrine of the Cross.
sometime the preaching of the Law, and the Doctrine of the Cross, the which
by the power of the spirit of God does wonderfully break down the pride of
man's heart, the courage of the cruel oppressors of the Saints, shakes every
strong hold which is raised up against the Lords anointed, and strikes into
their hearts a terror of the divine judgments, their own consciences being
guilty, accusing them of sin. Because the children of Israel, whom the Lord
brought out of Egypt, were by nature stiff-necked and hardhearted, neither
would be restrained and nourtred by that law which the Lord had written with
his finger in the hearts of me^, ^e at length gave them a law written, the which
also, he caused Moses to proclaim Exo. 20.
and publish openly, to be both heard and ^nowne unto all. This law did the
Pro^het expound unto the people, and ^om thence did denounce the judgments ^f
God upon them that transgressed the ^he same.

3. Saint John t(...) ^^ptist, before he prea^hed The preaching of John Baptist.
Christ Jesus, and made the people ac^uainted with the sweetest solaces of the
Gospel of Christ, prepared their hearts with ^aw, and the doctrine of the
Cross, say^ng: Repent ye: for now is the Axe laid to Mat. 5. and ^. and 21.
^he root of the tree: so that every tree which ^eareth not good fruit, shall
be he wen down and cast into the fire. Christ himself cal^eth into memory
this law, denouncing ^udgements and woe on the rebellious people, and to
bannish out of the hearts of his Disciples, that vain dream touching the
pleasures of a worldly kingdom and car^all liberty: he says plainly, He that
will ^he my Disciple, must take up his cross and fol^low me. Saint Peter, when
he would ^bruse the hard hearts of the Jews, who had crucified the Lord
Christ, and so presse^ out thereof the liquor of contrition, the tears of
sorrowful eyes, and the water of a bruised heart and grieved spirit acceptable
to the Lord, put the Winepresse^ in ure: he having accused them, as guilty of
sin: preached unto the Jews Act. 2. 38. and 3.
in these words: Repent ye: or amend your lives. Again. Repent and turn ye^,
that your sins may be blotted out. In this Good Grapes.
Wine Press, were bruised Adam and Herah, David and Solomon, Peter, Magdalen,
Paul, and other the servants of God, who upon the Preaching of the Law^ and
Doctrine of the Cross of Christ, have (as the right Vine) yielded unto the
Lord the sweet liquor of godliness, when some others being obstinate and
hard-hearted, being brought unto the Wine Press and bruised (like unto the
naughty Vine) have yielded him the Naughty Grapes.
unpleasant liquor, and unsavory sap of wickedness and sin; as Pharao, King
Saul, Herod, Julian, Nero, Judas, Demas, Simon Magus, and such others.

4. Sometimes the Wine Press, signifies Passions and afflictions.
all passions and afflictions, the which it has pleased the the Lord to ^y on
his people for their sins: as ^ee read in the Books of the Judges and Kings
of Israel, how oftentimes ^e Lord afflicted, not only private and ^ngular
persons: but also great perso^ages, and whole countries for their ab^ominations
and sins, as it was requi^e for him so to do, and yet in mercy, as ^erein
expressing the nature of a loving ^ther, to his disobedient child. Beyond The
passion of Christ.
^ others, those passions and crosses, which ^ pleased God to lay upon his
own ^onne Jesus for our sins, are by this Vine-presse, excellently depainted
and set ^orth. This is the same Vine, whom the ^ather sent forth from his
bosom and ^lanted in his Vineyard: this is that lamb Isa. 53. The right Wine.
Judge. 9.
^aine from the beginning, whose blood ^ssuing forth from the Wine Press of
his ^rosse, has pleased God, and comforted ^nen. And thus he says: I have
trodden the Isa. 63. 3.
Wine Press alone: albeit, this was some^imes spoken against the Idumeans and
^nemies which persecuted the Church, and which the Lord himself would destroy,
and therefore he is set forth there as a victorious King or Captaiue, all
bloody and read, after the great slaughter of his enemies: yet do the holy
fathers understand the place of the Cross and passion of Christ, by the which
he, pouring out of his blood, did over come the devil.

Now, as he would, that all they which follow him should take up their Cross
and do the same: so would he, that we should not refuse to tread this
Wine Press with him, as Peter, Paul, James, John, Stephen, Polycarpus, and
other his faithful Apostles Martirs and Ministers have in their places done,
and so yield forth the precious liquour of the Vine. The Ministry of the word
and discipline.


5. Sometimes the Wine Press notes the external ministry of the word of
God, the exercise of the Law of God, and that godly discipline, by and in the
use whereof the sweet juice of righteousness and holiness is wroong out and
applied to the glory of God, and the edifying of the Church. And surely this
thing is as needful in the Church at all time and times, as is the hand of a
man unto his body, by the which that ^ode is taken and applied whereof the
^ody lives: and as needful, as is the ^ine-presse to the Vinitor. And Vine to
^esse out and bring to right use the liquor ^ the Grapes. And this surely was
^erformed (as the Lord would have it) ^y the means of those godly Kings,
^rinces, Judges, Captains, Magi^ates, Prophets, Priests, and Mini^ers, which
the Lord raised up and pla^d over, in, and among the people of Israel ^ time to
time as the Histories and testi^onies of holy scriptures do truly testify. The
fullness of all things


6. Sometimes by this Winepresse is no^d the fullness, abundance and plenty ^
all good things. And indeed they were ^nderfully enriched, prospered and
bles^d, far beyond all other Nations (as the ^riptures report.) In thi^ sense,
under this ^nerall word are collected and drawn ^gither (as it were) not only
all those ^nefites and blessings before particular^ named and considered: but
also ^ others whatsoever (if any more can ^ thought on) which the Lord had
be^wed on them. By the which he would that this peop^ should be fully persuaded
of his gre^ love toward them, for whom he was ^ willing to do whatsoever was
meet, ^ requisite to be done, to their sacietie a^ happiness.

8. Lo, all these things has the Lo^ done and bestowed on his Vineyar^ that
is, on his people^ Now let us hea^ and consider what he expects of the^ in
lieu of those his blessings: and there^^ note (as we may compare our con(...)
and blessings with theirs) what he no^ requires of us, whom he has in his lo^
enriched and adorned with so many nob^ benefits, and divine graces.

CHAP. IX.
2. The Lords expectation of fruits, v^ verse 2.

Then he looked that it should bring forth Grapes.

WE have heard before of t^ great care, cost, and diligence^ the husbandman,
wherein the Lords great ^oue and mercy to his people is set forth. Now we are
come to his hope and ex^ectation. He expested (says the Pro^het) that the
Vineyard should bring ^orth Grapes: Yanabim (the word no^th) Grapes in the
Vines, or the clusters of ^rapes. This word is used by Pharaos ^utler, who said
to Joseph, The clusters Genesis 40. 11.
^ Grapes waxed ripe, and I took the ^apes and wroong them into Pharaos ^ppe.
And of such Grapes speaks Ierem.
^emy: Grapes on the Vine, Figs ^ the Fig Tree: that is, clusters of ^rapes.

2. By this, the Prophet would teach The end of our calling, delivery, and
blessings,
^e Jews, and not only them, but ^ also, and all others ^n the posterity, ^t
the Lord has not loved them, ^d stored them with ^is benefits, to ^ end,
that they should only with ^ barren Fig Tree, muster with green ^ues, and
make show of fruit when it ^h none: or bring forth unwholesome ^ites and
naught: but that they should ^ld him fruit correspondent to his ^e, mercy and
good nature: and this he looks for, as that King, who hauin^ both pardoned
and advanced the guilti^ person, would that ever afterward he^ should be
therefore thankful and obedient: and as that husbandman, who having bestowed
cost, care, diligence and labor on his field, would that it should yield him
the increase and fruits ^ his trauells: else, the Lord will notonely Isa. 1.
complain, I have exalted children and they have rebelled against me, an^ be
most unthankful: but also wi^ give over those rebels and vnthank^full
children to the spoil and utter destruction.

3. Unto this part alludeth the Lo^ Mat. 21.
in the Gospel, where he says: M^ 21. 34. And when the time of the fruit
dre^ near, he sent his servants to the H^ bandmen to receive the fruits of ^
Vineyard. And therein he shewe^ What he expects.
first, what the Lord expects of the^ on whom he has bestowed his
ben^fites: secondly, at what time he ^quireth When. By whom.
it: and thirdly, by whom^ first, that which he expects is ^ fruit of his
labor on them bestow^ secondly, he required it at the time ^ fruit, or in
the due time: third^, by the Ministry of his Ser^ts.

4. Indeed the Lord expects of 4. What the Lord expects.
^ people the fruits of his trauells (as ^ken after the manner of men) that
is, ^d fruits, such as in nature, quali^ and quantity, may be something
^verable to his love and manifold ^sings.

^ add, in quantity, not, in that ^ is able to yield a full measure, ^o
recompense the Lord for that he ^ received of him: neither does ^ Lord
expect or require it: know^ how unable man is to extend it: ^ how unprofitable
he is, when ^ has done all that he can, or ^ld do: but, in this sense, ^ of
him to whom much is given; ^ shall be required; that how great ^ blessings
are before others, by so ^h the more should we exceed ^rs in good fruits
and thankful^e.

And this in effect the Lord teaches, saying unto them that followed hi^
Herein is my father glorified, that ye gro^ and bring forth much fruit, and
bec^ my Disciples. Again, every brau^ that bears not fruit in me shall ^
cut off, and cast into the fire. ^ 15. 2.

5. This was the preaching of John ^ The preaching of John the Baptist.
Baptist to the Jews: bring ye forth the f^ worthy amendment of life, and
think no^ say with your selves, we have Abraham ^ our father. As if he said:
it is a vain thi^ for you to brag of Abraham, and w^ God has done for him:
and how man benefits he has bestowed on his c^dren, if waxing proud thereof,
^ care not to immitate Abraham, ^ yielding to the Lord such fruits ^ Abraham
yielded. So said Chri^ if ye were Abraham's children, ^ would do the deeds
of A^ham.

6. All the preachings, admonitions, e^hortations, The end of the Ministry of
the word.
threatenings, and lessons of ^ holy scriptures, tend to this, that m^ might be
persuaded to believe in G^ and to bring forth the fruits of godlines^ ^e
thankful to God, who as he has ^ted, preserved and blessed them, ^ht also
save them, and glorify them ^is everlasting Kingdom, through ^ merittes of
his only son, Jesus ^ist. Luke 1.

^. The Lord also observes the time: The time when the fruits are required.
^ee sent not for the fruits until the ^e time. Thus indeed it pleases the ^
to wait and expect our amend^t and conversion, until the opportune ^: but
then, he would not willingly ^efrauded. Eccles. 3. 1. Gal. 6. Eccles. 21. 1.
Hebr.
^ens has a time allotted. There^ the Apostle exhorts: Whiles ye ^ time, do
good to all men: observe the ^: exhort one another whiles it is ^ to day: and
Christ bids us to ^ke whiles it is day. That is, to accept ^ grace of God,
and in the time of his ^cies to yield him the fruits of thank^nesse.

As then was the time for the Jews The time of the Jews.
to yield good fruits, ripe fruit^ when the Lord yet continued his lo^ to
them, and granted them the v^ of his word, godly Princes, a pro^perous peace.
And this is our tim^ having and enjoying the like. The ti^ is present: let us
not be unfruitful ^ Our time.
ungrateful: but let us yield timely fruit to the Lord.

8. Finally, the Lord has certai^ 3. By whom the Lord requires the fruits of
the Jews.
servants sent forth to require this fruit^ as Christ said, he sent his
servants and who be they? The Prophets a^ fathers of the old Testament, we^
those whose Ministry the Lord vse^ to require this fruit, and to call t^
people of Ephraim and Judah to an a^count.

Such he chose, called and named hi^ wise and faithful servants: yea, after
this he sent his own son in the flesh vnt^ them, with this hope, that they
would no^ only reverence him, but yield hi^ By whom he does now require the
fruits of us.
the fruits of the Vineyard: And now h^ cease not (as yet) to send unto us
h^ faithful Princes, wise Magistrates, pain^full Preachers, and godly
Ministers, t^ require and do the like. Howsoever the ^ewes baue been and
declared themselves people most ungrateful, let us (as those ^ncient thankful
men) be willing to ^ouble benefits on us bestowed (if it were ^ossible) rather
then to be noted vnthank^ll, especially to our most gracious and ^ercifull God.
Let us answer his expecta^on in yielding him at this opportune ^me, some good
fruits.

CHAP. X.
^Vhat fruits they are, which the Lord requires: viz.

Iudge^ment and Justice.

THe Prophet Isayah in the 7. verse of the 5. Chapter (expounding the Parable
he had proposed) tells what those fruits are which the Lord God loo^ed for
and required to be yielded to him ^f his Vineyard in the due time, say^ng: he
looked for Judgment, and for Judgment, Justice. Mischpat. Zadarah.
justice: the which two words are ^ften times combined and joined togi^her, and
diversely taken, according to the diverse forms, parts, and actions, to the
which they be placed, used and applie^ Sometimes they be referred to the duti^
The duty of the Magistrates.
of the Magistrates only: sometime^ to them, and to the duties of all other
also; signifying in the one, the ordidinarie function, and public
administration; and the ordinary and lawful knowledge and discerning of caus^
according to certain prescript laws, whereby the Innocents are defended* the
guilty are punished, and justice i^ The duty of subjects and of Christians
one toward an other.
administered to every person. In the other, that civil obedience and eternal
right which men owe and are bound by the law, to yield one to an othero^ them.

2. Again, as they be applied to the The Magistracy.
magistrate and his office, two things (...) considered; namely to condemn and
punish the malefactors, and that is Judgment and to absolve the Innocents, and
to defend them from the injury of the wicked^ and this is Justice: as Chap. 1.
verse. 17. So David.
it is reported of David the chief Magistrate in Israel, he did Judgment an^
Justice to all the people. 2. Samuel. 8. And this did Solomon execute in that
Solomon.
^emorable example of the two harlots ^at pleaded before him for the living
^ild. He showed Justice, when he gave ^e child to his own mother: he gave
^dgement, when he condemned the other which had falsely accused the just and
in^cent. So also Iehu did yield Judgment Iehu.
killing the Prophets of Baal, and Justice preserving the Prophets of the Lord.
and thus the holy Ghost commands to justify just matters, and to con^mne
wicked matters, the which who does, shall be said to yield Judgment ^d
Justice: and the which two things, the lord does expect and require of all them
^at be put in authority, as Iere. 22. 3.

3. As the words are referred to the 3 The people and their duty.
^ople, and their duty, they comprehend the works and things which the Lord
^th commanded and required of man, ^pecially those which are contained in ^e
second Table of the Law, by the which they should declare and confirm ^eir
Religion before men, as Christ com^anded: Math. 5.
So let your light shine before men, that they may see your good works. These
indeed are the fruits of the fear of God Fruits of the fear of God.
and the signs of holy Religion, the which, whosoever brings not forth
(howsoever he be entitled either in the Church, or in the Commonwealth) he i^
either as that barrain fig tree without figs and as that Vine without grapes:
or the bitter root that brings forth bitter fruit, and that evil man,
that from the evil treasure of his heart brings forth that which is evil.

4. And these two words may in this 1. The mind and conscience. 2. The word and
action.
part be aptly referred, the one to the mind and conscience: the other to the
word and action: in the which, the one is as the tree, the other as the fruit,
expressing the kind of the tree. And this cannot but draw me^ to a more near
examination of themselves. Every one is ready to say, that he loves God, and
that he believes well: but this is certain, that he only loves God, and has
faith, that loves his neighbor, his brother, and has an earnest desire to do
those works, and to perform those duties which the Lord has enjoined him in
his law. And we cannot say, that that man has a lively and sound faith, and
is a right worshipper of God Faith and works.
according to those commandments contained in the first Table) who expresses
not the same by a good work, by an holy life: for faith which works ^ot, is
a dead faith; but by the work, ^oth the life and the quality of the faith ^^
manifest. Therefore says S. James, Show me thy faith by thy works.

5. For as men do commonly gather ^uch kind of fruit, as either their trees or
their seeds do naturally yield (as not figs Such as the tree is, such are the
fruits.
^f thistles, or grapes of thorns: but figs ^f the fig trees, and grapes of
the vines:) ^o there springs from a good faith and the ^eare of God, not
impuritie, not sin, ^out holiness and righteousness, which are ^he end of
our redemption, as Zachary ^ngeth, Being delivered from the hand of ^ur
enemies, to this end, that we should serve God in holiness and righteousness,
before him, all the days of our life, without fear. And this contains love,
mercy, gentleness, peace, meekness, humility, longsuffring, and an
obedient heart and endeavor to observe and keep the law of God in all things.
In and for the which, Christ himself has said, that he will commend them that
shall stand at his Math. 25.
right hand at the last Judgment, as the notes and arguments of their faith
and fear of God. And that the Prophet had this meaning, we may gather by this
also, that he opposes against Judgment, Oppression: and against Justice, a
Crying: as in that which follows is more plainly declared.

6. The Prophet in this alludeth (as it seems) unto that place in Genesis 18. 9.
where God commending righteous Abraham, said, that he knew that Abraham To do
judgment and justice, is to keep the way of the Lord.
would command his children, and his household after him, that they keep the
way of the Lord: he adds, to do Justice and Judgment: to the observation of
the which way, (as to that which the Lord prescribed them to do, and whereof he
will call account) the Prophet calls and allureth them. Lo, there is the
fruit of faith and holy religion, expounded to be a walking in the way of the
Lord: that is, a keeping of the Law of God.

7. This was commanded to the Jews under these two words, Justice, and
Judgment. And this Micheah testified that the Lord required of the people, to
do justly, to love mercy, humble thy self, and to walk with God, Sapi. 6.
8. Christ also said in the Gospel, that the Jews should have Judgment,
Mercy, Faith, being the weighty matters of the Law, Math. 23. 23. Which also
S. Luke comprehends in these two words, Judgment, and the love of God, Chap.
11. 42. Such pleasant fruits yielded holy Job, of whom the Scriptures report,
Job yielded those fruits.
that he was an upright and a just man, (though he were a Gentile and no Jew,
to the condemnation of the Jews) and the word is expressed, in that it is
added: he feared God, and eschued evil. Such fruits also both Zachary, and
his wife Elizabeth Zachary and Elizabeth.
yielded among the Jews, of whom it is written by the Evangelist, that they
were just before God. This Justice was discerned in them by the fruits and
outward appearance, and not by the cause, which only comes of the free mercy
of God in Christ: and therefore he adds, that they walked in all the
Commandments of the Lord without reproof, Luke 1. 6. And thus says the Lord
by this Prophet of Jerusalem before her rebellion: It w^^ Jerusalem had
judgment and justice.
full of Judgment, and Justice lodged therein. Whereby he means those works
of the second table, for unto those works he opposes fornication, murder,
filthiness, rebellion, theft, covetousness, briberie, injustice, etc. as Isa.
1. 21. 22. 23.

8. Thus have we considered what fruits the Lord God expects and requires
of his Vineyard, such as are both pleasant to him, and profitable for the
Vineyard. These be the fruits, whereby we express our thankfulness to the
Lord; then the which, nothing is more commendable in the judgment of all good
me^; then the which nothing is more delectable to be heard of, nor more
acceptable to be considered, nor more fruitful to be performed. Whiles the
inhabitors of Jerusalem yielded this to the Lord, we heard him not to complain,
saying: I have nourished and brought up children, but Isa. 1.
they have rebelled against me: but we heard him to rejoice over them, and to
commend them, saying, Jerusalem which has Isay. 1. 21.
promised fidelity unto me (as a faithful wife to her husband) is a faithful
City: it is full of Judgment, and Justice lodges therein.

9. All this premised, does Moses com^ehend Deuteronomy. 10. 12. 13. 14. 15. 20. 21.
in these his words to the Israe^es. Now Israel, what does the Lord thy ^od
require of thee? but to fear the Lord ^y God, to walk in all his ways, and
to love ^m, and to serve the Lord thy God with all ^ine heart, and with all thy
Soul: that thou ^epe the Commandments of the Lord, and ^ Ordinances which I
command thee this ^y for thy wealth. Behold heaven, and the ^auen of heavens
is the Lords thy God, and ^e earth with all that therein is. Notwith^nding the
Lord set his delight in thy fa^ers to love them, and did choose their seed
^ter them, even you above all people.

CHAP. XI.
The ingratitude of the people, noted in this:

That the Vineyard brought forth wild grapes, verse 2.

NOW let us consider how the Jews answered the Lords expectation. This people,
notwithstanding all tho^ What kind of fruits the Vineyard yielded.
benefits which the Lord in his love a^ mercy had bestowed on them, declar^
themselves a people most vnthankfu^ neither was there ever any nation vnd^ the
heavens that so much deceived t^ hope and expectation of the Lord (as may
speak it after the manner of me touching the unnatural dealing, and ^postasie
of that people, whose future degeneration and ingratitude, we cannot say but
that God foresaw from the begi^ning, and caused his servant Moses to s^ Deuteronomy.
29. and 30. and 32.
and write thereof, ere ever he brough^ them into the land of Chanaan.

2. As soon as the Prophet h^ showed what the Lord expected, ^ namely, that he
might receive Grape^ which his Vineyard should (in all righ^ and reason) have
yielded him, he adde^ by and by, how his hope and expectation therein was
frustrated: for the Vineyard brought forth Baashim. Wildgrapes stinking and
bitter.
Baaschim, that is (a^ the word notes) a kind of fruit, which in smell is
most odious and stinking; an^ in taste, most loathsome and vnsaueri^ The smell
of this fruit is as the stincke o^ ^ dead Carrion, especially of the dead ^ody
of a man. The Prophet uses this lord, when he speaks of the odious ^hell of
their dead bodies whom the lord should slay, Chapt. 34. 3. saying, their
slain shall be cast out, and their stink ^all come up out of their dead
bodies. And ^e Prophet Joel has the same word, ^hapt. 2. 20. His stincke shall
come up, and ^ corruption shall ascend. And in this it ^trarieth the Hebrew
word, and the ^eeke ' aroma, which is a most sweet A'roma.
^l odoriferous scent, as of Myrre, Ci^mum, Calamus, Casia, or precious
oint^ts, and sweet herbs and flowers.

3. The taste of this fruit also, is as taste of the sap of wild and sour
^pes, or as the sweet ieuse or dropping ^he willowes, and such like, most
bit^owre, harrish, and loathsome, as that ^on yecketh the stomach, and prouo^h
vomit. Neither is this fruit much ^ike in taste unto that root of bitter^se,
A root of bitterness.
which (as the Apostle says) sprin^h up and troubles the Lords people, ^r.
12. 14. Moreover, Job has the ^e word, the which is translated (as it may well
enough) Tares, or Cockle, a^ Let thistles grow in steed of wheat, an^ for
Barley Baascha.
Baascha, the Tare or Cockle Chap. 31. 40. And in this place the Prophet uses
the plural number, to note that there were many of this kind, Ex acerbis vuis
succus: arborum lachrymae, melligo. Diosc. li. 3. ca. 9.
the Greeks call them Omphacas, ampelo^ agrias agriamphelous, which the Lati^
translate, Labrustas, Labruscas, vuas agr^stes, syluestres, and erraticas, and
we call the^ wild grapes, as such which grow in the edges, banks, and hedges of
the Vine yard^ and besides the fields of corn, as weeds and things
unprofitable and noisome.

4. It is certain, that the Proph^ means by this word Baashim, not o^
fruit, but many fruits, and that of su^ a kind, as is not only contrary and
noy^ some to the right grapes; but also mo^ loathsome, hateful, and naught. By
the which, he would depaint and set forth not only the unkindness of the
people of Israel and Judah to the Lord: b^ also the kind of the fruits that
the brought forth and yielded to the Lord He says not, that the Vineyard
broug^ forth nothing: for that had been mo^ tolerable; but that it brought
forth ^ruits, howbeit, most stinking, and vnsa^erie fruits. Benefits
bestowed, should ^e kindly accepted, acknowledged, re^embred Ingratitude
toward them that bestow benefits.
and well requited: but here, they ^e neither accepted with kindness, nor
^cknowledged, nor remembered, nor well ^quited: nay beyond all this, which is
^ost monstrous, they are rewarded with ^il by them of whom the Prophet
corn^ained in the person of Christ, They have ^warded me evil for my good, to
the great ^iefe of mine heart. Such fruits indeed ^lded this vineyard, which
were neither ^swerable to the nature and kind of the ^od plant, nor to the
wisdom, care, cost ^d diligence of the good husbandman: ^t all contrary and
naught, that far ^yond all hope and expectation.

5. But it is demanded from whence F^^ whence came those naughty fruits*
^se naughty fruits came? for it could ^t be, that the good and choice Vine
^uld bring the^ forth, no more then the ^od wheat could produce tares. Here ^
must note, that he says not, that all ^e Vineyard was of this Vine: but that ^
planted therein this Vine. Now indeed the wild grapes came not of this, as it
appears, but of such bitter roots, as the envious man had planted, when the
righ^ vines were either oppressed or remoue^ (as Isa. 57. 1.) that is, the
Devil did sow^ tares, whiles men slept, and he went his wa^ And this
naughtiness could not be co^rected nor amended, nor changed (se^ing the Lord
has appointed every nat^rall thing to keep his kind) neither by the
goodness of the choice vine, no^ by the commodity of the place, not b^ the
diligence of the husbandman, b^ must of force bring forth fruits aft^ kind, as
stinking and unsavory fruits ^ the semblable roots.

6. And here we may behold as in glass, ye notable degeneration and
naug^tinesse The degeneration of the Jews.
of the people of Israel and Iuda^ who most ungrateful to the Lord the^ God,
did not only not bring forth frui^ to him acceptable and pleasant, but a^ most
injuriously gave place to the Diu^ (as Adam did) and brought forth grap^ of
gall, and bitter clusters, the wi^ whereof, is the poison of Dragons, a^ the
cruel gall of Aspes, as Moses sa^ ^ Deuteronomy. 32. 32. 33. And the reason ^ereof is
also alleged in the same Chap^, where he says: Their Vine is (not ^t choice
Vine which the Lord has ^nted, but) the vine of Sodom, and of the ^es of
Gomorah. Again, they have be^ed themselves frowardly toward him, ^ being his
children, but a froward and ^oked generation. And this Prophet in ^ first
Chapter in the behalf of the ^rd, disclaimeth them thus: Ah sinful ^ion: a
people laden with iniquity, a ^e of the wicked, corrupt children: they ^e
forsaken the Lord, they have prouo^ the holy one of Israel to anger, they ^gone
backward.

7. But did not the Lord foresee this? God did foresee all this, and spoke of
it before it came to pass.
^ doubtless, for all things are open ^ore his eyes, and he foreknoweth ^m ere
ever they come to pass, ney^ can his hope be frustrated, nor his ^ectation
deceived (as the hope and ^ectation of a man is deceived) and ^refore was not
this also hidden from ^n, what fruits this Vineyard would ^ld him. Moses
foretold of this in Deuteronomy. ^ 29. saying: I am sure, that after my death ye will
utterly be corrupt, and tur^ from the way which I have commanded yo^ And the
Lord says by this Prophet Isa. 48. 8. I knew that thou would grievously
transgress, therefore have I calle^ thee a transgressour from the womb: tha^
is, from the time that I brought thee o^ of Egypt. It is sure that the Lord
foresa^ their rebellion; and what he was to expec^ from them, he knew well
enough: as like^ wise he knew, before he made Ada^ what would follow. Therefore
this is no^ spoken as if there were in God a doubtf^ hope what would follow:
nor does the Prophet subtilie dispute what the Lord expected in his own secret
counsels: b^ he tells, how meet it was, that ye peop^ should have showed
themselves thank^full to him, whose great blessings and gr^ces on them
bestowed, they should neither forget, nor deny, nor reward with ^uill, nor
deprive themselves of his day^ blessings and benefits, through their ow^
abominations and sins.

8. Thus the Lord has commanded t^ Gospel to be preached and published to^
for their obedience to the faith: howbe^ not so, as therefore in his secret
counse^ be expects that obedience in all; for he God does not look that all
men should be converted: for there will be some obstinate and ungodly persons
to the end of the world
^noweth well, that all will not believe, nor ^ey. The godly are by the word of
^od mollified, as wax with the heat of ^e Sun, and drawn to repentance:
the ^her are hardened as clay, and made inex^isable. Neither may we think, but
that ^e Lord has made them ensamples vn^ his own children, who are wont to
^emble, and take instruction at the con^deration of his judgments on the
wic^d, as the Lion is wont to do, when he ^eth a dog beaten before him. And
thus ^e Lord does not only foreknow what ^sueth, but also provides so, that
even ^e same things which are most noisome ^d grievous to the ungodly, are most
ofitable and comfortable to his children. and in this, appears both the
iudge^ent and mercy of the Lord: his iudge^ent on those unthankful Jews: his
mer^e on them which believe and continue ^ his grace, Romans 11. 22.

^. To conclude, as the holy Ghost has ^kened those works and duties which we
we and are bound to yield to our God, ^ those fruits which are of the best
^ste and liking, as to the fruit of the choice vine, and the most pleasant
grape^ then the which nothing is more acceptable and delightsome to the
Husbandman: so has he compared man's disobedience, ingratitude and sins, the
which he should warily eschew and abandon, t^ those fruits that are of the
worst taste an^ most loathsome, as to the wild and sow^ Grape: then the which,
nothing is mo^ hateful and unpleasant: He says, tha^ the Vineyard of the
Lord, namely, the house of Israel and the Jews, yeelde^ him wild grapes; that
is to say, fruits mo^ odious and noisome: whereas they should have yielded him
good fruits and profitable. And in this, they have not followed Genesis 4. 4. 5.
that righteous Habel, who offered v^ to the Lord that which was good: b^ they
followed that wicked Cayn, who offered up that which was naught and noisome, to
the great displeasure of God^ they brought forth unto him, not the thankful
fruits of a good faith, but the unpleasant fruits of faithless ingratitude:
as in the Chapter following, it sha^ be plainly declared, by the grace o^ God.

CHAP. XII.
^ view of the naughty fruits of the ^ Vineyard: viz.

Of the sins of the Jews.

^F we well note the Prophets words, ^ we shall hear him to tell us plainly
^ what he means by those wild ^rapes which the Vineyard brought ^rth. For
he says, Lo, oppression: Lo, a ^ying: Verse. 7. the which two words, do ^nswere
those two former words, Iudge^ent and Justice: and that by a pretty allu^n,
which the Hebrews call, Zacoth Paronomasia: Polities Linguae.
^aleshon: that is, a decking or garnishing of ^e tongue: where (indeed) the
Prophet ^yneth together two words of near like ^und, but of a contrary
signification: as ^e looked for Mischpat, and lo Misch^ac: There was neither
Judgment nor Justice, but oppression, and crying.
for Tsedacah: and lo, Tseyacah.

2. Where the Lord looked for Iudge^ent, behold, he found oppression: where ^e
looked for Justice, behold, he found a crying. There was neither Judgment to
suppress the wicked, nor Justice to defend the godly: but the wicked did
oppresse^ the innocents, and the innocents were constrained not only to
complain of the injury to them in authority, but also, to cry to the Lord
for vengeance on their oppressors. In a word: there wanted the fear of God.
And so all humanity, gentleness and just dealing: and in ste^d thereof, there
swayed the malice of the devil, and so all inhumanitie, cruelty and injurious
dealing one toward an other. Therefore the Prophet in his first Chapter,
says: How is the faithful city become an harlot? It was full of judgment,
and justice lodged therein: but now, they are murderers: covetous, deceitful,
extortioners, thieves, brybers, cruel and vnpure. And truly, where these
sins sway, there is neither any fear of God, nor good religion, whatsoever
show of holiness men make before the world. The Prophet would therefore set
forth these their sins even before their faces to convince them, as
transgressors of the law of GOD, whiles they would with the Pharisee justify
themselves before all other Nations, as the ^nely keepers and dooers of the law
of God.

3. And it may be, that as in the two ^ormer words, Judgment and Justice, the
Prophet would comprehend al godly ver^ues: so by those two latter words
oppres^on and crying, he would comprehend all ^ngodly vices. And that as those
2. words judgment and Justice were first referred to ^he function and duty of
the Princes and ^udges, and then to the people (as it is before said in the 10.
Chapter) so here, the Prophet does (no doubt) reprove the vn^ust dealing and
abuses of the Princes and He first reproves the unjust dealing of the
Magistrates.
Magistrates, which were wont to oppress ^ther men with their tyranny, when
they should rather have administered judgment: and the poor innocents were
compelled to groan and cry out for want of Justice which they requested to
have at their hands; the which came into the ears of the Lord, as that
clamor of the Israelites in Egypt, and as that of righteous Loath in Sodom,
and as the innocent blood of Abel from the earth. And as that loud cry of
those Saints under the Altar, saying: How long Lord, holy, and true, do not
thou judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? Apo. 6. 10.

4. Indeed, such Princes and Magistrates, this Prophet vehemently reprooueth,
and from thence descends to the common people, he calls them, as they Isa.
1. 10 21. 23.
deserved: Princes of Sodomah, and rebel^ companions of thieves, and
murderers: having (indeed) a taste of the Vine of S^dome, whose Grapes be of
Gall and clusters bitter; whose Wine is the poison of Dragons and the cruel
Gall of Aspes, as Deuteronomy. 32. 33
Moses prophesied: for whereas they should seek Judgment and Justice, in
suppressing Isa. 1. 16. 17.
the ungodly, and such as oppressed the Innocents, and helping, defending and
releeuing the poor oppressed, they did not only neglect their duty therein,
but also became cruel oppressors themselves. As such of whom Solomon Eccles.
4. 1.
complained, saying: Behold the tears of the oppressed, and none comfort
them: the strength of the hand of them that oppress them, and none gives them
consolation. As if he said, the poor Innocents be oppres^d The poor
oppressed, find no Justice nor Judgment in them that should extend it.
by tyrants and cruel hearted persons, and they find no Justice, nor perceive
^dgement to be administered by them ^ho are called and exalted to this functi^.
And those kind of the Princes of ^rael, immitated Julian the Apostate, who
^ither punished them that oppressed the ^ore Christians upon their complaint,
^r delivered, nor defended them from ^eir oppression, as he should in right
have ^ne.

5. After that the Prophet had poin^d From the Magistrates he comes to the
people.
to the Princes and Magistrates of Is^el, who had broken the yoke (as Iere^e
said) then he comes to the people, ^om also with the same words he repro^th,
charging them, that they have not ^ely neglected Judgment and Justice in ^eir
kind and manner of dealing: but al^ have been as tyrants one to an other:
^pressing, and deceiving one an other ^f them, without all law, humanity,
mer^e, Justice, Judgment and piety, trans^ressing therein most horribly the
law and commandments of the Lord God, ^o less then did Gomorah: and
therefore the Prophes calls them the people of G^morah, ^sa. 1. 4. 5. 6. 10.
a sinful Nation, a people laden wi^ iniquity, corrupt children: And thus t^
Lord charge them by Amos. Chap. 5. ^ They turn judgment into wormwood, ^^
leave off righteousness in the earth: that i^ where they should use judgment
and i^stice as a fruit most sweet and pleasan^ to the Lord, they did in steed
thereof, practice all kind of oppression and cruelty on^ toward an other of
them: whereof ther^ ascended up a pitiful cry, as of the poor^ oppressed
against their oppressors.

6. Thus far the Prophet speaks ^ general words: from the which heede^
scendeth to certain particular sins an^ abominations of the Jews, with the
which, (as with most unsavory fruits) they had displeased the holy one of
Israel: yet not, that every particular sin of Certain particular sins.
this people is here numbered up (for that had been a matter both laboursome
and impossible, in so much a^ they were polluted with infinite sins) but some
certain vices, which most reigned among then at that time. So Ezechiel, The
sins of Sodom.
when he speaks of the sins of Sodom (to the which he compares Ieru^lem
with her sins) he names only ^ose 4. viz. Pride: fullness of bread:
aboun^nce Ezech. 16. ^9.
of idleness: and contempt of the poor. and these Christ seems to note in
the The sins of the rich men. Luke 16. 19. 20. 21.
^h man. Luke 16. 19. Who no doubt, ^d in him many other sins besides: ^
pride is noted, in that he was ^athed in purple and fine white: se^nd, his
fullness of bread, in that he ^ed dilitiously: third, his idleness, ^ that he
used it every day: fourth, ^ neglect of the poor, in that he ^ not relieve
poor Lazarus at his ^e. The sins of the Jews.


And thus Christ speaking of the ^fidious Husbandmen, Mat. 21. no^h chiefly
their contempt and blou^ cruelty against the Prophets, the ^uants of GOD, and
his son: ^ the which he did sufficiently depaint ^d set forth their monstrous
ingratitude ^ainst God. So here the Prophet num^eth up (as I said) some
certain sins, ^d such as we may thereby well judge of ^e rest.

Now therefore, as the prophet had before generally under two words;
comprehended either all the wicked abhominatio^ of the Israelites, or at least
their two cap^tal vices: so in the words following the e^position and
application of the Parabl^ does he number up and note some c^taine particular
sins, as the vnpleasa^ fruits of the ungrateful Vineyard. A^ first he
depainteth forth the insatiab^ The covetousness of the rich men.
covetousness and ambition of tho^ worldly rich men, who are never conten^
with any houses or fields, be they never so many, but labor daily to encroa^
and get more, howsoever they come b^ them: as if the Lord had given all the
ear^ to them, and not to any besides them; an^ that therefore, it is lawful
only for the^ to have all, and not lawful for any poo^ man, to possess and
enjoy any par^o^ portion thereof with them. Thus Alexander having the conquest
of the world, was not contented, but would have the other world also at his
commandment But the Prophet threatens them with a woe (as with those sour
Grapes o^ tares) meet for nothing, but for the fire^ Verse. 8.

7. Another sour Grape the Prophet Rioters, gluttons, and Epicures.
^oteth and condemns to the fire, in the ^euenth Verse, where he says: Woe
^to them that rise up early to follow drun^nnesse, and to them that continue
until ^ht, till the Wine inflameth them; as ^h as spend most of their time in
ryo^g and excessive pleasures, and use ^ means possible to provoke the ^ne,
and regard not the work of the ^rd, neither consider the operation of ^ hands.

8. An other wild Grape the Pro^et Impenitent co^temners of Gods Judgments.
notes and censureth to the ^ in the 18. verse, saying: Woe be to ^n, that
draw iniquity with cords of vani^ and sin, as with Cart ropes: etc. ^ch, as
are impenitent, contemners of ^ds judgments; deriders of the Pro^ts and
Ministers; and of a reprobate ^e: and use all exercises and allure^ts to harden
their consciences in ^e.

9. Another wild Grape he notes Men impudent and of* an impious judgment.
^ condemns in the 20. verse, saying: ^ unto them, that speak good of evil,
and ^ of good: which put darkness for light, and light for darkness: that put
(...) for sweet, and sweet for sour: As such, are not ashamed of sin, nor
care for h^nestie, but are grown into an impude^ and desperate impiety.

10. An other wild grape he notes an^ Conte^ners of doctrine, discipline, and
admonitions.
condemns in the 21. Verse, saying Woe unto them, that are wise in the^ own
eyes, and prudent in their (...) sight. As such as are contemners of ^
doctrine, discipline, and good admon^tions: such as disdain to learn of any
Hos. 7. 8.
being (indeed) dead, ere ^u^ they perceive themselves sick, who therefore
Solomon calls children, a^ fools. Pro. 1.

11. An other wild Grape he n^teth Such as glory in their wicked excess,
and justify the wicked for rewards.
and condemns in the 22. a^ 23. Verses, saying: Woe unto them the are mighty
to drink Wine, and to the that are strong to power in strong dri^ And this
has affinity with that (...) Grape which he noted in the eleue^ Verse:
howbeit exceeding that, in t^ degrees, whereof the one is, the these persons
do join unto that ^o^te a kind of glory, making brag^ ^ their own strength
and ability in this ^xcesse, and deride and mock them that ^e weak and not
able to keep them com^nse in this same.

The other degree is this, which the ^ophet also notes in the 23. Verse, as
^st incident to those persons: that ^y justify the wicked for a reward, and ^e
away the Justice of the Just from ^n. As such as love and like them ^ich
resemble them in their sins, ^d hate and contemn them that reprove ^m, and
be not answerable to their con^ons: as such, as in their excess con^nne all
that is good, and commend that ^ch is abominable.

12. These, and many other such bit(...) and unsavory fruits, did the people
of ^el and Judah bring forth and yield to Lord, after all his great and
bountiful ^sings bestowed on them, in stead of ^ete and pleasant fruits; yea,
so far This is not spoken without admirarion.
^ond all expectation, as it could not cause wonder and admiration. ^d this
does the Prophet teach in the ^etition of this demonstratiue Hinne, Hinne. Ecce:
^olde, as he looked for Judgment, and behold, oppression for justice; and
behold crying: the which has in it no small emphasis, force, and matter of
momen^ As if he said, that the Vineyard of the Lord, contrary to the nature
of the Vine, and diligence, care and cost of the Lord thereon employed, did
bri^ forth wild Grapes; it was a thi^ most strange and miraculous. Therefore
at this, Jeremy also woondreth an^ Ier. ca. 2. 21.
expostulateth with them in Gods b^halfe; thus I planted thee a noble Vine
whose plants were all natural: how then a^ thou turned unto me into the
Plants of strange Vine? that is to say, how is the faithful City become an
harlot? (^ says Isayah) how is it, that oppress^ springs up in the place
of Iudg^ment? and how is it, that there is a cry^ Eccles. 3. 16
in the place of Justice? yet so it is, as Sa^mon also witnesses; I saw under
the Su^ wickedness in the place of judgment, and i^quitie in the place of
justice.

Hereby it appears, not only that they had no fear^ of GO^ at all (to whom
they should have ye^ded some better fruits had they fear^ him): but also that
most horrible was ^eyr ingratitude, deserving to be ^erly cast off from his
love and de^ht.

13. Now, as no man beholding their gratitude and wickedness can but dis^e
them, and condemn them, as wor^e of destruction for the same: so let be
wary, that we fulfill not their ^asure of iniquity; by our like requitalls
^ll those good things which God in his ^e and mercy has given us: but let
daily endeavor to answer the expec^on of our most loving and merciful ^er;
let us be perfect as he is perfect; ^y as he is holy; and fruitful to him
^all good works (to his honor and ^rie) as he has been, and yet is ^d and
gracious unto us in all things.

CHAP. XIII.
The Lords appellation and his reques^ of Judgment in these words:

Now therefore o Inhabitant of Jerusalem and man of Judah: judge I pray yo^
between me and my Vineyard Verse. 3.

WE have heard before on the on^ part, how the Lord showed him self toward
the people of Isr^el and Judah; namely as a good husban^ or diligent Vinitor to
his Vineyard: a^ thereon what he expected of them, nam^ly that they would be
fruitful in goo^ works, as is the good Vine in Grap^* Then on the other
part, we have hear^ how much this Vineyard deceived the Lords hope and
expectation, namely ^ this; that when he looked for Judgment, yielded him
oppression: and when he look for Justice, it yielded a crying; it broug^ forth
nothing else but wickedness an^ iniquity; that vineyard which yeelde^ ^ the
Vinitor sour Grapes and noisome ^uites. And all this the Lord yet behol^eth
and suffers, being slow to anger, and of great long suffering, waighting for
^^e amendment of the people.

2. But now the ungodly, being of The wicked think all is safe and well, if
God proceed not to punish the^ by and by when they offend him. Genesis 4.
and and reprobate minds, having their ^nsciences seared with h^re yrons,
think ^at all is safe and sure enough: for they ^erswade as Cayn did when he
had killed ^s brother Abel, that the blood of the ^or oppressed, cries not to
the Lord for ^ngeance against the^; nor think they that ^e grasshoppers will sing
of their injuries in ^e fields: nor do they believe that the lord sees the^,
and that he will be avenged ^ them for all their sins: yea, they imagine, ^at god
who is gentle, merciful, and wil^g to expect their amendment, is very ^ell
pleased with whatsoever they do. ^ut yet thus says the Lord (which Psalm. 50.
^ey little regard) Thou think wickedly, ^at I am like thee: but I will
reprove ^ee, and set in order before thee, that which ^hou have done. Again:
Is not this laid up in Deuteronomy. 32. 34. 35.
^ore with me? and sealed up among my trea^res? yea vengeance and recompense
are mine, their foot shall slide in due time, for the day of their destruction
is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make haste^ for the matter
is not so forgotten nor neglected Eccles. 12.
as they imagine, nor will the Lord omit to call them and the matter into an^
examination and reckoning, and co^straine their own consciences to bear
witness, and to condemn their guilty souls.

3. But whom has the Lord made The ungodly are made Judges of their own case.
Judges of the cause between him and his people? Surely he makes not an
exquisite choice of this or that friend, or of this or that especial Judge:
but he appealeth even to the consciences and knowledge of them, who had so
egregiously abused his goodness, and makes them Judges as they are wont to
do, which are most assured of the truth and sufficiency of their causes, the
which being manifest, can neither be concealed, nor denied by their very
adversaries.

And this is a sure Argument of the goodness of the Lords cause, that he
appealeth to the consciences of his adversaries, and wills them to give
sentence, whether the matter be not so, as he has de^ared it unto them?
Therefore he says: Verse 3.
^ow therefore, o Inhabitant of Jerusalem, ^d thou man of Judah, judge (I pray
you) ^tweene me and my Vineyard.

4. Thus Nathan the Prophet appea^d not to any other Judge, then to David
^mselfe, as he pleaded the case of Vriah; ^d he drew in David to pronounce the
2. Sam. 12. ^.
^ntence of condemnation against him^fe, which said; As the Lord lives, the
^en that has done this thing shall surely ^e. And thus, when Christ had
propo^d a Parable of the like Argument to ^e Princes, Priests, and Rulers of
the ^wes, he affixed to the same, as it were a ^quest of their own judgment
in the ^use, saying: Therefore when the Lord Math. 21. 40.
^f the Vineyard shall come, what shall he ^o to those husbandmen? and they
whom ^e Parable reproved, gave the sentence ^ying: He will cruelly destroy
those wicked ^es, and will commit his Vineyard unto others, which shall yield
him the fruits there^f in their seasons. Neither can the con^cience refuse to
be both an upright wit^esse, and an accuser, and condemner of the sinful
soul, even against it self, especially there, where the things are manifest:
therefore he goes no further for judgment in the cause, then to the inhabitor
of Jerusalem, and the man of Judah.

4. Some would, that by this Inhabitor of Jerusalem, and man of Judah, should
be meant the Lord Christ, because the Prophet says not Inhabitors, and men:
but, The inhabitor of Jerusalem, and man of Judah: by this some understand
Christ
thou inhabitor, and thou man: as also, for that Christ was the spiritual head
and inhabitor of Jerusalem, the chief man of the tribe of Judah, and the Son
of God, to whom the Father had committed all Judgment. Neither may we think
otherwise, but that he shall be the Judge of this matter, and of those persons
in the general Judgment. But yet, it is plain, that the Lord in this place
appealeth by the Prophet to the Jews themselves. And in that he speaks in
the singular number, thou inhabitor of Jerusalem, and thou man of Judah, his
purpose was thereby not to crave judgment as simply of them all together, but
He appealeth to every one particularly.
particularly of every one of them. Neither would he that only one of them
should be Judge of another: but that also ^uery one of them, singularly should
en^r into his own heart, his own conscience, and examine himself, and judge
of himself in this case.

5. Neither did the Lord doubt any thing to commit this judgment to every ^ne
of them, the cause being indeed so ^st and so honest of his part, and so
ma^ifest and well known to every one of them, as could neither be reproved by
any of them, nor denied. Therefore ^ayth he) I come now for judgment in ^is
cause to thee, even to every singular ^erson of Judah and Jerusalem: requesting
^hee, to discern between me and my ^ineyard. Such a thing we have also in ^he
prophecy of Hoseah, where the Lord Hoseah. 6. 4.
^sketh of Ephraim, and Judah judgment, ^n these words: O Ephraim, what shall I
^o unto thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat ^hee?

6. Surely, this could not but pierce their consciences, and compel them to
give sentence in the cause, not only generally, Yoni. Iniquitas mea. Genesis 4.
13.
but singularly, as Cayn did, saying: My sin is greater then I can bear: he
says not, that man's sin, or such men's faults; but looking into himself, and
judging himself, he says; mine own sin: the burden whereof oppresses my
conscience, which acknowledges, that for the same a greater punishment is due
unto me then I am able to sustain: if he iested not at Gods threatenings, as
some do think: or, as King David did, who in the assured hope of mercy upon
his hearty repentance, confessed and said, I have sinned: Who? even I: But
thou art a King, a Prince, a Magistrate, the head of the people, a man of
Authority, and can thou sin? or at the least, will thou acknowledge and
confess thy sins upon the words of Nathan a Prophet? a Minister? an
inferior? a subject? yea, my conscience testifies against me, and I must
accuse and condemn my self of sin against God; and of the abuse of my
authority which I have from the Lord. And this is the request of Judgment on
the Lords behalf, by the ministry of his Prophet, his Minister, his Servant.

CHAP. XIIII.
^. The Lords complaint against his unkind people in these words: viz.

that could I have done more to my Vineyard that I have not done to it? Why
have I looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brings forth wild
grapes? verse. 4.

AFter that the Lord had appealed to the judgment of the people, touching the
case between him and ^em, and obtained audience, he opens ^e whole matter;
and first, he does not ^ly repeat his manifold benefits be^owed on them, but
also clears him^lfe of all fault which peradventure they ^ould have cast on
him, and then both An action of unkindness commenced by God against the Jews.
^ommenceth his Action of ingratitude against them, and proves the same to
their faces. Therefore he says, verse 4. that could I have done any more to my
^ineyard, that I have not done unto it? Why ^aue I looked that it should bring
forth ^rapes, and it brings forth wild grapes? As if he said: ye cannot say,
that ye wanted any thing which of my part should have been done for you:
wherefore the^ have ye so recompensed me? wha^ moved you to use me so? are
ye no^ too ungrateful against me? Israel,

2. These two points the Prophet H^sey Hos^ah. 6.
combineth, when he says in the Lord behalf: O Ephraim, what shall I do unto
1. A complaint. 2. The cause thereof.
thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat thee? By Ephraim, he means the house o^
Israel: by Judah, the Jews. This is the complaint: he adds a reason thereof,
saying: Your goodness is like a morning cloud, and like a deawe that quickly
goes away: whereby he notes their inconstancy and deceitfulness. This
complaint is also very patheticall, as if the Lord had striued with himself to
have vttred something more, then he could in words express. And this does the
manner of the speech by interrogation The manner of the speech.
or expostulation fortify, having in it indeed a more emphasis and force, then
he had only said, in a plain affir^ation; I am not able to do any more ^en I
have done for Ephraim: nor to ^treate Judah better then I have intrea^d him. I
know not what more I should ^ue done for my Vineyard, then I ^ue done. In this
sort speaks the lord in Jeremy, 31. 20. saying: Is E^hraim my dear son, or
pleasant child? though he would say, No, no: for he ^th dealt unfaithfully with
me. And ^us says the Lord again, clearing him^fe, Ierem. 2. 5. What iniquity
have your ^hers found in me, that they are gone ^re from me, and have walked
after va^tie, and are become vain? as if he ^yd: None at all.

3. And here, the Lord expostula^g with the house of Israel, seems revive and
call into remembrance, The Lord puts them in mind of his own goodness toward
them.
^at wonders and works, what bene^es and blessings he had wrought, ^ne, and
bestowed on an unkind ^d ungrateful people. As if he would ^ue said: O house
of Israel, and men of ^dah, consider well and remember, what I have done for
you: have I not powr^ forth many blessings and benefits o^ you? have I not
done and wrought man^ strange and wonderful works amon^ you? yea, and such,
as none else could do did not I make choice of thee for m^ self before all the
nations under the he^uens? when thou did wallow in the Ezekiel. 16. 6.
misery, vile and contemptible, did not look upon thee, pity thee, and
promis^ thee life? did not I spread my skirts o^ thee, and covered thy
filthiness? did no^ I swear unto thee, and made a couenan^ with thee? did not
I wash thee with water, and anointed thee with oil: an^ clothed thee, and
shooed thee, and gir^ thee about, and decked and adorned the^ with gold,
silver, and fine linen, and silk^ and broydred work? did not I feed thee
with fine flower, and honey, and oil, and made thee beawtifull? and did not I
for thee all things else, either pleasant, profitable, or convenient every way?
And was this of thy goodness ^ was it not rather of my love and mercy*

4. Again call to mind and consider, o house of Israel, and man of Judah, wha^
I have done: did not I make choice of The Lord shows how provident and
careful he was of his Vineyard.
^he Place, as strong, plentiful, and plea^nt for my Vineyard? did I not hedge
^e same about with my grace, and divine ^rotection? did I not cast out the
stony ^arted Canaanites before thy face, and ^ things that might hurt or annoy
thee? ^d I not plant in thee the pleasant Sorec ^d best plants, and stored thee
with ^ly, zealous, and godly men? did not ^ith cost and care build a Tower in
the ^ddest of thee? had not thou a ^emple for my worship, and noble ^ngs
and Princes, and many mighty ^rkes in the midst of thee for thy bet(...)
beawtie, glory, and defense? did ^ot make a Wine Press therein, and ^red thee
with the burdens of the ^ophets, and admonitions, and com^ts, and
comminations, and exclama^ns, and exhortations, and all things else the health
of thy Soul, to stir thee and enable thee to be fruitful and ^nkfull?

^. Well, after all these tokens of my ^e and mercy toward thee: did not I ^e
for grapes and expect good fruits? yea, I stayed and waited from time ^ God
puts them in mind of his own good expectation.
time, to see if thou would yet at leng^ bring forth any good and pleasant
fruit unto me: for as I am merciful, of lon^ suffering, and would with all mine
hear^ rather wait for the repentance of a si^ner, then hastily to condemn and
destroy him, if there may be hope there of: so I have stayed and waited for the^
to yield me good fruits: I looked for grapes, that is to say, for Judgment,
a^ Justice: I hoped that thou would perform those duties which in my La^ I
had prescribed thee to perform: so I formed thee for my self, to show for^
Isa. 43. 21.
my praise.

6. But after all those blessings a^ Here the Lord charge them with
ingratitude. The cause of his complaint. Isa. 43. 21.
tokens of my love, what have thou yee^ded me to answer my love, and satisf^
mine expectation? Thou have not called upon me ( o Jacob) but thou ha^ wearied
me ( o Israel.) Thou have n^ brought me the sheep of thy burnt o^frings,
neither have thou honored m^ with thy sacrifices, etc. but thou ha^ laden me
with thy sins, and weari^ me with thine iniquities. Thy fath^ has sinned,
and thy teachers have ^ansgressed against me: and thou have ^eelded me in
steed of grapes, wild ^rapes: that is, for Judgment and Iu^ce, oppression,
and a crying: wic^ednesse, and iniquity, Eccles. 3. 16. ^mos. 5. 7. Thou have
brought forth ^to me for liberality, covetousness: ^r sobriety,
drunkenness: for repen^nce, impenitencie: for love, envy: ^r chastity,
filthy lust: for long-suf^ing, hasty revenge: for humility, They had no
reason to behave themselves so toward the Lord.
^de: for mercy, cruelty: for justice, ^urie: for judgment, oppression: for
^odnesse, naughtiness. And why have ^ou so done? what reason has moved ^ee to
behave thy self so toward ^e?

7. Thus did the Prophet Nathan in ^ name of the Lord upbraid David ^ King, and
he said: Wherefore have 2. Sam. 12. 9.
^u despised the commandment of the Lord ^ God to do evil in his sight? And
thus Sa^el charged and vpbrayded Saul, and ^d: Thus and thus have thou done:
Where^e have thou not obeyed the voice of the 1. Sam. 15. 19
^rd? And in this sort, Moses charged and Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
expostulated the old Israelites, saying* D^ ye so reward the Lord, o ye
foolish nation a^ unwise? But why have ye done thus what can ye allege for
your selves t^ justify your selves in this point? Surel^ ye are wholly
inexcusab(...) (...)fore me, an^ as naked as Adam was a(...) his fall, neither
are ye able with fig leaves to coue^ your filthiness and shame.

8. Thus are they accited, and draw^ to the bar of Gods judgment, a^ hardly
charged upon the Lords complain^ They stand arraigned in the open Ses^ons
before the eyes of all the world, wit^ guilty consciences and trembling heart^
and find no reason to excuse themselves ^ unkindness, nor any way to escape
eith^ the sentence of condemnation, or the execution of that judgment which is
denou^ced against them for such their monstro^ ingratitude, and well worthy:
for why di^ they so requite the Lords goodness, t^ yield him wild grapes, when
he require^ and expected fruits answerable to h^ love, wisdom, cost, care and
diligenc^ They had no reason at all so to decei^ his hope, to frustrate his
expectation, a^ ^ behave themselves so frowardly to^ards him, as they
themselves cannot ^oose but in their consciences grant, ^d with their tongues
confess the same ^fore God, and all his holy Angels.

CHAP. XV.
The Lords sentence and commination, viz.

^d now I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard, verse 5.

^Orasmuch as the house of Israel, and the Jews, would not be moved at all to
the performance of their duty, which was, that they should have walked the way
of the Lord, being fruitful in ^od works) either by the consideration ^his
benefits, or his expectation of their ^od fruits, or by the equity of his
cause which he referred to their judgments, or ^ his woeful moan and
patheticall com^aint of their monstrous unkindness to^ards him; he proceeds
in his suite a^inst them, and now (at the length) A comination.
^reatneth them with his heavy judgments and plagues, the which, he did ful^
determine to cast on them, except the^ repented.

2. When Christ in the Gospel ha^ proposed the Parable of the perfido^^
hu^bandmen and the Vineyard, to the priests and rulers of the Jews* he
thereupon asked them, saying: When therefore the Lord of the Vineyard shall
come, wh^ The Jews out of their own words are both judged and condemned
shall he do to these husbandmen? and the^ gave the sentence of condemnation
against themselves, saying: He will crully destroy those wicked men, etc. And
the Lord replyeth: Therefore I say unto (...) that the kingdom of God shall be
taken from you, etc. Here our Savior having gotten of those Jews the sentence
of condemnation* against themselves, ratifieth the own words, and threatens
them with the judgments of God for their wickedness: Therefore I say unto
you, etc. S^ deals the Prophet, and says in the name of the Lord: And now
will I tell yo^ what I will do to my Vineyard.

3. Indeed there is something purposed There is a judgment denounced, which in
the due time shall be executed on the guilty.
to be done, and a work to be wrough^ in his time, that the ears of all them
the hear thereof, shall glow, as says the Pro^het, for they have mocked me and
decei^ed mine expectation (says the Lord) ^erefore shall they also be mocked
and de^iued: they loathed blessings, they shall ^erfore have cursings: they
contemned ^ercie, they shall therefore have severity: ^ey shall be troubled as
with a storm in ^e sea, with a sword in an house, with a ^oath in a garment,
with a rust in iron, ^ith a fire among thorns: they shall find ^eir enemies to
be as strong as Giants, ^ ramping as Lions, as cruel as Bears, ^ fierce as
Tygars; they shall be spoiled ^d punished; and then, be constrained ^
acknowledge their own unkindness ^d sins against me. And this is that which
Moses prophesied of long before, ^hereof the Prophets preached in their ^^es,
and Christ himself confirmed and ^ ^ea^^ed on the latter Jews, which in ^e
due time was also accomplished.

4. By this we may perceive, that their ^nnes were not small against the Lord,
^ho was so mightily provoked to high ^ispleasure: and that, as their great
^nnes moved him to great wrath, so the end of this wrath is the death of the
irrepentant sinner: for as without sin, there is no displeasure; so without
displeasure, there is no death, no misery: for man was not subject either to
death or misery, until he had sinned. But thi^ will appear the more, if we
duly consider,

5. But who are threatened to be punished? 1 The Lords own Vineyard is
threatened. Amos 3. 1: 2.
even the Vineyard of the Beloved, the house of Israel, the people of the Lord,
for they have rebelled against him: neither does the Lord omit both to
threaten, and also to beat and punish them for the same. Thus judgment
begins at Gods house (as the Apostle says) and if it be so, what shall be
the end of the ungodly? S. Paul lays the The old Israelites. 1. Cor. 10.
case of the old Israelites before the Corinthians, and tells them, how they
are made examples to them that come after. They might have been examples to the
latter Jews, had they had grace, and those latter Jews may be examples for
^s. Therefore let us not be high minded To. 11.
^ut fear, for if God spared not the natu^ll branches, neither will he spare
us. if ^e be polluted with the like abhominati^s. The Scriptures are stored
with these ^d such like cominations and threats of ^dgements, not I say, not
against the ^entiles and Heathen people, but against ^e people of Israel and
Judah, as the sha^g of a rod over the stubborn ser^nt and rebellious child.

6. But who threatens, and who pu^heth 2. God threatens and punishes his
people.
the people of God? who durst be ^bolde to reprove them? to threaten the^? ^
correct and punish them? The Pro^et tells them, that God takes this ^^ter
into his own hand, and does both ^reaten and beat them that be of his ^ne
house if they offend him, as a Mai^r his servant, as a father his child: and
^at he expresses in these words: Now will tell you what I will do to my
Vineyard. ^hese are the words of God, which the ^rophet speaks unto them: and
he ^th not, I will appoint or command this ^ that Tyrant, or this or that
person to ^ecute this thing: but I will do it my self: yea, I will correct
and punish my Vineyard mine own people with rod^ with stripes. An hard case is
it no doubt, when a father shall be constrained through the stubborn
wickedness of his own children, to be severe and cruel unto them* Yet lo,
they, even they whom he has brought up, have abused his goodness so far,
that he is justly provoked to punis^ and grieve them with severity.

7. Thus said the Lord by his Prophet to David* Behold, I will raise up evil
against thee out of thine own house. 2. Sam* 12. 11. And Isay says, that for
the sin of the people, God will take away from Jerusalem and from Judah, the
stay and the strength, a^ the stay of bread, and all the stay of water, Isa^ 3.
1. Again* The Lord shall make bald the heads of the daughters of Zion: and the
Lord shall discover their secret parts: Verse. 17. Again: The Lord shall wash
the filthiness^ off the daughters of Zion, and purge the blood of Jerusalem out
of the mids thereof by the spirit* of Judgment, and by the spirit o^ burning.
Isa. 4. 4. Again, The wrath o^ the Lord is kindled against his people* and he
has stretched out his hand upon them, and has smitten them. Isa. 5* ^5. And ^
says the Lord himself by the Pro^het Habaouk* Chap. 1. 5. I worked work ^
your days, a work which ye^ will not ^eleeue, if a man would declare it you?
^ct. 13. 41. And he means his iudge^ents on the ^ewes for the contempt of ^s
word, the abuse of his blessings, which ^ says ^e will himself execute. So he
says ^ Jeremy* against the kings of Judah: I will Ier. 22. 7.
^epare a destroy^^ ^^th his weapons for ^ee. By this evil, he means plagues,
not that God is Author of sin. Amo. 3. 6.


8. And this acknowledged the servant ^ Ieh^ram, is hen he said to Elisha
tou^ing the great plague of famine that was ^ Samaria in the sl^g^ of the King
of A^m: Behold^ this evil comes of the Lord. ^ King. 33. For there is not
evil in a Ci^ which the Lord has not done says Amos: by this evil he
means those ^lictions and troubles which sell upon ^e Cities of Israel and
Judah for their ^nsgressions^ and were inflicted by the lord himself ^^
according ^^ he before ^reatned them, saying* I will send a ^e upon Judah.
and it shall devour ^e places of Jerusalem: Amos. 2. 5. Again he says: I
will visit you for al^ your iniquities: Chap. 3. 2. And the Prophet Isayah in
this place uses the Pronowne and particle, Ego, which being Ego.
proposed for an Emphasis, adds to the matter the more vehemence. As in the
15. of Genesis verse. 7. the Lord says: Even I the Lord, which have brought thee
out of Vr of the Chaldees. By this it appears, that the Lord himself both
threatens and punishes his people for their rebellion and sin, whosoever be
his executioners.

9. Notwithstanding, the goodness of God is seen even here also, in two 1.
Gods goodness appears in two things.
things: first, that he does not punish them before he gives them warning
thereof by his Prophets: Now I will tell you ^ What I will do: that is to say,
what (not now, but) hereafter in the time to come, I will do^ to my Vineyard.

10. Of the first says the Prophet Amos: God gives warning before he^
plagueth them that offend him.
Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secrets to his servants
the ^rophets. And this mercy did the Lord ^ew unto the old world, when he
war^ed them by Noah, of the plague ensu^g. And the like he did to Sodom and
Genesis 6. 13. Genesis 19.
^omorrah by Loath, but most of all has ^is mercy bin declared on the
Israelites: ^ whom the Lord sent his servants the ^rophets, from time to time,
to admonish ^em of his displeasure, and to call them ^ repentance. And in this,
he would that ^e should understand, how loath he is to ^estroy a sinner, and how
willing he is, ^at he should convert and live. There^re, when we hear those
threatenings and ^monitions denounced and given to us ^ the Lords Ministers, let
us not con^mne nor disdain them, but know, that ^e Lord by these means is
willing we ^ould understand his pleasure: be admo^shed to fly those future
destructions 2. Gods long suffering in not plaging the^ by and by as soon as
they offend him.
^hereof we be warned in the time of his ^race.

11. In the second, appears his most ^ise deliberation and merciful long
suf^ring. But what need has the Lord to ^dmonish us before hand of plagues
ensuing? to stay for our amendment? to d^ferre to power down the thunderbol^
of wrath upon sinful and miserable m^n* Surely, we may well wonder at this
the Lords goodness with the Psalmist, which Psalm. 8. 4. H. ^. 2. 6.
said: Lord, what is man, that thou should ^ mindful of him? or the son
of man, that the would consider him? Is not this spoken for our sakes, and a
lesson given* to instruc^ and ^each us? he shows that the thoght^ of the Lord
and his ways, are not like ou^ thoughts, or our ways: but that for hi^ Isa.
55.
names ^^ke, and for his praise, he will defe^ Isa. 84. 9.
his wr(...), and refrain, as he says by hi^ Prophet, to punish offenders.
Therefore he is slow to anger, and forbeareth long^ yet he punishes men when
they offen^ him, to weight for their repententance^ and that when soever the
fruits of our faith appears, and we declare our selves such as forsake our
wicked ways and ungodly imaginations, he is most ready to shewe^ mercy and
to forgive us our sins. Howbeit, The long suffering and goodness of God,
should not embolde^ us in sin.
this is not spoken to embolden us in our sins, nor that we thereby presum^
on his goodness: for as he is slow to anger toward them that are cureable by
repentance: so is he of great power toward ^em that presume and continue
obstinate, ^destroy them. Let us not therefore pre^me and sin more and more,
because ^s goodness forbeareth yet to punish ^: but rather let this his
goodness lead ^ to repentance and newness of life.

12. To this end the Lord deferred to ^stroy the old world, after he had given
^em warning thereof by Noah an hun^ed and twenty years: in all the which ^e,
they had space to repent. Thus ^e Lord made a stay to destroy So^me, after he
had told Abraham thereof, ^d had warned them by Loath one whole ^ht. Thus the
Lord allotted unto Ni^ie forty days: thus the Lord waited ^ the children of
Israel in the wilder^sse forty years; and after that, in the ^es of the
Judges, of the Kings, of the ^ophets; many years after he had ^rned them, did
he defere to punish ^em: Hezekiah had the time of his life, ^d Josiah, had his
life also of respit, ^fore the Babilonicall captivity.

Lastly: the latter Jews had forty ^res allotted them to repent, after that
Christ had foretold them of their fina^ desolation: And wished (with all his
ha^^ for their return and amendment; the which, when he found not, he sighed,
an^ thus complained: Oh that my people ha^ (^ Psalm. 81. 13. 14.
their time) hearkened unto m^: and Isra^ had walked in my ways: I would soon
ha^ humbled their enemies, and turned mine ha^ against their adversaries?

13. But notwithstanding this forewa^ning and the long suffering of the Lord
the Vinyard of the Lord, which brough^ forth wild grapes, and turned Judgment
The Jews considered not of Gods mercy and long suffering of the^.
into Worme-wood, and Justice into injury) would neither acknowledg^ their
ungodliness as yet, nor repent o^ their sins, nor regard the Lords mercie^
but as a froward generation, they resiste^ the holy Ghost; and as the fathers
did, s^ did the children: and worse also, degenerating and declining farther
and farthe^ every day from the good nature of they^ heavenly father, through
the malice o^ the devil* to whom they gave place, an^ brought forth fruits
more agreeable t^ him, then answerable to the love an^ goodness of God.

14. Besides all this, when the Lord Isa. 22 12. 13. 14.
God of hoastes did call them unto wee^ing, and mourning, and to baldness, and
^ girding in sackcloth, that is, to repe^ta^ce: ^ehold, they in contempt of his
word had ^y and gladness; slaying oxen, and killing ^eep: eating flesh, and
drinking wine: ma^ng great cheer; saying in dirision of the ^rophets and their
preachings, Let us eat, ^inke and be merry: for they say, to morrow ^ shall
die. Therefore it was meet, that ^ which had enriched them with bene^es,
should now reprove them, and threa^ to power out his wrath upon them. ^d now
let us hear what is denounced ^d threatened to be cast on them in the ^ of
their visitation.

CHAP. XVI.
^e Lord threatens to destroy his people. viz.

^ill consume, tread down, and lay waste the Vineyard: Verse. 5. 6.

^He Lord having called audience ^ to his words, and plainly declared his
displeasure against his people for the^ wickedness: and therewithal threatne^
vengeance which was in the due time t^ be powered forth on them that would no^
take the benefit of his long suffering, an^ repent; he now in certain
particulars, shows both the destruction of the vineyar^ and the means to
further the same. The destruction is displaied in these 3. words, viz. The
destruction of the vineyard.


1. I will take away the hedge. 2. I w^ break down the wall thereof. 3. I
will lay^ waste. The means thereof are discerne^ in the other words contained
in the sam^ 5. and 6. verse: whereof we will speakei^ the 2. Chapters
following, and God wi^ In this we may consider the destruction threatened, and
the manner thereof.

2. There was a time when the Lord sai^ Malac. 3. 11. 1 A devouring or
consuming. Ezech. 33. 27.
he would reprove the deuourer, and withstand him from hurting the vine: but
no^ he threatens, that the vineyard shall be devoured or eaten up: whereby is
meant, tha^ the people should be consumed, some b^ the sword: some by
pestilences: some b^ famine: some by wild beast: the four^ ordinary plagues
which the Lord w^ wont to bring upon this rebellious and ^thankfull people,
according as he had ^reatned them in Deuteronomy. 32. 23. I will and plagues upon
them: I will bestow mine ^rrowes upon them: They shall be burnt ^th hunger,
and consumed with heat, ^d with bitter destruction: I will also ^d the teeth
of Beasts upon them, with ^ venom of Serpents in the dust: The lord shall
slay them without, and in the ^ambers fear: both the young man, ^d the young
woman, the suckling with Deu. 23. 21. Isa. 1. 20.
man of gray hair. And this more ^gely is set forth in the 28. Chap. of the
^e; where the Lord tells, that he will ^se them to be consumed from the land
^erin he would plant them, if they would ^ obey his voice, to keep and to do
all commandments. Yea, even as the fire ^oureth the stubble, so they should be
^oured and consumed. 3. Of this Ezechiel ^aketh at large. And that thing might
be sooner accomplished, he would cause, that ^raim should devour Manasses, and
that ^anasses also should devour Judah: Thus ^ Tribe should consume an other,
and by ^l broiles they should work one another destruction within and among
themselu^ then the which, no kind of contention more perilous and miserable.
The H^stories of the books of the Iudg^ Samuel, the Kings, the Chronicles, an^
finally, the story of Josephus, to^ching the latter state of the Mach^bees,
and of the Jews, yield us man^ lamentable examples of this matter. A^ hereof
was it, that the Psalmist compl^neth Psalm. 44. 11. Psalm. 80. 13.
to the Lord; Thou give us as shee^ to be eaten up, and thy Vineyard to b^
devoured of the wild beasts.

4. Next, the Lord says, that the Vin^yard shall be trodden down: alluding to
the 2. A treading down.
breaking in of wild beasts into a Vin^yard, which do not only eat and deuour^
but also tread down and spoil the vin^ And this rightly notes the manner of
fo^raine enemies, which invade with forc^ and devour and ouerrun both the
countr^ and the people thereof. By the which, the Prophet signifies, that the
enemies of I^rael, which were as yet withstood and r^sisted by the grace, power
and prouiden^ of God, from inuading and hurting t^ Israelites, should now at
the length ha^ entrance, and be able not only to fight ^ stand most strongly
against the Israe(...), but also to constrain them to turn ^r backs to fly,
and fall before ^m; who should (as God would have tread down those rebelllous
chil^n on the ground: thus the Lord also threatened to do to them, by ^oses:
Deuteronomy. 28. 25. saying: The Lord cause thee to fall before thine enemies: shall
come out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them: and shall
^attered through all the Kingdoms of the ^. Again Verse. 48. Thou shall serve
^ enemies which the Lord shall send upon in hunger and in thurst, and in
naked(...)* and in need of all things: and he shall put ^ke of Iron upon thy
neck, until he have ^oyed thee. Again, verse. 52. he shall ^ge thee in all
thy Cities, until thine high strong walls fall down, etc.

And this the Lord remembered in his ^ds to Solomon, when he appeared to after
the finishing of the house of god, ^ng: If ye turn away and forsake my sta^s
and my co^mandeme^ts which I have 2. Chro. 7. 19. 20. 21. 22.
before you, and shall go and serve other Gods, and worship them: then will
pluck them up by the roots, out of ^^ land which I have given them; and the
house which I have sanctified for my nam^ will I cast out of my sight, and will
make it t^ be a Proverb and a jest among all natio^^ And this house which is
most high, shalb^ an astonishme^t to every one that passe^ by, and shall say:
why has the Lord dealt ^ this fashion with this la^d, and with this house and
they shall answer, because they forsoo^ the lord god of their fathers, which
brog^ the^ out of the land of Egypt, and caught hol^ on other gods, and
worshipped the^: therefore has he brought all this evil upon them*

6. Lastly, the Lord in his Gospel Pr^phesied Luke 21. 24.
of this thing, and said in plai^ words; that this people should fall wi^ the
edge of the sword: and should be l^ away captive into all nations; and that
I^rusalem should be trodden under foot ^ the Gentiles.

How these prophetical comminatio^ of the judgments of God have been
pe^formed in the time and times appointe^ as sometimes by the Philistines,
sometim^ by the Egyptia^s, sometimes by the Assiri^ sometimes by the
Babylonians, sometimes ^y the Medes and Persians, sometimes by ^e Graetians,
and lastly by the Romans, the ^istories of those times truly report.

Hereof was it, that the Psalmist partly ^ the spirit of Prophecy, and part^
in the bitter sense of those Iudge^ents, complains; saying: Thou ma^t Psalm.
44. 10. and 80. 13. 15. 16.
us to turn our backs from the aduersa^, and they which hate us, spoil us at
their ^asure.

7. The Lord proceeds yet one de^ee 3. Awasting of the people.
farther, and says of his Vineyard: I ^l lay it waste. And this word
compre^deth not only all that which has ^e said before, touching the
consuming ^d treading down of the vineyard; but ^vtter contempt and neglect
thereof, by ^n who had before this, taken regard and ^e to defend and maintain
it: namely, that ^nceforth the vineyard, that is* the City ^ Jerusalem, the
land of Judah, the land of ^ael, with all the inhabitors thereof, be^g most
sinful and execrable before God, ^ould be utterly destroyed, according ^ the
Lord by the same Prophet spea^th in an other place more plainly: The Cities
shall be wasted without an inhabitor, Isa. 6. 11. 2.
and the houses shall be void of men, an^ the land shall be reduced into a
wildernesse^ the Lord shall take men away, and there shall be an unmeasurable
wasting in the midde^ o^ the earth.

8. The word signifies a concauitie^ and void place, a place without any
contents, as wasted Desert, and good for nothing. Batath. The meaning is, that
the land shall be made void, desolate Desart^ and wild for want of inhabitors,
and tillers of the same. And herein the Prophet alludeth to that comination in
Deuteronomy. 28* 63. Ye shall be rooted out of the land: an^ Chapt. 29. 23. The land
shall burn wi^ Brimstome and Salt: it shall not be^ sown nor bring forth,
nor any Gras^ shall grow therein: like as in the overthrowing of Sodom and
Gomorah, Admah and Zeboim, which the Lord ouerthre^ in his wrath and anger. And
thus did the Lord to his ungrateful vinyard in the appointed Isa. 17. 8. and
ca. 3. 30.
time: it was devoured: it was trod^ down: yea, it was wasted: for why the wra^
of God was kindled against his people f^ their abominations: he stretched out
h^ hand upon them, and smote them, that their ^ountaines did tremble, their
carcasses ^ere torn in the mids of the streets, and their land was laid
waste: yea, the Ezech. 7. 25 27. and 8. 18.
and became dark (as the Prophet says) and most sorrowful, and the light was
^arkned in the heavens thereof; that is, ^e whole land was overwhelmed with
^most dangerous blindness, and a sorrowful affliction: then the King mour^ed,
the Prince was clothed with de^lation, the hands of the people in the and were
troubled, and there was a ^ngsome and remediless misery. Then, ^hen
destruction was come upon them, Hos. 5. 15.
^ their trouble, they sought peace, but ^ey found none: they cried in the
^ords ears with a loud voice, but he ^eard them not; neither did his eye spare
them, nor did he in mercy pity them; nor ^urned he his wrathful displeasure
from them: but his heavy hand against them was stretched out still, as says
the Prophet.

CHAP. XVII.
The means to further the destruction of the Jews, declared in these words:

I will take away the hedge thereof: I will break down the wall thereof: that
is, of the Vineyard, verse 5.

WHen the Husbandman has employed his labor, cost, and diligence on his
Vineyard, in hope to receive the timely fruits thereof accordingly, and after
some years, does perceive that his Vineyard proves barraine and
unprofitable, and therefore purposes thenceforth to give up his Vineyard to
the spoil, and to let that lie waste; he neglecting all care thereof, teareth
away his hedges, breaks down the walls: he does neither cut it, nor dig it,
nor water it, but does suffer briars and thorns to grow up in it, being
indeed the meane^ and occasions that the Vineyard is devoured of beasts, is
trodden down and wasted. Even so, forasmuch as the Vineyard of the Lord was
unfruitful as ^ouching such grapes as he required, neither would be corrected
to yield him the ^leasant fruits of the fear of God, therefor the Lord
threatened a destruction to ^he Vineyard, and the means and occa^ions These are
Preambles to the destruction of the Jews. Isa. 5. 5. 6.
to further the same should be (as the Prophet testifies) these which follow:
that is to say, The hedge thereof shall be taken away: the wall thereof shall
be broken ^owne: It shall not be pruned, nor dug, ^ut briars and thorns
shall grow up, and ^he Clouds shall be charged that they rain ^o rain upon
it.

2. Thus seeing that the Lord is minded ^o give over his Vineyard, the people
of Israel, to the spoil and destruction, for their abominations, he takes
away and withdraws from them again in his wrathful displeasure, all those
benefits and blessings y^ which before of his love and mercy he had bestowed on
the^, for their beauty, strength, preservation, defense and commodity, making
thereby an open gap to the execution of his just judgments. Neither were there
any of those pure plants remaining, being also removed away, as from the The
good men were also taken away. Isay. 57. 1.
evil which was to come, as the same Prophet says: The righteous perishes,
and no man considers it in his heart: and merciful men be taken away; and no
man understands that they be taken away from the evil to come. Whereupon,
nothing being left, but only that which was meet for the fire, the Lord would
suffer his fierce wrath to fall upon it and consume it. Thus did he on the old
world, when Genesis 7. 16. 17
Noah was embarked in the Arc: thus did he on Sodom and Gomorah, when Lot Genesis
19. 23. 24.
was departed from them: and thus he did on Israel and Judah, when the choice
plants, I mean the righteous and merciful men were taken away: Isa. 3. 1. 2.
3.

3. I will (says the Lord) take away the The hedge, viz. the Lords protection,
is withdrawn from them.
hedge of the Vineyard; that is, seeing I have a full purpose to neglect and
give over this rebellious people to spoil and destruction; I will take away
from them, not only my law wherewith I had bounded them in and kept them in
order, but also my merciful protection and defense of them which has hitherto
ministered unto them, safety, prosperity, and defense: they shall not any
longer taste and enjoy the sweetness and commodity of my law, defense, and
grace, but shall be ^tterly banished and shut out from the ^appy possession and
sense of the same, ^o their perpetual shame and confusion.

4. This hedge was gapped in the time The hedge is gapped.
^f Manasseh the King of Judah, who ^ade Judah, and the inhabitants of
Ieru^alem, 2. Chro. 33. 11.
to err and to do worse then the ^eathen (whom the Lord cast out be^re the
children of Israel). At what time, ^ for the which cause, the Lord brought ^on
them the Captains of the host of ^e king of Asshur, which took Manas^h, and
put him in fetters, and bound ^m in chains, and carried him to Babel. ^gaine,
this hedge was gapped in the 2. Chro. 36. ^ 7. 17.
^yes of Iehoahaz the son of Josiah, at that time Neco the king of Egypt came
^to the land of Judah, and took him a^ay, and condemned the land in an hun^ed
talents of silver, and a talent of gold. ^lso there was a wide open gap in the
^id hedge, in the time of Iehoakim, when Nebuchadnezar the king of Babylon
en^ed and took him, and bound him with chains to carry him captive to Babel
with the vessels of the Lords house.

5. And in the days of Zedekiah, when there was a general Apostasy of the
people from the Lord, these gaps were enlarged, The gaps are enlarged.
and then the Lord brought in upon them the King of the Chaldees, who slew
their young men with the sword in the house of their Sanctuary, and spared
neither young man, nor virgin, ancient nor aged, God gave all into his hand.
And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small, and the treasures of
the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the King, and of his Princes, all
these carried he to Babel: and so whenever the hedge was neglected and
ruinous, that is, when God withdrew his defense and mercy from them, sometimes
the Medes and Persians, sometimes the Romans and other enemies, rushed in and
invaded them, to their great grief and misery, whereof the Saints were moved
to complain in the behalf of this distressed people: Why have thou broken
down her hedge, so that Psalm. 80. 12.
all they that go by the way pluck of her grapes? the wild Boar out of the
wood has destroyed it: and the wild beasts of ^e field have eaten it up: that
is, now ^ou have left off to help, succor, and ^efend us, both they that hate
our reli^on, and they that disdain our persons, ^aue rushed in upon us, and
deuou^d us.

6. Next to the taking away of the ^dge, he says; I will break down the The
wall is broken down, the benefits of Gods great works are removed and taken
from them.
^ll also which I have made. And this is ^ be referred to the Tower, which, he
^d before, he had built in the midst of ^ Vineyard. Now, as by this Tower, is
^nified (as before it is said) sometimes ^e City and Temple of Jerusalem:
^metimes the Commonwealth, and ^uernment of Israel: sometimes the ^eat and
wonderful works of God, ^ought for and among this people: ^metimes that great
mystery of godli^sse, whereof Paul speaks, 1. Tim. 3. ^rse 16. So by the
breaking down ^ this wall or Tower, is signified, that ^e Jews should surely
be deprived of ^ those benefits, which in and through ^ery of those things
were ministered vn^ them.

And to note the vehemency of t^ wrath, and the terriblenesse of the
vengeance, the Lord says not thus: The w^ shall fall down, as he says
elsewhere Isa. 3. 8. The wall shall be broken down violently.
Jerusalem is fallen, and Judah is fallen: b^ he says; I will break down the
wa^ Parotz.
Parotz, the word signifies, to tear an^ break down any thing with violenc^
or force, as mighty water-streames d^fret and break down the walls an^
banks of the earth by the which they ^^ David uses the same word, 2. Sam. 5.
20^ when, coming to Baal Perazim, when he smote his enemies, he said: The
(...) has torn asunder mine enemies before ^ like the breach of waters. And
Tobiah ^ the book of Nehemiah, had that wo^^ when he said: He shall break
down the stony wall.

7. Now, as this is applied to the Citi^ The City and the Temple. Math. 21. 4.
of Jerusalem and the Temple, which a^ indeed works of great excellency an^
moment (as the Disciples said to Christ^ the Prophet Isayah speaks in man^
places thereof (as other Prophets do) bu^ briefly and effectually in the last
Chapter of his prophecy; where as we also man hear the sound of the breach of
this ^all. A voice (says he) sounds from Isa. 66. 6.
^he City: A voice from the Temple: the ^oyce of the Lord that recompenceth
his ^nemies fully. And this is the voice, that they are forced to hear, which
^ould not hear the gentle words of the ^ords Prophets, and be obedient unto ^s
word. But of the last and most noble breach of this wall, prophesied our ^uiour
in the Gospel, saying: See ye ^t all these things? Verily, I say unto you,
^re shall not be here left a stone upon a ^e, that shall not be cast down:
Math. ^. 2. Again, he says: They shall ^ke thee even with the ground, and
thy ^dren which are in thee, and they shall ^ leave in thee a stone upon a
stone, Luke ^. 44:

^. How this was performed, the Scrip^es do testify. First, in the days of
^dekiah king of Judah, the Lord brought 2. Chro. 36. 19.
^ Caldeans into the City of Jerusalem, ^o the rather at the instigation of
the ^omites, rased and brake down the ^l of Jerusalem, and burnt the house
Psalm. 137.
God. And this did Hanani afterward make report of before Nehemiah; wh^ Neh. 1.
3.
at the hearing thereof, sat down o^ the earth, and wept and mourned certain
days. And last of all, about forty years after the death of Christ, the Lord
gave them into the hand of the Romans, who rased the wall to the foundation,
(as Josephus in his history reports) Josephus.
to the horror and fear of all the^ that heard thereof.

9. Next, as by the Tower is signified The Commonwealth of Israel, and the
great works of God, and mystery of godliness.
those other excellent things, ^ namely, the beawtifull and well goue^ned
Commonwealth of Israel, the gre^ works of God done in and for them, a^ the
most notable mystery of godliness^ the Prophet comprehends all, as ^ were in
these words: The Lord shall t^ away from Jerusalem and Judah the sta^ Isa. 3. 1.
and the strength, even all the stay of brea^ and all the stay of water, the
strong man and the man of war, the Judge and the Prophet, the prudent and the
aged, the Captain of fifty, and the honorable, a^ the Counselor, and the
cunning artifice^ and the eloquent man. And thus say^ the Lord: The stone which
the bui^ders refused, the same is made the head ^f the corner: But unto the
Jews he ^yth; The kingdom of God shall be taken ^om you. And this began to be
verified When this breach was commenced, furthered and perfected.
^en when Christ said: I go away, and ^ shall dye in your sins: John 6. It ^s
furthered, then, when Paul said; ^, we turn from you to the Gentiles: ^ct.
13. 46. And it was perfected then, ^en after the destruction of the City ^
Titus, they were utterly deprived of ^ those blessings and commodities both
^rituall and temporal, to the horror ^d example of all them that come af^.
Thus did the Lord break down ^ wall of his Vineyard, and it was ^den down.

CHAP. XVIII.
Some other means to further the d^struction of the Jews, noted of the^
words: viz.

It shall not be cut, nor dug: but briars ^ thorns shall grow up. I will
also comma^ the Clouds, that they rain no rain v^on it. Verse. 6.

THe Lord having threatened the d^struction of his vineyard, and she^ed the
manner thereof, does also d^clare the means, whereby the same she be furthered
and effected; as first, by r^mouing of the hedge: next, by breaki^ down of the
wall, as I have thereof said i^ the Chapter before going. Unto the which, he
adds some other occasion and means thereof: as that the Vineyar^ shall not
be cut, nor dug: but briars a^ thorns shall grow up, and that the Cloud^
shall be forbidden to rain any rain the^ ^n.

2. First the Lord continuing his It shall not be cut: viz. nor corrected with
due discipline, etc.
^etaphor, says: It shall not be cut. The ^rd Zamar, signifies a pruning, or
pa^g away of things superfluous, as the cut^g or pruning of a Vine. As it is
said in ^uit. 25. 3. Six years thou shall cut thy ^e, and gather the fruit
thereof.

And in this also, as in the former, he ^deth to those Husbandmen, that ha^g
no pleasure in their Vineyards, do ^lect to pare, prune and cut them: ^ning
(indeed) that he would thence^h no more correct them in the due or^ of
discipline, as he had done; dispai^g (as it were) of any profit of his la^rs.

And of this, in the first Chapter, ^rse. 5. he complains, saying: Where^
should ye be stricken any more? for ye fall ^y more and more: the whole head is
sick, ^ the whole body is heavy. As if he said: ^at avails it me to
endeavor to a^nd this people with often corrections ^d punishments, seeing, the
more I cor^ the^, the worse they prove; as that cor^t or rotten rooted vine;
for from the root ^he top, and from the highest of them, to the lowest of
them, they are polluted and will not bear that good fruit which I expected.
Therefore he says again^ (as that Husbandman which contemns and gives over
his unprofitable vineyard) Ah! I will ease me of mine Adversaries: Verse. 24.
Such words spoke the Lo^ in the old time, touching that most sinful
generation before the flood, whom great lenity, long suffering, and fatherl^
discipline of the Lord could not perswad^ to repentance: My spirit (says he)
shall i^ always strive with man, because he is but flesh Genesis 6. 3.

3. Truly, as those vines which are no^ The inconvenience of the want of
discipline.
pruned, cut, and cleansed from their rotten and superfluous branches, in the
due an^ convenient time, do either soon starve, ^ become barren: so also does
that gener^tion either drop to destruction, or becom^ barren of good works,
which are not exercised with meet discipline. As likewi^ those waters do
corrupt and stink, whi^ A note of Gods neglect of the people, and displeasure.
are not moved.

Again, as where the vine is neglecte^ and not pruned and pared by the Vi^tor,
it argues the little regard and delig^ ^e has of and in the same: so is there
not more manifest note of Gods displeasure ^wards men, and little care he has
of the people, then when he suffers them to ^n without controllment or
correction. ^or as he chastises the^ whom he loves, and corrects them whom
he receives: he gives over the wicked to their own ^sts, to be drenched in
sin, and damned death. To. 1. 28.

4. Unto this neglect of the cutting and ^uning of the vineyard, the Lord
adds, at It shall neither be dug. The word It shall not be dug.
^dere in this place (as it is put passiuely) ^gnifieth, to be drawn together
by some ^strument of husbandry, as the earth is to ridges or heaps, chiefly
about Vines, ^d such kind of heaps, as do in order and ^rme resemble a flock
of sheep, fee^ng here and there in the pasture. and hereof is it, that of
this Verb ^ere is made a Nowne of the same ^etters, which signifies a Flock
of A flock of sheep.
^heepe.

And this belongs to the manurance of ^e vineyard; a kind of husba^dry which
is ^roued both so convenient and necessary, as that without it, the Vine will
neither prosper, nor bear fruit.

5. By this kind of digging, is meant the What is meant by digging.
well disposing and ordering of the people, and the timely preparing of them,
to the performance of those duties which are of them required. And this is
wrought by the instrument of godly instructions, counsels, exhortations,
admonitions, and laws. Neither diffreth this word much in signification from
the husbandry which the Vinitor bestowed on his Winepresse, which (as before is
said) he dug and made: nor from that (in effect) whereof the sweet Psalmist
speaks to the Lord, saying: Thou have dug mine ears: Psalm. 40. 6. that
is, thou have prepared mine ears to the hearing of thy word, and have made me
obedient to thy law. Wherein David alluded to that rite A ceremony of the law.
observed in the law, Deuteronomy. 15. 17. as when a servant loving his master, and
willing to abide with him (notwithstanding that a freedom be offered him in the
seventh year) has his ear perced through against the door post, by the
which, he promises obedience and obsequie to his master. And so indeed the
Lord requires us, nothing else but faith, and obedience the word, that we may
harken unto his mandements. But this is not wrought, Who diggeth the ears, etc.
^t by the operation of his spirit: for he ^ust dig our ears, and order our
minds ^d bodies; the which if he do not, there not any hope of fruit. This was
it, that ^ah meant, when he prayed, that God ^uld persuade or allure Iaphet to
dwell in ^e tents of Shem. And this was it, that E^raim in captivity desired,
saying: Con^rt thou me, and I shall be converted. Now, that would follow of
that, when as the lord would not bestow on the Jews ^is kind of husbandry,
it is easily percei^d, which also the Lord lets not to ^presse in the words
following.

6. And therefore he says: Briars and The fruits of bad husbandry.
^ornes shall grow up, or ascend up. They ^e called in the Hebrew Schamor and
^chaith: which are translated, Sentes et ^inae, and they are so called of
holding and ^teining fast, and embracing and twining ^gither. And these are
(indeed) such ^ings, as both hold fast and choke up the Vines, whereby they
become barren and starve, and therefore are accounted both unprofitable and
noisome to the husba^dman and his Vineyard. By these bryer^ and thorns, are
signified, first the Gentiles Mat. 20. 19. Gentiles. Ezech. 7. 24
and the wicked of the heathen, whom the Lord God threatened to bring into their
houses, and to hold them in their possession: and who also in this displeasure
conceived against the vineyard, should be found most unprofitable and noisome to
the same: yea, and therein manifest themselves enemies to Christ Jesus that
best chosen Vine, and adversaries to his holy Apostles and servants the
branches of that vine: howbeit, these were both stirred up, provoked and
permitted thus farforth to invade the holy land, and therein to afflict and
grieve the right good vine with her branches; I mean Christ with his Apostles,
Disciples and servants, the true Israelites: (who were committed to Pilate,
Herod, and other Gentiles to be tormented) but utterly to devour, tread down
and destroy this ungodly and ungrateful people the false Israelites, and
counterfeit Jews, which yielded such unpleasant fruits to the Lord. So,
whereas the goldly were afflicted and punished, the ungodly were both pla^ued
The godly are afflicted but the wicked are plagued.
and destroyed by those brambles, and ^hornes; I mean, the Gentiles. As Ezech.
^. 24.

7. And of this execution to be done ^y the Gentiles on the ungodly Jews, Isa.
10. 5. 6.
^hus says the Lord by his Prophet: O As^ur, the rod of my wrath, and the
staff of their ^ands is mine indignation: I will send him, (meaning Assure)
unto a dissembling nation: (meaning the Jews) and I will give him ^ charge
against the people of my wrath to ^ake the spoil, and to take the pray, and to
tread them under foot as the mire in the street. And this was partly verified
in that time, when the Chaldaeans ascended up and captiued Israel and Judah.
And partly Luke 21. 24.
when Jerusalem was trodden down of the Gentiles, in the day of the visitation
of the Jews, according to the words of Christ.

8. Moreover by those Briars and All ungodly persons etc.
Thorns (as the fruits of a cursed and waste ground) are generally signified,
not only Ezech. 2. 6
all wicked and ungodly persons: but also all their sins, errors,
transgressions, and abominations, the which are made meet both for the Heb.
6. 8.
curse and the fire in the Lords displeasure, as says the Apostle to the
Hebrews: That ground which bears thorns and briars is reproved, and is nigh
unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. Neither can we either seek for
better persons, or hope for better fruits, or expect better events from
thence, where the Lord has justly withdrawn his love, favor, protection and
mercies. And therefore, after that the Lord had fully determined to forsake and
give over the house of Israel and Judah, they were not so evil before, but then
were much worse (as were those Gentiles of whom the Apostle speaks to the
Romans, Chap. 1. Verse, 6.) By the which they were made meet for the fire, as
said the Prophet: Wickedness burns as a fire, it deuoureth the briars and
the thorns, and will kindle in the thick places of the Forest, and they shall
mount up, like the lifting up of smoke. Isa. 9. 8. And this was verified at
what time Nabuzor-adan came to Jerusalem and burnt the house of the Lord, and
the Kings house, and all the houses of Jerusalem, and all the great houses (so
stored full with briars and thorns) with fire. 2. King. 25. 9.

9. Notwithstanding all this, the Lords 3. The clouds are also forbidden to
drop on the Vineyard.
wrath is not tutned away: but his hand is ^tretched out still: and now at
last, that ^he Vineyard may be without all means of recovery, he adds to
the former another plague, the which of all other, both ^rgueth his displeasure
conceived against ^he Jews, and his willingness to waste and destroy them. I
will also (says he) ^mmaunde the Clouds, that they rain no ^aine upon it.
Although before this, when ^he Prophet speaks of the planting, ^edging and
cleansing of the Vineyard, ^ith the building of the Tower, and ma^ing the
Wine Press, he seems to say nothing either of the pruning or of the ^igging
thereof: yet may we not think, ^ut that those things also being so neces^arie,
were done, procured, employed, and ^erformed on the Vineyard to the vtter^ost:
and that among those things, there was also a timely and sweet distillation of
the rain and shewers on the Vine^ard to water the same: as it is said in Deuteronomy.
11. 11. Being in a land that drinks water of the rain of heaven. For why?
the Lord himself said: What more could ^ have done to my Vineyard that I have
no^ done to it? Verse 4. And this was as needful as any of the former, and
without the which, the Vine could neither prospe^ nor grow; but starve and
wither away.

10. It was promised in Deuteronomy. 11. 14. and 28. 12. unto them that obeyed the
voice of the Lord, and observed his commandments, that they should be
plenteous in goods, in the fruit of their body, in the fruit of their
cattle, in the fruit of their ground: And to that purpose, it is added, The
Lord shall open unto thee hi^ good treasure, the heaven to give rain unto thy
land in due season, the first rain and the latter.

And to this alludeth Zachary the Prophet, Zach. 10. 1.
who teaches the Jews how they should eschew the plague of famine then
threatened them, said: Ask ye of the Lord in the time of the latter rain: so
shall the Lord make white Clouds, and give you showers of rain, and to every
one grass in the field. But now the case is altered, God finds his people
rebellious and wicked, ^d therefore he will not vouchsafe ^em his good
treasures, to give them ^yne in season; nor will make the ^lowdes to distill
and drop, but will com^aund the Clouds to rain no rain on ^em.

11. The word signifies very thick ^lowdes, and are so called Yabim, of
thick^sse, Yabim. Thick Clouds.
as are those which have in them ^uch water: such as Solomon mea^th, when he
says: If the Clouds ^e full, they will power forth rain vp^ the earth:
Eccles. 11. 3. Howbeit, nei^er shall one drop of water fall from ^ose thick
and full Clouds, how likely ^ ever they show to drop down showers: ^cording
to that commination in Deuteronomy. ^8. 23. where Moses says to the rebel^us
children: Thine heaven that is o^r thy head shall be Brass; and the ^rth that
is under thee shall be Iron: ^he Lord shall give thee for the rain ^ the
Land, dust and ashes; even ^om Heaven shall it come down vp^n thee, until
thou be destroy^. Thus, the Vineyard is threatened to w^ the timely watering of
the Clouds. B^ now as the Prophet has a Metaphor, l^ us also in this (as we
have in the form^ words) consider what is meant by the Rain, and by those
Clouds.

12. By the Rain, is meant the wor^ The Rain is the word of God.
of God, the which is called the Water ^ life: as indeed it is, and is more
necessar^ and profitable for the children of God^ then is the first and latter
rain for the Vineyard; and without the use of the which, the people do perish,
as they tha^ want the spiritual food. This is that water which droppeth down
from heauen^ and the which none can Minister without the help of the Lord
Jesus. The vs^ The word engendereth in our souls, faith.
of this water by the operation of the holy Ghost, engenders in our souls the
faith, whereby we be justified and prep^red to every good work. But without
this water, we be barren, and cannot bu^ starve. And this is that which the
Lord threatens (chiefly on the Jews) I wi^ take away from Jerusalem and from
Iudah^ all the stay of bread, and all the stay of water^ Isa. 3. 1.

13. As by the rain, is meant the word The Clouds are the Prophets, etc.
^f God: so by the Clouds, are signified ^he Prophets and Preachers of this
word; ^ho are called and sent forth to drop the ^howres of Gods word into the
ears of the people.

And this phrase uses Moses in his last Deu. 32. 2. 3
^ong: My doctrine (says he) shall drop as ^e rain, and my speech shall still
as the deaw, ^ the shower upon the herbs, and as the ^eat rain upon the
grass. And he ad^eth: For I will publish the name of the lord. Here Moses
likeneth the word of ^od, to the rain or deawe; himself to ^e dropping
Clouds, and the people The herbs are the people to who^ the word is preached.
^ the herbs and grass. And such in the ^me of Micheah the Prophet, were
called ^oppers, which prophesied, to whom the ^ople then said: drop ye not:
that is, pro^esie ye not. But, They shall not prophecy ^ them, neither shall
they take shame. Mich. ^ 6. For the Lord will command those ^loudes to leave
off, and not to drop on ^is ungrateful people, which so well re^mbleth those
dogs and swine, to whom he ^rbiddeth the^ to give his holy things, and before
whom, he charge them not to cast the precious Pearls of his word. To such
he says: The Kingdom of heaven shall be taken away from you Mat. 21.

14. As long as these Clouds be dropping, Whiles the word is preached, there
remains some hope of mercy and peace.
there remains some hope o^ mercy and life; as then, there remained hope of
a glad and joyful entertainment at the supper of the great King, whiles his
servants were in their message busy inuiting the Guestes: But when they
contemned this opportunity, and said to the Prophets, Ye shall not drop on us:
there worthily followed, not only a famine of bread, and thirst of water, but
the hunger and thirst of the word of God; which also drew after it, Wars,
Pestilences, plagues, and destructions. Their eyes were blinded, their hearts
were hardened, and their backs were bowed down always.

15. As the ministry and preaching A note of Gods favor and of his
displeasure.
of the word of God is a certain note of his continual care and favor, as the
well applying of a Vineyard with water, argues the care and delight the
Vinitor has in the same: so the taking away of the word of God from the
people, is ^ certain note of his displeasure: and ^eglect of them, as the
small regard ^he Vinitor has of that Vineyard, is ^iscerned, by that he
neglects to ^ater the same. Therefore to express ^e Lords high displeasure
conceived against the people of Israel, for their re^ellion and unkindness
toward him, and to certify them of their future de^ation and destruction for
the same, ^e says, that he will command the Clouds ^ rain no rain on them:
that is, that his ^^ophets, Apostles and Ministers, shall ^t thenceforth feed
them with the lord of God: neither shall there be any ^e of the Lords
mysteries among the^: who Act. 13. 46:
^ Paul and Barnabas testified) did put it ^m them, and judged themselves
unworthy everlasting life: which is (as Christ has ^^ght us) to know the only
true God, ^d whom he has sent Jesus Christ; ther^e it was meet also, that God
should de^ue the^ of this inestimable benefit, that so who had chosen the^ from
al other nati^s, beautified them and blessed the^; should ^ect them, deforme
them, and curse them: and that he, which before had prospered, sustained and
preserved them in the right use of his word, should now (in their abuse
thereof) alienate them from his delight, and give them over to their enemies
hand, to be consumed, trodden down, and wasted, according to his word; to their
perpetual shame, to the instruction Isa. 5. 5. 30. ^. Chro. 7. 19. 20.
of his Saints, and to the everlasting glory of his most holy name.

The end of the second part.
The third Part, Containing An application of the Parable.
CHAP. I.
^he love and mercy of God to England, and his expectation of good fruits.

WHen the Prophet Isayah had proposed his Parable to the men of Judah and
Jerusalem, and had judgment in the case, he afterward expounded the Parable,
and ^pplied it unto them, saying: Surely the Vineyard of the Lord of Hoastes,
is the house of Israel: and the man of Judah his pleasant plant: And he looked
for Iadgement, but behold oppression! for righteousness, but behold a crying!
And so, when the Lord in the Gospel, had taken up the Parable of the perfidious
husbandmen against the latter Jews, especially against their Priests and
rulers, and had of them the sentence of condemnation against themselves, he
replied and applied the Parable, saying: Therefore I say unto you, the Kingdom
of heaven shall be taken from you, and shall be given to a Nation which shall
bring forth the fruits thereof: Mat. 21. 43.

2. As long as both the former and latter Men are more ^edy to see and censure
the life and condition of others, then to note and judge them selves and their
own.
Jews thought that the Parable poynted not at themselves, but touched some
others, they could yield it audience, and give their censure of the case: as
the nature of man is, rather to prye into the dealings and faults of other men,
and to condemn them, then either to see or judge himself. And so long also
can we hear this of the Jews, and consent in judgment against them, whiles
we think it touches them only, and not our selves also: wherein ^ee rightly
res^mble that covetous ^an, who beholding wretched Tan^lus (of whom the Poets
tell) to stand ^ the mids of the water, ready to ^e thirsty: laugh^th at
his folly, not ^nsidering the whiles, that his own ^se is like his; who
having his Cof^s full stuffed with store, takes there^ no use at all, but is
poor in the midst ^his plenty. Therefore to him says the ^et:

And laughest thou at this, thou wretch? Mutat^ noie, de to fabula narratur.

But change thy name, and than
^e Fable truly points at thee,
And at none other man.
3 But Saint Paul teaches us the use ^ such examples, when having spoken ^ the
old disobedient Israelites, which ^e Lord destroyed in the Wilder^sse, he
turns to the Corinthians, ^ whom he then wrote, and thereof ta^th occasion to
instruct and admonish ^em, saying. These things verily are our examples, that
w^ 1. Cor. 10. 6. 11.
should not be lusters after evil things, as they also lusted and perished.
Again: All these things came unto them for ensamples, an^ were written to
admonish us upon whom the ends of the world are come, how God will also plague
us, if we be subject to the like vices. After this he said unto them, who then
thought themselves so sure as either the Israelites did, or we now do,
enjoying so many rare blessings; Wherefore, let him that thinks he stands,
take heed least he fall.

4. After this manner, suffer me (I pray* To Englishmen.
you) now to turn from the Corinthians, from the Jews, and from the
Israelites, to our selves; and not only to say unto my Contrymen (as Paul
did to the Corinthians), These be our examples: but also to apply unto our
selves, those parables and examples which do rightly touch our selves; that
we which think our selves* safe and sure, may yet be moved to consider the
uncertainty and misery of our condition, and beware we fall not as did those
Corinthians, those Israelites, and those Jews, to our destruction.

5. Whatsoever is written, is written for ^ur learning: and these things do as
neere^y touch us now, as they touched them ^hen, their case and ours being in
all points ^o comparable: therefore the Preachers and Ministers of the Lord,
have no less ^ause ministered unto them now, then had ^sayah then, to convert
prose into song, ^ plain words into parables: for whose ^mple Sermons are not
contemned? those plain dealing is not scorned? and ^ho believes our report?
who will hear^en, but to a song? who will be reproved without a parable? Do not
men in those ^eir choice diets show themselves sick? ^ea, and agonized, and
ready to dye? O lord God of mercies, convert us (we beseech ^ee) and we shall
be converted: that thou ^lso may continue favorable unto us, that ^e may
escape thine heavy judgments, and ^ue.

6. We cannot deny, but that the Lord We are forced to acknowledge and confess
the goodness of God toward us.
^ath loved us: for he has bestowed on ^s so many and so great blessings, as
ever ^e bestowed on the Israelites; yea, and ^ore then any of the Nations about
us ^aue received at his hand: therefore does he expect no less of us, then he
did of them. But alas, we do reward him much like as they have rewarded him; we
have brought him forth wild grapes, when we should have yielded him good
grapes the which will be our utter confusion and decay, except we speedely
repent. For what should cause the Lord to spare us, when he spared not them,
seeing our sins be as their sins were, and God is now, as God was then. But
this is that which has deceived many a man, Many men deceive themselves in the
trust of mercy when they sin.
when (notwithstanding his sins be as the sins of others whom God has
punished before his face) he imagines, that either God sees him not, or that
he will be more favorable unto him, then he was unto them, and so presumes on
the mercy of God in the time of long suffering, in the which he should rather
stand in awe, and repent.

7. Neither do they fear, as now (being fat and secure) to spurn with the
heel against God, and (as ungrateful wretches) to dispute as they did in the
Prophet, saying: Wherein has God Mal. 1.
loved us? What benefits has he powered forth on us, beyond that which he has
done ^to other nations? To whom, as unto ^ose, I suffer the Prophet to answer:
not Jacob Esaus brother? yet has he A special note of Gods goodness toward
us. 1. In choosing us.
^osen Jacob, and rejected Esau. And ^e not we Gentiles, as are the Spaniards,
^e Italians, the Graecians, the Barbari^s? and are not we of the same flesh ^d
blood descended from Noah, from Adam? yet, lo, he has allured us before Genesis
9. 27.
^em, to enter into the Tents of Shem, speak generally of our Nation: for ^od
has his people of all nations. In word, the Lord has called us into ^ Church,
and the fellowship of his ^ints, by the external preaching of ^s word, and
made us the children of ^s kingdom. Is this no benefit? I any Kings and
righteous men have ^sired this blessing on their people ^d countries, which yet
they obtay^ed not in their times: and at this day, ^ow many thousands are shut
out from ^is heavenly feast, we may behold, ^ we consider the state and
condition, ^ot only of all the world, but of that part thereof which is called
Christian. In respect of whom, (which are as prodigal children estranged from
the house of their parents, and sterue for want of food) we are as those
sons, who remaining in their fathers house, have bread enough. Is this no
benefit? no blessing? we are too ungrateful, if we confess it not.

8. Next, the Lord has given unto us 2. In the goodness of the land. Isa. 5.
1.
a land, which for fertility, pleasure, and all commodities, is near
comparable to that horn of Oil in Chanaan, and spares not to yield her
increase in the due times and seasons of the year, if our sins and
abominations hinder not the course of Gods graces, in his displeasure. And in
this land it has pleased the Lord (in the abundance of his mercies) to make
his Vineyard, and to renew the face of his Church, which has been so shadowed
and blemished with the tyrannies, sophistries, heresies, and wicked inventions
of worldly men, whose hearts from their youth are set on mischief, and are
only bent to do evil every day.

9. And this has he so compassed a^out with the hedge of his favor and
pro^ction, 3. In favoring and protecting us.
having his eyes ever watchful over ^ from the beginning of the year, unto
the ^d of the year, (as Moses testified the Deuteronomy. 11. 12.
lord had over the children of Israel) that neither the beastly wild Bores,
nor the ^uening Wolves, nor the cruel Bears, ^or the crafty Foxes, could yet
invade to ^noy us. And (surely) hereof is it, that ^us long we have enjoyed
peace, wealth, ^osperitie and safety, sitting at home under our vines and
fig trees from Dan to ^erzeba, as they did all the days of Sa^mon.

10. From this place has the Lord also 4. The expelling of Antichrist, and his
ministers, etc.
^oted out and expelled the stony heared Chanaanites, and those briars and
horns, the which might any way hinder ^he prosperity of his Church, or grieve
^is children, I mean Antichrist, is aboli^hed, his ministers are observed, and
(how^oeuer it be, that some Chanaanites showed themselves under the broad
leaves of ^he Vine in the Lords Vineyard) the power of the Bishop of Rome and
his mem^ers weakened every way, by the provision of those good laws which it
has pleased her Majesty by the grace of God to establish in these her
dominions.

11. And in this Vineyard, the Lord 5 The planting of good Princes, Magistrates
and Ministers in the Realm.
has planted his choice Sorec, or best Vine, as first and principally our most
gracious and excellent Princess Elizabeth, a vine most wholesome, sweet,
sauory, and comfortable to us all: and such a Queen, as, without just offense
to any, may be compared with those best Kings and Princes of Israel and Judah.
Next unto her, the Lord has planted in this Vineyard, many sweet and
profitable plants; as namely, the strong man, the man of war, the Judge, the
Prophet, the prudent, the reverend, the Captain of fifty, the honorable, the
Counselor, the cunning artificer, and the eloquent man: and (chiefly) of
these, the good Protestant, which to his power, promoteth the right service of
God, and holy discipline: whereby the sweet sap of the Vineyard should be
wrung forth to the glory of God, and the comfort of his Saints in the due time.

12. These and many such like bles^ngs has the Lord in his mercy powered ^n
us, to express his love, the which we ^ay neither deny nor dissemble, except
^e would show our selves too ungrateful. The Lord expects our good fruits.
Miche. 6 6. 7.
And what does he expect of us after ^l these his blessings? surely, not
silver and gold, nor burnt offerings, nor calves ^f a year old, nor thousands
of Rams, or ten thousands of rivers of oil, nor ^e first borne of our bodies
(as says the ^rophet) but he expects that, which ^t men (for the most part)
hau^ not been ^ady to yield him: he looks for Iudge^ent and Justice: that is,
an upright heart, ^d true obedience to his laws in all ^ings: he expects
love, mercy, libe^itie, humility, honesty, faith, and such ^dly fruits, as
that blessed man yeel^th, whose delight is in the law of his ^od, and in his
law does meditate day ^d night: Psalm. 1.

13. The Lord would, that the Prin^s What he looks for of the Princes and
Judges. I^ay. 1. 17.
and Judges should do well, seek ^dgement, relieve the oppressed, help ^e
fatherless, defend the widows, as ^s will is: that such only be preferred
and authorized to the same, which are persons courageous, fearing God, dealing
truly, hating covetousness, such a Iethro willed Moses to choose out and
provide Exo. 18. 21.
among all the people of Israel: to thi^ purpose also the Lord would that the
Prophets and ministers of his word should What, of the Prophets and ministers.
rule well themselves, rule well their families, and rule well the Church, of
the which the holy Ghost has made the^ overseers: that they labor in the word
and doctrine, studying and preaching the Gospel unto all the people of God, as
those good and faithful servants, whom their Lord has made rulers of his
house, to distribute the portions of food in du^ season to them of the house.
Moreover, the Lord would, that every man should What is required of every man
whatsoever.
(as the Prophet says) do justly, love mercy, and humble himself to walk
with his God: for this is good, and this is tha^ (indeed) which the Lord
requires us t^ perform in holiness and righteousness before him all the
days of our life Remember this o England!

CHAP. II.
The ingratitude of England. Gods appellation to the consciences of Englishmen,
with his complaint and sentence against them.

WE have heard before how many tokens we have had, and yet have and enjoy of
the love of God toward us; and what he does daily look for to be yielded from
us unto him. But what do we express toward him? and what do we yield him?
surely, whereas he has declared love, we declare What fruits men yield to God.
hatred, as such of whom he might say, They have showed me hatred for my good
will, to the great grief of my soul. And these be the fruits we bring forth
unto him, as from the evil treasures of an evil heart: in stead of Judgment,
Oppression: in stead of Justice, a Crying* Men yield to the Lord for obedience,
rebellion: for mercy, cruelty: for true dealing, extortion: for liberality,
covetousness: for humility, pride: for honesty, filthiness: for love,
envy: for faith, infidelity: for the fear of God, Epicurisme: for
Godliness, Atheism: and for all heavenly virtues, all hellish vices: yea, and
they also in a great part, which bear Bibles in their hands, flock to Sermons,
talk of the Gospel, dispute of Religion, and make glorious shows of
holiness, do run with thieves, partake with adulterers, shake hands with
mu^therers, and sit with false Judges: Psalm. 50.

2. These be the fruits which men for the most part yield now to the Lord. If
Moses were yet living, he would not dread to reprove them plainly to their
faces, for these their abominations. And John the Baptist, if he were in
these days, would not fear to point at them particularly, as he did to Herod.
But now, it is enough, (if it be not too much) that we reprove them covertly
Men will not be reproved plainly.
in parables, as Nathan did, as David, and Isayah did the Princes, Prophets,
and Rulers of Judah: or speak at randon in general words of that which should
be touched in particulars, if we speak to them at all. If we adventure farther
then this, albeit men are worthily to be reproved, having neither Hos. 4. 1. 2.
4.
truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God: but are given to swearing, l^ing,
killing, stealing, whoring, and sin upon sin: yet (as said the Prophet, so
we may say now) Let none rebuke, nor reprove another: for they are, as they
that rebuke the Priest: that is, they will not abide to be reproved: but will
rather ^lame and oppress the Prophet and Minister, which by the word of God,
^ndeuoureth to correct and amend them.

3. But Moses is dead, so is John ^he Baptist: so is Isayah, so is Nathan: and
all these sins and abominations ^o reign from the head to the foot Isa 1.
God sleeps not, nor will wink at men's sin*
^as says Isayah) and in the whole bo^ie (as it were) without controlment: and
there is a pitiful crying of the ^ppressed in every place, without help,
without succor, without comfort (as Solomon also said, Eccles. 4. 2.) What
then? does the Lord God sleep therefore? and does he neither hear nor regard
it? No, no: but these things are in the ears of the Lord of hoasts; he hears
the cry, regards the complaint, and ever watches over his people to keep
them, and to reprove all their enemies: for The Lord (as Christ witnesses)
will avenge his elect that cry day and night unto him, and that quickly. In the
mean time, the Lord has not utterly deprived his Church in the world of some
such singular Prophets and Ministers, as do not omit in his behalf to
expostulate those perfidious and unthankful persons, and call them to a
reckoning at the bar of Gods justice, howsoever they answer for themselves.

4. But, seeing the thing is so manifest, and in all equity to be granted,
Appellation to men's consciences.
what should let me ( o England) to appeal to thine own conscience? the Lord
himself is contented first to suffer thee to give the sentence in this case,
in the which, thy guilty conscience being as a thousand witnesses against thy
sinful soul, cannot choose but condemn thee, as both those former Jews, to
whom the Lord by Isayah appealed, and also these latter Jews, to whom
appealed Christ, gave sentence against themselves: or as Jonah, when he fled
from the presence of the Lord, and perceiving that it was for his sin that
both himself, with the Mariners, were troubled on the Seas, and was asked what
they should do unto him? He answered (his conscience accusing and condemning
him,) Take me, and cast me into the Sea, so shall the Sea be calm unto you:
for I know, that for my sake this great tempest is come upon you.

5. And thus says the Lord: O England, The Lord complayneth, and calls men
into Judgment.
what meanest thou? alas, that I should be moved through thine unkindness to
complain against thee. But I pereiue, it is high time, that I both complain,
and call thee into Judgment, seeing thou art neither thankful to me for my
benefits, nor profitable to my Church in thy fruits. What! art thou all so
forgetful of my b(...)es? and will thou not acknowledge them? Who chose thee?
who planted thee? who protected and defended thee? who cleansed thee? who
beawtified thee? who made and appointed thee to my service? to my glory? to my
use? was it not I? Am not I thy Father, Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
that bought thee, and made thee, and proportioned thee, and exalted thee? And
what is the cause (o England) that thou have not expressed some tokens of
gratitude and kindness unto me? Why have thou not answered my good
expectation, and yielded me good fruits? What more could thou desire that I
should have done, which I did not for thee? Why have thou been so ungrateful,
and used me after this sort?

6. If thou ask me wherein I find thee ungrateful? then hearken, and I The
cause of this expostulation and complaint.
will tell thee wherein. Have thou not brought forth wild grapes, when I
expected good grapes? Have thou not yielded me Oppression for Judgment? and
yielded me a Crying, for Righteousness? Is not wickedness seen in the place
of Judgment? and iniquity in the place of Justice? Is not the place of
Judgment often made an hammer to beat down the poor afflicted, the
fatherless, the widows, the innocents? and the place of Justice, a staff to
stay up and to defend the bribers, the extortioners, the thieves, the
murderers, the adulterers, the flatterers, the blasphemers, and such like? And
wherefore has it been so?

7. Behold and consider all ye that come by my vineyard, how many bitter grapes
it brings me forth, and yet could not find in heart to yield me any good
fruits! Shall I note some particular fruits, though I note not the particular
trees that bear them? then harken, and try, and examine the matter, if it be
not as I say. I have The particular fruits of this nation and time.
found Pride to spring there, where I expected humility, from them that should
be humble. I have found Envy there, where I required love, among them that
should be charitable. I have found covetousness there, where should have bin
liberality, even in the^ that should be liberal; lo, is it not so? Again, I
have seen that they which should be merciful, are cruel: they that should be
true men, are become thieves: they that should be diligent, are waxen
slothful: they that should be watchful, are sleepie: they that should be
chaste, are lecherous: they that should be harmless as Doves, are hurtful as
Vultures: they that should be holy, are profane: and (to be short) that which
should be good, is stark naught; for they be gone out of the way, and become
abominable, neither is there scarce any among them that fears the Lord; and
those few that fear him, are mightily afflicted by the malign worldlings. Lo,
is it not so? If it be so, as indeed it is, then deny it not; excuse it, and
say not that darkness is light, that sour is sweet, that evil is good, for
fear of that woe: Isay. 5.

8. Thus has the Lord complained, and hardly charged his vineyard, I mean
this our Nation (as he sometime charged the house of Israel, and the men of
Judah) for many sins, many abhominatio^s, the which have bin, and are daily
wrought against his Majesty. Howbeit all these enormities ^aue not been
perpetrated among us, for ^he want either of the preaching of the lord of God,
and other his divine bene^tes (for they have been most plentifully ^estowed on
us, as it is said before) nor for ^he want of needful laws and politic
^roceedings (for nothing has been o^itted in this respect that has been
ey^er necessary or profitable) but they ^roceed from that bitter root, which
^at envious man has planted in the Vineyard, there, whereas the good Vine
should stand; and of the negligent regard Mat. 21.
^f them to whom the Lord committed ^he charge of his Vineyard, who should ^aue
been most careful to suppress those ^ilde Grapes, and not have permitted them
to spring up: and to have defended and maintained the good Vine, and not ^o
have suffered it to starve and wither away.

9. But what mean ye, (my Countrymen) It is bootles for men to strive against
God. 1. cor. 10. 22.
what mean ye, that thus you be^aue your selves toward the Lord God? What?
Will ye wilfully provoke him to anger? Will ye say, that truth is falsehood?
that sweet is sour; that good is bad? Do ye not know, that ye should not
temp^ him, as they did in the Wilderness? Do ye not consider, that he is a
co^suming fire, into whose hands it is an horrible thing to fall? Is not his
voice a mighty voice, breaking the Cedars of Lybanus? What, There is both
mercy and justice with the Lord.
will ye still urge on him his mercy, and do not ye also think on his
Justice? What think ye of your selves? are y^ stronger then he? are ye able
to encounter with him? alas the feebleness of your strength, and greatness of
your imbecilitie to compare with God? was not Adam overthrown in this conceit?
were not the Israelites confounded in the Wilderness, and the Jews in
Jerusalem? when they made their own arm their strength, after that the Lord
(being displeased) withdrew his mercy from them? The strength of man (being
compared with God) is as the strength of an hair: and therefore when strong
Sampson trusted in his hairy locks, he was confounded by a woman. But the
strength of God, is as the strength of Iron: and therefore says the Psalmist,
Thou shall bruise them with a rod of Iron: that is, such as seek to resist or
strive against thy divine Majesty. Therefore ^t us not provoke him to anger:
for he is ^ronger then all men, without compari^n. But let us hear what the
Lord, who ^ provoked (indeed) says to England.

10. Tell me, tell me (says the Lord) The Lord threatens England.
that thou have justly deserved? show me that I should now do unto thee? Art
^ou mute? will thou not answer me? ^ell may thou put thine hand on thy
^outh, and grant to thy guiltiness and ^ by thy silence, when thou art not
able ^ answer me one for a thousand. But I will ^et tell thee, what I will do
unto thee, and ^at shortly, except thou repent: that is ^ say, I will cause thee
to be devoured and ^onsumed: yet more, I will make thee to be God powers
plagues on the^ that will not repent.
^oden down and spoiled: yet more, I ^il lay thee waste and desolate. And all this ^e sooner to further and effect in the time ^ppointed, I will deprive thee
of all those ^lessings and good things, which before ^ my love and mercy I
bestowed on thee. And thus will I do indeed, except thou ^mely and unfeignedly
repent.

11. If I did once swear in mine anger justly conceived against my people the
children of Israel (when they had provoked 1. Cor. 10. 5.
me 40. years in the Wilderness) that they should not enter into my rest, and
performed mine oath to their just destruction, when they would not repent: what
reason is it, that I should spare thee and not consume, nor tread down, nor
waste thee, which have had those examples both of them and of many others
(besides the daily admonitions of my servants) laid open before thee, to
instruct, admonish and warn thee? If I have constrained 2. Chro. 36. 16. 17.
Josephus. de bello Iudaic.
those latter Jews to couch down under the heavy burden of my fierce
judgments for their great unthankfulness to me; what should move me to uphold,
sustain, and preserve thee? If I have (beyond all expectation) perforce
compelled them that be presently near neighbors and well known unto thee, to
drink of the Cup of my heavy displeasure for their horrible transgressions of
my word and of my law, and for their vile abuse of my mysteries, and Ministers;
should I not likewise constrain thee, to drink of the same for the like? yes,
yes; and that justly and shortly; except thou timely and vnfained^ repent.

12. Thus says the Lord God to Eng^nd: Unfeigned repentance has remission.
Thus do the messengers of his grace ^et preach and publish to England: and ^is
shall the messengers of his wrath in ^me, execute on England except England
^pent. Albeit England be a Fig Tree, and ^eare fair broad leaves; yet* if it
yield no ^igs, it shall be cut down and removed ^ a thing unprofitable: much
rather then ^all England be rejected, if (in stead of ^ood fruits) it bring
forth (with the vine ^f Sodom) nothing but unpleasant and ^aughtie fruits:
yea, if England were as ^eare to the Lord, as the Apple of a man's ^ye is to the
man, yet will he pull it out, and cast it from him, without all regard of ^: if
English men continue sinful and ob^inate, and will not repent. Thus Christ ^
the Gospel said to the Jews: Except Isa. ^.
^e repent, ye shall all perish: so say the Lords ^essengers now, to England:
because England has transgressed, and her daugh^ers are proud, and walk with
stretched ^ut necks, and with wandering eyes, wal^ing and minsing as they go,
and making a tinkeling with their feet, as did the daughters of Zion of yore;
neither will they be reclaimed: therefore the Lord will be avenged, and shave
the heads of those daughters of England (as he did of those daughters of Zion)
and discover they^ secret parts, and bring them to shame; except they wisely
consider, and timely repent: for now is the Axe laid to the root of the tree,
that every tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and
burned in the fire.

14. And to say the truth: there belongs We have deserved shame and confusion.
in right, none other thing unto us, but shame and confusion; because we have
forsaken the Lord, and have not hearkened to his word, whereby we might walk
in his way, to do Judgment and Justice: howbeit, seeing that he who desires
God is merciful and will not the death of a repentant Sinner.
not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent and live, has
promised both mercy and life, (through the merit of his son) to them that
turn unto him, and yield the fruits of repentance: presuming on the fidelity
and assurance of his Let us therefore repent and we shall live.
promise; I say thus, and no more: O England, repent with speed, and bring
forth those fruits which are worthy amendment ^ life, and thou shall neither
be devoured, nor ^oden down, nor be laid waste: but thou ^ shall be
increased: thou shall be vpholden: thou shall be maintained in prosperity, and
flourish for ever.

The end of the third part.
Psalm. 81. 13. 14: ^ that my people had hearkened unto me: and Israel had
walked in my ways! I would ^one have humbled their enemies, and tur^ed mine
hand against their adversaries.
FINIS.

