The Ruinous fall of Prodigality: with the notable examples of the best
aprooued aucthours which has bin written of the same. Newly set forth by John
Carr.

TIMOTHI. 6 CHAP 1. Epistle. Charge them that are rich in this world, that
they be not hie minded, and that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in
the living God.

Imprinted at London in Fleetstreet, by Wylliam How: for Henry Kirkham ANNO.
1573.

To my very especial and sinuler good freinde, Master ^dmond Young,
Gentilman: Student of the Law. John Car, wishes continual health, and
prosperity, to the pleasure of God.
CONSIDERING with my self, how greatelye we are bound, to render thanks unto
God, for the great benefits, which he has bestowed upon us: which benefits
are infinite, and we are not able to yield unto him, praise, honor and glory,
so much as he deserves, which thing I did well perpend, therefore I thought
it meet to practice my pen, in the exercise of the little tale^t which God has
lent unto me: to the augmenting of Virtue, and to abrogate vice, for I was
moved to diuulgate, or set forth this simple work, according to my
literature, as far as my capacity was able to compass. For I being wholly
drowned, in the Lake of ignorance, had nothing more precious, to present unto
you, but this the pattern of my simplicity, which God has lent unto me. I
was the much more imboldened, to dedicate this simple work unto you, since that
I have known your zealous affection, which yet you have ever borne, to the
increase of learning, and that your study has ever bin pressed, to search and
look for the preservation of the same. And moreover because that I had a good
hope and affection, that you would as well esteem of this my simple work,
being the first fruits of my labor, as though it were a great deal more
better. And according as I perceive and understand how that you do take this
simple work being presented unto you, it will animate and encourage me, to
employ my study, more then yet I have done hitherto. And although that I want
the flowers of rethorike, to beutyfi and set forth this simple work, yet I
shall desire ye, as I have don before, to accept it: and if that any fault you
find there in, I shall desyer ye; to ostende your favor so much, that I may
have entelligence of it, for I will ever more submit my self, to the counsel
of the learned: and further more, I shall desyer ye, not think the worst of
it, for I will not, nor mean not to teach any man, how and after what sort, he
shall behave him self, in any respect. For I my self, have as much need of
teaching, as he that has most, but I will always stand under the correction of
the learned. Thus hopyng that you will accept this my travail and good will,
according to your accustomed courtesy, and be a patron, in the defense of this
my work and to gratify your courtesy, I will show my self frendable toward
you, and now I am loathe to trouble ye, with any* more circumstance, but wishyng
God to preserve you in health, wealth, and felicity, to his blessed will and
pleasure.

Amen.
Your friend to his poor power John Carr.

Another to the same, in commendation of Learning.
NO kind of ground so barren is,
but that by labor may
Be brought to bring forth fruitful vines
the Poets so do say.
Even so no mind or memory,
that is so dull to learn:
By practice often in the end
he wysdom may deserne.
For as the water drops in time
does perse the stone so hard:
Even so does learning perse the mind,
to it to have regard:
For what is he that learned is,
and therein does delight:
That will not to the simple fool,
and weak wits this resight?
That learning passes massy Gold,
and perfect precious stone:
And requisite it is for to
be had of every one.
what would king Cresus mounts of gold
prevail where learning wants?
No fruits of wealth does spring, but of
learning like Olyue plants.
The golden waves of Pactolus,
which Midas plague did purge,
Inferior is to learned lore,
for wealth to vice does urge.
And learning men to virtue bringes
and perfect souls does make,
Therefore his good will do accept,
which pende this for thy sake.
FINIS.
I. C.

To the Readers.
THE STATE OF the world is so good (gentill Reader,) that Iniquity has got
the upper hand of Truethe and Honest dealing: and Iniquity does florishe
now so much in the world, that all the preachinge and teaching that now is
uttered, by the preachers of the word of God, cannot persuade the people from
wickedness, but still they persiste in their malignitie: which thing I
perfectly view and behold, and do pray to God continually that it might be
amended, and according unto my bounden duty, I have employed my study to the
augmentinge of virtue, and to the overthrow of vice. In searchinge forth of
worthy histories, which are worthy to be had in memory: unto the end, that
those which do read and behold them, and see the end of such wicked
lyuinge, they may refrain from it. And because that now the most part of the
world is given unto Pride and Prodigality, I have here to the edificatio^
written and set forth the ruinous fall of Prodigality, with notable examples
of Histories of the best aproued aucthours which have written of the same: In
deed I have paste over many histories, the which I might well have treated
of, but for breuities sake I have refrayned them, and brought in diverse
others, which oblivion would have blot ted out of memory: and if that therein
thou do find any faults, do not stand carpinge on it, but lightly pass
them over, and say thou see them not then of the learned sort, thou shall
always be commended: for in deed I want the knowledge of Tertullian for Retho
rike, and the tongue of Mercury, to paint forth eloquence, and therefore I am
in doubt, that thou will not accept this my simple travel, and take it in
good part, for I have done it for the profit of my native Country, to the
augmentinge of the glory of God, and so I crave thee to accept it, farewell in
CHRIST.

Yours to his power John Carr.

Against all carpers and find faults.
THou carpinge Momus hold thy peace,
thy taunting words refrain:
I know thy spite is prone to speak,
each work for to disdain.
The learned route commendes the thing,
and does it well accept:
But thou whose tongue does never lie
does fautlesse things obiecte.
And Zoylus, thou whose mouth stands open,
thy carping words to sound:
Against each thing, the shame to thee,
in the end will sure redounde.
Thou spits thy spite, when one thou see
a piece of work has framde:
Thy heart does think, thy tongue does carpe,
and woldst have him defamde.
In spite of thee thou Momus thou,
and Zoylus in like case:
The aucthour of this work again,
his slender quyll will trace.
FINIS.
I. C.

E. Y.
Your name dear freinde
in few lines have I written here,
Them ponder well
and in your mind them ever bear.
Embrace virtue,
Delighte in the truethe.
Make no discord,
Obaye God,
Never do wrong,
Deal justly.
Yield to the truethe,
Opresle not the poor.
Norishe the needy,
Give good council,
Incline to Gods word.
The fall of Prodigality.
NOTHING DOES seem so commodious to the life of man, as to consider and
immitate, this present state of the world. For if every man wold*call to
remembrance, how, and after what sort, each kind of state does live, and
reuolue with him self, the works of the Almighty, which is so magnanimous,
then shall he perceive, if that man leads his life agreeable unto the word
of God, and especially those that are learned, which have the knowledge of the
truth, and can understand the doctrine that is contained in the mysteries of
the scriptures: they in mine opinion should be the followers, most chiefly of
the same: But I am of the opinion of S. Augustine, which says, though that
the learned rowte, do read and see the way to salvation, yet I think (says
he) that those which are unlearned, will be there before them: for in deed I
say so my self, that it is an easy matter for a horseman to ride to Rome sooner
then Horsemen are swifter then footmen.
he the which does god a foot: by which I do mean, that those the which are
learned, should sooner obtain the kingdom of God, then the ignorant can do:
and they may rather follow the way of virtue, because they do behold, the
enormitie, that ensues to those that do break, or stray from that way of
virtue, and run into the horrible and loathsome way of wickedness, as many do
at this present time, for I se daily that nature does grow, more perverse then
other: for those, which a man will esteem to be most ciuyll, are most
ryotous, and those the which are thought to be most prodigal or riotous, are
by their exterior or outward apara^ce most full of ciuillitie, whereby one is
not able to say that he does know a perfect man of living, the which is a
thing to be wondered at, considering the great learning that flows at this
day, more then ever it did, and the Gospel is truly preached, yet the state of
the world, is growe^ to such malignitie, as though that we had no teaching nor
preaching, for it was never more couetouse, nor the people were never more
edicted un to riotousnesse: for he which is a man but of a mean estate, will
brag of his gentillitie, yea, and keep company with those the which has
substance and wealth, because that he will not be counted an inferior unto
them. More whoredom, filthy fornication, was never used, since the first
original, more dissimulation, never was hard of nor seen? What more should I
say, sith the state of all things does decay: and the world was never more
full of impietee. And what is the cause of this? I will according to my simple
knowledge, reuele unto you. You see, daily with your eyes, that every man, if
that he be of any reputation, he will stand in the same, yea, and rather then
he will lose any part of his reputation, he will boast of the same, to make men
believe, that is ignorant of his state, that he is some Frankelin, or some
Gentilman borne, then he to uphold his state, will seem to be a roystyng
gamster, at Dice or at tables, or at Cards, the which if he use any thing
long, will make his reputation fall, and consume his substance, though it be
but small, then he must be driven of mere necessity, to go borrow money of
some of his familiar aquaintance: and when he has borrowed the same money, he
will never rest till the dice have left none, and thus he will and must make
shifte to maintain his gaminge: Now the time draws on, that he must pay his
creditour the money which he borrowed, and he has it not to pay: then must
he sell his lands or his goods to pay it, or else must go to prison, and
because that he will not seem so to be desamed by imprisonment, he will sell
that which is worth a hundred pound for.iiij. scoore, and thus he must do if
he frequent him self in exercise of such unseemly gaminge: then of force he
must be constrained to make shifte for money one way or other. Some will These
are the common pactises of some at this day.
use a kind of dissimulation, to cloak matters couertely, and will cogge and
foyste, and addulate a matter to gain by: and other some still go play the
roystinge rouers, and watch quick corses, when it were more meeter for them
to be in their beds a sleep* and all because that they want that which
they should have, to maintain their estates: Now if that he be a man of any
reputation, and thus in superfluity have spent his substance, then will he
crowche and crepe to his friends, now if his friends perceive any grace or
amendment in him, they will help him, and bestow their lyberalitie on him,
and then: if he again do fall, to the like vice, as he did before, they will
seem to draw their favor from him, and so will clean reject him, and thus
shall he be brought into misery. And again, if that one having substance,
and spend it so superfluous, and has no friends to help him, nor none to
whom he may sewe for any relief, the^ must he forsake his old companions,
then his riotousnesse is turned into a most miserable state of penury: thus
does many at this present time decay, thus are they brought low, which looked
so high. I would wish therefore each state to consider his calling, and to
remember the inconvenience of superfluity: for what will a man do, when that
he wants substance, which sometime had it? for when he considers the state
he has been in, and reuolue with him self his state present, it will be
dolerous unto him, mary the nerest way to avoid the danger of this dolor,
is: before to consider this which is chanced afterward, and think with him
self, that if I do now spend ryotously this substance which I have in my
youth, I shall want the same in my age, therefore I will spare it, I will plead
simplicity, I will not stand on my reputation, but yield unto the worst rather
then geeue occasion of wrong, this will he do, the which does not regard
the pleasure of vain things: Now I do not write this unto you, pretendinge
to allow covetousness to Covetousness is of th'aucthor here rejected.
be exercised among such youths, as I do write of, but I do write this to
the intent that they should not spend that which they have, in superfluity,
as in gaminge, in gay apparel, in keeping Good exercises are here allowed.
of such company as are edicted unto riotousnesse. In frequentinge such
exercises as are not commendable: mary in deed I can not disalowe some kind of
exercises, which are wrought by the agilitie of the body, so that they be used
with a mediocritie, not superfluous, nor upon bravery, to gain the name of a
lively youth: and some other exercises I do discommende, because they are
viciouse. Now I will not seem to teach a man what exercise he shall use,
for that will I refer to his own discrete mind: but I do show the
enormitie which ensues to those, which friuolously do spend their time in
vain pleasures of the world: as in delighttinge in Pride, which is the
mother of all mischief, and in drunkenness: for when a man or woman is drunk,
they are then edicted unto all mischief, and other vices beside, which I
perceive that the world is given to, therefore I would wish that this may be
a reformation for those the which have hitherto led their lives in such
wickedness, and that they may henceforthe, frame their minds to the
Imitatinge of virtuous exercise: and not to esteem the vain pleasures of this
world, which is but a vale of misery, but I do believe it were as easy to
turn the stone into the water, as to cause some of them to exterminate and
cast of the use of such vices, for they are so rooted in them, that they can
not part a sonder: But now to proceed further, let us se what worthy
Histories the ancient Historiographers have left with us in learned books,
towchinge the fall of Prodigality. Herodotus a Greek historiographer. Marcus
Huua was Dictator of Rome, one of the highest offices there.
I call to remembrance that Herodotus a writer of Histories, did pen in his
Book, that sometime one Huua was Dictatour of Rome, this Huua having no more
sons but only one, he was very careful for him, and loved him entierly,
for as the story says, that he did deck him up in costly array, the fyneste
that might be gotten, and kept him at schole: but he was so pampred and nusled
up in worldely prophanitie, that he had rather mind on his Prodigality then
on his Book, and would rather exercise him self in diverse kinds of games,
as disinge, cardinge, and other more, which ought not to be used, but rather
to be rejected and so he continued the space of seven years, in which time he
had consumed his fathers substance, so much, that his father did seem to
withdraw his great love and good will from him, and did keep him in so
short, that he could not have the value of one penye, but his father would
know how that it was bestowed. Now this youthful son, contrary unto his
fathers will, would priuielye resort unto his old companions, whose
companies before he frequented, and they gave him such council, that he
would not seem no more to be kept in at his fathers pleasure, but did show
him self so obstynate, that all his friends hated him: it came to pass that
his father dyed, and he possessed his lands and goods, and he through his
companions entisement, was seduced from all virtuous trade and led his life in
a most ryotous rate, and consumed it clean: when all was gone, and had
nothing left to maynteine his former state, his old companions which before
had frequented his company forsook him clean, and rather sought his
destruction, then for his prosperity, and so in great myserye, he went
beggynge his bread, and at last, fell to robbinge, and so was taken, and
according to the law suffered death: Oh what avayled Fortune which to him
was incomparable? for where that he had wealth and substance, was very well
esteemed and beloved among the Senators of Rome for his fathers sake, now
was he through riotous Prodigality, brought to utter destruction: the like in
these our days we may behold with our eyes, for a noumbre there be of
such children, which do include vice, and abrogate virtue, and all because
that they are edicted unto Prodigality, which is repugnaunt unto virtue, as
their exterior operations does manifestly ostend, Do no more then your
ability is able to reach.
for where the mind is given to play prodigal parts, and desirouse to goo
brave and to keep company with roysters, to be frank in expenses, to be free
in liberality, more then his habylitie is able to uphold, for I count him a
very innocent, that will put his hand further then his sleue will reach, and to
brag or boaste of his gentillitie, all these vices does derogate virtue, but
I must confess that lyberalitie proceeds of a gentle heart, as when he does
geeue some thing for a recompense, for gentelnes or profit, which he has
found: but yet it may digress from the bounds of virtue. In rewardinge
excesciuely, or in prodigal expenses, or on other things inconvenient, of small
importance, in deed I must say, that such errogation, is not worthy to be
counted the name of lyberalitie, but a thing done on a bravery: In prodygal
promptnes, is a singular sign, that the aucthour thereof, is rather given to
prodigality, then to civil demeanor: Now let us see farther, how they
which have used prodigality, are come to utter desolation. Iolas a lustye
youth, Iolas born in Athens. a worthy example.
dwellinge in Athens, at a festiual day, which the Athenians used to celebrate
he to honor the Feast, bestowed.x. thousand pound in aparel for him self,
They did celebrate to Diana, the Gods of chastity
and.xx. men, which he had hired to wait upon him as that day: he was so
richely decked in costely robes, that every man wondered at him, and did
stand in an admiration with them selves, how that he was able to deuyse so
rich garments to be made, but the mind which is edicted unto vice, or
prodigal actions, nothing to suffice his mind, is to hard or difficulte for
him to devise or inuente: He being thus decked, in such costly array, did
glory in him self, and perceived that the people did wonder at his great
expenses and cost in apparel, did ever after continually, wear the same, and
still maintained it, as long as his money did last: In the end to conclude
short, he had neither money, goods, nor lands, but was glad to set his
feet under other men's tables, and because he could not have his will as he
was wont to have, he fell to shifting other ways, and kept company with
whores and because that these harlots had robbed a gentell man, they were
taken, and Iolas with them in their company, Take heed of this exaumple.
and so was prisoned, where in he died myserably. Thus ye se, what the end of
his proud prodygalitie came unto: Trewlye the end of it is little better,
for if every youth or young man, would consider this, and reuolue with him
self, the imminent danger that on prodigality does proceed, they would
abandone them selves from it: but he that is naturally disposed, to be
prodigal, cannot be civil: In deed I must confess, that it is seldom
seen that a young man should be civil, till he come to.xxiiii. years of age,
or there about: in deed then he grows to some stature, and by wisdom* is
led to be Bambes king of Nauers brother. Xenophon
civil: I had almost forgotten Bambes, which was the king of Nauers brother,
how prodigally he did live, Xenophon makethe mention: for he would use to
have change of aparell, iiij. times aday, and he did glory in it, in so much
that he would never have resperte to think on the common wealth: the end of
it was this, he was oppressed with wars, by the Hungarians, and was taken
prisoner, and could not be ransomed, without great substance, he was cladde in
a rich armor, and set in a peyre of scales or balance, and he was weyed
ten times in pure massy gold, which much enpouerished his treasury, that
when he came to his kingdom he had but small substance, and because he
could not have his pleasure of wealth, as he was wont to have, did ertorte
his cominaltie, and they saying Rebellion against a prodigal king.
them selves ertorted, to maynteine his prodigality, rebelled against him,
and slew him, thus always the prodigal people do come* to destruction for
oftentimes we see, that he the which does exalte him self, is brought low,
and he the which does humble him self, is exalted: but we may perceius
plainly, that at this day there is few of our young youths, or else
gentill men (as ye would term them) that will enter into a pathe, which
leads unto humility, but rather will of him self be so obstinate, that he
will not force, friend nor foe, but wilfully run astraye* from the virtuous
imitation, which he ought to practice, and if his friends or his parents,
do tell him of the same, then he is straight at defiaunce with them, and
thereby he neglects his dewetie toward them, which in the.xx. of Exodus we
are commanded Exodus*
of God to keep, saying, Honor thy father and thy mother, etc. but tho
prodigal child forces not that, but will rather show him self obstynate
against them, then dotheyr commandmentes, which now in these our days, to our
lamentable reproach, is to much seen and proved by experience. Children more
disobediente to parents, I think was never seen: children and young men,
more edicted unto Pride, and Prodigality, I judge in mine opinion, was never
hard of, children more subtle and crafty then are now in these our days, I
have not hard of, for now the young teaches the old, the young corrects
the old, the young sekethe for the superiority of the old, the which is
contrary unto dewtie, for though he be never so poor, nor never so in
myserie, if he be old, those which are young for the honor of their age,
ought for to yield reverence unto them, and not stoutely to stand at
defiaunce against them: for we must honor age, in hope that we our selves
shall be old: but we may perceive that a great number do stray from the
same perfect pathe of virtue, as the xlij, children did, which mocked
Heliseus, 4. Reg. 2.
after the ascension of his master Helias. Then Heliseus turned again, and
cursed the Children, then immediately two she bears came out of the wodde
and devoured them, this example I do bring in, in this place, because I
perceive that the world is at this stay that children being brought up and
nusled in wickedness, when they come to age, they will not seem to show any
obedience to their parents, but seek to have their own wylles, whereby they
fall from virtue unto vice, and so advance them selves even to the top of the
prodigal Port: then there they set forth them selves in their bravery, and
there they vaunte and brag of their reputation, the which God knows, is but
very bace, yet they set a good face on the matter, and will not lose it for
bosting, and as I call to remembrance the like example I did find in the works
of Maturia, a Romain writer, that Maturiae a Romain writer dwellinge in Verona
at the City of Verona in Italye, there was a poor man which went begging of
his bread, for want of any other releuement, and when he came within half a
league of the City, there was two little boys playinge together, which
kept sheep out of the corn, and this old man came by, and they saying him,
they left their play, and rayled upon him, and threw stones at him, and with
durte and mud they sore misused him, then the old man said, take head
children, that you do not reap such fruit, as your seed which you sow,
brings forth: Then those two children left the old man, and fell to
wrastlinge together, hard by a stynking pit of mud (...) it chanced that
the two boys fell therein both together, one having hold of the other: and
they being in, could not obtain no rescue, but there were drowned. Thus they
which will seem to despise age, otherwise then duty does bind them, we
may perceive do come to a miserable end, Now whether it was for want of wit
that they did despise him, or whether it was upon their own voluntary will, in
a bravery upon prodigality, I cannot rightly say: but we may see at this
day, that youth is wilful, and often times will do such deeds which does
not become them, and again, many of their parents are so fond over them,
that theye will not give correction, but rather give occasion to prompte them
in it: which when they come to age, they cannot refrain it, but must needs
put in ure his former practice: This is an other cause that many fall to
predigalitie, and include vice, and exclude virtue, whereby their deed is
worthy of no landable report, but perpetual infamy: for experience does
inform us, that always the doings of the prodigal wight is wicked, and that
the end of it is misery: as for exaumple.

Julius Caesar that worthy conquer our Julius Caesar.
was so radicate in Pride and prodigality, that he thought him self not
terrestrial and mortal, but in a manner immortal, and Celestial, whereby he
refrained the company of his men, and made a decree that none should come to
him un called, in so much, that in tracte of time his nobles envied him for
his presumption, and specially Marcus Brutus, whereby his life was often in
danger, Marcus Brutus some say was Julius Caesar's son a bastard borne.
for they pretended to slay him: but there was one which knew of the
conspyracie, and he bare such good will to Caesar, that he thought to give
him knowledge of it, that he might preuente them. He then wrote the fame of
the conspiracy in a bill, and the same day that Julius Caesar should go to
the council house, he presumed contrary unto the kings commandment, to
come to his presence, and delivered the byll to him, but he being proud, did
not regard the person that gave it him nor yet esteemed the byll: but in a rage
threw it away, and denied to read it, and the same time he was slain, by
Marcus Brutus, and more of the confederacy, which were appointed.

O end most miserable, which was reaped unto him, through his prodigal
presumption, for if he had not been pufte up with Pride, he would have
esteemed the man that wrote the byll to give him intelligence of it, but he
being addicted to glory in himself, did not regard nor fear the imminent
danger, that happily should ensue, to reward him for his presumption, for the
end of it is ever little better. Therefore I would wish all those the
which do hear, and those the which do read, this book, to immitate and
reuolue with them selves, that Pride in the end has ever a fall, as for
example.

Dionise the king of Scicill, was expulsed Dionisius.
out of his Country, for his intolerable Pride, and was feign to keep a
grammar schole in Italy, and so lived begginge for his bread: and truly
these Histories which I do here resite, may give occasion unto us, to
dirrogate the horrible sin of Pride: for nothing can offend God so sore, as
a hautie heart, and a proud presumptuous mind: for I remember an old
proverb: A proud heart and a beggars purse, can never agree. He that is of
small habillitie, will think him self check mate, with those the which are
of a greatter reputation: yet he will think him self, that his reputation is
coequall unto his, Thus are many in these days addicted unto pride and
prodigality, and will never seem to show themselves, humble and lowelye, but
look stout and lusty, as though that there were none equal to them.

Perses king of Macedonia, was for Perses.
his execrable Pride, envied and hated of all his kynred, and they caused him
to be taken prisoner, by Paulus Emilius whom the said Perses did war against,
and he was bound and led prisoner, yet his Pride was so intolerable and
odious to his nobility, that his own son was afterward constrained,
destitute of friends, to become a smythe, and so lived in myserye.

Lo here we see, that pride and prodigality, does in the end bring man to
utter desolation, and not only him, but his posterity, and does thereby get
perpetual shame and reproach, and does reap hate and disdain of his frindes,
and so in the end, comes to myserie, as these examples does teach us.

Tarquine was the last king of the Tarquine, father to him that ravished
Lucrece.
Romans, and his Pride was more cause of his exile and banishement, the^ for
the cause that his son rauisshed Lucrecia, wife to Colatinus. In deed the
rauishinge of Lucrecia was a means whereby they might find a clawe against
him, as thereby they did in deed and so they expulsed him from al kingly
authority, and never after had king but were governed by consules: and so
they remain at this day: thus we may behold and see, that evermore the
prodigal man is odious to his countreye, and that he can obtain no favor
nor friendeshippe at his friends hands: but shame and disdain, for the
original Genesis. 4,
of pride came by Caine, when he disdained Abel, because god accepted his
brother Abels sacrifice, more better then his, and the end of Caine was
misery, and so is the end of al prodigal people.

The lord Morton of Dover in England Morton of England. a right good example.
was a very proud and prodigal man, and delyghted much the company of
roysters, the which in the end did torn to his inconvenience, as I will
here resite: He commonly frequented the gaminge houses, and did game and
spend much, and when that he had so continued, the space of one or two years,
his welthe began to fail him, then he came to an abbot (it was the abbot of
Malmsbury, as far as I could remember by the story) and to this abbot he
made his moan, and did show the cause how, and after what forte his substance
was consumed: then A good answer to him.
the abbot said unto him, go thy ways thither again, and look where thou
did spend a shilling now spend twain, alas quoth he I have it not to
spend: then said the abbot you might have told me this when you had it, and
not now when it is gone, I have no other answer to make unto you. Then Morton
departed with a heavy heart, and came to the house wherein he had spente his
substance, and finding one of his mates there that had won his money, and
had been a procurer of him to spend, when he saw him, his heart was freight
with care: remembringe the state he was in, and the state of the time present
did with his sword run him throw, and so slew him, and then he sat down and
wept bitterly, and for sorrow slew him self. Lo see his miserable end, this
history I found written in an old book in Westminster abbey, which book
was written by a Monk of the same abbey: I think that this story semes to be
true, for what care will sooner perce a man's heart, then when once he has
obtained the wealth of the world, and afterward fall to myserie, as the
Sacred scriptures does Luke. 15.
teach us there of the prodigal child, which spente his portion in
riotousenesse, and was never careful for to keep and save the same, to the
intent that he might, obtain the pleasure of it an other day, but riotously
wasted it, what was his end? the Scriptures do ostend, he was feign to eat
among swine.

O miserable state: yet in the end he repented, and came home to his father
again, who received him very louingely, and did more rejoice in him, then he
did in his son, which did not in such cause offend. Thus you may see
always that prodigality does consume wealth, good name, and fame, it abateth
honor, it disgraceth a man's credit, it causes hate of friends, and reap
the loss of favor, yea, and more Gods displeasure is worst of al
then this, it draws the displeasure of God toward us, and makes many
things dear which would be plenty, it causes men to swerve from God, it
reapeth to them perpetual dampnation, for the proud hearted man minds
nothing, but his pride: the couetouse man minds nothing but his wealth. I
compare Pride and Covetousness together, because of al vices that is, and are
used, none do more resemble one an other, then these two. For he that is
proud, is always covetous and gredie for to obtain wealth, to maintayn it,
the covetous man is proud in his heart, though he do not show it,
exteriorly, or outwardely, but because that I have treated of Pride and
Prodigality hitherto, I will leave of to speak of other vices, but towche
them a little as occasion serves me, but if I had a thousand tongues to speak
withal, and a voice as loud as brass, I could not utter the vices which
ought to be spoken of, to the reproach of such as use them at this day: but
forth I will proceed as I have begone, towchinge the fall of Prodigality.

I found certain verces written by Lampridius in latten, I have englished
them, somewhat effectually for my purpose: though I have not placed them in
order as they were in latten.

LAMPRIDIVS.
When youth begins to run the wanton race, which vain desire provoke to
ensew:
Then vice to rest in him will find a place, and cause him stray to be of
virtuous crew,
Pride first prouokes him so for to ensew* Then other vices follows fast by
heaps apace
And so does man procure to run his wicked race.
Likewise the same Lampridius, does show what damage ensues to those that
are prodigal, and more over he there does write, of what disposition or
nature he is of, that is given to prodigality: but in the end he concludes
that Pride and Prodigality, is the destruction of all those that uses it.

In deed I must and will commend clenlines and comlines of aparell, used with
a mediocritie, for it is to be abhorred to have too sumptuous apparel, to
flaunte it in brauerye, and not hable to maintain it, neither ought it to be
too simple and poor: but in a means modesty, which is best convenient for
profit and honesty. It is not meet to see a beggar wear a rich robe: nor
it is not decent for a maiestrate to wear a patched gown: but I would wish,
that every man according to his calling, would use the garments most
metest for him: In deed comely garments imports the majesty of a man, and
sumptuous garments not meet for his estate, disgraceth his audacitie. For
what need a ring of gold in a swines snowte, sure it is not comelye nor
decent, but contrary unto wisdom?

Homer writes of Ulysses, that when Ulysses in Homer is created at large.
his ships, and almost al his men, were after long tossinge on the seas,
near hand perished, he was driven on land where Alcinous reigned as king,
among the nations of Pheacas, and this Alcinous harbored Ulysses and his men
and gave him good enterteinement, for he was very bare without apparel, and
Nausicaa daughter to Alcinous sent a mantle to Ulysses, which when that he
had it on, he represented a wonderful Audacitie and countenance of Majesty,
whereby that Alcinous, said: I would that Ulysses would take my daughter
Nausicaa to wife. And in deed apparel mete for his state, which wears it, it
is a perfect and pure thing to set forth him self: but if he wear garments
and attire not mete for his ability, it imbaceth his grace and gesture,
therefore I say, let him always that thinks to live in the law of God, and
in the fear of him, not to desire other apparel, then with a mediocritie,
which is decente for him, for in excess of aparell ensues much
inconvenience, as I have written before in this book: but now to conclude, I
do pass over many worthy histories, which has been tossed in the brains of
sundry authors, the which were excellent good, to be treated of, but I have been somewhat tediouse in this my simple work, and therefore I think it mete
now to make an end, therefore these things which I have rehearsed, towchinge
the fall of Prodigality, ought of all estates to be had in memory, and
perfitelye pondered, and be vigilant that they fall not to the like vice, for
the enormitie of it, I have already resited. Now all ye readers and hearers,
consider with your selves that Prodigality is abhorred of God and man, and
that we ought not to use it, therefore of you let it be rejected and trod
under your feet. And all you parents which desire to have your children live
in the fear of God, keep them so in youth, that in age they may obey you, and
so shall you gain the favor of God and man, and be heirs of the kingedome
of Heaven, where the Lord Jesus does reign in his celestial glory, to whom
be all honor and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
I. Carr.

Imprinted at London, in Fletstreete, by William How: for Henry Kirckham, at
the sign of the black Boy, at the little North door of Poules. 1573.


