The rest of the second reply of Thomas Cartvurihgt: against Master Doctor
Vuhitgifts second ansvuer, touching the Church discipline.



Isay lxij, verse. j. For Syons sake, I vuil not hold my tongue, and for
Ierusalems sake. I vuil not rest: until the righteousness thereof break forth as
the lihgt, and the salvation thereof be as a burning lamp.

Ibid. verse. 6 and 7. Ye that are the Lords Remembrancers, keep not silence,
and give him no rest: until he repair, and set up Jerusalem the praise of the
world. Imprinted M. D. LXXVII.

TO THE READER.
ACcording unto my promise, yovu have here the residvu of my reply, unto the
Doctors ansvuer. Of the late appearing vuhereof, yt vuil not be uneasy to
conjecture: if boeth the distance vuhereby I am removed from yovu, and the
alterations in the place vuhere I remained, be remembered. In me verily, the
cause vuas not: vuhich more then a year ago, had brovught yt in a manner, to
the redines vuhich yt vuas in, when yt began to be printed*

But, considering the great enmytie against the cavuse, vuith some displeasure
against my self: some vuil (peradventure) say, that I have rather need to seek
excuse, vuhy I set yt forth at al, then so late. To vuhome I vuould yt vuere
ansvuered, that for the cause yt self: I never fear, least yt should come to
often, into the field. For, althovugh throvugh the poverty of the defenders
thereof, she come never so naked and unarmed: yet the lord has set such a
majesty in her countenance, that as vuith one of her eyes, she rauisheth into
her love, those vuhich are desirous of the trvuth in this behalf: so vuith the
other, she so astonisheth her enemies, as if they vuere cast into a dead sleap:
in such sort, that the stovutest of them, when they come to the fight, can not
find their hands.

Vuhome I admonish, and beseech also in gods behalf, that hovusoeuer they have
hitherto, been overtaken by the adversary: they vuould novu at the last
vuithdravu their foot, and those that have been Standerd bearers herein, not
only to retire them selves, but to blovu the retire also unto others. Let yt
be enovugh for them, to have stumbled at the truth, least if they run them
selves against yt, in sted of thinking that they have to do vuith men and
vuith vuordes, they meet vuith Christ him self: at vhome (as at a rok) they
shall vurake them selves myserably, upon vuhome also, if any come proudly, the
same stone vuilfal, and break them al to fitters: to their boeth deepest, and
Mat. 21. 44.
most remediles condemnation. For hovu gloriously soever men speak of the sun
of god: yet they al (no dovut) ^ Pet. 2. 8
rush them selves upon him, that rush them selves upon his vuord. Let them
therefore in time look unto yt, that they give place unto the rok for the rok
vuil give none to them: and assure them selves, that their heels vuil sooner
ache vuith kicking against the prik, then yt in receiving their broken and
strenghtles resistance. Vuhich, as in assurance of the trvuth mainteyned by us,
I propound unto them: so, if in buylding upon this goulden foundation of the
church discipline, there has escaped any stubble or hey of mine: I vuil (god
vuilling) not forget the same admonition, to be a lavu unto my self, to bring
the first fire, to consume yt vuith.

Novu when the truth, by this trial, gets ground: the displeasure against
my self, is no sufficient cause, to vuithdravu my hand, from this defense. For,
when the compass of our love tovuards god, must be moten by the thread of our
affection tovuards his truth: I see not, hovu I could persvuade my self, to
have to the quantity of a grain of mustard seed, of trvu love tovuards him: if
unto the trvuth laboring and travailing in this point, I should deny my simple
help. And verily, yt vuere a deintynes and dilicacy intolerable, if I should
not afourd, the los of a little ease and commodity unto that, vuhere unto my
life yt self, if yt had been asked, vuas dvu: if I should grudg, to dvuel in
another korner of the vuorld for that cavuse, for the vuhich, I ovught to be
ready, altogether to depart ovut of yt: finally, if I should think much, to
vuitnes vuith a little ink and paper that, vuhich numbres, in other places,
have already vuitnessed vuith their blood.

Vuhereunto serves, that yt is not the least part of my comfort, that in this
vacation from the ministry: the lord has not suffered me, to be altogether
idle: but employed me if not in griffing and setting, vuhich are the
mastervuorkes, yet in hedging and ditching abovut the Orchyard of his church
purchased vuith his most precious blood.

Last of al, I assure my self, that the same cavuse vuhich has brovught this
displeasure: is able (if need be) to set me in favor again. Vuherof, I vuould
little do vut: if yt might come to ansvuer before them, before vuhome, yt has
been so vnvuorthely accused. Alcibiades, vuhe^ one lifted up his Euribiades.
staf, ready to smite him, if he vuould not hold his peace: trusting unto the
vertvu of the truth, Smite (says he) so (...).
that yovu hear. When therefore these humane trvuthes, being propounded,
notvuithstanding al oppositions, by reason of former praeiudices, in the end
find favor, and have a resting place: hovu much more, the heave^ly trvuth,
sanctified and sealed by the blood of the sun of god, shall at the lenght have
the gates opened unto her. I grant, there is greater resistance unto this holy
trvuth, then unto other common and humane: but he that is author and mainteiner
of al trvuth, dravueth a great deal deeper, when he shoots forth this
arrovu, then when he sends forth the other. And thus much for ansvuer to
them, vuhich, not misliking the cavuse, may for that either (in their judgment)
I strive against the stream, or else for that I deprive my self of commodities,
vuhich I might othervuise enjoy: esteem my labor, ovut of season.

Saving the table, vuhere the greater letter is the Doctors: the variety of
letters is the same, and to the same end, vuhich yt vuas in the former part of
this book: vuhere the reader may take his direction. Of vuhome, as before I
craved prayer, for the lords assistance: so novu I desire, that thanks may be
given unto him, for all that, vuherein he shall understand yt, to have been vuith
me.

AN ANSWER TO THE RESIDVE of the surmises: as they are comprehended, in the D.
tvuo tables.
In the first Table.
The eight, is ansvuered, 248, 249, 250, 251. The tenth is ansvuered, 173. The
eleventh, 138, etc. The tvuelfth, 145, etc. The thirtinth, 191, 192, 193. The
sixtinth is vnvuorthy any ansvuer: seeing yt is manifest, that al those vuhich
have right to be baptezed, ovught to be houlden of the visible church, or
family of god, vuhere of the question is: as yt is further declared, by the
examination of the D. censures. The seuentinth is maintained, touching papists
children, 142. And there is the same reason, of the children of the
excommunicate, vuhich remayn obstinate. The eightinth is ansvuered, 64, 65. The
ninetinth, 64, etc. The tvuentith, 164, 165, 166, 167. For ansvuer, unto the
one and tvue^tith: I refer my self partly to that I have ansvuered in the
former part, partly to the examination of the D. censures.
In the second Table.
For the 38, and 39: I refer my self, to the examination of the D. censures.
The 40, is ansvuered 132, and 219. The 41, is confessed. The 42, is ansvuered,
230. The 43, p. 67. The 44, p. 85. The 45, p. 85. The 46, p. 87. The 47, p. 90.
The 48, p. 96. The 49, p. 157. The 50, in the former part. The 51, p. 262.
Fautes escaped.
Page 18, line 30, read may as. page 255, line 32, read three first. page 26,
l. 23 and 24, also page 27, l. 6. for the small, understand the great running
letter. Correct the number of the leaf, which is marked beneth, with the letter
N, immediately following the number 96.

AGAINST CIVIL OFFICES, IN ECCLESIASTICAL PERSONS: TRActate VII, and 23
according to the Doctor.
HAving in the last Tractate of the former part, showed the unlawful dominion
of certain of our church officers, over the whole church, and especially over
their fellow Ministers: yt seems good, to ioyn this next thereunto. For
thereby shall boeth better appear how insufferable this disorder is, which
ouerspreadeth boeth church and common wealth: and the government by the
Eldership (the tractate whereof shall follow immediately) in yt self just, shall
by comparison with this church lordship, be more justified.

That the most of the places quoted by the Admonit. Diuis^. page 749.
are used of vuriters of that excellency, vuith vuhome the D. is not vuorthy to
be named the same day: has, and further will appear. His exception, that by
this, they are lifted up above god himself: is vain. For, beside that it is a
kind of speech used of the best autors, to note a great inequality: he is les
worth, then I prised him at, if he think that he is worthy to be named the same
day that god him self is. For if he will so seruilely cleau unto words: yet the
question is, whether he be vuorthy, to be named, not (as he writes) whether he
may be named.

The place of S. Luke 9. 60. 61.
Luke, is understood properly of the Diuis. 2. page 750.
Ministers of the word: and not of al Christians, which is manifest, for that
our Savior Christ bids him, that would have goen bak for burial of his
father, to preach the Kingdom of heaven, which he never commanded to al
Christians: so that his meaning is of the calling unto the ministry, and not
of the calling to eternal life. That such civil offices as he allows in
Ecelesiastical persons, are helps for them to do their duties, repeted 752.
D. 4. 757. 761. D. 5. 762. D. 7. 765. D. 3. 773. D. 15. 783.
seven times: is a demanding of that in question. For, where 757. Diuis. 3.
pa. 751.
after he says, he has declared yt: he says untruly, he has only nakedly
affirmed yt: which how vntrw it is, shall after also appear.

My reply is that our Savior Christ's vocation, vuas to be a Minister of the
gospel, but he Luke 12. 24.
refused civil judgment because of his vocation: therefore he refused it,
because he vuas a Minister of the gospel. whereupon also follows, that Bishops
being Ministers of the gospel: owght not to receive, any such power. See now
how justly he complains, that I answer not to that he said, that Christ's
refusal in the partition of the inheritans, perteyneth no more to Bishops then
to Kings: no mervail also, if it require further answer, it was so well guarded:
seeing his reason is, because the doeinges of Christ be a pattern for all
Christians: then which, there can be nothing more absurd. For althowgh al his
doeinges, be instruction to al Christians: yet that they are a pattern to them
al, draws with it, that al may preach, that none may give judgment in civil
causes, and a number more horrible confusions: yt being also a falls ground of
popery, whereby they would establish the lenton fast, and other such corruptions.

Where also he would give to understand, that our Sa. Christ did refuse this,
not as a Minister of the gospel, but as Redemer: he renteth a sunder things,
which can not be separated. For one part of his redemership, stands in that
he was given of god unto us, for a teacher: so that, if he would have answered
any thing in this kind, he must have said, that he refused to judge of civil
causes, not as a Minister of the word, but as a Priest, or King, whereof also
the last, he in part sets down: saying he refused yt, to declare that his
Kingdom was not earthly, but heavenly: as if it were not as necessary, for him
to refuse it in respect of his Doctorship, that he might declare likewise, that
his doctrine was not of earthly things, but of heavenly: and consequently, as
convenient in the same respect, for the Ministers to abstein from it. But the
further confutation of this, the reader shall take from thence, Tra. 6. p. 404.
where is showed, that our Sa. Christ, by his own example, calls the Apostels
and, in them, all the Ministers of the word, from al pomp and dominion: and
therefore from these civil offices, whereunto pomp and dominion are annexed.

Then he answers, that no man gives the Bishops authority to judge in matters
of inheritans: whereas our Sa. Christ, refused it not, because he was no Judge
of that cause, but simply because he was no civil Judge: Ioh. 8. 1^
refusing upon the same ground, to give sentence of the harlot. The Ministers
(for sooth) may not meddle with civil occupations, but with civil offices: and
in civil offices, not with them of no countenance, as the Iailers office etc,
but with those of estate: and amongst those of estate, not with matters of
inheritance but with criminal causes. Thus, you take your self license, to say
al things, and to show none. But to leau the rest unto an other place, let the
D. show some reason, why the Minister should rather sit in judgment of criminal
causes, then in pleas of inheritans: they boeth belong to the Magistrate alike,
if he owght to accept one, being committed unto him by the Magistrate, why not
also the other: especially, when as by criminal causes, (requiring more search
and greater diligence then the other) there must needs be greater hinderance
from his ministry. As for that he says, those are to be decided by law, and
have other Judges appointed for them: the criminal causes are likewise. And if
there were no other Judges appointed for them: yet, whether there owght to be,
is the question: so that the D. answer, is here an open demand of the
question. Where also out of M. Calvin, he alleges Barnard, that the
Ministers power is in crimes: it is a shameful abusing, of boeth Calvin and
Barnard. for they speak there of rebuking and punishing syn, by ecclesiastical
censures: which is manifest, in that they convey the title of this power, to
the Minister, 4. li. Inst. 11. cap. 12. sect.
by the Keys delivered unto S. Peter. now the very word of Keys, especially
with this addition, given unto S. Peter: tells al men, that the power there
spoken of, is spiritual, and not civil. And here the D. is directly against him
self. For before, in this very division, saying that this judgment in civil
causes is not incident, but added to the ministry: here he pretends out of
Barnard, that civil judgment in criminal causes, is of the power and
jurisdiction of the Ministers.

And if it be trw that he says after, the pastor must use such discipline, as
seems good to the Magistrate: when the Magistrate ordeineth civil discipline
only, either that discipline must be incident to the pastorship, or else in such
a time, there shall be a Pastor of god, which has no discipline incident into
his office: seeing the ecclesiastical discipline, which is taken (by his
judgment) from him laufully, is not incident: so that this idle distinction
goes flat to the ground. I call it idle, be cause it makes nothing to the
question: which is not, whether a Minister may bear civil office, in that
respect that he is a Minister, but whether he may bear it at al. And of this
sort also is, that our Bishops break not violently into these offices, but
receive them of the Princes gift: whereas our question is, whether he may
receiu these offices when they be given: yet has he used this distinction, at
the least, five times.

After is added, that it is committed to them by the Magistrate, for fuller
satisfying of their duty: if so, why should not all the Ministers alike have
this power, to the end, that al might do their duties the better. Again, in
saying that it is necessary for this time: you openly wrest this power, out of
the Magistrates hand. For thereby it follows, that the Magistrate of duty,
owght to commit this unto them: and if he do not, he is guilty of gods wrath,
in leaving undone, that which is necessary to be done. you do also open injury
to the holy ghost, which is thus supposed to have left that in the liberty of
the Magistrate, which is necessary for the accomplishing of the ministry:
whereas, if it had been necessary, there had been also nothing more easy, then
to have given this general rule, that always under a Christian Magistrate, the
Minister should be armed with civil authority. But this succor which you seek
in the time, is Pigghius shift: as is also this whole cause, and the flower of
your arguments. For he says, As long as the church Pigg lib. 5. hierarh ca. 16.
vuas in persecution, al vuere obedient unto their Pastors, hovu simple or base
so ever the Ministers vuere: but after that the church came to have prosperity,
then it vuas needful, that Bishops should be magnifical also, to the end they
might be more apt, to govern the magnifical Princes: and that otherwise his
power and authority should not be sufficiently reverenced. To whom, as unto the
D. it is easy to answer, that if Kings and Princes, being yet in deadly hatred
against the gospel, were browght by the ministry of the word, unaccompanied
with any such pomp or jurisdiction, to yield them selves unto the gospel, and
to give due reverence unto the ministry: how much more now, being friends,
will they be kept in duty and convenient estimation thereof, withowt this
disguising of the ministry.

That alleged out of Calvin, that every man must respect his own vocation etc.
beside that it is drawn clea^ from the mind of the author, it is absurdly
applied. For the application, affirms it meet for the vocatio of the
Minister, that he should bear civil office: which is that in question. And
where he says, Calvin speaks nothing against these civil offices in
ecclesiastical persons, and after, that nether he nor any godly man, can
disalow of yt: he gives suspicion that he has sold him self to speak
untruth, withowt al chek of conscience. For Calvin shows, that albeit the
godly Princes, giving these offices to church men, had a good intent: yet, that
they did evil provide thereby for the church, considering that by it was
corrupted, or 4. lib. Inst. 11. cap. 10. sect.
rather utterly brovught to no vught, al true and ancient sincerity, and that,
the Bishops if they had had a spark of grace, vuould when they vuere offered
such offices, have ansuuered, that the armor of their vuarfare, is not carnal
but spiritual. Here again also, he is out with him self. For in the end of his
book, albeit the shifts he uses are to rowgh hewed: yet, when he comes to
Calvin, in this matter void of al shift, he is constreined to reject his
authority. If he have nothing against him, why does he make so small account of
him, as for nothing to cast him of: if he be against him, why does he here
deny it. And as I have alleged M. Calvin, and some others: so the learned know
that a number more might be browght, to the making up of a book: but for him,
beside the papists (as I am verily persuaded) scarce one so bold an enemy of
the truth, as to commit this to writing.

Against the plain meaning of the Apostle, opened in flat Diuis. 4. p. 752.
words, verses 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. of Romans 12. here is nothing but your suerly,
and certain: which I will suffer to have that credit, it can get, against so
manifest light. Your argument, is the same which I have said. The Bishop must
govern with discipline, therefore with civil discipline: your answer that he
must use discipline prescribed by the Magistrate, whether civil or
ecclesiastical, is an asking of that in question.

The answer to the place of 2. Tim. c. 2. 4.
Timothy, that it is spoken of al Diuis. 6. p. ^54.
Christians indifferently merely faced out with the name of Calvin: is Lib. 5.
hie rarch. ca. 6.
Pigghius answer, to the protestants. And it is confuted, in that S. Paul
instructs Timothy there, not as a simple Christian, but as a Minister of the
gospel: in that also he borrowed this speech of the law, which Number. 4. 3. and 8.
24. 25.
calls the ministry a souldiarfare: thirdly in that the same Apostle in
other 1. Co. 9. 7 Phili. 2. 25.
places gives this title of souldiarship, and fellow souldiarship, to those of
the ministry. Beside that it flatly condemns Cyprian, as an abuser of the
place: who by vertw hereof, forbids a Minister an Executorship, which, by
the D. either is not forbidden him, or else is forbidden to al Christians alike.
And not only Cyprian is condemned, but li. 1. officio cap. 38.
Ambrose and upon Sophon. 1. ca.
Jerome which use it, as the admonition: Beside Bucer upon Ephesians. ca. 4.
Bucer and other godly writers of our time, as appears by Pigghius answer.
The reason whereby Pigghius and he, would show it understood of al Christians
alike, is this. Al Christians be spiritual souldiars: S. Paul speaks of
spiritual souldiars: therefore he speaks of al Christians: concluding
affirmatively in the second figure, which is to open a faut. where you should
understand, that althowgh Christianity be a kind of spiritual warfare: yet, it
follows not, that every spiritual warfare, is Christianity. Your answer to
Cypria^, whereby you would restrein his judgment to the Executorship, and not
suffer it to have place in civil offices: is frivolous, and flatly against his
words, which Cyp. lib. 1. epist. 9.
says that it vuas decreed in a Council, that the Minister should only serve
the altar, and the sacrifices, and give them selves to prayer. Your reason is
as fond, that the executorship is more troblesome then to bear civil office,
because sometime temporal men (as you call them) do refuse it: as if therewere
not, which refused other civil offices, for the same cause. The reply to the
next division, the reader may take, out of the page 409. l. 31.
former part of my book.

The exception out of the Coloss. that wives must obey their husbands Diuis.
8. p. 755.
in the lord: does not hinder, but that the place to the 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12.
Thessa. may put a difference betvuene the civil and ecclesiastical government.
For S. Paul (as the Hebrews do the preposition ^) uses the preposition (In)
diversely. where therefore he wills the Thessalonians to acknovulegd those,
vuhich vuere set over them in the lord, he means, in things perteining unto
the lord: but when he wills the vuiues, to obey their husbands in the lord,
he means, that they should do it, no further then is agreeable unto the will
of god: not that he would restrein their obedience, only to such things as
pertein to the kingdom of heaven, as the words be taken in the other place.

In saying, that althovvgh the godly Magistrate rules in the lord over us, yet
that this title is given by excellency (...)
unto the ecclesiastical officers: I do not daly; it is the distinction of the
doly Ghost him self. For, albeit they that handle common wealth matters, serve
the lord, and do things tending to his glory: yet the scripture comparing
boeth these governments together, gives this title, as a note to discern the
ecclesiastical officers from the civil, as appears in the 2. Chron. 19. 11.
Chronicles from whence (it is like) the Apostle took this manner of speech. The
reason whereof is: for that civil governments are not so nighly, nor so
immediately referred unto the glory of god, as are the ecclesiastical. Beside
that this reproach is against M. Calvin, and Beza: who upon that place upon the
5. chap.
of the Thessal. ground the same distinction. I grant, there be some things
common to boeth the gouernmentes, as be also to things diverse, yea contrary:
but in confessing the civil government distinguished from the ecclesiastical,
and yet affirming certain civil offices common to boeth, you speak wthout al
sens. For, where that which should agree, owght to be a third thing from the
ecclesiastical and civil power: you make one of these two, to agree to them
selves.

And althowgh he still rubbeth upon this, that civil offices, such as he
means, are not only no hinderans, but a help for the Bishop to do his
office: yet he can never be browght to expres, what those offices be. For he
fears partly, that the confutation will be a great deal easier: partly least,
if he should prik high, he should draw his cause into the hatered of al, if he
should fallow, he should not serve their appetite, to whom he would,
peradventure, offer unto in this cause.

It is in deed a good reason, as the course of this disputation Diuis. 9. page
755.
does declare: they must exercise ecclesiastical discipline, therefore not
civil: they must have the spiritual sword of corrections always in their hand,
therefore not the civil: oneles they can hold, and beweld two swords at once:
and oneles the two ha^ded sword of the word of god, occupiyng boeth their
hands, they have a third hand, for the civil.

To the next I answer, as unto the seventh diuis. As for Diuis. 10. page 756.
the answer which he asks to his vntrw surmise, of the Admonit. abbridging
the Magistrates authority, seeing it is so often, and of no not only cause, but
not so much as occasion, as a thing unworthy once to look bak for, I quietly
pas by: albeit this untruth has, and shall (god willing) after generally appear.

To that I alleged, of the difficulty and multitude of duties, Cap. 2. Diuis.
1. p. 757
vuhich the ministry of the vuord does lay upon the Bishop, of one side, and
of the vueaknes of man's nature, of the other, thereby to bind the Bishop from
reaching out his hand to other functions: he says, that this had had
likelihood, if he should exercise a function, contrary to the ecclesiastical.
Of this sort, are also these profes alleged page 761. page 766. Diuis. 5. page
766.
other where: that they may exercise boeth jurisdictions, because they tend
boeth to one end, that is to the maintenance of religion, reformation of
manners, and punishment of syn. where the reader may see, that the distinction
which he churmeth after so painfully, will not come. As if there were any lawful
function, be it never so base, contrary to an other lawful function: seeing that
good can not be contrary to good: nether are there any, which pertein not to
the maintenance of religion. And the judgment of lands (which notwithstanding
he confesses unmeet for a Minister) pertayneth to reformation of manners, and
punishment of syn: whilst that which is his, being given to every one, the
wrong doers are punished. Likewise is also the Princis office: so that, if he
may receiu al these callinges, he may either exercise all the offices and
occupations in the land, or at the least more then him self dare avouch. But the
proverb shall the^ be (as it is already) trw in the^: that he vuhich embraces
much, streyneth but a little. After he excepteth, that by this reason a
Christian man should be continually in spiritual meditation, and never meddle
with worldly affairs: which proceeds of a great want. for as well (althowgh not
so principally) perteyneth it to the duty of every Christian, to have to do
with worldly affairs: as at times convenient, to be occupied in spiritual
meditation. And as the reason which I browght, has not so much as the least
seed of Anabaptism: so the D. answer, leads to plain monckery, whilst he
places the whole duty of a Christian man in spiritual meditation. But, seeing
you imagine the Bishops, to be men of so great burden, that beside their church
ministry, they be able to carry the civil office: answer me, how comes it to
pas, that they commit part of their own and proper office, unto Chauncelors,
Archdeacons etc, except they have more to do then they can do them selves?
what a confusion is it, to turn over to others, things which (they say) belong
properly to their office: and to take offices, which they confess, are not
incident to their calling.

I alleged, that the Apostles of greater gifts, then can Diuis. 6. p. 758.
be hoped for of any, for accomplishment of the ministry of the vuord, gave
over even that vuhich they had received upon them, that is to say, the
disposition of the church money, a thing merely ecclesiastical, and therefore
that vuhich might have been easelier joined vuith the ministry of the vuord,
then a civil office. To this he answers, the Apostles did boeth those charges
before, and therefore that these offices may sometime meet: where, if he mean,
they may meet now, it follows not. For althowgh they might meet, before the
holy ghost, by the mouth of the Apost. made a several office of yt: yet they
might not so afterward, when it was otherwise determined of, by the mouth of
god. There were diverse kind of marriages, with consanguinitie, as brother with
sister, aunt with nevew etc lawful in the beginning* which, after that the lord
had otherwise disposed of in the law were unlawful.

As for that out of Calvin, and 2 Corinthians 8, it is frivolous. For it never
perteined to the Deacons office, to exhort for the contribution of the poor:
but was, and is the Ministers of the word: the Deacons office being, to receiu,
and to distribute yt, in that church where he is Deacon. The causes also which
he alleges, of the casting of of that office, and the business which the
Deaconship did draw in that church of Jerusalem, are to trifle out the time:
considering, that the decree of the Apostles, towching the nue office, was
general for all places, and not where there should be many poor, or so many
thousand professors. what a bouldnes is it also, when the Scripture does
plainly show, the cause of delivering them selves from this office, to have
been, that they should not leau their ministry and that they might be
continually upon it: to reject this cause, and to set up another, which the
scripture ^ Act. 6 2.
gives no ynkling of.

That they ordained others, for because they should go into the world, is also
nothing worth: seeing that in some of them, it came not to pas diverse yeates
after, and in other some, never: as those which were determined there to
remain, when as notwithstanding, al desired this releas. Beside that, he
answers nothing to the inequality of gifts, between our Bishops and the
Apostles: nor considers not, that the Spiritual charge of our Bishop, is over
more now then there were then in Jerusalem: and that they were at that time
twelu, where he is but one: had their church together, which he has scartered.

I showed, that the Papists are not only condemned, Diuis. 3. pa^ 759.
for vuringing the civil authority ouut of Princes hands, but simply, for
exercising it: and there fore this first section, is idle.

To that I alleged, that it is as monstrous for the Bishop to go from the
pulpit, unto the place of civil judgment, as for my lord Mayor to go to the
pulpit: he answers, that it is not uncomely to go from the pulpit to civil
administration of justice etc, which is a mere mockery of his reader. For not
daring to deny, but it is uncomely for the lord Mayor: he answers, by
affirming that in question. For if he say, it is not uncomely for the lord
Mayor to go to the pulpit, he runs in to that, which he says I surmise of
him: where of notwitstanding I have not a letter. Albeit the truth is, that he
may as well say, the Magistrate may minister the Sacrament and preach, which is
the proper dwety of the Minister: as to say, the Minister of the word, may sit
in judgment of civil causes, which is the proper dwety of the Magistrate. For,
look what difference the lord has set, between the office of the civil
Magistrate, and of the Minister: the same must of necessity be between the
office of the Minister, and of the Magistrate: as, there is the self same
distance between Athenes and Thebes, vuhich is betuuene Thebes and Athenes: and
if there be a mile, from the top of the hill to the foot, it is as far from the
foot, to the top.

And althowgh, yt abhorring the eyes and ears of al, he is afraid here to
affirm it comely, that the lord Mayor should preach and minister the
sacraments: yet as a man whose judgment wastes not by little and little, but is
suddenly and at a clap taken away, he shameth not a little after to affirm, that
the Prince may preach and the Bishop exercise civil page 768.
office, if they be lawfully called thereunto. where, if by lawful calling, he
understand a wonderful and extraordinary from heaven, he speaks altogether
from the cause, our question being whether a Minister by calling of the
Magistrate, or a Magistrate by calling of the church, may enter upon each others
office. And if he mean by lawful calling, the ordinary calling then his answer
is absurd. For he falls into that absurdity, which the Papists do falsely
surmise: that we give unto our Princes power to minister the Sacraments. yea
by his diuinitye, which gives the chois of the Bishops to the page 135.
Prince alone, and which makes it lawful for one to offer him self to the
ministry: the king of the land may make him self page 48.
Bishop, withowt waiting for the church is consent.

Upon that he alleges out of M. Beza, which wishes some of the nobility to
be of the Eldership, compared with that which I affirm, that the Eldership is
an ecclesiastical office: he concludes, that either I must dissent from M.
Beza, or grant that one person may at once bear civil and ecclesiastical
office. I answer, that nether is necessary. For, whereas Lordships, Baronryes
and Erldomes are often either by birth, or given of the Prince, as bare degrees
of honor: such being of the church Eldership, do not therefore bear, boeth
civil and ecclesiastical office: considering that they have no magistracy
necessarily joined with them, further then the same is particularly committed.
Albeit, having the Heluetian confession, I find no epistle of M. Bezas: so
that, either he mistaketh the place, or else has some other edition, then I
could get.

If the gentry and nobility of the realm, be (as you confess) fitter to bear
these offices, then ecclesiastical persons: there needed some great causes, to
have been showed by you, why the fittest should not be taken: otherwise the
white of expedience, that churchmen should bear them, which you threap of them,
that they see, will be so dim, that boeth the Prince, and they passing by it,
will (I hope (put down (as there calling serves) this usurped power. In the
mean season, it being so expedient a thing for the church, at you pretend: the
church is little behoulding to you, that do not make this expedience to appear.

I said that if there fall a question to be decided by the Diuis. 4. p. 760.
vuord of god, and vuherein the advice of the Minister is needful: that then
his help, ouught to be required. The D. hereupon fathereth of me, that the
magistrate may determine no weighty matter, withowt him: as if there were no
weighty matter, wherein the Magistrate could know what is the will of god,
withowt sending for the Minister: so that, it appears that there is no
untruth so open, which finedeth not (as in a common Inn) lodging in the D.
tongue. But else (says he) wherefore are these words? therefore, forsooth, that
where you and others might, under color of the knowledge which he has in the
word of god, hold him the stirrup, to clime into the civil gouernmentes: it
might appear, that the common wealth might reap that commodity, withowt such
iumbling of offices together, which cause I expressed. The place of Deuteronomy. 19.
17. 18.
Deuteronomie, is faithfully alleged. That, before the lord, in diverse places,
signifies before the Ark, it is well known: that it does so here, first there
is nothing against yt, the^ the translation of vau by ( and) rather then by (
that is to say) is more used, albeit, whether it be or no, it makes nothing to
this matter. For, the weight of my allegation, lies in this, that the handling
of the matter, is appointed unto the Judges, not unto the Priests: whereunto,
beside his bare affirmation, he answers nothing Esra. 9. 1.
Likewise is Esra faithfully alleged: and that out of Esr. 10. 4. 5. is nothing
against it. For, althowgh that matter of divorce pertained unto him, first, in
respect that he should convince the people of their faut, secondly, in showing
what was to be done in such a difficult case, where the Israelites had been so
long married with strange we men forbidden, and begotten diverse children of
them, and thirdly in the ecclesiastical censure of separation from the
congregation, there mentioned: yet to sit in judgment of them, or by civil
punishment to drive those, which would not willingly, is not showed to pertein
unto him.

To the next division, wherein is showed that those Diuis. 5. page 761.
vuhich had only the light of nature, yea and vuere great extollers of man's
ability, did yet see in part the incommodity, of this clapping of many offices
upon one man's bak: is answered nothing, but that which is confuted 1. Diu. pa.
757.
before. Of the uniformity of church government, partly has been, and more
shall, god willing, be said afterward.

Here the D. has not a word of answer, his reason why he Diuis. 6. p. 761.
will not answer, for that it is a matter of policy, and not of divinity, does
as it were, with one stroke of a pen, cross out almost his whole book: where he
hangs al these church matters of the circumstance of time, place, person, and
of the form of the common wealth. Nether does my reason, accuse the prince and
the council which is, that if it vuere at liberty for Ministers, to execute
that vuhich pertains to the Magistrate, or the Magistrate to do that vuhich
belongs to the Minister: yet, that the later, vuith us, ovught rather to be
done, then the first: for that there is a greater vuant of sufficient church
men, then of able common vuealth men. But as I altogether excuse none, from the
highest to the lowest of us, which have continued this popish corruption so
long: so I accuse especially you, and such as you are, which in steed of
refusing them, and showing the unlawfulness of mingling them, gape after them,
and are ready to proclaim war (as the 3. Mich. 5.
Prophet says) if you durst unless by hurling in some morsel one or other, your
mouths were stopped. And yt may be said of Princes, how godly soever other
wise, which lift the Bishops into this honor, that is Hilarious aduersus
Constant.
said of a wicked Emperor, which promoted them likewise: he honored the
Priests, that they should be no Bishops, that is, that they should be unable,
to do the office of a Bishop.

This worldly principality, entered not, as you pretend, Diuis. 7. 8. page 761.
into the ministry, with the Christian Magistrate, immediately after the time
of persecution: but long after. For, it began first Socrat. 7. l. c. 7. etc. ^^
at Alexandria in Cyrils time, and after entered into Rome. your answer also, to
the cano^ attributed unto the Apostles, is vain, for the cano^ opposes the
attendance in his ecclesiastical ministry, unto worldly offices: beside, that
your answer is otherwise to homely. For it is as much, as if you should answer,
that the canon is understood of al worldly offices: saving those which you
defend.

My reason out of the Calcedo^ Council is, for that it forbids to take the
charge of an Orphan, which requires not so much attendance, as the civil
offices, and which common charity, would otherwise lay upon him. Again, for
that it Can. 7.
forbids the Minister, to receive upon pain of excommunication, any secular
honor: and therefore the office of a Justice of peace, of a Justice of Quorum,
of having judgment of life and death which the D, I will not say craftily (for
it is to manifest) but fearfully, passes by, whereunto ad 4. Co^ Carthag. ^.
20.
that decreed in another Council, that the Bishop should only attend unto
prayer, reading, and preaching. where, so far it is, that it will suffer him to
deal with civil offices: that it forbids to meddle, with matters of his own
household: which notwithstanding belong unto him. and therefore I do not allegd
it, as that which I altogether allow: but to show how severe the ancient
councels have been in this point, whereof he would bear us down, that there is
not a word. For otherwise, withowt some favorable interpretation, this canon in
this point is out of rule.

To the D. which will not have the Ministers work: in Chap. 3. ^ Diuis. page 763.
any handy craft occupation etc, but bear civil office: I replied, that it vuas
as much as if he should say, that he vuould not be bound vuith iron, but vuith
goulden fetters etc. whereto he answers, that I do but deride. Here, I leave
it to the reader to consider, whether by this which he calls derision, I have
broken the head of his cause: so that, if it could, it would weep. As for that
out of M. Bucer, there is no man dowteth of: but that one, and the same may do
the office of a Minister, and of a Magistrate at once he affirms not: he
does the clean contrary, as I In the end of my former book and in the former
part of this. page 660.
have showed, and In ratione canonic. examinat. 2. Diuis. pa. 764.
further may be seen.

M. Calvin does not only invey against the papists, which enter forcibly
upon the Magistrates office: but against those also, that receive it being
given. For his reasons 4. li. inst. ^^. c. 9. sect.
that no man is able to sustein boeth those charges etc. are general. I grant,
the D. alleges not all the Papists reasons: yet this of the papists, is the
same with his: yea in this point, with grief, I am compelled to see him further
carried from the bounds of modesty, then they are. For they (as is alleged by
M. Calvin) content them selves with this defense, that their ministry is not
greatly hindered by it: but he dare say, that these offices are a furtherance to
their ministry. which trwly, withowt miracle will hardly be done, that a man
having already a burden, as much as he is able to bear: should handle the
matter so konningly, that he should not only be able to bear another as heavy
almost as yt, but to bear it also easelier.

Hither pertains, that he has afterward, where he affirms Diuis. 3. ca. 4.
p. 764.
that the necessity of studying the laws of the realm, makes him fitter for
the ministry: that is to say in effect, makes him have more leisure to study
the laws of the kingdom of heaven, thereby to give the riper judgment in
things perteining thereto.

And as this is strange, in the study of the laws of the realm: so it is yet
more strange in the practice by executing the office of a civil Judge. For tell
me, I pray you, how the care you owght to have of the civil causes before you
come to judgment, the time to be informed of them on boeth sides, the examining
of witnesses, the consultation to what law, or to what branch of the law, the
crime should be reduced: tell me (I say) how does it make you fitter to execute
your ministry, then if you had bestowed that time, in study of the word of
god? if you say, that by the knowlegd of these things, you may do your
ministry the better: so may you by knowledge of the Potters, the Vueuers, the
Carpenters occupation, from which similitudes being taken, the doctrine is
deeplier imprinted: as we see to have been done by the Prophets and Apostles.
But as it is not meet, that because the knowledge of these things profits,
that therefore Ministers may exercise these crafts: no more follows it, that
because the knowledge of civil judgments profits for the better doing of the
ministry, therefore a Minister lib. 4. Inst. c 11. sect. 9.
should exercise them. Now, if M. Calvin answering the Papists, which only
say that the exercise of this civil povuer, did not much hinder their spiritual
ministry, called their answer babbling: I leave it to you to consider, how
sharply he would have censured this bouldnes of yours, if he had met with all.

As towching that which I said, of bodily occupations fitter unto the estate of
a Minister, then these civil offices: it may appear, for that they are done
withowt pomp or show, which accompaniyng the civil offices, have been showed to
be unlawful for the estate of a Minister. and that glittering shows and pomp
in the Ministers, are hindrances to their ministry, may further appear: by
that S. Paul did 1. Co. 2. 4. 5.
forbear from al stately wisdom and bravery of words, to this end that the
virtue of the spirit of god in the simplicity of the ministry, might show it
self more clearly. when therefore the ey seeing this pomp, is as well affected
with it, as where the ear hears it, and carries it to the mind as sone, and
in the common people especially, sooner: by the same reason that the one, the
other also must hinder the course of the gospel. Hereupon no dowt, Ambrose
says, that Ambr. lib. Epist. 5. Epist^l. 33.
vuorldly government is the vueaknning of the Priest: alluding unto the
Apostles saying, that he vuas then strong when he vuas vueak.

Further, when the mind is weried, and that he vnbending it, will give it rest
for a time: it is more apt for him to exercise him self, either in planting or
setting somewhat in garden or orchyard by way of recreation, then in shooting
as it were continually in yt, in the end to break yt, and to make it
unprofitable either for the civil or ecclesiastical estate. And I meruail what
steel the edges of their wits be of, which will not be turned, when they cut
boeth so deep, and in so hard matters: whereas it is known, that men of
counsel have found in the office of a Justice of peace or Quorum, so much to
do, that they have had scarce time enowgh, to do the office of a father of a
household, in their private families. And it must take up so much more time in
the Bishops, then in them: as they, for want of being nourished in the knowledge
of the laws and customs of the realm, are more unready in such cases, then
the nobilitye commonly is: onles they will sit upon the bench like idols,
nodding rather to the pleasures of others, then upon any grounded knowledge,
giving judgment them selves.

His reason of the difference, that the Minister can not commit his power to
whom he list, but that the Prince may: is (I fear me) an endeavor of to open
flattery, at the least it is to losely spoken. For, althowgh there be greater
liberty, in the one, then in the other: yet, the Prince can not commit his
power to whom he lists, but is bound first to choose those which fear the
lord, then those which are best able to execute yt, to the glory of god and
commodity of the subjects: and therefore not the Ministers, which have already
as much as they can turn them to, when they do their most. Beside that he can
not thus escape. For, if the Prince will accept the ministry, of the Bishops
hand: then his difference falls to the ground, and the^, by his saying, the
Prince may well preach, as the Bishop bear civil office.

As for his example of Samuel, which did Saules office in slaying Agag, when as
Saul might not do Samueles in sacrifising: it makes nothing for him. For,
Samuel did it not by Saul's authority, but by an extraordinary calling from god:
so that if this example prove, that ecclesiastical persons may bear civil
offices, it proves that they may do it withowt any commandment of the
Prince. I pas by, that it was not Samuels office to sacrifice, as the D.
imagines: he being not of the race of Aharo^ to whom only that apperteyned,
but a simple 1. Cron. 6. 20. 23.
Leuite: so that where it is said that he sacrificed, either it must be
understood that he procured the sacrifice to be made, or else that it was done
by an extraordinary calling, contrary to the rule that the lord had given, of
offering sacrifices

To that I ask, vuhy if the Minister be helped by exercising a civil office in
his ovun person, the Magistrate should not be helped by exercising likevuise an
ecclesiastical: he answers, the Magistrate may do by corporal punishment,
which the Minister ca^ not do by ecclesiastical: so may the Minister do by
ecclesiastic. which the Magistrate ca^ not do by corporal. And this in deed is
the ordinance of god, that every one should do that which properly belongs
unto him: and not that one, should do al. where he adds, that the Magistrate
may bridle the most vnruliest, where the greatest censures of the church, few
now a days do regard: verily it is no mervail, thowgh they be contemned,
being exercised as they are, by those to whom it apperteyneth not, and for
every trifling and three halfpenny matter: where if, being duly executed, they
be contemned, the Magistrate bears the sword, to punish that contempt. But
the D. would have the Minister, have that sword in his hand: that beside the
sentence of exco^municatio^, he might have also the civil sword, whereby he
might strike a further Romans 13.
fear of him self into the peoples hearts. In deed, thus is fear, which the
Apostle most properly gives unto the civil Magistrate because of the sword
which he bears, translated unto the Ministers: And thus it comes to pas,
that they having boeth civil, and ecclesiastical vengeance in their hands,
make them selves more terrible unto the people, then the Magistrate him self,
which has but the civil sword only. Vuhereby has grown (and if it be not in
time prevented) will grow contempt of Magistrates, and other inconveniences:
wherewith Princes them selves having been before beaten, owght so much the
streighter to look unto. As for that he brings, of other ecclesiastical
punishments which may be used, beside those prescribed in the scripture: it
apperteineth to another question. And so does Gualters testimony, which is not
only idly, but shamefully alleged, in this cause especially: considering that
he does precisely co^demn the upon the 6 chap. 1. Co. Diuis. 2. p. 764.
exercise of any civil government in ecclesiastical persons. The two next
divisions, are answered.

I know that corporal punishments be means to bring men to hear. and (if you
will also) to believe the word: but that it does so, or at least so much when it
is executed by the Minister, as when it is executed by the Magistrate, I deny:
even as it is in excommunications and ecclesiastical censures, when they are
executed by those to whom they do not appertain.

It follows not, that because fear of civil punishment is profitable,
therefore yt is profitable in the Ministers hand: nether for that it hinders
faith when the Minister, preaching in the pulpit, has the civil svuord in his
hand, there fore it hinders, when the Magistrate houldeth it in his hand. For
the profit of the fear of the sword, depends upon the blessing of god, that
gives it efficacy: which blessing is then given, when the sword is drawn by
him, unto whom it properly belongs. There are of judgment, that it is not
convenient, M. Ascham in his Schol^master.
that the same should teach scholars, and chasten them with the rod, but that
some other rather should have that charge, wherewith I will not meddle: but if the
Scholemaster should have beside the rod, the sword also to take away the lives
of their scholars, or to send them to the iayl, who sees not the inconvenience
that would rise thereof. And yet the Scholemaster, as he whose office is les
ecclesiastical: is much more capable of this power, then is the Bishop.

That he supposes me to affirm, that the causes which Diuis. 6. pa. 766.
they meddle with as the Queens majesty's Commissioners, are ecclesiastical,
and that they may give a judicial sentence of them: is a flat untruth. This
only I gave to understand, which I yet affirm, that the same causes may be
boeth civil, and ecclesiastical. For in respect that inquisition is made, to
punish yt with corporal punishment, it is civil: the same is also
ecclesiastical, when it is examined, to the end that the conscience may be
towched with sens of the syn, by the church censures.

The D. similitude is (as I said) manifestly injurious to Diuis. 7. p. 766.
the Magistrate. For if the execution of the laws belong unto the Bishop, as
the making of them does to the Magistrate: it follows, that as the one is the
proper office of the Magistrate, so the other is the proper of the Bishop. And
further, that in that common wealth, where the Magistrate may make the laws
him self alone: there, by his reason, the Bishops may execute them alone. As
for his answer, it is nothing but a demanding of that in question.

That moses did the office of the Sacrificer is certain: Diuis. 8 pa. 767. and
9. 768.
in that he Exo. 24. 6. 8.
sprinkled the blood upon the altar, and people, which perteyned properly unto
the Priest. likewise the same is confirmed by his Ex. 29. 13.
ordeyning of Aharon, and his sons, to the priesthood: which belongs unto
the Priest in like manner.

That Moses (after Aharon was made Priest) prescribed Aharon what he should
do: he did it from the mouth of the lord, and that also as the Prophet of god,
and in a Act. 7.
figure of the doctorship of our savior Christ, and not simply as the civil
governor of the people. For althowgh the ptieshood, were taken from him: yet
he remained a Prophet unto his dying day, and therefore that exception is
insufficient. So is that also, of them, in whom he says that boeth offices
civil, and ecclesiastical met. For not to enquire how truly those examples are
alleged, especially of Nehemias, of whom there is not a step of likelihood,
that he exercised boeth the offices: it helps him no whit althowgh it were
so, as he alleges: considering that such were extraordinarily raised up of
god, and not by any established order or election of men. Which also is a
piece of answer to that alleged after to this purpose of our Savior Christ's
whipping, which was in ruinous, and not in 10. Diuis. p. 768.
standing estates of the church.

Nether is this once to move, much les to ouerthow that which was before
disputed. For the question is, what order the church is bound unto, not what
laws the lord is bound unto: likewise the question is, not what either may be
done, or tolerated in the desolation and wast of the church, but what owght to
be done, in a church established and reformed: and what that order is, for
establishment whereof, every man must employ him self, according to his calling.
In Elies and Samuels times, it appears that the church was in miserable
estate: boeth by the whole discourse of the story, and namely 1. Sam. 3. 1.
that there was a great dearth of the vuord of god. But mark (I pray you) this
divinity, he would have their examples which have been (as he says) boeth
Priests and Princes, yea and page 262.
Captains also of the host, serve to prove that Ministers may be Justices of
peace, but not that, they may be Princes or Captains where as if those
examples prove, that a Minister may be chosen to bear civil office, they prove
especially, that he may be chosen to bear that office, which they bare, from
whom he fetches his proof. For if that wherefore they may be chosen to other
civil offices, do not agree unto them: the other which have their ground from
thence can much les agree. Therefore, if the D. be afraid to confess, that these
examples prove, that a Bishop may be a king or a Captain if he be chosen to yt:
he owght also to be afraid, to confess that a bishop may be a Justice of peace,
when he is chosen unto it.

To that I say, that these examples do as vuel prove, that the civil
Magistrate may be a Bishop, as that the Bishop may be a civil Magistrate: he
answers, that the civil office is accidental to the ministry, and such as
may be removed from it, but the ministry is not so unto Princes, onles they be
ordinarily called: then which, what can be more confusedly spoken. For, if I
should grant, that the Prince might be a Minister of the gospel, and the
Minister of the gospel a Prince: why should not (I beseech you) the ministry be
as accidental to the princehood, as the princehood unto the ministry. Surely,
if it be not accidental to the princehood, and yet such a thing as agrees unto
it: it must needs be essential, that is, that which can not be severed from
it, withowt hurt of that estate. Beside that, in placing the difference of the
respect of the Ministry, to the princehood, and of the princehood to the
Ministry, in that the Prince may not be a Minister withowt an ordinary
calling: you give to understand, that the Minister may bear civil office,
withowt an ordinary calling. For if the Minister may not bear civil office,
until he be ordinarily called: then here is yet no distinction made, between
the respect of a Minister to a civil office, and the civil officer, to the
Ministry. In the end you are compelled, to destroy your own distinction:
affirming, that as a minister may ioyn to his Ministry, a civil office, if he
be called thereunto by the Prince, so the Prince may ioyn to his office the
function of the Minister, if he be called unto it by the Bishop. For so you
must needs mean, seeing you make him the Stward of ecclesiastical officis:
which absurdity before this birth of yours, I suppose was never heard of: and
it is thorowgh out the whole discourse confuted. For, as for that you ad, if
they be lawfully called, it is to open folly: seeing the question is, whether
there be any such election lawful.

Here the D. is taken again, in his words. For if the Diuis. 10. p. 768.
example of our Savior Christ's whipping, do prove that, a Minister may meddle
with civil affairs: then it proves, that he may not only sit in judgment of
crimes, but also be the Tortor himself, which he denies. For our Savior
Christ, executed the punishment with his own hand.

To that also I alleged, that the Ministers, by the examples of Paul and
Peter, may be Fishers, and Tentmakers, if of the D. examples it may be
concluded, that it is lavuful for a Minister to bear civil office: he
answers, they may do so upon like occasion. The occasion of S. Paul's
laboring with his hands was, partly that he 2. Cor. 11. 12 1. Thessa. 5.
might not in that point be inferior to the false. Apostels, which took no
stipend: partly to support the need, and poverty of the churches. There being
now therefore Anabaptists, which teach withowt wages and diverse churches which
are very poor: by the D. answer, it is convenient the Bishops should exercise
some handycraft. which beside other inconveniences, is against that which him
self has truly said, that they are hindrances unto the ministry: considering
that there be no such gifts now a days as the Apostles had, which were able
to do more with one hand, then we with boeth. And if his answer were trw, yet
it is nothing to purpose. For, if by these examples he will conclude, that
Ministers may ordinarily be called to the civil government: then it must also
follow, that by these examples of S. Paul and Peter, the Ministers may
ordinarily have occupations joined with their ministeries. But if the Ministers
may not exercise any handicraft, but in like cases as the Apostles did, and
upon like callinges: then it follows also, that they may not exercise civil
offices, but in like time, and upon like callinges as those did, from whom he
draws his proofs. The rest is answered.

Before the D. said, that the Ministers could not exercise any civil Diuis. 11.
p. 769.
jurisdiction in time of persecution: here he says, that Timothy, which Diuis.
7. p. 762.
lived in time of persecution, exercised civil jurisdiction. Thus, like a
windshaken reed, he never stands in one sentence. But (I pray you) note his
reason, which is because mention is made of accusers and witnesses: as if they
were not common to al kind of judgments. For where the thing is not manifest,
there the trial must needs be either by confession, or witnesses: so that if
there be an ecclesiastical judgment, there must needs be witnesses and
accusers: otherwise the Minister in time of persecution, should take upon him
civil jurisdiction, withowt the consent of the Magistrate, which is absurd, and
being urged by me, is unanswered. yea the Housemother, which, upon accusation
and witness of some of her children, chasteneth other some: should by the D.
saying, break upon the office of the civil Magistrate.

Upon diverse reasons browght to show, that S. Peter's killing Ananias and
Saphyra with the word (which reason Diuis. 12. p. 770. Pigg. 5. lib. hierarch.
cap. 2.
was ministered him out of Pigghius) proves not that the Ministers may have
their prisons: he answers nothing, but taking up the carcass of his argument,
in steed of burying of it, assayeth to blow life into it, after this sort.
Peter punishing with death, did nothing repugnant to his vocation: therefore it
is not repugnant, to the vocation of a Minister, to punish with temporal
punishment: which follows not. For as much as the vocation of a Minister now,
is not the same which Peter's was at that time: not only for that he was an
Apostle, but also, for that withowt a particular motion of the spirit of god,
it was unlawful for any, or for Peter him self to have done so.

That browght to vphould this with, that that which Peter did by extraordinary
power, the Ministry now may do by an ordinary: is a very cartrope, to pull in all confusion into the church and common wealth. For thus, of that Phinees a
private man killed, and the Israelites borrowed, which they never meant to
restore: if the Magistrate will license men to do so, it shall be lawful by the
D. rule. If he say, that those are things forbidden, but not this, that a
Minister should bear civil office: it is nothing but an asking of that in
controversy, whereupon he continually faleth. And where he says, he speaks
of the fact of Peter, and not of the manner: even the fact of Peter, was to kill
a man, withowt any under Minister. And therefore of this answer also, it
follows that the Magistrate may appoint the Bishops, to be the Tortors and
hangmen: which the D. has before denied. How comes it also to pas, that he
which page 149.
before compared the politik laws of god, putting Idolaters and adulterers to
death, in cruelty with the Turks laws: now makes it a death matter, if a
man, to conceal some part of his wealth, being iudicially demanded thereof, do
make a ly. For thus much he says in effect: when he affirms, that it may now
be done ordinarily, which Peter did then extraordinarily.

Vuhere I added, that the povuer vuhich S. Peter used vuas ecclesiastical, and
vuithal, my reason ovut of the 1. Cor. 1^.
Apostle, vuho reckeneth that amongst the church gifts: leaving the reason,
he opposes the authority of M. Beza. whereas, if that had been any lawful kind
of disputing: I could have alleged learned writers, that such punishments
were done by virtue of that church office. But how could S. Peter, do that by
right of the civil Magistracy: when as the civil Magistrate had no right, to
punish that dissimulation, which was hid. Hitherto also refer, that the D. him
self in his page 769.
former book, affirms that their offense was against no ordinary law of the
church, or common wealth. whereupon follows, that there being no transgression
against his laws, there could be no punishment due. M. Bezas meaning is only,
that as the lord, when there was no Christian Magistrate, did use corporal
punishments, and those of death, against them which resisted the doctrine of
the gospel: so the Christian Magistrate, should do the same: so that althowgh
his manner of speech be diverse with that I propounded, yet his judgment is al
one.

Here Pantaleon and M. Bale, are rejected as insufficient Diuis. 13 p. 771.
to make report of Eugenius doeinges, which was so long before their time: and
yet Erasmus is stoutly vpholden, for reporting Titus to have been an
Archbishop, albeyt Titus was 600 years before Eugenius. But, if the D. can not
show any that commanded, that the Bishops should have prisons before Eugenius:
these writers shall be able easily, to maintayn their credit against his
bouldnes, of affirming and denying, what so ever he lists.

To that out of Possidonius, that those matters alleged Diuis. 14 p. ^71.
of the Bishop to be done of Augustine, could not be civil affairs, considering
that he immediately opposes them unto secular or worldly matters: beside
words he answers nothing. he opposes other places out of Augustine, whereof
the first out of his book of the works of monks, can not be understood, as
he would have it, of any judgment given by reason of civil authority. For that
which he did, he affirms, that the Apostle 1. Cor. 6.
commanded it should be done, by the most contemptible in the church: So that
oneles he dare say, that the Apostle commanded, that the simplest in the
church might bear civil office, when the Magistrate being an enemy would commit
no authority unto him, this place is utterly from the purpose. Again, when
Augustine says, that the Apostle has tied him so to do, and laid yt upon him:
if the D. will have, that a civil office is there understood, it must follow,
that the civil office is incide^t unto the office of the ministry, and can not
be severed from it.

The place out of his epistle 110, is to as small purpose. For, in that it
appears there, that the Councels decreed, that Augustine should ceas from
those business: it is manifest, that he dealt with them, not by any right of
civil office. For what had the Council to do, to decre that he should not do
that which the Magistrate had lawfully laid upon him: he owght to have sowght
the releas of that, at the Magistrates hand, and not at the Councels. likewise,
in that he obteineth of the people, that these matters should be turned from
him, upon Eradius, and that in an ecclesiastical assembly, where they met for
choosing of one to succeed Augustine in the Bishoprik: it is manifest, that it
was no civil office. Last of al, it is to be observed, that in boeth these
places, Augustine complains of these matters as of hindrances unto his
Ministry, as things which did more let the course of yt, then if he had
vurovught every day vuith his hands in some occupation: that he seeks to be
delivered from them at the Councels and at the peoples hands: whereas our D.
says, that they are not only no hindrances, but necessary helps to do the
Ministry with, and not only seeks not, that the Bishops may be discharged,
but makes cords, to bind these offices streighter to the^. I have reported
the truth, the Bishops words are out of Clement, Diuis. 15. p. 772.
that it is not lavuful for a Bishop to deal vuith boeth a In the defense of
the Apolog. 5. part chap. 4. Diuis. 2. cap. 3. diuis. 7. Diuis. 16 p. 773.
svuordes: likewise that he ovught to be removed that vuil supply the place
boeth of a civil Magistrate, and of an ecclesiastical person. These words do
not only co^demn the pulling the sword out of Princes hands, but al use of it
in eccles. persons.

I pray god, that the custom of shameful denials, do not so harden your
forhead: that no point of truth how sharp soever, can perce it. Howbeit I
trust, whatsoever yt please you to say, it is manifest to all that do not
willingly close their eyes against the truth: that the scripture teaches that
Ministers, owght not to meddle with civil offices. That which you ad out of
Deuteronomy. 17, makes nothing for you: for, they are there bidde^ to resort unto the
Priest, as to the Interpreter of the law, when the question was difficult, and
they knew not what to do. which is manifest, in that he distinguishes there
the Priest, from the Judges: so that in such appeals, he places the Priests
and Levites office, in teaching what is the will of god, and the Iudgis office
in giving sentence accordingly: as appears yet more plainly in the same verse.
11.
chapter.

The same is to be answered, to that alleged out of Nombers 27. In which
matter that the Priest was present, and called to consultation for the
difficulty thereof, to know what was the will of god in that behalf, it is
manifest, in that he being not able to resolve of the matter, Moses verse. 5.
was fayn to bring it to the lord: To let pas, that it was not Aharon which was
taken into that consultation, but Eleazar: onles you will have Aharon decide
controversies, after his death.

The example of Melchisedec boeth king and Priest, is more absurdly alleged,
then the other: not only because he was before the law, when this order of
separating the priesthood Psalm. 110. Heb. 5.
from the civil government, was not yet established, but because he had them
boeth, that he might be a figure of our Savior Christ: as the Apostle and
Prophet do declare. You might much better have alleged Abraham, which was
boeth a Priest, a Prophet, and a noble warrior: which notwithstanding, yourself
do not permit unto the Bishop.

As for the appeal, which Constantine granted, from the civil Magistrate unto
the Bishops, likewise Theodostus and Carolus grant that men might choose the
Bishops Judges of their controversies, if either party would: they were the
wrestes, wherewith the Princes scepters were wrung out of their hands, and (as
I have before showed out of M. Calvin) al syncerity ovut of the churches. yea
upon that very grant of Constantin, it is noted in the Iacobus Grinzus.
margent, that it is repugnant boeth to the doctrine, and example of S. Paul.
And in deed by the first of these decrees, the Bishops civil authority, is made
equal with the Emperors. And by the other, it is at the pleasure of the
people, whether all the civil Magistrates shall be Idols or no, having the bare
name of the Magistrate, withowt doing any duty. For, if either of the parties,
be affected toward the Bishops judgment: the Magistrates may go lay them
down to sleep. Nether does it follow, that because the Emperors gave such
liberty, or licentiousnes rather, unto the church, or because some Bishops used
it: that therefore, the practice of the church was such. For I have showed, that
the godly Counceles forbad it: and that the godly fathers utterly misliked of
it. And as I have alleged some, so it is not hard to alledg Tertul de leiunio.
Ier. in Soph 1. cap. Chrysostom. 3. honul. in Act.
others, to the same effect.

In his example of Dorotheus, his translation is fauty. For in steed of (...)
which signifies a civil honor, he has turned it priesthood: as if it had
been (...). the office also which Eusebius notes he had, was to ouersee the
purple dies in Tire: an office to advance the Ministry (I think) in the D. own
judgment, very unfit. His examples of Philaeas and Epiphanius, serve not his
turn. For nether is it said, whether they meddled with civil affairs before
their bishoprik, or in yt: and if it were, considering there is no approbation
of their doing, but only a bare telling that such a thing they did, it can
not help him. For it is one thing to say, they were commended for dexterity in
such matters: and another to say, that they did it in duty, and well. even as
if the civil officer, taking the pulpit, and speaking fitly of a text, a man
might give him the commendation of dexterity in handling the text, and withal,
condemn him for doing it withowt page 341.
calling. Hither pertains that which he alleges in another place, of
Letoius a Bishop which burned Monasteries: but by what authority, appears not,
beside that his act seems otherwise to have no ground. For if it had any good
issw, it was more by hap then by good konning. The like and upon Theod. lib. 5.
cap. 39.
like zeal was done by one Audas a Persian Bishop, that burnt an Idols Temple,
which act gave occasion of grievous persecution: whereby may appear, that
Bishops went some time beyond their limits, and did things permitted unto
them, nether of god, nor man.

Of our age he cites witnesses M. Cranmer, Ridly, Hoper, and in another place
Brentius. for Brentius, seeing he has no reason, page 64.
let him have that credit, which so small a friend of sincerity deserves,
especially against the consent, of so many better then he: for the other, he
makes it not to appear, that they were of that judgment. And of M. Hooper, it
is manifest that upon the eight commandment
he did flatly condemn it: which shows that the Bishops for the space of 400
years after the Apostles, althovugh they vuere more able the^ ours, did meddle
vuith no civil affairs. where he sharply tau^teth our Bishop which meddleth
with boeth offices, when one is more then he is able, vuith al his diligence,
to discharge, and impossible that he should do boeth: and that if the
Magistrate vuil employ a Bishop in civil affairs, he ovught to discharge him
of his Ministry. If M. Cranmer and Ridley did exercise boeth, that is to be
ascribed to the time: wherein the Sun of the gospel, being but lately risen in
our climate, all the clouds which popery had ouercast our land with, could not
be so quikly put to flight.

Seeing therefore the Ministers office, is only in things that pertayn to god,
which for a degree of excellency that they have in promoting our salvation,
more then other, the holy ghost opposes unto the Princes, and common wealth
affairs: seeing also it is of greater weight, then the strongest bak can bear,
of wider compass, then the largest hands can faddam: a soldiarfare that will be
only attended upon: seeing also it tends to the destruction of the body, when
one membre encrocheth upon the office of another: and that the civil Magistrate
may by the same right invade the office of the Minister, as he the office of
the civil Magistrate: seeing further our Savior Christ, having the spirit
withowt measure, refused as a thing unmeet for his ministry, the office of a
Judge: seeing also the Apostles endued with such glorious gifts, as are not now
to be looked for, gave over the office of the Deaconship, as that which they
were not, with the Ministry of the word, able to exercise: and seeing for the
burden thereof, it was easier then the civil charge, which the Bishops take
upon them, and for the kind of Ministry more agreeable: seeing also the
examples in the Scripture, of the^ which have born boeth the charges, are either
before this order was established of god, or being since, were extraordinary:
last of al, seeing this mingling of the estates is contrary to the practice of
the elder church uttered boeth in Councels, and fathers, contrary also to the
practice and judgment of the godly learnedest of our time: I conclude, that it
is unlawful in an established estate of the church, that a Minister of the
church should bear civil office. And thus much against the Ministers, which
have one foot in the church, and an other in the common wealth. Now to the
treatise of the Eldership, for the cause In the beginning of this tract^te.
before assigned.

THAT THE CHVRCH GOVERNMENT BY AN ELDERSHIP IN Every congregation: is by the
ordinance of god, and perpetual. Tractat 8. and 7. according to the Doctor p.
626.
THat which a Tully says of an Orator full Chap. 1. Diuis. 1. a In philip. of
Antony.
of words, that he would make owtcries, to get an appetite to drink: may be
feared somewhat otherwise in the D. who gives suspicion, that he has forced
his pen to write, not to get, but to quench (if it might be) the thirst of
honor. And verily if this order of Eldership, had not strenght to stand by our
defense: yet the vertw of it might easily appear, in that yt so amazeth, and
astonieth the adversary, as if he had been stricken with a thunderbolt from
heaven: so that beside a multitude of words, wherewith by oppressing the
reader, he might make some show of answer, there will be little found, that can
of right chalendg a reply. Howbeit, to honor him with some answer, leaving his
disordered handling which I noted: as well for that his defense is fond, as for
that this is not the place to diduct that matter, let us see, what he brings
in this cause.

Against that I alleged out of the Apostle, The Elders 1. Tim. 5. 17
vuhich rule vuel, are vuorthy dubble honor, especially vuhich labor in the
vuord and doctrine, to prove that there were Elders, which assisted the
teaching Ministers, only in the government of the church: he answers first,
that the word, Elder, is the same commonly with Bishop or Pastor: wherein
partly he confuteth him self. For, if it be but commonly so taken, and not
always: then it may be taken otherwise in this place. His first example
likewise out of Peter 1. 5. is plain against him: for thereby appears, that
Peter an Apostel, and no Bishop, is called Elder. nether is there any word in
that place, whereby the exhortation to the Elders should not be applied, as well
to the Elders which governed only, as to those which labored in the word also:
considering that the word of feeding, respects not only preaching, but that
government also which is with out preaching: in which respect boeth in
scripture, and otherwise, the civil Magistrate is said to feed: And it is to
great an oversight, to think that because al Bishops be Elders, therefore al
Elders are Bishops: when as the name of Elder is common unto al, which have
government of the church, and most properly agrees to those, which have the
government only, withowt further charge of teaching. And the name is taken, of
the usage under the law: where they which had only government either in church
or common wealth, were so called.

Secondly he says, that by those that governed, and labored not in the word:
are understood, those, which ministered the sacraments. where to let pas that
which has, and shall be after (god willing) showed, that the same owght to be
Ministers of the word and Sacraments: I would know of him, which hangs so of
the interpretation of men, why he has here departed from the judgment of the
learned and godly writers of our age, and forged an interpretation, which has
no approbation of any auncienty. For, as for that he says of Chrysostom,
beside that yt is vntrw: if he had never so small a sound that way, he would
have rong it so deep, that withal he would have turned Chrysostomes clapper.
But observe, how improperly he makes the Apostle to speak, in giving the name
of government unto that, wherein there is no government at al. For is yt not
(think you) a strong kind of government, and needs it not a great gift of
discretion and judgment, to power a little water upon the childs head,
distribute a lofe of bread, carry the cup, and say, or read a sentence, al, as
he is praescribed? when the Apostle, no where gives this title of government
unto the Deacons, in whom notwithstanding is required no common discretion, to
know to whom, and how much is to be given: how much les would he give it to
such, as have the only, and bare administration of the Sacraments.

How should also S. Paul be made to agree with him self, which went the nearest
way to work, to ease the churches of charges: if he should have brought into
yt, such unprofitable burdens as is this order of Ministers of Sacraments,
which the D. imagines, especially seeing a Pastor was needful in every church,
who being praesent at the Sacraments, might as commodiously Minister them, as
be a receiver only. His reason, that the Apostle would otherwise have said,
which labored in the word and Sacraments, is weak: not only because it is
usual unto the scripture, by the chief part to note the whole, but also, for
that the Sacraments are contained under the word, and are a visible word, in
which respect they are also said to have a voice. Nether does he here a Exodus
4. verse. 8.
make mention of praying, another of the Bishops Act. 6. 4.
duties: so that by your answer, we should have an other order in the church,
of Sayers of prayers. Alike vayn it is, that S. Paul was not sent to baptiz,
but to preach, when he was called to boeth, althowgh rather to the one, the^ to
the other, as your self some where have confessed. As for that you would
conclude, that Pastors have no more bond to baptiz in their churches, then S.
Paud had, you might as well have concluded, that al Pastors are Apostels:
considering, that he speaks that in respect of his Apostleship, whereby he
was bound to go from place to place, and not to tarry (as the pastor) in one
place.

The titles of Christ's Vicares, and of gods Prelates, do boeth agree unto the
Elders, which only govern. And althowgh nether Ambrose nor Calvin make any
mention of this Eldership upon ^. Timoth. 5. 19. yet how follows it, that they
meant no such Eldership in the place which I Tim. 5. 17
alleged, this is but a strange conclusion. M Caluins place also Institut.
chap. 8. sect. 72, is shamefully abused: for he says, that those vuhich
teached vuere Elders. And where as the rule of the action, when the Eldership
met, apperteyned unto the Ministers of the word: that they chose amongst them,
one which governed the action. Now in steed that M. Calvin says, that all the
Ministers of the vuord, vuere called Elders: ^he An. makes him to say, that all the Elders of the church, were Ministers of the word. where Calvin in the self
same chapter does expressly make two kind of Elders: one of those vuhich
Ministered the vuord, another of those vuhich vuere only Censores of the manners
of the church. This Jerome is (if I have not taken my note amiss) a bastard: and
yet he has nothing for him. For in that he says that there was and order,
which had the word, but labored not: he is as favorable unto this Eldership, as
unto his order of sacrament Ministers. The next division has nothing, but that
which comes afterward to be handled.

Against the place, that Act. 14. 23
Paul and Barnabas ordained Diuis 3 p^^. 628.
Elders by voices in every church, first he excepteth, that the plentith of
preachers then was such, that every congregation where Paul and Barnabas had to
do, might have more then one: which is said withowt either proof, or likelihood.
the untruth whereof may easily appear, in that to the great cities, where there
was greatest store: S. Paul was fain to send Timothy and Titus for supplies,
which otherwise he could so hardly spare. Then he says, to ordeyn Elders
throwgh every church, is to ordein one Pastor in every one, which is no plain,
but a figurative speech, and that doubly: boeth in that the general name of
Elder, is put for the particular, and in that the plural number is put for the
singular. Therefore unless he can work it out with good reasons, to prove that
the governing Elders, can not here be understood: the simple and plain sens,
is to be praeferred. As for the place of Titus, it helps him not. For the
Apostel referring Titus to that order, which he had prescribed him: contenteth
him self, to pursu the office of the teaching Elder, upon occasion of falls
teachers, which trobled the church.

For that out of Calvin and Brentius, it may be said, that althowgh S. Luke call
them Elders, which were Bishops: yet he calls them not so only. And of M.
Calvin, it must needs be so understood: seeing he avouches the place of
Titus, Instit. 4. book 3. chap. sect. 8.
which the An. confesses al one with the 14 acts, for the establishment of
these governing Elders. But if the D. had read M. Nowels catechism, so
diligently as he would seem: a page 155.
this would not have been so strange to him. For where he shows, that the
Pastor owght not to excommunicate withowt the judgment of the church, and
declares that for that purpose there were in the well ordered churches certain
Seniors chosen, and joined with the Pastor: he quoteth this very place, which
the admonition does. And I see not why, it may not be as well referred to the
Elders, as to the Bishops: Seeing S. Luke there sets forth, how they set a
full order in the church. And of that judgment, is the greek Oecumenius in 14.
ctcto.
Scholiast, which affirms that those vuhich folovued S. Paul and Barnabas,
vuere vuorthy to be Bishops: and that they created of them Elders and Deacons
also. In the next division, if the D. first answer be only considered, he
might justly complain of me: but when he by and by, reasons against the
admonition, for that yt would prove Seniors out of that place of 14 Acts, al
see that I have done him no wrong.

To prove further, that boeth Pastors, and Elders which Diuis. 5. p. 630.
only govern, can not be understood in that place of the Acts: he assigns
this reason, for that the holy ghost should use equivocations, or speak
dowtfully: then which, there can be nothing more unsavory. For it is a great
oversight, that he can not put a difference, between a word that is general,
and has diverse forms under yt (of which sort this word Elder is) and between
that which has diverse significations. Rather I may say, that for so much as S.
Luke did not use, the particular word of Bishop, but the word Elder, which
contains boeth Bishop, and other Elders: that his meaning was, not that the
Bishops only should be meant. And suerly, when as the word Elder, does so
agree to Bishops, that it does much more properly (as has been showed) agree
to the Seniors: it were hard to understand Bishops, and shut out Seniors, to
whom that name does most properly pertayn: especially there being no
circumstance in that place, whereby that should be of necessity tied to the
Pastor only. Beside that those which have knowledge in the hebrew tongue, know
that the scripture uses some times Judge. 10. 4 Judge. 15. 16.
equivocations, and yet nothing thereby derogated from the simplicity thereof:
but (as it is Aben Esra upon Genesis
observed) makes sometime to the elegancy, and ornament of the speech.

That the place to the 1. Cor. 12. 28.
Corinth. can not be understood Diuis. 6. and 7. page 631.
of civil Magistrates, as the An. and Dorman. 2. Tom. fol. 45.
Papists would have it, and therefore that yt owght to be understood of
ecclesiastical officers, I have In the former part of this booK page 418.
showed: whereof also there is the same reason, in the place to the Romans 12. 8.
Romans. Nether can that out of M. Gualter, maintein any such opinion: seeing
it was not lawful for the church, to appoint any ordinary Magistrate, to hear
civil causes: nether needed any either go to them for judgment, or stand unto
the judgment given, further then the parties listed, therefore that could not be
any government, which was withowt authority. How true it is, that learned men
expound the word gouernmentes, of civil and ecclesiastical, at the least to the
D. knowledge: the reader may thereby know, that Gualter which he chose to speak
for them al, does not affirm it. For in that he says, there is now no need of
them seeing there is a Christian Magistrate: he manifestly opposes them to a
Christian Magistrate. Althowgh M. Gualters authority, may not be received in
this question of discipline. For beside that his hand, is herein against the
learned boeth old, and nue which I have either red or heard of, also against
the practice approved in the churches of al ages, and amongst them against the
practice also, used in ours: it shall appear, that the reasons drawn from him,
are altogether insufficient.

Then he says, that by that word Governors, the Pastors may be understood,
because having spoken of the Doctor before, he mentioned not the Pastor: which
is absurd, boeth because it should be a marvelous confusion, to have carried
the Pastor so far from his fellows, which are the Ministers of the word, and
reckened up in the beginning: and for that, the Pastor is not severed from the
Doctor in governing, but only in the kind of teaching. whereas he, by his
answer, shuts out the Doctor from the government of the church. Beside that
howsoever I do make a Pastor, and a Doctor, diverse: yet for as much as him
self, makes them al one, S. Paul placing the Doctor before, he owght to have
been ashamed to say that S. Paul may mean this of the Pastor. That he adds,
that the place being doutful, it can not serve to establish the Seniors, is
daungerously spoken, and smells of popery: as if the scripture should lose
her authority, because men agree not of the understanding of it. Althowgh (I
suppose) there are few places of scripture, wherein things are spoken of, so
shortly: that have so full consent of learned interpreters of our time, as this
place has, for that signification of Seniors, which we use it for. And in
deed, when the Apostle makes it a distinct office, from the Ministers of the
word, which notwithstanding have the government of the church: it must needs
be an office occupied in government alone, otherwise it should not be severed,
from their office.

The same reason, is of the place to the Romans: against Romans 12.
which, that which the D. brings out of Calvin, is nothing worth. For
althowgh the precept of bearing rule in diligence, may by proportion, be carried
to al Magistrates, yea and to al crafts men, over their Apprentises: yet the
words of the Apostle, are nevertheless understood properly of the Elders in
question, as M. Calvin declares boeth there, and Instit. 4. booK 1^. chap. 1.
sect.
other where. Likewise are M. Martyr etc. Bucer, idly cited of him. For seeing
they boeth agree, that these Elders are comprehended in that word: what either
hurts it us, or helps yt him, that other beside them are understood.

If they preached some time, that was not by vertw of this office: and the
place of Timothy alleged of M Beza, does not prove it. Nether owght the An.
to have alleged that interpretation, against this cause: seeing him self does
therein differ from M. Beza, as well as I, which by presidentes in the vuord,
has before expounded the Bishop, as it is in deed and not as M. Beza, for a
kind of Elder, differing boeth from the Pastor, and Doctor. But the An. is
like that fellow that would have boeth his eyes put out, that his neigbour
might lose one. For to the end he may do some scare to the truth, he brings
eue^ that which is the overthrow of his cause: namely M. Bezas judgment of an
Eldership governing, beside the Ministers of the word, that is beside boeth
Pastor and Doctor. And of this trweth which we maintein out of this place unto
Timothe, amongst others, we have M. in lib. de rat. can. examine.
Bucers most plain and most full testimony: which upon this sentence of S.
Paul, flatly confirms that there were tvuo kind of Elders: one, vuhich
together vuith the discipline, had the charge of the vuord and Sacraments, and
another, vuhich had charge of the discipline only. I confess there was some
faut here, in ascribing words unto him, which he has not: but it was an
oversight only, not as he makes yt, with mind to forge.

Here the An. repents him of his good deeds. For where Diuis. 8. p. 633.
he had accorded before, that there were such Elders, as are in question: now
he says, he meant them of Seniors, which be Ministers. wherevpo^ it follows,
that it is not meet that there should be any Ministers at this time. For of the
same Elders, which he granted to have been in times past: he affirms, it
inco^uenient that they should be now. And if he say (as he has said) that they
were only Ministers of Sacraments, first he gives his reading Ministers the
wipe, which by this judgment of his, are clean cut of, as utterly inconvenient
for this time. Again, he affirms that the Seniors in times past, were such as
exercised the jurisdiction, which the Magistrate does now: in that he says,
that they can not now be withowt injury of the Magistrate. whereas if this
office were, either a Ministry of the word, or Sacraments, it could not towch
the office of the Magistrate: so that throwgh the nawghtines of this cause, in
his whole course of answer, he does nothing, but as it were paue his way, with
snares to entrap him self. And for answer to him, this may be more then
sufficient.

Howbeit for the readers sake, althowgh this Eldership is manifest in it self,
of the words of the holy scripture: yet the same shall receive some
confirmation of the practice of the churches after, which kept this order boeth
in persecution and peace. This I will do, if I first in a word, note how this
order of Eldership, was taken from the government of the people of god, before
and under the law. yt is therefore to be observed, that so sone as there is made
mention, of any fixed form of church, which standing of diverse houshouldes,
were divided into particular assemblies: so soon is made mention, of this
office of Elders. For Moses to let the Exo. 4. 29.
churches, and assemblies of the Israelites to understand his Embassage from
god: assembled the Elders. which, that they were ecclesiastical officers,
thereby may appear: for that under such a Tyrant, and such oppression as the
Israelites were in, it is altogether unlike, that they had the benefit of
Magistrates of their own. And if a man would say, that those Elders were the
Taskmasters, which Pharao had set over the Israelites: beside diverse
vnlikelihoodes thereof, it is flatly confuted, in that after the Israelites
departure out of Egypt, before any nue creation of officers, this order of
Elders is spoken of, and as church officers, Exo. 17. 5.
taken to the administration of church matters.

Another example hereof is, 2. Reg. chap. 6. 32.
where Elizeus is said to have had the Elders in his hows, to consult with:
what time the king of Israel, sent a messenger to take of his head. The like is
said, of other Ierem. 19. cap. 1. Ezech. 8. 1.
Prophets: which in that state they were in, were utterly unlike to have the
civil governors to consult with. Likewise in Nehemia, there are mentioned
certain, Nehem. 8. 5.
which as they are distinguished from the people, in that they are reckened as
assistantes unto Esra, boeth on the right, and left hand: so be they also
distinguished, from the teaching Levites, in that the Prophet, after he had
spoken of these, speaks of that sort of Levites, which had the verse. 8. 10.
teaching of the people. This is also strenghtned, by that the nue testament
speaking of the ecclesiastical officers amongst the Iues, joins with the
Scribes (which I have In the former part of this booK page 443.
showed to note those, that had the handling of the word) the elders: which
should have been withowt reason, if there a Acts 4. 5 and 6. 12. etc. Act 5.
21. b page 304.
had not been a kind of Elders, which had not the handling of the word. whereby
it may appear, that it is wntrue, which the An. gathers out of Caluins
words: that these Elders should have their beginning, after the Iues return
out of the captivity: whereas he only affirms, that there was a bench or (as
some term it) a Consistorye of ecclesiastical offices appointed, after their
rerurn: but says not (as he pretends) that they were then first of al
appointed. Nether can M. Caluins words, be drawn to that sens. For, if by
these words of his ( the Sanedrim vuere appointed after the Iues return)
should be understood, that they were then first created, and not rather, that
they were then restored: yt must follow, that the Priests and other leuitical
teachers, which were a portion of that bench, had then their first institution.
which sentence so absurd, and so full of ignorance of the state of the church:
no man which has a spark of equity, can ascribe unto M. Calvin. Althowgh if it
were so, as he pretends, that these Elders did then begin: yet, that helps
him nothing at al. For it should not have therefore, the les authority:
considering that it were to be esteemed, that they took it not up of their own
head, but by the authority of the Prophets of god, which lived then, and
directed the stern of that government. And herein (howsoever the An.
misconstrueth him) M. Calvin is upon the 18. of S. matheuu.
flat: that this estate was lavuful, and approved of god.

Having thus spoken, of this order of Elders, in the Apostles times, and
before: I will now return to that I promised, of the practice of the churches
after the Apostles times, to see if this order of Elders can find any more
favor of the^, then of the Answerer. Amongst which, that of Tertullian,
Tertu. Apolog. chap. 39.
before alleged of me, is most clear. Nether can the D. escape with this, that
the college was likely to be of Ministers of the word etc. considering that it
is incredible, that all the churches, whose defense Tertullian takes upon him,
and whose usage he describes, had such a college. Then, that of Cyprian
comes to be considered, which notes a piece of the office of these Elders,
Cyp. 4. booK. Epist. 5.
by dividing the communion bread into equal portions and carrying it (for the
assistance of the Bishop) in little baskets or trayes: where by placing their
office in this assisting the Minister, he does manifestly shut them out from
the ministering of the Sacrament: especially seeing Cyprian in that place, notes
the honor of that office, to consist in that they had by reason of it, acces to
this assistance of the Pastor, in so great mysteries. which should have been
fondly put, if they might also by virtue of that office, them selves have
ministered the Sacraments, as well as the Bishop: whereof also it comes, that
in another 1. booK ep^. 9. Sportula^tes fratres. Possid^ ^s in the life of
Augustine.
place, he calls them brethren, vuhich had care of the basket.

But towching the use of the Affricane churches, until Augustins time, that one
testimony is more then sufficient: whereby is affirmed, that Valerius Bishop of
Hippo, did contrary to the custom of the Africane church, in that he committed
the office of teaching unto Augustine, which was an Elder of that church, and
that he was checked therefore of the Bishops: checked (I say) nothwithstanding
that Valerius is there declared, to have done it for support of his infirmity,
because him self was not so apt to preach. And howsoever Possidonius, allow of
Valerius fact: yet boeth the continuance of that order by the space of 400
years, and the judgment of other Bishops round about, is withowt comparison of
more weight: especially, when it appears by Possidonius writings, that
(being a good simple man) he was nether of great learning, nor deep judgment.
where also, it is to be observed, that as the discipline was best kept in those
churches of Afrik: so the doctrine remained purest in them: As may appear not
only by the Councels of Carthage, compared with other councels of that time,
but also by Augustins writings, compared with Ieromes, and other Doctors boeth
greek and latin, in the same age.

In other churches, where this discipline was not so diligently looked unto:
there are notwithstanding marks, whereby we may know, that they went out of the
way. As at Alexandria, where, althowgh the Elders did teach: yet after Arrius
was convicted of heresy, it was decreed, that the Elders should no more teach.
by which Socrat. 5. booK chap. 22.
decree, they did, as it were, covertly confess: that they had received the
reward of breaking the order of god, in permitting that the Elder, should
teach in the church. For if it had been of the institution of an Elder, to
preach: Nether Arrius, nor ten thousand more such heretik Elders, owght to have
given cause of such a decree: seeing the institution of the lord owght not to be
broken, for any abuse of men. Jerome (I grant) somewhere does reprehend Ad
Nepotian.
this, and some learned of our time after him, have esteemed the decree of
Alexandria fauty herein. But that being considered, which I have alleged,
there is no cause to condemn that decree, whether it were of the Nicen council,
or of Athanasius and the Eldership of Alexandria. And what if Jerome him self,
althowgh an Elder of Rome, give testimony unto this cause: that is to say, that
yt belongs not unto an Elder of the church, to minister the word, or
Sacraments? Let his words be weighed, whereby he confesses plainly, that
nether Elder nor Deacon Ierom co^tr^ Lucifer.
had right, but upon the Bishops commandment, so much as to baptiz: vuhich
notvuithstanding (says he) is licenced even to laymen in time of necessity.
Vnhereunto also, refer that, which Tertullian writes, that it belonged unto
the Bishop only to baptiz: and that the Elder Tertul. lib. de Baptis.
and Deacon could not baptiz, but upon the Bishops license.

Now, if the Elders had no right to preach etc. by reason of their office, or
as incident into yt, if the Bishop only had right, and the other but by
indulgence, or commandment: thus far we have boeth Tertul. and Jerome agreeing
with us, that by the word of god and his institution, the Elder has not to do
with the word and Sacraments. And the same autors we have also, flatly
contrary to the D. which houldeth (as appears by the discourse of his book)
that al Elders and Deacons of the church, althowgh not in government, yet
towching the ministry of the word and sacraments, are equal, and have as much
authority, as the Bishop him self. This difference only remains, between
Jerome and us, whether this being not of gods institution, that an Elder may
preach, or Minister the sacraments: it be lawful for any man, to give license
thereof. which bouldnes of removing and changing the bounds, which the lord, in
the tarriers of his word has limited: boeth is before, and shall afterward (god
willing) be further handled.

Last of al, for proof of these church Elders, which being occupied in the
government, had nothing to do with the word: the testimony of Ambrose
alleged in my former book, is so clear and open, that he which does not give
place unto yt, must needs be thowght as a bat, or an owl, or some other night
bird, to delight in darkness. His saying is, that the Elders fell avuay by the
ambition of the Doctors: Ambros. in 2. Timot. 5.
where by opposing the Elders to Doctors, which tawght, he plainly declares
that they had not to do with the word. whereupon it is manifest, that boeth yt
was the use in the best reformed churches, certain hundredth years after the
times of the Apostles, to have an Eldership which meddled not with the word, nor
administration of Sacraments: and that they which wanted it, partly complained
of the want, partly declining from this institution of god, corrected their
error, at the least, they kept this difference, that whereas the Bishop
preached and ministered the Sacraments, in right of his office: the Elder did
it not as a thing incident to his office, but only upon indulgence of the
Bishop.

Another point wherein the D. turns his tongue is, that where he confessed
before, that there was in every church Seniors: now he says, in some only.
And to salve this contradiction, with him self: he says by every church, he
meant, every chief city. Thus you speak, but by what rule, and according to
whose language, when you expound every church, every chief city? as if their
were no churches, but in chief cities. But thus must al their tongues be
divided, which put them forth against the truth. Howbeit to come to that point,
by what reason can you show, that the Apostles instituted a several Ministry
for chief cities, which they did not for vplandish towns? what were this, but
to bring in an inequality, amongst the churches: which your self otherwhere,
confess owght not to be. Yt is (I grant) meet for the furtherance of the
gospel, that the chiefest cities, when al can not be served, should have the
first, the sufficientest, and (according to their need) the greater number:
but, that they should have a several Ministry ordained for them, into the
fellowship whereof, the smaler churches may not be admitted, is withowt reason.

Secondly, the gospel which conteyneth the doctrine and discipline, went not
out of Jerusalem, into the chief cities only: but into all the world. Thirdly,
it has been showed, that the epistle of S. Paul to Timothy, wherein mention is
made of the interteinment of these Elders: was not a rule prescribed to
churches in great cities only, but unto al churches wherosoeuer. Further,
seeing the Elders are continually joined, with the Bishop: it being In the
former part. p. 514.
showed, that the lord ordained for every congregation a Bishop, it must follow,
that he ordained for every congregation Elders. finally, for as much as the
Apostles labored, to bring the churches one with another to an uniformity, eue^
in the smalest ceremonies: how can they be thowght, to have made so uneven
work, in the Ministry of the church.

I let pas here the place in the Acts, before handled: where Act. 14.
it is said, that Elders vuere ordained in every church. Likewise, the
necessity of them, as well in other churches, as in churches in the city: which
is after to be handled. Only I will note, what has been the practice of the
churches, in this point: whereby may appear, how the ancient fathers have
understood this order. That Ignatius, which the An. Ad Tralli.
will have S. John's scholar affirms, that there is no church, (...).
vuhich can stand vuithovut her Eldership, or Counsel. This is manifest also
by the Apology of Tertullian, wherein he defending the government of all the
churches, not of those only in cities, and showing for that cause the order
observed in them: makes precise mention of this Senate of Elders, as has been
before alleged. The testimony of M. Bucer, is also manifest in this point: as
it is alleged of me In the former part. p. ^56.
before. Likewise of M. upon the ^. to the Corinth. 12. chap.
Martyr, who affirming that certain of the people, vuere joined vuith the
Pastor in the government of the church: assigns the cause, for that the
Pastor could not do al him self, thereby giving to understand, that the
Eldership was as general, as the Pastor. For he does not say, where the Pastor
could not do al, there he had assistance of an Eldership: but because the
Pastor could not do al etc.

The only reason, which the An. has against this, is: that there was not an
Eldership amongst the Iues, in every of their synaguoges. But (as his wont is)
he does only say so, proof he brings none. And as I for my part confess,
that there comes not to my mind, whereby I could precisely conclude yt out of
the old Testament: So I am assured, that he is not able to prove, that which
he says. But that which the D. affirms p. 663.
otherwhere, that it was only at Jerusalem: is utterly untrue. For Iosaphat at
one time, set in Judges in every vualled city throvughovut the kingdom of
Judah: which of 2. Chro. ^9. 5. 8. 11.
what sort they were, namely, in part civil, in part ecclesiastical, appears
by the Judges placed in Jerusalem. And to the^ men had recours to, in matters
of greater difficulty, according to the causes: if civil, to the civil, if
ecclesiastical, to the ecclesiastical, judgment. where owght not to be
forgotten, the nu^bre of cities in one only tribe (as it might be in york
sheer) to the number of a hundredth and twelve: least that the Iosue chapter 15.
reader, should measure the number of their cities, with ours. So that where
the Answ. says, that therewas but one Senate in all the twelve tribes: it is
found that there were in one only tribe, at the least, a hundredth ant twelve
ecclesiastical Elderships. Vuhether it may be concluded out of the nue
Testament, that every synagog of the Iues had this Eldership, considering that
the policy of the church now, was in this point taken from the Iues church, I
leau it to the reader to judge, of that which I have alleged. whereunto aideth
the custom of the Iues, unto this day: which in every of their synaguogues,
have their Elders: Likewise Ieromes testimony, of which it may be certainly
collected: that he esteemed that the Iues had their Elders, in every Synagog.
For, he Ad Alg^siam quest. decim.
shows that they chose of the vuisest in their company, for governors:
vuhich should asvuel admonish those that had any corporal polution, to absteyn
from the assemblies, as to reprove the breakers of the ceremonies of the
Sabbat. now, seeing there was the same use of these admonitions and reproves as
well in vplandish synaguoges, as in those which were planted in the cities: it
follows necessarily, that there were Elders as well for them, as for the other.
At the least, the nue Testament in marking these Elders, MarK. 5. 2^ Act. 13.
15. Act. 18. 8, 17.
which it calls chief of the Synagog, in diverse quarters: does manifestly
overthrow the D. which says, that they were only at Jerusalem. upon al which
matter, appears how extremely bold you are in your affirmatio^s: which
beside these two before mentioned, say also, that the Eldership was not
always, no not in persecution. wherein, not to enter a nue field, for every
light word you cast forth: what reason (I pray you) ca^ you assign, why
sometimes there should be an Eldership under pecsecutio^, and other some times
none: considering that you imagine this Eldership, to be in place of a Christian
Magistrate. whereby, it must needs follow, that his seat being void in time of
persecution: it owght to be occupied by the Eldership, which you fancy, to be
his Lieftena^t. whether the D. pincheth the Chap. 2. diuis. 1. p. 633.
churches, where, with a Christian Magistrate, the Eldership still remains,
which he here denies: let the reader judge of his former book, page 633. 639.
642. 656. 660.
where he affirms yt injurious to the Magistrate, and full of confusion, also
that it can not, nor owght not to be as in the Apostles times etc.* yea let him
judge of this division. For after that he grants to Princes, to commit their
authority to the church if they list (then which there is nothing more vntrw) he
adds whether it be well done, I will not determine. wherein I beseech you mark
first, what contraries he speaks. For he does determine precisely, that civil
Magistrates may commit their right and authority to these Elders, if they will:
and yet, he will not determine whether it be well done or no. whereas if he would
not have determined, of the one, he should have suspended his judgment, of the
other: for thus he assures them, they may do that, whereof he will make them
no assurance, that it is well done. Secondly, it is to be observed, that where
the question was of the Bishops receiving of civil authority from the Prince, he
makes it not only lawful, but convenient, yea necessary that it should be
derived from the Prince to the Bishop: but here toward the Eldership, he
says, yt can not be practiced, withowt intolerable contentions and extreme
confusion. So that the Bishop, Archdeacons, and Deanes, which with us are the
deepest churchministers, may exercise (if the Prince will commit yt unto them)
even the highest civil jurisdiction, and that to the singular advancement of
the church: but these Elders, whose office in the church is not such, but that
boeth they have, and may follow some civil trade of life, may not receive that
power of the Magistrate which he vntrwly affirms that they had in time of
persecution, on les al, by and by, fall upon heaps. In one and the same church,
the Bishop, the Dean, the Archdeacon, and for a need, some of the Prebendaryes,
may have beside their ecclesiastical jurisdiction, civil authority: but these
Elders, althowgh they were but two in number, may in no wise use any. This
difference verily, rises not in the breadth of shoulders, whereby they are able
to carry all this, and the Elders none: but upon the widenes of the throat, which
as the grave, is never filled.

Thirdly, it is to be observed, that the D. which for his own profit,
stretches the power of the Prince beyond al bounds: here, as if he had to do
with a cheuerel scepter, draws it in. For he gives more liberty herein, unto
the Magistrates of small common wealths: then unto monarchs. For to them, he
seems sometime to leau yt at liberty, whether they will communicate their
authority unto these Elders, or retayn it with them selves: but unto kings and
Princes, he will in no wise permit yt. Vuherein also, he is contrary to him
self: which in another place says, page 764.
that the office of the civil Magistrate, may be committed unto whom soever it
pleases him best to like of. If that be true, and this jurisdiction of the
Elders were (as he untruly says) belonging to the civil Magistrate: why might
not the Prince, commit yt unto these Elders? as for his reason, that so every
parish should be a kingdom: Diuis. 12. p. 643. Diuis. 2. and 3. page 634.
yt comes to be answered, in another place.

To that I alleged of the necessity of the Eldership, because the Pastor can
not have his ey, in every corner of his parish etc. he answers, an able
Pastor, is able to do al required of a Pastor, which is no answer at al. For
that is not the question, but this, whether he be able to do, whatsoever
church government belongs to the wealth of his church: which because he durst
not affirm, or affirming it, had nothing to prove yt, he slipped away after
this sort. And now that he understands, that this reason is confirmed by M.
Peter Martyr: I trust hereafter, he will give it some honester name, then my
fancy.

To that I alleged, that if the Auncientes should not be under a Christian
Magistrate, yt vuould folovu that the lord should have les care of his church
under a Christian, then under an unchristian Magistrate: he answers, that the
Christian Magistrate is in place of the Eldership, but nether adds reason him
self, nor once towcheth the reason which I browght, namely that yt vuas never
lavuful for the church in persecution, to appoint any that should enter upon
any part of the civil Magistrates office. This also could not be a sufficient
recompense, in matters pertaining to the soul health, that for an Eldership in
every church, they should receive one Prince in a whole country. For one
Prince, can not in the spiritual government of the realm bring that to pas,
which the Eldership in every church did before: althowgh he should do nothing,
but attend upon that. So that to make the Magistrates to succeed into the
office of the Elders, and therein to do all the duties appointed unto the
Eldership in times past: is to charge the Magistrates with a thing impossible,
and such as must needs kyl their consciences.

Thus, where the Christian magistrate is given of god, to keep the order which
god has set in his church: you bring him in as a breaker and changer of the
order, which god has appointed by his holy Apostles. But the godly Christian
Magistrates may understand, that as nether our Savior Christ, nor any wise and
well instructed mynistery under him, will meddle with any order or form of common
wealth lawfully instituted of them, for the better government of their people,
but leau them as they find them: So they owght to leau whole and vntowched,
that order which Christ has placed in his church. And as the An. says truly
otherwhere, that Christ came not to overthrow civil gouernmentes: even so it is
p. 647.
as true, that god sends not kings to overthrow church government, planted
by Christ and his Apostles. Yea so much more absurd is this later, then the
first: by how much they owght to have more firmity, which were set by the lord
him self, then which were by men. For what son of Adam shall presume to alter
that order, which the lord him self from heaven has set, And even so does the
Apostle precisely speak of this office with others, that 1. Cor. 12. 28.
god has set it in the church. If it be said, that he set also Prophets and
workers of miracles, which are now no more: it is true, they are now no more,
but why are they not? Is it, because any man has removed them? no verily, but
because the lord him self, has withdrawn them. For if the lord had given even
unto these days, these gifts of healing and working of miracles etc. I think
there is no man so extremely impudent, that would say, that the civil
Magistrate might abolish or put them down. Beside that, it is untrue which he
says p. 659.
otherwhere, that this office is placed amongst those, which be temporal: for
even that next before yt, notes the office of the Deacon, which is perpetual.

As for that he cries out and so often repeateth, that, by this means, no more
is given to the Christian Magistrate, then to the Turk, proceeds only of a
famyn of reasons to answer, which drives him to this vnrulynes: otherwise, he
can not tell how the establishment of this office, should spoil the 2. Cor. 1.
13.
Prince of her authority. S. Paul professes of him self, that he vurote the
same, that men red, that is to say syncerely, not pretending one thing and
meaning another: but all this ialousy, pretended for the Prince against the
Eldership, is in deed for the Bishop. So that, albeit the name of the
Magistrate be houlden out, to draw this cause into hatered: yet the truth is,
that yt is to establish their own tyranny. For as towching authority or
pre-eminence, there is nothing given, to be done by the Eldership jointly with
the Pastor, in one only congregation: al which, and more to, the Bishop him
self alone, does not undertake to execute in a whole diocese or province.
Therefore, if the exercise of this spiritual jurisdiction in the Eldership,
spoil the Magistrate of his authority: then the Bishops, are the chief in this
robbery.

Vuhere he asks, how I show out of the scripture, that those are the duties
of the Elders, which I have assigned. I answer, that forasmuch as S. Paul
appoints them governors of the church, together with the teaching
governors, placing the difference 1. Tim. 5. 17
only in teaching, and consequently in publik prayer and administration of
sacraments, which are joined with yt, or comprehended under yt: that therefore,
the rest, remain common between them, to be done as well of these, as of them.

That the place of S. Matthew, is not to be understood Diuis. 4. p. 636. Math.
18.
only of private offenses: I have In the former part. p 66.
before declared. your interpretation of tell the church, that is publikly
reprove those which, admonished privately, repent not: is evil nurtured,
breaking in withowt leau. where mark (good reader) how easy it is for the D. to
write answers, which being pressed gives him self this liberty: that having no
key to open the door, breaks it open after this sort. To interpret tell by
reprove, might have some color, by that the general is some time put for the
special: but that tell the church, should be, reprove the offender, has a
disease, that all the tropes and figures which I have red of, are not able to
cure. And me thincketh, that you which accuse others for making the scripture a
nose of wax: if you will not put of your shoes, at the least you should wipe
them a little cleaner, when you enter into the lords Sanctuary. That which
follows, is not a whit better.

For, after he says that, by the church may be meant one only, so that he be
in authority: which is not unlike unto that, which the papists say, that a man
may appeal from the Council, unto Council. To^. 4. Basilienf. council.
the Pope. whereof, some of the papists them selves (if he do not repent) shall
sit in judgment: which leaving unto the Pope the highest place in the church,
have notwithstanding upon this place, preferred the judgment of the Council, to
the Popes. But where I require some example of this monstrous speech, vuherby
one is said to be many, one membre a body, one alone a company: the D. is domb.
where I show further, that if one only should be understood by the church,
that then the going from three to one, should not rise but fall, not go forvuard
but bakvuard: he answers, that to tell one which has authority to correct the
faut, is more then to tell twenty: as thowgh the complaint is made, to the end
he should be corrected, and not that he should be admonished. For as for
correction, other then by words, it owght not to be awarded, onles he refuse
to hear the church: so that here still the process is, from the admonition which
is by many, to that which is by one. And if the Pastor be he, that does first
privately admonish him, and afterward take two more: by his answer, the Pastor
must from his own admonition in the presence of one or two more, take the matter
to him self, and admonish him self alone.

He having thus dalied with the holy scripture, after confesses that by the
word church, are understood many: but those out of Chrysostom are (says he)
Prelates and Preside^tes: as thowgh S. Paul, did not also call these Elders
Presidentes, which is al one 1. Tim. 5. 17
with Prelates. Then he adds, that the place is understood of the
government under the law, not of any rule which our Savior Christ gave, to
govern his church under the gospel: even as where our S. Christ bids, to
leau the gift before the Altar: which overthrows his other interpretation.
And again out of Musculus, that it was but unto the time of the Christian
Magistrate: which overthrows also this next before. But if this be either the
law government, or the gospel government only, until the time of the Christian
Magistrate: then to admonish privately him that offends, to take one or two,
if he rest not in the admonition, be also of the same sort. For our Savior
Christ puts them alike general, alike necessary, of like limitation of time:
for he chayneth them one with another, by the link of his commandment, that if
this way profit not, then the second must follow, and the third after that.

Then also it follows, that the means to bring sinners to repentance, served
only for the time of the law, and unchristian Magistrates. For after that our
Sau. Christ, had tawght how the lord deliteth in the return of the sinner, and
in the fyneding of the lost sheep: he propounds this, as a principal mean,
whereby he will have that browght to pas. But, let the D. show, any light out of
the word of god, whereby it may appear, that certain of these commandementes
are temporal, and certain perpetual, certain to serve for the time of the law,
and an unchristian Magistrate: if not, then the commandment of Christ
remains, whereof nether he, nor none other can show any countermandement.
Beside that it is absurd, that it should be here declared, what order was used
under the law, and not under the gospel: when our Sav. Christ instructs his
Apostles, how to behave them selves in the church, and speaks of the math.
18. 18*
order, that should be in his church, in time to come.

That also which he cites out of mathews, is flat against him. For, althowgh
our Sau. Christ uses manner of speeches, drawn from the service of god, which,
then in use, be not so now: yet the commandment he there gives, under that
kind of speech, is perpetual. And as, what soever is abrogated of that precept
Matthew 5, is abrogated by the prescript word of god, which teaches us, that
offering of calves upon the altar, and other ceremonial laws are done away: So,
if he will have this ordinance of god abrogated, he must show us some place of
Scripture, where our Sau. Christ repealed yt. what we ascribe unto the
Christian Magistrate, shall appear afterward.

To the place of 1. Tim 6. ^3.
Timothe, requiring a necessary observation Diuis. 5 p. 637
of things comprised in that Epistle: he answers first, that these Elders
are not there comprised, nor their office. I have showed, that boeth they and
their office be there: which is the same with the Bishops, that only excepted,
which I have In diuis. 3 of this chapter.
before noted. Further in the word 1. Tim. 3. 8
Deacons (as yt is well In the booK of the discipline of England.
observed) the Apostle comprehends boeth the Elders, and those which had the
alms to dispose: which may appear, in that, describing the qualities of the
Deacons, he notes there no special quality, of him that has the order of the
church is treasure, but those qualities only which are common as well to the
Elder, as to him that disposed the church money.

After, he says that those words can not be extended, unto all the precepts,
first because the office of widows should be then necessary: But he does not
consider, that S. Paul ordeyneth them not simply, but upon condition. if he had
instituted the Eldership with condition, if he had ordained that office, rather
for the mayntenance of the persons them selves, then for the service of the
church, if he had left so small choice of those to this office, as to that,
namely that none might be chosen but poor, none but destitute of al friends,
none under the age of lx years: then he had said somewhat. And even now, the
perpetuity of that commandment towching widows, remains in that sort it was
given: that is upon condition. Then he says, that so, Ministers which have
such infirmities as Timothe, should of necessite drink wine. By wine, the
Apostle means, not only the blood of the grape, but strong drink also, and
what soever might be apt against Timothies infirmityes: And so it is a plain
commandment, not only to Timothe, but to al ministers in his case, that they
should use such remedies against their diseases, whereby they might be more
able, to do their Ministry. Nether is it les, a perpetual commandment, to al
Ministers, because al countries have not wine: then the commandment of
excommunication, because al countries have not such Publicanes, Math. 18.
as were in Jury, to make their pattern of excommunication by.

Last of al, he brings Chrysostom and Calvin, which refer those words unto
Timothes office: which is to no purpose. For Timothe for his part (and in his
place the Minister of the word) had to do in all those offices, as well to
ordeyn, as to reprehend and punish them, if they did not their duty: so that,
in commanding Timothe to execute his duty, according to the tenure of that
Epistle, he does plainly command the mayntenance of this office. whether the
word, vuithovut spot, be referred unto Timothe, or unto the commandment, I
leave to the readers judgment: So I do the next division. In the next also,
beside Musculus and Gualters judgment, there is nothing saving an extreme,
either forgetfulness, or that which is wors: in saying that he remembers not to
have red any author, that makes mention of this Eldership. For if he had never
red the autors them selves: yet he could hardly forget that out of them: which
In the end of the booK.
I alleged to that purpose.

To the first reason, proving that an Eldership is more Diuis. 8. p. 640.
needful novu, then in the Apostles times, for that the Pastors novu are not of
that sufficiency to govern al alone, as they vuere then: he answers, that
there be not also so sufficient men to make an Eldership now, as there were
then: which serves, as well to prove that we should have no Pastors at al, as
that there should be no Eldership, to support the Pastor. But how absurd is it,
that because they can not give so full and plentiful assistance now, as the
Elders in times past, therefore they must give no asistance at al. So that
oneles he will say, that none of the parish can do any thing in the government
of the church, but the Pastor alone: he must needs confess, that, that wchich
may be, owght to be for support of the Pastor. his other answer, is In this
chap. diuis. 2. and 3. Diuis. 9. p. 641.
before confuted.

Secondly yt was alleged, that S. Paul, so loeth to lay any unnecessary
charge, upon the church: yet enjoined this ministry unto the poor and
persecuted churches. The stre^ght of which reason lies in this, that some
contributio^ vuas necessary to their mayntenance then: vuhere as novu in time
of peace, this ministry, may be vuithovut al charges unto the church. To this,
in sted of answer, he frames other arguments of his own, wherewith he
dalieth, skowreth up his old stuf of widows, and the civil Magistrate, before
answered, alleges the poverty of some parishes, the unwillingness of other
some to contribute: which is a mere trifling. For seeing, the poverty of the
churches could not exempt them from this charge, when they were much poorer ^.
Tim. 5.
, as appears by S. Paul, seeing also yt may be now withowt the charge of the
church, as appears by the practice of the churches, which are so governed in
these days, where there is not a penny allowed to any Elder: either he owght to
confute this, or blush to set down that for answer: yet he is not afraid page
657.
after to put yt, for a reason against the Eldership. whereunto may be added,
that the churches in persecution, nether those now, nor other in times past,
could have such helps of howses or lands, appropriated to the fineding of
their ministry, as the churches with us: but were driven to pay for all of
their own purs. And not that only, but co^streyned to pay their tithes, or
other exactions, to the Idolatrous priesthood, of that place where they abode:
which we are freed Diuis. 10. p. 641.
from, under a Christian Magistrate.

To the third reason, that the declyning of a popular rule, or that of the
best, has not so easy redres under a Tyrant, as under a Christian magistrate:
he says, men in persecution are not desirous of honor etc. which (in a manner)
is as much to say, as men in persecution, ceas to be men, and is untrue, as
appears boeth in the Gal. 1. 17. Phili. 2. 21. Ioh. 3. 9.
Apostles times, and after, as I have In the former part of this booK p. 500.
showed. Secondly, he answers, that the governors the^, were but during the
pleasure of such as ppointed them, whereof he brings no proof at al, and is
likewise untrue, considering, that they were chosen to remayn so long in their
office as they behaved them selves vnblamably: or at the least, until a certain
term, before which they could not by any equity, but upon their faut, or their
own desire, be put out. In the first of which two cases, they are somewhere
now, as they were then and in the later, they may if it seem expedient, even
now, as well as then: so that here is no difference at al, between those, and
these times. Nether does he consider, that the governors, being corrupt, the
greatest part of the church, is commonly led away with them: In which case, the
church is withowt remedy under persecution, when notwithstanding she has an
easy remedy, under a Christian Magistrate.

Thirdly he says, that, this granted, the argument follows not: reason he
shows none, but open askinges of that in question. And whether it follow well,
that for so much as there is les inconvenience, in the government of the
Eldership under a Christian magistrate, then under a Tyrant: therefore it may be
better under him, then under a Tyra^t, let all the world judge. his owtcourses,
as also his open untruth, that I confess the church government to be a monarchy,
I pas by: I only said, that it is a monarchy, in respect of our Sau. Christ,
which is nothing to that purpose, he alleges yt for.

In the fourth, that the Elders could not then meet vuithovut Diuis. 11. p. 642.
danger, vuhich they may do novu, and therefore, that the government by one
only, as of the Bishop, had been ( if ever, then most convenient: he
answers, that it was not so dangerous, which is contrary to al reason, and
experience. Then he says, the church must be subject to the civil magistrate:
whereby (as appears boeth in this division and in the next) he means
nothing else, but that yt owght to allow of that church government, which the
Magistrate will appoint, althowgh yt be diverse from the Apostles, which is a fat
begging of that in question. his first and third answers also, towch not the
cause at al.

Vuhere against his distinction, that this government of Elders Diuis 12 p. 643.
may be in a City, but not in a Realm, I alleged, that it has had place, by
his ovun confession, in a vuhole Realm: he says, that that is true, where
every church is, as yt were, within yt self a common wealth, as in France and
other persecuted churches. wherein he does shameful injury, to al those
churches of god, and to the Apostles them selves which used that order: in
ascribing unto them, as thowgh they made new common wealths, or lived not
under the same form of civil government, were not obedient unto the same civil
laws, and to the same Magistrates, which the Idolatres them selves were. what
one, either action, or property can you assign in an Eldership, under a
kingdom, which should cause this rent: that there should be so many common
wealths, and so many kingdoms, as there are Elderships? why also does this
Eldership make a greater rent, in a monarchy where one governs: then in a
common wealth, where many govern. If you think therefore, because a monarchy is
greater, then a common wealth, whereby there must be more Elderships in the one,
then in the other: beside that the argument is nawght, that also whereupon it
is grounded, is untrue. For, there are common wealths, where many rule,
greater then the monarchies, where one only governs: as Rome in times past,
Venys within our remembrance, and such like.

Vuhere I alleged also, that, by his reason, a monarchy should not be good in
the common vuealth, because the government of one is good in a hovushould, etc.
He answers, that the authority of the Master of the howshould, derogateth not
from the Princes, but the Eldership does: which is his accustomed beggary.
where, in deed, the authority of a Master of a howshould, approaches nerer unto
the kind of government of the Magistrate, as that which has, corporal
punishment annexed unto yt: then the authority of the Eldership, which meddleth
not that way.

And because I am entered into that example, I would know of him, which will have
other gouernmentes, fashioned to the form of government of the common wealth:
whether in a common wealth, where many have equal authority, the magistrate may
ordeyn, that the father of the household, shall not rule his own hows alone, or
be chief in yt, but shall have his wife of like authority, or some of his
servants quarter Master. If he be ashamed of this, then he sees that the wall
of al his defense, against the discipline of the church, as well in this cause,
as in diverse other, pauncheth: so that it is not able to abide, the vueight of
a fox. For thus, there is not only (as he obiecteth) a several government in
every Town: but in every private hows. And if the Master of the household may,
and owght to retein his authority withowt prejudice of the Magistrate: why may
it not be so, in the government of the church.

Vuhat will he further say, to the Scholemaster, which he otherwhere affirms
to be an Ecclesiastical officer: may there not be, either two in one Schole,
under a Prince, or one in one Schole under a common wealth where many have like
authority, oneles the common wealth be thereby mangled, and the magistrates
authority empaired? But of this matter, I have also spoken In the former part of
this booK. page 604.
otherwhere. Howbeit, whereas the D. alowing of this Eldership in a common
wealth, can not abide it in a monarchy: I will say this further, that if there
were any danger to a common wealth, by this Eldership, it should be greater to
the small common wealths, then to great monarchies: considering that they,
should not be able, so well to repres the Eldership ouerreaching and goeing
beyond their bowndes. And if the Elders hips authority, belong unto the
magistrate (as he says): then by how much, these magistrates have les power,
and fewer prerogatives over their peoples, then the monarchs over their
subjects, by so much have they more need, then the other, to keep al in their
own hand.

Upon his own confession, that there be more disordered persons Diuis. 13. p.
643.
now, then in time of persecution: I concluded that there needs so much more
asistance, for the Pastor to find them ovut, to judge of the quality of the
faut, and to correct them with censures of the church. Hereunto he answers,
that it is better done by the Magistrate, and by corporal punishment: which is
diuis. 2. an 3. of this chapter.
before answered, althowgh yt be unworthy answer, considering that albeit the
bodily punishment, were more apt to reform things amiss: yet thereof follows
not, but that boeth the civil punishment, and ecclesiastical together, will do
more then the civil punishment alone.

I would also know, why the Pastor owght not, to carry, even private offenses
great or small, unto the Magistrate: if it be so, that this ecclesiastical
authority, be escheted to him. As for that he alleges out of Gualter, that men
will not set a straw by the authority of the Eldership: it serves as well against
the ecclesiastical censures of al Pastors, and of our Bishops, as against the
Elders: and more against them, then against these. For so much as, if they set
not a straw by the Elders and Pastor together jointly, they will much les esteem
the Pastors or Bishops alone. And if they set nothing by it, when it is
countena^ced by the civil magistrate: they will much more set them at nawght in
persecution, when for the contempt of yt, there is not only no corporal
punishment, but a reward at the hands of the Tyrants. The bare names of
suspensions and excommunications, strike a fear into the hearts of the people:
which notwithstanding (throwgh an horrible abuse of them, for every trifling
money matter) are not to be feared: according to the prou. 26. 2.
wise man's saying, acauseles curs, shall not come, but flies avuay as the
sparovu or svualovu.

Seeing then these fray bugges, no more to be esteemed, as towching the
conscience, or further then they empty the purs, then the braying of an Ass,
strike such a fear: with what power, would the lord accompany them, when they
be executed according to his institution. for further answer, the libr. de
curanim.
reader may have recours unto M. Bucer: who confuteth this very objection, of
contempt of the churchis censures. And this voice tends, as well to the
subversion of al ecclesiastical censures, for ever hereafter: as to the utter
condemning of that, which was used by the Apostles heretofore.

Althowgh, if it be the ordinance of god, this is no reason against yt:
considering that the owtrage of men, can not put the lord to silence, or make
his ordinance to give place. In the next, where, upon his answer, I conclude,
that either vue must have no Pastor at al (vuhich is absurd,) or else an
Eldership in as many places, as sufficient men may be gotten: he answers
nothing, beside repetitions, and demaundes of that in question.

In the next, where is proved that the hardness or apparent impossibility may
not be considered, when there is a commandment to do any thing: he lets
all that defense go to the ground, wherein notwithstanding he placed great
force. Let him therefore strike out that objection, or if he move further debate
herein, let him not be ashamed, to return bak, and take his work before him.
And for further answer thereunto, let him look li. de curanim.
M. Bucer: who confuteth also this objection. where he excepteth, that it is
not commanded, thereof let the reader judge, of that which has been written.
Althowgh it In the former part. p. 156.
has been showed, that the example of the Apostles, and general practice of
the churches under their government: even withowt a commandment, draws a
necessity.

Then he says, that if it were* yet it were but a temporal commandment, as
the widows, the eating of blud, and washing of feet. Of the widows, has been
answered, the decree of the blud, was never a simple prohibition, after our
Sau. Christ (whose blud that did ^eu. 17. 11
shadow) had finished his oblation: but only to the support of the Iues. So
that even then, when that decree was made, the faithful, boeth of the Iues or
Gentiles, might have eat yt: so they did yt withowt offense of those which were
weak. And if there were now any Iue weak in faith, whom we should by eating of
blud, drive from the gospel: I dowt not, but that until he be fully instructed
of the liberty I have in Christ, I owght to use the same charitable support
toward him. And this appears manifestly, boeth in Act. 15. 21.
the same, and other places: where 1. Cor. 6. 12. et 10. 25 Romans 14. 14
S. Paul which gave out that decree to be kept, teaches generally the free use
of al meats, so yt be withowt offense.

As for the washing of feet, commanded unto the Apostles, it is nothing but a
trope or borrowed speech: whereby our Sau. Christ wills them, and, in them, us
al, not for a time, but to the end of the world, that, for help one of an
other, each should submit him self to other, even unto the doing of the basest
offices. which may appear, in that he places Ioh. 13. 17.
perfect blessedness in the obediens to that commandment: which he would never
have done, in the washing of the feet: So that this commandment, might well be
of them (as of us) fulfilled, withowt that particular actio^, of washing each
another feet.

But here observe, I pray you, how dangerously you behave your self, in respect
of the common Adversary. 1. Tract. 3. chap. 2. diuis.
Before you have made us things necessary to observe, and that as of the
Apostles authority, which were never written, but as you would make us believe,
left by tradition: here, you bear us in hand of commandementes (I know not how
many) written, not necessary to be observed, but only to last, for a time. if
unwritten traditions be perpetual, and written co^mandementes be not: what
wants to the utter banishment of al truth, and settling of al falsehood in the
church of god. For as you may except against this, so may other against any
commandment of the Apostles: whereas the authority of god in them, once being
showed, either men owght to show some place, whereby that is called bak, or else
let yt stand, in that authority it was first set in, of the lord.

To that I alleged, that god is present in his church, Diuis. 16. p. 645. 1.
Sam. 10.
vuith the riches of his spirit, in knovuledg, vuisdome, etc. and especially
vuith those lavufully called unto office, co^firming it by the example of Saul:
he answers, the church is sometime withowt good Pastor, or good governor, as
in Elias time: which is untrue: for there were a 1. King. 18. 13.
hundredth prophets, kept of one man alone. Then he says, that it is
Anabaptistical, upon a miraculous change, and that of one, to make a general
rule: But yt is his great faut, not to know, that the miracles wrought upon
certain, have a general doctrine, and serve to the confirmation of our faith,
in all our necessities. As the feeding of the people of god in the desert with
man, etc. serves to this: that althowgh, the ordinary means of norishment
fail, Deuteronomy. 8. 3. Math. 4. 4.
yet that the lord will otherwise provide for us: the feeding of the people in
the desert, by our Sau. Christ to this, that those which seek the kingdom of
heaven, shall have al other things cast unto them.

If I had given hope, of the assistance of god, in things taken in hand
withowt a calling, or in a calling, withowt using the lawful means, which god
puts in our hands, then yt had been Anabaptistical: but to assure the
church of the assistance of god, in goeing about that, which I hold for
commanded of him, when yt assaieth al lawful means it can, is more skilful
divinity, then you can stayn with all the skill you have. I could have browght
other examples of David, Solomon etc. but that one of Saul, was more pressing,
the force whereof noted by me, you clean pas by.

Nether has the lord done this, in certain particular persons: but generally,
in his whole church. For when he would make his tabernacle, which was a figure
of the church, he commanded an exquisite workmanship in yt. where, albeit there
was nothing more gros and rude then the Israelites, as those which had been
many years houlden in vile slavery, occupied in clay and dirt, and al other
kind of drudgery: yet the lord gave numbers of such dexterity, in working Ex.
31. 1. 6. and. 36. 1.
al kind of broidery, and rich works, as if they had been browght up in all
liberal exercise, and norished as Princes children.

Moreover, when as the lord furnished unto the church under the law, able men
for this function, notwithstanding he used not that larges toward yt, which he
does now toward us: they are to injurious unto the grace of god, toward the
church now, which, under pretense of want of able men, would drive this order
out of yt. In the city of Athenes (as Tertullian reports) children spoke,
when they lib. de anima.
vuere but a month old: and shall we think, that in Jerusalem, which the lord
will have to be the beauty of the world, and which he has set upon a stage,
that in yt he might, as it were, make a show of al his riches, shall we think (I
say) that men of 30 and 40 years, shall be al such babes, that they shall not be
able to give any judgment of the laws of that city, whereof they have been so
long Burgesses. Ad also, that you, to give the Pastor a pasport, to be away
from his charge, say that there may be diverse found in his absence, able to
answer all the page 240.
dowtes, that a dowtful and turmoiled conscience can minister: which verily
althowgh it be not the same, yet is a rarer gift, then is necessarily required,
of an Elder of the church, such as we require.

To that I alleged, that the common vuealth government, Diuis. 17. p. 646.
must be framed unto the church, and not the church government unto the common
vuealth, as the hanginges to the hovus, and not the house to the hanginges: he
answers, as thowgh I had meant, that the form, of the government must be
changed, and made the same with the form of the church government: which is an
open wresting of my words, seeing al know, that to be framed according to
another thing, is not al one as to be made the same with yt: oneles he that
commands his hanginges to be framed to his hows, commands that his hows and
hanginges should be made the same, or that the Master which bids his servant
frame him self to him, bids him to give commandment for commandment, chek
for chek, blow for blow.

Therefore, my meaning could not be such, but it was as it is, which I also
expounded in the example of the Prince, the principal part of the common
wealth: that if there vuere any custom, prerogative, or pomp in the common
vuealth, before the Prince joined him self to the church, contrary to the order
of a church vuel established, that that should be corrected.

And if I had had any such meaning, as he surmiseth, yet our common wealth
could have received no such change by this: considering that I had boeth
declared my liking of yt, and showed how the form thereof, resembles the form
of the church government. whereby also appears, what a p. 180. of his booK.
shameful slander it is, which he surmiseth of me, that I would have Princes
throw down their crowns, before the Seniors of the church etc. which I
precisely prevented with plain words, because I knw with whom I had to do.
Albeit, that Princes should be excepted from ecclesiastical discipline, and
namely from excommunication, as he here and page 657.
otherwhere signifies: I utterly mislike.

Now he has left the point of his slanderous speech in me, in his answer to
my arguments, as a be which has lost her sting: he is altogether
unprofitable. For unto the similitude of the hows and hanginges, he says, that
it proves yt not: but reason he shows none. unto that also, that the church
vuas before the common vuealth, and therefore that yt should serve the church,
and not the church yt: he says, the argument follows not, but he says yt
only. whereas, if the church and common wealth were otherwise equal, which can
not be, one only respecting the life to come, the other the co^modityes of
this life: yet having this preeminence above yt, that it was before yt, it must
needs be better then yt, and consequently owght rather to be served of yt,
then to serve yt. the 1. Tim. 2. ^^.
Apostle also uses the same reason, to prove that the woman is subject to the
man.

To that I alleged, that the church is the foundation of the vuorld, and
therefore the common wealth, builded upon yt, must be framed unto yt: he says
that yt is obscure etc. But it is for want of light in him self, for otherwise,
the thing is clear. And to leau Salomons proverb, which Rabbi Leui Ben Gerson
Prou. 10. 25
does so interpret, and whereof in deed the sens may well be, that where the
wicked are carried away with the tempest, the just not only stand fast, but be
the cause why the world stands: I say to leau that, S. Peter plainly
confirms, that the cause why this world endures, is for that the full 2. Pet.
3. 9.
number of the elect is not yet gathered: so that, as soon as they are
assembled by the ministry of the church, there shall be forthwith an end of the
world. As for that he brings against this, yt is unworthy the rehearsal: for
of the three first, he can conclude nothing, and his last answer, is no better.
For yt talks of a change of that, which is laid upon the foundation, whereunto
the common wealth is likened, and is that which I affirm: but of changing the
foundation, whereunto the church In the first division of this chap and diui. 4
Diui. 20. p. 650.
is compared, not a word. the two next divisions be answered.

Here, he presses that, which he infers of the Admo* that if the rule of
more in the church, be better then of one, because it is easier to turn one then
a company from truth and equity: it should therefore follow, that the more that
govern, the better it should be, which he has now mended, by putting for more,
more good men, nothwithsta^ding that this also is but sophistry. For by the same
form of reasoning, it should follow, that because two bittes of meat norish more
the^ one? therefore the more a man eats, the more he shall be norished. he
should therefore understand, that as there is in this government a defect, so
there is an exces, and between boeth a mean, vuhich (...).
is to be houlden. and that as the comodity of having the church judgments,
handled by a company, is to be sowght after: so the inconvenience and
confusion, of assembling a great multitude for every ecclesiastical case that
may befall, is to be avoided. Beside, that it is not enowgh, that they which
should govern be good me^: oneles they be of greater counsel and judgment then
the rest of the body: of which sort, when he will not affourd us any just
number, he might well have spared this objection.

If it were greatly to the matter, it were easy to show, Arist. Eth. 8. lib ca.
10 Arist. Rhet. ad Theod. 1. lib.
more lavuful forms of common vuealths the^ three. Likewise, that althowgh
common wealths have their names, of that which bears the chief sway: yet
that they are, to their profit, te^pered and mixed one with another, singularly
the monarchy. This is to be seen namely in our land, where to the passing of
diverse things: the consent of the Parliament is so required, as that withowt
yt, those matters can not pas. The next is In the former part. page 411. Diuis
22. and 23. page 651.
already partly, and partly comes after to be answered.

Here, he denies most shamefully, that he alleged Ambrose, to prove, that
Seniors owght not to be under a Christian Prince. For, boeth the sentence
immediately going before and following after, drive thereunto: yea and that he
affirms upon confidence of Ambrose saying only, for other proof he has not.
It is therefore to great bouldnes, that he asks me, why I gathered the time
between Phillip and Ambrose,

Then he denies, that the Eldership flourished in Constantines time: but he is
much to blame. For the Centuries, wherein he has been raking so often, must
needs have told him: that the same orders and functions of the church, were
in that time which were before. And it is manifest, that the churches were
governed under him, as before, by Bishops Elders and Deacons: by that which is
recited of an infinite number Eusebius. 2. li. de vita Co^stan.
of Elders and Deacons, vuhich came to the Council of Nice, vuith the 250
Bishops. moreover, yt being before declared, and in part confessed by him, that
this government was before Constantines time: if he be not able to show that
Constantin changed yt, the same must be presumed.

After, not denying but that it might be under some Christian Prince, he says,
that it is not the question, whether it may be, but whether it owght to be:
which, how untrue it is, let the reader judge of that I have diuis. 1. p. 633.
Diui. 24. p. 652. Ier. 2. lib. in Is.
before noted.

To Ierom that says, that the Christian church has her Eldership, he
answers they were Ministers of the word and Sacraments: his reason, because
they were such as S. Paul speaks of unto Timothe, makes for us, which have
showed that S. Paul speaks there of Elders, that govern only. which may be
better understood, in that Ierom compares them with the Eldership of the
Iues: which was, as has b appeared, Diuis. 8. p. 633.
a several order from the Priests and Scribes, that interpreted the law, and
offered the sacrifices. Duarenus also helps him not, rather he makes against
him. For, in that he says, that the Canons succeeded into the place of the
Elders: he declares, that the Canons are of another order then they were. As
when Jerome says that the Bishops, succeeded unto the Apostles: he means not,
that the Bishops are of the same degree and order of ministry, with the
Apostles. the next I leau to the readers judgment.

Unto Ambrose he answers: if he misliked the abrogating Diuis. 26. p. 653.
of this Seignory, why did he not labor to restore yt. That he misliked yt, is
manifest, when he condemns the Ministers of the vuord of negligence, for
suffering it to vuear ovut of the church: or rather of pride, vuhilest they
only vuould seem to be some vuhat. he labored also in part to restore yt, in
that he reprehended the abolishing of yt. whether he did further labor or no,
is not expressed, the best is to be supposed: which is that, to his power, he
endeavored to set in that, the M. Bucerin lib. de rat. can. exam* alleges this
place of Ambrose to the same purpose vue do.
want whereof he condemns: But Ambrose was no lord Bishop, that he could do
in the church, whatsoever he desired. his extreme bouldnes in denying, that
either he was abused, or would have abused other, let the reader judge of: also
in that he says, Ambrose makes nothing for our cause, to whose judgment I
also leau the next division.

If he deny, that church officers which handle church matters, Diuis. 28. p.
654. Heb. 13. 17.
and vuatch over the sovules of me^, be ecclesiastical officers: then let him
deny also, that two and two make four. But so gentilmen and handycraftes me^,
should be ecclesiastical persons: why not? if they be chosen thereto. were S.
Paul and Isay the Prophet no ecclesiastical persons: because one was a
Tentmaker, the other of the kings stok. Nether occupations nor dignities have
any such mark of uncleanness, or profanation, that they may not be coupled with
the church ministry: when the ministry is such, as together with their
professions, they may also execute yt: in which kind is the Eldership of the
church. I omit, that the D. has here patched together a sentence of M. Calvin
before answered, and another of M. Beza: 1. Chap. 1. diuis.
which, in that sens he pretends them, are quite contrary one to another. yt
is therefore meruail, if he can make of them one uniform, and even answer.

Now he has ranged and roued, almost in this whole disputation: Chap. 3. p.
656.
he must have leau to run bak the way he came, to see whether he has let any
of his pieces fall. And first, good reader, he dasheth the in the face, with two
open untruths, in the forehead of this chapter. For the order of the church
propounded by us, is uniform, and standing, as it is left us in the word of
god: and not as he surmiseth, varying according to the number of the churches.
Also for ceremonies variable by circunstance, it is frankly confessed: that
they owght to be determined of, by advise of the church Synod, assembled
especially of the flower and most sufficient of the ecclestical governors,
sent by consent of the rest, if al (as yt happens) can not be coueniently
there.

Secondly, it is nether affirmed, nor ever practiced in any church where this
order is, or has been used: that he that is chosen may not refuse yt. So that,
if there be any that thinks his honor stained, in being joined in counsel
of church matters with poor men, when there either are not, or are not enough of
others: he has not to complain, seeing he is at his choice. Albeit, if any man
should be so myneded, to think skorn to hear the sentence of a poor man, in
that he is a poor man: let the same know, that he Pro. 17. 5.
reprocheth god that made him poor. And if he be lawfully appointed, to this
office: the^ he does not disdain the man, but Mat. 18. 18
Christ him self. Therefore, if he have any fear of god before his eyes: he will
from hence forth be ashamed to use this for a reason. Beside that, he thus
overthrows the high court of Parliament: where, with the nobility, are joined
in consultation the commons of the Realm: where also the estates, being
unequal, the voices notwithstanding are equal. I omit, how that if there were
any inconvenience in this, that the sentence of the Pastor and other not so
rich or so noble, should weigh down the sentence of that noble man he speaks
of: yet him self has delivered us of yt, which tells us, that the lord of
the town, or some other of countenance page 136.
will lead away the rest of the church: how much more then, shall he be able to
lead away two or three? Thus he plaieth on boeth hands: for there he pincheth
at the nobility, and here he pretends, as if he were tender over their honor.

His third reason is answered Cha. 2. diuis. 9.
before: likewise his Cha 2. diuis. 3. and 17.
fourth: his Cha. 1. diuis. 6 and 7.
fifth: his Cha. 2. diui. 2. and 3.
sixth, and a seventh. As for the eight, of partial affection and contentions
which would ensue: it is plentifully answered, In the former part of this booK.
page 2 9. 134. 147. 288. 227.
in the question of the church election. For if these be frivolous reasons
against those ecclehastical actions, where the whole church has interest: much
more are they, against the assemblies of three or four only, and those of the
choicest. the e Cha. 2. deuis. 1.
ninth is also Chap. 2. diuis 13.
answered.

The tenth, that it would be to great extremity to punish for one faut twice:
is a falls principle, taken from the Pelagian herefy. For the Magistrate may
appoint four kind of punishme^tes, for one faut, if he think good, to be
executed at diverse times: so that they altogether and jointly, exceed not the
quantity of the faut. And, by his reason, the Magistrate shall be shut out, from
his right of punishyng syn: if it fall out, that the lord by some punishment
laid upon the offender, prevent the Magistrates punishment, especially when the
punishment is in such sort, that it may appear that yt was sent for that
special faut: for examples sake, if of dronkennes, he fall into some siknes: na,
thus the lords sword, is wrung out of his hand. For nether may he punish those
fautes, which the Magistrate punished before: and if he punish a man in this
life, he has bound his hands, for punishing him in the world to come. For in
deed the church discipline, is the punishment, or rather the correction of the
lord: in a far other kind, and to an other end, then the civil punishment. But
I have showed, that boeth these In the former part of this booK. page 3.
were practiced amongst the people of god, for one and the same faut. And is
not this, in the Apostles, to condemn the holy ghost him self? For if it be
true, which he says, when one had stolen, or committed adultery, it had not
been lawful for them to have used the ecclesiastical censure, least the
offender being after apprehended, and punished according to the laws of the
common wealth where he lived, should thereby have been wronged. Beside that,
the D. accuses al our Bishops, which for diverse causes punishable by the laws
of the Realm, send forth their excommunications: yea all the elder churches,
which did not leau to proceed in ecclesiastical censures against those, whom
the heathen Princes had justly punished. But hereof the reader may know further
in M. Caluins 4. booK. chap. 11. 5. 1. 2^. 4.
institutions: also in M. lib. de cura animar.
Bucer, who praecisely co^futeth them which say, that the punishment by the
civil Magistrate is sufficient.

His eleventh, that alterations are dangerous: is unworthy answer. For when yt
has been showed, that ceremonies otherwise in different, owght when they breed
offense to be changed: how much more, owght those to be changed, which are
showed to be contrary to the institution of god. And nether this, nor the next
clause in this eleue^th article, nor diverse other allegatio^s in this chapter,
have so much as a countenance of reason: unless it be first granted unto the D.
which is the principal question, that is to fay, that the Eldership of the
church is not commanded of the lord. his two other reasons in this article,
are boeth often repeated, and utterly untrue: there having been never any
Christian Prince that used the spiritual sword, which only is given to the
Eldership, nether any noble man or gentilma^ which in our la^d uses this kind
of correction, but only the Bishop, which usurps yt, and abuses yt. I omit
his often jesting, at the Pastor, by calling him diverse times in contempt,
Master Pastor: which the Angels them selves dare not do: when as him self can
not deny, but to have a Pastor in every congregation, is the ordinance of god.
If men will not look to such disorders: I dowt not, but the lord will lay to his
hand.

The first reason, to prove no certain kind of church government Chap. 4. p.
658.
appointed, is answered 1. Chap.
before: likewise the 2. Cha. diuis. 2. and 3
second and third: the fourth is a gros asking of that in question. In the fifth
M. Caluins and M. Bezas first and last sentences, are violently drawn from
their meaning: as has been In the former part. of this booK p. 80. and. 134.
etc.
showed. The middle sentence, bears no such argument, as he would gather: for
there is no word, that shuts out the necessity of the Eldership under a
Christian Magistrate: no, or that makes it, so much as les necessary under a
Christian Magistrate, then under persecution. For the word, especially, is
restrained, unto the government which the Bishop had over the Elders: so that
if there be any thing to be gathered of that, it is this, that the Bishop
should not have so much pre-eminence over the Eldership, when there is a
Christian Magistrate, as when there was not. And how does not he blush, to
alledg men's sentences directly contrary to their judgments, plainly declared
in this matter of the Eldership: which counts yt such a faut, to set one
writer against another. I omit other places, out of M. Epist. 11. 14. 20, 83.
Beza, where this cause is confirmed boeth generally in the unvariable
government of the church, and particularly in this case of the Eldership. The
reasons alleged of M. Musculus and Gualter have been answered. His sixth reason
of giving no more here, to the Christian Magistrate, then to Nero: is but only
said, the untruth whereof shall appear in place.

Seeing therefore, the lord him self has once set this government by Elders in
the church, and that no man may displace, which he has placed: seeing yt is a
supply of that in the church, which the most sufficient and most diligent
ministry of the word, is not able to perform by yt self alone: seeing the
churches under the law, and in the Apostles times could not want this help: and
seeing the antiquity which followed for diverse hundred years, partly held the
same, partly lamented the want of yt, and partly left marks and footinges
whereby, being lost, yt might be recovered again: seeing further, the liberality
of god toward the church is commended, in that for the greater safety of yt,
he would have many watchmen of one church. Lastly, seeing the Apostel in the
person of Timothe, charge most straightly all the Ministers of the word, with
the keeping of this order, until the appearing of our Sa. Christ: let us
conclude that the Eldership ordained for the government of the church only, is
the perpetual and unchangeable decree of god, and therefore not only in common
wealths where many, but also in Monarchies where one governs, not only in
time of perseqution, but also in time of peace, to be retained.

Again, for so much as the Apostel ordained these Elders, church by church:
forasmuch as giving a rule of the government of al, as well of churches in the
country, as in the City, he enjoined the praeseruation of this order:
forasmuch also as the gospel, whereof this is a part, brake forth out of
Jerusalem into al places, not into cities only: and for that, the Pastor of an
vplandish town, is no more able to do all that is to be done in his church,
then the Pastors in the city: considering also that the churches, as dawghters
and coheirs of one father and mother, owght to enjoy like privileges: seeing
further the Bishop to whom this Eldership is assistant, has been showed to
belong as well to churches in the country, as in the city: finally, forasmuch as
the use boeth of he churches under the law, and of those after the Apostels
times, lead us hereu^to: yt is likewise browght, to pas, that this Eldership
owght to be in all churches, not in those only which are planted in great
cities.

Thus is also ended, the question of Cathedral churches: page 742.
whereof the D. has made, a whole tractate. wherein there appears, scarce a
step of this institution of god: of which, when he would brag of, and set the
highest price, he has valued twelve of the best of them at no more, then one
poor halin Cambridg or Oxford, is able to yield. yea then they were at, Queen
Mary's time: when there vuere commonly in every one some, vuhich dissembling
for fear, vuere not vuithstanding able to confute al Papists and Anabaptists,
whereunto he can answer nothing. That the offices came, from the bottomless pit
of hell: may partly appear by that which I have In the former part p. 616.
alleged, partly in that the names of Prebendaries etc. are not to be found in
any godly or pure writer, but in the dregs of the canon law. For further
understanding of which disorders, I refer the reader to that which M. Calvin
Inst. 4. booK chap. 5. sect. 10. p. 746.
writes of them: who peinteth them out in their colors. And where I showed,
that to look for any good unto the church in the Popes invention, is to look to
be fed vuith the Cockatrice eggs, and to be clad vuith the spiders vueb: he
answers, that the Pope, as the Ethnickes, may make good laws: which is
untrue, in matters belonging to the church, especially in so great a matter, as
the appointing of an office. I will not deny, but they may devise good laws
for the commodity of this life: but yt can not be showed, that ever the lords
people fetched their laws to govern the church by, from the heathen, much les
from the Pope, which is the head of the heathen.

Therefore al may see, what a singular profit boeth the church and common
wealth should have: if they were converted into Colleges, for the bringing up
of scholars, which they would yield (as I think) in greater number, then boeth
the universities do now, with furniture of professions in all good knowledge:
where now, they serve but for the fatting up of a few, and those either unworthy
to be norished of the Alms of the church, or else whose presence is necessary
in other places, and dutiful by reason of pastoral residence. wherein, as well
against theirs, as against our university men's non residence: I refer the
reader to the special tractate thereof. should serve for rewards, to those
which have spent much time in getting learning: is but to foam at the mouth,
that which is a shame once to conceive in the mind. considering that by
reward, he understands not the honest and sufficient provision for his
competent how should, and convenient hospitality for the poor, which is
confessed most due: but means some surplice beside this, which is In the
former part. Traclat 6. chap. 5.
before confuted. Nether is any good to be hoped from them, whom the
excellency of this office before Angels and men, does not content: to whom the
fruit which they shall receive daily, in that by their ministry god is
glorified, and men are saved, does not satisfy: finally to whom the special
crown of glory, which remains the^ in the life to come, with sufficient
provision for this present life, does not make the ministry sauory, unless it
be also sauced, with these inticementes of wordly wealth and dignity. So that
this is rather a lure, to draw hyrelinges into the church: then an honest
provocation, to call in faithful Pastors.

Hereunto comes the example of other churches, which have pulled them down,
and converted them to other uses: which the D. partly denies, partly makes no
great account of. That they were pulled down, the experience teaches: at the
least, of as many as I have either seen, or could understand of. And yt is
namely recorded, of the Bullin. upon 1. Cor. 14.
church of Zurik: yea of al of them, M. li. Epist. p. 14.
Calvin teaches that the prebendes etc. ovught to be called to a more lavuful
use, namely to the fineding of Scholars, Ministers, and Poor. And this is our
meaning: not that these goods should be turned from the possession of the
church, to the filling of the bottomless sackes of their gredy appetites, which
yane after this pray, and would thereby, to their perpetual shame, purchase them
selves a field of blud. which thing, althowgh we have given plainly to
understand: yet because we have to do, with so importunat an adversary, that
fears not to charge us with intent to gratifye such Cormorantes, I thowght
good in a word to protest yt.

As for the light account, he makes of those examples of the reformed
churches, which notwithstanding pretends to esteem so greatly, of one or two
of the ancient writers: I leau to utter what yt argues, oneles he were able
to show by the word of god, that they did not well. The rest of this tractate,
which is a cartlode of untruths: uttered partly in accusing me, partly in
maynteyning him self, I will not touch.

THAT EXCOMMVNICATION, BELONGS NOT TO THE Bishop alone: Tractate ix. and
xviij, according to the D. page 661.
YT having been showed, that in elections and depositions, the Bishop can do
nothing withowt the advice of the whole church, nor in the common government
withowt assistance of the Eldership: yt must follow, that in excommunication,
which is one of the weightiest judgments in the church, this sole authority of
the Bishop is unlawful. For as, when in civil matters, the judgment is of life
and death, and as in the art of curing, when consultation is taken of cutting
or burning, the bench is fuller, and the assistance greater, then when matters
of les importance be debated: even so, if it might be accorded to the Bishop,
to pas some other matters by him self, yet it were not safe to commit unto him
the judgment of excommunication. whereupon I mervail, why even here also you
go about, to pek out our eyes. For the light of this truth is such, that some
of the Papists them selves, are ashamed to look against yt: as appears by
Pigghius, which seeking al manner of peintynges to hyde the filthiness of Rome,
could find no color to disguise this with: but is fayn, partly to confess her
nakedness in this behalf: saying that it is not lavuful (the Bishop of Rome
only excepted) Piggh. hierarch 3. lib. 9. cap.
for any Bishop to excommunicate by him self alone. So that, althowgh the
weightines of the cause, might require a long treatis: yet the plains of it,
will be content with a short.

First, whether the word discipline, may note the vuhole government, or only
the punishments, as in a disputation of wwordes, I will not strive: althowgh it
be known, that the word discipline, is used in good autors, for the whole
manner of government, either at home or in war. Secondly charged a 2. diuis. 661
vuith co^trarietie, he answers, that to ascribe excommunication to the
Minister of the word, and to the Bishop only, agree, because the Bishop is a
Minister of the word: which might have been admitted, if it had been al one, to
be a Bishop and a Minister of the word. But seeing by the word Minister, with
us, is noted a diverse degree, and meinteined by him: it is but an escape.
Howbeit, I am content he amend his speech: if he had yet amended it, and not
rather utterly marred al. For pretending that 661. 662. et 673.
the Bishop only, has by the word of god, the excommunication committed unto
him, he says notwithstanding that the church, if she will, may commit that
authority unto other: giuig the church authority, to make that common, which the
word of god has made several. Thus he enterfeereth at every step almost,
cutting him self to pitifully. The rest is In the former part p. 575.
answered: so are the In the former Tract.
two next divisions, saving that it appears that you were somewhat hongry, of
a testimony of great reading, which pres mine so sore: that may be given to the
veriest trewand, that ever went on two legs, which may in half an hour know
the mind of twenty commentaries, and requires rather a man well booked, then
either well red, or well learned.

To prove, that the lord did not borow this form of government Diuis. 5. p. 663.
of the Iues, he assigns one reason, because he never appointed it unto them:
which beside the untruth, that has and shall further appear, is contrary to
that him self has affirmed: where he says, that al, even the least things,
under the law page 116.
were commanded. So that oneles he will deny, that they had ever any
Eldership, or having it, had it against the commandment of god: it must follow,
that they had it, by the prescript of god. Another reason is, for that the Iues
abused their Eldership: then which, there can be nothing more disagreing from
the D. whole course of defense, which will not have so much as a peeld ceremony
removed, for the abuse.

Unto the reason I alleged why the word Council, ^hap. 5. 22.
in S. Matthew, is taken for the Eldership of the church: he answers nothing.
whereunto ad, that in other places of the new Testament, where it is often Act. 5.
2^. and 6. 12. and 23. 30.
mentioned: it is always so taken. The testimonies he cites, are partly to no
purpose, partly before confessed of me.

This is a wonderful bouldnes, that you dare say, yea Diuis. 6. p 664.
and glory in yt, that S. Paul kept an other order of excommunication, then our
Sau. Christ commanded: considering that he autoriseth 1. Cor. 11. 28 1. Cor.
15. 1.
his doeinges in the church of Corinth, with this, that he gave that vuhich he
received, who also in this very particular case of the incestuous man,
alleges the authority 2. Cor. 5. 4.
of our Savior Christ. That out of M. Calvin, makes against him manifestly.
For upon the places boeth of S. Matthew and Paul, he shows that the church
has interest in the excommunication: only he notes, that our Sa. Christ
applied his form of speech, to the estate of the church then, which is nothing
to our purpose.

After, upon confidence of M. Caluins authority only, he triumphs upon the
interpretation I browght, of the purging of leuain, noting the thrusting ovut
of the incestuous person: which notwithstanding is proved, for as much as that
verse, is the conclusion of that before, where, by leuain ca^ not be denied, but
the incestuous person is noted: unless we will say, that the Apostle concluded
another thing, then that which he had before mentioned. upon the same place.
M Beza also, coming after M. Calvin, and not easily dissenting from him:
follows the same sens, which I have done: So that althowgh you take your
pleasure of me, yet you should not ride so hard upon him.

But mark a little, how unable your answers be, to vphould such a confident
insultation. For, where this here spoken by a borrowed speech, is plainly
uttered: you are compelled to expound these words of the Apostle, take avuay
the vuicked man amongst yovu, that is, shun his company: which is not only a
wresting of words, but also unsitting to the co^pariso^ with the leuained
bread, which S. Paul uses to set forth excommunication by. For it was not
enough for the Israelites not to touch or use any leauened bread, in the
celebration of the Pasouer: but they were bound to put it ovut of their Exodus
12. 15. 29. and 23. 18 and 34. 25.
hovuses, to provide that no leauened bread vuere found in their hovuses, and
not to kill the Pasouer, before they had rid their hovus of it.

Like violence he uses, towching the receiving of the excommunicate. For where
S. Paul uses the same word of forgiving, or as it is called, absoluing, as well
to note his own 2. Cor. 2. 10
releas, as the churchis, he will have, that the same word in the same verse, in
one and the same cause, to be taken diversely: and that referred to S. Paul, it
shall have the proper signification, to remit, but referred to the church, to
signify the effects and signs of the remission, or absolution.

Vuhere I show, that S. Paul's declaration of his good vuil Diuis. 7. p. 665.
to excommunicate, could be no full excommunication, because that that
notvuithstanding, the Minister and church (althovugh unjustly) might have
received him to the communion of the Sacrament: he answers, that he is yet
excommunicate in heaven, which is a mere abusing of the reader, for I expressly
prevented that. And it is most untrue, that it is enowgh to make the
ecclesiastical censure of excommunication, that a man be bound in heaven: when
as our Math. 18. 17.
Sa. Christ notes it, in that he is taken of the church, for a Publican and a
Sinner, and in that, there is an actual secluding from the sacrament. For
otherwise, as soon as such wickedness is committed, and withal so long as it is
unrepented: the sinner is bound in heaven, and in right shut out from the
communion of the Sacrament, althowgh no man excommunicate him: which being
alleged of me, is unanswered.

To that I alleged, that S. Paul joins the Corinthes Diuis. 8. p. 666. 1.
Cor. 5. 4.
vuith him, in the excommunication: he answers, that they are joined as
lookers on or as witnesses, not as doers in that action. But who has taught
him, thus to play, with the word of god: when as S. Paul ascribes the same
cause, of the corporal assembly of the church for that action, which he does
unto that presence, wherewith he says his spirit should be (after a sort)
there. If therefore S. Paul's spirit were (after a sort and as it might) there,
to look on, and to be witness only: then the church was also. else let him show
us, with what words S. Paul declares: that his spirit should be there for one
thing, and the Corinthians for an other.

But what a shameful defense this is, that one voice declares: 1. Cor. 5. 22.
whereby the Apostle gives unto the church, the judgment of this matter. now,
to judge, or to give sentence of malefactors: is more (I think) then to look on,
or to be witness. And what that judgment is, is yet more clearly declared, by
that which follows, where the Apostle says, that the lord verse. 23.
judges those that are none of the church: giving to understand, that they had
only to use their censures upon those of the church, and that they should
leave the infidels to the judgment of god. so that, if he say that the judgment
of the church is nothing but a looking on etc. he must also expound these
words, the lord judges the infidels, that is, the lord stands by, and
looks on whilst some other punish the^: whereto ad, that the Apostle
ascribes to the church the same word of judging, which he takes to him self.
Likewise that the writer to the Hebrews, gives to the church, that Heb. 12.
25.
they should provide, that no poisoned root remayn amongst them: which
althowgh it be carried of some, from the person to the crime, yet it is certain,
boeth by the place of Deuteronomy. 29. 18.
Moses, from whom it was taken, and by the scope of the Apostle, that yt is to
be understood of the persons. For he exhorts the church, first to give
diligence, that there be no such amongst them: then, if there be, not to
suffer them to remain, to the infection of other. which is yet also more
manifest, because according to the custom of the scripture, that which he
spoke before, by a metaphore or borrowed sp^^ch: he expounds in the next verse
when he says; let there be no vuhoremonger or profane person etc. Ad further,
that S. Jude, alluding unto the prophet Zachary, wills the church in taking
pity of some, to save others, as it vuere, out of the fire, by fearing them:
which church, had no other means to strike any fear into persons, that were
(throwgh obstinacy in syn) as firebrandes almost half burnt, but by
ecclesiastical censure.

To that I asked, vuhy S. Paul chideth vuith the church, before he had
signified, that he vuould have him excommunicate, if it belonged not unto the
church: he answers, because they did not co^plain of him, whereof there is
not a letter to be gathered, in the holy Scripture. And what a mischief had it
been, for the church to have had no remedy, for such a contagious disease at
home: but must go seek for yt, in another country, and languish all that time
whilst the messengers went and came.

I leau to those which have the books, to look with what faith he has cited
these autorities, seeing contrary to his wont, he makes them not to speak:
Beside that, they are alleged for defense of excommunication by the Bishop
alone, out of them which are open enemies to that kind of excommunication,
especially the later writers. I say, leaving that, I answer, that none of them
(one excepted) is to purpose. For, albeit the 18 of math. be explaned, by the
other of Math. 16. and John 20: yet it follows not therefore, that they be al
one. And althowgh in the 16 of matthew and John 20, together with the preaching,
the excommunication were understood: yet the place of the 18 of S. Matthew,
being of the authority of excommunication and not of the preaching, the
difference does still remain. Nether hurts it, that every several Minister of
the word, has by these places authority to excommunicate: being understood of
every one for his portion. which must needs, seeing in S. Math. 18 the church
has authority likewise: so that it can not ^e, that one several minister, can
by those places chalendg the sole authority of excommunicating. That alleged of
Musculus, wherein it is said, that he confounds these three places, is untrue:
for he exte^deth math. 18 to al Christians, restrayning math. 16 to the
Ministers.

As for his reason to prove them al one, because they were al spoken to the
Apostles, yt is frivolous: seeing our Sa. Christ did not only instruct them of
things belonging to their Ministry, but also of those that touched their
private life, and of the duties of the whole church. Of the same sort is, that
the same words are used in all three places. which is al one, as when the
Prince ordeining, that one chest may be opened and shut by one only, one other
not so, but by others with him: he should conclude, that al have power alike,
because Keis with power to lok and vnlok, be given to al. For this manifest
difference, is in the manner of speech, considering that Math. 16, he speaks
of one in the singular nombre, in John 20, althowgh he speak in the plural, yet
he understands yt distributiuely, that is, that every one of the Ministers
binedeth and loses by preaching. But in S. Math. 18, those words being added
to autorise the churchis excommunication, which word church, is a noun
collectiue: they can not be drawn, to the particular person of the Minister.

Here also, it is to be observed: that the D. has quite overthrown his
difference, of the Bishop, and of another Minister, in the matter of
excommunication. For if in S. Math. 16 and John 20, together with the preaching
of the word, is understood power to excommunicate: al Ministers of the word
having by those places authority to preach, it must follow necessarily, that they
al have power committed unto them to excommunicate. And so falls, his whole
cause: which is, that by the word of god, the Bishop only has the right of
excommunication.

Vuhere to that of S. Paul's excommunicating Alexander etc, I Diui. 10. p. 667.
answered, that one is said to do alone, that vuhich he vuas moderator of, and
vuherein he had assistance: he answers, that it is an imagined shift. But now
he knows at least, if he will not acknowledge it: that it stands of
infallible In the former part of this booK. page 196.
reason, and is confirmed with most grave authority of learned men. To that I
answer, towching the place of Titus, that to avoid an heritik, is not to
excommunicate him, but to troble him self no more vuith him: he opposes M.
Caluins authority, withowt any aid of reason. wherein, when I have showed the
reason, which led me so to expound the place: let the reader do, as him
thinks good: remembering, that if he understand it of excommunication, yet it
helps him not, the same answer serving, which was given to the place of
Timothe.

For so much then, as the Apostle wills that the Minister should avoid him,
as one utterly perverted: and notwithstanding wills 2 Thessalonians. 3. 15.
otherwhere, that the excommunicate should be houlden for a brother, until such
time as it appears, how that medicine of excommunication will work with him:
and for that also, yt apperteineth unto the Minister especially, even then
privately to call upon him, when he is excommunicate: it seems, that this can
not be understood of one to be excommunicated, but of a desperate enemy whom
excommunication has not cured, but rather is (throwgh the poison in him)
hardened. And hereof, I have the judgment of Ireneus: which says, that the
fact of S. John the Apostle, which would not go into the bathes where
Cerinthus the heritik was, nor once so much as speak unto him, vuas done
according to this rule of S. Paul to Titus. ^useb. li. 4. cap 14.
And if an heretik be taken in that sens, which the D. has often taken him, in
saying he mayer, but that he will be no heretik, that is to say for one that
stands stif in his false opinion: then we must needs understand, that this
order which S. Paul prescribes, is understood of that which is to be done
after excommunication. For in such, we must not tarry, until two or three
admonitio^s be given: but as soon as one shows him self an heretik in that
sens, the sentence of excommunication lies against him.

But if the D. will needs have it understood, of excommunication: it shall be
the bane of his own cause, and a confirmation of that answer, which he so
scornefully rejects. For S. Paul noting excommunication, by the avoiding of
the person excommunicate: in commanding Titus to avoid him, does not therefore
command him alone. where as the D. will have these, and such like
commandementes: addressed unto Titus and Timothe alone. But either, the church
is not here excluded, which you deny: or else it follows, that the church may
keep company with an heretik, and the Minister only forbidden so to do, which
is absurd.

In the next division, in steed of Basiles offices cited in the latin and
English book, he has set out a long sentence of Ambrose, but which makes
nether whot nor kould: it being granted, that it apperteyneth to the Bishop,
but denied, that it does only. whether to take one man for an other, be so
gros a faut, as to cite a book which never was: let al judge. you should rather
have compared my faut, with yours in the next division saving one: which you
pas by, as you do other withowt any confession. The next division, I leau
unanswered.

In the next, I confess I was deceived in the order of the story, which came
thereupon, that Sozomene tells that first, which was done after, and
contrariwise: but my answer, that the Bishops sole excommunicating, vuas but
the publishing of the sentence, given by him and the church, stands. Nether
is it of any weight, that George would not be entreated, or that suit was made
to him for absolution. For it is easily answered, that George had numbers of
his faction, for the gaining of which, it behooved to win him first.

The D. would with words bear us down, that Theodoret Diuis. 14. p. 670.
and Sozom. affirm Ambrose to have excommunicated the Emperor alone: which is
but a facing, there being nether the word, alone, nether any words which
countervail yt. his reason, that Ambrose carried away all the commendation, is
nothing worth: seeing it is known, that the chief bears the name, as the
general of the field or Captayn, is often said to have won the field, when
notwithstanding he used thereto, the valiancie of the soldiers. And to set
aside the institution of god, it had been no commendation of Ambrosis courage,
but a note of rashness and folish hardines: to have enterprised that of him
self, against such a mighty Emperor, wherein he might have had the support of
others. seeing thereby, not only the danger should have been les toward him:
but also the fruit greater, toward the Emperor, whilst yt should have had
more authority, that was done by him with others, then by him self alone.
Ambrose Epist. 38.
And when Ambrose says precisely, that he should be more charged vuith
displeasure, then the rest: he gives to understand, that some of the
displeasure would lie upon the necks of the other Bishops, which with him
determined of that excommunication, althowgh not so much as upon his, that
should have the execution of yt. whereby yt is yet more apparent, that the
place out of Ambrosis epistel towching the Synod, and of his answer to the
Emperor, was cited faithfully, withowt falsifying. As for his answer, that the
Bishopes lamented it only, it has no likelihood, as it is In te examination
of the D. censures.
observed. Vuhere he says, that the Synod was assembled, before the slaughter,
there appears no such thing: althowgh the cause lies not in that point. For
yt is al one to us, whether the Counsel met for that matter: or being assembled
for other, upon the report of yt, decreed of that censure.

The confession of his faut before the congregation, and asking forgiveness of
the church: was alleged to purpose. For what is yt, to ask forgiveness, but to
ask absolutio^ of the church: and why should he ask to be absolved of the
church, if the church had not bound him? That he says, the penitentes do so
with us: touching any demand of absolution of the church, I think it be
untrue, wherein nothwithstanding, I refer me unto the practice. but if it be,
it is a very mockery, to crave absolution of it, when as, howsoever it is
satisfied, the Bishops absolution, right or wrong, must stand. In the first
section of his next division, let the reader judge, how shameful his denialis,
and in the fourth section, how miserable his defense is: the rest are answered.

Here, as thowgh Tertullian, had committed some high treason, Diuis. 16. p. 673.
the D. draws him, and quartereth him, upon Rhenanus coment: whereas,
althowgh Rhenanus disioyn the sentences by putting his comment between that
which I conjoined: yet he joins the^ in exposition, as those which hang
together. for Tertull. having before spoken, of the casting forth of the wicked
out of the communion of the church: Rhenanus adds, least yt should be
thovught a confused company it is said, that there vuere certain Elders etc. yt
is to much bouldnes therefore for you to say, that it can not be gathered of
this place, that these elders meddled with excommunication. If they meddled with
other things (as you confess) much more with this: if the putting between of
Rhenanus commentary, does not hinder, that this sentence should be referred,
unto things which are further from yt: why should it hinder the referring of
yt, to excommunication, which goes immediately before. And beside this open
light of Tertullia^s words, you have M. Peter Martyr, that was no mangler nor
corrupter of Tertullian: which upon this place, precisely affirms, that these
Seniors had their government in upon the^. epist. to the Cor. cap. 5.
excommunication. your shift, that the Elders Tertullian speaks of, were
likely to be Ministers of the word and sacraments: is In the 8. tract. diuis.
8.
answered.

In that you say, this authority being admitted, the people is quite shut out,
first you conclude negatiuely of authority, namely that they have nothing to
do, because Tertullian does not say they had. Then you faut again in not
marking, that when Tertullian says, that these were Presidentes or chief in
the matter: he leaves a signification, that other had to do in yt, which
followed with their sentence those, that with the ripenes of their judgment,
went before the rest is In this chap. 2. diuis.
answered.

If the excommunicate might not be received, withowt the Diuis. 17. p. 674.
peoples request, much les withowt their consent: for men use not to make
request, for that they consent not unto. As for that alleged, because Cyprian
would have that absolution stand, Cyp. lib Epist. 3 epist. 8.
which was done by one, that therefore it is lawful for the Bishop alone to
absolve: is to trifle. For so Cyprian, will have it stand, that in the mean
season, he condemns the doer of yt. And the D. owght to understand, that it
is one thing to prescribe what should be done: and another to support a thing
which being commanded, is otherwise done then it owght: as has been showed, in
the baptim by heretics. Victor also being repentant, and having showed fruits
thereof: it had been against right, to have thrust him out again. If he had not
repented: it is certain, that Cyprian would have dealt with him afresh.

Cyprian professes, that he vuould never do any thing Epist. 10.
in his bishoprik, vuithovut the counsel of the Elders, and consent of the
people: and yet the D. can not see, how this should make against his sole
excommunication. what stronger words, could there have been? If he vuould do
nothing vuithovut them, how much les excommunicate, which is so weighty a
judgment. As for that he expounds no matter, that is no doutful matter: it is
a shameful corruption. which appears, in that beside the counsel of the
Elders, to resolve him of the dowt, if any were: he adds also, the consent of
the people. Also, for that the same case, wherein he protests he would have
done nothing withowt the church: was a plain case, and whereof he was able to
resolve, withowt the advice of other. Likewise that he says, it was in
Cyprians power to have done al him self alone, because he says, he determined
not to do so) is yet more ridiculous: as thowgh David in saying he determined
to Psalm. 119. verse. 57.
keep the vuord of god, or any other, that he determines to keep his promis,
do thereby give to understand, that either the one needed not to keep the word
of god, or the other his promis.

The next Cyp. Epi. 14.
place makes the Elders and other church men, as vuel to have povuer in
absoluing, as the Bishop: yet the D. sees not how that makes against him,
which would have the Bishop alone. but (says he) the people is not there
mentioned: as thowgh that was not sufficiently showed in other places, and here
left out, because they did not lay on their hands as the church officers.
althowgh in the later end of that epistle, he also threatens the disordered
persons: that if they go forvuard, they shall be made to ansvuer the matter
before the people. But yt appears (says he) that it could not be done
withowt the Bishop: even as it could not be done withowt those, whom Cypria^
calls clerks: beside that it is to great daliance, seeing none denies the
Bishops an interest.

The next place is wherein Cyprian says, that for so much Cyp. Epist. 19.
as absolution belonged unto al, meaing of those in his church, that he alone
durst not do yt. yet (says he) in that they desire it at Cyprians hand: it
argues, that the manner was then for one to absolve. was yt in deed, the manner
to do that which was not lawful, even by your own confession: that is for one
to lose that which many had bound? For they which desired absolution, knw that
they were excommunicate by many: if therefore upon that they desired absolution
of one, it be well concluded that one was wont to absolve: it follows, that
they were wont to do that, which was unlawful, which is a slander of that
time, and yet helps you not. But the reader may understand, that they came
therefore to desire absolution of Cyprian: because it belonged unto him, to
assemble the Seniors by whom the receiving was first handled, before yt came to
the church.

And who knows not, that the grief of the penitent sinner, languishing and
feinting with desire of being joined with the church again, does even wring
out petitions to be helped of them, which are not able alone to help:
especially when as they (likely) thowght, that the rest would be counseled by
Cyprian. who sees not also, that the sens of Cypria^s answer to those
afflicted persons, which would have been delivered before the time prescribed
of their repentance: is to show him self moved with compassion of their sorrow,
which he for his part was ready to help, if the other would thereto agree.
which may better appear by that 2. lib. Epist. 3.
epistle, where the D. says, he can find nothing of this matter: which
notwithstanding is most pregnant. For Cyprian shows there, how he travailed
greatly vuith his church, to receive those vuhich, having fallen avuay,
repented them: declaring thereby, that it was not in him alone. In the end,
althowgh he has used such bouldnes, as I am ashamed to give the proper name
of: yet he fears not to say, that I have abused the reader. which, let him
understand (as touching three of the middle places) to be spoken as well against
M. Calvin, as me: Inst. 4. lib. cap 11 s. 6.
who uses them, to condemn the sole excommunication of the Bishop.

To the places out of Augustine, noting that he vuould Diuis. 18. p. 675.
have this discipline ceas, if the more part be infected, vuhereby I gathered
that he vuas of judgment, that the consent of the church vuas to be required:
he answers, that those sayings are to be understood, not of any right they
had of excommunication, but of the mislikyng of the fact, for which the Bishop
does excommunicate. But where has he in Augustine that interpretation, more
then I have that which I set down? I am well assured, that Augustins words, are
as favorable to mine, as to his, and so much the more favorable, as the schism
which he would have by this means avoided: rises sooner, when one is
excommunicate, of whom they have given the Bishop to understand, that they
would not have him thrown out, then when no such judgment has passed from
them. For then the ungodly oppose the^ selves, not only because they would
have the faut, wherewith they them selves be infected, unpunished: but also,
because they will auow their own sentence. Nether did I propound that sentence,
for Augustins words, as he surmiseth, but as that, which I gathered of them.

As for the medicin which he pretends to give, that the people retain sins,
when they separate them selves from the company of the excommunicate: it is
given to him, that is not sik. For, althowgh that may, by a borrowed speech, be
so called, whereby the effect is put for the cause: yet that Augustine meant not
that only, it is manifest in that he attributes unto the church, helping of
the Bishop, yea and the very word of accursing, which he uses for
excommunicating: so that the D. has corrupted the mind of Augustine. For
Augustine puts first of al, the churches helping of the Bishop in
excommunicating, as one several thing, and then the avoiding of his company for
another: which he expounds as al one. but if he will depart from the usual
speech, he must show us some good authority: whereby it may appear, that we must
needs wring Augustins words to that sens. which I am assured he can not do:
especially when Ad Deem triaden^ 1. Epist.
Jerome who lived in the same age with Augustine, affirms that together with
the Bishop, the Elders in other censures of the church, and the church yt self,
have, interest in the excommunication. whereupon may appear, that my
interpretation of the places browght either before or now, towching the Bishop
excommunicating, vuhich is that he vuas the chief in the action, and had the
publishing of the sentence, and not the vuhole right of excommunication: is
sound, and comfortable boeth to the holy scripture, and practis of the elder
and purer churches.

That the Canon of the counsel of Sardis, whereof the Answerer glories, is to
be understood not of the Bishop alone: one proof is, in the Elders joint
government with the Bishop generally in all matters, which I have In the former
part p. 594. Arles 2. ca. 30.
before set down. Another shall be, that another Council autoriseth, the
suspension, which the Elders and Clerks decree against the Bishop: and that
(as yt says) by authority of ancient decrees. The Councels therefore, giving
the Elders remedy at home, and with in them selves: the rash excommunication,
which the Counsel ascribes unto the Bishop, must needs be understood to have
been done by advise of the Elders. For otherwise, if the Elders consented not
unto yt: they had by the ancient decrees, authority to deal with the Bishop
the^ selves, withowt running either to Metrapolitane, or other Bishop. if this
answer like him not, let him (if he had rather) take that which M. Inst. 4. li.
11. chap. s^^
Calvin gives: that the Bishops, when they excommunicated of them selves
alone, did it ambitiously, contrary to the decrees of the godly Councels.

As for that you be of judgment, that the Bishop may not excommunicate whom he
lists, withowt proof etc. and thereto cite a long sentence out of Augustine: it
is well said, but wherefore serves this well saying? do you think the church
much behoulding to you, for that which never any yet (the Popes Ca^onistes
excepted which give him absolute power to throw out and take in whom he list)
durst deny? here therefore, you run fairly, but out of the way altogether.

If I of the other side, should herein set down the judgment of Bucer co^tra
Groppe rum, and in 4. chap. to the Ephesians. Item in lib. de rat. exa. can. and
lib. de any. cur.
Bucer Martyr upon 1. Co. 5.
Martyr, Zuing. in Ecclesiaste su^. Chap. 2. diuis. 2. page 679.
Zuinglius, and other godly writers of our age, against the sole
excommunication by the Bishop: it would require a book, by it self. But as in a
thing clear and plain, I will not weary the reader. The two next divisions, as
mere and often repeted reproaches, I omit.

In the next, he confesses that Chauncelors etc. owght not to meddle with
excommunication. The civil separation from trafique, etc. cited out of Gualter:
is nothing but a rouing. For we meddle not here, with civil punishment, except
he peradventure be of his judgment, that the ecclesiastical discipline of
excommunication, may be taken out of the church, and this civil separation put
in place: if he be, let him speak out, that we may hear him.

But because these kind of allegations be dangerous, and tend to the shaking
of this institution of god: and for that alowing sometime of excommunication as
of the institution of god, at other some times he insinuates, that yt should
not be exercised, especially against the Prince, and nobility: leaving M.
Gualter, I will take me to him. And to speak in a word of yt, yt is nothing but
a mere mockery of the lord, and to offer him self, as a Baud to al manner of
sins in Princes. If al were delivered from this correction (as M. Gualter
pretends) then yt were good reason that the Prince should also: but to
insinuat, that others being subject, only Princes should be exempted (I fear)
comes from a wors cause, then from simple error.

For who could be ignorant, that our S. Christ speaks Math. 18. 15
generally, when he says, if thy brother etc. whereby he co^prehendeth al
those that are members of one church, and children of one heavenly father. In
which number the scripture reckeneth the king: whilst in yt he is boeth called
a Deuteronomy. 17. 15. 20.
brother, and calls his subjects 1. Cronic. 28. 2. 1. Cor. 5. 12. 12, 13.
brethren. or who could be ignorant, that S. Paul subiecteth al unto this
order: saving those only, which are strangers from the church. So that to
say, that Princes are not subject unto this order: is al one, as if he should
say, that Princes pertain no to the kingdom of heaven, are none of the church,
have no part with Christ etc. Thus is boeth Christ robbed of his honor, which
in contempt of his order (as thowgh yt were to base for Princes to go under)
is him self contemned: and Princes defrauded of a singular 1. Cor. 5. 5 2 Timothy
1. 20. 2. Cor. 7. 11.
aid of salvation, and way to draw them to repentance, when they (throwgh the
common corruption) fall into such diseases, against which this medicin was
prepared.

Hither belongs the practice of the church in this, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 34.
Theod. 5. 18 Platina. ca. Gelasius.
and such kind of censures, toward the Emperoures Philip, Theodosius, and
Anastasius on the one side, and the godly Emperoures submission thereunto on
the other, which if he (upon confidence of M. Gualters authority) dare co^demn
of pride in them which exercised those censures, or of folly in the Emperors
that submitted them selves: not to charge him with Master Nowels authority,
which says that the Prince ovught patiently to abide excommunication at Tom.
2. fol. 53. Numb. 12. 14. 15. 2. Cronicl. 26. 21.
the Bishops hands, what will he answer to the example of Mary Moses sister and
king Vzzias, which were subject to the same law of vnclea^nes by reason of the
leprosy, as well as any of the common people. For that the separation commanded
in respect thereof, was not only a civil policy, to keep the whole from the
sik, but that there was therein used, a part of Ecclesiastical discipline, yt
may appear, for that the Priest had the knowledge of the cause, the shutting
them out, and receiving them in: and for that Azarias the Priest of the lord,
with other his Assistantes, removed the king out of the temple, for the which
he is commended in the scripture.

And if yt had been only a civil separation, yet when the Princes could not be
exempted from yt, for fear of a corporal infecting of their subjects: how much
les owght they to be exempted from that separation, which is 1. Co. 5. 6.
instituted against the spiritual contagion. that which he obiecteth, of the
drawing this spiritual sword, at every light or no occasion at al, thereby to
deliver the Prince from subjection thereto: is vayn. for if they abuse this
power, the Price needs not only to co^te^n yt, but also may punish the
abusers of yt: So that in this respect, there is les cause, why the Prince
should shake of this yoke of Christ, then others: considering, that he has
better remedy against the abuse of yt, then others.

That co^tractes of mariadg, appertain not unto the judgment Diuis. 3. pa. 680.
of church officers, it is manifest, considering that it is partly oeconomical,
and belonging to the right of the 1. Co. 7. 38.
parents, partly civil, in respect that it was in times past concluded before
the Ruth 4. cha. 1. 2.
Magistrate. For as for the blessing in the church, it is no part of the
contract, but a thing annexed unto yt. which appears, in that upon the bare
contract, before the blessing: the parties (althowgh not to have company one
with another) be Math. 1. 20.
man and wife: and for that the breaker of that contract, is taken for an Deuteronomy.
22. 23. 24.
adulterer. whereupon it follows, that the judgment of diuors, being merely
publik, must be the civil magistrates alone. For matters of wills, it
appears that they belong unto the Magistrate: considering that they are
occupied in the commodities of this life, and towch the distribution of goods
or lands.

As for the An. reason, that the Bishop having best knowledge in those things,
may best judge in them: it is a hook, to get al into their own hands. But I
deny first, that they have, or can (by their calling) have best knowledge in
such things: considering that there be diverse things in them, which require
other knowledge, then of the law of god. And the case is rare, when the question
is, whether a legacy, a contract, or a diuors be according to the law of god,
or no: at least which requires any deep knowledge to dissolve it. And if all that which may fall into these matters, were to be decided by the law of god:
yet to sit as judge in them, requires not only knowledge, but also a calling,
which Bishops can not have, for the causes above alleged. Therefore it is
manifest: that herein the Bishops are usurpers, whereof also the D. may read,
M. Nowels judgment, that vuhoredomes, 2. Tom. fol. 25.
adulteries, slanders, subtraction of tithes, cases testamentary etc. vuhich
Bishops sometime meddle vuith: are no more spiritual, then are murders,
theftes, oppressions, and other injuries.

Nether will it help him: that they exercise al manner of jurisdiction, in the
Princes right. For, first it has been showed, that they owght to exercise no
civil jurisdiction, althowgh it were committed unto them. Then, how comes it
to pas, that in right of their bishoprik, withowt further commission from the
Prince: they take upon them these judgments of whoredom, divorces etc, even
as they found them in time of popery. And as for excommunication, and other
censures ecclesiastical, if they exercise them in the Magistrates right: it
follows that boeth the magistrate may much more exercise them him self, and
appoint other then ministers to do the^, boeth which, as they be absurd, so
are they overthrown by the D. him self: which thinks it unlawful for
Chauncelors to excommunicate, for that (as I suppose) they be no ministers.

In the next, where the Chauncelors are charged to excommunicate, and absolve
for money, also one man for another etc. he says, it is the faut of the man
and not of the law. which if it were true, yet it argues the Bishops
insufferable carelesnes of gods glory, whose institution is thus shamefully
profaned: and neglect of duty toward the Prince, whose subjects are thus
pilled. And here it is not to be omitted, that where the ecclesiastical
ce^sures in reformed churches, are exercised withowt a penny charge unto any
person: our churches, partly by reason of the Archbis. and Bishops, and partly
the Archdeacons officers and their hangons, which by this means live in all
bravery and iolytie of life, are sore wrung: So that they are thereby much les
able, to contribute to the necessary charges, either of releeuing their poor
minister, or susteyning the subsidies laid upon them, for defense of the realm.
Therefore if the Archbishops and Archdeacons will needs take more upon them,
then them selves be able to beweld: at the least, let them pay their servants
wages, and not thus burden the church. But thus the reader may see, how
unworthily the Archbishops, Bishops and Archdeacons deal with the church, which
not content them selves to use tyranny over yt, and to take upon them of their
private authority, which belongs unto other with them, have also brought it
into bondage under their servants, and servants servants, I mean
Chauncelors, Comissaries etc. The next I pas by.

In the next, where I show that the office of Chorepiscopus Diuis. 6. p. 682.
alleged for defense of the Chauncelers office, vuas far another thing: he
says, that he only alleged yt to prove that Bishops had their deputies*
which, how dishonest a shift it is, may appear: in that he makes no difference,
between the Chauncelor and Chorepiscopus, but only in the name: saying, to
contend for the name when the thing is certain, is a token of a contentious
person.

Althowgh he had not so gained, that the Bishops had deputies: seeing I In the
first booK and in the former part of the booK. p. 523.
showed, that boeth the nature of the word, and the authority of certain
interpreters, lead to the signification as well of a Bishop in the country
towns, as of a deputy. yt is untrue, that I have any where allowed an ordinary
deputy, whereof the question is here: but contrary wise, have showed that there
owght to be none, not only in the treatise of the Pastors residence, but also
in Diui 2. p. 679.
this, whereunto the D. answers nothing. But if it were granted, that they
might have, such as I have showed to have been Chorepisc. yet what a strange
conclusion is this, that they may as well have Chauncelors: considering that he
is now constreyned to confess, the office of the one greatly different from the
other. The rest is in the former part of this booK p. 146. 229. and in this
part diuis. 16. p. 645.
answered: so are the two In the examination of the D. ce^sures.
next.

In the next, where he is charged for alowing as necessary the Archbishops
court of faculties etc, which he confesses he knows not, what it means. He
says, he browght better reason for it, then is browght against yt. which is no
defense of his rashness, whereby he affirmed, that which he confessed he knew
not. His reason which he has learned since is, that the Queen's p. 561.
prerogatives are defended there: As thowgh the Archbishop were the fittest man
to defend her prerogatives. Also, that it was set up, when the Pope was put
down: in deed so yt was, which is a good sign, that the Archbishop (saving
profession of obedience to the king) was made Pope in his place. For hereupon
it comes, that he exercises intolerable and filthy merchandise: of which
diverse objected by the Adm. he partly confessed, 561. 685.
and part throwgh lothnes to confess and inability to answer, were passed by.

That also, of not changing laws but upon strong reasons, which he other where
repeateth: has no place, where the question is, whether they be against the
word of god or no. For here that worthy sentence has place: if god command any
thing August. in his 3. booK of confess. 8 chap.
against the manner or decree of vuhatsoeuer they be, if it vuere never done
before, it ovught to be done, if it have been omitted, it ovught to be
restored, if it vuere never before, it ovught to be instituted. If the D.
allegation have place, it has place in variable ceremonies: which
notwithstanding (as has been showed) the church has changed, according as the
circumstances have required, to the most of her comodity.

Seeing therefore, our Sau. Christ commands, that the excommunication should be
made by the church: Seeing the Apostles his faithful interpreters, communicate
the same power with yt, in commanding yt to thrust out impenite^t sinners, to
procure that boeth they may be saved, and others also kept from infectio^:
seeing also the holy ghost, chideth the church, for that it had not used this
power against the unrepentant: Seeing he communicates with it, the power of
absoluing those which were thrust out, when they declare their repentance: Last
of al, seeing boeth the judgment, and general practice of the elder churches,
and in a manner of those which are now, lead us hereunto: Of the other side,
seeing the Bishop can not pas smaller matters, withowt the advice of the church:
seeing by his sole excommunication, he has browght the church to a miserable
servitude, and that not to him self alone, but to his servants, Chauncelors,
Officials, etc. seeing under color hereof, he has thrust his sickle into the
Magistrates office, suffered the glory of god to be trodden under foot, the
Queen's subjects to be pilled: And finally, seeing that for his sole
excommunication, there is not so much as one either approved example, or writer
to be browght (some of the papists them selves being ashamed of it:) let us
conclude, that the excommunication does not belong unto the Bishop alone, but
that by the ordinance of god, the church also here owght to have her interest.

THE TENTH TRACT. OF THE OFFICE OF DEAcons: vuhich contains the D. xix, and
xiiij.
HIs question, where the office of widows is restreined 1. Diuis. pa* 686.
to the poor which are sik, and strangers, I pas as impertinent: especially
when he does not assign any other, to whom their attendance belongs. that
the contrary does appear, almost in expres words: is but his accustomed
bouldnes, of untrue speaking.

Let us therefore come, to the Deacons: whose office is assigned, to be about
the church money. The Romans 12. ^.
first proof hereof, received for answer, that it was but daliance with the
scripture: ^ith which time, althowgh M. Calvin, Bucer, Martyr, and Beza, have
been showed to have so expounded the place, yet his accusation is unrepealed:
whereby al these learned men, with many others stand charged still by him, as
daliers with the scripture. But what, think you, does he answer, to this whole
college of godly learned men? he opposes the exposition of certain fathers.
who would have looked for this answer at his hand, in setting one writer
against another, withowt a tittle of reason, words only excepted, which has
so bytingly, page 65.
condemned yt in other.

These learned men, were not ignorant of those expositions: nether did they
lightly depart, from the interpretation of the ancient writers. For whom also
it may be answered, that in interpreting this place of private giving: they
me^t not, to shut out this office. And of M. Bullinger it is manifest, that
upon the 12. Romans
he does so allow of that, that he will have it understood properly of the
Deaconship: so that you openly abuse his testimony herein. The cause why the
ancient fathers followed this exposition, is known well enowgh to those which
have been conversant in them, with any judgment: namely a desire they had, to
draw al to the correction of manners streyning often times their textes in hand,
to draw them to the present use of their churches. by reason whereof, whether in
steed of milk, they sometimes drw blood, I leau it to the judgment of the
learned reader.

But let us see, if this wrangling of his: can be convinced, of the place yt
self. where first it is manifest, that it is an explanation of that similitude
which was drawn from the body: in which the Apostle showed, that as all the
members have not one office, So in the church, every one has not the same
function. whereupon follows, that if this distributio^ of money, which is a
part of that explanation, should agree to all the church alike, and should not
be a several office: he should quite overthrow his purpose. For he should,
show, things agreeing unto al alike: in steed that he should have showed, that
some things be peculiar. If he reply, that he had showed those before, and
that here he begins to show the things, which are common to al Christians
alike: he is manifestly beaten down, by the order of the Apostle. For seeing
boeth that which immediately goes before this, and which follows immediately
after, be publik offices: what extreme bouldnes would it be, to say that this
in the midst, is but private. If he do give him self this license, let him
show example, of such an order.

Further, the Apostle here makes a partition: as it is manifest by the words
and articles, which are instruments to part with. Now if he will have one
membre in this partition, bigger then all the rest, and to conteyn them al: he
makes the holy ghost (which is to be detested) an evil and an uneven parter.
Hereupon it comes, that when he speaks of the duties, which belong to al
alike: he begins with another verse. 9.
form of speech.

Last of al, yt is not to be omitted, that he uses the word of Distributor,
rather then the word giver. For althowgh it be taken sometime, for the giver,
yet that is but by a trope: for so much as the same is often the distributor,
which is the giver: so that the proper signification being, to dispose that
which was given of others, agrees unto the Deacon, and not unto one which
gives of his own. His exceptions of Prophesy, and widows office In the former
part of this booK. p. 326. and in this later part diuis. 5. p. 637. Diuis. 4.
p. 688. Romans 12. 8.
be answered. In the next being co^uicted of his untruth, he falls to
jesting: albeyt it be manifest, that the Adm. towcheth not only things in
controversy, but sometime also, the breach of that which is established.

To prove, that the Deacon owght not to meddle with the administration of the
word and Sacraments, I alleged first, that the Apostle vuilling every one to
keep him self in his bounds, boundeth the Deacons office in distributing of
the church treasur, and by that separateth him, from those vuhich have the
dispensation of the vuord: vuhereas, if he should preach the vuord as the
other, the Apostle should have made an evil partition, and pretended a
separation vuhere none is. His answer hereunto is, that it is no reason: but
why it is not, he keeps to him self.

The second reason was, that for so much as the Apostles having such passing
gifts, did find them selves unable to susteyn boeth the ministeries, of the
vuord, and for the poor: that therefore there can be much les novu, any able to
do them boeth together. His first exception whereunto, is frivolous, and
Tract. 7. diuis. 2 pa. 758.
before confuted: his other that they spent no great time in provision for
their sermons, is untrue and opens a gap to Anabaptism. For althowgh their
gifts were greater in those times, then now: yet they omitted not therefore,
to study diligently which may appear, in that S. Paul is so 2. Ti. 4. 13.
careful to have his parchmentes browght: in that S. Peter had 2. Pet. 3. 16
red S. Paul's epistles so diligently: Likewise that the Prophets in times
past which had extraordinary gifts, used great diligence in reading, as it may
appear in Daniel. which, notwithstanding he was so wise, so expert in the
tongues, and had so often and so wonderful revelations: yet Dan. 9.
studied the prophesy of Jeremy. And in a word, of them al, S. Peter
pronou^ceth, that 1. Pet. 1 10.
they took great pains in their prophesies: using words most strong, to set
forth their great labor, in providing for that they tawght.

Nether was this of pleasure, and a thing which they might either do or leau
undone, but a commandment: as it is to be seen in the example of Timothy,
which had gifts so much the more excellent then the Deacons, as his office of
Euangelistship, was higher then the Deaconship. For he is 2. Tim. 4. 13. 25.
bidde^, to read, to meditate and to preach, joining one with another, and that
not slightly but with attention, yea that (...).
he should dvuel in them, or be as it were shut up and enclosed in them:
thereby noting the great diligence that was to be bestowed, as well in reading
and studying, as in preachi^g, And thus went the building of god singulerly
forward, when unto the gifts which came withowt their labor miraculously: they
labored also after either encreas of them, or getting of nue, by the ordinary
means provided of god in that behalf.

Again, S. Paul reckoning up, all the ministers of the word: Ephesians. 4.
the Deacon not being there, it follows that he is no mininister of the word.
And here the D. is plainly found, at strife with him self. For he confessing,
that there is in that place, 308.
a complet and perfect division of the ministeries of the word, and withal that
309.
the Deacon is not there contained: does notwithstanding here, sing a clean
contrary song.

Moreover, it is diligently to be observed, that S. Paul in describing this
office, requires not that they should be able, 1. Tim. 3. 8.
or apt to teach: which notwithstanding being (by the An. judgment) the chief
point belonging unto him, should have been most absurdly left out. Lastly, if
the Deacons office had been, together with the Stewardship of the church
treasure, to have preached and administered the sacramenres: yt must follow, that
his office must have been a greater office, then the Pastors, as that which
requires greater gifts for executing boeth that which the pastor does, and
more to: which being absurd, that is also, whereof this follows. That monster,
which remains in this division: I will set upon, when I shall have run throwgh
that which pertayneth unto this matter, as it lies in the 14 Tract. page 5^2.


As I did not before deny, so now I co^fes him to have been Phillip the
Evangelist, and not Phillip the Apostle, which is mentioned Acts the 8: and
hold as before, that he preached by virtue of his Euangelistship, and not by
virtue of his Deaconship, vuhich vuas then ceased, for that the church
vuhereunto he served vuas scattered. Against which answer, his authority out of
the Acts 21, to prove that he was still Deacon: is quite contrary, to him self.
For it affirms of the time past, that he was, before Paul's arriual unto
Caesarea, Deaco^: not that he was so, when he arrived. For then the
interpreters, would have turned the participle, which serves boeth for the
time past and present, according to the circumstance of the place, which is one
of the seven, and not vuhich vuas: So that, here we have the common consent of
al interpreters, flatly against the D. namely, that Phillip was not then Deacon
when S. Paul came to Cesarea, but had been before.

That of M. Gualter, makes also against him: which places the Deacons office,
in the disposing of the church treasure, and that they preached not, but in
times of necessity. So that where M. Gualter permits preaching no more unto
Deacons, then you do baptim unto women: you will have it, their standing office.

The difference between a Priest and a Deacon, browght out of Augustine and
Epiphanius, can by no means stand: considering that, that imposition of hands
whereby gifts were extraordinarily given, which Phillip absteyned from, he did
not absteyn from, only as Deacon, but also as he was Evangelist: seeing that
was a thing peculier unto the Apostles, and a proper note, whereby the lord
magnified their ministry, above al other ministeries whatsoever. So that, it
is no good reason to say, that Phillip could not by laying on of his hands
give the holy ghost, therefore he was a Deacon: considering that, nether
Evangelists, nor Prophets them selves meddled with that kind of laying on of
hands, which is there mentioned.

And if Phillip were then Deacon, he was Deacon of the church of Jerusalem,
whereunto he was chosen. But it is manifest, he was not Deacon there:
considering that S. Luke after his departure from thence, and preaching in
Samaria, and certain other places, brings him to Caesarea, where Acto. 8. 40.
Act. 21. 8.
he leaves him as a houshoulder and towndweller. so that unless he dare say of
Phillip that he was a continual non resident: yt can not be, that he was Deacon
after his departure from Jerusalem.

But let us grant, that Phillip was boeth a Deacon and Evangelist, which is
notwithstanding absurd: seeing that the Apostles confessed them selves
insufficient, to susteyn that burden, together with their preaching ministry.
I say let us grant that, yet forasmuch as he can not deny, but that yt
belongs unto the office of an Evangelist to preach: how is he able to prove,
that Phillip preached rather by virtue of his Deaconship, the^ of his
Euangelistship. So that onles he be so bold, as to deny that Phillip was there
no Evangelist: he gains nothing, by all this travail. For otherwise, it
follows that Phillipes example, will not warrant the Deacons preaching: except
he have, some other ministry of the word, joined with yt.

Therefore, let not him any more pretend, the authority of the godly writers:
but confess, as the truth is, that this argument was ministered him out of
Pigghius: who upon this Piggh. Controuers. 11.
example of Phillip, affirms (as he does) that the Deacons may preach, even
as the Priests do. As for Augustine, he goes about (althowgh not so aptly, as
I have declared) rather to show, that the Deacons might not lay on their
hands: then that yt belonged, unto them to preach. which may appear, in that
he does not permit them to conceive the prayers, whereunto the people should
answer: which notwithstanding is les, then to preach.

I showed, that by the same reason, they are houlden Diuis. 2. p. 583.
from the administration of the supper, they ovught also to be barred from that
of baptim: considering that, it is not only a miserable rending in sonder of
things vuhich god has joined, but also gives occasion, or rather, being
crept in, maynteyneth a dangerous error: vuhich is, that men esteem some
holier thing to be in the sacrament of the holy supper, then in baptim. To this
he answers, that the reason of this difference is: because yt is mentioned
that Phillip baptized, and not that he administered the supper. where, by the
way, let the reader observe, that upon two particular examples, which he also
untruly pretends, he would ground a doctrine, that the Deacons owght to
preach, althowgh he be able to show no rule, nor commandment for yt: which
notwithstanding he utterly condemns in us, althowgh yt be showed, to have
been done generally. Secondly, how he reasons negatiuely of authority, that it
was not done, because yt is not so written: yea which is more, that yt owght
not to be done, another thing also, which he reprocheth us with.

Now, as for his answer, yt is to frivolous. For, althowgh yt be a good reason
in the direction of the church, to say, there is nothing wtitten towching yt,
therefore it is not to be admitted: yet in the practice of that which is
prescribed to be done, it is an evil argument to say, it is not written,
therefore yt was not done: much more, that yt may not be done. For, when our
Sau. Christ's acts, Ioh. 20.
were not al written: is yt any marueil, althowgh all that Phillip did, be not
written? And by his reason, the Bishops owght not to administer the supper:
considering that, in all the scripture it is not mentioned, that a Bishop
ministered yt.

Nether, if Phillip did not minister the supper: follows yt therefore, that he
had not authority to administer yt, as well as baptim: except he think, that our
Sa. Christ had not authority, as well to administer baptim, which he did Ioh. 4. 2.
not, as to administer the supper, which Luke 22. 19.
he did.

To that wherein I noted the disorder in our church, permitting to one that can
not preach, the administration of the supper, and not to the Deacon (as they
call him) which can preach: he answers, that the one is called thereto, the
other is not. where he must needs mean, that the one is lawfully called
thereto, and the other lawfully shut therefro: which is an asking, of that in
question.

My reply to his objection of Steuens oration, that yt vuas no Diuis. 3. p. 584.
sermon, but a defense of him self against his accusations: is clear. For yt
appears, that the high Priest and Scribes Act. 6. 11. 15 and 7 1. 2.
etc. were there set in judgment, the false witnesses were set up against him,
he was demanded whether the accusation were true, and upon that demand began
his oration. now, let him show such a form of preaching, to have been used in
any church.

Yt is also unlike, that the high Priest and Scribes would permit him to
preach: when as they had forbidden the Apostles before. but to give him leau to
answer to his accusatio^s, was needful for the^: thereby to mayntein that visard
of holiness, whereby they pretended an exact observation of the law, which was,
that no man should be condemned unheard. And so, if he will have this a sermon,
he shall yet gain nothing: considering that he had not this power by his
ministry of Deaconship, but by commandment of the Council, that had power to
require an account of that, which he had propounded in disputation, with those
of the College of Liber tynes etc.

His proof, that it was in the Synagog, is first withowt al warrant: there
being not a word thereof, in the scripture. And yet being made in Jerusalem, if
it had been a sermon: it is liker, to have been in the temple. Nether, if yt
were in the Synagog, has yt any force to prove a sermon: onles he think, that
every one which pleaded his cause in Paul's Consistory, in Queen Mary's time,
made a sermon.

That he also reprehended them sharply, is no other thing, the^ diverse of the
Martyrs of god have done with us, which, I think he will not say to have
preached, by virtue of any ecclesiastical function. althowgh I confess, that
that is not to be lightly done, and withowt some especial direction, whereof
the lord, in such times, does furnish his: otherwise those that are private
men, owght to content them selves, with a simple and plain defense of the truth.

Nether is Paul's answer unto Tertullus accusation Act. 24, any sermon but a
simple defense, addressed only to Felix as to his Judge, uttered at the bar, as
they speak, in a civil Court, and in a civil or common wealth cause, namely of
sedition: and has les of the nature of a sermon, then Steuens oration: yet, it
is singulerly profitable for instruction of our behavior, in like cases. The
least part also of S. Peter's oration Act. 2, is spent in answer to the
accusation of dronckennes: and that nether compelled, nor judicial, as was S.
Steuens.

I grant, a man may defend him self against falls accusations in a sermon: but
that is not, when he stands iudicially accused like a malefactor, as S.
Steven did. whose vuhole oration, how apt a purgation yt is (which he denies):
the reader may fetch from M. Calvin, upon that place: that I be not compelled,
to lenghthen my book by so long translations. Against M. Beza (in quoting of
whom, I failed) are opposed Gualter and the Centuries: of whose sentences,
which is truer, let it be judged of the reasons on boeth sides. whether in the
two next diuisio^s, the Ans. shifteth his gros oversight, let the reader judge:
especially, when as his pretense, that the Adm. assigned the deaconship, to be
only in handling the church treasure, is untrue. For nether have they the
word, only, nor any thing of that value: and it is manifest, that their drift
was, only to shut out the Deaco^ from the administration of the word and
sacraments. so that, in taking his words, in that sens which he now would
have them: in effect he confesses, him self to have but trifled with the
Admonition: changing the pricks, which they had set him to shoot at and
roving after a mark of his own finedi^g. In the next, I alleged, that if the
Deaco^ship vuere granted, a step to the ministry, yet thereof folovueth not
that yt is the mynistery: but contrarivuise, that it is not, and therefore
ovught not to do things pertaining to the ministers. To this he answers, he
concluded not so: which I confess, can not be forcibly won out of his words.
But he says, he might have so concluded: which is absurd, and al one as if he
should say, that the foot of the stayer is the same with the top, whether it,
in ascending, leads. And how dare he say that he might have so reasoned: when
as to the argument, which I drw from these words of his, he can answer
nothing, how could he have hurt us, with this, which he suffers to be driven
so flat, upon the head of his own cause.

Vuhere afterward, to prove it no step to the ministry, I alleged, Diuis. 7.
p. 587.
that the gifts are diverse, and that one may vuel dispense the church treasure
vuhich, for vuant of utterance, should never be fit Minister: he answers,
that the Bishops and Deacons gifts, required 1. Timot. 3, do not much differ,
which is a great untruth. For it is required of the one, that he should be
boeth able to teach, and of long time in profession of the gospel, nether
whereof, is required of the Deacon: when notwithstanding, the first only of
them, makes a greater difference, as towching the duty of preaching which is
in question, then if he had made them to differ, in an hundredth other things.
he adds that they may be put by the mynistery, for their lewd life: which is
a mere mispending of the time, for so may the Clokkeper or the Sexten. Again,
that Ambrose with other, expound yt so: which is likewise, that being before
confessed by me: especially, when other learned men, by his own confession,
leaving their exposition, take this which I propounded.

Further, that utterance sufficient for the distribution of the church money,
is sufficient also for the ministry of the word: which must of necessity be
his answer, if he speak to the purpose. And being so, it is to absurd: the
confutation whereof (if it deserve any) may be fetched from that In the former
part of this booK. Tract. 5.
before handled. Althowgh, if that were true, the argument is not avoided:
oneles he will also say, that there is as great knowledge and as deep judgment in
the scriptures, required for the disposing of the church treasure, as for the
preaching of the word. unto the other reason, which I browght against this,
that the deaconship should be a step to the ministry, raised out of the same
place: he answers nothing.

Here he abuses the readers patience again. For where Diuis. 8. p. ^88.
before, not able to show one testimony out of any ancient writing, that the
Deacons had to do with the word and sacraments, I confessed notwithstanding
frankly, that there were some: he has here, set them down. whereunto, beside
the answer before made, I ad: that those cited out of Tertullian and Ierom, be
so far from helping him, that they make against him. For in that the Deacons
could not meddle with the word or Sacraments, but upon the Bishops license: it
argues, that yt belo^ged not unto their office: seeing it is absurd, that that
which they were bound to do by reason of gods institution, should be hanged
upon the Bishops pleasure.

Likewise, that out of M. Beza, is against him. For in saying, they supplied
the Pastors office: he gives to understand, that it belonged properly unto
Pastors, and was done by Deacons but in time of necessity. And so was, the
Administration of the supper: which ( 583.
says he) he can not read in any author, to have been permitted to the Deacon.
wherein, to let pas the Council of 2. Con^. can. 15.
Arles and others, which license this unto the^, in absence of other: at the
least, did he not read M. Bezas sentence, which he has thrust into his own
book, that they ministered the sacraments, not only the Sacrament of Baptim:
althowgh the places quoted 1. Corin. 1. 14. 15. and John 4. 2. prove no such
thing, no not in the Ans. own judgment, as I think. For, will he say, that the
twelve Apostles which baptized, were al Deacons? or that because S. Paul did
not commonly baptize, those whom he converted, that therefore Deacons baptized
them: as if there were nether Evangelists nor Pastors, to do yt. Nether is yt
enowgh for him thus to trifle, except he use most vile reproaches against me: as
thowgh I striued, against a manifest truth. But that (even by M. Bezas
judgment) the administering of baptim, does lawfully belong to the Minister
alone, and not to the Deacon: the D. may see Libell. de Quaest. in Sacr.
quaest. 137. Tom. 2. 6. Council. Constantinop. san. 16.
otherwhere.

Now, unto the most certain grounds, of the word of god: let him hear, the
testimonies of the ancient times. And first of the general Council, which
makes the Deaco^s Ministers of the poor, whom it calls Ministers of tables
and not of the holy things. Another Council decreed, Tom. 1. Co^. Vasense 2.
Can. 4.
that in the Ministers siknes: the Deacon should read, the homilies of the
fathers. whereby appears, that that Counsel, not so much as in the time of the
Pastors siknes, suffered them to preach the word, but to read homilies: thereby
assigning also, the greatest honor in doing any thing which the Minister used
to do in the church, in that he might read either the scriptures or homilyes.
Chrysostom says, that the Deacons had need of great vuisdome: althovugh the
preaching In act. ca. 6
of the vuord be not committed unto the^. And further shows, that yt is
absurd, that they should do boeth the office of preaching, and caring for the
poor: considering that they be not able, to do boeth thorovughly. yea, even
immediately after that corrupt sentence, which the Ans. will needs father upon
Ambrose: it is said, In 4. cap. ad Ephesians.
that in his time, the Deacons did not preach. Of this practis of the elder
churches, we have M. 5. Decade Sermon. 3.
Bullinger that gives a plain testimony with us, that althovugh, the goods of
the church increasing, there vuere beside the Deacons, Subdeacons and
Archdeacons: yet that the Deacons remained still in their charge for the poor,
and vuere not as yet mingled, vuith the Bishops or priests, and vuith the
order of those vuhich tavught.

This being thus set, that which, for the strau^genes, I called a monster:
falls flatly. for when yt has appeared, boeth by the word of god, and
practis of the elder churches, that it be lo^geth not unto the office of the
Deaco^, to meddle with the mynistery of the word and sacraments, if yt be
true, which the Ans. 689.
says, that provision for the poor by a Deaco^, is not necessary under a
Christian Prince: yt must follow, that the office of Deaconship under a
Christian Prince is unnecessary. which as yt is absurd, so him self (I think)
will not affirm yt: if he do, yt has the same refutation, which the denial of
the necessity of the office of Elders, has had before.

Na althowgh yt were granted, which he would have, that the Deacons office
were to minister the word and sacrament: yet this point of provision for the
poor taken away, the Deacon is quite extinguished: considering that there
should remayn, no part of office, whereby the minister of the word, should be
severed. if he say, that there should be difference, in that the one might
minister the supper, and the other not: beside that I have showed how absurd
that is, he ca^ not so escape. for still the gifts are al one: considering that
whosoever has gifts of god to minister the word and Bapti^, the same has
also gifts to enable him, to minister the supper. whereas seeing S. Paul
separateth the offices by their gifts: yt were against reason to Romans 12. 8.
make the^ diverse offices, which have the same gifts for their execution.
Beside that, in taking away that which he is co^streyned to co^fes, to have
been by gods institution, at the least a part of this office: he is manifestly
co^uicted, of cha^ging and corrupting, if not of utter overthrowing the lords
ordinance. Else, let him show us, what tittle of the scripture he has: whereby
yt may appear, that the ministry of the word and Baptim (which he surmiseth to
belong unto yt) should be perpetual, and the provision for the poor temporal.
p. 69^.


So also appears, that the co^tradictio^ is unanswered which was laid unto
him: in that in the lati book saying yt owght not to be taken away, in this and
the other, he says that this part is not necessary. for thus should yt not be
the office of a Deaco^, instituted by the holy Apost. but another function,
forged by D. whitgift. This assertion of his, being strau^g: his reason
whereupon yt is grounded, is yet further out of fashion. for he contenteth not
him self, to say that me^ may devise as good away for the provision of the
poor, as did the lord him self: oneles in this behalf, he set up the wisdom of
men above the lords. For this does he plainly in effect affirm, when he
says, that the poor may by other lawful and politik means, be better provided
for: considering that yt was the lords own order, established by the Apost.
where, beside that his reason, is a demand of that in question, and that the
untruth thereof, has been In the former part of this booK. and in the preface.
Es. 7. 15. etc.
before noted: I will answer further out of Esra, where there is a notable
story, towchi^g a matter not much unlike. for after he had received of king
Darius, boeth precious vessels and other gifts for gods service: being now in
journey from Babylon unto Jerusalem, and understanding, upon view of his
company, that there were not of Priests and Levites a sufficient number, to
whom he might commit this treasure: stayed there with Esra 8. 15.
his whole suit, until such time as he had recovered, a competent number of the
church men. For that this was the cause Esra 8. 25.
of their sending for, appears by the yssu, of committing the treasure unto
their custody.

And albeit there might be some other use of them at Jerusalem, beside this
cariadg: yet that their presence was necessary in this respect, it is manifest,
not only because otherwise he might have given order, that they should have
comen after, withowt staying so great a company, for their sakes: but
especially upon the words of Esra, which assigns verse. 28.
the cause of their election unto that charge, to have been, for that the money
and plate being consecrate to a holy use, yt behooved them which were likewise
consecrated, to have the custody of yt.

Now, if the Ans. should sit in judgment of this act of Esra, and judge by his
Canon law, which he has here set down: this godly learned Priest, has already
received the blak stone or sentence of condemnation. For were there not as
faithful, and as wise for that purpose in the company, as either the Priests or
Levites were? were there not of the Princes, which for their skill in fight, and
for the trayn which followed them, were more able to make head with the enemy,
that should give the attempt to take them away: then were either the Priests or
Levites? finally, is it not a mere superstition, to stand thus upon the
difference of a tribe or family, with los of time, and expens of money, in so
great a company?

But the Priest, appealeth to that court, where the canon of the holy
scripture, sits Judge. which because yt teaches, that the safty and
prosperous succes of things, depend upon the blessing of god, and that that
blessing is especially given, where things are done according to his
institution: the same restores his righteousness again, and gives him the
white stone of absolution: for that the weaker, and more unlikely, having the
calling of god thereunto, is more apt, then withowt that calling, the strongest
Sampson that can be got. So that, if in common reason, the Collectors were
fitter then the Deacons, which is untrue (considering that the same may be
ecclesiastically ordained Deacons, which are Collectors) yet, forasmuch as it
is the unrepealed and vnrevoked order of god, that the Deacon should do this:
yt owght to be preferred, to all the inventions of men, how faier and colorable
soever they appear.

But of the confutation of this, enowgh is said: especially, considering that
beside the continual practis of the church, with the common consent of the
learned boeth old and nue, M. Bucer has labored this point particularly, in
the behalf of our church: which shows, that this office Bucer de regno
Christ^ and in 4. ca. ad Ephesians.
must of necessity be restored, as yt is described Act. the vi, if England vuil
receive, the true discipline of Christ.

Hereupon also, considering there be poor in every church: diuis. 5 page 690.
In the former part of this booK Tract. 6. chap. 3. In this part Tract. 8.
the use of this office in every church, is manifest. For further confirmation
of which point, the reader may have recours to that I have proved before: that
in every church, according to gods institution, there owght to be a Bishop:
especially, when the Ans. him self will not deny, but the Bishop and Deacon
should go together. Likewise, unto that which has been said of the Eldership,
in this behalf: considering that some of the reasons, are common to boeth. As
for the first of his exceptions, that the Deacons of one city, may serve all the
whole Dioces, yt is to far out of square: considering that for one only
church, and that within one city Jerusalem, there were seven.

His second, that in scripture yt can not be showed, that Deacons were placed
any where then in cities: is first to reason negatiuely of authority, not in the
question whether yt owght to be done or no, but whether yt was done: which not
we alone, but him self also condemns. Secondly, if this be a reason to bar
the churches, which are not in cities, because there are none specified but in
great cities: the^ he shall by the same reason, bereue them of their Pastors:
considering that there is never a small town, of which yt is any more said, that
yt had a Pastor, then that yt had a Deacon.

Thirdly, he says that the same can not be showed (oneles he be greatly
deceived) in any ancient writer. wherein he gives suspision, that he took not
his wares by tale, but in gros: otherwise, he might better have known what he
has suffered his page 339.
book, to be stuffed with. For yt has examples of country churches, belonging
to the church of Alexandria: which had boeth Elders and Deaco^s. And his own
Ignatius, whom he will have John the Apostles scholar: affirms, that every
church ovught Ad Philadelph.
to have this office of Deaconship.

His comparison of this reason, there vuere Deacons at Jerusalem, therefore in all churches, with this there be preachers in Cambridg, therefore in all England:
is vnaequal. For yt was not nakedly so propounded, but warranted with reasons:
in that the Apostles labored after the co^formity of the churches. so that the
proof, that there was such an office in one, is proof, that there was in all: or
at least that there owght to have been, which is al one, to the matter in hand,
his answer whereunto is before confuted. Therefore, the comparison had been In
the former part 6. Tract. and 3. ca^. Tract. S. chap 2. Diuis. 9. p. 641.
iuster with this: that the men in the city have two hands a piece, therefore
they in the country have so to: and if any have not, that there is a faut. The
next is answered, so is the next to yt.

To the reason I alleged, that the church may be at as small charges vuith a
Deacon, as vuith a Collector, seeing that yt may make of the Collector a Deacon:
he makes no answer, only he covers him self, under color of the admonit:
which (ironically as I judge) says that every parish, can not be at cost, to
have boeth a Curat and a Deacon: considering, that yt requires, boeth a Pastor
and a Deacon, in every congregation. althowgh, to cut of occasion, about their
meaning herein, I will not strive. The second chapter In the 8. Tract. diuis. 5.
p. 637.
of this tractat, is answered before.

Seeing then, the Apostle separateth the office of the Deacon, from the
ministry of the word, making them diverse members of one whole: and seeing that
in the perfect division of the ministry of the word, he is not remembered:
seeing also the Apostle describing his qualities, requires not that he should
be able to teach: Again, seeing that in executing his office toward the poor,
together with the function of preaching, he should be charged with more, then
the Apostles them selves could do, and had need of greater gifts, then the
Pastor: last of al, seeing boeth by judgment, and practis of the purer churches,
the Deacons have been either altogether shut out from preaching, or being
permitted to preach, have done yt upon a nue grace, over and above the calling,
of a Deacon: I conclude, that the Deacon has no calling of god to preach the
word, and by the same reason, that he has none to administer any Sacrament:
which later conclusion shall further appear, in the next Tractat.

THE ELEVENTH TRACTATE, AGAINST THE CORRVPTIons in doctrine, tovuching the holy
Sacraments.
The first chapter vuhereof is, against the sacriledg of private persons, and
vuemen especially: in administering the holy Sacrament of Baptim, as it
begins page 503 of the D. book.

LEaving to the readers judgment, upon the Diuis. 1.
reasons alleged, whether the meaning of the book be to admit baptim by
Midwiues, for as much (as I trust) there shall no such horrible profanation be
suffered hereafter: let him observe how the An. because he has once undertaken
this cause (covertly as he dare) continues the defense thereof. Iwis, of
folies the shortest are best. yt had been better for him, to have laid his hand
upon his mouth: or rather in confessing of his faut, to have given god the
glory. But let us see what he brings.

To that which was alleged ovut of the place of S. Mathevu, Math. 28. ^9.
that yt makes as much against baptim by vuemen, as against there preaching:
he answers, that by that reason, Pastors may nether preach nor baptiz, for
that they are no Apostles: which follows not. For the Pastor succeding unto
the Apostles, as touching preaching and baptising in their proper churches:
have by the same place authority to do boeth. For further answer whereto: I
refer the reader, to that I have written In the former part p. 369. line 30.
before. And I think, there is not so much as one of the godly writers, either
old, or nue, which speaking of the ordinary ministry under the gospel,
whether it be to stablish or overthrow things perteyning to it: uses not the
places, that were first spoken to the Apostles alone. As for M. Inst. booK 4.
chap. 25. sect. 22.
Calvin, he uses this place expressly, which the Adm. does: to prove that
women owght, at no hand, to baptize, but only the Ministers ordained to preach
the gospel: the same does M. Quaest. de Sacram. quaest. 136.
Beza. yea the Ans. him self, to prove the Bishops saying to those he ordeyneth
page 227.
alleges these words, receiu the holy ghost: which notwithstanding were first
said, by our Savior Christ, unto the Apostles alone: so that the Ans.
frowardnes, is here intolerable. Nether is it any thing excused by Zuinglius.
For, althowgh baptim be not instituted here, which was instituted in the
ministry of John Baptist, nor here be mentioned any circumstance: yet the
minister of that institution, which is no circunstance, but a subordinate
efficient cause, may well be appointed.

For confirmation hereof, I alleged that the ministry of the vuord and
Sacraments, joined of god together, ovught not to be pulled asonder: and
therefore cyted examples, vuherin vue see observed continually, that the same
vuere Ministers of boeth together. whereu^to first he answers generally, that
examples prove not: which is In the former part p. 155. etc.
before answered. The^ unto the particular example of the Ark, he excepteth,
first that if that were a sacrament, the Minister may make sacraments, for
that Noah made yt: as if it owght to be so straung, that the Minister
ministerially and subordinately, according to the institution praescribed of
god, should be said, to make the sacrament. For as yt it often times said, that
the Priests made the sacrifices: So, the Minister in using the water, Leuit.
9. 7. 22. et 14. 19* etc.
which was common before, unto that use, and after that sort, which Christ has
appointed, makes yt holy and Sacramental water. Nether owght yt to be more
straung unto him, that the minister should after this sort make the sacrament:
then that he should 1. Tim. 4^.
save his hearers, Isay. 6^.
that he should harden their hearts, close up their eyes, stop up their ears,
etc. al which things, the scripture ascribes unto the minister.

Secondly he says, it had no promise of eternal life, nor was a seal of any
promise: boeth which are untrue. For it confirmed Noah in the promise that god
had given, that he should not be drowned, with the rest of the world. And as
the promises, made of temporal blessings unto the fathers, extended them
selves unto the everlasting: so the sacraments to confirm those promises, were
sacraments to confirm the^, in the hope of eternal life. This does S. Peter
confirm, which teaches that the preservation of Noah in the Ark, was the same
^. Epist. 3. 21
to him and his, which baptim is to us: to whom, the Ans. does in this point,
directly oppose him self.

Thirdly, he adds, that it was a figure of the church, and therefore no
sacrament: which follows not. For the bread and wine in the holy supper, are
so a Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ: that they are nevertheless,
Sacraments of the church represented thereby, in that, 1. Cor. 10.
as many corns make one loaf, and many grapes one cup of wine: so many
members, make one body of Christ, which is the church. Nether is the example of
the miracles, unaptly alleged: for they be signs to confirm the word of god,
as are the Sacraments. therefore whosoever can show, that Ministers of the
word owght only to be Ministers of the signs, whereby it is confirmed:
shows, that they only must be Ministers, of the Sacraments.

To prove, that the forbidding of them, from the ministering of the word, is
their forbidding from the ministering of the Sacraments: I browght an argument
of contraries, for that S. Paul being bidden to minister the word, as in
things which go together, did withowt further commandment, minister the
Sacraments: which was, belike, as a pil, that he could not well swalow,
considering that he answers nothing. And if this, be not a good argument,
then there is no commandment in the scripture, to bar women from being publik
ministers of the Sacraments: for it is no where expressly forbidden them, to
minister the sacraments, but only to minister the word. If therefore the godly
learned, have judged them unmeet, to minister the sacraments, because the holy
scripture has disabled them, to minister the word: yt follows necessarily,
that none may have power to minister the sacraments, which has not also to
minister the word. for otherwise, if those might publikly minister the
sacraments, which can not do the word: women by reason of their sex, are not
so shut out, but that they may have entrance into that ministry.

Against this, and to prove, that there may be ministers of the sacraments and
not of the word: he refers me to his page 483, where are cited Chrysostom,
Ambrose, Martyr and Calvin upon these words, Christ sent me not to baptize,
but to preach. For answer whereunto, first it must be understood, that when
S. Paul says, that he was not sent to baptiz: his meaning is not, that he had
no manner of sending at al to baptiz. For so should his own mouth condemn him:
as one which had undertaken to do that, whereunto he was not sent: considering
that he confesses in the same place, that he baptized certain howshouldes.
what is then his meaning? Verily even that, which he declares by his practis:
that he was rather sent to preach, then to baptiz. And of such negatiues by
comparison, the Ans. could not be ignorant: seeing boeth he has otherwhere made
mention of them, and it is a thing which a young divine, and he that has yet
the pap in his mouth, may easily understand. As when it is said, receiu my
discipline, Prou. 8. 10.
and not silver: Likewise that thy name shall be no more Genes. 32. us. 28.
called Jacob, but Israel: that is to say rather discipline, then silver,
rather Israel, then Jacob.

Now, seeing S. Paul did boeth preach and baptiz, by authority of god, and virtue
of his calling: al may see, that no man can conclude of this place, that one
may be minister of the sacraments, and not of the word. if any thing ca^ be
concluded, it is: that some may be occupied in administering the word, more the^
in the sacraments. And this is also an answer to that alleged out of
Zuinglius, towching Christ teaching and his disciples baptising: considering
that the disciples preached also althowgh not so much as our Sav. Christ.

Secondly, in so great numbers of men and women to be baptized, if to the end
that the Apostles course of preaching should not be stayed, others had that
charge to pour on the water, which were no Ministers of the word: that was in
the beginning, before any ordinary ministry of Bishop was erected in the
churches: and therefore nothing perteyning to our quaestion, which in quire,
what owght to be the ordinary and settled government of the church. For is it
credible to a man of any judgment, that either the Apostle would commit, or
these writers would say: that he committed the office of baptizing, unto those
which were not Ministers of the word, passing by the Pastor him self.

Albeit, where there was no Pastor to assist the Apostles: I see not, why the
help that others, which were no ministers of the word, gave in that
administration, should be properly called baptizing: no more then he which
serves the Pastor, either in carrying about the bread, or reaching the cup, can
be said to have ministered the lords supper. So that, the Apostle S. Peter,
having preached of the use of baptim, and pronounced the words of the
institution: althowgh he powered not the owtward element of water with his own
hand, might well be said, to have baptized them al. Beside that, nothing
hinders, why the words Act. 10 he commanded them to be baptized: may not be
expounded, that he commanded water to be browght, wherewith they should be
baptized.

Howsoever it was, yt could not be, as the D. says very dangerously out of
Ambrose: for that he would not vouchsafe to do it him self, other ministers
being present: considering that the ministry of the holy sacraments, being of
the same nature with the preaching of the word, is of greater excellency, then
any man upon earth is worthy to handle. Beside that, seeing he aloweth of
Ambrosis place to the Ephesians, which affirms that al men preached in the
Apostels times: he can receiu; no benefit of him in this place. For if al did
preach, as well as baptiz: then it is true which I say, that none had the
ministry of the sacraments, but he which had the ministry of the word
withal: and untrue which he affirms out of Ambrose, that some were ministers
of the word, which were not of the sacraments.

Likewise is the testimony out of M. Beza (whereto I have In the Tractat of the
Deacon.
answered before) flat against him in this cause: considering that his judgment
is, that the Deacons did boeth preach, and administer the sacraments sometime.
And as there is no harmony between him, and his autorityes: so is there none,
between the sentences of his autors, which he has mashed together. For where
some say, al: other say, that Priests only baptized. where he says Musculus
does allow, that some should minister the sacraments, which can not preach: yt
is very true, and further, that he would rather have yt done by them, then by
those that can preach. But his ground, is upon the misunderstanding of Act. the
6: whilst he took the ministering to tables, which is the provision for the
poor, for the ministering of the lords supper. The foundation therefore of his
assertion, being naught: the assertion yt self, can have no place.

The place of the 1. Timoth. 5. is In the tractat of the presbytery.
answered: In the former part p. 371. line 10
so is his question. To diu. 3. and 4. pa. 506. 507.
return again therefore to his demand. where he asks, what point of
Anabaptism it is, that women may preach in the church, when there is no other
that can, nor will? I answer, that yt approaches to that branch, whereby the
Anabaptists hold, that me^ may preach withowt an owtward calling of the
church: only, if they think it needful.

Vuhere I objected, his building upon examples, of a fevu particular persons,
vuhich alovueth not ours, althovugh they be grounded upon the general use of
the churches in the Apostels time: he answers, that he builds no necessary
rule, but only that yt may be done upon like occasion. But this is but a vayn
shift. For those extraordinary acts which are comendable, were done either by
expres commandment, or by special direction of the spirit of god: the
obedience whereunto, was not at their chois to do, or to leau undone. So that,
if the Ans. will have these examples, to be the directers of baptim by midwiues:
they not only may, but owght to do yt. And if there were any such case of
necessity, as he untruly pretends, and that yt might in such a case be
ministered by women: it were absurd to leau it in the chois of the Midwife,
whether she would minister it or no.

But note (I beseech you) what horrible confusion, he brings into the world,
by this saying. For if extraordinary examples do prove, that such things may
be done in such cases: then may private men execute malefactors, because
Phinees did so: and men may borow and never pay, as did the Israelites. If he
say, that he adds upon like occasion and circumstance: it is true, but
thereby he means, if like need or necessity be. For if he mean as he owght,
having a particular commandment of god by word, or a rare and extraordinary
instinct by the spirit of god: his answer is nothing to purpose, considering
that he will not (I think) say, that the Midwiues have any of these two: and if
they had, they do it not in respect of the former example, but only by reason
of the extraordinary, either commandment, or motion.

His example of the Samaritan woman John 4, is frivolous: that she should
become a publik preacher, which had not yet learned her catechism, nor was
scarce out of her Christian A. B. C. where it is manifest, that she did
nothing, which belongs not to every one: that is, that we should exhort one
another, to go where the knowledge of Christ is to be Isay 2. 3.
had: so that, she did only, as it were, towl the bell, to draw the Samaritanes
to our Sau. Christ, that he might preach unto them. Nether does his other
example, of the women Math. 28 which preached the resurrection, help him. For
if that may be called a publik ministry, it has an expres commandment of the
lord, by the Angel. which commandment, as often Math. 28. 7
as Midwiues can show, we will acknowledge their ministry lawful: otherwise the
general commandment, which we are 1. Cori. 14. 34. 1. Tim. 2. 11.
bound to follow, is direct against their preaching, which being showed of me,
is unanswered by him. So that here he merely trifleth, often saying, that there
is nothing against the baptim by women, and never answering the scriptures
alleged, whereby it is generally forbidden the^, to deal in these matters.

To that I concluded of his words ( women may preach, if there be no man that
either can, or will) that vuemen by that means have his license to preach in
diverse places: he answers it needs not, seeing the scriptures are red in all
places. But that is but an escape: considering that althowgh they have a
reader, yet they have no preacher, reading not being preaching, as I have a
showed. And who sees not, that many with us, for In the for^mer part Tract. 5.
want of teaching, ly in horrible ignorance of the truth: so that, by his rule,
this is the time, in which women may teach openly with us.

But here again, he opposes M. Calvin, which says there is a Diui. 5. and 6.
p. 507.
time wherein a woman may speak. If he mean in her own hows, or otherwhere
priuat^ly, I grant: if publikly in the church, upon an extraordinary calling,
I grant that also: otherwise I can not grant it, for the reasons before, and
after alleged. And that M. Calvin, had no such meaning as he pretends: Inst.
4. booK. chap 15 sect. 20.
appears, in that he will at no hand, admit baptim by women: to whom,
althowgh he oppose Zuinglius, yet he shows not, nor (I think) is able to
show, that he allows, of baptim by Midwiues.

The next division, which shows that godly vuemen never took the ministry of
the vuord, but by extraordinary calling from god, approved either by miracle, or
some not able yssu, (says he) is needles, as that whereunto he agrees: which
is not so. For hereby is condemned, the baptizing boeth by weme^, and other
private persons whatsoever: as that which has no such calling, and approbation
of god. The next to it, shows his poverty: which endeavoring to defend the
baptim by women, was ignorant of the principal hold of that cause: and was
needfully met with for their sakes, whom that might trouble.

In he next, he would insinuate, that they may baptiz in the hows: for that S.
Paul bids them teach in private places. where, if he had made his argument
just, and to clasp well together: he should have concluded, that they owght to
teach their howshold in private places, therefore they owght to baptiz in
private places: and they owght to teach their families ordinarily, therefore
they owght to baptiz their families ordinarily. thus must the argument be cut
out, according to his measure: and he may as well say, that a woman owght to do
the same in the holy supper. But the knot is not yet loosed, my answer
whereunto is, that if there were any private sacraments, as there is private
teaching: I would accord unto him, that women having power to teach privately,
might also minister the sacraments privately. But because that the holy
sacraments are publik, as is the preaching: his argument, has no force. For
in what place, will he lodge this argument: a woman may do a private act,
therefore she may do a publik. The division following, being evil severed of him
from the next chapter, whereunto it belongs: I leau, until I come unto that
matter.

Now, it may please the reader, to turn unto the 5 chapter page 516, which is
also of this point in hand: towching the person, by whom this sacrament should
be administered. where first mark (I pray you) a wily distinction, which in
effect is, that he defends not baptim by women, but improueth the Adm. that
disaloweth yt: as thowgh one could improve the one, and not defend the other.
And unless he had browght the example of Sephora, to mayntein baptim by women,
it had been fondly alleged: considering that the words of the Adm. are of the
practis of the Apostles times, an exception against which, fetched from the
time which was 1000 years before, might seem to come from him, whose wits
were not at home: especially, when the question is, what was done, and not what
owght to be done, as he him self now pretends.

Secondly he says, he will not contend with me in diverse things in this
division, for that he misliketh their error, which condemn infantes that be not
baptized, as much as I: which is not so. For he says, that the lak of baptim,
may seem to be a probable token and sign of reprobation, p. 524.
which is boeth untrue, and perilous: considering that not the want, but the
contempt or neglect only of the holy Sacrament, can draw any, the least
appearance of the lords wrath. Nether is that either neglect, or contempt
prejudicial to the infant, but to the parents only, whose faut that is. which
notwithstanding, can be none, where they seek to their uttermost, that yt may be
baptized of the minister of the church, orderly, and conveniently: no more then
it was prejudicial, either to the child, or parents under the law, when the
infant died, before the eight day, which was the time appointed, for the
administration of the Sacrament of circumcision. For as the eight day, was to
them: so is a convenient, and orderly time, to us.

Yt is therefore a shameful dealing, that he makes us here to ioyn with the
Anabaptists: which reject children from baptim, until they be able to make
profession of their faith. whereas we confess it owght to be ministered, with all
convenient speed: so it be by the minister, whom god has ordained for the
same purpose. In which accusation of Anabaptism, with us, he windeth up also
(as it were in one bottom) the reformed churches: where it is not permitted,
that the infant in any case should be baptized, but by the minister. withal,
the reader may perceive, how idle he is, which translateth a great piece of M.
Calvin: to prove that, which none denies. whom also, he goes about to oppose
to him self, which is of the same Inst. 4. booK chap. 15. sect. 20. Lib. epist.
p* 179.
judgment with us, in this behalf: althowgh, there be not so much as a tittle
in the words he sets down, bending that way.

Yt may well stand, that this profanation came from the Gentiles, from Victor,
and from the Papists: Victor borowing it of the heathen, and the Papists of
him. For boeth popery is like a bundel of corruptions, which being picked out
of sundry times and places, it has cocked up together: and the Pope is like a
hog, which when he comes into a garden, leaving the sweet flowers, takes him
self always to that, which is most filthy in all the place. otherwise, the D.
might deny, any corruption almost, to be papistical: seeing they have few,
whereof either paganism, or declinyng from Christianism, has not been the first
founder. Diuis. 3. pa. 517.


To that I alleged, to prove the unlawfulness of the circumcision by Moses
wife, for that she did it, in presence of her husband a Prophet, which is M.
Caluins reason: he opposes Inst. 4. booK chap. 15 sect. 22.
the note of the bible printed at Geneua, that he could not do it, because he
was sik, and that the Lord required it then. whether he was able or no, I will
not strive: but that the lord required circumcision, if there were no ordinary
minister for it, does not appear. For, as it was an order of god, that the
male child should be circumcised the eight day: so was yt also his order, that
he should be circumcised by a minister. Now, how can it be showed, by that the
lord struck Moses, that he would therefore, have this ordinance changed: when
as the siknes sent, was a correction for the breaking of one of his orders, and
not a trumpet blown, to call them to the breach of the other.

And what if (as it comes to pas) the lord had, as yt were, stricken Moses by
siknes in the child, or that the child, being of discretion, had him self
willingly wanted circumcision: owght the child therefore, by and by, with the
present hazard of his life have been circumcised? no verily. But as this
siknes, should have instructed boeth father and son, to repent them of the
former negligence, and to purpose the amendment of yt, when the child should
be able to abide the wound: so the siknes of Moses, was for that end sent, that
he should repent him of the former negligence and amend it, when it might be
according to the order appointed.

To that alleged, that she did it in a koler: he answerereth not. To that,
that Moses recovery is no proof of the lavufulnes of it, considering that when
things are measured by the event, the good are condemned, and the vuicked
justified oftentimes: he answers that the event often declares the thing,
which is but to wast wind. For if it do often otherwise: it can serve for no
reason, or allowance of that circumcision. And if the judgment by the event, be
to be taken, it is there, where the causes do not appear: but here the cause
of circumcision, which is the institution of god, is able to try the matter.
where also appears, how affamished he is, to find contrarietyes in my book:
in that he supposes variance in this, that here, I call Moses a prophet, and in
another place, say that the priesthood vuas taken from him, and given to
Aharon: which is to foul an oversight. For boeth, there were Prophets, which
were no Priests nor of the race of Priests: and the time of the deliverance
over of the Priesthood unto Aharon, was long after the time, here spoken of.
Dinis. 4. p. 518.


Against that I affirm it a necessary point of the Sacrament, that yt be
ministered by a Minister, he makes many owtcryes: but they be not these loud
clamours, which can gain the cause, where there is so deep silence of reason:
and where out of the scripture, not so much as one sily reason, is once
pretended. Therefore, to cut his comb, that he crow not so loud hereafter: he
has flatly betrayed his cause, in that, not able to alledg one reason out of
the word of god, he places the strenght of this cause herein, that against
baptizing by lay men in the time of necessity, we have (as he says) no
scripture and he has learned men for yt. For first, in that he can bring no
reason out of the word of god, why a lay man or woman in time of necessity (as
he terms yt) may baptiz: yt is manifest, that he owght not to have set yt
down. For this is a matter of doctrine, and a matter of faith: even in that
narrow signification, that he takes matters of faith. this is none of the
variable ceremonies, which alter by the diversity of times, of countries, and
of persons: and therefore by his own rule, here an argument of the authority of
the scripture negatiuely, is good: so that here it is a good argument, the
scripture commands not that lay men or women should baptiz, therefore they
may not baptiz.

Beside also, that he does us wrong, in saying, that it is avouched withowt
proof. It might have contented him, to have said withowt good proof: for proof
there is, whatsoever yt be. where, that which he affirms, that the scripture
does not forbid lay men to baptiz, is an untruth: considering it forbids
that any should take honor to him self, but he vuhich is called as vuas Aaron.
which sentence does manifestly shut Heb. 5. 4.
out, al private persons from this administration: seeing yt is a singular
honor, in the church of god. As for that string, which he continually runs
upon, that in time of necessity, it may be admitted: yt is but a plain asking
of that in co^trouersy. For, it being confessed, that baptim is necessary, when
it may be administered according to the order which god has ordained: the state
of the question is, whether there be any such necessity of baptim, as for the
atteining thereof the order which god has set in his church, of administering
it by a publik minister, owght to be broken. Of the same sort, is his often
idle talk, of the refusal, neglect, or contempt of baptim: as thowgh, there
could be any of these, in this case. If he can show, that women, or lay men
owght to baptiz in such times, and that god has ordained, that in defaut of a
Minister, they may lay to hand: then let him talk his fill.

But that I am assured he can not, the contrary rather may be seen: that the
lord has condemned such rashness, as may appear by the examples of Saul and
Vzziah. For what greater 1. Sam. 13. 11
appearance of necessity of sacrificing, could there be: then when Saul took
upon him, to sacrifice. And how probable reasons, in the judgment of men, does
he bring to defend his fact: as that the people would otherwise have forsaken
him, that the Philistines pressed him, that Samuel, came not within the time
appointed. Likewise what greater appearance of necessity: then when Vzziah
stayed the ark, otherwise like to have fallen. yet (these necessityes
notwithstanding) 2. Samu. 6. 6. 7.
forasmuch as they took upon them, that whereunto they were not called: they
received, the reward of their bouldnes. whereas here there is (as I have said)
no danger: so that the ordinary mea^es be not neglected. And verily it is al
one, as if he should say, that if there be no magistrate at hand, or none that
will do his duty in executing justice against a murderer: that then a private
man may take upon him, to hang the murderer.

Now where he propounds, to prove two points, the one that baptim by lay men
is lawful, the other, that althowgh they were no fit nor lawful Ministers, yet
that the baptim is lawful: to the end the reader may have more light wherewith
to judge of these matters, or ever I towch the second, I will rid his arguments
of the former point. for he has confusedly blinded and meddled them boeth
together.

His autorities here, for the most part, are idly set down: as those which I
confessed before, when I granted the auncienty of this corruption. But seeing
they are here: I will speak a word with them. First out of Ambrose upon Ephesians.
4. is cited, that al baptized. If this make any thing, to prove baptim by lay
men: it proves not only, that they may baptiz in this pretended time of
necessity, and privately, but that they may daily, and publikly baptiz: so that
he, by this means, will have lay me^ ordinary Ministers. Then, let the reader
observe, how unhonestly he deals with him. For in the same place, it is
contained, how in the time wherein Ambrose lived, it was not permitted unto lay
men, nor unto clerks them selves, which were an inferior order of church men,
to baptize: so that this Author makes directly against him, affirming that
althowgh it were so then, yet that it is no direction for us now.

Augustine follows, another of his witnesses, in this cause: whose judgment is
herein flat against him. For when he dowteth, whether one baptized by a lay
man, ovught to be 2. li. contrae litteras Parm. ca. 13
rebaptized: it is manifest, that he aloweth not, that a lay man should take
upon him to baptiz, but only stands in dowt, whether that baptim, being so
unduly ministered, owght to be counted for baptim. Otherwise, if he had houlden
the ministry of a lay man lawful: there had been no place unto his dowt,
whether the baptim be good or no. And therefore the D. durst not set down his
words: but carried them thr^e or four divisions further, where they serve him,
for the second point in controversy.

His third witness, is Ierom ad Luciferianos: which makes not to prove, what
was lawful by the word of god, but what was permitted then by the church. There
remayn therefore Tertull. and Zuinglius, which do affirm yt lawful: to whom, if
the matter should be tried by authority, he has his own Ambrose, and Augustine
to encounter with. Chrysostom also, as him self page 483.
cites him: which will give none leau to baptiz, but a Priest. Ad to these
Cypr. ad Iubatanu^.
Cyprian, who althowgh he erred in rebaptization, yet proves by substantial
reasons, Nomb. 16. Leuit. 10.
of the vengeance of god against Chore, Dathan, Abiram, and of the sons of
Aaron: that only the ministers of the church, may baptiz: secluding thereby a
lay man, althowgh he be never so catholic. I leau his Denis, which is here full
for us, and come to the later writers: where he has beside M. Calvin before
alleged, Beza in quaest. de sacr. quaest. ^37.
Beza, and Bulling. 5. Decad. Ser. 8.
Bullinger with others. Beside that whatsoever, or whosoever shall be alleged
afterward, to prove that the Sacraments owght to be celebrated in a publik
assembly, serves to bar al private persons and especially (by the D. own
confession) women, from this administration of Sacraments. f In the second part
of the last Tractate and third chap.


Now, it may please the reader, to turn over the leaf in his book page 521:
where this question is yet pursued, and examples browght of lay men which
preached in Origins time. where it is first to be noted, that the Ans. is
contrary to him self: which page 139 and last section, denies that any man may
preach the word, no not so much as to show a proof of his ability, unless he be
at the least admitted into the ministry. If he have an admittance, to the
ministry of the word: how is he a lay man? As for that he adds, it was upon
occasion: I would know what occasion there could be then, when the churches
were builded, and an order set, why lay men should preach. Or why might not
those Bishops, which gave lay men leau to preach, have ordained them ministers
of the word: seeing the Bishop only (by his opinion) had then the ordeyning of
them. was it not as easy for them, to have made them Ministers of the word, and
so to have kept the order of god: as to have sent them out in the quality of
lay men, contrary to that order: so that, his drift seems to be to bring in all disorder and confusion, into the church of god.

Then I answer, that althowgh they were not duly chosen, yet were they not mere
lay men: considering, that they, had an ecclesiastical calling, such as yt was,
even the Bishops admission: unless he will have all the Ministers with us, lay
men, which have only the same admision. The place was browght of me before,
not that I approved it in all points, as I also noted: but to show in what
estimation that election was had, which was made by the Bishop alone.

Here, upon that I said, that Baptim ministered by an heretical Diuis. 7. p. 521.
Minister, is good: he thincketh it to be rather good, when it is ministered of
a lay man, that is a member of the church: which is a foul error. For an
heretical Minister, so long as he is suffered to enjoy his ministry, and not
deposed therefrom: is boeth a member of the church, and a Minister of god,
althowgh boeth and evil member, and an evil Minister. And, it is as much, as if
he should say, that the execution of a malefactor by a private man, which is
honest: is rather lawful, then by a publik Magistrate, which is a briber.
withal, let it be noted, that here the Ans. boeth contrary to the truth, and
contrary to that him self professes, hangs the effect of the sacrament, upon
the goodness or naughtines of the Minister: in that, in this respect, he
prefers the sacrament ministered by a private man, being good, unto that which
is ministered by an evil man, althowgh he be a publik Minister. The rest in this
division: either has had answer, or requires none.

Yt had been (as I said) a gros error: if M. Bucer had judged Diui 8. and 9 page
522.
it meet, that women should baptiz. And whether the Ans. would have had him so
understood, or no: I leau to the readers judgment, upon the discourse in boeth
his books. Nether can it want, some skar of error: to allow of the title of
private baptim. for, althowgh it were convenient, that the child should be
baptized in the hows, when there is danger to bring it to the church: yet,
for so much as that owght not to be withowt a convenie^t nombre of the faithful,
and withowt the publik Minister, the baptim is not (as also it can not be)
private, but publik. As for the reasons, they have been answered: and come to
be answered further, in the treatise of administration of the sacraments, in
private howses. How unworthy a thing it is, that he should charge us vuith
private vuritinges, vuhich he keeps in his study, leaving his publik vuorkes:
let the reader judge.

I made mention, of other gros absurdities, of M. Bucers: least the excellency
of his learning and godliness, should carry the simpler sort to believe any thing,
contrary to the truth. And if it be judged of the godly, that I might have
spared that speech: it is a thing, wherein I will not stand against them, in mine
own defense.

Here, first he asks, where Augustine disaloweth baptim by women. Diuis. 10 p.
523.
althowgh these words of mine does not alovu, be not so full: yet, in that,
talking of this surmised case of necessity, he never comes so low, as to the
baptim by weme^, but stays in that which is ministered by lay men: it is
manifest, that he disalowed the baptim by women. For otherwise, if he had
thowght, that women in that case might have baptized: it stoed him upon to have
taught, that in defaut of a lay man, a woman might be taken: seeing that, in his
judgment, the salvation of the child, stoed thereupon. when he dowteth also,
vuhether it ovught to be ministered again, vuhich Contra Epist. Parm. lib. 2.
ca. 13.
vuas ministered by a lay man: he could hardly leau any dout, of the utter
misliking of baptim by women. whereunto serves, the practis of his times,
which was (as has been showed) in such cases: to run to the church, vuith
their children. His other question, comes to be answered afterward.

Against the fourth Council of Carthage, which forbids Diuis. 11. p. 523.
Tom. prim. Can. 100.
vuemen to baptiz: he runs for aid to Gratian, the common falsifier of the
good canons, of whom I have In the former part p. 285.
before spoken. Althowgh if the answer be true, which he frames out of this
forger, that she may not baptiz in publik: for so much as al baptim is to be
ministered in publik assembly, and that even then, when it is ministered in the
hows, it follows that a woman may never baptiz. And to the intent, the Ans.
may know his error the better: let him repair unto M. Decad. 5. ser. 8.
Bullinger, who cites this canon, to condemn al manner of baptizing by women.
Here also, let it be noted, that albeit the Answ. seeing such consent of the
learned against baptim by women, dare not flatly meynteyn it: yet, where he
finedeth any thing to defend yt by, althowgh never so base, he forgets it
not.

To that alleged, that the breaking of the orders of god, Diuis 12. and 13. p.
523
vuhereof one is, that the minister only should baptiz, the other, that it be
done publikly, confirms men greatly in that heresy, that al are damned,
vuhich are not baptized: he answers nothing. Likewise, to that, that if a man
could not be saved vuithovut baptim, yet vue might not therefore break the
order of god, he answers also nothing, but wandereth idly in talking of the
necessity of baptim, which we confess, as has been In the 5. and 6. divisions
of this chap.
before declared. Vuhere, against his absurd saying, that the teaching of this
kind of private baptim, implies no more the tying of salvation unto the
sacrament, then to teach that children should be baptized before they be able
to answer for them selves, I replied that the baptim of young children, has
ground in the scripture, but baptim by lay men or vuemen has none: he
answers, that this confirms his saying. wherein, the reproach of triflyng,
is to easy, to set forth his intolerable abusing of his reader. For to have
answered, he owght to have tawght, a rule out of the word of god, whereby it
might have appeared: that a private person, may take upon him in this pretensed
case of necessity, to do that which god has not committed, but unto the
Minister: so that here, it is manifest, that he had never a knee to bow unto
the truth, Alces. Caesar li. 6. de bell. gall.
but was like that beast, which having never a joint in her leg, must rather
break then bend.

To that I alleged, of the continual, and almost general practis of the
church: he answers, that lay men from the beginning have been permitted to
baptiz: whereof let the reader judge. In the mean season, he is able to show no
practis of baptim by women, but in the extreme ruins of the church: otherwise
we should have been sure to have heard of yt. Howbeit here he asks whotly,
what order of god is broken in private baptim: even the same which is broken in
private preaching. So that whatsoever has been In the former part p. 72. etc.
before spoken of the church preaching, that it owght to be publik and not
private: serves in like manner, for the holy Sacraments. The next division,
must rest in the readers judgment.

Now remains the other point which is, whether baptim administered by one
which is no Minister, althowgh against the word (as yt is contained in his page
518 etc.) be yet auailable. the D. says yea. his first reason is, that
otherwise many should go under the name of Christians, which were never
baptized: and so (says he) I may prove my self to be no Christian. where I
deny the argument, and withal desire the reader to take heed of the venom:
which, he going about in other places to hide, brake out here at unawares. In
an other page 524.
place, he said that it is a probable sign of reprobation, if children die
withowt baptim: but here he sets down flat, that they be no Christians,
which are not baptized. So that, the children of the faithful, by his doctrine,
are not Christians, before they be baptized: and consequently condemned.
whereas the truth is otherwise, that if he be not a Christian, before he come
to receiu baptim: baptim can make him no Christian, which is only the seal of
the grace of god before received. And what will he here say, to those in times
past of Thessalia, with whom the sacrament of baptim Socra: 5. li. chap. 22.
was celebrated but once a year, namely at Easter: were all the children paganes
all that while? what will he say to that time, wherein they received it not, but
at their death: were they also all the time of their life paganes? I grant,
boeth the customs naught: but in the mean season, he shall do the good
Emperors, and other good men great injury, in saying that they were heathen,
or no Christians.

His second reason is, that there must be by this mean; some general
rebaptization: which is the flat reason of the Anabaptists, and in deed plain
Anabaptism, that for a dowt whether some be baptized or no, al should be
rebaptized. For thus Zuing. lib. de baptis. Tractat 2*
they prove, that men must be rebaptized: because (say they) they are not
assured, whether they were baptized or no: as it is reported of Zuinglius. But
it is enowgh for me, which am assured of the favor of god in Christ Jesus, the
thing it self whereof baptim is the sacrament: that I know my self to have been
born in that people, where the common use is to administer baptim by a publik
Minister, such as he was. So that, unless he can show assuredly, that I was not
baptized by such a one: the want of baptim, shall not hurt me: seeing that I
nether neglect it, nor contemn yt.

And if he could show, that I was not baptized: yet the case of rebaptization
is not so clear, as he makes yt. considering a Eusebius. 7 lib. cap. 9.
that Dyonisius the great and famous Bishop of Alexandria, when one came unto
him, which swear that the baptim he received of the heretics, was nothing like
the catholic baptim, but full of horrible blasphemies, and desired to be
baptized of him, for that he was trobled in his conscience: said that b he
durst not baptiz him, adding that for so much as he had often said Amen unto the
thanks giving in the church, and received the holy supper of the lord: that he
should therevuith content, and comfort him self. If the Ans. had but such an
authority, vncontraried of other: he would quikly shape us out, a definitive
sentence. howbeit, I stay not thereupon: only I bring it, that when such a
case should befall, we come not unto this remedy, withowt inquiring into the
matter, and that yt be not done upon the D. bare word.

Vuhere I alleged that the Minister is of the substance of the sacrament,
considering that it is a principal part of Christ's institution: he answers,
that the essential form, is to baptize in the name of the father, the Son and
the holy ghost: which being kept, the Sacrament remains, by whomsoever, or
howsoever yt be ministered. This he fathereth of Augustine, and Zuinglius:
whereas, nether of them goes further then to the person, by whom yt is
ministered: so that he has here falsified them. Beside that I have page 521.
523.
showed, that Augustine stands in dowt, whether baptim by a lay man, be
available or no. where, by all likelihood, he was out of dowt, that that which
was ministered by a woman, whose unaptness herein is dubble to that of a lay man:
was of none effect. he cites also M. Calvin: but utterly to another purpose,
then he means. For where he shows, that the goodness or euilnes of the
Minister makes not, nor marreth not the sacrament: the D. pretends, as
thowgh it were not to be esteemed, whether he were a publik minister or no,
which is a mere abusing. For further answer, I refer the reader to that In the
examination of the D. censures.
already answered: so do I, for answer to that of Ministers which crepe in
withowt calling, unseasonably spoken of: likewise for the cauil of
rebaptization.

Now, if the reader compare the answers of his together: he shall see, that the
Ans. him self, has clean ouerthrown his own grounds. And first of all this,
that the being of the sacrament hangs only hereof, if the form of words, I
baptiz the in the name of the father etc. be kept. For to prove that the being
of the sacrament, depends not in any respect of the person which ministers
yt: he alleges first, that so we should be always in dowt, whether we be
baptized: which makes stronglier against this, that the being of baptim
depends of the using of those words I baptiz the in the name of the father
etc. then against this that yt depends upon a publik Minister. for all may
understand, that yt is easier for a man to know, that he was in his infancy
baptized of a publik Minister: then to know, that the Minister then used these
words, I baptiz the in the name of the father etc.

Another reason is, for that the force of the sacrament is not in the man, but
in god him self, his spirit, and free effectual operation: and thereto abuses
1. Corinthians. 3. what is Paul etc. which is rather to prove, that the being of
the sacrament depends not of the using of the words, I baptize the in the
name of the father etc. forasmuch as S. Paul speaks there, of the vocale
ministry, whereof this is a part, wherein the D. him self places the being of
the Sacrament. And in deed, the drift of his reason is, that there is no
owtward thing whatsoever, necessarily required in the being of the Sacrament:
which is a shameful error.

Howbeit, let it be, that the usage of these words, is the only essential
form: what shall be the material cause? For there must be as well a matter,
whereof the sacrament must consist, as a form whereby it is: and as well is the
material cause of the sacrament a substantial cause, as is the form. For eue^
as a thing can not stand withowt the form: so can yt not stand withowt the
matter. Now when the one is as necessary, to the constitution of a thing, as
the other: let him show me, why a faut in the form, or departing from the
words, should more destroy the nature of the sacrament, then a defaut, or
departure from the matter, which is the water. And verily for my part, I would
rather judge him baptized, which is baptized into the name of Christ, withowt
adding the father and holy ghost, when the element of water is added: then when
the other words being duly kept, some other liquor is used.

This also is declared by his own example of the ^ue baptized with sand: in
that yt was decreed, that he should have vuater povured on him. whereby
appears, that yt is untrue which he says, that the sacrament always
remains, what error soever be committed, when the form of words is retained.
For there the words were kept, and yet the sacrament was not supposed, to be
ministered. Althowgh the example otherwise, in my poor judgment, be unsound:
that a man having the words said at one time, and the Element powered at
another, should be judged baptized. For it is as much, as if a man receiving
the bread in the church at Easter, and the cup at the Nativity: should be
therefore said, to have received the holy holy supper of the lord.

Therefore, howsoever some learned and godly, give some liberty in the change
of the Elements of the holy sacraments, yet I do not see, how that can
stand: considering also that the ^ Joel. 1. 9.
prophet threatening a general dearth of corn, wine and oil, shows, that the
Priests should weep and lament, for that boeth the meat offering, and drink
offeri^g should ^eas. whereas, nether the offeringes needed to have ceased, nor
the Priests for that to have lamented: if they might for wine and oil have
used water, or for the beasts of the land, taken the fishes of the sea, or
other creeping things for their offeringes.

Having thus spoken of the matter, that it must necessarily be such as the
institution of god has prescribed: let us come to the Minister, which is a
subordinat efficie^t cause. whom seeing I have also proved (whatsoever he say)
to be instituted the only minister of the sacraments: let him show me, why
the breach of the institution in the form should make the sacrament
vnavailable, and not the breach of this part. for if this be not also
necessary, and of the being of the sacram: then when two go together, if one
speak the words of the institution, althowgh no man power on water, but god
only by rayn from heaven, yt is baptim. And if it be baptim which is ministered
of a child in sport (which thing M. Farel derideth as a mere toy) then if a
mad man, with mind to hurt, do speak libr. Episto. Calu. p. 85.
those words in pouring water upon his head, which is not baptized, it shall be
baptim also. further, if it be administered by him, which is by profession a
Turk: it must, by his rule, be a good baptim. so we shall come to the dotage of
the papists, which imagine that the Shepard in the field consecrated their
host; in saying certain words of the institution of the supper: which was the
cause why, afterward, they would have the^ mu^bled up in secret. These things
being absurd, it is certain that the D. rule, that it is baptim by whomsoever
it be ministered: is crooked. But when none ca^ wash us from our sins but our
S. Christ, and none can represent his person in that owtward sacrament of the
inward washing, but he whom our Sav. Christ him self has appointed: if we will
receiu the benefit of the holy seal of baptim, to assurance of our conscience,
that we are washed from our sins, we must have the publik minister. If it be
said, that this is to ty men to straight to the owtward means, and that for
so much as it is Christ that washes from sins, there is les matter who be the
Minister: I answer, that as our Sa. Christ's blood, being the spiritual matter
of the sacrament, and that only wherewith we are purged, yet we may not
therefore lak the water, which he has ordained: so althowgh he be he which
alone washes us from our sins, yet we may not therefore lak that owtward
minister, which he has appointed.

And if the will of a Prince, do make that only to be his seal, which he has
appointed for that purpose, so that althowgh another either withowt or against
his will be made, of the same matter and faschion, and in all things like yt,
yet the same is none of his seal: how much more owght the will of god, which is,
that only those should minister the sacrament, which have a publik calling
thereu^to, have that authority. And, as by the seal, which the Prince has set
apart to seal his grauntes with, when it is stolen, and set to by him that
has no authority, there grows no assurance unto the party that has yt: so if
it were possible to be the seal of god, which a woman should set to, yet for
that she has stolen yt, and put it to, not only withowt, but contrary to the
commandment of god: I see not, how any can take any assurance by reason
thereof. If it be said, that the Princes confirmation afterward, makes even
that stolen seal, which was set to, of force: I answer, that where yt can be
showed, that baptim by women is confirmed of god, there I will grant the like
in yt. hitherto may be referred, the pursuit of the former comparison. For as a
private man, kylling a murderer, has him self murdered, and executed no
justice, because he had no calling thereunto: even so, those which withowt al
calling have taken in hand to baptize, have made a profane washing, and
ministered no sacrament of the lord.

That a distinction has been kept in names of offices, when the offices the^
selves have not been distinguished, or at least not so thorowghly as they
owght: is an easy thing to show, if it were to great purpose. But yt is enowgh
for us, that the D. him self can not deny: but that baptim, which is ministered,
by him which they call a Deacon with us, is ministered by a Minister of the word:
so that there is here, no danger of rebaptization.

I alleged, that part of the institution (as that vuhich Diuis. 5. p. 520.
tovucheth the vuordes of the holy Trinity) being observed, and not this, it is
no more baptim, then the papists communion is the supper, vuhere one piece
taken, the other is left. whereto he answers, that the cup is of the
substance, because it is expressly commanded. So is this of the Minister also
commanded: therefore by his own answer, of the substance of the sacrament. But
(says he) I can not show a commandment, that a Minister only shall celebrate
the Baptim, or else be no Baptim: no more can he in so many words, that if the
cup be not received, it is no supper. But if his proof be sufficient, because
the lord has commanded that yt should be received: my proof is also, that have
showed the same in the ministering of baptim: especially seeing the breach is not
in the circumstance, but in the causes.

He alleges further, that circumcision ministered by such as were no Priests,
was good: I grant, if it were done by those which were simple Levites, if yt
were done also by Prophets which were no Priests: But if he can show it good,
done by those to whom it belonged not, then he says some what.

To that I browght ovut of S. Romans 10. ^5.
Paul, that he can not Diuis 6. p. 520.
preach vuhich is not sent: he answers it is understood of the
extraordinary calling: as thowgh it were not as well required in ordinary
callinges, that one be sent, as in the extraordinary. For althowgh, there be
diverse sorts of sendinges: yet that the Minister be sent, is required of al.
So that althowgh S. Paul should there draw that disputation, unto the sending
of the Apostles: yet the rule whereby he confirms the Apostelship, is general.
For a Pastor can no more preach now, in a particular congregation withowt a
sending: then an Apostle could then, in all the world. The words I added, no
not althovugh he spoke the vuordes of the scripture, be no such addition, as he
surmiseth: seeing they are necessarily contained, in the Apostles sentence. For
when him self denies not, but that one which is not sent, may speak the words
of scripture, and the Apostle says, that the same can not preach: it follows,
that one not sent, althowgh he speak the words of the scriptures, can not
therefore be said to preach.

He proceeds further, saying that as it is the word of god which is preached
by minister, or other: so is baptim true baptim, by whomsoever it be ministered.
as if he had already gotten, either that whosoever speaks the word preaches
yt: or that it were already baptim, withowt the publik minister, boeth which
are in demand. Moreover, if he can prove, that the washing with the element,
withowt any to apply it, is a sacrament, as the word is the word, althowgh no
man handle yt, or speak of yt: then I will grant, that which he says. But if
it be no Sacrament, but when it is browght into use, and the use be defined to
be such as is said: then yt is apparent, that there is a great difference,
between the word and sacraments, in this respect.

Last of al, as he, which taking one part of the words of the scripture, an
leaving another that should go with yt, propounds not the word of god, but
his own idle fancy: even so, he that keeps one principal part of the
sacramte^, leaving another behind, ministers no sacrament of god, but a
devise of his own head. Now, where he would draw this cause into hatered, in
that there is (as he says) no learned man of this judgment: althowgh the
reason be weak, and yt unmeet, that the trwth should be mistrusted, because she
can find no suertishyp amongst men: yet, if that will help him, he has M.
Beza which does praecisely affirm, that the baptim Libell. ^e quaest. in
Sacra. quaest. 139. etc.
vuhich is ministered by a private man (much more by a vuoman) is utterly void.

Seeing then they only are bidden in the scripture to administer the
Sacraments, which are bidden to preach the word, and that the publik Ministers
have only this charge of the word: and seeing that the administration of boeth
these, are so lincked together, that the denial of license to do one, is a
denial to do the other, as of the contrary part, license to one is license to
the other: considering also, that to minister the Sacraments, is an honor in
the church, which none can take unto him, but he which is called unto yt as was
Aaron: and further, forasmuch as the baptizing by private persons, and by women
especially, confirms the dangerous error of the condemnation of young
children, which die withowt baptim: Last of al, seeing we have the consent of the
godly learned of al times, against the baptim by women* and of the reformed
churches now, against the baptim by private men: we conclude, that the
administration of this Sacrament by private persons, and especially by women,
is merely boeth unlawful and void.

There remains another quaestion, whether the infantes of papists, are to be
received to baptim. Of which, as of a thing more dowtful amongst the godly
learned, because I wrote privately and more at large: when I came to the
confutation of the D. book in that point, I passed by yt, with mind to take
afterward my reply thereunto, more commodiously from the discourse I wrote of
yt. Howbeyt, the trwth is, until I came to the place of the printing, where I
had not his book with me: I forgot yt. If therefore in answering, I either pas
by any weight of reason, or ascribe any thing to him otherwise then trwth: I
desire the readers gentle support herein, either until his next answer, or else
unto another opportunity, when the arguments of boeth sides may be more fully
debated. Unto the reason that I alleged out of 1. Cor. 7. 14.
S. Paul (to my remembrance) he answers nothing: but only opposes M. Bezas
authority in his epistles, which if they had not come forth whilst his book was
in making, yt seems, that he had been utterly destitute of answer. His reason
out of him, that the papists are to be compared with the Israelites, which fell
away from the t^w religion, and not vuith the Idumeans: can not help him,
oneles he first show, that the infantes of those Apostatas were lawfully
circumcised. For, if they were not circumcised by gods order and institution,
but rather at the lust and pleasure of those which, being fallen away from the
covenant, ceased not to put to the seal, as if they had been still within the
covenant: yt follows that, in this respect, there is no more succor for the
Papists in their resemblance with such Israelites, then when they are matched
with the Idumeans or Ismaelites.

THE II. CHAPTER OF THIS TRACTATE: OF THE CORRVPTIONS in doctrine abovut the
holy communion, beginning page 526. diuis. vij. of the D. book.
Amongst diverse reasons browght, to prove that the whole body of the church,
should (so much as may be) communicate ^n the holy supper together: he
cauilleth ^t that alleged, out of S. Paul, saying that 1. Cor. 11.
he blames those, which did contentiously separate them selves: whereas, the
Apostle under one kind, notes al needeles sundring of the members one from
another, in that holy action. That out of S. Matthew 18 of two or three gathered
in Christ's name: is answered. nether is it denied, but that two or three may
communicate, if the other will not at al: only yt is said, that where the other
will, althowgh not so often as is convenient, yet that in such a case, the three
should (for the reasons alleged, whereunto he answers nothing) tarry for the
rest. diu. 8. 530
his next division, is answered in the 9 division, which he takes up before,
by rending my book asonder, that he might seem able to say somewhat: which in
9. diu.
answer of mine, upon how good ground yt stands, let the reader judge, his
reply whereunto, is senseles. where also, his mervailing, that I say, the
tvuelue vuere made Apostles after their first calling, argues his want:
considering that the ordeyning of them, to be Ambassadors throwghowt the world,
which is the vocation of their Apostleship, was not, until after the
resurrection. That which deceives him, is, for that he considers not, that
yt is the use of the scripture, in speaking of the beginninges of things, to
term them by the names, which they had at the time of the writing, and not
which they had, when that which they wrote, was done: as in the Cenes. 10. 10.
25.
names of Babel, and Peleg, etc. the next, requires no answer.

In the next, he accords that by ecclesiastical censures, Diuis. 11. p. 531.
and civil punishments, the rest of the church should be browght to
communicate, with the three: where he manifestly forsakes the book, which
leaves yt free, three seasons of the year only excepted. And the truth is, if
it be convenient, that yt should be celebrated oftener: yt is also meet, that
there should be punishments, for the breach of that Numh. ^.
conueniency. his exception, against the proof of excommunication, for want of
doeyng this duty, that to cut ovut his soul from the people, signifies to put
to death, and not to excommunicate: utters his want, considering that the
same commandment, Genesis 17. 14.
was given to Abraham in the government of his hows, which was the church of
god. And yet that no civil sword was put into his hand, is manifest: in that,
being a private man in the common wealth he dwelt in, he had no power of life
and death. But of this matter, he may learn further In the booK of the
d^scipline of England.
other where. His objections against the Adm. and my allegation of canons,
ascribed to the Apostles: are p. 170. Diuis. 12. ^. 532.
answered.

That the owtward uncleanness under the law, may be easlier avoided, then the
inward, which owght to keep us from the communion: being so generally spoken,
is untrue, and refuted by me, in the case of procuring the funeral of our
friends, to which we are bound: whereunto he answers nothing. nether can the
uncleanness of life, which is private, and not openly known, hinder any: oneles
yt be such, as men mean not to amend. That weakness of faith, owght to withdraw
us from the communion, is a manifest untruth: yt being instituted, for the
strenghtning of the weakness thereof. The examination of him self, is required,
not only in the partaking of the communion, but also in hearing of the vuord
of god: as whether he come with mind to be tawght, and to follow, or whether he
come of curiosity, or of custom, or to please men, and such like. As for
corruption of judgment, want of instruction in the use of the sacrament, open
offenses, and al such disorder of life, as requires separation by the churches
ce^sures: they fall not into this case, where is disputed, not for what causes
men owght to be put from the holy communion, but for what causes they may
withdraw them selves, when they be, by common and good policy of the church
admitted. Therefore, all this is but an abusing of the time, which is browght
against that which I said: that if, being of the church, and able to examine
them selves, they be not fit for the hearing of the vuord, nether are they fit
for the receiving of the communion. whereby also may appear, how unworthily, he
does now the second time: object contraryety with my self, so openly refuted,
by expres words.

As for the reasons, which I alleged to confirm this sentence with, he once
towcheth not: whereunto, I will ad the judgment of the ancient writers: that he
may learn to blush, which not contented to have reprehended yt here, sets yt
in the beginning of his book, as a dangerous point, and palpable error. Hom. 3.
in Ephesians. (...)
Chrysostom writes thus of the supper. hovu tariedst thovu behind? I am
(thovu say) vnvuorthy: then art thovu also vnvuorthy, of the communication,
vuhich is in the prayers. The like sentence he has, in another of his
homilies, unto the people of Antioche. li. 5. de Sacra. cap. 4.
Ambrose says, he that is not fit to receiu the bread of the supper, daily: is
not fit, once in a year. Ep. 118. ad Ianuar.
August. speaking of this matter, shows that if the sins be not so great,
that one should be excommunicated for them, that then a man ovught, not to
separate him self, from the daily medicine of the lords body. whereunto ad M.
Bucer, which disalowing the communion which Bucer. in ce^sur. Liturg. Anglic.
c. 3.
is by the Minister and one other, and withal showing that the rest of the
church, owght to be driven unto yt: boeth alleges, and aloweth that sentence
of Chrysostom, before rehearsed. In the next division, of the cause of the
superstitious fear of coming to the communion, let the reader judge of:
considering that, of the evil beginninges of lenton fast, I have spoken before,
and will not suffer the D. to start away, by moving of other questions.

To this chapter belongs, the rest of the 15 Tracta. where in the page 590
first division, for his saying, we read not that women received the supper: he
pretends M. Calvin and Zuinglius: but they excuse not his rashness. For,
althowgh they have the same words, yet they match this cause, with others
which are necessary, and which have certain proof out of the scripture,
althowgh not in expres words: whereas, he matcheth yt with those things which
are (by his own confession) indifferent and not necessary, giving thereby to
understand, that there is no better grownd of the one, then of the other. which
reason, being alleged to prove the occasion of triumph which he giuith here
unto the Catabaptistes, and Anabaptists: he answers not. The three next
diuisio^s are answered.

Next unto this follows another unchangeable doctrine as yt lies pa. 603 of
the D. book. where, althowgh the Answ. dare not openly undertake the defense of
driving of known papists unto the lords supper: yet, partly, in trifling with
the proofs browght for the shutting of the^ out, partly casti^g in other
matter of his own: privily, and as it were under the ground, he maynteyneth his
former rashness, of saying, that the Admo. were good patrones of the papists,
for maynteining, that papists owght not to be thrust into the lords supper.

There was alleged, that the scripture vuhich forbids 1. Cor. 5. 11.
to have any familiarity vuith notorius offe^ders: does much more forbid that
they should be received to the communion To this he answers, out of M.
Calvin: his marvelous unfaithful dealing wherein, has been In the former part
p. 246. lin. 35.
before noted. I say marvelous, because there can be hardly any, of so small
perceiuera^ce as not to understand the difference, between the Anabaptists
which thereupon falsely gathered, that a man might not communicate, when any
such open offender was admitted unto the communion: and between the Adm. which
houldeth, that the papists ovught not to be admitted unto the lords supper,
which is justly concluded of yt. To that, alleged, that our Sau. Christ
instituted his supper Diuis. 2 p. 604.
amongst his disciples, and those vuhich vuere vuithin: he answers first,
that Judas was present, yet not of the church, but withowt: which is a foul
error. For, althowgh in some signification, he were not of the church: yet he
was boeth within, and as towching the owtward calling (whereof our question is)
of the church also. But unto this I have In the former booK p. 168. lin. 16.
already answered. Secondly, he charge me with a gilty conscience: for that
cyting S. 1. Co. 5. 12.
Paul, I nether quoted the Epistle, nor chapter: which how unworthy an
accusation it is, let the reader judge. But if yt be a good argument, that he
has a gilty conscience, which leaves the testimony vnquoted: let the face of
his conscience be looked on, by the glass which I have set before him in an
other In the former part p. 605. l. 26.
place. How untrue it is, that no papist with us, is admitted to the communion,
which he affirms: let the reader judge.

To that I said, that papists not to be admitted unto Diuis. 3. p. 604.
the holy supper, ovught to be compelled to hear the vuord of god: he obiecteth
as contrary, that I had said before, that if they be not meet to receiu the
communion, nether be they to hear the vuord, which is a mere mispending of
time. For I added expressly, and that twice: As many as be of the church, from
which I had before, shut out the papists.

In that the Admo. vuil not have men come constreynedly to the holy Communion:
they take not away the punishment, against those which owght to present them
selves. And their saying has an easier defense, then his page 530.
otherwhere: that the book will not have men compelled, to come to the
communion. For the punishment of such, is therefore taken: that afterward they
may come in diligence, and good will. But if (notwithstanding that punishment)
yt be manifestly perceived, that they come with no affection, but
constreynedly: then the Adm. would have such put by: which is their meaning,
and a judgment agreeable to the word of god. to the rest in this chapter, I
answer not.

Hereunto ad that of the examination of those, whose knowledge of the mystery of
the gospel, is douted of: as yt stands in his book page 592. which
examination, he is not afraid to deny, to be necessary, or commanded by the
word of god. his first reason is, because that in the Apostles times no such
would offer them selves: which is a manifest untruth, as may be gathered of
that I have In the former part. p. 244. l. 16.
said, and by that the seed of the vuord of god, is Mat. 13. 4
taken ovut of the heart of diverse that profes the gospel, which
notwithstanding, either throwgh hypocrisy in desire to be counted to have the
same knowledge with others, or insensiblenes of not feeling their want, will
offer them selves. And if there were none such then, yet for so much as, there be
such amongst us: that answer is insufficient, considering that the scripture
conteyneth remedy, not only against the corruptions in the time of the
Apostles, but in all times.

His second reason, that offering them selves so, it is their own only faut:
is a craving of that in question. For that it is only their faut, and that the
governors of the church have no commandment, to look to yt: are the same in
effect.

His third reason, that if yt had been so necessary, S. Paul, would have spoken
of yt here especially, is to fond: considering that the Apostle writes only,
either of such fautes as were in that church, or of matters whereof his judgment
was asked. That also out of M. Calvin, is merely idle. For it is one question,
whether a private man, under coulor of an unmeet person admitted to the supper,
owght to withdraw him self: and another, whether such a one, should be admitted
by the governors of the church. his answer makes also as much to prove, that
known whoremongers should not be driven to repentance, before they come to the
communion, as known papists: considering, that it belongs not to private
men, to take in hand the correction of them, when they present them selves.

Against that alleged, of the commandment to the Levites, Diuis. 3. p. 592.
Cronicl. 2. 35. 6.
to prepare the people to the receiving of the Pasouer, vuhich vuas the same
vuith them, that the holy supper is vuith us: he excepteth, and that
confidently, and with reproaches, that it is abrogated. whose shameful dealing
herein, let all the world judge of: considering that, by how much our sacrament
is excellenter then theirs, by so much, owght there to be greater care and
diligence in preparing the people thereto. But of this, more has been said In
the former part p. 162. lin. 10. and 220. l. 28.
otherwhere. After he excepteth, that the text is, that they should prepare,
not examine: which is frivolous, and prevented, in that I added, that
examination is a part of preparation. So that he that comma^deth the whole,
must needs do the part: whereunto he answers not, but affirms yt
manifest, that the Levites used no such examination. of which manifestnes,
there is not a letter in the text. The contrary, by all likelihood, is to be
intended: considering, that diverse of the people, nue come out of ignorance and
Idolatry, had need of particular trial. against which the marginal note makes
not: seeing exhortation may well stand with examination, and the nature of a
note, is not to lay out things at large.

That the papists may as well use this for auriculer confession, is so placed,
that yt may be taken, that the Iues used auricular confession, as a ceremony
under the law, which is untrue: and so yt is propounded, as if there were as
good ground in the word of that, as of this: which beside the untruth, is
ouerturned of his own words, confessing that page 593.
examination may be: unless he will say, that auriculer confession, may be
likewise. diu. 4. 593
his argument, which he renounceth, is as I have framed yt: whereof let the
reader judge, as also of the Admo. meaning.

OF THE AVTORITY OF THE CIVIL MAGISTRATE, IN CAUSES ECclesiastical: Tract. the
tvuelfth and tvuentith, according to the D. page 694.
THere is a proper place, where the D. (if he had been able) should have
showed, that I agree in this cause, with the Papists: namely in the end of
this treatise, where I show, how far I stand from them in this behalf. Howbeit
having (beside vntrw surmises) little or nothing at al to mayntein him self
with, he has, to strike a prejudice into the mind of the reader, and to set
(as it were) a bias of his judgment, to draw it unto his side, here in the
forefront set up this untrue accusation: whereunto I will answer, when I come to
that place. Now for better clearing of this matter, the distinction betvuene
the church and common vuealth under a Christian Magistrate, denied by him: is
to be confirmed.

Vuherin as towching the authority of the word of god, boeth out of the old
Testament and the nue: I refer the reader, to that which I In the 7. Tract
diui. 8 p. 755.
have written. saving that the place of the Cronicles comes after to be
towched again. In the churches after the Apostles, and that under godly
Princes: the same difference, has been diligently observed, by the
ecclesiastical writers. As when it is said, that the church and common vuealth,
Socr. 5. li. in praefat. Soz. 3. libr. 26. cap.
not only suffer but flourish together: keeping this distinction, as well in the
church is prosperity, as in her adversity. Also, Euse. 3. li. de vita Co^stan.
that the hovuses of prayer, being restored to the church: other places vuere
adjudged to the use of the common vueaelth. Likewise, Aug. epist. 167. ad Apung.
that there is one cause of the Province: and another of the church.

If he can not conceive, how this should be: he may be given to understand it,
after this sort. that a man may, by excommunication, be sundred from the
church: which forthwith leeseth not of necessity, his Burgeship or freedom in
the city, or common wealth. Likewise, that the civil Magistrate may, by
bannishment, cut of a man from being a member of the common wealth: whom the
church can not by and by, cast out by excommunication. Again, when one is for
his misbehauior deprived of his privileges, boeth in the church and common
wealth: albeit the church be, upon his repentance, bound to receiu him in
again, as a member thereof: yet the common wealth, is at her liberty whether
she will restore him or no. Finally infidels under a Christian Prince, may,
until such time as they refuse instruction, be members of the common wealth:
yet are they not therefore, members of the church. where, if the church and
common wealth, were (as he says) under a Christian Prince, al one: it should
follow, that whosoever is a part of one, should needs be a part of the other:
and contrawise, whosoever is cut of from one, must be cut of from the other.

His authority pretended against this distinction, out of Musculus, page 180. et
695.
that the Christian Magistrate is not profane: is to no use. For, not only the
high dignity of the civil Magistrate, but the most basest handicraftes: are
holy, when they are directed to the honor of god: but to conclude thereof,
that they are not distinguished from ecclesiastical causes, is to much
unadvisedness. For will he conclude, that for because the government of the hows,
and the government of the common wealth, are boeth holy: that therefore, the
government of the hows, is not distinguished, from the government of the common
wealth: or will he say, because the company of a man with his wife in lawful
matrimony is holy, that therefore it is a church matter?

This distinction, of the church and common wealth, under 2. Diuis. pa. 697.
a Christian Prince, being so apparent in certain cases, there is no reason,
why it should not be so, in the rest: which shall yet better appear, in this
discourse: where, comes first to be considered, what he answers to the place
of the Cronicles: where, upon that certain Priests and Levites, had 2. Chro.
19. verse. 8. 11.
the handling of matters perteyning unto god, and certain others the matters
perteyning unto the king: I concluded, that the church judgments ovught
ordinarily to be handled, by the church officers. His answer hereunto is, that
for so much as Iehosaphat the king, by his authority committed boeth
ecclesiastical, and civil causes: therefore he had power him self of boeth.
whereunto I reply, that he committed not those ecclesiastical matters, unto the
Priests and Levites, as those which he might have retained with him self, or
as a thing in his own discretion: but used only his princely authority, to put
in execution, that which the lord had commanded. For yt is manifest, that the
self same thing which Iehosaphat did here, was commanded Deuteronomy. 17. 8. etc.
to be done, in the law. And if this prove, that the judgment of ecclesiastical
causes perteyneth to the king, because he confirmed by his authority the
ecclesiastical Judges: it proves also, that boeth the ordination of Ministers,
and the preaching of the word, belong unto him: considering that this very
king, is 2. Cronicles 17. 7. 8. 9.
said to have sent forth preachers into al lury.

But let the reader observe, how he has here utterly passed by the weight of
my argument, which stands in this, that the holy ghost makes this partition,
that some matters pertayn to god, and others to the king: whereas, if the
matters pertaining unto god, pertayned also to the king, the partition should
be fauty. Nether by matters pertaining unto the king, are understood those
which pertayn unto his own person, or his family, but matters within the compass
of his princely judgment: as appears, by the example of the cause of blood,
which the scripture sets down, verse. 10.
especially if this place be compared, with that of Deuteronomy, where this
example is put particularly, and opposed to the judgment of Deu. 17. 8
leprosy, which then belonged unto the priest.

To the place in the Heb. 5. 1.
Hehrues, that the high Priest is appointed, over things vuhich appertayn unto
god: he answers, that the Apostle declares, that those things are to offer
gifts etc. which is nothing worth. For, the proposition is general, whereupon
the Apostle concludes so much, as served for the present purpose: otherwise
you may as well say, that yt belonged not to the high Priest, to preach, because
the Apostle mentions not that part of his office, in that place. Seeing then
it is apparent, out of the Cronicles, that judgment in church matters
pertayneth unto god: Seeing likewise, it is evident out of this testimony of the
Apostle, that the high Priest is set over those matters in gods behalf: it must
needs follow, that the principality or direction of the judgment of them, is by
gods ordinance pertaining unto the high Priest, and consequently to the
ministry of the church. And if it be by gods ordinance, apparteyning unto
the^: how can it be translated from them, unto the civil Magistrate?

That which I said, of Levites used to the judgment of civil causes, for that
they could not al be employed to the ministry, considering that, so there
should have been almost for every xijme^ a Leuite: is barely denied, and
nether the reason which I browght confuted, nether any of his set down.
whereunto may be added the reason, why the Levites not occupied in the church
ministry: were willingly taken, for assistance in civil judgments. which is,
because they being better acquainted, with the law of god, then commonly the
rest of the tribes: were consequently better seen in the judicials, by which
the common wealth of the Israelites was governed. And that all the Levites, were
not applied unto the ministry, may appear by the example of a Banaias, the
high ^. Reg. 4. 4.
Priests son, high Constable or general of the host.

Before I come to the Ans. arguments, I desire the reader Diuis. 3. p. 698.
to observe, that althowgh he has out of the ancient writers, borrowed certain
places, to just with those, which I have taken from thence: yet out of the holy
scripture, whereof he should have made the base and foundation of his defense,
he has browght nothing. But let us see them such as they are. Eusebius (says
he) calls Constantine, as yt were a general Bishop. That makes no more to
prove, that the judgment of ecclesiastical causes, belonged unto him: then that
he calls him a Doctor, Eusebius. 1. li. de vita Co^stan.
appointed of god to al nations, proves him to have been a publik preacher of
the word. Rather, as he was called a Doctor, because that the doctrine taught
by the Bishops, was maynteyned by his authority, not for that he taught him
self: so he is called the general Bishop, for that he caused them to meet in
Council, protected them when they were there, kept them in peace, maynteyned
with his princely authority, that which was godlyly decreed, not for that he
determined the matters him self. This may also appear, in his epistle to the
churches, where willing to draw credit unto the decrees of that Council, he
does not say that they were his, but the Bishops decrees. And in deed yt might
more justly Eusebius. 3. li. de vita Co^stan.
be concluded, that he was a minister of the word by the one place, then by the
other, that he made ecclesiastical laws, of his own authority: considering,
that the place browght by him, is delaied and laid in water, by that he calls
him not a Bishop simply, but as it vuere a Bishop: where as, the other place is
not so.

And it is further to be observed, that the word Bishop is taken some times
generally, for any ouerseer: and not only for the church Minister. In which
respect, Constantyne calls him self a Bishop, but puts a manifest
difference, between his Bishoprik and theirs: namely, that the church officers
were Bishops and overseers of things vuithin Eusebius 4. li. de vita Co^stan.
the church, and he, Bishop or ouerseer of those that vuere vuithovut the
church. whereby he clearly also establishes, the distinction of the church and
common wealth under a Christian Prince. Hither also may be referred, that of
Hillary: which exhorts Constans, that he would In lib. ad Constan.
provide, that the governors of his provinces under him, should not praesume
to take upon them, the judgment of ecclesiastical causes: where also the same
author further affirms, that the common vuealth matters only belonged unto
them. Likewise that Ambrose says: That Palaces belong unto the Emperor, but
the churches Amb. lib. 5. Epist. 33.
unto the Minister: and that he had authority of the common vualles of the city,
and not over holy things.

That of Constantyne, and after of Justinian, making laws touching godliness,
as against the worship of Images etc. is idle, considering that it is nothing
but an execution of that, which is commanded of god, and withowt the compass of
things, which fall into the church is consultation. For in things, which he is
assured of, to be the unvariable truth of god: who douteth but that he not
only may, but owght also to mayntein them, with his authority. Saving that, if
there be a general dowt raised, what is the law of god therein: to the end that
the the truth may have better course, and that the conscience may be provided
for, there is herein great caution to be used. For least that which is godly,
should be doe^ ungodly, that is to say ignorantly or doutfully, and to the
end that the autors of error (being convinced) may do les hurt, and finally to
the end that the punishment of the obstinate, may be boeth more just, and les
grudged at: yt belongs unto the civil Magistrate, to call (as did the godly
Emperor Constantine) a council of the ministry, by whom, as by gods
interpreters, the people may receiu a resolution, warranted by substantial
grounds out of his word.

Yet so far it is, that we suspend upon the Councels determination, the putting
in execution of such as he is assured to be the unchangeable commandments of
god: that boeth before, in, and after the Council, yea and howsoever they
determine, we esteem that the Prince owght to procure by all godly and convenient
means, that such laws of god have place: at the least that the contrary be
not suffered, not so much as (if it might be) one only hour.

That out of the Chalcedon council, that the orders there made were by the
Emperors authority, because they cried long life unto the Senate and Emperor:
is insufficient. For, althowgh it was unmeet, that in such grave meetinges,
there should be used such shoutinges, as then appeared to have been the manner,
when they liked or misliked any thing, which was more fit for stage plays,
then for such a grave company: yet who sees not, that there was cause enowgh,
why thanckes should be given unto the Emperor for his care, his pains, and
his charges in calling and confirming yt, althowgh nether the judgment were
his, nor apperteyned unto him.

Now touching the places alleged by me, in the first, gros oversight there is
none: seeing there is not a word in that place, which enforces external
buildinges. For in steed of that which is turned buildinges: the greek has,
vuorkes or affaiers. (...).
also for that, of selling the buildinges: there is no such thing in 1 lib cap.
15
the greek, nether (as I think) owght to be. For the place, which (no dowt) is
for insted of that Eusebius. has (...) yt should hau^ been (...).
corrupt in Eusebius: may be restored out of Theodoret, that reports the same
epistle. Howbeit whether it be understood of the owtward, or inward buildinges,
I will not strive: and I rather think, that it is of the ow^ward, then
otherwise: considering, that that seems to be more simple.

To the second, where the Soz^. 1. li. cap 17.
Emperor confesses the Bishops matters, not to pertayn to him: he answers,
that the Emperor of modesty refused the determination. But what modesty is yt,
to say that which is untrue: or what modesty, to affirm that yt belongs not
to him, which is (by you) his office, and committed to him of god, especially
unto his subjects? For it might have more color, if you had said, that it
were modesty for a Bishop to say: that to administer the word and sacraments
belong not to him, but unto the Prince. Beside that, if he would have showed
forth modesty: he would have rather said, that he was not worthy, then to say
that it vuas not lavuful for him to do yt.

To that, that the Emperor vuould not determine of Arius heresy, but committed
yt to the Synod: he answers, that yt lets not but that he had authority,
saving that, thereby he showed his wisdom, in committing matters of doctrine to
them, which are most fit to entreat of them. A strange kind of wisdom, to
put over that which belonged unto his office, to them to whose office that did
not belong: verily this is not the wisdom, which comes from above. For
althowgh it be lawful for a Prince, to discharge part of his burden upon
others, for the more commodity of his subjects: yet, if this belong unto him,
as he is appointed of god the civil Magistrate, he can not put yt unto any
other, the^ unto a civil Magistrate, as I have Tract. 7.
before showed.

Here also, I would ask of him, how the Council of Nice was fitter to judge of
the matter, then the Emperor? was it by some singular case, or by reason of
their office of being Bishops? If (as needs he must) he answer, that they are
by calling and by office, fitter to judge of such causes: how must not that
pertein unto them, which are hereof, by calling, the fittest Judges. For,
althowgh there be found sometimes, some civil governor which has more skill to
judge in church matters, then some Bishop, as also some Bishops to have more
skill in common wealth matters, then some civil governor: yet notwithstanding,
nether the one, nor the other has this kunning, by any gift incident into his
office which he exercises. So that, the Answerer, in reputing it, for wisdom
in the Emperor, to commit these matters unto the Bishops, as unto the most
able Judges, makes a deep wound in the wisdom of god, whilst he supposes,
that god has committed that to be done by the Magistrate, whereof, by office,
he is not the fittest doer: which is a voice, unworthy of a very sukling, much
more, of a D. in divinity. And, that this is most properly belonging 1. Tit.
unto a Bishop, it appears, in that the Apostle requires, that he should be
able to convince the gainsayers: which he never required of the civil
Magistrate: and notwithstanding would have required yt, if the decision of such
causes, had apperteyned unto him. For the lord, calls no man to any thing: of
whom he requires not gifts, meet to furnish his calling.

Not unlike to this reason, is that in the 5. division page 701, which is: that
for so much as the Ministers, are most able to decide of church matters, that
therefore, the decision belongs unto them. whereunto he answers first, that
it is Hardings reason, but shows not, where it is to be found: where I
alleging it, as his own reason, pointed him the place, whereunto he answers
not a word. Secondly, he says, that yt proves only, that it is most
convenient and necessary, that the ministers, while they be godly and learned,
may have the deciding of matters in religion. Here, if the Answ. had not
fumbled, and faultered in his speech: we had had him, if not altogether, yet
very nigh consenting with us. therefore, let the reader note, that whereas he
has borrowed boeth his answers, and al his ancient autorities from the Bishop
and M. Nowel, withowt confessing any (one only place out of the Bishop
excepted:) in this answer, wherein the chief point of the question does
consist, he has given them boeth the slip. For they boeth do flatly confess,
that as long as the Ministers be godly and learned, yt is necessary, Defense of
the Apol. 6. part. chapter 11. diu. 11. and 12. chapter di. 4. M. Novuel. Tom. 2. pa.
35. 38. 34. 27.
they should decide these matters, that the Prince is commanded to have recours
unto them in dovutful matters, that it belongs to the Bishops office to
decide of such causes: but that Christian Princes, have rather to do vuith
these matters, then ignorant and vuicked Priests, and that in case of
necessity (meaning when the ministry is wicked) the Prince ovught to provide
for convenient remedy: the very self same thing, which we maynteyn, in saying,
when there is no lavuful ministry, that then the Prince ovught, to take order
in these things.

Now, because he dissenting from them, would yet seem to be at one, he also
has set down, that it is necessary: but how? mark I pray you, and you shall see
that, in stryuing against a manifest truth, he became speachles. Forsooth it is
necessary, that they may decide: he durst not say that it is necessary they
should, but that they may decide. where in saying that it is necessary, he
leaves no choice: again, in saying that they may, he destroys the necessity,
which he had before put, leaving it in the Princis power, whether they shall or
no. Thus as the mous kleauing fast in the pitchbox, in one sentence: he
affirms that a godly and learned ministry, must of necessity, and not of
necessity, decide of these causes.

That which he adds, that the authority does as well still remain in the
Prince, when the Ministers decide, as when the Judges determine of civil causes:
is vntrw. If, as he pretends, it were at the Princis chois, whether a godly
mynistery, should decide of them or no, then yt were true he says: but if it
be true, which the Bishop and M. Nowel say, that yt is necessary, that a godly
ministry should decide of them, and that yt belongs to the the Bishops
office so to do: then the comparison, is most unequal. For the judgment of
civil causes, does so be long unto the Magistrate, that he is not bound by the
law of god, to translate yt unto other. Nay the law of god, will have, that
Princes them selves (so far as they may, and are able) shall bear their dominion
upon their own shoulders, and judge the causes of their subjects in their own
persons: considering that the scripture calls al princes, Judges, and sets
every one a Throne, to judge the causes of his people. Now (to return bak, where
I leaft) follows his answer to the Council of Constantinople: that it is to
late a testimony, being other in the year 549 or 681. which might have place in
this case, where the question is of the Bishopes jurisdiction, as that which in
process of time did owtreach: were it not confirmed, by other testimonies of the
former age. In the first of which Councels, Menna the Patriark being president,
it is said that the decree of the Bishopes firm in yt self, vuas confirmed by
the Emperor. Now seeing the Bishops, had then this authority: how much more, by
his own confession, had they the same, in the other which was later. And the
same Constantine which the D. speaks of, gives more to the Bishopes, then we
do: namely that he vuould compel none to the truth, oneles they concluded
something.

That yt was said, that the Emperor confirmed the decrees of the Council, and
not that the Emperor made the decrees: serves also well for this purpose. For,
if either he had made them, or they had been made under his name: they should
have been said, to have been made by him: as decrees made by the Princis
deputies, are said to be made by the Prince.

That which he adds, of the Emperor being moderator of the Council, beside
that yt proves not his cause, considering that the Moderator had not all the
authority: it is untrue, and contrary to the practis of Councels in all times:
oneles by moderatorship, he mean the appointing of the time of the Councels
assembly and dismission, the houers of their sitting, the civil punishment of
them which behave them selves tumultuously, or otherwise disorderly. If he do,
it is that which we willingly grant: but, which makes nothing for this
purpose.

To that alleged out of Ambrose, vuho refused to Diuis. 4. p. 700. Amb. li.
Epist. 5. 32.
have a church matter before the Emperor Valentinian, first, he answers that
he was young: as thowgh his tender years, could diminish his right: or that a
Prince of 18 or 20 years old, had not as ample authority as one of 40.
Secondly, that he was not baptized: which was not, for that he refused baptim,
but because the manner then was not to baptiz, before the hour of death was
supposed to approach. For, the Arians them selves, do not pretend any enmity,
or refusal of baptim. And howsoever some have alleged yt, you might have been
ashamed to alledg yt: which before, affirmed that page 146.
Ambrose was meet to be chosen Bishop, notwithstanding that he were not
baptized.

The last exception is, that he was an Arian heretik: so that no equal
judgment, was to be hoped for at his hand. which is no sufficient answer:
considering that Ambrose denies the Emperor the determination of the cause,
not for that he was a wicked Emperor, but because it was not red in scripture,
nor heard of before, that any Emperor, (and therefore nether godly nor ungodly)
was Judge over a Bishop, in a cause of faith. which was not his judgment only,
but the judgment of other Bishops round about. Therefore, it is untrue, that
Ambrose stayed him self chiefly, of a priuiledg granted by Theodosius: not
only, for that it was not lawful for Theodosius, to have passed the right of
the civil Magistrate, to the Bishops: but because Ambrose fetched his defense,
from the scripture and auncienter times, then was Theodosius priuiledg. Beside
that, if Theodosius had granted that to the Bishops, which belonged unto him:
his heir could be no more bound by his grant herein, then the committing of
civil judgments unto them, should have hindered him to call them bak again, into
his own hand. So that, when Valentinian had declared, that he would have the
hearing of the matter him self: that could not be, any just defense.

Moreover, if it belong unto the civil Magistrate, to judge in causes
ecclesiastical, no abuse or disorder of his, can deprive him of yt, so long as
he remains in the full estate of a Prince: no more then men can take away from
him, the right of judgment in civil causes, and erect another court against
his, because he peruerteth judgment, either by gifts or favor. Therefore, if
it be true that the D. houldeth, that this right belongs to Caesar: Ambrose
owght to have appeared, and to have waited, what the Emperors judgment would
have been. If it had been against the truth, then to have answered as the
Apostles to the Council, that he vuould Act: 5.
rather obey god then man. This may yet better appear, for that if the Emperor
had sent for Ambrose, and given him summonce, to show what was his judgment,
withowt pretending to be Judge in the cause: Ambrose could not have refused yt,
althowgh the Emperor would after have said, that he was an heretik. Last of
al, this being objected part. 6. chap. 12. diuis. ^.
by Harding, that there is the same right of a Christian Prince and of a Tyra^:
is not denied of the Bishop of Sarisbury. For the ordinance of god is one: even
as there is the same right of a heathen master, husband, and father, over a
Christian servant, Son and wife, as if they were Christian. And yt was an
error, against which the Apostles labored: that private men, might deny unto
Princes and other their superiors, which did not their duties, things which,
otherwise, were due unto the^. Nether owght the D. more to charge me with this
saying, because Harding has yt: then I charge him with his opinion, of the
same kind in this behalf with Pigghius: who Hier. 5. lib. cap. 4.
teaches, another right of a Christian, and of a profane Magistrate.

The relation of Athanasius matter, to the Emperor: was (as Apolog. 2.
may appear) because the most part of the Bishops, were he retikes, either
Coluthans, Arians, or Miletians.

That out of Augustine, demanding why the Donatistes made the Emperor Judge, if
it were not lawful for him to give sentence in a matter of Religion: was only
to beat them with their own rod, not that Augustine allowed their fact, in making
the Emperor their Judge. which is manifest in other places, where he does
precisely reprove them for it: and cast yt in their teeth, that August. in
psalm. contra partent Donat. and Epist. 68.
they preferred the Emperors judgment unto the Bishops: when, notwithstanding,
the Emperor gave the same judgment which the Bishops did, and was, for his
godliness, the perl of al Emperors. Vuherein, it is also to be observed, that
Augustine in another place says, that the Emperor, Epist. 166
not daring to judge of the Bishops cause, committed yt unto the Bishops: and
that he did, not once but twice. Likewise, that he was driven by Epist. 162
the Donatistes importunity, which made no end of appealing unto him, to give
sentence in that matter: for the which also, he vuas to crave pardon of the
Bishopes. Hitherto makes singulerly, that Augustine puts d Li. prim^ contra
literas Parmenian. ca. 7.
a plain distinction between these judgments: saying of the Donatistes, which
of their private authority russhed upon the catholics, that yt vuas nether by
ecclesiastical lavu nor by the kings lavu: which were ridiculous, if (as the D.
says) the ecclesiastical laws, were also the kings laws.

That out of Sozom. 4. lib. 16, owght not to have been alleged: considering
that boeth the Emperor Constantius, which required to have the ending of the
matter, and the most of the Bishops in the Council of Syrm, which agreed unto
his request, were infected with Arianism. Likewise, that out of Socrates 5
book, cap. 10, is idle: seeing nothing is done there by Theodosius, which is not
confessed to belong unto the Magistrate. The next is answered before.

Vuhere I pressed him with his own words, affirming that diuis. 6. pa. 702.
etc. also the first diu. p. 694.
the church has authority to make ceremonies: he answers that he included the
Prince, as chief governor of the church: which is not sufficient. For either
the Prince alone, must be the church, or else one of his sentences, goes to
ground: either that which says, that the church has authority, or this
affirming that the Prince has all the authority, to make ceremonies.

I alleged for further answer, against his shameful slanders of us, as if we
were joined with the papists in this cause: as follows. First, that the
papists exempt their Priests from the punishment of the civil Magistrate:
vuhich vue do not. whereto he answers, that Harding and Saunders do as
much: which is utterly vntrw. For by the words, he cites out of Saunders, yt
appears, that he does not subject them unto the Magistrate, in respect of
their priesthood. Out of Harding, he nether cites words, nor quoteth place:
which his burning desire, of coupling us with the papists, would not have
passed, if it could have been found.

And that the reader, may better know his great unfaithfulness in so weighty a
matter: let him take Hardings own words to the Bishop, which are these. Apolo.
6. part cap. 9. diui. 1. and 2.
Yovu teach princes, to use violence against Priests, as thovugh their fautes
could not be redressed, by the Prelates of the clergy. And after, yt is not
convenient, that the king should call Priests before him, to his ovun seat of
judgment. I assigned also another difference, that vuhere the papists, vuil
have the Prince execute vuhatsoeuer they conclude, be yt good or bad: vue say,
that if there be no lavuful ministry, as in the ruinous decays of religion,
that then the Prince ovught to set order. And if, when there is a lavuful
ministry, it shall agree of any vnlavuful thing: that the Prince ovught to stay
yt, and to drive them, to that vuhich is lavuful. This difference, althowgh he
could not deny, and althowgh, by it, we are sundred from the papists, as far
as he is from him that said, the king of Persia might do vuhat he lusted: yet
he continues his former slander, that we shake hands with the papists: and
fears not still to say, that he sees not wherein (in this article) we differ
from them.

But not able to deny this difference, he cauilleth at yt: asking first, why
the prince owght rather to determine of ecclesiastical causes when there is no
lawful ministry, the^ when there is: forsooth because the Magistrate is bound
to see, the service of god maynteined in his dominion. which, when yt can not
be by the 1. Tim. 2.
means, which god has appointed ordinary, yet for as much as his bond still
remains, the next is, that yt be done as nerely unto that order as may be:
until such time (which owght to be with all possible speed) as the standing, and
set order, be established. I say, as nere as may be unto the order prescribed
of god, least any should think, that because that order can not be precisely
kept, he were by and by at liberty, to set up clean another order, which should
seem best to him: neglecting, upon occasion of the inability of observing al,
the observation of those things which may be observed. For herein owght to be
followed, the example of the godly learned Priest Abimelech: which admitted
David and his company, to the participation of the show bread, that was
otherwise lawful for the Priests only to eat of. who, althowgh (to keep
charity which is the end of the law) he brake so much of the ceremonye, as the
present necessity did require: 1. Sam. 21. 4^
yet he ceased not therefore, to be careful of the observation of the rest: as
appears, in that he asked, vuhether they had absteyned from the company of
their vuiues.

Again, yt is known, that the Priests and Prophets have extraordinarily
meddled with civil affairs, in confused times: will he therefore say, that this
power is ordinarily annexed unto the Bishops office. The cases, I grant, are
not altogether like: yet to his question, which supposes that there is no
cause, why the Magistrate should not judge of church matters, as well when there
is a lawful ministry, as when there is none: this may serve, for part of an
answer.

Moreover, as in siknes, there is another diet, then in health: so the church
in her grievous diseas, has an other kind of government, then that which is
ordinary, and used in a good constitution of her body. which thing, being said
of the ruinous estate of the church, is to be understood also, of her
beginninges and, as yt were, infancy: where either there was no church before,
or having been, yt was rased from the foundations. If this content him not: let
him answer me, why the Prince must of necessity, commit these matters to the
ministry when it is learned and godly, rather then when yt is otherwise: if,
at the least, he will now at the last, have this the meaning of this broken
english. And of his answer, to this question, will easily rise an answer to his.

But some sharper Adversary, might here have objected: that Moses, David, and
Salomo^, being Princes in the most flourishing estate of the church: did
notwithstanding make church orders. whereunto I answer, that they did so,
partly, for that they were not kings only and Princes, but also Prophets of
god: partly, for that they had special and expres direction thereto, from god by
the prophet: whereby they did even those things in the church, which, withowt
such special revelation, was not lawful, for the Priests the^ selves to have
doe^. And althowgh, the truth of this answer, be apparent: yet, that it may
have the more authority, especially with the D. that tastes nothing withowt
this sauce: he may understand, that it is M. Caluins answer of Moses, and
David, and that in this present cause now debated. Lib. epistol. Gal. pa. 46


His other quarrel against this answer is, that if a lawful ministry
determining some thing unlawful, will not be browght to that which is just, that
then the Prince must have either that which they will, or no religion. As thowgh,
such a ministry were a lawful ministry, that is obstinate. or as if, this
obstinacy being general or for the most part, the state is not here ruinous:
so that the Prince may, after due means, assaied to bring them home, procure
that other be put in their places. we herby appears, that the remedy of this
inconvenience, which (he says) he can not see: was comprehended, in the first
part of the second difference, between ours, and the Papists judgment.

But, if for that, a lawful ministry is subject to error, or does er in the
decision of ecclesiastical causes, he think that yt should not therefore handle
these matters: he may as well take from them, the preaching of the word:
considering that an error, may as well be found in the pulpit, as in the Council
hows. And look what remedy the Magistrate has against a ministry, teaching
falsely or inconueniently in the pulpit: the same has he against yt,
determining so in Council.

And, to make the partition wall, between the papists and us in this question,
one cubite higher, that those which will not open their eyes to see it, may feel
yt, in not only stumbling, but running also their heads against yt: I will ad
this much, that in ascribing unto the ministry, the decision of matters in
controversy, and the making of church ceremonies: our meaning is not utterly to
seclude the Magistrate. For, when Ruff 1. li. cap. 3.
experience teaches us, that often times a simple man, and, as the proverb
says, the Gardener has spoken to good purpose, but 2. Croni. 30. verse. 20. 4.
and 34. verse. Act. 11. 2. 4. and 15. 22. and 21. 22.
especially when in the holy scripture, the old Testament and the nue: and
thirdly, when in the 1. Tom. council. in praef. ^. conci. Carthag. Ambrose
Epist. lib. 532 Hither belongs that vuhich the bishop has vuritten in
defense of the Apology 6. part. chap. 3. diuis. 3.
ecclesiastical writers, yt is found, that there have been of the people
admitted unto these consultations: when further it is found, that they have had
their consent there, and sometime also their speech: with far greater reason,
may the Christian Magistrate, boeth be assistant, and have his voice in such
assemblies.

That then, which we give unto the ministry in such church consultations,
which are not of the daily ministry, as Synods be: is boeth a fore
consultation, as we see to have been done in the Act. 21. 18
scripture, to the end that the matter being digested, and as it were cut out,
and prepared a forehand, yt might be the better handled in a fuller assembly:
as also the direction and moderation of that meeting, where these matters are
defined and concluded of.

But in the cheef point, he is sure we agree with the papists: even as the
godly and learned writers, old and of our age, do agree with them, and none
otherwise. whereof two, the D. is him self constreyned to co^fes: meaning (as I
think) M. Call. Inst. 4. booK 11. cha. sect. 15. and 12. sect. 7.
Calvin and Beza Epi. 8.
Beza. whether he do or no, so they are, as may appear. And how durst he say
of those two, upon no ground, that in this article of the Magistrates authority,
they differ nothing from the papists. For so he says in effect, when he says
so of us: whom he is compelled to confess, to have their assistance in this
cause. Althowgh they are not (as he says) alone: but have diverse others
bearing them company. Amongst whom, M. Bucer may seem to be worthy of the
chief place: which affirms, that the magistrate ovught not to administer d
Bucer lib. de cura anim.
the discipline of the church.

So that, so far as we consent here with the papists, we do it, as in the
article of the holy Trinity, where we have with warrant of the word of god, the
approbation also of the best. we hold with them, things in common: in which
respect, we are not afraid to confess, that we consent in some point, with the
Iues and Turks, or they rather with us. But you are found in diverse places, in
their private orcheyardes, gathering your fruit of trees, which their hands
did first plant: and from thence you bring your stocks, which you would place
in the lords vineyard. And even in this question, whom have you opposed unto
these two: which you co^fes of our judgment. you pretend in deed, the Bishops
of Sarisbury and winchester, with M. Nowel: but for two of them, I have showed,
that they are in effect of the same judgment we are: assured I am, they are
further from you then from us: of the third also (albeit I have not seen him (I
persuade my self likewise.

There remains only Musculus, whose saying if I should deny not to be
charged upon us, but on the papists only, seeing we do not deny altogether as
they do, that he has authority to make church laws: you se we have hold,
which you can not easily put us from. But because, when I confessed some of
contrary judgment: I meant him, at the least as one which (if he thowght as we)
did not sufficiently expres yt: let us grant you, this reed to ride upon, and
to bear your self up, in this great triumph. And let it be granted you, to
make your faut seem so much the les: that you have one learned man, of the same
judgment with you.

That I have no other reasons then the papists, is untrue: at least you show
yt not. And I may holily profes, and in the presence of god, that I went not to
the papists for them: but in reading the scriptures, and the autors them
selves, observed them. Nether could the papists abusing them, to the
maintenance of their tyranny over Princes, and the whole church, affray me to
use them, as I have: no more, then they affraied M. Calvin and others, which
have used of them in like manner.

Of al which matter, the reader may understand, how unworthy owtcries they be,
which he so often raises against us: that we give no more to a godly Christian
magistrate, then to the Turk or Nero, with such like. For who will communicate
the church matters, with Nero, open to him the necessity of houlding a Council,
desire his confirmation of the church orders, pray his aid in the maynteyning
them, call upon him as well for making them, where the lawful ministry fails,
as for redres of the evil?

Yt is trw, the Turk and Nero, owght to do al these: even as they owght to
do, whatsoever belongs unto a godly Christian Prince: for the leaving of
which undone (much more for doeyng the contrary) the wrath of the lord rests
upon them, and theirs. But for as much, as they profes enmity of the truth: as
they must want boeth the honor in this world, and reward in the world to come,
which the lord gives unto a Christian magistrate: so the church must patiently
bear, the want of these things under the one, which she enjoys under the
other.

To end this matter, seeing the church and common wealth, are distinguished
as well under a Christian Prince, as under an unchristian, and that thereof
follows the distinction one from another, not only of the lower, but also of
the higher members, which are the governors in boeth the bodies: seeing also,
the lord has appointed the Ministers, to be over the matters perteyning to him
self: Seeing further, the ministry of the church is, by calling and gifts
incide^t thereunto, the fittest Judge of the church matters: last of al, seeing
the ancient practis of the church, houldeth up her hand hereunto: I conclude,
that as well in the decision of the doctrine, as in the chois of the variable
ceremonies of the church, the principal authority belongs unto the ministry.
The rest of the sections in this tractate, as those which require no reply: I
will not towch, but leau them to the readers judgment.

THE THIRTINTH AND LAST TRACTATE, AND NINTH WITH THE D. beginning page 474: of
the inconvenience of the Ceremonies used in the church of England, divided into
tvuo parts: the first vuhereof, is of the general fautes, the other, of the
particular.
THe doctrine and discipline of the church, The first chapter, of the first
part that the church in indifferent ceremonies, ouught* not to beco^formed unto
the popish Synagoges.
as the weightiest things, owght especially to be looked unto: but the
ceremonies also, as mynt and common, owght not to be neglected. For, if honest
matrones have regard, to the smalest part of the attire of their daughters,
that yt be nether sluttish, nor gawish, nor after the manner of harlots: much
more, owght that care to be taken for the church of god, that by her comely and
maidenlike apparel, she may content eue^ the eyes of al, which love her
spiritual chastity. And althowgh the corruptions in them stryke not strayt to
the heart: yet, as ge^til poisons, they consume by little and little. which is
rather, to be taken heed unto: for that the harm they do, is to the most part
so insensible, that the church may seem to die hereon almost withowt any grief
or sens of yt, or go away, as yt were, in a sleap. Hereupon, it comes, that
this part has before been somewhat labored in, and now also shall have her
defense, but short: especially when as the Ans. beside a heap of words, open
untruths, dissembling, and perverting my arguments, has almost nothing
worthy the answer.

For even in this first division, what an open untruth is yt, that it is one of
our principles, not to be lawful to use the same ceremonies, which the papists
did: when as I have boeth page 256. diui. 2. and p. 272. diui. 1. p. 475.
before declared the contrary, and eue^ here have expressly added, that they are
not to be used, vuhe^, as good, or better may be established. what an abusing
also is yt, to affirm the mangling of the gospels and epistels to have been
browght in to the church by godly and learned men: not a word of proof, being
browght therefore, which afterward, he says generally, of all the Ceremonies in
question: beside the insufficiency of his answer otherwise, to prove them not
Antichristian, which I have Tract. 11. di. 6 p. 522.
before observed. what boeth untruth, and abusing the time is yt, to reason
against me, as thowgh I had confessed al errors in our ceremonies taken away:
when I name expressly, gros errors, and manifest impieties. Finally, how single
so led an argument is yt, that we may retayn popish ceremonies, because we say
the churches are reformed, and not transformed: seeing that, as transforming may
be in part, or in whole, so may also reforming? and seeing that the To. 12. 2.
scripture, noting the whole and total restoring of a man, sets yt forth as
well by renuyng, as by transforming. who can patiently, bestow his trauail in
such refuse, as this is?

For the mayntenance of this reason, that the Apostles di. 2. p. 474
in ceremonies conformed the Gentiles unto the Iues, and not contrarivuise, the
Iues unto the Gentiles, and therefore, that the churches in the matter of
ceremonies, should be instituted rather according to the pattern of the churches
dressed up before them, then of the popish sinagog: I refer the reader, to that
I have In the former part p. 470.
already written. That the lord, forbad his people to do some things, vuhich
in them selves vuere lavuful: is manifest in the Leuit. 19. 19. 27.
law. That he has showed, that the Christians have conformed them selves unto
Idolaters in their church ceremonies, with approbation either of the word, or of
Augustine, is untrue: only he showed, that the use of things necessary, owght
not to be taken away for the abuse: which he boeth often, and idly repeateth, as
that which is confessed.

Vuhere I showed, that the lord being careful, to sever Diuis. 3. pa. 475.
his people by ceremonies from al strangers: vuas so especially, to sever them
from the Egiptians and Cananeans amongst vuhome they lived, and amongst
vuhome they vuent to live: he answers, that the Egiptians nether worshipped,
nor pretended the true god, but the papists do, which is In the former part
p. 184. etc.
before answered: that the Gentiles, had like ceremonies etc. which is also In
the former part p. 470.
answered: that having certain ceremonies common, with those from whom we
differ wholly in substance of religion, we may much more have the same with the
papists, from whom we differ but in certain substa^tial points. The one part
whereof, is answered: the other (to take yt in the best sens a man can expound
yt) is untrue. For the Turks believe one god, and so do we: and therefore, we
differ not in all substantial points, from them. And althowgh popery houldeth
diverse things, better then they: yet the Turks hold some things, better
then yt.

Vuhere I affirm yt, more safe for us to conform our indifferent ceremonies to
the Turks, vuhich are far of, then to the papists vuhich are so near, he
charge me, with diverse reproaches, boeth here and otherwhere: but the reasons
in this division, whereof one is, that the lord used the same vuisdome to
vuardes his people, another, that there is greater fear of infection from those
vuhich are near, then from those vuhich are further of, he touches not. As for
his reason, that the Turk is a professed enemy unto Christ and his name, the
Pope pretending the contrary: the first is not altogether, and in all respects,
true. For the Turk, acknowledges our Savior Christ a prophet, and gives the
true Christians more rest under him, then the papists do under them: Nether
can the pretense of the name of Christ, when the effect is contrary, diminish
the Popes faut: seeing beside the enmity against Christ, the syn is rather
increased by his hypocrisy. Howbeit, I will not here dispute, whether the Turks
or papists are greater enemies: yt is enowgh, that they are boeth fallen from
Christ, the one by errors in the head points of his person, the other by
errors in the head points of his office: in which respect, as boeth their
ceremo^ies are to be avoided, so in that the papists are nearer us the^ the
Turks, theirs are more to be avoided, then those of the Turks. That we do
not in any kind of ceremonies, conform our selves to the papists: requires
no confutation, as that for the proof whereof, the Ans. must put out the eyes,
and stop the ears, of al. The rest, of the false pretense of Christian liberty,
is page 256. 257. 258. also in the former part of this booK p. 403. lin. 29
before confuted.

Diu. 4. p. 476.
To that, that contraries are cured by contraries, and that as to establish
Christ's doctrine and discipline, yt is necessary to abolish the popish doctrine
and government, so to heal the infection crept in by the popish order of
service, yt is meet that an other vuere put in place: he answers, that as in
doctrine and discipline, they have some good, so in ceremonies. wherein, he
touches not the point of my reason. For the cause why, that good which is in
Popery of the doctrine and discipline, can not be changed, is, for that they
are perpetual commandments, in whose places, no other can come: but the
ceremonies we speak of, are changeable, so that if either better, or but as good
as they can be ordained, yt is manifest, that for the cause assigned, those
abused in popery, owght to give place. Again, whatsoever good they have, either
in doctrine or in discipline: yt is none of theirs, but the church is.
Therefore by his answer, as no popish doctrine or discipline, is fit for the
church of Christ: so are no ceremonies, browght in by popery. And in deed, when
the ordinance of convenient church ceremonies, proceeds of the light and
knowledge of the word: there being such darkness and ignorance in Popery, yt is
maruail, if yt could shape out one convenient ceremony for the church of
Christ. The second sectio^ of this division, is not to the purpose.

To that I alleged, of the vuay to bring a man from his diuis. 5. pa. 476.
vice, to carry him as far from yt, as may be, which I made plain, by examples
of reforming dronke^nes and streightning of a crooked styk: he disputes
against me, as thowgh I allowed that a man might run from one vice, for remedy
against the other: which is an open untruth, and intolerable, seeing I added
expressly, that I did not alovu yt, but only that of tvuo euiles, yt vuas the
les: whereunto he could not answer. I omit that you bring in S. Paul To. 3,
saying that which he has not. The sentence is true, but you owght to make a
difference, between that he says, and that which is concluded of his saying:
especially seeing you have (althowgh untruly) twice charged me, with the like.

To that of Tertullian, commending the Gentiles, vuhich Diuis. 6. p. 477. Lib.
de Idolatria.
vuould not vuittingly keep any of the feasts of the Christians, and of the
other side, disco^mending the Christians, that kept the feasts of the
Gentiles: he answers, that they communicated with the^, in their Idols:
which is untrue, there being not a word cyted here by him self, importing so
much. For, to ceas from labors the same days they did: was not simply
unlawful. He charge the^ also, vuith feasting on the same days vuhich they
did, also vuith sending of nueyeares gifts: were these not things, in the^
selves indifferent, and only condemned of Tertullian, because they were the
ceremonies of profane nations? and does he not see, how Tertullia^ makes
with us, in that he prefers the use of the ceremonies of the Iues which are
abrogated (for that they were sometime autorized of god) to the ceremo^ies,
which other profane nations, had taken up of their own brayn. This also, may
be understood, by the opposition he makes, of the co^mendatio^ of the
Gentiles. for, seeing Tert. commends not the Gentiles, for that they
worshipped not god with the Christians, but for that they would not admit the
ceremonies, of a religion contrary to their own: to make the opposition
answerable, we must needs say, that he rebukes the Christians, for that they
used the ceremonies of a religion, contrary to that they approved. For further
knowledge, of Tertullians judgment herein: I refer the reader, to that In the
first booK and first Tractate. Diuis. 7. p. 478.
before written.

To that of Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 17. Socra. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Co^sta^tin, disalovuing for diverse causes, that the Christians* hold hold
the feast of Easter, at that time vuhich the Iues did: he says, that the East
parts kept yt, as the Iues: which is no answer seeing he shows not, whether
he allow of Co^stantines judgment, or no. his second answer, that he mea^t, we
should have nothing common with them, repugnant to Christian liberty: is
untrue, seeing in it self, there was nothing more free, then whether a feast
should be kept upon thursday, or sunday.

His third reason, that if he had generally misliked their ceremonies, he would
have abrogated them, cleaves not together. In steed whereof, he should have
said, if he had utterly misliked ceremonies, and not their ceremonies. For as
for theirs, he abrogated them: not only in propounding another end, then they
did, but also in disanulling a number of ceremonies, used in the keeping
thereof. At the least, this example teaches, that if we will hold holidays
and fishdayes, with the papists: yet in detestation of their religion, and for
avoiding of superstition, which has crept into men's minds by them, we owght
to change the days.

His last answer, that as Constantyn changing the day, and keeping the feast,
put a difference between the Iues and Christians, so we greatly differ, from
the papists in the ceremonies taken from them: is likewise insufficient. For
althowgh that the Christians, had kept the same day with the Iues: yet their
keeping of the Easter, should have differed from the Iues keeping, as much as we
differ now from the papists, in the ceremonies we have from them. But, they
thowght yt not enowgh, to differ from the Iues, in things merely unlawful:
onles they were also severed from them, by a ceremony, which was in it self
most indifferent.

To that alleged out of the Councels, that they vuould Diuis. 8. p. 478.
Zaodicens. cap. 38. 2. Tom. Bracar can. 73. 74.
not have the Christians communicate in unleavened bread, because the Iues did,
nor dek their hovuses vuith green bovughes, because the pagans did so: he
asks, to what purpose they be alleged: you know full well, that these go to
the heart of your cause. For, what can be in yt self more indifferent, then
these two, forbidden the Christians: for that they were used, of the enemies of
the church. And being a reason, yt must be general of al such as the church may
well want: much more of those, in place whereof, it may have as good, or better.
As for your often repeating, that the ceremonies in question are godly, comely
and decent: yt is your ouldwont, of de^aunding the thing in question, and an
undoubted argument of your extreme poverty. That I cyted out of the Council of
Braccaras is to be found in the council and Tome I alleged Can. 74. And the 73
can. which I cyted, is generally against al ceremonies used by the paganes. for
the two next sections, I refer the reader to that In the examination of the D.
ce^sures.
already answered.

And that this complaint of ours is just, in that we are thus constreined to be
like unto the papists, in any their ceremonies, and that this cause only,
owght to move them, to whom that belongs, to do them away, forasmuch as
they are their ceremonies: the reader may further see, in the Apol. first part
chap. 2. diui. 8.
Bishop of Sarisbury, which brings diverse proofs thereof, directly against
the D. and flatly for us.

To this place belongs, as that which is general, the reason of the offense,
c before handled, whereunto page 288 a In the former part of this booK p. 403.
he adds, that those which are offended at this apparel, take an offense
where yt is not given: which is (as he means an offense taken) nothing else,
but a demand of that in question. And yt deceives him, that he considers
not, that the Apostle teaches that an offense is not only given, when an
unlawful thing is done: but also, when a thing, in yt self lawful, is done
unlawfully: that is, out of time and place. Howbeit, yt is page 277. et diuis.
6.
further said, that the offense may be taken away by preaching: but yt, was
also replied, that yt is not so convenient, that the ministers, having so many
necessary points to bestow their time in, should be driven to spend it, in
giving warning of not abusing them, of which (althowgh they were used at the
best) there is no profit. whereunto, his answer (that the abuse of meats, and
costly apparel for Princes etc. does not take away the use) being of things,
whereof there appears a manifest profit: is partly In this chapter.
before, and further comes to be answered, in the diduction of the
particulers. The untruth also of his surmise, that I would hereby take away out
of the church, the doctrine of indifferent things: is manifest. For, I spoke
not of al ceremonies, but of such, as have been shamefully abused, and whereof
there is no manifest profit: nether did I disalow the doctrine, against the
abuse of them, seeing I added, that one sermon against their abuse, joined vuith
their removing by them to vuhom that appertains, vuould do more good, then a
thovusand vuithovut: as appears by the example of our Sau. Christ, which for
Math. 15. 2. 16. Marc. 7. 2. 14.
the better rooti^g out of error, refused the hurtful ceremonies, and tawght
the abuse of them together. And what wisdom is yt, I pray you, that by
continuance of the popish ceremonies, the church should reciue a wound, to the
end that afterward, by continual warning, yt might receive a plaster: so that
the inconuenie^ce which I assigned, lies in this, that the ministers by the
continuance of them, should be driven to occupy a great deal more time, and
with les fruit, then when they should be taken away: the confuting whereof, he
is so far from, that he rather confirms my saying. For, if the taking away of
these things from the eyes, does not by and by root out the opinion out of
the heart, when as doctrine is joined withal (as I set yt down, and as in deed
yt owght to be:) then how much les, will the doctrine be able to pull yt out of
their hearts, when they be always before the eyes, and in use. This I made
plain, by his example, vuhich should set one to vuatch a child al day long,
least he should hurt him self vuith a knife: vuhereas, by taking avuay the
knife quite from him, the danger is avoided, and the service of the man better
employed: his answer whereunto, of a child which has discretion, is no
answer, when I meant of a little child which, by age, is not able to guide a
knife. Of which sort, yt is les meruail, if there be amongst us: seeing there
appear to have been such, in the ^ Romans 14. 1. Cor. 3. Heb. 5.
Apostles times. the rest in that division, is to no purpose.

Hither appertains also, that in page 259 diuis. 5. of the surplice, that by
using of these ceremonies the papists take occasion to blaspheme: saying that
our religion can not stand by yt self, unless yt lean upon the staf of their
ceremonies. whereunto his first answer, that they were before Antichrist: is ^
Tract. 11. Diuis. 6 p. 522.
before answered. His second, that they make no great account of them, is very
untrue, even in the very surplice: seeing they have so many mysteries in yt, as
Durandus in his Rationali diuinoru^ reckeneth up. which answer also of his, is
Hardings shift: confuted by the bishop, who In the defense of the Apol. 3 part
chap. 5. Diuis. 1.
shows, by diverse testimonies, what great holiness they put in these things.
His third, that they know we could be well withowt them: is but an asking of
that in controversy, and contrary to that them selves do speak. Also that we
do not (but for obedience sake) much esteem them: but how shall they know that,
when they may see greater severity used for the omitting of them, then for the
lords own commandments. where also, yt is to be noted, that althowgh the
wearing of the surplice and of the cap, were free by the laws of the church:
yet the D. would not willingly, altogether part with them, althowgh he would
not so greatly esteem them. the rest there, often repeated: has partly been,
and partly comes, to be answered.

To that, that thus they conceiving hope of having the rest of their popery in
the end, causes them to be more frozen in their vuickednes: he answers, that
they have no cause so to hope, which is no answer. For not the cause, but the
occasion also, owght to be taken away: where yt may be so chepe, that is to
say, withowt removing any thing, whereof we may not have either as good, or
better in place. Althowgh, let the reader judge, whether they have cause given,
to hope that the tail of popery yet remaining, they shall the easelier hale in
the whole body after: considering also, that M. Bucer notes, that where these
things have been left, there upon the 18. of S. mathevu.
popery has returned: but of the other part, in places which have been cleansed
of these dregs, yt has not yet been seen, that yt has had any entrance. the
rest, towching their hopping withowt their hope etc. nether lets the^ in the
mean season, throwgh this hope, to die in their sins, nor is (if yt come to
pas) any gramercy unto this remnant of popish ceremonies, which do their best,
to keep the memory of Aegipt with us. Diuis. 6. p. 259.


To prove the papists triumph and joy in these things, I alleged further,
that there are none vuhich make such clamours for these ceremonies, as the
papists, and those vuhich they suborn. He answers, that they do so justly
etc. al which depends of the demand, of that in question: albeyt what meat,
I beseech you, is yt like to be, which a popish stomak, does so gredily
embrace? I deny not, but some of ours, may speak for them, throwgh a good
intention, they have to obey the Prince: but there be none so lickerous of
them, as are the papists, nor none cry so loud for them, as they: which is
that I meant, and uttered. the second section is a answered b In the former
part p. 245. Diui. 7. pa. 260.
partly, and partly comes to be answered after.

Yt is there further alleged, against the incommodity of these ceremonies,
that there be numbers vuhich have Antichristianity in that detestation: that
they can not vuithovut grief of mind behold them. The same persons, upon so
easy an opening of the wicket, unto this trus of popish ceremonies: fear least
if the assault should be whot, they would set open the gates, to the bringing
in of greater packes: whereunto his answer out of M. Calvin, is from the cause.
For, let hardely his sentence strike upon them, which, for every light
corruption in the church, will make a departure from yt: yet their frowardnes,
shall never excuse the sluggisnes of them which labor not, as they may, to
remove those imperfections, at which they have so miserably fallen. Your
surmise, of transforming our selves daily into a new shape, if we will please
the people: is (to let the rest go) but a wa^dring from the matter. For I
added, that such godly brethren, are not easily to be grieved: which they seem
to be, when they are thus martyred in their minds, for ceremonies which (to
speak the best of them) are unprofitable. Beside that your proof of this, that
the people are always desirous of noueltyes, which is that man's nature is
desirous of nwes: is to wide. For yt takes the prince, and other estates boeth
in church, and common wealth by the head: as well, as the people.

Hither is to be referred, that yt is required, that the ceremonies should not
only not offend, but also tend to edification: which being barely denied, by
the Answerer, In the former part p. 279. Tra. 1.
has been declared, of me. Also, that many of these popish ceremonies, faut by
reason of the pomp in them, vuhere they should be agreeable, to the simplicity
of the gospel of Christ crucified: which he likewise denies, to be necessary,
and might as well deny, that the rest of the building should be conformable unto
the foundation. But of this also there has been spoken Tract. 7. and ^.
before, in the matter of the church discipline: whereof there is (in this
respect) one reason.

Hither also belongs, the eight division page 551. where first he alleges,
that in matters of order, the church is judgment is to be preferred, before a
private man's: where, if he understand, that we must do so always, and
generally, he differs nothing herein, from the papists. For why should we
for matters of order, always hang our judgment upon the church is sleue:
rather then in matters of doctrine. The determination, of the goodness of them
boeth, is fetched (as has In the former part and first Tr.
been showed) from the word of god: if therefore, the church is hand, may slip
in the one, yt may do so in the other. And if a private man, may sometime in a
matter of doctrine wake, when the church sleapeth: he may do the same, in a
matter of order. But if he understand, that the church is judgment, is to be
preferred to a private man's, when hers is framed according to the word of god,
and not his: yt is in deed true, but then his reason is a mere daliance, and an
open demand of that in question: Beside that this judgment, is not the opinion
of a private man, but of thowsandes, and of those amongst which, diverse are in
publik charge and authority.

Touching the next division, I know that god is the author of al truth, and
consequently the holy ghost: but I resisted this, that all that speak yt, speak
yt moved by the holy ghost, which seemed to me to be your meaning. And althowgh,
the knowledge of god which the wicked have, be his gift: yet the use of yt,
proceeds not from the spirit of god, further then of his general working,
whereby they live and are moved, and whereby the Devil him self knows the same.
therefore, that which in this case, you durst not affirm of the devil: you
owght not to have affirmed of the wicked, which are led by his spirit.

THE SECOND CHAPTER: THAT the churches ovught to be conformed, to the example
one of an other.
ALthowgh to prove, that as the churches of Diu. 11. and 12. 13. page 480.
Christ, ovught to be most unlike the sinaguoges of Antichrist in their
indifferent ceremonies, so they ovught to be most like one unto another: there
were alleged, three reasons, one out of S. Paul tovuching the time of
gathering 1. Cor. 16. 1. 2.
for the poor, the second, of the comparison of the children and servants of
noble men, going (for order and comelines sake) in one livery, the third out of
the great Nicene* Council, of the gesture in prayer: yet in his answer he
fears Can. 20.
not to say, that I speak wtthowt any warrant of gods word. as if S. Paul's
authority were no word of god, with him: which, if I had abused, why did he not
convince me. And when he is compelled to confess, that the unity in ceremonies
is to be wished: I would know of him, why it is to be wished, if yt be not, for
that the word of god teaches so? If it do teach so, and not by this place, why
does he not show some apter? but his cause falling here to the ground, for
want of answer: he falls to accusing, that I break unity. If he mean (as he
owght) holy, yt is that, which is in question. Also that we are cause why
uniformity is not observed in our church: which is likewise, and In my first
booK. p. 288 lin. 37 etc. and p. 294. l. 1.
before answered.

Then he asks, to what churches, ours should conform yt self: and why other
reformed churches, should not as well frame them selves, to ours. his reason,
that we have as good grounds of our doings, as they: if it be (as it owght)
understood of the ceremonies, is still the demand of that in question. But to
leau to the judgment of the reader, upon the allegations, whether our
ceremonies be as good as theirs: for further contenting his question, I answer,
that if there be any ceremonies, which we have better then they, they owght to
frame the^ selves to us: if they have better then we, then we owght to frame
our selves to the^: if the ceremonies were alike commodious, the later churches
should co^form them selves to the first, as the younger dawghters unto the
elder. for as S. Paul, in the members, where al other things are equal, Romans
1^ 5. 7.
notes yt for a mark of honor above the rest, that one is called before
another to the gospel: so is yt (for the same causes) amongst the churches.
And in this respect, he pincheth the 1. Cor. 14. 37.
Corinthes, that not being the first, which received the gospel: yet, they
would have their several manners, from other churches. Moreover, where the
ceremonies are alike commodious, the fewer owght to co^form the^ selves unto
the more. forasmuch therefore, as all the churches (so far as I know) of our
confession in doctrine, agree in the abrogatio^ of diverse things which we
retayn: our church owght, either to show that they have doe^ evil, or else she is
found to be in faut, that does not conform her self, in that which she can not
deny to be well abrogated. Nether does this bring in any more popedom: the^ he
which teaches, that the younger dawghter should reverence the elder, does
teach that the elder has authority, to command the younger.

That out of M. Calvin, and Gualter, only serves, for filling. for we confess,
that for indifferent ceremonies, nether the churches owght to fall out with them
selves, nor any member sever him self from the church. But if (which he can not
deny) this be the duty of the churches, to conform them selves one unto
another: then there must be some to inform, and admonish the^ of this duty.
Therefore to let pas the offenses, which the superstition in them works, and
to presuppose of them, as much indifferency in the use, as there is in there
nature: yet, he has here, manifestly condemned him self. For, confessing that
the churches in ceremonies, owght to be like, as much as is possible: he
endeuoreth notwithstanding with might and mayn, that they should not, onles al
other will conform them selves to ours. In steed whereof, he owght to have
confessed, at the least, some imperfection of our church, in this behalf: and
have addressed these admonitions of his, unto them which (for difference in
ceremonies) make a departure from the church. Beside, that the froward spirits
against which M. Calvin speaks: were those that stuk in the ceremonial
Judaism, as the D. does now in the ceremonial papism, and pressed them, as the
unchangeable laws of god: which, he ca^ not show to be done of us, in any
indifferent ceremony. M. Gualters place, so far as yt concerns ceremonies,
has the same answer.

THE THIRD CHAPTER, of the first part.
AN other general faut of the service book, Diuis. 14. p. 482.
is assigned, in that yt mainteineth an unpreaching ministry: partly in
appointing so long time of prayers and reading, vuherby the les time can be
spent in preaching: but especially for that yt requires nothing to be done by
the Minister, vuhich a child of ten years old can not do as vuel, and as
lavufully as that man, vuherevuith the book contenteth yt self. Here, in the
first point, he gropeth at none days: asking, whether this, or that be my
meaning. which I plainly declared, in saying that the devil under color of
long prayer drove preaching ovut of the church: unto the which reason he
answers nothing, but asks, whether we can spend an hour better, then in
praiyng, and hearing the scripture red. whereunto, I answer that if with that
hour, he allow an other for the sermon: the time will be longer, then the age
of some, and infirmities of other some, can ordinaryly well bear. whereu^to
also, if another hour, at the least, be added. for the celebration of the holy
communion: he may see, that either the preaching must be abbridged, or not so
due regard had of men's infirmityes.

Beside this, there is to be considered, the common infirmity: whereby, throwgh
such continuance, the powers of the mind standing so long bent, are dulled,
and often also a most dangerous lothsomenes occasioned. Against which, our
church (as others have done) should, by a godly policy, have provided: where,
for this cause, the whole Leiturgy or service, is not ordinarily, above an
hour and a half. Nether let any here object, the papists long service. For,
beside that the rage of Idolaters, has always been more set on fire in the false worship, then the zeal of gods people in the true: yt owght to be
considered, that their prayer was more a liplabour, then any exercise of the
mind, and their churches rather stages to represent gay shows unto the eyes,
pleasant soundes unto the ears, and sweet smells unto the nose, then any hows
for the children of god to meet in, about any earnest work: and also, that they
had respite, between their Mattins and Mas.

In the second reason, he asks whether a child of ten year old, may
minister the sacraments etc. no for sooth, but yet as well as he, which can but
barely read, if he have the same calling: which, being that which I affirmed,
he is not able to move, with one word of reason. After, he supposes of me, as
if I had said, that the book maynteineth an unpreaching ministry, because a
child can read yt: adding, that so I may say of the Bible, because a child
can read yt also: which is to open an untruth. For my reason is, not because a
child of ten years can read yt: but because, yt requires nothing to be done
by a Minister, which such a child can not do. And if the holy Bible (which is
far from yt) should permit, that one which can but read yt, might be made a
Minister, or required no more of him, then that he should be able to read yt:
then I might well say, that the Bible maynteined an unpreaching ministry. If
the order of the church, do not permit this: then the charge, lies upon the
Bishops necks, which withowt any warrant, have so bouldly enterprised, such a
shameful act. part of the next division is answered, in Tract. 10. chap. 1.
this part: the residue with the two next after yt, in the page 370. l. 15. etc.
former part of this book.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER, of the first part.
TO a third faut, assigned in that the fruit Diui. 18. 19 20. p. 485.
that might othervuise be taken of the service, is not received, by reason that
the minister reads some in the hither, some in the upper part of the
chauncel, as far from the people as the vual vuil let him go: he cries out of
impudency, corruption, and falsifying, for leaving out these words, except yt
shall be othervuise determined, by the Ordinary of the place. Alas, how should I
be free, or what armor may be given me, against these untrue accusations:
which could not, escape the here. For in the very next division, I expressly
mention this exception, which he has mangled and cut of from this division:
belike, to the end, there might be place, to this surmise. But unto the
reasons, that yt renueth the fashion of the leuitical Priest, vuhich vuithdrvu
him self from the people, to talk vuith god alone: Also that if it be for the
most edification, that some part of the service should be said in the body of
the church, that then yt is not so, vuhe^ other some is said in the nether,
some in the further end of the chauncel, and other some in the further end of
the same church: Again, that if yt be expedient that he should have his face
tovuards the people in reading of some, yt is unmeet to have his bakturned to
them in other some: last of al, to the indecency in trudging from place to
place: I say, to al these reasons, he answers nothing worth the naming. But
the sum of his defense, is: that the Bishop has power to order yt, to the
most edification. wherein, how unlawful yt is, that he alone should have the
order hereof, is In the former part Tract. 7.
before declared, and how dangerous it is, let the practis in this point be
judge. For I am assuredly persuaded, that the tenth church in England: has not
all the service said in that place, where the whole church may best hear yt: And
withal note (as I said) what a shameful disorder, is committed, in a matter, so
easily remedied.

The place of S. Luke, is an unchangeable rule to teach: that 1. Act. ^5.
all that which is done in the church, owght to be done where it may be best
heard, for which cause I alleged yt. his cauil of the place of the font, said
of me to be at the church door, in steed, that I should have said, over against
the church door: is unworthy the answer, especially considering that I spoke
more favorably for the book, the^ he, which, by this answer, sends the
minister for baptim beneath the church door. And so also, I leau to the
judgment of the reader, what was the end of him that penned the book, in this
behalf: seeing he could hardly be ignorant, that the places used customably in
Popery, were not the aptest for the understanding of the hearers.

And this, boeth separation of the Minister by Chauncel, as Monckish, as also
the often shifting of, the Ministers place, as a thing very absurd: M. Bucer in
Tract. de reforma^. Colleg. Item in Ce^sur. liturg. Anglica recens Basil^ae
edit. cap 1.
Bucer boeth generally in all places, and particulerly in our church, does
co^demn. Ambrose has been answered. as for M. Calvin, he shows, that
althowgh our slaknes to believe, be evil, which is cause that one swears: yet
that the oath is lawful, considering that the use of many things is pure,
vuhich proceed of an evil beginning. whereby, the reader may see, how
shamefully he would abuse him. for the slaknes of beleui^g, which is the
original of the oath, can never be pure: and the lawful oath, occasioned hereon,
can never be but pure. So that, where M. Calvin refers the pure use, unto a
thing diverse from the corrupt beginning, and simply good: the Ans. refers yt
to the corcorrupt beginning it self. his cauil of my untrue dealing, for
changing his word good, into not evil: is unworthy any answer.

THE SECOND PART OF this Tractate.
THE FIRST CHAPTER WHEREOF, being of holy days: is divided, into tvuo parts.
THE FIRST PART, OF THE FIrst chapter: of the ceremony of the Easter, Nativity,
and Vuhitson holy days.
TTe Treatise of the general fautes being Diuis. 1. pa. ^^8.
ended, I come to the particular: where, I pas, the eight first divisions, as
those which have no matter, either worth, or requiring answer. Before I come to
the ninth, which is of the prayers: I will dispatch the treatise of the holy
days, as it lies page 538, of the Doctors book. To that of abrogating them,
for the shameful abuse and superstition, crept into men's minds of them: he
answers, that things of necessary use, owght not for their abuse, to be
abrogated. where, first he makes a necessary use, in the church of things,
which the scripture has given no commandment of: Secondly, he condemns in
this point, the churches that use them not: and thirdly, destroys the liberty
of placing or displacing them, which him self page 541. ^ect. 2.
otherwhere ascribes to the magistrate. His other answer, that they be means
rather to withdraw from superstition, by reason of reading and preaching,
diverse times after repeated: is but an abusing of the time. For nether does he
answer any thing to my reply, which was, that preaching ca^ not come to al,
throvugh the scarcity of preachers, and that vuhere yt does, the fruit is
hyndered, vuhilest the common sort attend rather to that vuhich is doe^, the^
to that vuhich is said: Nether can he make any sufficient reply to my diui. 4
p. 540.
answer, which is, that that profit is vuithovut danger received othervuhere,
and may be vuith us, vuithovut such solemnities of feasts, if, preaching and
prayers being as they are, the rest of the day be employed, as other vuorking
days. Against which, that which he excepteth page 546, that if these and other
holy days were not, men should, for instruction of their families, be driven
to spend twice or thrice in a week, half the day: is to simple. For they have
the lords day, a great part whereof may be bestowed that way: and that which is
needful for their further instruction, may be supplied of the howshoulders,
whilst their families be in their daily occupation: as also, the lord in his
Deute. 60. verse. 7.
law, by reckoning up certain kinds, commands to be done, in all manner of our
exercises. The next requires no answer.

That the keeping of Easter, vuas left free at the first: Diuis. 3. pa. 539.
will appear after, out of Socrates. That out of lib. 5. cap. 22.
Eusebius: makes against him self. For to let pas, the unlikelihood of the
days of fast, which should go before, whereof there is not a word, nether in
the old nor nue Testament: if it were a tradition of the Apostles, yet it was
used of them, as a thing indifferent: considering that the same story
witnesses, that S. John the Apostle, together with the churches of Asia, did
celebrate Eusebius. 5. li. 24. 25.
the Easter, as the Iues were wont, upon the xiiij day of the month. Now, if
S. John him self, which departed not from the authority of the scripture, did
keep the Iues day: he gave sufficiently to understand, that our Easter has no
authority from the scriptures: for then he would have kept yt also. Likewise,
the Heluetian confession, leaving yt at the liberty of the churches, as a thing
indifferent: makes against him, but against me yt makes not, which confess,
that that day may be kept, and deny, that yt is for our estate and time, so
expedient. his answer to the incommodity of restrayning our cogitations, to a
fevu days, vuhich should be extended to our vuhole life: is nothing worth. For
althowgh, no abuse of men, may take away gods institution: yet in abuse of
things, which may be changed, and are indifferent, yt is not so.

His allegation, that the lord notwithstanding the liberty of working Diuis. 4.
p. 541.
six days, made certain other holy days: is but an abusing of the reader, it
being In my former booK division. 6. p. 542.
prevented by me. And not content herewith, the very same judgment, which he
here aloweth in him self: in me he flatly condemns afterward. For where in
his former book page 174, he confesses that god gave liberty to labor six
days: in this, he affirms, that by making certain feasts, whereof some fall
upon these six working days, he has taken away that liberty. I say not a jot
more, in effect: yet my saying is nue, and his is old: I am ouershot, and he
has hit the mark. His reason is, because I make god contrary to him self. But
how I, more then he? o have liberty of god to work six days, and to be
restrained by him of that liberty: be as contrary, as any thing which I have
set down. And of him, it is said also bluntly, withowt any caution: whereas, I
showed the equity of god in this color of contrariety. Against which, his
exception, that yt can not be showed in all the scripture, that god has made
any law against his own commandment: is untrue. For not to go far, was it not
a law of god, that the Iues were bound of necessity, to keep the Sabbats, and
other solemn feasts? And, is yt not now a law of god, that (at the least) they
are not so bound? His fear, that god should be thus contrary to him self, is
causeles: no more, then the father is to be houlden unconstant, which when his
son comes to man's estate, freeth him of the obedience unto his servant, under
which he cast him in his tender years: or then the physician, which, according
to the state of his pacients body, prescribes not Call. 4.
only a diverse, but a quite contrary diet. This is a catechism matter, whereat
he could hardly have stumbled, if his ey had been simple: althowgh, to say the
truth, in this case in hand, there is no contrariety, but only exceptions out
of a general law. which, that the church may do in likewise, as god the
lawgiuer him self, which he after makes his proof: is to gros. For thereby,
not only the question yt self: but more also then is in question, is demanded.

That those to whom the establishing of the ceremonies does belong, may
appoint that which is convenient for divine service, as often as the church may
conveniently assemble, is agreed: and even in the matter of appointing whole
holy days, in certain cases, yt is also by me page 54^.
confessed. But, that the Magistrate may call from, or compel to bodily labor,
as shall be thowght to him most convenient: is not measured, according to the
cubit of the sanctuary: I mean, of the word of god. For, what if the Magistrate
shall think yt convenient, that men should labor, but one day in the week: what
if he should think never a one: is the Subjects obedience tied to this
ordinance? If it be so, what shall then become of gods commandment: that Genes.
3.
men shall eat their bread in sore trauail? who shall provide for wife and
children, with the rest of the family: for which notwithstanding 1. Timo. 5.
vuhoso provides not for, is vuors then an infidel. His reason, that this yt
no conscience matter, deceives him, whilst he always restrayneth conscience
matters, to inward things alone: whereas yt extends yt self as far, and to
as many matters, as there is either commandment for, or prohibition against, in
the word of god.

And as this is unadvisedly put forth, so that which soloweth, that the word of
god does not constrein the Magistrate, from turning carnal liberty to the
spiritual service of god: is to fowl an oversight. For, thereby he accounts
bodily labor a carnal Tract. 7. p. 757.
liberty, which is an acceptable service unto god: as has been alleged, where
he fell at the very same stone. whereas, if bodily labor were carnal liberty:
the church, and the Magistrate not only might, but were straightly bownd to
restrayn yt: yea utterly to abolish yt.

After he asks, why the church may not as well restrayn from working any part
of the day, as from the most part of yt: which (says he) I confess. where,
first, my words taken at the largest, affourd no further vacation from
labors, then the time wherein the ordinary service may be celebrated: which is
not, the most part of the day. Secondly, where he concludes thereupon, that yt
may restrayn us any part of the day: if that were admitted, what would follow?
that therefore, yt may restrayn from labor the whole day? there is great
odds: for, yt is one thing to restrayn any part of the day, and another, to
restrayn the whole day. Therefore, to have concluded any thing: for these
words, any part of the day, you should have put, the whole day. Now if you ask
me, why the church may not as well restrain men from labor the whole day
ordinarily (for in extraordinary cases yt is confessed) as to restrayn them so
much time, as the divine service may be celebrated in: yt is, but a fai^t
question. For I would ask of you, whether, if it were lawul forth church to
appoint two holy days every week: yt were therefore lawful for her, to appoint
six? And if you will have your reason trust up in few words, yt is this: The
church may do that, which is les, therefore yt may do that which is more.

Again, the divine service, wherefore the vacation is commanded, being ended:
whereupon should the rest of the day be better employed, the^ in the daily
vocations? you will answer, in private reading the word of god, and prayer.
This, in deed, might have better color, if the charge were as straight to
drive men from playing, and dissolutnes often times, unto this exercise: at yt
is, to drive them from their work. Howbeit, here owght not to be forgotten, the
wise man's counsel, Eccles. 7. 18.
that vue should not be to just: So that, as the greatest heap fall away from
god, by prophanes and contempt of his service, thorowgh the desire of following
the world: eue^ so of the contrary part, men boeth may, and have sometimes
declined, whilst they esteemed that the cutting away of some piece from their
necessary trauail, could not be unacceptable unto the lord, so that the same
were bestowed in the church exercises.

And, althowgh the wealth of some may well suffer, al these vacations from their
daily callings, and more to: yet, in making the church ceremonies, respect must
be had, what the common sort may do: even as yt is in a musical consent, where
the sweeter or finer voice is not always taken, but that which will best accord
and fall in, with the rest of the Quier. As for those, to whom the lord has
given the means, to occupy them selves oftener, in private reading of the
holy scripture, and prayer, if they have affection thereunto, they will likely
do yt, withowt this order: if they have none, they will abuse the rest, to
fulfill their nawghty desires: which might be in part restrained, by trauail in
their vocation. Diuis. 5. pa. 541.


The reason, is like. For the authority is al one, to make yt vnlavuful to vuork
when god has made yt lavuful: and to make yt lavuful to labor, when god
has made yt vnlavuful. And therefore, even as the church can not command men,
to labor the seventh day, wherein the lord has commanded rest, but upon some
good consideration: so can yt not, but upon like considerations, restrayn men
from labor any of the six days: so that his answer, that the one is a
commandment, the other a permission, is nothing worth. For, as the
commandment of resting the seventh day, must, because of gods autoritye, abide
in the nature of a commandment: so the permission to work the six days,
warranted by the same authority, must abide in the nature of a permission. The
third section, is beside the cause. For yt is not in question, whether private
men should be subject, unto such orders: but whether the church, should charge
them with this yoke, or no.

Of the liberty of the church in this matter, so yt be upon conditions Diuis.
6. p. 542.
before specified, there is no question. Howbeit, the example out of Esther 9,
of the two days which the ^ues instituted, in the remembrance of their
deliverance: is no sufficient warrant, for these feasts in question. For
first, as in other cases, so in this case of days: the estate of Christians
under the gospel, owght not to be so ceremonious, as was theirs under the law.
Secondly, that which was done there: was done, by a special direction of the
spirit of god, either throwgh the ministry of the Prophets which they had, or
by some other extraordinary means, which is not to be followed of us. This may
appear by another Zach. 8.
place, where the Iues changed their fastes into feasts: only by the mouth of
the lord, throwgh the ministry of the Prophet. For further proof whereof,
first I take the 28 verse: where yt appears, that this was an order to endure
always, even as long as the other feasts days, which were instituted by the
lord hi^ self. So that, what abuses so ever were of that feast, yet as a
perpetual decree of god, yt owght to have remained. whereas our churches, can
make no such decree, which may not, upon change of times and other
circumstances, be altered. For the other proof hereof, I take the last verse.
For the Prophet co^tenteth not him self with that, that he had rehearsed the
decree, as he does sometime the decree of profane kings: but adds
precisely, that as soon as ever the decree was made, yt was registered in this
book of Esther, which is one of the books of the canonical scripture:
declaring thereby, in what esteem they had yt. If yt had been of no further
authority, then our decrees, or then a canon of one of the councels: yt had been
presumption, to have browght yt into the library, of the holy ghost. The sum of
my answer, is, that this decree was divine, and not ecclesiastical only. That
which he adds, of every private man's consent in these matters: is not to the
question, and ^ In the former part of this book p. 226. lin. 35.
yet is b before answered.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS chapter, of Saints days.
IF purgatory were propounded only as a Diuis. 1. pa. ^43.
thing indifferent, which a man might believe or not believe, and yt were in our
chois, whether we would pray for the dead or no: yet this liberty is nawght:
wherefore, your answer, that purgatory is made necessary to salvation, is
insufficient. But, as purgatory is unlawful, with what sauce soever you set yt
before us: so the keeping of Saints days holy, can by no glos be made good.
your confounding therefore of Saints days, with holy days, as if there were
one case of them boeth: is no simple dealing.

Vuhat force there is, in the name of saints days, to make Diui. 2. pa. 544.
men believe, that they are instituted to their honor: let the reader judge, of
that which I In the first booK. p. 61. sect. 3. and 4. and pa. 62. sect. 1. 2.
also in the former part of this p. 408. lin. 37.
have written. How much more, do they confirm this: when boeth the corrupt
custom, and doctrine, in popery, has forestalled the peoples minds with that
opinion. whereunto his answer, that I might much better reason against the
names of Sunday and Moneday: is untrue. For first, the use of such things, is
not so free in ecclesiastical matters: as in civil affairs. Secondly, our
people has not been nusled up, in that filth of worshipping the Sun and Moan,
as they have been of the saints: in so much as (the learned set apart) there
are few, which know that there were ever any days, observed in the honor of
the Sun or Moan. If they had been so nusled, who sees not, but that yt had
been most convenient, for the rooting out of that Idolatry: to have made a
change, of these names. Thirdly, yt is known, that good men after the example
of David Psalm. 16.
(which would not once defile his lips with naming the Idols or Idolatrous
things, except yt were with detestation): boeth absteyn from such names, as
much as the common use will suffer, and desire the abolishment of them.

To my reason, that as the lords holy days, are taken to be instituted to his
honor, so the saints holy days may easily be thovught of the ruder sort, to
be instituted to their honor: he answers, that the lords holy days, are so
called especially, because the scriptures concerning him, are then red: which
is no answer. For, if his answer were true: yet, yt confessing by the way, that
they are taken in part, to be instituted to the lords honor, grau^teth
forthwith, that there is occasion given to the ruder sort, to think that the
Saints days are in part, instituted to their honor. As for his sentence out
of Augustine, yt is a mere abusing of the time: as if every thing instituted to
the honor of god, were a sacrament, or that a thing done in remembrance of the
lord, may not, or rather is not, doe^ to his honor. And here, yt is to be
noted, that the D. is taken, in his own nets. For he defends the keeping
holy, of these Saints days, as they were used in the elder churches, and as
Jerome and Augustine mayntein the^. Now, him self, has for his defense alleged
out of Jerome, page 546.
that these days are observed to the Martyrs: and out of Augustine, that in
them we honor the memoryes of martyrs. Therefore his escape, that no man is so
mad, as to think, that by these days we do any honor unto the Saints: is
not only an open untruth, but directly contrary to that him self maynteyneth.

Vuhat ignorance is in the land, for want of teaching: I In the former part
Tract. 5.
leau to the readers judgment, of that which has been said. To that I
alleged, that althowgh there vuere teaching, yet yt vuere good, that these
names should not help to vnteach: he answers not. Howbeit, he goes further,
asking whether for every particular man's ignorance or abusing of yt: the
churchis order, must be changed. He may well know, that if there be one man
which abuses yt throwgh ignorance, there are more then a thousand: and if there
were but one only, yet, seeing that man is in danger to wrake him self at this
rok, owght not the church rather to change this name, then to give occasion of
destroying him, for whom Christ has died? considering, that of naming those
holy days, Saints days, there can be no fruit, or profit assigned.

His exception against Augustins complaint, of the Diuis. 3. pa. 545. Augu.
Epi. ad Ianuar. ^9.
multitude of Ceremonies, that he speaks not of holy days: is unworthy of
answer, considering that he speaks generally of al kind of ceremonies:
likewise, that he says he speaks of unprofitable ceremonies. For, he
disputes simply against the multitude of Ceremonies under the gospel. whereas,
if they had been but a few, and yet unprofitable, he would therefore, have
condemned them. As for that he says, that ours are profitable, and appoued by
the custom of the whole church: the first is an asking of that in question,
the other is an untruth, as does after appear. Now, whereas I said, that in
this ceremony of holy days, vue excede even the Iues: he makes his accountes
so, that they (as he says) had the greater number. But what Auditor will allow,
these accountes of yours. First of al therefore, you must strike of the supposed
holy day of Judith, for the reason, showed in In the former part p. 400.
another place: likewise, those of the Makabites, as those whereof there is no
certeinty: and boeth Iudiths, and the Makabites together, as those which, if
ever they were houlden, were houlden many hundredth years after the giving of
the law. For the which cause, the two days of Hesther, althowgh they differ as
far from the other, as heaven from earth: owght not to come, into this account.

For this comparison, is not instituted between us, and any estate of the Iues
under the law: but with the ordinary estate, and with that which was given in
mount Synay, by the ministry of Moses. For, that is boeth S. Augustins
meaning, and yt is a fowl wart in the churches face under the gospel: to be so
ceremonius, as the ordinary estate of the church was under the law. There
remayn only, three feasts of the Pasouer whitsontyde and the Tabernacles:
unto every one whereof, you ascribing seven, raise the sum of one and twenty
holy days. But here also, you are fowly over reckened. For, the first only,
and the last day, of every of those three seue^s, were Leuit. 23. verse. 7. 8.
etc.
holy: in the rest, which were between them, althowgh there were extraordinary
sacrifices, yet men might, after divine service, follow their ordinary
vocations. Oneles therefore, you make a far other roll of the Iuish holy days,
then you have done hither toward: you see that my saying, that vue have more
the^ dubble as many holidays as they, is mayntenable, and deserves no such
censure, as you give yt.

For any thing that I could ever learn, we are by the laws as much bownd from
labor upon the saints days, as upon the lords day: wherein, I report my self
to that which may be known hereof: the rest is answered. In the next division,
there is nothing but a manifest pillar of popery, with shameful owtrage unto
the holy ghost: in that he calls the appeal to the scriptures and example of
the Apostles, from certain customs of the churches, which were more then a
hundredth years after Christ, an unlearned shift: which is page 549.
before towched.

In the next, the testimony of Socrates, is faithfully cyted Socrat. 5. li.
cap. 22. (...)
of me. As for that he answers, that by every one, he means not every
person, but every country or people, alleging to that purpose another place
in the same chapter, where (says he) is put every particular people: he is
abused. For there is no more mention of people in that (...).
place: then, in that which I alleged. Beside that, in saying that yt was no
law, but a custom, and that yt was not penal to those vuhich did not keep yt:
Socrates confirms the indifferency, which I affirmed, to have been in in the
beginning.

For the alowance of Saints days, whereof the question Diuis. 6. p. 549.
is here, althowgh he has only M. Bullingers testimony, which is retracted
and condemned by M. Bullingers own self: yet he marches forward still as
bouldly, as if he had a whole legion of learned men, of his side. what dealing
this is, let the world judge. But they be (forsooth) his own words, which he
has alleged: so are these yours, Basil in his book of offices, yet, I
suppose, you will be loath, that yt should be now accounted your judgment, after
you have corrected your self. Here also, to the judgment of such a Co^fess.
Eccles. Tigur. and aliarum ^cc. cap. 24.
number of reformed churches vuhich have condemned the keeping of these days as
vnlavuful: he not only answers nothing, but walks still in his old path of
bold and untrue affirmation, that the custom of the whole church confirms
them: as thowgh page 545.
the reformed churches now, were no churches at al. And, that the reader may
further know, his importunity in this behalf: he may understand that beside M.
Bullingers consent in general, with the rest of the churches: the disalowance
of that particular church of Zurich, and consequently of him towching these
Saints days, does appear in a book Lauaterus de ritibus eccles. Tigu. cap. 8.
a part. And if the learned reader look, the later edition of M. Bullingers
commentary upon the Romans: he may, peradventure, find his former judgment,
alleged by the D. corrected.

Hitherto also, comes Musculus judgment in particular: Muscu. common places
upon the 4 commandment. Hoper upon the same commandment.
which affirms, that there can be no defense for the saints days,
vuhatsoeuer be pretended: likewise M. a Hopers, which condemns them,
notwithstanding their gray hears, yea the very first institution of them, and
that upon credit of that, which the D. calls an unlearned shift: that is to
say, by opposing the authority of the word of god, and the examples of the
churches, governed by the Apostles and Prophets. In the next division, in
Caluins judgment, towching the three feasts dedicated to the lord, I will
proceed no further: considering that yt appears in his epistles, that he was
not the cause of the abrogating them. As for the saints days, whereof only
(in deed) the question is in this place: considering that which has been
alleged, I think the D. him self will make him no patron of. Althowgh, throwg^
the multitude of our papists, the observation of these days, as of Easter
etc. amongst us, vuould have inconveniences, vuhich yt should not have vuith
them, vuhere there are none, as I have also before observed. The rest in this
chapter, is answered.

THE SECOND CHAPTER, OF the second part of this Tractate: of the fautes,
touching prayers.
THE FIRST PART, OF THE chapter: touching the fautes, in the matter.
TO mayntein, that we should pray, to be delivered diuis. 9. pa. 492.
from al adversity, he falls fowly, and as yt were upon al four: teaching
with great confidence, that we pray for things, whereof we have no promise.
For, seeing our prayers made withowt faith, be abominable, and no faith is able
to be grounded, but upon the word of promise: yt must needs follow, that the
prayer conceived withowt promise, is likewise abominable. But then, says he, we
may not pray to be free from al syn: no more, in deed, we may in this life,
because we must always pray, forgive us our sins. nor yet (says he) pray
against persecution, math. 6.
no nether, against al persecution, because yt is contrary to that word, which
says that every one vuhich vuil live godly in 2. Tim. 3. 12.
Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. Hereunto, he abuses S. John 14 13
whatsoever you ask, I will give: which, S. 1. John 5. 14.
John him self soluteth, when he says, that he hears us in all, that vue ask
according to his vuil, and that will, is in his word. Hither, he draws the
example of our Sau. Christ, which prayed to have the cup removed, that he knw
he should not obteyn: which as he alleges yt, serves to prove, that we owght
to pray for that, which we are sure we shall not obtein: which is absurd, and
not only to pray withowt, but also contrary to faith.

Nether did our Sau. Christ, pray withowt promise. For as other the children of
god, to whose condition he had humbled him self, have: so had he a promise of
deliverance, so far as the glory of god, in the accomplishment of his vocation,
would suffer. And I deny, that (at that time he made that prayer to his holy
father) he knew he should not obteyn. For althowgh he knw, that he should
suffer, yet if I answer, that as towching his humanity, he knw not the most
infinite and extreme weight of sufferances, which god his heavenly father had
measured unto him, or knowing them, had throwgh the unspeakable force of the
panges which he then was in, forgotten them: I see not, how this answer may not
be maynteyned, as a Christian and catholic answer. For our Sau. Christ, taking
unto him, together with our nature, our infirmities: might, withowt al
contagion of syn, boeth not know some things, and be subject to forgetfulness,
of that which he knw: not to the forgetfulness, which comes of negligence, but
which comes of a sodayn astonishment, and shaking of all the powers, boeth of
body and mind. Al forgetfulness, I grant, is the punishment of syn: but that
al forgetfulness is syn, and upon al occasions, I think, the Answ. him self will
not affirm. As for that, he wandereth in about the condition: yt nothing
excuses, his error. For we owght not to desire, to be free from al adversity,
if yt be his will: considering, that he has already declared his will therein:
but only of this, or that adversity, whereof we know not, but upon the event,
what is his good pleasure. He has much other fog to this purpose, but not
worth the naming.

After, he cyteth the 91 psalm, that no evil shall come to the: where, he
manifestly overthrows, that he has affirmed before. For, poverty and
persecution are amongst those euiles, of which him self says, we have no
promise to ground our selves upon, when we pray against them. As for the place
yt self, yt must not be understood, that the afflictions, shall not touch us.
which is manifest, in that, assigning the manner of performance of verse. 15.
these promises, he says, that the lord vuil be vuith him in his troble, and
deliver him: noting, that he shall be in troble, which is contrary to that, that
he shall be free from al troble. So that, to accord the scripture, with yt self,
the meaning of of the promise must needs be: that he shall not be ouerlayed or
oppressed, but contraryly, that the afflictions Roma. 8.
shall serve (as the Apostle says) to his good. Here therefore, a difference
must be put between evil, and adversity: in such sort, that althowgh the
scripture do promise to deliver the faithful from al evil, yet yt follows not
thereof, that yt promises to deliver them from al affliction, or adversity:
considering, that that is sometime good for them. His distinction, Psalm. 119.
verse. 71.
is merely idle: the former part whereof, is only in question.

Hither also, he will have referred, that which comes diuis. 16. p. 497.
after: towchyng the petition, deliver us from the evil. Vuhereby, whether yt
were his meaning, to prove that we should pray ordinarily, and expressly against
thunder: let the reader judge, considering, that that only is there in
question. Let him judge also, whether, where he accuses my vnsyncere dealing: I
dealt not with him, most favorably. For his words there, 494. l. 14.
being either withowt sens, or else having a very dangerous sens: I passed by,
not sticking in them, but raking that which I thowght he meant. Now to prove,
that al manner of adversity is noted in them, notwithstanding that by the word,
evil, be understood the Devil: he alleges, that some interpret yt, that we
desire to be delivered from al aduersityes, which the devil works against us
in this world: which makes clean against him, considering that diverse
afflictions, are immediately sent of god, other some by the service of good
Angels, others by officers whom god has appointed to chaste^ us, for that
wherein we offend, against the good order of the church, or common wealth. And,
as for the later kind of these chastismentes, after the offense committed, and
judgment accordingly given, we owght not to pray to god, to be delivered from
them: considering, that that were to pray, that the course of the revealed
justice of god, should be stayed* whereby he may see, that althowgh the Devil
be author of al evil: yet he is nether the first author of any adversity, nor so
much as the instrument, of diverse aduersityes.

To mayntein the prayer, that god would give us, that we Diuis. 10 p. 493.
dare not ask, he alleges, that we must be humble, and acknowledge our
unworthiness: as if, these could not stand with a bouldnes, of asking in the
worthiness of Jesus Christ, whatsoever we have need of. And, the very
similitudes he uses, condemn him. For, what child, coming to his father for
a bit of bread which he stands in need of, uses to say: that he dare not,
ask yt. Likewise, of one friend toward LuKe 11.
anoher, which most amiable names, our Savior Christ will have set before us,
when we come to prayer: to engender in us, a reverent familiarity, with him.
And the bouldnes, that the children of god owght to have, so much passes that
which we use, to any of our most dearest friends: as we are more assured of
his love, then of theirs. After to help him self, in steed of that S. LuKe 18.
13.
Luke says, the Publican standing a far of, vuould not so much as lift up his
eyes unto heaven: he brings him in saying, he durst not come nigh, nor lift
up his eyes: where, beside his corruption, he gayneth nothing, unless he had
showed, that he durst not open his mouth, to ask forgiveness of his sins. Of
the contrary side, seeing he durst ask forgiveness of his sins, which is the
greatest petition that a man can make: yt is manifest, that there is nothing
needful for us, which, in Christ, we may not be bold to ask.

But here, he has found out another hole, to crepe into, that we should,
forsooth, say we dare not ask, and yet ask: whereby, in steed of teaching true
humility, he opens a schole to hypocrisy, which the lord detesteth. Not
unlike unto the Popes Canonistes, which being in great pain how to accord the
Popes title of being Servant of al servants, with his title of being lord of
al: amongst other answers set down this, that he does yt of a certain
humility of mind, not in truth, or for that he is so in deed. Herein also his
own example, utterly conuinceth him. For the Publican, which, he says, durst
not lift up his eyes, did in deed not lift them up: so that if, by his example,
we should say we dare ask nothing, we owght also to ask nothing. I leau his
examples of the Pharisey and prodigal Son, as utterly vain and impertinent: I
pas by also (as needles with us which profes the gospel) the testimonies of the
scripture, where bouldnes to Romans 5. 2 and 8. 15. Heb. 10. 19.
go unto god, throwgh Jesus Christ, contrary to this not daring, is plainly
tawght: marueiling, where the Answ. will stay, which sets him self against
this sentence propounded of me, that throvugh the vuorthynes of Jesus Christ,
there is nothing vuhereof vue have need, vuhich vue may not dare to ask, of our
heavenly father.

His first section, is idle. In his second, to mayntein the Diuis. 11. p. 495.
exces of craving earthly commodityes, by a particular discourse of them,
against my reason that there is but one petition in the lords prayer, tovuching
the commodityes and discommodities of this life: is alleged, that there is but
one petition towching prayer for the forgiveness of sins, which is nothing to
purpose. For althowgh, there be but one precisely of that matter: yet there are
six of that kind, that is towching the glory of god: where there is, but one
only petition, of this kind. Against which distinction, of things perteyning
to gods glory and to this life, his exception, that al things tend to his
glory: is frivolous. For althowgh, al things work to his glory, and our
salvation: yet in respect, that one does this of the own nature, the other
accidentally, the one nearer, the other further of: boeth the Deuines do so
commonly speak, and the a scripture yt self vphouldeth this distinction. ^
Math. 6. ^.


To mayntein, that we may ordinarily pray against thunder and lightning in
winter etc. he cyteth the 11 of Ecclesiasticus of thincking of adversity in
prosperity: which (if yt were of weight to confirm a matter in controversy) yet
is nothing else, but that one owght to provide him self of patience against that
day, and not to promise him self always, good days. Likewise, S. Matthew 24
where the Iues are bidden to pray, that their flight be not in winter: which is
of a certain, and determined calamity, and that of a whole nation: in which
case, I confessed that there owght to be prayers. Further, that sundry perish
suddenly by thunder: to which I answer after, that so they do by falls from
page 497.
horse, and by infinite other ways. His reply whereunto, that these, which I
speak of, come commonly by negligence: makes for me, for so much as they are
so much the more fearful. For considering that beside the bodily harm, they
befall unto us, throwgh our own syn of vndiscretion: we owght the rather to pray
against these, then against the other. To that I alleged, that these dangers
are oftener then thunder: he answers not. Howbeit he thincketh yt most
convenient, that we pray against these also: in generality and with condition,
I grant, nether is this in question, but not piece by piece and ordinarily. The
reason whereof, I assigned, that so there should be no end of begging earthly
commodities: whereunto he answers nothing. The same reason, I alledg
afterward page 536, against the particular thanks giving at the churching of
women: whereunto he answers, that there owght to be for this especially,
because yt is so dangerous and common: yet yt is not so common as siknes,
which, throwgh disobedience, befalls to men and women boeth, nor so
dangerous, as a number of diseases out of which one does not so likely escape,
as women out of their trauail: beside that the restoring of some to health,
towcheth the church nearer oftentimes, then this. As for his asking after
scripture, not able to answer the reasons, grounded upon the scripture: yt is
unworthy the answering. In the example of the Massilian heretics, that held
that we should always pray: he does but abuse the time, talking much, but not
towching the point wherefore I alleged yt. let us therefore return.

I alleged, that the original of the Let any, brovught in Diu. 12 and 13 page
496
upon occasion of some general mortality, likevuise of certain confessions of
the divinity of our Sau. Christ, upon occasion of the detestable heresy of
Arius: ovught, tovuching the ordinary use of the church, to ceas when those
evils vuere appeased. whereunto he answers, that we are still subject to these
mischeifes: So were the elder churches, before those euiles came, and al other
churches now, as well as ours: yet, nether did the elder churches, then
institute an extraordinary remedy before the mischief, nether do other
churches now, continue yt after recovery. And in deed herein, yt is with the
church of god, as with man's body: whereunto no wise physicion, prescribes an
extraordinary diet, but upon some diseas present, or apparently approaching:
other wise, why are not there also extraordinary confessions, and letanyes,
against al other detestable heresies, and heavy judgments, which have been
from the beginning of the world, unto this day.

He answers further, that so the psalm; made upon special occasion, should
be now unprofitable, which is nothing so: for they have always the same
profit, to be studied in, to be red, and preached upon, which other scriptures
have: and this for advantage above the rest, that they are to be sung, as their
name does declare. But to make daily prayers of them hand over head, or
otherwise then the present estate wherein we be, does agree with the matter
contained in them: is an abusing of them. For how inco^uenient is yt, that our
church, living under a godly Prince, should in sted of a prayer for yt self:
say a psalm, which complayneth of oppression by a Tyra^t. Yea, when the estate
of the churches should be such, as the psalm does expres: yet, considering
that the prayers in the churches, owght to be framed to the understanding of
the most simplest, and the psalms have manners of speeches, which the learned
them selves, have enowgh to do to understand: yt is manifest, that they are
not the aptest forms, of publik prayer. That of the repetition, of the
articles of our belief, is alleged to no purpose. For, yt is a short Sum of
the whole Christian profession, directed against no particular heresy: but
alike needful, at al times.

To prove, that gloria patri etc may be often repeated, at one meeting: he
answers, that a good thing can not be to often said. which, that I abide in the
former similitude: is as much to say, that a man can not take to many
purgations: And if yt be so, as he says, why is there any other thanckes
giving, then this. His reason, that yt is a good thing, is not enowgh, so much
as to bring yt into the church, much les to cause yt to be so often repeated:
unless also yt be so good, that nothing can be, for the time and place, better.
Hither belongs, that of Mat. 6. 7.
vayn repetitions, in the page 804.
end of the book. where first with what face he denies, that he understood his
words, wickedly wrested of the Geneua translation cyted by the admonition, let
the reader judge of his words: wherein, rendering the reason of this charge, he
says, for the words of Christ, be not as they translate them, but etc. Then
let him observe, that of diverse reasons used by me, to establish that
translation: he answers not so much as one. To prove, that long prayers are
not forbidden, which none denies, also that the true translation is, that we
should not babble much, which is in effect the same with that of Geneua, he
brings diverse autorityes: but, to prove, that our Sau. Christ meant to
condemn, only repetitions withowt faith, or that he condemned not, when one
thing is ordinarily often repeated in a small time, which be the points in
question, nether the 4 first testimonies, nor the 2 section, have one word of.
As for that out of M. Martyr, yt proves that multiplying of words withowt
faith, is babbling: but not, that that only is babbling, which (to put us from
this place of S. Matthew) owght to have been proved.

Nether does the example of our Sau. Christ, repeating the same words thrice:
help him. For first yt appears not, in how short space this was done. Then,
yt is unmeet, of every example of prayer made in some especial estate, either of
exceeding joy, or of exceeding affliction: to make a pattern, for the ordinary
prayers of the church. For when this repetition, is engendered of a zeal, which
by this joy, or affliction (as by more wood put under the furnais) is made
whotter, then commonly yt uses to be, in the best of the children of god: yt
is apparent, that where this strenght of zeal is not, to send forth these
repetitions, and with a strong voice, to cause, as yt were, this Ecco: there
(as hypokritical) they can not but displease the lord. Therefore, the ordinary
and usual prayers of the church, owght to be so conceived: as all the children
of god, by that measure of zeal, which the lord commonly departs unto them,
may be able to follow with affection. If some member can, by reason of such
particular scholing as is before spoken, ouershoot this common mark: he has
his chamber at home alone, as our Sa. Christ had his garden here, where he may
have further scope. But, that the prayer of all the church, should be framed
unto his estate: is no more convenient, then, for that some one laboreth of the
diseas of the gout, all the whole church should have an ordinary prayer, to be
delivered from that diseas.

The same Diui. 14. p. 497.
reason is, of the thanks giving by magnificat, Benedictus, and nunc dimittis:
which were made by occasion of certain particular benefits, no more to be used
for ordinary prayers, then the Aue Maria. whereu^to he answers, that that
pertayneth to the virgin only: even so do certain things contained in these
psalms, either agree to certain particular persons only, or else are such as
can not agree to us. As to have seen our Sa. Christ with bodily eyes, to be
called blessed of al generations, to have a son which should prepare the vuay
to the son of god. And therefore, by his own answer, these verses, at the
least, are no more to be daily said of us, then the salutation of the virgin
Mary. So that boeth for this cause, and the other before alleged of the
psalms: yt is not convenient, to make ordinary prayers of them. Nether does
the respect, that they contein the mystery of our redemption, serve to make
them ordinary prayers: no more, then infinite other places of the scripture: yt
proves rather, that they should be the ordinary textes, to preach on. The two
next be diui. 9 and 11. Diuis. 17. p. 498.
answered.

To the defaut of the book assigned, for that there are no forms of thanks
giving, for the releas from those common calamityes, from vuhich vue have
petitio^s to be delivered: althowgh he can here answer nothing, yet, as his
manner is, he blotteth paper. Howbeit, page 536 he goes about to return this
upon my head, because taxing the want of thanckes giving here, do there find
faut, with the solemn thanckes giving at wemens churching. whereunto I answer,
that I do not simply require, a solemn and expres thancksgiuing for such
benefits, but only upon a supposition, which is, that if yt be expedient,
that there should be expres prayers, against so many of these earthly miseries:
that then also, yt is meet, that, upon the deliverance, there should be an
expres tha^ckesgiuing. But whereas he says, that thanckes are then given, for
encreas of gods people, and deliverance from syn: the first, is here out of
time, as that which belongs to baptim, and not to churching: nether is there
any such thing contained in the book. The other, is spoken first dangerously to
the simple reader, as that which, having no good sens, gives also manifest
suspision, that either the company in marriage, or the bringing forth of children
(boeth which are commendable) is syn. Then yt is spoken slanderously, in
respect of the book: which, having no such thing, is browght into suspicion of
yt. Here also, you should have learned to mend your speech, of our subjection
unto syn. For, althowgh the dangerous trauail of women with child, be a
testimony of syn, which we committed: yet it is not a testimony of subjection
unto syn, in us which are sanctified: considering, that althowgh, Romans 6.
syn dvuel in our mortal bodies, yet it reigns not over us, nether are we
subjects unto yt.

THE II PART OF THE II chapter, of this Tractate: of the fautes, in the form of
our prayers.
TO that against the prayers, shred into so Diui. 18. 19. and 20. pa. 499. etc.
many and small pieces, vuhere, as in doctrine, so in prayers, regard ovught to
be had not only to the matter, but also to the form: he answers, that so the
doctrine be the same, the form is left free, which is vnrrue. For yt owght to
be done withowt al 1. Cor. 2. 1.
pomp, and owtward show: also to the Heb. 5. 12. Ioh. 16. 4.
capacity and most advantage of the hearers memory: and that which towcheth
this point chiefly, yt owght to be done 1. Cor. 14. 40.
comely and orderly: al which things, as they pertayn to the form of
preaching, so do they to the form of prayer.

To this vncomelines, set forth by similitude of a supplication, made unto an
earthly Prince: he answers, that the dealing with god herein, is far other
then with men, except I will admit the popish reason of praying to saints,
which is nothing worth. For boeth him self has used this kind of reason
diuis. 20. p. 493.
before, and the Malach. 1. 8. 14. Martyr upon the 1. of Sam. cha. 1.
Prophet, in the matter of sacrifices, does use the same: Peter Martyr also
uses the same in the case of prayer. where the word of god, has determined
the contrary, there this kind of reasoning, drawn from the usage of men, is
shut out: but where the lord has not prescribed the contrary, there yt has a
place. Of which kind, is the matter of comelines and decency: wherein we must
have regard, to the comely usage, and conversation of men. upon which grownd,
we say, that yt is comely, that the lords table should then only be spread,
when the holy supper is to be ministered: and rather, with a fayer cloth, then
with a fowl. Also, that yt is not against order, that many should sing
together: but yet a disorder, that many should speak together.

My answer, to the short prayers objected out of the Acts, that S. Luke
sets dovun only, the sum of the prayers, is manifest: seeing in sermons, as
needful to be reported at large, as the prayers, he has used the same
shortness. Althowgh, towching those which are private prayers, for particular
necessityes, they owght to be no rules, in this point of publik prayers. To
that, that even those prayers, as they are set dovn, vuere continued, and not
cut into pieces: he can answer nothing. whether the form of prayer, which we
have in this point taken of the papists, be as good as that which I towched,
and which is used of other reformed churches: let the reader judge. That al, or
the most part of them, have allowed our order: is untrue, as may (if need were)
be showed by records of the difference for yt, in Queen Maryes days. Diverse
other rouing sayings he has, whereof that of our Savior Christ's and the
Apostles usual preaching withowt textes: has no ground. That of their
preaching, withowt prayer before, or after their sermons: is a shameful
untruth. For, prayer being assigned, for a Act. 6. 4.
piece of the duty of the ministry, althowgh yt had been never (as Ioh. 17. 1.
Act 2. 42. Act. 1. 24. Act. 20. 36.
sometime yt is) expressed: yet yt must of necessity be intended. Oneles
peradventure he will say, they prayed, as the papists, in the midst of their
sermons: as if gods assistans were needles, for the first part of their
preaching. That the Apostles, did not labor and study for their sermons: is
another untruth, In the tract of the Deacons.
before conf^ted.

Beside the confusion and wast of time, in that the people Diuis. 21. p. 501.
rehears word for word after the Mynister certain prayers, which they may as
well do by consent and affection of mind: was alleged, that thereby is
engendered an opinion, that the other prayers do not so much pertein unto them.
whereto he answers, that there is special cause, why they should be used,
because they contein a general confession, which al Christians must, even with
their voice, confess: as if the desiring of things which are necessary, and
giving of thanckes for benefits which we have received, were not boeth as
general, and as necessary to al Christians, and a thing which concerned the
glory of god, as much as the confession of our sins. If yt be so, what cause
can he assign: why the people, should with their voice pronounce one, and not
the other.

My reason, which is, that as in the publik liturgy, the Minister is only the
mouth of god, from him to the people, so he is the only mouth of the people,
from the^ unto god: he corrupts, leaving out only in one place, and taking
yt in the other, that the strength of the argument of payers, might the les
appear. For answer whereunto, he is fayn to take the answer, serving to the
last reason, which is of the practis of the church in the 1 Cor 14. 26.
Apostles time, Justin Apolog. pro Christ.
and after: and to apply yt to this. wherein first he cyteth Musculus, which
thincketh yt not unlikely, that the disciples repeated the hymn after our Sa.
Christ, to whom I answer that there is no likelihood, that the disciples
repeated the whole song after him: only, as the nature of some Exodus 15. 1.
21. Psalm 136. 1. 2. etc. Esdr. 3. 11.
hymns does require, yt may be, there was a common foot of the song,
wherewith the disciples answered, unto our S. Christ synging first. And this
(no dout) is Musculus meaning. That out of Pliny, is nothing to purpose, yt
being confessed, that the whole church may sing psalms with the Minister:
where also, his objection of dissent with my self in this point, is easily
answered: namely, that the practis of the Apostolic church, having been such
in the psalms, and not in the other prayers, is cause enowgh, why that which
is convenient in one, is not so in the other. Beside that, there is no los of
time, in synging the psalms: considering that the people sing, together with
the Minister.

Then he alleges, Acts the 4: that, in praying, all the Apostles lifted up
their voices. The greek is, they vuith one accord, lifted up a voice to god,
not voices: so that, S. Luke notes that there was but one voice amongst them
al: which, because yt was with consent, he does aptly call the voice lifted up
of them al, and wherewith they al prayed: even as he Act. 6. 2.
after attributes the exhortation made by one of them, towching the chois of
Deacons, unto them al. Vuhere, al must needs co^fes, that either one only
spoke in the name of al: or (which god forbid) there shall be ascribed unto the
holy Apostles, either a chiledish folly, whilst twelve, one after another,
propounded the same words at one time, and in one assembly, or else a barbarous
confusion, whilst they spoke al at once. Here also, he greatly forgets him
self. For setting down, that that part of prayer which consisted in confession,
owght especially to be repeated after the Minister: his pretended examples, are
of that part of prayer, which stands in asking, and thanckesgiuing: so that,
yt seems by his proofs, that these should be especially repeated: at the
least, that they should be as well, as the confession.

Against that alleged for us, of the practis of the church in Iustins time, he
answers, that I left out, vue al rise and pray together, which is to fond: as
thowgh our church, prayed not with the mynister, when yt only attends unto
the prayers, albeit yt reherseth them not after him. And, this form of church
prayer, noted of Justin, is noted also of Dionysius Euse. 7. lib. 9. cap.
Bishop of Alexandria: to consist, in that the people, attending to the
prayers, sounded Amen together: which may be also an answer, to that of Basil.
The practis cyted out of Chrysostom, owght not to be admitted: considering
that in the same place he shows, that as the Minister conceived one prayer
for the people, so the people conceived another diverse from yt, for the
Minister: which how unmeet yt is, in the church of god, and publikly, has been
before declared.

That I used that form in my sermons (for any thing that I know) I learned yt
of the book: which use, for so much as some years after, whilst I yet preached,
I corrected in my self: yt declares, that I first misliked and condemned my
self in that point, or ever I found faut with the book. The next division, I
leau to the readers judgment.

To this treatise belongs, that which comes after, page 740.
of singing the psalms side by side, where he requires proof of that I
alleged, that yt is not enovugh to pray vuith the heart, when a man may pray
vuith the voice also: which is proved, by as many places, as we are bidden to
sing unto the lord: and in that the lord will be served with all the strenght we
have: so that, where nether inconvenience of ecclesiastical policy, nor want
of health, or such like hinder, there the lord contenteth not him self with the
heart, one^es the voice be given also. And of this, the example of Anna, which
him self brings against me, is a manifest proof: which wagged her lips,
when, for grief, she could not speak out. His proof out of the Corinthes, as
also whatsoever he has in this division, of contrariety with my self: is a
mere mispending of the time, considering that I boeth added expressly, that vue
ovught to pray vuith the voice, vuhere yt may be, and had before declared, the
inconvenience of doing so, in the other prayers.

Vuhere I showed, that this kind of synging ovught so much more to be
suspected, for that the Devil has goen about to get yt authority, by deriuing
yt, partly from Ignatius, partly from heaven: he answers, that if yt came
from Ignatius, as Socrates says, yt is not the les to be esteemed: which is to
induce Socra. 6. li. 8. cap.
the reader, to believe this fable, that the Angels were heard, to sing so from
heaven. For Socrates says, that Ignatius took yt of them: so that in this
fable, he had rather believe Socrates, whom page 350.
before he accused of heresy, then 2 lib. 24.
Theodoretus, whom he will not page 415.
suffer, to have been ever towched with heresy. Hither pertains, that which
is page 606, where under pretense of indifferent things, he seems to allow of
Organes: which, beside the popish abuse, renueth Judaism, and has now no thing
perteyning to edification, one of the rules whereby indifferent ceremonies,
should be squared.

His defense of his profane proverb, matching mad men, women, and children
together, out of S. Paul calling the men of Crete, liars: is a shameful
profanation, of the scripture. For where, S. Paul set his mark, of one only
I Will, he sets his upon the whole, boeth sex of women, and age of children,
throwgh the world. And where S. Paul, did yt by reason of his ministry
toward them: he does yt, withowt. Last of al, where S. Paul did yt truly: he
does yt untruly.

Unto the indecency, of the scraping at the name of Jesus, page 744.
he answers, that the same is in hauking: as if the case were like, the
natural necessity requiring the one, and no necessity requiring the other.
Nether is there any indecency in hauking, if (as yt is meet) every man do yt
severally as his need moves: and not, as somewhere yt is done, altogether.
That alleged of ingendring a greater estimation of the Son of god, then of the
father or holy ghost, in that his name is curtesied unto, and not the other: he
derideth, but answer he can give none. Vuhere the reason is manifest,
especially with the simpler, which esteem that better, to which more honor is
given: so that where this is not beaten down by continual teaching, yt can
bread no other opinion. And althowgh preaching did abownd, yet the ceremonies
owght to be conformable, and not contrary to the doctrine: beside the other
inconvenience p. 56 sect. 3. of my first booK pa. of his 278.
before noted. After he says, yt has continued many hundred years: so has
popery. And, I believe, when he shall be driven to show the antiquitity, which he
aduoucheth, yt will fall out, that he can fetch yt from not other head, then from
popery.

For, as for that he alleges, of the Christians which used yt, because the
Iues, abiding other names of god, could not abide yt, yt is nothing so:
considering that the Iues, have that name in great honor, althowgh they have
not him so, to whom of right yt belongs. And in regard, that yt was given to
the son of god, they hated the name of Christ as much, and in some respect
more: because, in sound, yt is further of from their word, then the name of
Jesus. That especially this curtesy should be made at the name of Jesus, when
the Gospel is red, which contains the glad tydinges etc. is a foul oversight,
the confutation whereof I have before noted: which In the former part pa. 320.
lin. 23.
serves also, against the standing rather at the gospel, then at the Epistle.
That also, of subduing of al our spiritual enemies by Christ etc, is frivolous:
seeing that boeth god the father, and the holy ghost have their work in our
salvation (althowgh afrer an other sort) as well as our Sa. Christ. How absurd
he is, as well in affirming that a Pastor may better have two benefices to preach
at, then a Curate two cures to read at, as also in his reason thereof: let the
reader judge.

THE III. CHAPTER, OF THE SEcond part of this treatise, of ministering the holy
sacraments in private hovuses, beginning page 510 of the D. book.
YT has been showed, that the administration In the former part pa. 71. l. 36
etc.
of the word and Sacraments owght to be publik: and that they ceas not to be
so even then, when, for the distres of persecution, the church is driven to
hold her assembly in a private hows. Here yt remains only in question,
whether yt be convenient, that in the churchis peace: the sacraments, for
siknes sake, should he ministered in private howses. Vuhere, to that alleged
out of S. Paul, that he opposes the congregation, ^. Cor. 11. 22
vuherein the lords supper should be houlden, unto a private hovus vuhere men
satisfy their hunger: he can answer nothing, but repeateth that out of Calvin,
which he idly alleged before.

I am content, that the reader judge, whether boeth those Diuis. 1. pa. 511. and
diuis. 2. pa. 2.
absurdities which I laid upon him: follow of his rash answer. As for that he
replieth, that our Sau. Christ's preaching, and S. John's baptizing openly,
prove not, that the administering of the word and sacraments should be publik,
because examples prove not: yt is In the former part p. 155. lin. 28. etc.
answered: Beside that I have p. 73. l. 19.
showed, that yt has commandment. Another reason of his is, because our Sau.
Christ preached in private f^milies. which is p. 74. l. 11.
likewise answered. That out of Zuinglius that yt is not necessary to baptiz in
the church, I grant: for the case may be such, that yt may be baptized in the
fields, but in a private hows, in this case of siknes, where there be set and
ordinary meetinges in the church, I deny yt convenient. If he mean by not
necessary, that it is baptim, althowgh yt be not ministered in the ordinary
assembly, I grant: if he mean, that yt is not necessary to decency and good
order: his own words, give me answer enowgh. For as the time makes
conuenience, when yt is ministered so sone as yt may be commodiously, or
inconvenience when yt is differred longer: so does the place.

Albeit, S. Paul was a prisoner, yet the Iaylor being converted, Diuis. 3. p.
513.
would have accorded him, what place he had judged meetest for baptim:
therefore that example, had been more apt the^ the other of Peter, althowgh
nether of them, make any thing for you. As for that out of Matthew 18, where two
or three etc, to prove that two be enough to make a congregation, wherein baptim
may be ministered: first, if it could come to pas, that there were but two
persons in the whole church, one to baptiz, the other to be baptized: I dowt,
whether yt were meet to stay the baptim, until we saw whether the lord would
give further encreas. But, that yt is convenient, that in our church, yt should
be ministered in the presens of two or three only: is a thing most unworthy, of
the dignity of the holy Sacrament: when as, if the civil administration of
judgment should be handled so cornerlike, yt should worthily, be suspected.

But what shall then be answered, to the place of S. Matthew? even this, that our
Sau. Christ speaks not there of the publik administering of the word and
Sacraments, but of the proceeding in the church discipline against offenses,
and of that part, which was done privately. For after he had tawght how from
the admonition by one, we owght to proceed unto that which is made by two or
three, and so to the churchis: having before ratified the proceeding of the
church, he autoriseth also by this word, the admonition which, with invocation
of his name, was given by those two or three* promising that yt shall not be in
vayn, but have effect that way, which god has disposed of, whether yt be to
conversion of the party, or to further making him inexcusable. If it be asked,
why then our savior Christ did not also speak, of the ratifying of the first
admonition by one: I answer, that he spoke of the effect of these two later
admonitions, not that the other should he withowt fruit, but for the excellency
of the effect of these, before that. Vuhich was also therefore needful, to be
made mention of, more the^ the first: for so much as otherwise, upon experience
of the sinners hardness of heart, in reiection of the first admonition, he which
gave yt, with the other one or two appointed for that matter, throwgh despair
of his amendment, might be beaten bak, from proceeding any further with him.

To me acknowledging, that in the time of persecution, yt may be in a private
house, as may also the publik preaching: he answers, that the same may be done
in this necessity, which he repeateth in his 6 division, where still he
demau^deth that in question. For yt is in question, whether there is any such
necessity of baptim, as for the ministering thereof, the common decent order
should be broken. And verily, by these kind of speeches, he plainly condemns
those churches either of neglect, or contempt of the holy sacraments: which
suffer none to be administered, but in the ordinary congregations. Here, I leau
to the readers judgment, whether by this extraordinary administration, there be
more danger of confirming this error, that children can not be saved, if they
die before they have received baptim: then the administering yt only when the
infantes may be conveniently browght to the church, does confirm the error of
the Anabaptists, which say that children may not be baptized, until they come
to age: seeing that, by the daily practis of the church, in baptizing them,
there can not rise, the least suspicion of this later error.

In saying, that I have nether scripture, reason, nor Doctor: he keeps but his
wont. For scripture, and reason, let the reader judge: for Doctor, I marueil
what playner testimony can be, then that I alleged out of Augustine, which
notes the use contra Litter. Parm. lib. 2. ca. 13.
of the church to have been, to run to the church vuith their children, in
danger of death: and that, when some had opinion, that their children could not
be saved if they were not baptized. Verily, if there were ever any time when,
in the peace of the church, baptim in private howses should have been used: yt
was then. I would also know of him, what Socr. lib. 7. cap. 4.
he will answer to that, which is noted of a Christian Iue, desperately sik of
the palsy: that was with his bed carried to the place of baptim? Vuhere nether
his grievous siknes, nor the inconvenience of the cariadg in his bed, could
purchase him baptim in his private hows: does yt not manifestly appear, how
contrary the practis of the church was then, unto this which he would here
mayntein? what will he Eusebius. li. 6. cap 43.
answer to this, that those which were baptized in their beds, were thereby
made unapt to have any place amongst the Clergy (as they call them): does yt
not leau a note of infamy in those, which had procured, that baptim should be
ministered in private howses? For yt can be, by no likelihood, understood of
those, which, being carried in their beds, were baptized in the ordinary place
of meeting. what Just. in Nouel constable. 57.
unto the Emperors decree, which upon authority of the ancient laws, and of
the Apostles: forbids that the holy things, should be administered in any
man's private hows.

Finally, what will he answer, to the practis of the purest and best reformed
churches this day, in Sauoy, Germany, France, and diverse other: which
administer the Sacraments, only in the ordinary meetinges? How dare he say,
that there is no Doctor of this judgment: when as whole churches old, and nue,
and therefore their Pastors and Doctors, either al, or, at least, the most part
appear to have been of this judgment. Martyr in Ep. Roma. cap. 6. Viretus 14.
lib. de min* verbi and Sacram. Beza in his questions of the Sacraments quae
st. 151
Some also of the learnedest of our days, have noted their judgment here of
particulerly: and to him that has the commodity of books, yt will not be hard
to find others.

To this defens, he has added in division 7. page 515. that M. Calvin
gathers, John Baptist to have been circumcised in ^is fathers house: which can
not be, well concluded. For there is nothing spoken of S. Luke 1. chapter 58
verse etc. to have been done in the hows: which is not done, in diverse places
with us and others, where the parents friends come to the hows, to accompany
the child unto the church. As for the question of the name, beside that, yt is
sometime talked of in the hows, when notwithstanding the child is appointed,
to be carried to the church: yt must be considered, that yt was here
necessarily moved with the mother, which kept the hows, before they went to the
synagog: for that Zachary the father, to whom the naming of the child, by
common order, does belong, could not speak. And I would gladly know of him,
what just cause there should be, to circumcise the child in the private hows:
except he will, withowt al ground, say that John Baptist was sik. which, if he
do, yt is easily refuted: for that, then the parents would have differred the
circumcision, which could not be ministered, withowt present danger unto to the
child. Yt appears therefore, that John Baptist, was carried unto the Synagog,
to be circumcised: if he were not, yet for so much as he was circumcised at
home, withowt any cause of necessity, either just, or pretended by him: this
circumcision in the hows, can not help him. Yt is lib. Epist. Call. p. 228. and
321.
true, that M. Calvin does not of necessity require a temple, nether do we:
but first, he contenteth not him self (as the D) with a fevu vuitnesses, but
will have some number of the faithful meet, to make a body of a church:
secondly, he will lib. Epist. p. 94. p. 179.
have yt done vuith a sermon: and thirdly, by him vuhich is acknovuledged for
Pastor. And al these, he will have necessarily. If the D. like of M. Caluins
judgment, in this matter, let him not spare: yea, he precisely misliked, that
yt should Be ministered in a private hows, even in the time, of the supposed
necessity.

Now to return, where he affirms, that the church is election should,
towching the chusers, as well vary by persecution, as the place of administering
the word and Sacraments: yt is fond. I confess yt me^^ that as the word and
Sacraments, even so the election, made ^^enly in the time of peace, should in
persecution, be made in secret. But because, he draws me hither, he owght to
understand, that this makes against the election, by the bishop alone. For, as
in persecution althowgh the place be changed, yet the same person owght to
administer the word and Sacraments, which did administer them in in peace, and
in peace which did in persecution: so, althowgh the place of the election
change, yet, as touching the persons which choose, they owght to be the same,
boeth in the time of peace, and persecution.

To the cause I assigned, why our Sau. Christ held his holy Diu. 4. and 5 p.
514.
supper in a private hows, that being joined vuith the pasouer, yt might better
appear, that yt had an end, and that this is in place of yt, vuhich
consideration can have no place vuith us: he answers, that thereby appears
that yt is not of the substance, of the sacrament: which I confess, taking
substance for that, withowt which yt may be a sacrament, and so his answer is
nothing to purpose. That upon occasion yt may be ministered, in a private hows:
I grant, if that private hows be the place for the church to meet in. Hereto
also makes, that the lord to keep the sacrifices in times past, in just
estimation: would not permit, that the flesh should be eaten any where, then
Deu. 12. 18*
in the place which god did choose for his service. Vue therefore, having
Sacraments more excellent then they: owght by so much more to be careful,
least throwgh administration of them in such obscure places, withowt any
necessity, we draw them into contempt. The next is answered.

Hitherto belong the 5 first divisions of the 6 chapter, page 526. to the first
whereof, he can answer nothing: saving that he peruerteth my words, which
desire only that the antiquity of hovus Communions, be not prejudicial unto
the truth: considering the like antiquity, in other abuses of the supper. How
the first and second division, make against his cause, is manifestly showed in
the fifth division: which (as his wont is) he rent in sonder, to find him talk.
In which fifth division, his answer, which supposes yt necessary to quiet
trobled consciences, is insufficient. For, if it had been so necessary a thing
to the quieting of their consciences: the Apostle S. Iam. cha. 5.
James (as yt is well Bulling. decad 5. Sermon. 9.
observed) speaking of the visitation of the sik, and of their comfort
especially, vuould never have omitted that. And as for the consciences, they
may be otherwise quieted, when they be tawght not to think, that the working of
assurance in their hearts, is so tied unto the sacraments, that, withowt
them, the lord nether will nor can comfort them: but rather to consider, that,
even as when the Iues were deprived of the sacrament, of the Sanctuary, the
lord promised that he him self would be for a Sanctuary Ezech. 11. verse. 16.
unto them, and supply the want thereof: even so, he will not be wanting unto
them, which having a desire to be partakers of yt, can not so conveniently be
received thereunto: putting them also in remembrance, of the horrible
abominations of private mas, which came first in, by occasion of these private
communions, as they are called. Here let the reader take heed of an error,
which the D. has let fall: that we have remission of sins by communication
unto this Sacrament. whereas, remission of sins, received by faith alone, and
sealed up in baptim: must be had, before we come to the Communion.

To the Council, vuhich forbids the communion Diuis 4. p. 527. Laodic. ca.
58.
in private hovuses: he answers, that yt means usually, for that the use
was such in some places, which is said withowt al proof, or likelihood of
truth. whereby, for a shift, he sticks not to slander whole ancient
churches: notwithstanding that he pretends sometime, such reverence to one
only man, as the reader before has seen. Then he opposes the Nicen Council,
which is that I prevented in the 2 division, and in the fifth showed, to make
against him.

After, follow M. Bucers and Martyrs notes, which if they we^e Diuis. 6. p. 528.
theirs, and had been for further assurance thereof, tawght by them to look
upon the Son: yet being the testimonies of men, how learned and godly soever,
they are subject to examination. I will not deny, but they might be of that
judgment: considering, that I see M. Calvin, to have been of the lib. Epist. p.
43.
same. which, I therefore let the reader understand, that he may be diligenter,
in the examination of the reasons against yt: and not to descend into our
judgment, onles he be compelled by the matter yt self. Althowgh yt is not ours
alone, but, as he has heard, of others: yea of diverse reformed churches, where
this is not admitted. putting him also in mind, of boeth M. Caluins and
Martyrs judgments, in the matter of Baptim: that yt owght not to be in a
private hows, nor withowt a sermon: desiring him further to consider, whether
certain reasons making against the one do not strike upon the other. And in
deed, as (in my judgment) is is unmeet to administer either of the sacraments
in private howses: so, that is yet les tolerable in the holy supper, which
has a special mark and representation of brotherly communion, more then
Baptim. Here, I pas by, as a thing political rather then perteining to
conscience; the skare that may come by these private communions: when the
siknes (as often comes to pas) is contagious. As for that of Musculus, yt is
idle: seeing his approbation of yt, is not made to appear, and no man denies,
but they that used yt in times past, did yt for a good end.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER, OF this Tractate: tovuching the ceremonies in Baptim, page
607 of the D. book.
NOw follow the corruptions in the sacraments apart: and first of those in
Baptim. where in mayntena^ce of the questions, ministered to young infantes
which can not answer: he would make us believe, that the catholic writers, as yt
were the Gouldsmithes, were in dout whether the Denis which he browght, were
good money or no: whereas the contrariety in opinions, is between the Papists,
and Protestants. His evidence to prove him legitimat, because these books be
very ancient: implies that a number of horrible abuses, are as ancient. And
therefore in sted of saying, some falsehood might be thrust in: he should have
said, some truth might be thrust in, to give credit to the rest: considering
that the pureness of the tongue (which he wrote in) being set apart, there are few
things, worthy either of S. Paul's Scholar, or of the Bishop of Athe^s. His
defense, by the Bishop of Sarisbury, is in the former part p. 466. l. 2.
answered. The not answering also of my reply, against Denis, under pretense of
a flout: is In the Epistle of the former part of this booK. Diuis. 2. p. 609.
before noted.

To the reasons against Augustines kind of speaking, he can answer nothing:
only he mispendeth the time, in proving that baptim is the seal of faith,
which none denies: but that yt is called faith (which he owght to have proved)
he could not find a word. For that also, that Augustine makes for the
interrogatories ministered to infantes: beside strong affirmations he can bring
nothing. As for that alleged by me, yt is most August. Epist. 23.
manifest in another place: where Augustine shows yt to have been the use,
that the minister asked of the parents vuhether the child believed, they
ansvuering that yt did: so that, althowgh this were an abuse, yet yt is much
different, from the manner which we have received from the papists, and more
simple then yt. In the next division, he answers nothing to the purpose, nor
in the next to yt, saving only a vayn cauil: for, whereas I meant the true
faith, he flies to that of Simon Magus, which was counterfeit. In the next,
where yt was alleged that al ovught to be done simply and plainly in the
church, he can answer nothing: only, yt may serve for a colorable cavil, that
as the book will have the infantes promise by the godfathers, so (says he) the
Adm. will have infantes, desire by their parents. For albeit the Adm. words,
might have been warelier set: yet it is but a hauking after syllables, when
their meaning is plain: that there owght to be no such strange, and unwonted
kind of speeches, in the common service. I pas by Musc. common places in
treatise of baptim.
Musculus authority, flat far us: but M. Bucer in Cens. Litu. Angli. cap. 12.
and 14.
Bucers, wherewith the D. often presses us so sore, must not be forgotten:
which does precisely find faut with our service book, herein.

His second chapter requires no answer. For as for his exception, that we allow
of godfathers devised by the Pope, yt is Diuis. 3. p. 475. in the first booK.
answered: beside, that yt was not, by his own account, devised by a Bishop of
Rome which was Antichrist. The contrariety with my self, in that page 18, I
denying, that the usage of a thing by the whole church, can give yt such
authority, as that yt may not be abrogated, yet here allow of godfathers, as of
an indifferent ceremony: considering that the churches have generally received
yt, is unworthy of answer. For there is great difference, in allowing the
churchis authority absolutely, or withowt condition: and in reuerencing her
authority in an indifferent matter in yt self, and, towching the use,
profitable, when yt is used accordingly: so that a blind man might see, how I
might justly improve the first, and approve the last.

In the there first divisions, of his second chapter page 614: there is no
answer, worthy the reply. Vuhere he would prefer crossing before milk in
baptim, he does yt contrary to Tertullians authority, of whom only his reason
depends, which will have them alike necessary. His reasons, that the milk
endured not long, nor was general. besides, that they are popish reasons, are
not proved, and may be in part confuted, in that yt had not only place in
Afrik, but in the ^^^om ^^ ^ra Lucifer.
west parts, not only in Tertullians, but also in Ieromes time: At the least,
the anointing in Baptim, was as general, and of as long continuance, as the
cross. For, being in Afrik in Tertullians time, yt spread yt self into the Bas.
de sa(...) spiritu (...) 28
east, and Ambr. lib. de his qui (...) co^^^^rantur.
west churches: with such continuance, as from them, yt passed into the p^pish
synagoges, as well as crossing.

To this defense may well be referred, that which he answers page 275 unto my
objection: that Sensors. Tapers holy bread etc, are even of the same coat that
the surplice is of, and to be measured with the same pole. for if his answer
there, which is, that the surplice is indifferent, but that these things be
falsely accounted indifferent, be good: yt will help to succor, his weakness
here: and if yt be showed nawght here, nether will yt serve him there. Let him
tell us therefore, why the surplice and the cross with their significations
should be indifferent, and oil and tapers etc with their interpretations,
falsely counted indifferent. Here, we must believe him of his word, for reason,
he has none. Howbeit page 291, where he repeateth this again, he pretends
this reason: that the one have an opinion of salvation and of worship annexed,
al which (says he) we remove from these orders: which, saving that yt is
against him self, is to no purpose. For, in the first part of his answer, he
gives to understand, that the papists shameful abuse of these things, is
cause enowgh to make them now vnindifferent, which is contrary to the whole
course of his defense: and in the later part of his answer, he gives to
understand, that their oil, tapers, censors, holy bread, and holy water may be
browght into our church: so that the opinion of salvation and worship, be, by a
publik and solemn protestation of the indifferency of them, removed. V^ho
knows not also, that the abuse of the papists, has been as great, and
rather greater in the cross especially, by opinion of salvation and worship:
then ever were, the tapers or sensors. whereupon yt is manifest, that the D.
herein, can make no more distinction or difference, between the cross and the
surplice, with oil and tapers etc: then he vhich chaulketh* (as they say) a
vuhite line, upon a vuhite vual. Let us (...).
therefore return.

In the next division, to diverse reasons against this ceremony in Baptim, boeth
simply, and in respect of the present time, he answers not a word: only, he
passes the time, in showing how the papists used yt otherwise, then we do,
which is not in question. In the next, to that alleged of the signification,
making yt more popish: he answers, that the papists did not declare the
signification, and that they were therefore dumb with them: as thowgh their
pulpites rung not oftentimes, of such unsavory voices, or that a number of the
simpler papists, knw not this popish deuinity. To that, that yt brings in a
nue vuord into the church: he answers, that there is nothing against yt in
the word, which is untrue. For, althowgh the ceremony of crossing, were
convenient, yet to raise a doctrine of yt, is unlawful: for as much, as yt is
not enowgh to teach the truth, unless yt be truly tawght, and that is, only out
of the word of god. Now, let him show a word of god, that two lines laid
croswise: signifies, that we should not be ashamed, of the passion or cross of
Christ.

Hitherto belongs, that which he has 291, towching the surplice: where yt
appears, that his defense in this cause, is spekled and of diverse colors.
For there, in the first section, he gives plainly to understand, that he
aloweth not, that a man should draw any such signification from the apparel, as
the admonition does, from sitting at the lords supper. Now, the signification
yt brings, of rest, and of a full finishing, throvugh Christ, of all the
ceremonial lavu, and of a perfect redemption vurovught, that gives rest for
ever: is a holy doctrine, therefore yt follows, that he will not have, so much
as an holy and an agreeable doctrine, unto the rest of the scriptures, fetched
out of the wearing of the apparel: which is the same thing, which I affirm:
namely, that yt is not enowgh, that the thing signified, be according to the
scripture, onles the signification yt self, be raised and grounded of the
scripture. So that hereby, he has utterly overthrown him self: not only, in
the signification of the apparel, but also in this of the cross, and that after,
of the ring. For, by the same reason, that he misliketh al such signification,
in the one: he must needs mislike yt, in the other.

I answer the supposed reason of M. Martyr, directly. For, ^eing yt builds
the wearing of a white surplice, upon that the Ministers are called angels: yt
must follow, that the same cause that moves the scripture, to bring in the
Angels clad in white, must be the lesson, that the Ministers have to learn of
their white apparel: which, whether yt be pureness, or glory, or boeth, yt being
a true representation in them, is (as I said) a lying sign in the Ministers,
which are miserable and sinful men. Herein also, to that which I objected, that
by the same reason the Ministers should vuear vuinges, because the Angels are
so described, he can answer nothing: whereunto ad, that hereof there is yet
more cause. For the white apparel, which the Angels wore, was no signification
of their office, but of their pure and glorious nature, wherein they were
created, and wherein they still remain: whereas, the wings, shadow forth their
office, which is, that they are swift messengers of god, in all things
whereunto they are sent. Therefore, seeing this reason will have the co^formity
between the heavenly spirits, and Ministers of the gospel, to stand in respect
of their office: their wings, being a picture of their office, and not the
whitenes of apparel: yt follows, that the conformity should be rather in the
wings, then in the whitenes of apparel.

To that which I alleged, against them which make yt a civil matter, that by
this signification yt is made ecclesiastical: he opposes, that a grave
apparel, puts us in mind of gravity. Y^ does so, and that is no civil, nor
yet ecclesiastical, but a divine order, that, by how much a man has obtained
at the hand of god, such an estate or dignity as requires such apparel: by so
much, he is bound in the whole course of his life, by modesty and gravity, to
show him self thankful: whereof, even his table, better furnished then other
men's, owght likewise to put him in remembrance. And these things, have a
perpetual conuenience, which can not be changed. As for the several habites of
degrees, and estates, I gra^nt also, that those which be convenient, and as
long as they be so: owght likewise to bring to remembrance, the duty which the
estate whereof they are marks, does require. And, if he could prove, that the
surplice were a fit garment for a Minister: I would not deny, but that he owght
generally, be thereby put in mind of his duty in that behalf. But, that me^
should run out into idle speculations, of the color, or form: I can not agree.
For, no more then yt is meet, that upon the eating of milk, syncerity and
simplicity should be enjoined: no more owght there upon the white color of the
surplice, be raised any such signification of glory and pureness. In civil
respect, and where the commodity of this life is only regarded, the use of
significations is freer: as in Livery and Seazon of a hows, by the ring, and of
land by a clot or turft: but, where men are called to godliness of life by
significations, there they nether owght to be withowt warrant of the word of
god, nor yet can be civil. For a civil ceremony, does bind us no further,
then to the owtward performance of that, whereunto the ceremony is used: which
if we do, althowgh it be with an evil mind, yet we ca^ not ciuilly be charged.

So long as the signification of the white in the surplice, is (as he
supposes) and aid to godliness, so long yt is necessary and not indifferent:
which is that which I said, and which he confuteth not. Likewise in saying,
that they are supposed strong to vuork godliness, I meant not, that the virtue
is in the garment, as if yt could cause men to be godly: but I meant to ascribe
unto you, that in so speaking of yt, you match yt with the word of god. For the
word of god yt self, throwgh the perverseness of our nature: is not, withowt the
working of gods holy spirit, strong enowgh, to work godliness in us. And so my
argument, if vuhite have strenght to move to godliness, then that vuhich is
vuhiter has more: is good. For, nothing has power to move unto godliness, but
that which god has ordained for that purpose: and that which he has ordained,
has of yt self power to work that, whereu^to he has ordained yt, if it light
of a fit object, or matter to work upon. In what sens, I call them Sacrament,
which are instituted with such significations: I have before declared.

That which I ad there of our superstition, vuhilest vue vuil have no painted,
nor graven, but vuouen images, agrees also well, unto this matter of the cross.
For, if to set up a wodden cross in the church, with commandment that in
looking upon yt, we should remember not to be ashamed of the cross of Christ, be
a faut against the first table: the same reason is, of this cross of flesh:
whereunto his answer, that those are against the expres commandment of god, is
In the former part and first Tract.
before confuted, where is shwed, that they are as vnlavuful, vuhich may be
gathered or concluded to be forbidden, as the things, which are expressly
forbidden. And, here yt has been proved, that these significations upon such
grounds, are not according to the word of god. Beside that, yt may
peradventure abuse him, that he takes the word image, to reach no further then
unto the portraiture of a man, or of some other living thing? whereas yt
co^prehendeth al representations of men's devise, browght into the church, for
doctors and teachers therein. The rest in this division, is not to purpose.

Here, leaving the principal matter which is, that every Diuis. 6. p. 617.
ceremony vuhich vuith an ovutvuard sign, had a doctrine annexed unto yt, is,
in a general signification, a sacrament, and that consequently they make a
Sacrament of the cross: he takes him self, to that I denied the foreskin in
circumcision, to be an element: which is not worth the answering. For, I
confessed circumcision, to have been gods holy sacrament: the question is,
whether that Augustine did well define of a sacrament, in using the word
Element, which is properly taken for the simple natures only* when as, the law
of defining; requires the propriety of words: considering also, that by his
manner of speech, in calling wine, bread, or flesh, Elements, the common people
are not instructed: so that, boeth in respect of the learned and unlearned, yt
seems; the definition might have been better assigned. Being charged, for
rejecting M. Hoopers and Alascos allegory as papistical, vuhe^ he
notvuithstanding allovueth of this: he answers, that theirs is dumb, and not
this, which is untrue: for they ad boeth a more witty, and likely
signification, page 599. and 132 of mine sect. 2.
before noted, whereof let the reader judge. vuhy anointing vuith oil, vuhich
vuas sometime the lords ovun sacrament, and vuhich has a more ample
signification, then that of the cross, should not asvuel be retained, as the
cross, or rather vuhy, the cross being displaced, yt should not have place: he
can answer nothing, but that yt is the churchis liberty: which is straung, that
she should have liberty to do that, whereof she can give no reason.

To that, that vuodden crosses in high vuayes, are as lavuful, Diuis 7. pa. 619.
as those in the forehead, and in the church, he answers, that they are
durable and erected to be worshipped, which these be not: as thowgh, there were
no danger but in gros worshipping. Althowgh, here he forgets, that which he
alleged out of M. Bucer, who gives warni^g, that yt be not received vuith
superstition or servitude of the element: which were in vayn, if (as he says)
there were no man so mad, as to imagine any such thing of yt. That, of the small
indura^ce, will not help. for, if there be danger of Idolatry, when yt is long
before our eyes, considering that that Idolatry has her beginning in one
mome^^: yt may as well have yt in that moment, as in another. yea so much more
likely, at this cross; the^ at that in the streets: as yt is set in a higher
place, eue^ in the church, and not behind the door, but in the holy sacrament,
as yt were in the Ark, where the principal iuels of the church are laid up. Is
the fire once kindled? ywis, our peruers nature has matter enowgh, to make yt
flame. And, beside that the memory of yt is renewed, at every Baptim: by this
example in the church, they may easily cross them selves at home, at the least,
the superstitious (which think that their crossinges in the forhead and breast,
is an armor of proof against al tentations of the Devil) take occasion hereon,
to be confirmed in their superstition.

THE SECOND PART, OF THIS chapter: of confirmation of children, and vuemens
churching.
TO this chapter pertayn, the confirmation of children, and wemens churching:
as things supposed, to be annexed to the baptim, and birth of children. In the
first whereof, his first sect page 726, is no answer to me: which alleged yt,
boeth horribly abused, and not necessary. That yt is auncie^ter, then the
feyned decretal epistles, I yield unto: But to that alleged, that yt has no
ground in scripture, he answers nothing, wherein notwithstanding the question
consists. That alleged of the impositio^ of hands, untruly fathered of the
Apostles, he will have me prove: whereas, yt being affirmed of him, owght to
have been showed by him. That yt was not in Iustins time, may appear: in that,
he describing the liturgy of the churches in his time, makes no mention of yt.
That yt was no tradition of the Apostles left, as Jerome (al his proof in this
behalf) affirms: has been In the former part p. 34. lin. 25.
before declared. His exception of the abuse in laying on of hands, in
ordeyning Ministers, against that I browght that this ceremony confirmed an
opinion conceived, that yt is a sacrament: is idle. For, that being the
ordinance of god, may not for any abuse be taken away: but this, being not,
althowgh yt were in yt self indifferent, for the offense sake, owght to be
disanulled. Hither appertains that pa. 787.
otherwhere, of M. Caluins alowance hereof. where the reason I opposed out of
him, that the gifts by laying on of hands ceasing, yt also ovught to ceas: is
unanswered. I grant, he speaks against the popish imposition of hands: but
withal, in this point, he speaks against ours, which pretends (as does
theirs) that the holy ghost is given by this imposition of hands, whereof there
is no promise. And therefore, his defense that yt is given by prayer, is not
sufficient: considering, page 727.
that the book says, by putting on of hands and prayers: so that, althowgh M.
Calvin should like of laying on of hands, yet he must needs mislike of ours,
which presupposes that the holy ghost is given, by the bishops laying on of
hands. His answer, to the authority of so many reformed churches, is fond. For,
that they meant to disalow confirmation simply, and not the popish only: may
appear, in that they purged not the popish imposition of hands, but utterly
cast yt away: And when they say, they can vuant yt vuithovut damage, they
signify, that in the best sort, yt is unprofitable.

To that alleged, of the popish opinion, that yt is better then baptim,
confirmed in that, that our Bishop only may confirm, vuhere every Minister may
baptiz: he answers out of Ierom and Bucer, that yt is meet yt should be done
by the Bishop: which I grant, if yt were meet at al. But that the Bishop which
b in the former part p. 588. and 556.
Jerome and Bucer allow be not lord Bishops, but simple Pastors of one only
church, or not of the twentieth part whereof our Bishops are, has been before
declared. The reason, of the inconvenience of bringing the children half a
score miles vuith charges, for that vuhich (if yt vuere needful) might be done
by the Pastor at home, he answers, by calling yt chiledish: such is the
compassion, he has of the peoples trauail: and especially of the necessity of
the poor, which are compelled thus, beside extraordinary charges, to lose two
or three days work. That he thincketh yt, not worthy once to be considered:
belike is, because they go not, upon his legs, nor spend of his purs.

There rests the churching of women. where this title, page 534.
implying a banishment from the church is defended, b^ the common peoples usage
of Christmas a popish name: as thowgh this error of the people, owght to have
been confirmed by the book, and not rather corrected: he might as well answer,
that the drawer of the book, might have called the holy Communion a mas,
because the ignorant sort, do so. But unto this answer, has been further
replied 2. part of the last Tract and 2. part of the chapter. diuis. 2.
before. Of two other points in that division, he talks, but answers not:
the next requires no answer: the next has been answered: the next to yt
requires none.

To excuse his rashness, in permitting the vail, which is a church ceremony, to
wemens discretion, he says* yt is rather civil: the untruth whereof, is
manifest, yt being done of superstition, and opinion that yt owght to be so,
not for succor against the air, as he pretends: beside that, in saying
rather civil, he privily confesses, that there is some part of yt
ecclesiastical.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER: OF CEREmonies abovut the holy communion, in the residu of
the D. xv. Tractate.
IN eleven divisions whereof, to diverse reasons of the great inconvenience of
ministering yt with wafer kakes, and in kneeling, there is nothing alleged
worth the rehearsal: considering that yt has been showed that the churchis
power in things indifferent is not absolute, to do what she thincketh good,
but for the most edifiyng in regard of the persons and other circumstances:
and considering, that against that we would have the sitting of our Sa. Christ
called again, for remedy of the superstition, yea idolatry committed of some by
kneeling: his instans of celebrating the communion in the night, is
insufficient. For, that was upon a particular occasion, which is not in our
church, nor has no place in the ceremonies in controversy: seeing that (for the
causes assigned of me) the celebrating of yt in the night, was for that time
necessary: which is also answer to that of unleavened bread used at the same
time, whereunto he can answer nothing: Lastly considering that to show the
inconveniences, and humbly to desire redres herein, in such sort, as for the
abuses, we do not withdraw our selves from the holy communion: is not (as he
slanderously accuses) to make any tumult. Therefore not to spend time, in
confutation of his bare sayings, the contrary of certain whereof, are to be
seen: as in a plain matter, I commit these unto the judgment of the reader.

Only, let him observe that Bucer. in cens. Litur. Anglica. cap. 5.
M. Bucer does improve the kneeling at the communion: and in one word, all the
gestures which the Papists used, in this imitation of the supper of the lord.

For that in the page 601.
17 division, towching this, whether yt be meeter to say take ye, or take thou,
to the reason, of the example of our Savior Christ, he can not answer. To the
reason, taken of the manner of preaching, he says: that exhortation given in
the second person singular, moves most, which is not to the point of the
question. For, yt is not debated here, whether the Minister should speak to al
at once, by thou, or by ye: but, whether yt is meeter, that yt should be once
only spoken to all that communicate at one table, or rehearsed according to the
number of persons that communicate. Beside that, a figurative speech, as this
is, (when by the word thovu, are noted a great number:) is more fit for
preaching and prophetical writing, then for the ordinary service. which owght
to be most simple. I confess some difference, of the exhibiting of the
benefits of Christ in the sacraments, and in the word: but how that
difference should cause us to change the form used by our Sau. Christ which
(knowing that difference best) did notwithstanding at once, speak to al at the
table with him: I see not, nor he shows not, nor, I am assured, can not. the
rest in this chapter, requires no answer: the two next chapters be answered.

The 6 chapter, is of the ceremonies in the Solemnization of marriage page 723.
where for the mayntenance of the ring, with the fond ceremonies thereof, and of
the uncomely words of worshipping with the body, taken only from popery:
there is likewise nothing worth answer, that of the devising of nw signs, to
teach by, being before confuted.

THE VII CHAPTER, OF THE second part of this Tractate: to vuching the
ceremonies in burial, page 727.
HOw needful my preface was, to prevent Diuis. 1. 2. diui. 728.
vura^glers, let the reader judge. Likewise of the reasons, the Adm. uses:
which he is not afraid, not only to deny to be good, but to be any at al. How
little Tertullians authority owght to prevail in establishing funeral prayers:
hereof yt may be known, not only, that he would thrust diverse fond ceremonies
upon the church, as necessary, but for that in another book, this oblation (as
he terms de Corona Mil^^is.
yt) for the dead, he makes of the like necessity, with those that are
commanded in the scripture.

Vuhether yt mayntein, in the minds of the ignorant, Diuis. 3. p* 729.
an opinion of praying for the dead, must be in the readers judgment: putting
him in mind, that, if notwithstanding the ordinary prayers so often red, there
be some so ignorant, to think that Morning and Evening prayer, is nothing but
the popish Mattins and Even song in English: how much more, will they judge the
same of the funeral prayers, which are not so ordinary.

That there were no such prayers in the Apostles time, is showed by a manifest
reason of the scripture: which setting forth the smalest matters in Burial,
vuould not have Act. 8.
houlden bak this, being so vueighty: by which circumstance, his exception of
negative arguments in authority, being ouerthrown, he has nothing to answer.
And, beside that he is never able to prove, that all the churches used yt: yt is
In the former part p. 86. lin. 26.
before showed, what truth Augustins sentence is of, which would make al
Apostolical, that is generally observed. That the Apostles example, owght here
to have prevailed, is showed diuis. 6: which is, that if funeral sermons had
been so fit, as is pretended, the Apostles vuould never have lost such an
opportunity of preaching, whereunto he answers not. Hither also serves,
that, for so much as there vuas no prescript form, of funeral prayers under the
lavu: yt is not meet, there should be any novu. which reason, beside an
immodest triu^ph, receives no more answer, the^ the other: where he owght to
learn, that of al other, yt is most effectual. First, for that a multitude of
ceremonies, was more agreeable to the estate of the people of god under the law:
then yt is now, under the gospel. Then, for that, by how much more, they had
not so clear sight of the resurrection of the dead, as we: by so much, they had
more need of these things, then we.

To that, that the Minister having othervuise necessary duties, as many as he
can turn him to, has notvuithstanding by this means, anue charge laid upon
him: he answers, yt is no charge, but his duty to preach, and to pray, which
is untrue. For, althowgh yt be his duty to do boeth, yet yt is not his duty
to do them then: if yt be, then he must of necessity do yt, nether can this
ceremony be abolished; and so the Ministers in other reformed churches, which
do yt not, are thereby condemned. where he asks, why he should not do this,
as well as his own business: verily, amongst other reasons, this also is one,
that to the end he may have some time for his own business, the church owght not
to charge him, with things which are not necessary.

To that, that mourning apparel provoke sometime immoderate Diuis. 4. p. 730.
sorovu: he answers, that so we should not approach the bed, nor grave of the
dead, which is insufficient. For yt is one case, of things dutiful and
commanded, or whereof we have great use: and another of those, which are not
so. In the one, gods vocation, is warrant enowgh against al inconveniences:
which is not so in those, which we take up of our selves. And yt makes against
him. For, having, by reason of our vocation, means enough to strike the wound of
sorrow so deep into us, as is needful: we owght not to seek others, of our own
brayn. The examples, whereby this was set forth, he answers not. And hereof,
the reader may see also: that profitable ceremonies in things indifferent, may
be maynteyned, althowgh this fall.

As for that he says, that Cyprian and Augustine do not so much condemn
mourning apparel, as immoderate sorrow: if they condemn yt at al, yt is enowgh
to convince his extreme bouldnes, in all ledging an antiquity for him, which
makes against him. But, if he would thereby insinuat, that they misliked not
of this ceremony: these be their words, let me^ judge of his dealing. vue
ovught not (says Cyprian) to take blak garments, Sermon. 4. de mortal.
when the faithful, vuhich are deceased, have received vuhite apparel: nether
must vue give occasion, that the heathen should justly blame us, that vue
lament those as lost, vuhich vue affirm to live. Concerning Augustine, he
writes thus. By vuhat reason should vue die blak garments, lib. 2. dec^^sol.
for the dead: oneles yt be that vue vuould, in joining them vuith our
lamentation, declare thereby, that the deceased vuere very infidels and
miserable? These are my brethren unmeet, they be strange, they are vnlavuful.
And, if they vuere not vnlavuful, yet they are indecent. As for the continuance
of yt, with any allowance, further then from the time of the heresy of the
papists, which be not the church of god: he shows not. The rest in this
division, is not worth the naming.

The first argument, against the inconvenience of funeral Diuis. 5. p. 733.
sermons: has the same mayntenance, with the first of the third division. To
the next reason of the sodein, and consequently (for the most part) negligent
preaching: he opposes as a contrariety with my self, that I preferred a simple
sermon made every day, to that which is made only once in a month, which is
only to mispend the time. For, althowgh I preferred yt, to the other: yet I
approved not, that one only Minister (except he have rare gifts) should
preach every day. why he can not have sufficient warning, is manifest: if he
refuse, he is thereby laden with displeasure of his parishoners, in that he
does not, as other, which is hurtful to his ordinary ministry.

To the reason of acceptance of persons, in that sermons at the burial of the
rich, nether be, nor are able to be made, at the burial of the poor: he
answers, that yt is alone, as if the Minister not able to preach every day,
should not therefore preach once a weke. Vuhich is untrue, considering that his
ordinary ministry, is commanded of god, where this is but a devise of men, and
considering that in the ordinary preaching, there is no acceptance of persons,
whether yt be done once, or often in a week: so that, althowgh preaching, must
be necessarily had, yet preaching at burials, is not meet, unless withal yt be
done withowt inconveniences. He denies yt also, to be acceptance of persons,
houlding forth the objection which I gave him: but the answer unto yt, he
towcheth not. Likewise, he says, that there is sometimes more occasion to
preach at the rich man's burial, then at the poors: but he says yt only, for
proof he brings none.

My argument, he answers not, which is, that the cause Diuis. 7. p. 734.
vuhy burial sermons vuere brovught in, of giving of famous men their
commendation, vuas insufficient: considering, that the same vuas done, by the
holy Prophets, most able and vuilling to do yt by sermon, if yt had been
convenient. Likewise, to the infamous beginninges of these funeral sermons,
from infidels, he says nothing: only he abuses the time, in opposing the
authority, which I confessed. by which kind of reasoning, he may also bring in,
Ierom. ad Eustochium de mort Paulae.
torches at noon days, Ambro. de obitu. Theod. de fide resur. Diuis. 8. p. 735.
month, weke, and year minds: which have the alowance of the same times, that
these burial sermons have.

The first sect. is answered, in the 3 division. My argument, which is that as
other inventions of men, use to do, so these sermons have driven ovut, the
necessary duty of particular comforting the parties, vuhich are especially
stricken by the death of their friends: he has utterly perverted, turning my
argument of effects, into that of contraries, as he did likewise boeth my
arguments of the final and efficient causes, in the 7 division, which is but
untrue dealing. The general sorrow of the church, in the death of a member, may
be easily sustained, by the ordinary teachinges: but, they that be specially
wounded, owght to have a special plaster. wherein, that which he affirms of
the exhortation given generally, to be as apt to comfort as when yt is
particularly applied: is boeth a manifest untruth, and directly contrary to him
self: which page 601.
says, None douteth, but that a man is more moved, by that which is spoken to
him particularly, then he is, with that spoken generally, as well to other, as to
him self. And hereby, yt may appear, how inconvenient yt is: to clog the
minister with this voluntary charge of preaching at burials, which, beside his
ordinary ministry, has so necessary a duty cast upon him, in the death of his
parishoners: whereunto, ad also, the travail and care, toward the deceased,
during his siknes.

The first section is answered, in diui. 3. To that, of tying Diuis 9. pa. 735.
hereby the meditation of death, vuhich ovught to be continual, to one only
time: he answers, as you see, the reply whereunto is In the chapter of feast
days. Diui. 10. p. 736.
before. Althowgh, this reason, owght not to have been so whotly pursued: seeing
that, althowgh I wrote yt, yet I professed, that I would not precisely
subscribe yt.

lib. Epist. p. 43.
M. Caluins judgment of these sermons, does now appear: which is, that he
does not greatly disalow them. His answer, against that I alleged, that they
might be easelier born in other places, then vuith us, vuhere there are such
svuarmes of papists, and other ignorant vuhich take occasion of falling
thereby: is partly replied unto in the 3 division, and is further confuted, in
that the doctrine against purgatory and trentals, may be as frutfully tawght at
other times, as yt is in other churches, where we see singular fruit of such
teaching. As for the morosity, he talks of, yt is In the first chapter of
this Tract.
before answered. Althowgh the money for preaching, be given unasked: yet if yt
be received in that respect, the occasion of the papists slanderous speech,
is not taken away. The next division, belongs unto the readers judgment: the
next is In the former part p. 361.
answered. Here, yt is once to be noted, that he, not content to wrest my
particular arguments, has perverted this whole disputation. For, where my
reasons do never conclude, the unlawfulness of these ceremonies of burial, but
the inconvenience and inexpedience of them: he imagines me co^cluding, that
they may not be, and that yt is unlawful to have them: which notwithstanding S.
1. Cor. 6. 12.
Paul, does precisely distinguish.

THE EIGHT CHAPTER, OF the second part of this Treatise: of the surplice, and
other apparel, taken from popery.
AGainst their importunacy which may peradventure say, that I leaped the matter
of apparel, throwgh conscience of the weakness of our cause: yt shall not be much
out of the way, to run yt over, that yt may appear, boeth how little there is
which has not been answered, and how little weight yt has, which remains to
be answered. The first diuis. is In the former part.
answered, so is the second: for further answer whereunto, I refer the reader
to the In the defense of the Apolo. 5. chapt. 1. diui. p. 385. sect. 3
Bishop of Salisburys book, where he shall perceive, how directly the D. is
contrary unto him, in that point. As for the last section, yt is answered in
the first part of this tractate: saving, that he misconstrueth my words, in
affirming me to say, that monumentes of Idolatry may be used in the church, if
some manifest profit do appear. Vuhere as, my meaning is plain, that they
owght to have no entrance into the church: not only, for that they are
monumentes of Idolatry, but because there appears, no manifest profit of
them. For, althowgh I will not enter, into that question: yet I can not see, how
that which is properly a monument of Idolatry, can have any good use in the
church. That, things ordained to good uses, and after converted to Idolatry,
may be profitable, I grant: but, that a thing shall be profitable, in the
church especially, whose nativity and first birth, was consecrated to an Idol,
and which the first day yt was invented, was applied unto Idolatry, I think,
the Answ. is not able Diuis. 3. pa. 257.
to show. In the next, the first part of the first section, the reader has to
judge of: upon the reasons alleged, and upon the common experience. His
question, is only to blot paper: being afterward precisely boeth moved, and
diuis. 6. p. 278.
answered by me.

For proof, that some think the sacrament better administered with, then withowt
a surplice: I alleged, as witnesses, them vuhich say, I vuil not communicate,
unless he vuear a surplice. whereunto he answers, that yt may come of just
cause: when the Minister, by not wearing, shows an example of disobedience.
Vuhereby, he first aloweth that men should absteyn from the Communion, for want
of a surplice: then, in part he gives the execution of the laws, to private
men, contrary to the law of god, and of the realm. Vuhereas, if the Minister
did evil, in not taking a surplice, and would not give place to their
admonition: yt behooved them, to receive the sacraments, and hear the word at
his hand, and after to complain of the disorder, to those to whom the
correction belongs.

His reason, that none which are persuaded to communicate with us, think the
sacrament better or wors for a surplice, for that they are dissuaded from
greater things: is insufficient. For, there were Iues, a 1. Cor. 8. Romans 14.
which were browght from confidence in them selves, and in their own works, to
seek for their salvation in Christ: which in a piece of a holy day, or a bit of
flesh, which is far les, put great religion. Vuhere the lord takes a man by
the hand, there he may leap over a wall: but where, to let us have experience of
our own weakness, he reaches not his hand: there, a little stone in the way is
not withowt danger.

But admit (says he) they have a religion: yet because their error is as
great, which think the sacraments polluted by this apparel, yt is convenient,
yt should be used, and their errors confuted. This conuenience, did S. Paul
never know: if he had, he would undoubtedly have tawght yt, when the like
question in meats, as this is in apparel, was moved in the church. For so, he
had had an easy way, to have compounded between the Iues and Gentiles, if he
could have tawght the Corinthes, which were so loath to be abbridged of their
liberty, that they might use yt before the weak brother, so that they gave him
instruction of the indiffere^cy of yt: whereas, the Apostle plainly forbids
to eat before him, as long as he remains in that weakness what other thing, is
this therefore: then to set, the Apostle to schole? The 2 section of the next
division, is In the former part Tract. the first.
answered: so are the Ib. p. 403.
two other: likewise the In the first part of this Tract. Diuis. 1 pa. 262.
three next: the next unto them belongs only, unto the readers judgment.

The first section, has nothing but words. His second, that Saul knew not
Samuel to be a Prophet, for want of a mark in his apparel, but forsomuche as he
was a rudesby in the common wealth, as Master Martyr says: is to very little
or no purpose.

For he says not, that Saul knw not, what manner of apparel the Prophets wore:
but only, that he knw not Samuels particular person. Now, they may well stand
boeth together, that Saul knw the Seers particular apparel, if any were: and
yet not know Samuels own person. where, he would get this out, of the which is
description of Samuel, by a mantel: he may as well say, that yt was a proper
mark to the Ministers of the word, to be old: seeing the one as well as the
other, is given as a mark, to set forth Samuel by: howsoever he, boeth
absurdly, and withowt any assistance of reason, does deny this. For, I would
know of him, why she names him an old man, if yt were not for this cause,
that he might the easelier acknowledge him for Samuel: and, how could a mantel
be a sufficient note of discretion of Samuel, from other Prophets, which were
dead, when as him self says, that all the Prophets wore the same kind of
weed. Last of al, seeing Samuel was, as he page 262.
alleges, a Prophet, a Magistrate, and a Captayn of the host: if he had had a
peculier kind of garment, why might yt not as well be, the proper garment of
the Prince, or Captayn, as of the Minister.

Towching the proper apparel of those Prophets, which were extraordinarily
raised up, whereof he makes such large discourse: it was confessed, and the
reason beaten upon his own head, where yt cleaves still. For, yt was alleged,
that they vuere notes of their extraordinary calling, and therefore unmeet for
us, vuhose calling ovught to be ordinary: whereunto he answers not. And, if
he will have the Bishops now, co^formed unto the prophets in their apparel:
they must were common, course, homely, and vile cloth. For, so M. Calvin, from
whom he prete^deth his help, describes yt. But, upon Zacha. 13.
where is Luther now become, which says, that the dstiinction of the apparel,
amongst the Ministers under the gospel, is not convenient. page 150.
before, he could take Luther, and leau M. Calvin: here, in the same Prophet,
the same chapter, and almost the same verse, he has cast of Luther, and laid
hold of M. Calvin: which notwithstanding makes nothing for him. For, the
doctrine which he gathers, that the Ministers apparel, should be grave and
sparing, withowt rufling in their silks, and veluetes: is that which we
desire, and him self, with others whom he defends, faut in. Nether is his
other place, out of M. Calvin, any thing to the purpose: for the Anabaptists,
condemn the use of armor, which is not only not forbidden, but also, in some
case, commanded of god. Nether do we disalow, any of this apparel simply, as
unlawful: but as inconvenient, and that not altogether, but to that use,
whereu^to yt is (especially in these times and with these circumstances)
applied.

His plaster for all sores, of a negative argument, unto our reason, that the
scripture makes no mention, of any distinction of apparel, for the Minister of
the gospel: as in other places, so here especially, yt heals not. For, there
is not the least thing, incident unto a Minister, as he is a Minister: but yt
is comprehended, in the word of god, else, let him give an insta^ce, or one
only example: whereof, also this may be a good witness, that S. John's apparel,
which was several, is set forth so diligently, eue^ unto the very girdle. And,
seeing the Apostle entered, into mention of the Ministers apparel, when he 1.
Tim. chap. 3.
wills yt should be honest: if he had thowght yt needful, that he should have
had a mark in yt, to be known by, how easily could he have noted yt: which was
instructed by the holy ghost, of al things profitable, to advance the ministry
of the gospel, How vain a thing then is yt, that the D. would bear us in hand:
that yt is so profitable and so convenient, for their ministry. Vuhat also,
that the Apostle, where need is, and comelynes does require: contenteth not
him self, to command in general that the apparel should be honest, but
descends also to the very form of the apparel: as, when he commands, that
vuemen should have a long garment, 1. Tim. 2. (...).
coming dovun to their foot. When therefore, the Apostle appointing this long
garment for women, did leau yt free unto Ministers, which fashion of long
garment, of al other, seems to be most fittest for a Minister, and seemliest
in all places: what can we think, but that he would have the Minister free, in
this behalf.

Vuhere he takes for granted by me, that some of the Apostles used a several
apparel: he is to light handed, in taking that, which I never gave. For, when
as in speaking of the Prophets, Apostles, and our Savior Christ, I confess
that some of them had a peculiar garment: yt is manifest, upon my discourse,
that I meant the Prophets only, which were extraordinarily raised. And so far
I will grant, his conclusion: otherwise, if some only of the Apostles had a
special garment, how could that be a mark of his ministry, when the rest of
the Apostles, which were fellows in the same ministry, had not? And
therefore, I meruail, how you dare pres S. John's thin plate upon his head:
seeing that Eusebius, notes that of him as a singular attire, from other the
Apostles: whereas, if yt had been a mark, of the ministry of his Apostleship,
other Apostles, should have had the like. If yt had been a mark of his
Archbishoprik (whereunto, from the hal to the kytchin, you use sometime to
promote him) then all the other supposed Archbishopes, did wear the same: which
is, as far from Eusebius mind, as the other. So, your conclusion, that if some
of the Apostles had a several apparel, therefore all the ministers may have such
a note of their ministry, is to bad: yt rather argues, the clean contrary:
that, for so much as the Apostles leaving nothing undone, which might make for
the furtherance of their ministry, differed amongst them selves in the form
of apparel, one wearing a leaf of his head, the rest wearing no such thing:
that therefore, yt pertayneth not to the furtherance of the ministry, that al
should be enjoined, to wear one form of apparel.

The reason, which I browght to prove, that Peter had no special apparel,
whereby he could be discerned, to be one of the twelve: he utterly dissembleth.
His two last shifts against yt, are fond escapes. For the persecuting Iues,
would nether have spared candle, for remedy of the darkness in the night: nor
have stood gessing, and suspecting, when as they might have had, a sufficient
and a certain mark in his apparel, to know him by. In his first exception, that
it may be, that he put of his uppermost garment: he bewrays his to great
bouldnes, by running in the maz of his own head, withowt any thread of the word
of god, to bring him out. For, when the Evangelist MarK. 14. 52.
makes expres mention, of one of their infirmities, that to save him self,
cast away his upper garment: he would, if there had been any such thing, have
done the same of Peter.

In his answer, of our Sau. Christ's garment: for one faut, he makes two. For,
he says, that S. John would not have made mention of yt, unless yt had been a
several apparel: which is a shameful saying, considering that yt is manifest,
that he notes yt to have had no seam, to show the occasion that the souldiars
took, of casting lottes for yt. Vuhereby, boeth David's Ioh. 29. 24*
prophesy of him, was fulfilled: and he the better known, to be the same, of
whom the Prophet spoke. Again, this garment wherein the Answ. will have, the
mark of our Savior Christ's ministry, was his coat and vndergarment: and
therefore, not so fit to show forth his ministry, as he passed by the
streates, considering that yt was hidden by his cloak, or mantel, which he wore
upon yt. And, if our Savior Christ, had the note of his ministry in his coat,
then, althowgh S. Peter (as he deuineth) had put of his upper: yet, they might
have known him, by his under garment, which was also a proper note of his
ministry. Unless, he will peradventure say, that our Savior Christ, wear the
mark of his ministry upon his coat, and S. Peter his, upon his cloak: which in
this bouldnes he is entered into peradventure he will not stik to do. Last of
al, this judgment of our Sau. Christ's several apparel, like unto John Baptists:
is contrary, to the Matthew. 11. 16. Luke 7. 31.
Evangelists. which show, that he in his owtward faschion of life, took
another way then S. John Baptist: namely, for that where S. John chose a path,
throwgh which he separated him self, from the ordinary and accustomable trade
of other men, our Sau. Christ followed the common and high way, that other went.
which, being expressly mentioned of his diet, must by the same reason be
understood of his apparel: considering that that was one of the two points,
wherein S. John sowght a singularity. The contrariety with my self, is before
In the former part Tract. 1. Diuis. 1. pa. 265.
answered: the next division, I pas by.

Vuhether the Magistrate may command a several apparel, is another question
from this, vuhether he may command the popish: considering, that he that
gets the first, has not therefore won the second: whereunto, the D. beside
words partly idle, of genus taken vniuersaliter, partly boeth idle and fond,
of Totum in modo etc, answers not. But now, in sted of his former affirmation
which was, that the Magistrate may appoint a several apparel: he has set down
that he may appoint any kind of apparel: As if these two, to appoint an
apparel, and to appoint any apparel, were al one. In which dealing, let yt be
observed, that where in his first affirmation, he would have fayn changed his
question, of the popish apparel, for a better: now, to defend his wandering, he
has, for a cause which was not good before, gotten one which is a great deal
wors: the norishing whereof, will stand him in more, then did the other. So
that, in sted of setting on a piece: he has here made the rent, a great deal
bigger. For, if the Magistrate may lawfully command the Ministers, any kind of
apparel: he may command them to wear purple colored garments, which being
comely for c youth, should not be so for the Minister, that 1 Arist. The. 2. ad
Theo.
bears the person of an ancyent. Likewise, he might command them to wear (as
Arist. polit. 2.
Hippodamas did) furred clothes boeth vuinter, and summer: also a Souldiars
weed, which M. Calvin (of whom he seeks favor in this cause) e affirms to
be against common sens: how much more, if he should command them, to wear a
woman's habit. If you except, that these things be not comely: nether is that
required (for any thing that I can see) by your defense but only, that he
propound yt, as a thing for comelynes and orders sake, withowt any conscience
of religion. Althowgh, to answer, that these things are uncomely and
unorderly, and that the surplice and cope etc are comely and orderly: is only,
a bare demand of that in question: Beside that, when any of these kinds of
apparel should be established, by the superior powers, as orderly and comely:
you teach us, that yt belongs not unto us, which are private, to judge whether
yt be otherwise, but to them alone.

To that I said, that in the appointing of any several apparel unto the
Ministers, there is some injury done to the^: he makes a noise, as if Hannibal
vuere at the city gates: but if the proverb be true, that a deep vuater is
commonly still, there is like to be no great deapth of reason or knowledge, to
mayntein that with, which is born out with such owtcries. Vuhatsoeuer it be,
let us sound yt. His first answer is, that being chosen by the church, the
Magistrate can not know, what kind of minister every parish has: even as well,
as when he is chosen by the Bishop: for, the Prince is agreed, to have the
confirmation and allowance of the election by the church, as well as of his.
Althowgh, this is no answer to my reason, which was, that the Magistrate may
vuel alovu of him, as for one vuhich knovueth vuhat apparel is meet for his
estate, vuhom he alovueth, as an able man to govern his people, betvuene god
and them: so that my reason is, of his alovuance, and his answer is, of his
knowledge. And, if withowt any particular knowledge of him, he may allow of him as
of a fit Minister: he may withowt the same knowledge, allow of him, as one which
is able to wear his own apparel.

His second reason is, that the Magistrate aloweth him, with condition of being
obedient: which is utterly from the purpose. For, the question is not here,
what the Minister may lawfully obey, but what the Magistrate may lawfully
command: and yt was set down, that the Minister, as also other subjects,
might, in some case, vuith good conscience obey that, vuhich the Magistrate can
not vuith so good a conscience command. His third reason is, that the
Magistrate may be deceived in him: whereunto I answered, that he might then
punish him, according as the faut requires, to the which he replieth not.
Lastly (says he) how sufficient soever he be, he must be subject to good
orders. wherein, he beggeth, that this several apparel, is a good order, which
is the question.

Howbeit, the Answ. which in delivering his reasons by tale, oftentimes gives
but eleven to the dosen: has given us here at unawares, thirten. For as for his
former reasons, if yt had not been, in such a slippery place of the obedience
unto the Magistrate, with the contrary whereof, he so often and so unjustly
charge us: I would not have once, vouchsafed to have named them. His reason,
that other wise men may alledg, that they need not to be prescribed in their
apparel, which he counts not: has, of al other, the greatest color, and yet
yt is answered before. For, althowgh there be, which know how to wear their
apparel, as well as the Ministers: yet by calling there is none, of whom yt
owght to be so much presumed, as of them: yt being, as yt was alleged, vuithin
the 1. Tim. 2. 9. 1. Pet. 3. 3. Isay. 3. 16.
compass of their charge, to teach the people to vuear theirs: which charge of
teaching the people, belongs to no other estate. There being therefore, so
good reason, why the Minister should be left unto his honest liberty, in this
matter: yt must needs seem hard, that his estate, should herein be inferior
almost, nay altogether to all the orders and estates in the land. For, the
Judges, Sergeantes, and Aldermens several apparel, is not (for any thing I
could ever learn) so enjoined them: but that they may some times, and that in
publik places, use the apparel, which to them selves seems good. And, I would
know of the Ans. which makes such ado about this saying: whether he thinks,
that if the Magistrate should appoi^t the Minister, a several and prescript
diet from al other men, he should not do that, with some injury unto the
ministry. And verily, the case is not unlike: especially, seeing in S. John
Baptists ministry, which the lord would have discerned, he would have yt as well
discerned, by a special diet, as by a special apparel. At the least, this is
certain, that if it be well reasoned of him, that yt is convenient, to appoint
the Ministers of the gospel a several apparel, because John Baptist had so: yt
is as good a reason, that the Ministers, should have a several diet appointed
the^, because S. John had so.

Now, where you note subtle dealing, in that I pretend, that by this restraint
of apparel, the Ministers discretion is mistrusted in wearing his gear, where
yt is commanded for a note of distinction: if you mea^ not, that yt is only to
discern them from other, you say nothing against me. For yt may be, boeth for
the one, and the other respect. if you mean only, you speak against your self:
which affirm yt to be commanded for comelines and order. And, even p. 279. 287.
etc.
in the very next division, for confirmation of your cause, you alledg this
sentence out of M. Calvin, that Doctors should in gravity and modesty of
apparel, differ from the common sort: so that you seek by this several apparel,
to bring the Minister, unto a modesty in wearing his apparel. For, if the
Ministers may be gravely and modestly apparelled, when they wear not al one
form of apparel: yt is evident, that you are here, clean out of the furrow.
Furthermore, if yt were for distinction only, what need so many marks abroad
by the streates, in the cap, in the gown, and in the typpet: when as, knowledge
enowgh would be given by one? why do the Doctors of the civil law, and
(sometime also) the Physicions: wear the same attire? finally, wherefore are
not the papists, driven to the putti^g the^ of: with the like severity, as the
Ministers are driven to the putting of the^ on? The honester sort of the
cytisens of Rome, Liuius 9 li. ab vrbe.
whose proper orname^t was, to wear a goulde^ ring, and other marks of their
dignity, when they see every raskal wear the^, did cast the^ aside: what would
they have done, if they had seen their enemies wear the^? Not that I, for my
part, desire that the Priests should, as long as they remain in popery, lose
their cap, and tippet, unless they lose their head and nek to: but because I
would show, that some thing else is sowght for, the^ a note of distinction. And,
within the church, would not the Priests gown suffice, withowt the surplice?
His surplice, withowt the cope? his preaching and other ministerial function,
withowt them al? For, who can he be, which does these things in the church,
but the Minister? can there be a fayerer white, to know him from all the rest,
then these? he that, either can not know, or will not acknowledge him, for a
Minister by these marks: yt is not safe, that he should know him by the other.
Here also, yt is little to your credit, that you carp as an absurd speech:
because I said, the College vualles, would have tavught better logik. If
Cicero li. 6. Epist familiar. Ierom. Epi. de suspecto co^tubernio.
Tully, herein be not a good Scholemaster: you might, at the least, have given
me leau to have followed Jerome, which uses this manner of speech, as well as
Tully. In the next division, unto two reasons whereby I showed, that there is
not the like respect in the several apparel, appointed to Judges and Cytizens,
vuhich is in the Ministers: beside petitions, and repetitions, he answers
nothing to the matter. The next, requires no answer.

The first section is In the examination of D. vuhitgifts censures.
answered. In the second, towching The D. 4. c. Diuis. 1. pa. 269.
Sycinius, my reply that he vuas reprehended only, for to much exquisitenes in
his apparel: he can not move. His collection thereof, that the ministers wore
blak, is first withowt the book: then, if yt were true, yet his conclusion,
that they were thereby known, as by a proper note, is nawght: considering,
that as now, so (no dowt) then, others then Ministers wore blak. Likewise, unto
my reply, that nether S. John nor Cyprian, living in the time of persecution,
vuere so unadvised, as by vuearing some notable apparel from the rest, to
betray them selves into the hands of their enemies: he can not answer a word.
The truth whereof may better appear, in that the Bishops, to keep them selves
from knowledge of the persecutors: were driven sometimes to wear apparel, which
otherwise had been absurd: as lib. 7. Histor. Tripa. cap. 16.
Eusebius, vuhich goeing abovut to ordeyn Elders etc, vuore a souldiars vuede.
And this was also the cause (no dowt) why Justin Martyr and Hermes, after they
were called to function in the church: are said to have continued their
Philosophers apparel. By how much more, I mervaile at the D. inconstancy: which
page 275 cites a sentence, to prove that the change of the apparel in the
mynistery, as well as in other estates, is not material. He alleged also one of
these examples, to wit of Justin wearing a Philosophers apparel, after his
receiving to the ministry: which he would never have done, if there had been
an uniform faschion of apparel, appointed unto the Ministers. Unless,
peradventure he will say, that all the rest of the Ministers, did wear
Philosophers apparel, as well as he: which is untrue, seeing this is noted of
them, as of rare examples.

Unto the particular reasons of Birrus, because he could not answer: he has
feyned a nw signification of a thyn plate, contrary to the authority of the
Calepine, that proves yt to be a garment of course and heary cloth, of no
price. His Dalmatica also, if yt were, as he imagines, with wide sleeves:
makes not a whit, to prove yt a peculier garment. Contrariwise, the word
signifiyng Slauonish, declares, that yt was not proper to any degree of men,
but to the country, either because the cloth, or faschion, came from thens. His
reason, that they were particular kind of uestimentes, because the names be
expressed: is to shameful, as if there were no other cause, to name them:
whereas, the naming of the^, makes to the certeinty of the story. And further,
in Cyprians garments, yt makes to his commendation: which, in giving his
garments according to the quality of the persons, used discretion, and
declares him, to have been of a present mind, in the very point of death. The
particular reason of the cloak, he has let fallen flat: yet is yt their
reason, whose names he pretends, for other, as well as for this.

To that I replied, of the white apparel in Chrisostomes time, that he rather
reprehendeth yt, when he says, that* their dignity is not in the vuearing
thereof, but in taking head to their ministry: he answers, that yt is spoken
by comparison, but that is only said. I grant, we sometimes speak in that
meaning: but that is nether the simplest, nor vsualest ki^de of speech. To
prove that the white apparel was with the^ nothing else, then a more honest
apparel, as blak with us, I alleged Solomon: wherein, his interpretation of
innocence, Eccles 9. 8.
is not innocent: as that which ouerturneth, the whole suit of the text. That
of joy, will not stand: considering that that was mentioned before, and the
scripture uses commonly to send the figurative speeches before, rather then to
place them after: althowgh, I grant, yt is a thing annexed with joy. But, that
yt is to be understood of the white apparel, used in those parts: yt is
manifest by the oil of the head, which is joined in the same verse, considering
that yt is known that the a use thereof amongst the richer sort, especially 2 Samuel 12. 20. ^. Sam. 14. 2. LuK, 7. 46.
when they would recreate them selves, was common. where he excepteth, that
this custom might be changed, between Salomons and Chrysostoms time, he owght
to have showed yt: for, such a custom once proved, is still presumed, until the
contrary appear. Albeit in Tullies Cicero in vatin.
time, many ages after Solomon: yt appears that the Romans, which, with the
East empire, translated a number of East fashions, at bankets when men attire
them selves more honestly, used to wear a white garment.

But yt shall appear, that this white garment, had the same estimation in Ieroms
time: and therefore also in Chrisostoms. Hither therefore pertayneth, that page
282, of the white garment, used in divine service, and alleged out of Ierom:
where, the D. being required to answer the reasons of the reply to the
examiner, by which yt is maynteyned, that no special mark of apparel in the
service of god, is mea^t: says, he purposes not at this time, which, in good
english, is as much to say, as he can not. For otherwise, he must needs be in
damages, which arresting so violently and so infamously, one that said nothing
to him, in calling his proof a chiledish cauil: now being called upon, puts
in no declaration against him. His pretense, because I set not the repliers
reasons down, is vayn: for, he that took the pains to read his book to accuse
him, should have done the same to have convinced him: especially, seeing yt was
yet never answered. But, because he says, that the place which he cyteth out
of the council of Carthage, may be a sufficient confutation of al, which is
said of Ieroms places: seeing we have no credit with him, let him hear Erasmus,
which affirms, that vuhite garments vuere In praefatione in Ieronymum.
in Ieroms time in great price, and that the vuearing of them vuas, for honors
sake, accorded unto the Priests, but not unto the Monks, saving only in
divine service. Vuhereby, yt is manifest, that the white garments, which
Priests did wear in the divine service: was (as we say) their holyday apparel,
and used of them as well with out the church, as within.

So is yt also apparent, that the place of the Carthage council, towching the
Deacons white apparel: is nothing else, but that the Deacon did in the church
only, wear that apparel, which the Bishops and Priests (as those which were
more esteemed) did wear boeth within, an withowt the church. Nether is there any
necessity, that he should translate the words of the Council, in manner of a
commandment unto the Deacon, to wear a white garment: feing the word, may
as well be turned inducatur.
he may vuear, as let him wear, and better also. For, considering that yt was,
as has been showed, granted for honors sake: yt is more agreeable with the
nature of honor, to leau yt free, then to drive him to the wearing of yt,
whether he will or no. whereupon, likewise ensues, that there is not like cause
in our country, of wearing a white garment, which was in theirs, yt being
stage like with us, which was grave and honorable with them.

As for Iero^s place out of Ezechiel, the Ans. does shamefully abuse his
reader. For, he speaks of the use of the Iues under the law, and not of us:
which appears manifestly, in that he opposes that ceremony of the law, unto
the manner of the Aegiptio^ Priests, vuhich vuore boeth vuithin the church, and
vuithovut, vuhereas the Priests in the lavu, did vuearonely vuithin the
church. This appears again, in that which he adds by and by: that this
vuhite apparel vuearing is fulfilled in the gospel, when vue put on Christ.
For further reply herein, I refer the reader partly, unto the answer unto the
Examiner, which (to take away the D. excuse) I would have gathered, and set
down, if I had had the book: partly, to the In the defense of the Apol. part.
3. chap. 5. diuis. 1. pa. 386. section 4. etc.
Bishop of Salisbury, who shows out of Augustine, and Ierom, vuith others,
that the Ministers nether vuere in times past, nor ovught to have been,
discerned by any special note or mark in apparel. The next division, requires
no answer. In the next, to prove that Eustathius vuas deposed, for seeking a
singularity in his apparel, not only from the ministers (as he would untruly
insinuate) but from the common use of men: there can be scarce playner words,
then those which the D. sets down. where, there is so great light, that the
glos upon the 30 distinction, which he alleges: is compelled to say, that by
the tenor of that Council; yt is enouugh to use the apparel, vuhich is
accustomed in every country. The challenge there, which I made about Eustathius,
as yt was easy: so, I confess, yt was causeles, and of my oversight. The two
next, are answered.

Caluins sentence now, as Augustins before, towching the applying The D. 5.
chapter. 3. D^u. 273.
of things to the honor of god which were abused to Idolatry: are only to pas
the time, yt being in things necessary, boeth confessed, and confirmed by us.
His reply whereunto page 284 is, that althowgh wood, gould, and oxen were
necessary: yet, that those abused to Idolatry, were not* seeing other might be
taken, which is untrue. For, there is none of these things, which were not
particularly commanded: so that they could not, withowt manifest breach of gods
commandment, be changed. And if there had been, no such particular
commandment: yet those which should have applied these abused things, to the
use of the divine service, had had better ground for them in the general
commandment, then he can show, to bring in the surplice and cope. For, the
lord having once declared that he would be served in his temple, by the spices
and ki^des of these creatures of gould etc: they might well know, that he could
not lose his right, by any wrong that men could do. Therefore, he should have
compared our cope and surplice, with the Idolatrous cope: whereunto, the lues
are bidden to say, get the hence. wherein, althowgh the Ans. say, Isay. 30.
that our cope is nothing of that nature: yet, he can show no reason why. And,
as our cope and surplice, are well matched with that Idolatrous cope: so are the
ox, gould etc, well matched, not with the surplice and cope, as he matched them,
but with water, bread, and wine, which our Sau. Christ has appointed, for the
elements of the holy Sacramen^es. For, even as no abuse of these creatures, be
yt never so horrible, can put us from their use: so was yt, of the gould etc.
The sum is, that unless he show as good ground for the surplice and cope etc, as
we can for this gould etc: he leeseth al his labor here, which was also
alleged. That of churches, so often repeated, is page 256. and 275.
answered: let us therefore return.

Augustins misliking of these ceremonies, can not be August. Ser. 6. de verbis
domin. in Matheum.
so wrong from us. For, granting that he does in that sermon, dissuade the
people, from coming unto that Idolatrous service: I answer, that he does more
then so. For, would Augustine have been so unadvised, as to have called the
presens at Idolatrous service, a toy: which is the highest treason against the
eternal god, and a matter of most fearful condemnation? Therefore, when he
says leau their toys: yt is apparent, that he comprehended such like
ceremonies as these, which are, even by those that use them, commonly called
toys: and therefore, by Augustins counsel, to be left, that the papists,
when they see so fevu use them, might also, in this behalf, be ashamed of
their fevunes.

Vuhere I affirm, that I vuould be loath, either vuith him, or Augustine, to say
that it is not lavuful, to convert a thing abused in Idolatry, to a private
use, as to make a shirt of a surplice etc. he takes his pleasur of me. And, I
would yt were but of me alone, and that a piece of his insultatio^, reached 1.
Cor. 10. 25. and. August. ad Publicolam epist. 254.
not unto S. Paul: who teaches precisely, that a man may eat in a private
house, of the flesh that was offered unto Idols, which notwithstanding
Augustine says, a man may not, althovugh he should die for hunger. whose
counsel, if yt had been followed in Julian the Apostatas time, when boeth the
meats, and fountaynes, were abused to most horrible Idolatry: what a number,
should have starued for hunger? Therefore, Theodorets judgment in this point,
is more catholic: Theodoret ^. lib. ca. 15.
which approves the use of those meats and waters, to the ordinary
sustenance. Nether, was yt well concluded of Augustine, which upon one
particular commandment, of employing the spoil of Jericho, to the use of gods
service, concludes, that yt is not lawful, to emploi things consecrated to
Idolatry, to private uses. For, after the lord had taken the first fruits of
the spoil, gotten by battayl, in the city of Jericho: Iosu. 8. 2.
he bids the Israelites expressly, to take the spoil of Ay, withowt al
exception: where, no dout, there were rich Idols, as well as at Jericho. My
detestation, of such cormorants as hunt after the spoil of the church, I have
before protested. The next division, is answered. Unto my reply in the next,
the D. answers nothing, to the purpose. The In the first part of this Tract.
two next unto that, be likewise answered: so was the next, sufficiently In the
former part. Tract. 2.
answered in the first book, withowt any spice, of the inconuenie^ce, which he
talks of.

In the next, the first sectio^, whether the admonitio^s vuere vuritte^
vuithovut knovuledg either of other, I said that which I thowght: let the reader
judge. As for his reasons, there is never a one that co^uinceth any
communication between them: before their books were written, or pri^ted
almost. The rule which I cyted out of Aristotle, has that sens which I
alleged yt for: which is to be showed, if this were the place. the other
sectio^, with the next division, requires no answer: the next unto yt, is
answered. In the next, the An. shows his to great bouldnes, that would make
the reader believe, that the Adm. allows of a gray Amys, as of a garment of
dignity in the ministry: seeing they would have the Ministers knovuen, only by
voice and doctrine, as him self affirms of them. The rest in that diuis.
requires no answer.

The first section is answered, the later is nothing but repetition: 1. diu p.
28^ Leuit. 13. 5^
in the middle, I confess, that for things infected with leprosy, which are
commanded to be burned: I mistoke things consecrated to Idolatry. Althowgh,
the analogy from the corporal leprosy, unto the spiritual: will strike fire
enowgh, to consume these rags, towching the use of the^ in the church of god,
as has been well In the book entitled a full and plain declaration of
ecclesiastical discipline.
observed. The two next I pas.

In the next, charged for saying, that M. Bucer, and Martyr, affirm that they
edify: he prete^deth some thing out of M. Bucer, which may be drawn that way,
but out of M. Martyr, he ca^ find nothing. yet, does he still countenance yt
out with words, althowgh the answer unto them boeth; (if they had so said)
follows in the 4 next divisions.

In the next division, he answers nothing, for defense of his first
proposition. For, yt is manifest, that a lavuful Magistrate may command an
vnlavuful thing, notwithstanding that he protest, that yt is for orders sake
only. For, as for that he adds, withowt any suspision of superstition, if it
be understood, that the Magistrate does not command yt superstitiously, that
does not heal up the matter, seeing he may faut by other ways the^ by
superstition: if he understand, that the subjects do not abuse yt to
superstition, yt is that in question. But here, he is fallen again from him
self. For 279.
before, he answers as thowgh a church ceremony, might be comely, and not
tend to edificatio^: inasmuch, as to me obiecting, that yt ovught to tend to
edification, he answers, that yt is sufficient, if yt pertayn to order and
comelines. Here, presuming comelines, he concludes thereof: that not only yt
tends to edification, but also that yt edifieth. The rest, is an open asking
of that in controversy: that only excepted, which is before answered.

Against his reason, that the surplice edifieth, because those which wear yt,
edify: I alleged the Midvuiues lie, whereunto he answers nothing to the
purpose: but that, which I gave him, which is not enowgh to mayntein him, seeing
he propounded generally, that those things edify, which are done by them which
edify. And, what auantageth yt him, to prove that this apparel may be worn,
that the lie profited: when yt owght not to have been done, if yt might have
saved all the world. The Romans 3. 8.
similitude of stammering, is unanswered. For, seeing he is browght to that
pinch, that he ca^ here assign no other cause, why they edify, then because the
Minister can not otherwise be admitted to preach: if there should be a
Magistrate, which, in contempt of the gospel, should ordeyn that none should
preach, but those which stammer: he sees, that the similitude houldeth. If
this example, be not grave and sad enowgh, to match with the cope, which has
been always esteemed, so fit for a players garment: let him take the example in
oil etc, propounded under the same conditions. The rest, is answered.

In the next, to the reasons against his assertion, that the wearing of the
surplice, makes the wearers to agree in other points of doctrine, and the not
wearing to disagree: he partly answers not, and the answer which he makes,
hangs altogether of blind experience. I call yt blind, because he can give
no reason of yt: and therefore, as that which has no light to show yt by, yt
must needs be unvisible. As for his untrue surmises, that we imagine a
perfection, whereby we have no need of laws or Magistrate, they never fail
him: as if yt were not, amongst other, a singular use and profit of the
Magistrate: to procure by laws and punishments, that those means, which god
has ordained to mayntein godly unity with, be straytly observed, althowgh he
devise none of his own. The next division, is In the chapter of the ceremonies
of Baptim and in the former part of this booK. p. 92.
answered.

In the next, being not able to carry his reason, they are signs of good
things, therefore they are good, any further: he discharges yt upon M. Bucer,
which has yt not: also upon the common use of speech, which he also
slaundereth. For, we do not call yt a good sign commonly: unless that, as the
thing is good, so the sign to mark yt out with, be agreeable. And, if he presume
that here in the surplice, he openly beggeth the question: otherwise, what is
he, that will say, that a wolfs skyn is a good sign of a lamb, because the lamb
which is good, is clothed in yt: althowgh, his answer is nothing but a shift.
For he considered not, what the thing is in common speech: but what yt is in
deed, and in reason. The example of the goulden calf, was well alleged. For, yt
was to the Israelites, a sign of the true god, but a nawghty, and a wicked
sign: and so, if none but Ministers of the gospel, did wear the surplice: I
would confess, that with us yt were a sign of a Minister of the gospel, but yet
an uncomely, and an inconvenient sign. And to the intent the reader may know,
how unfaithfully the D. deals with him, in houlding out M. Bucers authority
for the surplice, and the rest of this popish apparel: he may understand, that
Bucer in censur. Liturg. Anglic.
he does boeth for that it serves to superstition in many, and for diverse
other causes, require that they should be taken avuay in our church. His first
section, is to no purpose, of that which I towched him for. In the next, his
answer that the abuse of the brazen serpent, could not be taken away, oneles
the superstition yt self were: is withowt al proof, and may be as well said, of
this apparel. For, althowgh no man worship the apparel, by falling down before
yt: yet he may have a damnable opinion of yt, and as hard to be pulled out, as
the other. Beside that, by how much the abuse of the serpent, was greater, then
of this apparel: by so much, was the profit of the brazen serpent, if yt had
been called to the right use, withowt comparison greater, then of these
ceremonies. And althowgh the necessary and commanded use of the serpent, were
but for the time, wherein yt was a mean to heal those which were bitten: yet
afterward, yt had a notable use, of continuyng the remembrance of gods
vuo^derful benefit to vuards that people, whereu^to he answers not: Else, I
ask of him, why it was continued in the church so many hundred years, under so
many boeth good kings, and godly Priests.

His answer, to that objected of the love feasts: I receive, so far as
concerns the inconvenience of keeping them in that place, wherein the lords
supper was celebrated. Howbeit, to that, that the church has, for the abuse,
utterly taken those feasts avuay, notvuithstanding that they vuere likely
means to norish love vuith: he answers not. That those love feasts were
borrowed of the Gentiles, is unlike: considering that S. Peter gives
sufficiently to understand, that they were used in the churches of the Iues,
which abhorred from the ceremonies 2. Epist. chap. 2. 13.
of the Gentiles. For, writing unto the churches of the Iues, he alludeth
plainly unto that of S. Jude: where these feasts, are expressly named. Yt is
much more probable, that they were taken from the imitation of the Iues under
the law: who Deuter. 14. 23. 29.
are bidden to feast before the lord in Jerusalem. wherein, are commended unto
them, as gests and partakers of the same blessing of god with them, strangers
and widows, with other nedy and destitute persons: which is manifest to have
been, one of the ends of this love feast. The two first sections, are nothing
but an asking of that in demand: especially having regard to this point,
whether this apparel be convenient for the ministry or no, or whether, being
inconvenient, yt owght so to be declared, in which points this question lies.
As towching that point, whether the Minister should wear yt, althowgh yt be
inconuenie^t: the truth is, that I dare not be author to any, to forsake his
pastoral charge for the inconvenience thereof: considering that this charge
being an absolute commandment of the lord, owght not to be laid aside for a
simple inconvenience or vncomelines of a thing, which in the own nature is
indifferent. The offense, in occasioning the weak to fall, and the wicked to be
confirmed in their wickedness: is one of the fowlest spots in the surplice,
and which of al other can make yt most detestable in the eyes of a godly
Minister. And such it is in deed, that if it were balanced with any thing left
free unto us of the lord, as in the choice of meats, and drinks: yt would
easily weigh yt down. But, when it is laid in the skoles, with the preaching of
the word of god, which is so necessary for him that is called thereunto, that a
woe hangs on his head, if he do not preach yt: yt is of les importance, then
for the refusal of yt, we should let go so necessary a duty.

As for that which is uttered against the offense, yt is as the In the former
part pa. 403.
rest of this disputation, to show how inco^ueniently such things are
established: not that they may not in any respect, be born with. And my reply
to the place of the Corinth. 1. 8. against his answer, which says that in
things indifferent comanded by the Magistrate, we owght not to have such
regard unto the offense of the weak: owght not to be drawn further, then I
alleged yt: that is, in applying our selves to our brethren, so that we leau
not undone that which the lord has absolutely commanded. where that is not,
boeth in use of these indifferent things, and absteyning from them: we are so
straightly bound to have regard unto the weak brother, as no Magistrate is able
to lose the knot of that bond. But, where offenses can not otherwise be
redeemed, the^ by leaving that vndoe^, which the lord him self has not left
free unto us, but cast a yoke of necessary service upon us: there the case is
otherwise. for if the Prince, upon declaration of the inconvenience of such
ceremonies, and humble suit for the releas of them, will lose nothing of the
cord of this servitude: for my part, I see no better way, the^ with admonition
of the weak that they be not offended, and prayer to god to strenghthen them
thereunto, to keep on the course of feeding the flok committed ynto him.

This is, in few words, my simple judgment of the matter of this apparel and
such like ceremonies, peradventure needful to be here propounded: not so much
for their sakes, which mislike yt (which I suppose for the most part to be of
that judgment) as for them which are born in hand, that there is no other
cause, why the Ministers have left their flocks, then for that they would not
wear this apparel. Vuherein, beside other matters of far greater weight, even
in this case of ceremonies: the yoke which is laid upon their necks, is not
only to use them, but to subscribe unto them, as unto good and convenient
orders. where, yt is not only not lawful to subscribe the^, but requisite,
that the Minister should, as occasion serves, teach the inco^modity of the^.
And alt nowgh I can remember nothing in either of my books, contrary unto this
judgment: yet if there be any thing that may be drawn against yt, yt is meet
that yt fall, that the truth may have the vpperhand: unless a better judgment
then this can be showed, which I will willingly learn at his feet, that can
teach yt. The next belongs only to the readers judgment: the last is In the
former part p. 391.
answered.

THE IX CHAPTER, OF THE second part of this Treatis: of the name of Priest,
page 721.
THat yt skilleth by what names things, especially In the first book pa. 61
sect. 3 and 4. and page 62. sect. 1. and 2. also in the former part of this
booK, page 408. l. 37.
ecclesiastical, be called: I have a showed. To the vnmeetnes of calling a
Minister vuith us, Priest, considering that our translations of the bible have
usually noted the sacrificing Priests by that name: he opposes, the ancient
writers, which used the word of Sacerdos and Presbyter for all one. But their
abuse herein, may easily appear, in that, in this to great liberty of speech,
they also used to call the holy supper of the lord, a sacrifice, and the
Communion table, an altar: if he allow of one, he must also of the other. But if
these kind of speeches, have given occasion of falling unto many: then yt is
manifest, that this defens is nawght. For, that they called the Ministers of
the gospel, by the same word which is proper to sacrificers only, appears
page 411.
otherwhere. That the best of English writers in our days, use yt, is more
excusable, in that they do yt of constraint: partly in translating the elder
writers which spoke so, partly for that they had to do with adversaries which
used that language: to whom, that yt might be better understood which was
written, they applied them selves. Of his want which he utters in this behalf
page 785, let the reader judge.

Thus, what matter soever is in controversy, either perteyning to the discipline
or ceremonies of the church, is answered: in other by matters, yt is enowgh
once to have noted the D. insufficiency or other misbehauiour, and so to commit
them to the readers judgment.

Althowgh the learned know, what a colowrable defens I might bring out of the
diverse judgments of writers, for that I said the vuriter of the Apocalypse
concealed his name: yet that I pas not my faut withowt confession, as the D.
uses, I confess a faut, which I also amended in the second aedition. Likewise
in that I charged him with leaving out some part of his book, albeit yt may be
trw: yet towching the places which I meant, I perceive that there is sum injury
done to him. For not fineding the^ where I looked for them, and where they
owght of most right to have been: I found them notwithstanding transported to
other places.

His answers in the end of the book, to the most plain and clear testimonies
of the writers in our age, concerning the matters in controversy: I will not
towch. For what remedy against him, which denies that the snow is white: or
what fear is there, of being deceived by him, which comes in to the stage
without a visard? And verily, the son of those places is such, that yt would
not suffer him, to have so much as a little peinting to disguise him self with:
insomuch, that I would desire the reader, upon the shameful bouldnes which he
uses in that part, to esteem of his fidelity and trust, in the rest of his
book. Beside that, for the most part, the same matters, by other sentences in
the same writers: have been in this work confirmed.

A TABLE, WHEREBY YT IS NOT UNEASY TO FIND, ANY OF the principal points,
contained in this part of the booK.
The seventh Tractate. page I.
Vuhether the Ministers of the word, whilst they be Ministers, may bear civil
office: not whether they may do yt in respect that they are ministers: or do
yt against the Magistrars will, as the Ans. pretends page 3, 4.

Vue affirm that they ovught not: because
THeir office is only in things perteining to god, page 7, etc. In preaching
and prayer page 7, 10. That Christ refused to be Judge, in the cause of
inheritance, and adultery, page 2, 3. whether refer that of the D. that
criminal causes are not hereby forbidden ibid. and page 15, and 16. also that
they may meddle with matters of estate, but not with occupations ibid. when as
if either were convenient, the later were more tolerable page 17, and 18.
Hither also refer, the contrary examples supposed of Samuel p. 18, of Moses, of
that our Sau. Christ took the whip, with others p. 21, 22, 23, 24, of Peter p.
24, 25, 26, of Melchisedek 28, of Augustine 26, 27, of Dorotheus and Philaeas
29. That the Bishops, armed with boeth swords, make them selves more feared
then the Magistrate p. 19, 20. The difficulty of the ministry, especially
compared with the imbicillity of our nature page 8, etc. whether refer, that
the Bishops turn over to others, that which they say belong to them: taking
upon them that, which they can not deny, not to be incident into their office
p. 9. That civil offices have pomp annexed, which is forbidden the ministers,
page 3. That this mingling of offices, began not with the Christian Magistrate,
p. 15. That this mingling is not profitable, much les necessary, p. 4. Hither
refer, that yt is as profitable, and as necessary for the Magistrate, to be
Minister, as for the Minister to be Magistrate, 19. Also that the ministers,
have les need of this Civil authority, under a Christian, then under an
Unchristian prince, 4, 5. That the common wealth (if need be) may receive the
help, which the minister can give that way, withowt this mingling of offices,
13. That yt is as lawful for my lord Mayr, to take the pulpet, as for the
Bishop to take his judgment seat, 11, 12. And that if either were to be
permitted, with us (throwgh the scarcity of good ministers) the first were more
tolerable, then the later, 14. That those indwed only with the light of
nature, have misliked the clapping of many offices upon ones bak, 14. That the
Apostles them selves, throwgh a feeling of the weight of this ministry: gave
over even the Deaconship, althowgh an ecclesiastical office, 10, 11. That, for
accomplishment of the ministry, we owght sometime leau vndoe^, things
otherwise commanded of god: much les take upon us, that whereof (by their
confession) there is no commandment, 1. That yt tends to the destruction of
the body, when one member incrocheth upon the office of another, 6. That yt is
a soldier fare, that will be only attended upon, 6, etc. That yt is contrary
to the practis of the elder churches, uttered boeth in councels, Chalcedon, 15.
Carthage, 16. fathers, Tertullian, 29. Cyprian, 6, 7. Hilary, 14. Chrysostom,
29. Ambrose, 6, 17. Jerome, 6. contrary also to the judgment, of the godly
learnedest of our time, M. Bucer, 6, 16. Calvin, 5, 16, 17. Hooper, 30. Iuel,
27. Gwalter, 20. I^cobus Grinaeus, 28. and others, 6.
The eighth tractate, page 32.
The government of an Eldership is perpetual. because

God has instituted Elders in the church, which being shut from the
administration of the word and Sacraments: have only to do with the
government, 1. Timot. 5, 17. page 32, 33, 34. Item Act. 14, 23. page 35, 36,
37. To the strengthening of which plaeces serves: that the name of Elder, does
most^ properly agree unto those, which had the government only, page 33. Item
1. Cor. 12, 28. page 37, 38. Item Roman. 12, 8. page 38, 39. Lastly Math. 18,
17. page 51, 52, 53. That there be church matters, to be done in the government
of the church, which the Pastor, is not able do do of him self, 49. That the
Eldership, beginning as soon as there is mention of any assembly of the visible
church, standing of diverse families: was boeth before, and under the law, 40,
41* That the Apostle will have yt continued unto the worlds end 54. whether
refer, that objected of widows and wine page 54, 55: also of the blud,
strangled, and wasshing of feet page 62. Likewise that the supposed danger of
altering the estate of the church government, ca^ here have no place page 71.
That the chief offices of charity, can not be exercised withowt yt 51, 52, 53.
That the supposed impossibility, of getting able men to exercise this charge,
can not hinder the restoring of this order 61, 62, 63, 64. That yt is
confirmed, by the use and custom of the elder churches, 41, 42. Also that
degenerating, yt retained notwithstanding certain marks, whereby we might come
to the knowledge of yt: partly open, in co^demning the breach of this order, 42,
correcting their error 43, complaining of the want of yt 44: partly secret,
whilst they confessed, that the administration of the word and Sacraments,
belonged not unto the Elder, but by grace and permission of the Bishop, 43, 44.
That it is confirmed by the judgment of the godly writers, boeth ancient as
Tertullian 41, Cyprian 42, Ignatius 45, Ambrose 44, 68, Jerome 68, and of our
age, as Bucer 39, 68, Calvin 35, 41, Martyr 46, Beza 72. That yt owght to be,
as well in a kingdom, as in small common wealths 58, 59. That if this church
government, were dangerous to common wealths: yt were more dangerous, to small
common wealths, then unto kingdoms 59, 60. As Well under a Christian, as under
an unchristian Magistrate page 49, etc. because The common wealths must be
framed, unto the church, and not contrary wise p. 64, 65. The Magistrate can
not displace, that the lord has placed p. 50. Otherwise, yt should be wors
with the church, under a Christian, then under an unchristian Prince 49, 50.
The punishing of one faut by two iurisditions, can not hinder this, 70, 71. The
Elders, iontly with the Pastor, take not so much upon them, as the Bishop whom
the Magistrate does permit 51. That Princes owght no more to change the church
government, then our Sa. Christ and his Apostles, changed the form of the
common wealth government. 50. There is more use and commodity of the
Eldership, under a Christian, then under an unchristian Magistrate 55, 56, 57,
58, 60, 61. That yt was used under Constantine, a Christian Prince, p. 67.
As Well in vplandish towns, as in great Cities, page 44. etc, because The
Apostles did institute yt, church by church, 45. That there is the same use of
yt here, as well as there, 45, 46, 47. The gospel (whereof the discipline is a
part) went out of Jerusalem into vplandish towns, as well as into cities, 25. S.
Paul, inioyning this order unto Timothe, instructed him, as well of the
government of the churches in the country, as in the City 45. The Bishop
being showed, to belong unto the churches in the country, as well as unto those
in the city: the Eldership, which is given for his assistance, must do the
same 45. The Pastor there, can not do al by him self alone 49. Otherwise,
there should be an inaequalite browght in amongst the churches, which the D.
him self misliketh, 45. The Apostles, studying to conform the churches one to
an other, in smaler matters: did yt much more in this 45. The use of the elder
churches, was such, 46, 47. Of the reformation of the prebendes and Canons
etc. which are a part of the ruins of this Eldership: and of the applying of
their livings, to the erecting of Colleges 73, 74, 75, 76.
The ninth Tractate page 77.
Of excommunication, which is a separation from the company of the visible
church: and not of the excommunication out of heaven only. Excomunication
belongs to the church. because, Our Sa. Christ instituted yt to be done by
the church, page 78, 79. whether refer that objected out of math. 16. and John
20, 82, 83. whereby notwithstanding the D. cause falls 83. The Apostles and
the holy writers of the scripture, communicate the same power with the church
79, 81, 82. whether refer that supposed of S. Paul's sole excommunicating of the
incestuous Corinth, 80: likewise of Alexander 83, 84: also of Titus avoiding an
heretic 84. further, that the church is joined with the Bishop, as a doer, not
as a looker on, or witness only 81. The holy ghost chideth the church, for that
yt used not this power 82. That Princes subjection unto this discipline of the
church, hinders not any more the excominunication by the church, then by the
Bishop 92, 93, 94. The church has power to absolve, 80. Yt belonged unto the
church of Israel, to rid their howses of leven, at the Pasover 79, 80. Yt was
done by the elder churches, and with approbation of their Doctors: in
Tertullians time 87, in Cyprians 87, 88, 89, 90: Likewise in Ieromes and
Augustins times 90, 91: confirmed by the godly learned of our time, M.
Zwinglius, 92. Calvin, 90, 91. Martyr, 92. Not therefore to the Bishop alone:
especially When by his sole excommunication, he has profaned the glory of
god: browght the church to a miserable servitude, not to him self alone, but to
his servants also, 95, 96. broken in to the Magistrates office, 94. pilled the
princis subjects, 95, 96. When he may not pas smaller matters in the church,
by him self alone, 77. When, for his sole excommunication, there is not so
much as one approved example, or writer to be showed, 85, 86, 89, etc. some of
the papists them selves, being ashamed of this sole authority of the Bishop,
77.
Tractate the tenth, page 99.
The Deacons office, stands in the care for the poor: and not in the
administration of the word and baptim: because This office, is so instituted,
Romans 12, 8, 99, 100, 101. The Apostle, dividing the ministeries of the word,
makes no mention of the Deacon, 102. Hither refer, the exceptions of Phillip,
103, 104. and Steven, 106, 107. The Apostle, describing the qualities of the
Deaco^, makes no mention of his ^ptnes to teach, 102. If yt were a step to the
ministry: (as yt is not 108,) thereof follows, that yt is not the ministry.
107. Yt is an opposite member, which, together with the ministry of the word,
helps to divide one whole, 101. In doing boeth, he should have need of
greater gifts, then the Apostles, or the pastor, 101, 102. whether refer, that
the Apostles and other, endued with extraordinary gifts, labored their
sermons, 101, 102. By the same reason, they are barred from the administration
of the supper: they owght to be likewise, from that of baptim, 104, 105. The
judgment of the elder church, was such, 109, 110. whether refer, that where
they meddled with either. the administration of the word or Sacraments: they did
yt by a nw commission, and not by virtue of the Deaconship, 109. Also of the
godly learned of our age, M. Bucer, Calvin, Martyr, Beza, 99, 109, 113. The
Deaconship, owght to be in every Church, 113, 114. Likewise under a Christian
Magistrate, 100, 111, 112, 113.
Tractate the eleventh, page 116.
Of the corruptions in doctrine, about the holy Sacraments: the first chapter
whereof, is against the sacriledg of private persons, women especially, in
administering baptim: because, Yt confirms the error of the conde^natio^ of
the^, which die withowt baptim, 133. when as the want of baptim, oneles yt be
with neglect or co^temt, is not only no probable sign of condemnation, or
cause why we are no Christians, but also is, in no respect praeiudicial: and
where that neglect or co^temt is (which can be none when yt is with all
convenient speed, browght to be baptized by the publik minister, in the
congregation) yt returns upon the parents only, 124, 125, 134, 135. Yt is
void, which is so ministered, 134. because (the washing from our sins, coming
only from our Sa. Christ) to have confirmation of our faith by this sacrament,
yt is required that yt be ministered by him, whom he has set in his place,
138, 139. As the princis seal stolen, and set to, by one to whom yt belongs
not, brings no security, etc. 139. whether refer, that yt is more lawfully
administered, by a minister which is an heretik, then by a private person, which
is a catholic, 131. Also that not to have he rein chois, of him that
administreth the sacrament: approaches to the dotage of the papists, in the
Shepards consecration, 138. Hither refer, that the keeping of the words, I
baptiz the in the name, etc. are not only of the substance of baptim, 136,
137, 138. As he that propounds the word withowt vocation preaches not, 141,
142. As he that takes part of the words of the scripture, passing by another
part: propounds not the scripture, but a devise of his own brain, 141. As the
communicatio^ in bread, withowt the cup, is no supper of the lord, 140. As a
private man which, killing a murderer, executes no justice, but is him self a
murderer, 139. As the seal, of the same matter and figure with the Princis,
withowt his authority, is none of his, 139. God has instituted, that those
only should baptiz, which have (that women can not) vocation to preach, 116,
117. Hither refer, the making of the Ark, 117, 118. Also of S. Paul, which,
having commission to preach, as a thing annexed to preaching, administered
baptim, 118, 119. further, that otherwise there should be no commandment in
the scripture, to hinder, that women may not as well be taken to the ordinary
administration of the sacraments, as men, 118, 119. Hither also refer, that
alleged of the wemens preaching, 122, 123. of Paul's baptizing, and others at
the commandment of Peter, withowt a calling, 119, 120, 121. Origins example,
130, 131. None may take honor unto him self, but he that is called as was Aron,
128. No not so much as in private howses, althowgh they may teach privately,
124. Nor in the time of the supposed necessity 128, 129, 130, 132. Hither
refer, that of Sephora 126, 127 The judgment of the godly learned boeth
au^cie^t and of our time: Counsel of Carthage 132, Cyprian, Chrysostom 130,
Calvin 117, Bullinger 133, Beza 130. Infantes of boeth parents Papists, owght
not to be baptized 142. The second chapter, of the corruptions, in the
sacrament of the holy supper 144. Against the receiving by two or three with us
144, 145, 146. Known papists not to be admitted, much les comppelled to the
supper, 147, 148. Examination of those, whose knowledge in the principal points
of religion, is douted of: is commanded in the scriptures 148, 149, 150.
The tvuelfth Tractate page 151.
The administration of the church matters, under a Christian Magistrate: does
ordinarily and principally, belong unto the church officers. because By the
word of god, the matters perteining unto god, are committed unto the Priests
and Levites, the matters perteining unto the common wealth, being committed to
Civil persons, 152, 153, 154. Nether makes yt against this, that certain
Levites handled common wealth matters 154: or that certain kings, determined
of church matters 166 The church governors are, by calling, the fittest to
determinyn of them, 158, 159. whether refer, that the scripture requires not
of the civil magistrate, that he should be able, to convince an heretik. The
church laws, are called the Bishops and not the Emperors decrees, 155, 156.
Althowgh yt belong unto the Magistrate, to make laws for a Christian common
wealth: yet yt follows not thereof, that he may make laws for the church: the
distinction of the church and common wealth remaining, even under a Christian
magistrate, pa. 151, 152. Althowgh in confused times, yet not in well ordered,
165, 166. Yt is one thing, to make laws for the church, and another thing to
put in execution the laws already made, whether divine or ecclesiastical: so
that althowgh the later belong unto the Magistrate, yet thereof follows not,
that the former does so, 153, 156, 161. The danger of the Ministers erring, in
the determination of these matters: lets not this right of theirs 167. Nor
that the papists, hold some point herein with us: from whom notwithstanding,
even in this cause, we differ manifoldly, 164, 165, 166, 167. The learnedest
and godliest, boeth old and nw, confirm yt: Constantine the great 157, 163,
Hillary, 155, 156, Ambrose, 156, 161, and other bishops of his time 162,
Augustine, 163, Bucer, Calvin, Beza, 168, the Bishop of Salisbury, 159, 162,
Nowel, 159, even the D. him self 164
The thirtinth Tractate.
Of the indifferent ceremonies: the fruit and necessity whereof is showed,
171. The former part whereof, is of the ceremonies in general. The first
chapter of which former part is: that the church of Christ, owght not to be
like in ceremonies, unto the synagog of Antichrist. because The Apostles,
conformed the Gentiles to the lwes, not contrariwise, 172 The lord severed his
people from profane nations, in things otherwise indifferent, 172 Especially
from those, with whose corruptions in religion they were entangled, and with
whom they lived, and had occasion of conversation: in which respect, yt is les
danger for us, to be like, in this point, unto the Turks, the^ unto the
Papists, 172, 173, 174. The conformitye offends the papists, 177: namely in
that they take occasion, of speaking evil of our religion, as if it yt could
not stand withowt the aid, of their ceremonies, 178, 179. Also, that thereby
they conceive hope, of bringing in again, their other corruptions: whereby they
harde^ the^ selves in their error: likewise, that they ascribe holiness to them,
79, 180. whether refer, that yt is no sufficient exception, that the people be
warned of the abuse, by preaching, 177, 178. Yt brings grief of mind, to
many that are godly myneded, and to the weaker sort, occasion of a most
dangerous fall, 180. Yt aedifieth not, 180, 181. The popish ceremonies, have
pomp annexed, 180, 181. Even as to establish the doctrine and discipline of the
gospel, the Antichristian must be removed: so to remedy the infection, crept in
by the ceremonies, they also owght to be removed, 174. The godly and learned,
boeth old and of our time, confirm yt: The council of Laodicea, of Braccara,
176, 177. Tertullia^, 175. Constantine the great, 175, 176. The Bishop of
Salesbury, 177. Nether is the decree of any church, of that authority, as to
bind us, that, even in the matter of ceremonies, her judgment should not be
examined, by the word of god.
The second Chapter.
Of the first part of this tractate: that the churches owght to be like one to
another, in ceremonies, page 142. As the churches in the Apostles times, and
after in the primitive church, 142. As the children and servants of noble men,
go in one livery, 142. How this may be done, 142, 143. Althowgh the churches,
owght not to fall out about yt, nor men make a departure from the church, for
want hereof: yet the church (to the end she may correct yt) owght to be told
of her faut, in this behalf, p. 143, 144.
The third chapter:
That the service book, after a sort, mainteineth an unpreaching ministry,
184. Partly, throwgh the lenght of prayers, 184, 185. But especially, in
contenting yt self, with a Mynister which can do no more the^ a child of ten
years old, 185. Or else, the Bishop is yet more gilty, which makes such
Ministers, withowt warrant, either of god or man, ib.
The fourth chapter:
That the fruit, that might be, is not received, p. 186, Throwgh the change of
the place, and gestures of the minister, which hinder the understanding of the
people: renw the leuitical Priesthood: is uncomely: and, according to M. Bucer,
boeth absurd and munkish page. 186, 187. That the order hereof, is dangerously
left in the Bishops discretion, 187.
The second part,
Of this Tractate: of the particular fautes, in our ceremonies.
The first part,
Of the first chapter thereof: is of abrogating the feasts of the Nativity,
Easter and whitsonday, pa. 188. For the superstition, crept into men's minds of
them, especially, when they are not necessary, pa. 185: the superstition also,
being not so well remedied by preaching only, 189. They restrain the benefits
of Christ, unto the time, they are houlden in, pa. 190. In appointing of holy
days, regard must be had not only to the rich, which may, withowt their
hinderance, abstein from labor: but unto the poorest, 192, 193. The church may
appoint standing times, for the publik service of god, and, upon extraordinary
causes, whole holy days, yet not therefore ordinarily command such feasts,
191, 192. As ordinarily, yt can not be ordained, that men should work the
days, which god has commanded to rest in: so ordinarily yt should not be
forbidden, to labor in those days, which god has licensed to work in, 193.
The elder church, left the feasts free, 189 198.
The second part,
Of the first chapter, against Saints days, page 194.

